B4713 E1838_1 R210133 99868959 170444
THE DRINKING OF THE BITTER CUP: OR, THE HARDEST LESSON. IN CHRIST's School, Learned and Taught by Himself, Passive Obedience. WHEREIN, Besides divers Doctrinall Truths of great Importance, many Practicall Directions are held forth, for the teaching of Christians how to submit to their Heavenly Father in suffering his Will, both in Life and Death, Patiently, Obediently, Willingly. As it was lately presented to the Church of GOD at Great YARMOƲTH, By JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of the Gospel there. Heb. 5.8. Though he were a Son, yet learned he Obedience by the things which he suffered. 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example that we should follow his steps. LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Joseph Cranford at the Castle and Lyon in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1660.
Mr. BRINSLEY of Passive Obedience.
To all his Near and Dear RELATIONS, Natural and Spiritual, within the TOWN of Great YARMOƲTH, or elsewhere; Grace and Peace. Much affected in the Lord, NOT having a better Legacy to leave you, I doe here present you with a Cup, your Sa∣viours Cup, which having him∣self
drunk, he hath left it for you to pledge him in. A thing which sooner or later, in some kinde or other, you must all make account to doe, meeting with many Crosses and Con∣flicts here upon Earth, and at length be brought under the power of that last Enemy, Death. Now that you may learn so to drink this Cup as your blessed Pattern did, sub∣mitting to your Heavenly Fa∣ther, in suffering his Will, Pa∣tiently, Obediently, Willingly, is the Design of this Treatise. Wherein you shall meet with many usefull and needfull Di∣rections tending to this end.
These I shall desire you care∣fully to lay up in the Closet of your Souls, that you may have them at hand to make use of, as Providence shall offer occasion. Which that they may be blessed to my selfe and you, and through Grace made effectuall for the purpose to which they are designed, is and shall be the Earnest Prayer of him who is Yarmouth, Anno 1659. M. 2. D. 23. Yours in the best and nearest Relation, John Brinsley.
THE DRINKING OF THE BITTER CUP: OR, The Hardest Lesson in Christs School, Learned and Taught by Himself, Passive Obedience. JOH. XVIII. 11. The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? SOwre Hearbs are sometimes more whole∣some then sweeter morsels. Of all Medita∣tions which the Soul of a Christian hath to feed upon, I know none more usefull in this Vale of Tears, then those which concern his Passive Obedience, his Drinking of the bitter Cup, his
suffering of Affliction. A handfull of these herbs, The occasion of undertaking this Subject; the loss of two hopefull Sons, the one suc∣ceeding the o∣ther in his Ap∣prentiship and Sepulcher. a few of these Meditations (such as my own soul hath (as heretofore, so) of late been dieted with) my purpose is through Gods assi∣stance to present unto you, and set before you; being assured, that as they may be seasonable to some, so they will not be unusefull to any. For this purpose I have here taken up these words, which fell from the mouth of our blessed Saviour a little before his Passion. Upon what Occasion, Occasion of the words. the Verses foregoing will readily inform you. Judas, with the High-priests Officers, coming to apprehend his Master, Peter more forward then the rest, steppeth forth, drawes upon them, attempts a rescue, and ma∣king an Assault, cuts off Malchus's Ear. Where∣upon, his Master, interposing himself, taketh the peace of him, commanding his Sword into the Sheath, [Put up thy Sword into the Sheath:] For which he subjoyns this Reason; [The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?] In which passage we meet with two Generals, Division. Two Generall parts, the Fa∣thers Dispen∣sation, the Sons Submission. presenting themselves to our consideration; The Fathers Dispensation, and The Sons submission. The Fathers Dispensation, in giving this Cup to his Son, [The Cup which my Father hath given me.] The Sons submission in receiving and drinking of it. [The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?] Begin we with the former of these, The Fathers Dispensation in giving this Cup to his Son, First Generall pat, wherein three particu∣lars. [The cup which my Father hath given me.] In which words, for the more distinct handling of them, we may take notice of three particulars. What
is here said to be given, By whom, To whom. What, [The Cup.] By whom, [The Cup which my Father hath given.] To whom, [The Cup which my Father hath given me.] Upon these look we seve∣rally, each of which will afford us somewhat worthy the taking notice of. Begin with the first. What is here said to be given, [The Cup,] The thing gi∣ven, The Cup. , quod potum con∣tineat. Sgnif∣cat id idc b∣bitur, sive Cya∣thus, sive Calix, sive Ʋceus sit. Leigh Cri. Sac. , (from whence both the Latine Pocu∣lum, and our English, Pot, are conceived to have their Originall,) it properly signifieth Potorium, (a word answering it both in sound and sense) a Drinking Vessell, Id unde bibitur. Any kinde of Vessell that men use to drink out of, of what material, size, or fashion soever. This is the proper signification of the word. Improperly it is both frequently and variously used in Scripture, where we meet with divers sorts of Cups. Among the rest, A Mystical & Metaphorical Cup. two of special note. Calix mysticus & metaphoricus. A Mystical Cup, and a Metaphorical Cup. 1. A Mystical, a Symbolical Cup. A Vessel, which having some naturall liquor in it, Mystical Cups. importeth some spiritual Mystery. Such was that Cup which the Psalmist speaketh of, Psal. 116.13. I will take the Cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.] Cos Jeshugnoth, calieem salutum, The cup of Healths, salvations. A Cup of Wine, or some such other Liquor, which the Jews at some solemn meetings were wont to take and drink, in token of their thankfullnesse to God, the Author of their tem∣poral, and spiritual salvation. And such was that Paschl Cup, which was in use in the Passeover, of which we read (for so are we to understand that Text) Luk. 22.17. where it is said, He took the
Cup, viz. The Paschal Cup. And such was that other Cup, which we there meet with, vers. 20. Likewise after Supper he took the Cup; viz. the Eu∣charistical Cup, that Sacramental Cup, which at his last Supper he blessed, and gave unto his Apo∣stles to drink in remembrance of him, leaving it unto his Church as a Memorial of his Death and Passion untill his second coming. Of which St. Paul speaking, calleth it, The Cup of Blessing, 1 Cor. 10.16. , that is, the Blessed, Consecrated Cup, set apart by the Word and Prayer from a common to a sacred use. These are Mystical Cups, representing some spiritual my∣stery. To leave these, 2.  There are (in the second place) Metaphorical Cups, Metophoricall Cups. so called by way of Allusion and Resem∣blance. Of these we meet with two kindes in Scripture. A sweet Cup, and a Bitter Cup. 1.  A sweet Cup, a Cup of Prosperity, an hap∣py and prosperous state and condition in the world, A sweet Cup. when men abound with temporall com∣forts and contentments. Of this Cup speaks Da∣vid, Psal. 23.5. My Cup runneth over. God had given him a large portion, as of spirituall, so of temporall mercies, so as he had not only for ne∣cessity and conveniency, but even for superfluity. But this is not the Cup which here we meet with in the Text. Surely had such a Cup been pre∣sented unto Christ, Peter, who was so ready to bid him favour himself, and consult his own se∣curity, (which he doth Math. 16.22.) and had so many thoughts about a Temporall Kingdome, that his Master and his Followers should enjoy upon earth, would not have been so forward in put∣ting it from him.
2. Besides this, there is also a Bitter Cup. A Cup of Wormwood and Gall, A Bitter Cup. a Cup of Affliction and Suffering. This in phrase of Scripture we oft times finde set forth under the name of a Cup, and that both in the Old Testament, and New. Of this speaketh the Psalmist, Psal. 75.8. In the hand of the Lord there is a Cup; that is, a Cup of wrath and vengeance. Such was the Cup which the Prophet Jeremiah received at the hand of the Lord to carry it to all the Nations, Jer. 25.15. viz. a Cup of fury, (as it is there ex∣pressed.) And such a Cup it is which the Spirit threatneth, that all those who have received the mark of the Beast shall drink of, Rev. 14.10. , a Cup of wrath, The Cup of Gods indignation. And such a Cup it is that our Saviour speaketh of once and again; As Matth. 20. vers. 22. where he puts this Question to the sons of Zebedee, Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of? So again, Cap. 26. vers. 39. If it be possible, let this Cup passe from me. And so here again in the Text, The Cup which my Father hath given me,] meaning a Cup of suffering, that Bitter Cup of his Passion, the bitterest that ever was drunk upon earth. Of this Cup our Saviour had already tasted in that bitter Agony of his in the Garden, Hoc loce nihil est unde certe collgas sudori huic sanguinem suisse prmi∣stum: Nom non dictum est ; Vide Theophilac: & Euthym. ad loc. Sudor vix solet , Grot. ibid. where conflicting with the appre∣hension of what he was ere long to undergoe, it put him into a strange bodily distemper, an unheard of sweat, insomuch as he sweat, either
drops of blood (as it is generally received,) or ra∣ther, as it were drops of blood, so the Originall hath it, Luk. 22.44. , that is, a thick sweat, as it were clottered and congealed blood; And made him to break forth into that thrice-repeated Deprecation; Father, if it be thy will, let this Cup passe from me. And this Cup he was now to drink, to drink it off, to wring out even the dregs thereof, which he did in that painfull, shameful, accursed death upon the Cross. And this bitter Passion it is which our Saviour here calleth a Cup: , The Cup.] Q. And why so called? A. Christs Passi∣on why called a Cup. The expression (as I told you) is Metapho∣rical, and borrowed. Reasons and grounds of the Metaphor held forth by Expositors are di∣vers. Dicendo autem poculum, insi∣nuat mortem dulcem & de∣sidrabilem in salutem hmi∣nu. Theophyl. ad loc. To let passe that of Theophylact, who conceives our Saviour here to call his Passion a Cup, to intimate how acceptable and welcome the work of Mans Redemption was unto him, and in order unto that, his Passion, even as gratefull, as desireable as a cup of drink is to a thirsty man. In which sense some understand that word of his upon the Cross, Joh. 19.28. I thirst, viz. after the Redemption and Salvation of lost Mankinde. As also that other of a later Expositor, Idò calicem nominat, ut estendat am gavissimas af∣fūctiones in hoc mundo nihil esse (ut uà dicam) isi unum hau∣slum, statim im cessahunt. Ferus in loc. who con∣ceives in and by this word to be insinuated the momentaninesse, the short continuance of all afflictions and sufferings upon earth: which be they never so bitter and grievous, yet they are but as it were one draught, a cup, soon swallowed down, soon put over, according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light Affliction which is but for a moment, &c. To let passe these with some other, which I look upon as more witty then weighty.
With more probability the Metaphor may be conceived to be borrowed from one of these three Heads, A threefold ground of the Metaphor. all taken notice of by Aretius writing up∣on this Text. 1.  Some fetch it from a custome among some of the Heathen, From a deadly Cup given to Malefactors. Formula petita â ritu Gentium, quo noxios po∣ticnibus missis in corcerem to∣libant è medio. Atet. Com. in loc. who were wont sometimes to put malefactors to death by giving them a deadly cup, a Cup of Poyson to drink. So Historians tell us of Socrates, that famous Moralist, that being condem∣ned to dye, a poysonous potion, a Cup of the juice of Hemlock was sent him to drink, which having done, he ended his dayes. To this custom some conceive that forenamed passage to allude, Jer. 25.16. where the Prophet is sent to the Nations with a cup, to cause them to drink it. Vid. New Annot Engl. in Mat. 20. vers. 22. And so they look upon the word here in the text. And it must be acknowledged, the allusion is ve∣ry proper and fit. Christ having taken upon him the sins of the World, he was now by Im∣putation a grand Malefactor, a great sinner, the greatest that ever was, having the sins of the World charged upon his account. Hereupon God the Father, as a just and impartial Judge, for the satisfying of his Justice, giveth him this deadly cup, this poysonous potion of an accursed death to drink, to undergoe. But I shall not insist upon this, though a truth, and an usefull one. Applic. Usefull, as to other ends, Sin continued in, will be bi∣ternesse in the later end. so to deter all presumptuous sinners from daring to go on in any known evill; which if they shall dare to do, let them know that it will be bitterness in the lat∣ter end. As Abner once said to Joab concerning his over-eagre pursuit of his Brethren, 2 Sam. 2.26. Knowest thou not that it will be bitternesse in the latter
end? So may I say to all wicked and ungodly men, who are so eager in the prosecution and pursuit of their sinfull wayes and courses; Know ye not that it will be bitternesse in the latter end? So the Saviour of the World, the eternall Son of God, found those sins which he as a Surety had taken upon himself: And surely so shall you finde those sins which now you give over your selves unto; they will be a bitter Cup, a Cup of Poyson in the end. Ʋpon the Wicked God shall rain snares, fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest; this shall be the portion of their Cup. Psal. 11.6. But I shall not dwell here. In the second place, From the Phy∣sicians potion. others conceive the Me∣taphor taken from the Physician, who sometimes prescribes unto his Patient a churlish Potion, Vel, a medicis, qui aegris pro∣pinant potiones, ac interdum sa∣tis amaras ac acerbas. Ità Deus Pater hanc potionem Filio suo propi∣at, ut pro sa∣lute omnium fi∣delium mortem subeat. Aret. in loc. dis∣tastefull to the Palate, and loathsome to the stomach, in it self (it may be) deleterious, little better then poyson, were it not corrected, and so made medicinable. Which Cup being prepa∣red, he presents, requiring his Patient to drink it off, for the saving of his life, the preserving or recovering of his health. And of this Allusion we may say, (as of the former) that it suiteth well with our present purpose, and that whether we make a particular, or generall Application of it. 1.  Apply it to the particular case in the Text. The Death and Passion of Jesus Christ it was such a Cup, Christs passion a medicinable Cup. a Medicinable Cup, a bitter Potion, which God the Father, as a wise Physician, prescribed, pre∣pared, and presented unto his Son, that he should drink it for the salvation of his Elect people. Thus the Head taketh in that Potion which is medicinable to the whole Body. And thus Jesus
Christ, the head of his Church, he drinketh this Cup, which however to him it was a bitter and distastefull Cup, yet it was a Cup of salvation to his whole mystical Body, a true and soveraign Catholicon, healing all the diseases, taking away the sins of the World, the Elect World. Thus in particular. 2.  Make the Application in a more generall way. Afflictions, crosses, sufferings, Such are all Afflictions to Gods people. wherewith God is pleased to exercise his people upon earth, they are but a Medicinable Cup, which he as a wise Physician mixeth and tempereth for them; and administreth to them for their good, for the health of their souls. Applic. A usefull Meditation, A ground of patience. did I intend to insist upon it. Usefull, (as otherwise, so) specially for the promoting of that design I have now in hand, the teaching of Christians quietly and con∣tentedly to submit to the will of their heavenly Father in the bearing of whatever sufferings he shall be pleased to exercise them with. Thus doe Patients submit to their Physicians. Appre∣hending them skilfull and faithfull, they put themselves into their hands, being ordered by them, taking whatever Dose, or Potion they pre∣scribe unto them. Even thus should Christians submit unto their heavenly Physician, their God and Father, knowing him to be both wise and faithfull, they should now yield up themselves to his disposure in the drinking of whatever Cups he shall prepare for them, Three ordina∣ry ground, of Impatience, all which this Metaphor meeteth with. quietly and patiently submitting to whatever afflictions, not murmu∣ring, not repining, not quarrelling his Dispen∣sations and dealings with them, whether in re∣gard of the Quality, or Multiplicity, or long Con∣tinuance
of them. These are the three things which ordinarily make men impatient. O (saith one,) were my Crosse a common ordinary one, I could bear it, but it is a heavy one; My Cup is a bitter Cup, no sorrow like my sorrow. That is the Churches complaint in her captivity, Lam. 1.12. Behold and see if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger. And Christians are ready to take it up; when the hand of God lyeth heavy upon them, O now there is no sorrow, no Affliction like unto theirs. O (saith a second) were it but one affliction I should make shift with it, but I am compassed about on every side. That is Da∣vids complaint, Psal. 40.12. Innumerable evils have compassed me about. And such is the condition some∣times of Gods dearest children. Their Crosses are (like Jobs Biles, which were from the sole of his foot unto his Crown, Job 2.7.) many of severall kindes; they are afflicted (as he also was) in Body, Estate, good name, Wife, Children, no part free. O (saith a third) My burden, were it but for a short time, I could undergoe it. But far carriage maketh a light burden heavy; the long continuance of my Affliction maketh it unsup∣portable. Now this Metaphor which we have in hand it fitly meets with every of these. 1.  With the first; Is thy Affliction sharp and bitter, The sharpness of afflictions. remember it is a Potion, a medicinable cup, and those sometimes must be such, viz. where the necessity of the Patient requires it. And such it may be is thy condition; a gentler medi∣cine would not work upon thee. It may be thy corruptions are strong, and so require a strong Potion to work them out; which were it weaker,
it may be it would do thee no good, but rather harm. Now God is a wise Physician, who know∣eth what is fit for his Patient. And therefore submit unto him; not quarrelling the bitternesse of thy Cup. Bitter Drugs which help to evacuate evill and noxious humors, and to cleanse the stomach, are better then sweeter meats which might breed dangerous surfets. 2. For the Multiplicity; Are thy Afflictions ma∣ny, of sundry kindes, The Multipl∣city of them. remember again this is a medicinable cup. Now in such a cup the Physician often mingles many Ingredients; which he doth, that they may meet with severall humours, and that one may help, or correct another. And thus dealeth God by his people. Sometimes he putteth divers Ingredients into their Cup, exerci∣seth them with sundry kindes of Afflictions and tryals; which he doth for the like ends. It may be their corruptions, their Soul-maladies are ma∣ny. And it may be one affliction alone would not work so kindely, so throughly. And there∣fore he is pleased thus to mixe his Cup. Which he doth not, but where his people have need of it. If need be ye are in heavinesse through manifold temptations, (saith St. Peter) 1 Pet. 1.6. . Where one Simple will serve the turn, the wise Physician will not trouble his Patient with Com∣positions. Surely, if God do make his people heavy with multiplicity of Afflictions, there is a cause for it. They have need of every Ingredient in this cup. 3.  Again (thirdly) for the long continuance of Affliction. The long con∣tinuance of them. Here still remember this is a Medici∣nable Cup. Now (whatever the covetous and self-ended may) the wise and faithfull Physician will
not hold his Patient in a course of physick longer then need is. If he still prescribe potion after potion, surely he seeth there is a cause for it. And thus is it with our heavenly Physician, if he do keep his people in a course of afflictions, it is not that he taketh any delight in it. No, though earthly Parents may sometimes chasten their chil∣dren for their pleasure (as the Apostle speaketh, Heb. 12.10.) our heavenly Father doth it not. He seeth that there is a cause for it. Coninuance of Afflictions sometimes needfull. He seeth that they have need of it, need of those afflictions wherewith he exerciseth them, and under which he holdeth them. Need, either for the cure of some old Malady, or for the prevention of some new one, which he seeth them in danger of. 1. For the cure of habituated lusts. For the cure of some old Malady. Possibly there may be some old habituated Lusts, which through a long custome and continuance have taken a deep rooting in the soul. Now these are not easily, or suddainly wrought out. There must be a course of physick to cure an inveterate disease. M. Paul Bayne Christian Let∣ters, 33. It may be (as I remember a reverend and holy man writes to a friend concerning himself) the sweet wayes of youth have bred such a bed of Worms in our souls, that our heavenly Father seeth it necessary for us to conti∣nue our Wormwood and Aloes. Thus God doth this sometimes by way of cure. 2.  And sometimes by way of prevention. Though for the present (it may be) the soul may be in a sound and healthfull plight, For the pre∣venting of spi∣ritual mala∣dies. yet he fore∣seeth what infirmities it is subject to, and in danger of, and hereupon it is that he followeth his people with a succession of Afflictions. Even as the Physician that purgeth his Patient every Spring
and Fall, that so by those seasonable Evacuations he may prevent the sicknesse which he is inclined to. Thus doth God, knowing the temper of his people, he often followes them with afflictions and tryals to prevent those spiritual Maladies, which otherwise he seeth would breed in their souls. To which end he keepeth them (it may be) continually under his correcting hand, holding them (as I may say) in a course of physick, even all their life long. And shall he be pleased so to deal with any of us, let not us repine or murmur. True it is, Repine not under long afflictions. to be held long, much more continually, under affliction, it is a wearisome thing to flesh and blood. As we say of physick, Qui medicè vivit, miserè vivit; To be alwayes in the Physicians hands it is a miserable course of life: And truly so it is to be continually under Gods afflicting hand, to nature it is a wearisome condition. But here let Grace correct and help Nature, by minding us, that this is the condition which our heavenly Father seeth fit for us. And therefore quietly and contentedly submit unto him, to the drink∣ing of whatever cup, or cups, he shall prescribe unto us. Only labouring to finde the kindely working of every of them, Labour to find a kindely wor∣king of them. that we may be bettered by them as to our spirituall condition; that we may finde all sinfull and inordinate lusts more and more purged out of our souls (and the peaceable fruit of righteousnesse brought forth.) So shall we have cause to blesse God for this his dealing with us; ac∣knowledging with David, that it is good for us that we have been afflicted, that we might learn his statutes, Psal. 119.71. which is a sweet and blessed
fruit. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teachest out of thy Law, Psal. 94.12. When Nocu∣menta thus prove Documenta; when chastening and teaching go together, this is a blessed thing. But I am not come where I intend to fasten. There is yet a third head, a third rise of the Metaphor, A third head of the Meta∣phor. From Governours at Feasts. which is looked upon as most genuine and proper; which is to fetch it either from a custome among the Ancients, who in their Ban∣queting and Feasting, being wont to drink by measure, they had one who was appointed to be the Moderator or Governour of the Feast; Sumpta est Metaphora vel a more convivantium. Veteres enim in conviv is, singulis portionem suam per dispensa∣torem assignabant; Latinis Modiperatores erant, &c. Aret. in loc. as you shall finde it at that Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee, which our Saviour graced with his presence, Joh. 2.8, 9. Him the Greeks called (as it is there)  or , and so after them the Latines, Modiperatores quasi modum imperantes. Architriclinus, or Symposi∣archa, whose Office it was to order all things at the Feast, and in speciall to see a measure kept in drinking (from whence he was called Modiperator) to which end he ap∣pointed every one his cup, which he must drink, and no more. Or from Ma∣sters of Fami∣lies. Or else more plainly and simply, (as others conceive of it) from a Master of a Fa∣mily, Metaphora sumpta a more Veteri, secun∣áum quem Pa∣ter-familias singulis domesti∣cis, ut certam cibi partionem edendam, sic etiam certam poculi, id est vini seu potus, mensuram bibendam distribuebat, &c. P. Ravanell. Thesaur. Calvin; Piscator, &c. ad loc. whose manner anciently was, to give to every one in the Family, children and servants, their severall portion, as of Meat, so of Drink, to every one their cup. Even so doth God, the great Moderator, the wise Disposer and Governor
of all things, and the Father of all the Families in heaven and in earth, distribute to every of the sons of men their portions, as of mercies and blessings, so of sufferings, which in phrase of Scripture is called their cup. Whence it is that we finde these two sometimes put together; as Psal. 11.6. This shall be the portion of their cup; And again, Rectè à viris doctis annota∣tum est per  Hebraeum, cut respondet Helle∣nistarum , significari sortem prosperam aut improspe∣ram, quae Deo inspectante ac moderante cuique obtingit. Unde & vocem  interdum adjuactam legi∣mus. Grot. Annot. in Math. 20. vers. 22. Psal. 16.5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheri∣tance, and of my cup. So then by [Cup] under∣stand we that portion of sufferings which God by his providence layeth out unto the sons of men. which he doth not at randome, but by measure. Mark it. This is the Doctrinall conclusion which I shall from hence take up. Afflictions, sufferings are dispensed by God unto men by measure. Sufferings dispensed by God by mea∣sure. Perindè ac Pa∣cerfamilias ci∣bum & potum filiis ac dome∣sticis suis distri∣ouit, ità hoc juris in nos ha∣bet Deus, ut singulos tractet prout visum est. Calvin Cem. in Text. So were the sufferings of the Son of man, the Lord Jesus; and so are the sufferings of all the sons of men. They do not fall upon them by chance, or fortune, but by a divine provi∣dence. Neither are they poured out upon them without any regard of stint, (as I may say) but by measure. As for the former of these, none but an Atheist will deny, or question it. It is that which Eliphaz willeth Job to take notice of, Affliction cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the ground, Job 5.6. Crosses, afflictions, sufferings, of what kinde soever, they do not happen by chance, nor yet have they their Originall meerly from secondary causes. There is a hand of Divine providence in every of them. Shall there be evil in a City, and the
Lord hath not done it? Amos 3.6. This is Gods work. And this he doth by measure. God doth all things by weight and measure. So he doth all things, by weight and measure. As Job saith of the Waters, Job 28.25. He weigheth the waters by measure;] He so ordereth the waters of the Sea, as that they keep within their banks, as if they were weighed, or measured. And so may it be said of the waters of Affliction, of sufferings, God weigheth and measureth them out, giving to every one his dimensum, his proportion, his Cup. For the prosecuting and clearing of which truth we may take notice of two sorts of sufferings, Sufferings of two sorts, satis∣factory and ca∣stigatory. two sorts of punishments which God inflicteth upon the sons of men. There is Poena satisfactoria & castigatoria. There are some punishments which are satisfactory, other castigatory: Which two, however for the matter of them they are one and the same, the same Cup, the same li∣quor, (as I may say) yet they are differenced ac∣cording to the subject, the persons on whom they are inflicted. The former are judgements, or punishments properly so called, which befall wicked men. The latter corrections, chastisements, tryals, wherewith Gods own people are exerci∣sed. Both dispensed by mersure. Now of both these it is alike true, that God dispenseth them by measure. Mark it, Punish∣ments and chastisements, (so call them for distincti∣ons sake) God dispenseth them both by measure, though not by the same measure. Though not by the same measure. The one he measureth out by a measure of justice, the other by a measure of mercy, proportioning the one to the desert of the sinner, the other to his strength; which two we may (with the Schools) call the
one an Arithmetical, the other a Geometricall pro∣portion. Yet in both he dealeth by measure; mea∣suring out punishments unto wicked men, and measuring out chastisments unto his own people. I shall deal with them severally. Begin with the former. 1. Punishments properly so called, satisfactory punishments inflicted for sin, Punishments inflicted by measure, a measure of justice. The sufferings of Christ thus measured. God poureth them out by measure. By a measure of justice (as I said) proportioning the punishment to the sin. Thus did God measure out the sufferings of Jesus Christ, those satisfactory punishments inflicted upon him, they were proportioned to the sins which he had undertaken. This is that which the Pro∣phet Isai setteth forth so clearly and fully, Isa. 53.6. where speaking of the Messiah, of Christ, he saith, The Lord hath layd on him the iniquity of us all; or (as the Margin in our new Translation readeth it according to the Originall.) He hath made the iniquity of us all to meet on him;] inflicting on him whatever was requisite for the satisfying of his justice for the sins of his Elect people, for whom Christ, as their surety had undertaken. So the next Verse explains it, vers. 7. He was op∣pressed, and he was afflicted; or (as the Originall hath it word for word,) It was exacted, and he an∣swered.] God the Father, as a just Judge, requi∣red full satisfaction from him, and he therein answered, by paying a full price, and so dis∣charging of the debt wherein his Elect were in∣gaged. And after the same manner will he deal with all those who have not a share in that satisfacti∣on, even all wicked and ungodly men. The sufferings of wicked men thus measured. To them will God measure out punishments by the same
measure, a measure of justice proportioning them to their sins. Temporall pu∣nishments sometimes. Thus doth he oft times measure out unto them temporall plagues and punishments in this life, there∣in dealing with them according to their sins. This David prayeth for, that God would so deal by his mischievous enemies, Psal. 28.4. Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wicked∣nesse of their indeavours, give them after the work of their hands, render to them their desert. And this God often doth, proportioning judgements to sins: Thus is he said to deal with Mystical Babylon. Ba∣bylon the Mother of Whoredomes, spoken of Rev. 17.4. is there said to have a Golden Cup in her hand, full of abominations, and filthinesse.] There is the measure of her sins, A full cup. And behold how her punishment answereth it. To her God giveth the cup of the wine of the fiercenesse of his wrath, Rev. 16.19. And that a full Cup; A Viall full of the wrath of God, (as those Vials are described, Cap. 15 7.) In the cup which she hath filled, fill to her double, Rev. 18.6. Thus a full cup of abomi∣nation meeteth sometimes, oft times, with a full cup, an answerable proportion of temporall plagues and judgements, wherein God rendreth unto men according to their demerits. So he threatneth, Deut. 32.41. If I whet my glittering Sword, and my hand take hold of vengeance, I will render vengeance to mine Enemies, and will reward them that hate me. However, Eternal pu∣nishment. this he will do hereafter, at that great day of retributions, when the Lord shall render to every man according to his deeds, (as the Apostle hath it, Rom. 2.6.) then shall he pour out wrath and vengeance upon all wicked and
ungodly men; which he shall do by a measure of justice, proportioning their plagues to their sins. To the nature and quality of them. The greater the sin, the greater the punishment. Sins of ig∣norance shall meet with fewer stripes, sins of knowledge with more; so our Saviour tells the Jewes, Luk. 12.47, 48. And so for the number; the more sins committed, the oftner repeated, the greater weight of Judgement. Thence is that phrase used by the Apostle of heaping, or treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath. Rom. 2.5. A heap, a treasure is encreased by daily additions; and so is that punishment which shall be inflicted upon wicked men at the last day, it shall be increased by the multiplying of their sins. Every sin being as it were a Faggot to feed that eternall fire withall. Now the more Fagots are cast on, the greater is the flame. And the more sins a man committeth here, the greater (without repentance) shall his punishment be hereafter. Applic. Wicked men deterred from going on in a course of sin. The consideration whereof might be of use for the deterring of all wicked and ungodly men from daring to go on in a course of sin, as too many do, who adde drunkennesse to thirst, (as the Lord there speaketh, Deut. 29.19.) adde one sin to another, drinking iniquity like water, Job 15.16. multiplying their transgressions, as if they could never have their fill of sin. Alas, what do they hereby but fill up this cup? the cup of the wrath of God, which at the last day, that day of wrath and the Revelation of the righteous Judgement of God, shall be poured out upon them. But I shall not insist upon this.
The cup which we meet with in the Text, we finde it held forth by the hand of a Father, Chastisements inflicted on Gods own people. [The Cup which my Father hath given me.] And so points more directly at that later sort of punish∣ments, which I call castigatory, such sufferings as Gods own children are here subject to. Afflicti∣ons, chastisements, tryals; these, all these God dis∣penseth by measure. Even as a Master of a Family (for from thence, as I told you the Metaphor is most fitly derived) giveth to every childe and ser∣vant in his house their dimensum, their portion of meat and drink, what he thinketh fitting and convenient for them, Admonemur hâc meraphorâ ad∣mensu rationem quandam esse in cruce, quam suis imponit Caelestis Pater. Muscul. com. inloc. so doth the Lord dispense afflictions and tryals unto his people, giving to every one their cup, what he seeth fitting and convenient for them, afflicting them by measure. Mark it. This is the point which my eye is here principally upon; the manner of Gods dealing with his people in afflicting them. This he doth by measure. So dealt he with his people Israel in their Captivity. Dispensed by measure. So the Prophet Isai setteth it forth, Isa. 27.8. In measure, when it shooteth forth, thou wilt debate with it.] When it shooteth forth, or (as the Margin in some of your Bibles hath it, In emittendo eum. Montan. Tremell. according to the Originall,) When thou sendest forth, viz. into Captivity; then did God debate with that people, calling their sins to remembrance, he punished them for them. But this he did in, or by, measure. In measure when thou sendest it forth.] Besuassaah, In sato, (saith Montan.) The same word with that which we finde 2 King. 7.1. where the Prothet Elisha foretelling the incredible plenty of Victuals that should be in Samaria, he tells the Elders of Israel; To morrow about this time shall
a measure of fine Flower be sold for a shekel, and two measures of Barley for a shekel: Thus doth God dispense afflictions unto his people, not at ran∣dome, but by measure, even as men measure out Corn by the Peck or Bushel. When he debateth and contendeth with them, he doth it in, & by measure. Measuring out their sufferings. Which he doth both as to the quantity and continuance of them. 1. For the quantity, he weigheth them out. Even as the Physician prescribing to his Patient, he orders his Medicine as for the number and kindes of Ingredients, so for the quantity of each, As to the quantity. so many Ounces, Drams, Scruples, Grains, and no more. Thus doth God order the afflictions of his people; as for the kinde, what they shall be, so for the measure how great they shall be, so much and no more. So was it in the sufferings of this his Son. Every drop in this his Cup, every grain of his passion was weighed and measured out unto him. Insomuch that all his enemies could not adde one drop, one grain more to it. How came it to passe that not one bone of this Paschal Lamb was broken upon the Cross? What, was it the mercy of his enemies? nothing lesse. Such was their malice that they would not have omitted any thing that might have imbit∣tered his cup, made his death more grievous. But it was the over-ruling providence of God, which limited their rage, and his sufferings. This was done (saith our Evangelist, Joh. 19.36.) that the Scripture should be fulfilled, Not a bone of him shall be broken. God had predetermined what they should doe; and he should suffer, (as St. Peter tells the Jewes, Act. 4.27.) And to this they could not adde the least scruple more.
And thus doth God limit the sufferings of all his people. So far shall they reach and no farther. So great shall they be and no greater. Even as he limited the fire of Nebuchadnezzars Furnace, which though seven times hotter then usual, yet it could reach no further then to the bands of those Martyrs which were cast into it. Their bands were burnt, but upon their bodies the fire had no power, nor was a hair of their head singed, neither were their cloaths changed nor the smell of the fire passed upon them, Dan. 3.27. Thus hath God limited and bounded all the sufferings of his people. Even as he hath bounded the waters of the Sea▪ So far shall they go, and no further. It is not all the men upon earth, that can adde a drop to their cup beyond what God himself hath appointed. No nor yet all the Devils in Hell. That one instance of Job may serve instead of many. Satan could not touch his Body, his Children, his Estate, untill he had still received a new Commission from God for every one of them. He could not set a step, but as God still let out another link of his Chain. Thus doth God measure out the afflictions of his peo∣ple for the quantity of them. 2.  And so in like manner for the continuance of them; As to the con∣tinuance. as it was said concerning Nebuchad∣nezzar, Dan. 4.16. &c. Let seven times passe over him; that is, seven Years, or seven Weeks, or seven Dayes, (as that Text is variously construed) So dealeth God with his people, he numbreth and determineth the Years, the Weeks, the Dayes, (as of their lives, Mans days are determined, the number of his moneths are with thee, and thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass, Job 14.5. so) of their affliction. So he did the four hundred
years of Israels bondage in Egypt, (as he tells Abra∣ham, Gen. 15.13.) And the seventy years Capti∣vity of the Jewes in Babylon. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, (that is 70 years) Dan. 9.24. When this term was at an end, so was their Affliction. When the Land (the land of Judea) had enjoyed her Sabbaths, (lyen desolate) to fulfill threescore and ten years (the term foretold for their Captivity) then in the first year of Cyrus King of Persia, (that the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished) the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus to proclaim liberty to that people to return to their own Countrey, as we finde it, 2 Chron. 36.21, 22. So exact is God in measuring out the continuance of the suffer∣ings of his people, for a year, nay for a dy. When the four hundred and thirty years were exprd, the self same day departed all the hoasts of the Lord ut of the Land of Egypt, (so that Text hath it) Exod. 12.41. Thus doth God number the dayes of his peoples affliction. Ye shall have tribulation ten dayes, (saith Christ to the Church of Smyrna) Rev. 2.10. that is, for a set time. Even as it was with our Saviours resting in the Grave; his lying under the power of death, it was for a set time, for so many dayes, beyond which he could not be detained in that prison. Thus hath God determined and set down the dayes of his peoples lying under an affliction, with the day of their deliverance. After two dayes he will revive us, and the third day he will raise us up, (saith the Church) Hos. 6.2. In which Text the Prophet is by some conceived to have an eye to the Bu∣riall and Resurrection of Christ; shewing how God would raise up hi hua Grch and people out
of the grave of affliction at the set and ap∣pointed time. Even as he raised up Christ out of the Grave. There he lay two dayes, but the third day he was raised up. So did God deal with the Head, and so will he deal with his mysticall Body, and all the members thereof, his Church and people: However for a time, for two dayes, (as it were) he may suffer them to lye buryed under an affliction, yet when the third day cometh, the time by himself appointed, then will he raise them up, nothing shall hinder their delive∣rance. When the third day was come nothing could hinder the Resurrection of Christ. Not the Stone rolled upon the Spulcher, not the seal set upon it, not the Watch set to guard it. Maugre all these, he rose again the third day ac∣cording to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.4. And so shall it be with his Members, the Saints and servants of God. Let the Stone be never so great, the pressure never so weighty that lyeth upon any of them; let men and Devils conspire, and use all wayes and means they can to keep them still in the grave, under an affliction, yet in despite of all, the third day they shall rise again; when the time by God prescribed and determined is come, deliverance shall not be deferred. Thus doth God exactly measure out all the sufferings of his people, both for the quantity and continuance of them. Q. But by what measure doth he thus measure them? A. Christisements measured out by a measure of mercy to Gods people. To this I have in part returned answer al∣ready. This he doth by a measure not of justice, but of mercy. Such is that measure which the Prophet Isai there speaketh of in the Text fore∣cited,
Isa. 27.8. In measure when it shooteth forth thou wilt debate with it.] In measure, by measure, a measure of mercy: moderatè, (as Tremellius renders it) with moderation: So doth God deal with his people in afflicting them, not as with his and their Enemies. Hath be smitten him as he smote those that smote him? (saith the verse foregoing.) God in debating with his Enemies, in punishing them, he proceeds in a way of justice; not so in correcting his people, with them he deals in a way of mercy: Whereas he poureth out his wrath upon the one, Poure thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, Jer. 10.25. he measureth out his anger unto the other, and that by a measure of mercy, dealing with them in a way of discretion, and mercifull moderation. So he tells his people, the Jewes, that he would deal with them, Jer. 30.11. repeated cap. 46.11. I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpu∣nished.] God being provoked by his people, he spareth not to punish them, but it is in measure. In judicio. Lammishpat (saith the Originall) by judgement, (so the former Translation, there properly ren∣ders it; and the like doth our new translation elsewhere; as Jer. 10.24. where the Prophet speaking in the person of the people, makes it his Request, Correct me O Lord, but with judgement; whereas the word is the same, Bemishphat.) Thus doth God deal with his people, though he doth correct them, and that sometimes sharply, yet still it is in measure, with judgement, propor∣tioning their sufferings, not to their sins, Proportioned to their strength. but to their strength. Even as the Physician (as I told you) in praescribing Pills and Potions, he hath a respect as well to the strength and ability of his
Patient, as to the nature and quality of the disease. So dealeth God in afflicting his people, he doth not proportion his judgements to their sins, their deserts. He hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. Psal. 103.10. But to their abilities and strength. So the Psalmist there goeth on, vers. 13, 14. of that Psalme. Like as a Father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. For he knoweth our frame, he remembreth that we are but dust. Thus doth he deal with his people, not as a Judge, who proceeding according to the strict rule of justice, regardeth not the person of the Offender, but the nature and quality of the offence, to which he proportioneth the penalty; but as a Father with his children, whom if they offend, he cor∣recteth, but with a wise moderation and temper, having a regard to their age and strength, proportioning his strokes to their weaknesse. So dealeth God with his children. If they offend, they shall feel the smart of his rod. If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandements, then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their ini∣quity with stripes, Psal. 89.31, 32. But herein he dealeth with them in a wise and mercifull way, having a regard to their strength. So much Paul assureth his Corinthians of, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithfull (saith he) who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able.] . God will not himself afflict, neither will he suffer Satan or his Instruments to oppresse his people beyond their strength. Gods people how said to be pressed out of measure, above strength. Obj. No (it may be said) Doth God alwayes thus measure out afflictions to his people, pro∣portioning them to their strength, what then
means that information of the Apostle St. Paul himself, 2 Cor. 1.8. where acquainting his Co∣rinthians with some great afflictions which had happened unto him, he tells them expressely, that he was pressed out of measure, beyond strength. For brethren, (saith he) we would not have you ignorant of our trouble (or Affliction, ) which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above strength. So it was, whatever the affliction was, whether the great danger that he was in at Ephesus, in that tumultuous sedition there raised by Demetrius of which we read, Act. 19. (as most looked upon it,) or some dange∣rous sicknesse wherewith he was visited, or what∣ever it was, it so seized upon him, as that he was overburdened with the apprehensions of it; pressed out of measure, above strength: . A Metaphor (saith Calvin) taken from a Porter, Metaphra sumpta ab iis qui sub gravi∣tate ponderis dficiunt: Vel à nov bus quae nimio onere merguntur: Calv. com. in loc. who hath a greater burden layd upon his shoul∣ders, then he is able to stand under, or from a Ship, that is laden beyond her bearing. So was it with this great Apostle in this affliction. The apprehension of the eminent danger wherein he was over burdened in his soul. And was it not so also with our blessed Saviour himself? Who in the midst of his passion cryeth out, as sinking under his burden, My God, my God, why hast thou for∣saken me? Mat. 27.46. How then is he said to afflict his people by measure, such a measure, so as to proportion their sufferings to their strength? A. For answer, we must distinguish of strength, A twofold strength, natu∣ral, supernatu∣ral. which is twofold: Naturall, Supernaturall, (it is Aquinas his distinction upon that Text.) The strength of Nature, and the strength of Grace.
The former may be called our strength, Pati suprà vir∣tutem, potest in∣telligi duplici∣ter, vel suprà virtutem natu∣ralem, & de hâc loquitur hic, supra quam Deus aliquando permittit sanctos tentart: vel suprà virtutem Gratiae, & de hâc intelligitur illud, 1 Cor. 10.13. Aqu. in Com. in loc. the latter Gods strength. Now look at the former of these, our own strength, the strength of Nature, and we shall finde it no newes, no wonder that the people of God should be overburdened with their afflictions, laden beyond their bearing, pressed out of measure, above strength; this strength being no other then weaknesse. Thus it is said of our Saviour, 2 Cor. 13.4. He was crucified through weaknesse; meaning his flesh, his humane nature. Such is the strength of nature no better then weaknesse: Not able to stand out against Death, no nor yet to look it in the face. The reason why many meer naturall men do engage with this enemy with such resolution as they do, is because they doe not apprehend it aright: their senses are stupified, intoxicated. Even as the Jewes were wont to give stupifying potions to Malefactors before their Execution, that so the fear of death might be thereby taken away. Even so are the hearts of naturall men oft times stupified, so as they do not apprehend the ter∣rors of Death; which if they did, it were not all the power of nature that could be able to support and bear up the spirit against it. Now beyond this strength it was that Paul was there pressed, being in eminent danger, insomuch that he even despaired of life (as he there saith) he found his spirit begin to fail him, he was not able to bear it. And so was it with our blessed Saviour himself in that his passion; the God-head for a time (as it were) hiding it self, withholding its wonted influence, the Manhood being thus left to it self, it was pressed beyond strength, and so ready to succumbe.
But there is another strength in the people of God, even a supernaturall strength, Supernaturall strength sup∣porting Gods people in their sufferings. the strength of Grace, whereby they are upheld, and carryed on, as in their active, so in their passive obedience, beyond the strength of nature, inabled to doe and to suffer more then flesh and blood could doe. In themselves they are poor, weak, im∣potent creatures, not able to doe, or suffer any thing as of themselves; but by and through the Grace of God strengthening and enabling of them they are able to do and suffer all things. So saith Paul of himself, Phil. 4.13. I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthneth me.  (saith the Originall) I am able for all things, viz. to suffer them. Such are the things which he there speaketh of in the verse fore∣going, rather passions then actions, as to be abased, to suffer want, &c. these things Paul apprehends himself able to do. But what made him so strong? Not any strength of his own, but the power of supernaturall grace received from his Lord and Master Christ. Through Christ that strengthneth me. And the like may every true Believer say, how weak soever of himself, yet through the grace of Christ strengthning of him, he shall be able to bear, to suffer what∣ever God shall please to lay upon him. Thus it is not the strength of Nature, but of Grace, which maketh them thus able. Even as it is with a Leaden Vessel, which of it self, being empty, is subject to melt with a little fire, but put water, or other liquor into it, and now it is able to indure the hottest Fornace; so it is with Chri∣stians, of themselves they are weak and feeble, their hearts are ready to melt within them upon
some great tryall. As it is said of the Israelites, when they were smitten at Aye, Josh. 7.5. The hearts of the people melted, and became as water. And the like saith David of himself, Psal. 119.28. My soul melted for heavinesse. So is it sometimes with the best and strongest Christians; being brought into a Fornace of affliction, some fiery tryall, their hearts are ready to melt within them. But being by grace strengthned in the inward man, through this supernaturall strength, they are made pares oneri, able to suffer that which all the strength of Nature could not doe. And to this strength it is, Afflictions proportioned to Gods strength in his people. that God propor∣tioneth the sufferings of his people: Not to their own strength, but to his strength. Not to the strength of Nature, but to the strength of Grace; that strength which either already they have, or which he supplyeth to them. For so it is when God cometh to lay greater burdens upon his people then they are able to bear, now he cometh in with a new supply of strength unto them. In this way it was that Paul was support∣ed under that Temptation wherewith he con∣flicted, by a supply of Grace. My grace is suffici∣ent for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. The stronger conflicts any of Gods people meet with, the more Grace doth he confer upon them, for the inabling them to withstand those assaults. And thus is his power made perfect in weaknesse (as it there fol∣loweth;) putting forth, and shewing it self more in supporting his people under such tryals, as in themselves do far exceed their strength. And thus you see this Doctrine confirmed and made good, how God dispenseth all afflictions to his people, by measure, and that a measure of mercy,
proportioning them to their strength, that strength of grace which they have, or which he giveth them. And will you know why he dealeth with them after this manner? God correcteth his people. this he doth in as much as he correcteth them in love, for their pro∣fit. 1. In love. Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth. Heb. 12.5. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten, In love. Rev. 3.19. Hence is it that naturall Parents cor∣rect their children, not out of hatred but love. And so doth the Lord his children. Whom the Lord loveth he correcteth, even as the Father the Son in whom he delighteth, Prov. 3.12. And thus correcting them out of love, and good will which he beareth them, he dealeth with them in such a way of mercy; proportioning their sufferings, not to their desert, but their strength. 2.  And doing it out of love he doth it for their profit. For their pro∣fit. In this the Apostle sheweth how the heavenly Father differs from some earthly Parents, Heb. 12.10. They verily for a few dayes chasten us after their own pleasure, but he for our pro∣fit, , for our spirituall advantage and benefit, That we might be partakers of his ho∣linesse.] Even as the Physician, intending the health of his Patient, he orders his Potions in that manner, proportioning them to his strength. But I shall no longer dwell upon Doctrinall illustration. Bring we it home by way of Appli∣cation. Where let me (in the first place) serve in this Cup, as a Cup of consolation, A Cup of consolation to Gods people. a ground of comfort to all the Saints and servants of God. What doth God, their heavenly Father, thus measure
out their sufferings unto them? then let not them fear. That is the use which the Lord himself maketh of it in that Text forenamed, Jer. 46. last. Fear not O Jacob my servant, saith the Lord, &c. I will not make a full end of thee, but I will correct thee in measure. And such use let all the Sons of Sion, all true Israelites make of it. However God may correct and punish them for their sins, (which he will do as soon, or sooner then any other, You only have I known of all the Families of the earth, therefore you will I punish for all your iniquities, (saith the Lord to Israel,) Amos 3.2.) I will not leave thee wholly unpunished (saith the former Text,) yet here is the comfort; he will not punish them as he punisheth others. Hath he smitten them as he smote those that smote him? Isa. 27.8. He will correct them in measure, with judgement, with a wise and mercifull moderation. Which let it serve to byace and bear up the hearts and spirits of the sons and daughters of Affliction under whatever sufferings. Which be they never so many, never so grievous, of ne∣ver so long continuance, yet let them know, it is but their Cup, the portion which God in wis∣dome and mercy hach measured out unto them. And O that all the Lords people were but fully perswaded of the truth hereof! that all their afflictions are thus dispenced to them. How patient, how contented, how chearfull, how thankfull would it make them, under whatever suffering? What is the reason that the hearts of men are so subject to melt and faint under afflictions? Surely one chief cause of this deli∣quium, this soul-fainting is, unbelief. Men are
not fully perswaded that there is such an over∣ruling hand of Providence in the ordering and disposing of them, that they are thus measured out for the breadth, the length, the greatness and the continuance of them; they look upon them as happening to them by chance or fortune. Which while they doe, no wonder if they sink under their burden. But so let not Gods children look upon their sufferings. Whatever they be let them look upon them under this notion, as their Cup, their portion measured out unto them; And that by a measure of mercy. There is the consolation. The punishments of wicked men are measured out too, they also have their cup. But it is by a measure of justice, proportioning them to their sins. But the sufferings of Gods people are measured out by a measure of mercy, proportioned to their strength. And what a sup∣port may this be unto them, (if rightly consi∣dered) under whatever afflictions? Be they what they will, they shall not exceed their strength, the strength which they have, or that which God will supply unto them. For this the Apostle is bold to engage Gods Fidelity in that forecited Text, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is Faithfull, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able. And what an incouragement is here? Of all discouragements there is none greater to a Chri∣stian in his suffering condition, then the appre∣hension of his own weaknesse, want of strength to undergoe what he feeleth or feareth. What is my strength (saith Job) that I should hope? Is my strength the strength of stones, or is my flesh of brosse? Job 6.11, 12. O (saith the poor soul) had I but strength to bear my burden, were it never
so heavy I should be contented with it, but my burden is great, and my strength little. How then shall I but faint in the day of adversity? (as the wise man hath it, Prov. 24.10.) But let not this discourage any true Believer. Thou wantest strength; alas, who doth not? When as such a tall Cedar as that blessed Apostle was, should be pressed beyond strength with the apprehension of an imminent danger, how should such Shrubs as thou and I ever look to hold up head, if we look at our own strength? I, but remember to whose strength it is that God proportioneth the suffer∣ings of his children; it is not their strength, but his own strength. Christians are much deceived when they look upon themselves for strength, either to do, or suffer any thing. No, this is a condition on Gods part, not ours. A comfortable meditation. Gods Cove∣nant with his people to give them strength, as to doe, so to suffer his will. When God en∣treth into Covenant with his people (the Cove∣nant of grace,) they covenant with him to be willing to doe and to suffer what he shall require and impose, so to be at his ordering and dispo∣sing, both as to their active and passive obedience. This is the condition on their parts. But on the other part, God graciously covenanteth with them to give unto them strength to doe what he commandeth. That is the condition on Gods part. As when he sends Moses upon that Embassage to Pharaoh, Moses yields his service, but God covenanteth with him to inable him for it. Certainly I will be with thee, Exod. 3.12. as to protect, so to direct and inable thee. So is it in Passive Obedience. So long as Gods people are willing to suffer what he shall impose, he will be with them. When thou passest through the waters
I will be with thee, Isai. 43.2. so is God with his people in all their sufferings, supporting them under them as well as delivering them out of them. How then is it that Christians in their sufferings look so much at themselves, their own strength, as if this were a condition on their part? No, God hath ingaged himself for it, and he will make it good. Only see that we be willing to suffer. As for strength in suffering, leave that to that God, who will so order the affliction, that we shall be through his strength able to bear it. And therefore trouble not our selves in this case, Christians not to trouble themselves with needlesse fears. (as too many doe) with distrustfull and di∣stractfull thoughts and fears about what may be∣fall and happen unto us. Strange it is how Chri∣stians do sometimes disquiet their own hearts by anticipating of their sufferings, forecasting how they should do, in case such or such a tryall, such an affliction should happen unto them. O (saith one) the afflictions which I feel are great, but those which I fear are far greater. O, if God should bring upon me the evill which I fear, how should I bear it? Should God deal with me as with his servant Job, or with some others of his servants, how should I undergoe it? Thus do they disquiet their souls oft times with vain ap∣prehensions of what God (it may be) never in∣tendeth to do to them; so making the burden of the present day a great deal heavier then it would be, by pulling to morrows burden upon it. Against all these causelesse fears the Medi∣tation in hand may serve as a soveraign Cordiall. God, when he afflicteth his people he doth it by measure, by a measure of mercy, proportioning
their sufferings to their strength: So as if he shall call any of them to sufferings above, and beyond their strength, he will make a proportionable supply. And if he give a greater measure of strength for the bearing of it, it is all one as if the affliction were lighter. And why then should we disquiet our souls with these ifs and ands, these doubts and fears of what may come here∣after? Come what will come, come what shall come, it shall not exceed that measure, which our wise and mercifull God seeth fitting and conve∣nient for us. And therefore being perswaded hereof, Christians qui∣etly to submit to divine dis∣penstions. (to close up this point with a word of Exhortation) let all of us quietly and contentedly submit to whatever dispensations we meet with. Look∣ing upon them as our Cup, our portion, take them, and submit to them, and that not only patiently but willingly. Children who are content∣ed with such portions of meats and drinks as their Parents reach forth to them, many times speed the better for it; whereas those which lowre when they have not what they would, are sent away fasting. Never did any childe of God get any thing by repining and murmuring at Gods dispensations and dealings with him. Here∣by many times they double their afflictions: And therefore whatever it be, take it contentedly. This bitter cup being thus drunk, may make way for a sweter. So it did to our blessed Saviour. His Crosse, which he thus took up upon his shoulder, made way for his Crown. He humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, the death of the Crosse; wherefore God also hath highly exalted him. Phil. 2.8, 9. Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and
to enter into his glory? Luk. 24.26. Where the Bread of affliction and water of adversity, are taken, and swallowed down contentedly, in a way of Obedience, God hath sweeter morsels in store. As the Physician who after his churlish potions giveth pleasant and refreshing Cordials. Such Cordials hath God in store for his people, which he waiteth to bestow on them, when he seeth them fit for them. Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you (saith the Prophet Isaiah to the Jewes) And therefore will he be exal∣ted that he may have mercy on you; for the Lord is a God of judgement, blessed are all they that wait for him. Isa. 30.18. Mark it; The Lord is a God of judgement,] one that doth all things with wis∣dome, moderation and discretion, especially in his carriage towards, and dealings with his chil∣dren, (as our new Annotation there rightly ex∣pounds it. And therefore, Blessed are all they that wait for him; such as quietly and composedly sit down under his correcting hand, not rising up against him, not running out from him, to seek relief by any indirect wayes and means, but expecting his deliverance, in his time, and way, when to him it shall seem seasonable to send it. But of this I shall have occasion to speak more fully in the latter part of the Text, to which I shall ad∣journ the further prosecution of it. I have done with the first particular; What is here said to be given, [The Cup.] Passe we now to the second. By whom it is given. By whom gi∣ven, where consider. [The Cup which my Father hath given.] Where take we notice of two things; The Agent,
And the Action. Singula verba singularem Em∣phasia habent, Ferus Com. in loc. The Agent [My Father.] The Action, [Hath given.] Look we upon them severally. For (as Ferus truely observes) there is not a word in this Text but hath its weight, a special emphasis in it. Be∣gin with the former. The Agent, The Agent, God; Who is called a Father. the Person reaching forth this Cup, [My Father.] , (saith the Originall) The Father. A Relative title, which in Scripture we finde given two wayes, ; Essentially, Personally. 1. Essentially. Sometimes Essentially. And so it relates to the whole Godhead, to all the three Persons joynt∣ly considered, who being but one God, are called by this name of Father. Thus is the word used in the entrance to the Lords Prayer, Our Father which art in heaven.] Where the word [Father] is to be understood essentially, as comprehending all the three Persons in the Trinity, to whom joyntly the prayers of Gods people are to be di∣rected. And so Malach. 2.10. Have we not all one Father, meaning God. 2. Personally. But most commonly the word is used Perso∣nally, as a Relative Title, serving to distinguish the Persons. And so it pointeth at the first Person. So are we to look upon it wherever we finde it pointed with either of the other persons. As Math. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Where, by the Father we are to un∣derstand the first Person. And so is it most pro∣perly looked upon in all those Texts, where Christ maketh mention of his Father. Among
which, this we have now in hand is one [The Cup which my Father hath given me.] For the opening of which Title, God a Father in divers re∣spects. we may take notice that God is said to be a Father in divers respects. 1. In reference to all creatures. There is one God, Generally. To all his Creatures, to whom he is a Father. and Father of all, (saith the Apostle) Eph. 4.6. of all creatures. Which he may be called upon a divers account. 1. A Father by creation. All things having their Originall, their being from him. By Creation. Ʋnto us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, 1 Cor. 8.6. . All things have their being from him, as a Childe from the Father. Have we not all one Father? hath not one God created us? (saith that forecited Text) Mat. 2.10. 2. And (secondly) a Father by Providence; By Providence. as he giveth them their being, so he taketh care of them, providing for them as a Father doth for his children. The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou givest them their meat in due season. Psal. 145.15. 3.  And thirdly a Father to them similitudine vestigii, In regard of similitude. in regard of some similitude and likeness betwixt him and them, there being never a crea∣ture but hath some print and footstep of God im∣printed upon it. Quaelibet herba Deum. Never a creature, but whoso looketh upon it, may see something of God in it. Thus is God a Father to all Creatures, universally. 2.  Among them he may be said to be a Father after a more special manner to Mankinde. Specially to Mankinde. In whom there is not only similitudo vestigii, but ima∣ginis, not only some footsteps, but even the Image of God. So was Man at the first created. Let us
make man in our own image, after our likenesse. Gen. 1.26. So God created man in his own Image, in the image of God created he him, vers. 27. resembling his Creator, as a childe doth the Father, like unto him, as in divers other perfections, so especially in knowledge, holinesse and righteousnesse. 3. Peculiarly to true Believers. Among men he is said to be a Father more peculiarly to all true Believers. To them a Father by the grace of Adoption. Having predestinated us to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto himself, Eph. 1.5. As also by the grace of Regeneration. Bless d be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again, 1 Pet. 1.3. Hereby he reneweth his Image in them, making them partakers of the divine nature (as St. Peter calleth it, 2 Pet. 1.4.) , not , not of the Divine essenee, or sub∣stance, which is incommunicable to any creature, but of divine qualities; whereby they are made like unto God in grace here, and glory hereafter. And being thus related, he performeth all the offi∣ces of a Father to them, providing for them ne∣cessaries and conveniences, both temporall and spiri∣tuall upon earth, and laying up an Inheritance for them in heaven. Behold a sea of matter, which I might here lanch into, and that without any wrong either to you, or the Text. But I shall confine my self. In the fourth and last place, Properly unto Christ. God is most pro∣perly a Father unto Christ. Blessed be God the Fa∣ther of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.4. So we finde our blessed Saviour often calling him. My Father worketh hitherto, Joh. 5.17. and frequently elsewhere, . And so our Translations, both old and new, do here render the Text,
[My Father.] And so God may be said to be the Father of Christ; and that in a most peculiar way; so his Father, as he is not of any other. His Father, and that in reference to both na∣tures, God a Father to Christ in reference to both natures. His Godhead, His Manhood. 1. In respect of his Godhead; According to his Godhead. so he was his naturall Father, begetting him by an eternall, wonderfull, unexpresseable, unconceiveable kind of generation, communicating the whole divine essence and substance unto him, as a natural Pa∣rent communicates his nature to his Son. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, saith God the Father to his Son Christ, whom according to his divine nature he begat from all eternity, Psal. 2.7. Whence it is that he is called the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 3.16. the only begotten of the Father, Joh. 1.14. Not only Primogeni∣tus, but Ʋnigenitus, not only the first born, (which he is also said to be [The first-born of every creature,] Col. 1.15. The first-born among many brethren, Rom. 8.29. in as much as he is the heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. (having the preeminence among all Gods children,) but the Onely begotten Son, . So he was according to his God∣head. 2. According to his Manhood. And (secondly) according to his Man∣hood. So God may be called his Father. And that 1. In regard of the wonderfull Conception of it. In regard of that wonderfull and extra∣ordinary operation of the Father in his conception; which was effected by his sending of his holy Spirit to work it. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall over-shadow thee,
(saith the Angell to the Virgin,) Luk. 1.35. . Even as it was in the Creation, where it is said that The Spirit of God moved upon the wa∣ters, Gen. 1.2. putting forth a secret and im∣mediate power in the production of those crea∣tures; so did it over-shadow the Virgin, effecting this conception by an immediate, and extraordi∣nary power. And upon that account (though not only or chiefly that, as Socinians would have it) Christ is called the Son of God. So it there followeth, Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God. Thus was God the Father of Christ according to his Humane nature, in respect of the conception of it. 2.  And (secondly) in regard of the Personal union, In regard of the Personall Union. which was, and is, betwixt the God-head and the Manhood. The Manhood being (as it were) marryed unto the Godhead, made one Person with it, by an inseparable, indissoluble union, God who was the Father to the one by nature, he be∣comes also a Father to the other. And upon these accounts it is that Christ here (as frequent∣ly elsewhere) maketh claim to this Relation, call∣ing God his Father. And to him it is that here he looketh in the businesse of his Passion. Christ in his Passion looking unto God his Father, as his Father. Being now to drink this bitter cup, which he saw coming towards him, he looketh up unto God his Father, and he looketh upon him as his Father: Each of which will afford us somewhat for our Instructi∣on. 1. Christians to eye God in all their sufferings. In that Christ here looketh up unto God his Father, see we whither it is that Gods people are to look in all their Grosses and Afflictions that befall
them. Look upwards, see God in them. So doth our heavenly Pattern here, the Lord Jesus. The High-priests, with the Scribes and Pharises had conspired against him, Judas, his own servant, had betrayed him, Notandum, hic est quod non dicit, An non bibam poculum quod infundunt mihi Judai, inimici & hostes, sed Quod dedit mihi Pater. Admone∣mur hic ut in ferendâ cruce suspiciamus ad Putrem coe∣lestem. Muscul. Com. in Text. the High-priests Officers, with a band of Souldiers were ready at hand to ap∣prehend him, but he looketh be∣yond all these, looketh up unto God his Father, looking upon this Cup as prepared and presented by him. [The Cup which my Father hath given me.] Thus should Gods children in all their afflictions and distresses, look through Instruments, Hic docet nos in adversis non respicere in hominem, aut Daemonem mala inferentem, sed in Deum permittentem. Ferus Annot. in Text. beyond secon∣dary causes; look through them un∣to God himself. So did holy Job, (the story is well known;) when he heard what the Chaldeans and Sa∣beans had done to him, how they had plundered him of his substance, driven away his Heards and his Flocks, what saith he to it? Why, The Lord hath given, and the Lord hath taken, Job 1.21. Non Chaldaei, non Sabaei, (saith one) he doth not say, the Chaldaeans, the Sabaeans have done this, but The Lord hath taken. As for them they were but Instruments, it was God that set them on work to doe what they did. And therefore Job looketh beyond them unto him. And the like did David, when Shimei came like a mad Dog with open mouth, foaming and barking against him, for which Abishai would have had him have given him commission to take off his head, what saith he? Let him alone, and let him curse, for the Lord hath
bidden him, 2 Sam. 16.10, 11. This had God done, though not by any order or direction, yet by a secret providence, so ordering and dispo∣sing of Shimeies malice, that he might be instru∣mentall, for the further humbling of David. And David taking notice hereof he disdains to look at that despicable Varlet, but looketh higher unto God, by whose permission, yea secret commission, he did what he did. So it is, In all mans sufferings God the principal Agent. in whatever sufferings, whoever be the Instruments, God himself is the principal Agent. What they do, they doe it by Gods ordination and appointment. It was one thing which Rab∣shakeh would have Hezekiahs servants to tell their Master, concerning his coming up against Jeru∣salem, Isa. 36.10. Am I now come up without the Lord against this place to destroy it? The Lord said unto me, Goe against this place, and destroy it. This he spake falsely, and yet truely; falsely as preten∣ding to a Commission and Warrant from the Lord for what he did; yet so as there was a truth in what he said. Though he had no word from God, yet it was by his secret counsel and ap∣pointment that he came up thither. So the same Prophet, speaking from the Lord, elsewhere as∣serts it, Isa. 10.5. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, the staffe in their hand is mine indignation. So it is in what hand soever it be, the Rod, the staffe of Affliction and Suffering is Gods. If the Assyrian come up against Jerusalem, it is God that sendeth him. [I will send him against an hypocriti∣cal Nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge; (so it there followeth) vers. 6. True it was, he intended nothing lesse then the doing of Gods work, the fulfilling of his will,
as the next verse hath it, [Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so, vers. 7.] He came of his own head, to doe what was in his own heart, to satisfie his ambitious and cruel minde, in conquering of Kingdomes, and making havock of the people where he came. That was his de∣sign. Yet so as herein he had a secret Commission from God, who sent him as a scourge against that people. Thus is God the Orderer and Di∣sposer of whatever evils befall his people. Shall there be evil in a City, (and so in a Family) and the Lord hath not done it? Amos 3.6. Evill of affli∣ction and suffering is Gods work, issuing out of his mouth. That is the Churches acknowledge∣ment in her captivity. Lam. 3.37, 38. Who is he that saith, and it cometh to passe, when the Lord com∣mandeth it not? Out of the mouth of the most High proceedeth not evill and good? As prosperous suc∣cesses, so crosse issues, they are all of them by Gods determination and appointment. I form the light, and create darknesse, I make peace and create evill, I the Lord doe all these things. Isa. 45.7. So it was in the sufferings of our blessed Saviour, (as I have in part showen you already, and shall (God willing) do it yet more fully,) it was God, his heavenly Father that measured them out to him. He it was that mixed, that tempered that Cup for him, his naturall Son; and the like he doth for all his adopted children. And if so, then great reason there is why they (as their blessed pattern here doth) in all their afflictions and tryals should look up unto him, taking notice of his hand in the ordering and disposing of them. Without which they can neither have support under them, nor yet a sanctified use of them.
Which let it be applyed by way of Reprehension, Applic. Exhortation. Ʋse 1. Reprehension of such as in their afflictions look only downwards. By way of Reprehension. Were the eyes of our blessed Saviour in his sufferings thus raised upwards, what then mean our eyes to be cast al∣together downwards, as often they are? In af∣flictions and sufferings, whither is it that men ordinarily look? Some they know not to what, to Chance and Fortune, things which are not; others to Instruments and secondary causes. So it is for the most part. If men be plundered and spoyled of their goods, whither doe they look? To the Chaldaeans, the Sabaeans, the spoyl∣ers, Robbers, Enemies that did it. If themselves or theirs, be visited with sicknesse, what is it that they pore upon? The time, and place, when and where they got it, how they came by it, and by what means they may be rid of it. And so for Slanders, their inquiry only is after them that raised them. This is the highest pitch that car∣nall spirits rise unto. As for God, he is not in all their thoughts (as David saith of the wicked man, Psal. 10.4.) And as for Gods own children they are oft times blame-worthy in this kinde, for looking too much downward, too little upward. And thence is it that they are so impatient un∣der their Crosses, as too often they are like Horses champing upon the Bil, not considering the hand that holdeth the Bridle; biting the stone, not taking notice of the hand that throweth it. So did not our heavenly Pattern. Exhort. to fol∣low Christs example in looking up∣wards unto God. Ʋse 2. Whom, be we (who professe our selves his Scholars) exhorted in this, to imitate and fol∣low. In all the crosses and afflictions which befall us look upwards. It was Eliphaz his speech
to Job, in that text forecited, and it was a true one, Job 5.6. Affliction cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the ground; wherein he giveth him to know (what he was not igno∣rant of) that afflictions have a higher rise then men ordinarily look at. They are not things which happen by chance, neither do they de∣pend meerly upon secondary causes; they have God himself for their principal Efficient. And therefore in all our Afflictions look upwards. So must they doe who would finde out the Head of a River, they must go upwards. And the like course take we, that we may finde out the head of every affliction, look upwards, look above and beyond all secondary causes, Instruments, means, occasions, look up unto God himself. The thoughts of a Christian in his suffering con∣condition should never rest till they come at God. Nay, till then they will never rest, The only way to quiet the spirit in Affli∣ction, to see God in it. till they come to see God in every tryall, take notice of his hand. Whence is it that Impatiency so often surprizeth the hearts of Gods own people as it doth? Surely from their looking so much at the Creature, so little at the Creator as they doe. When once a man cometh to see God in an af∣fliction, this quiets all. Such effect it had upon David; I was dumb (saith he) and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord didst it, Psal. 39.9. In his affliction, so long as he looked at secondary causes, he could not be quiet. No, then (as he tells us vers. 3.) his heart was hot within him, while he was musing the fire burned, and then he spake with his tongue, venting his Passions in some un∣becoming expressions. But when once he came
to see God in it, seriously to consider, that this was his doing, this apprehension quieteth and silenceth him, working in him that patience, that quiet composure of Spirit, which by all his reasoning he could not attain unto. And the like effect it will have wherever it taketh place. The soul coming to apprehend that it hath to deal with God, that it is God who hath done what it feels, this silenceth the Tongue. So it did to Aaron, Lev. 10.3. when his two sons were taken away by that strange and unheard of judgement, devoured by fire from heaven, Moses telling him, (what there he doth) This is that which the Lord spake, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh un∣to me,] it followeth, And Aaron held his peace,] quietly and patiently submitting to the will of God. And so it was with Job; seeing God in all his Afflictions, In all this (saith the Text) he sinned not, in thought, word, or deed, Job 1. last. And such effect it will have upon a sanctified soul; coming to see God, seriously to consider, that it hath to deal with him, so as if it strive and contend, it must contend with him, the Pot-sheard with the Potter, this silenceth the tongue, and keepeth the heart in temper from rising up in inordinate Passion. This it was which made our Blessed Saviour so patient in this his Passion, insomuch that he was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before her Shearer is dumb, so opened he not his mouth, (as the Prophet Isai describeth the manner of his suffering) Isa. 53.7. This it was that made him so willingly submit to the drinking of this Cup, he saw his Fathers hand in it: As for the Judas and the High-Priests, and Souldiers, &c. they were but
as the Apothecary, by whom this Potion was brought and ministred unto him: in the mean time he looked upon God his Father as the Physician, who had prescribed and ordered it for him. And herein looking upon God his Father, he looketh upon him as a Father. Christ looking upon God as his Father. There is the se∣cond thing which I propounded here to be ta∣ken notice of, The Cup which my Father hath given me.] Thus eying God in these his sufferings, he looketh upon him under the notion of a Father. And such is God to his people, God afflicting his people, he is still their Father. Signanter autem non dicit, Deus aut Judex de∣dit, sed Pater, utsciamus De∣um, etiam quum flagellat, Patrem esse. Ferus Annot. in Text. even when he afflicts them, he is still their Father. Let that be a second Observation, no lesse usefull then the former. When God is most angry, and dealeth most severely with his people, yet even then they may call him Father. So we finde the Church doing, Isa. 63.15, 16. where expostu∣lating with God about his alienating himself from her, Where is thy zeal (saith she) & thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercies towards me? are they restrained? God did not manifest himself in such conspicuous signs and tokens of his affection towards his people as in former times he had done, which she sadly bewails; But mark what followes; Doubtlesse thou art our Fa∣ther, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not; thou O Lord art our Father. And the like again we finde in the Chapt. fol∣lowing, cap. 64.7, 8. where the Church taking up the like complaint concerning Gods dealing with her, Thou hast hid thy face from us, and hast consumed us because of our Iniquites, yet in the next verse she subjoyns, But now O Lord thou art our
Father. Thus in her saddest condition, even then when God hid his face from her, and dealt most severely with her, yet still she layeth claim to her Relation, calling him her Father. And the like may all true Believers doe, whatever their state or condition be, yet still they may call God their Father. Reas. For so he still is, this Relation being an everlasting Relation. This Relation everlasting. Such is the Covenant betwixt God and his people, I will make an everlasting Co∣venant with them, Jer. 32.40. When God ta∣keth a people into Covenant with himself, (the Covenant of grace) giving himself to be their God, and taking them to be his people, this Co∣venant is an everlasting Covenant, a Covenant that shall never be broke; Betrothing them unto himself he doth it for ever. So runs that promise which God maketh to his Church, Hos. 2.19. I will betrothe (or marry) thee to me for ever. Thus is he an everlasting husband; and so an everlasting Father to his people. That is one of the Titles given to the Messiah, to Christ, Isai. 9.6. The everlasting Father. And so is God to his people. Once a Father, and ever a Father. As it is with na∣tural Parents, though they fall out with their children, and fall upon them, are angry with them, and make them feel their displeasure, yet this doth not dissolve the Relation that is be∣twixt them; no more doth it betwixt God and his children. Ʋse 1. A comfortable meditation, and so let it be to all the sons and daughters of Zion, Comfort to true Believers. even all true Believers, who are sometimes, oft times, sons and daughters of Affliction, lying under the correcting hand of God. Such was Jobs condition,
whom we hear complaining to his friends, that the hand of the Lord had touched him, Job 19.21. And the like doth David, Psal. 38.2.3. where he sadly bemoans his condition unto God. Thine arrowes (saith he) stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore.] So again, Psal. 32.4. Day and night thy hand was heavy upon me. And in the like language we may hear the Church bewailing her calamity, Lam. 3.2. Surely against me is he turned, he turneth his hand against me all the day. Thus doth Gods hand, his afflicting and correcting hand, often lie heavy upon his dearest Saints. But let it not discourage them, so long as it is the hand of their Father; which it is even then when God reacheth forth unto his people the bitterest Cups that can be, yet still he is their Father. A Fa∣ther when he frowns, as well as when he smiles, when he strikes, as when he stroketh, still retain∣ing the same Relation. Yea, and the same Affection. Gods affection to his people still the same. As he is an Ever∣lasting Father, so his Love is an everlasting love. I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. God sometimes, oft times, changeth his counte∣nance towards his people, but his Affection is not changed. Sit licet in natos facies austera Parentum, Mens tamen aequa manet— Naturall Parents sometimes frown and bend their browes at their children, there is nothing but anger and wrath in their countenance, yet even then their affection towards them is the same that ever it was. And so is it with God our heavenly Father; being offended and displeased
with his children, he frowns upon them, so as it may be there is nothing but wrath in his face, yet even then there are bowels of fatherly com∣passion within. So runs that known promise which the Lord maketh to the Seed of David, Psal. 89.31, 32, 33. If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandements, then will I visit their trans∣gression with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes. Neverthelesse my loving kindenesse will I not utterly take from them, &c. God doth not take away his lo∣ving kindenesse from his people though for a time he may hide his face from them. In a little wroth, I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindenesse will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. Isa. 54.7, 8. Josephs bow∣els never yearned more towards his Brethren, then when he turned his face from them, and dealt most rigorously with them, binding Simeon before their eyes, (as you have the story) Gen. 42.24. God is never more affectionately com∣passionate towards his children then when he dealeth most severely with them. Is Ephraim my dear Son (saith the Lord in that patheticall passage, Jer. 31.20.) is he a pleasant childe, for since I spake against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are troubled for him.] Ephraim, the people of Israel, (one Tribe put for the whole Nation,) they had not behaved themselves so as that they deserved to be owned by God, as a dear Son, as a pleasant childe, that he should so look upon them, so acknowledge them; no, they had walked unanswerably and unsuitably to that high Dignity conferred upon them, and given God just cause for ever to reject and cast them off; whereupon he spake against
them, threatning them by his Prophets, yea and proceeding against them in a way of judgement, yet he still remembred them, having still a fatherly affection towards them; His Bowels were troubled for him;] A humane expression suited to vulgar apprehension. When a man taketh a thing to heart, and is deeply affected with it, it maketh his bowels yearn and move within him, sending forth deep sighs and groans; even so was the Lord affected with the condition of that his people. In all their affliction he was afflicted (as he elsewhere expresseth it) Isa. 63.9. Even as every stroak which a tender Mother giveth unto her dear childe it goeth to her own heart, even so is God affected towards his people; when being provoked by their sins he taketh the Rod in hand, and dealeth sharply with them, this is so far from alienating his fatherly affection from them, that it is hereby rather inflamed and in∣creased. A strong Consolation, Gods heart toward his people when his hand is against them. which being rightly ap∣plyed may be of great use for the bearing up of the hearts and spirits of all Gods Saints and ser∣vants in the saddest condition. Even then when God seemeth to be turned their enemy, so as they have no sense and feeling of his love and favour towards them, but all things are against them, his countenance is against them, his hand is against them, he writeth bitter things against them, (as Job saith of himself, Job 13.26.) proceed∣ing against them in a way of Judgement, yet even then his heart is towards them. He is still the same that ever he was; I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3.6. Though he come against them as a Judge, yet still is he the same tender
and compassionate Father that ever he was. At this time when Christ was to drink this bitter Cup, to indure these bitter sufferings, God the Father had now put upon himself the person of a Judge, requiring and exacting from him a full satisfaction for all the sins which he as a Surety had undertaken, so as his Fatherly affection seemed now to be layed aside, yet even now doth he lay claim to this Relation, calling him his Father, still looking upon him under the same notion. Now if he did so look upon him even then when he was powring out Vialls of wrath upon him, inflicting upon him those satisfactory punishments, how much more may his children so look upon him, when he is inflicting upon them only castigatory punishments, exercising them with afflictions and tryals for their good. Which, be they what they will, never so sharp, never so bitter, yet let them rest assured that they cannot dissolve that Relation, that Affection which is be∣twixt God and them, so as to separate them from his love. This is the matter of Pauls triumph in that known Text, Rom. 8.35. Who (or what) shall separate us from the love of God in Christ? This shall not whatever Tribulation or distresse doe (as it there followeth.) God being once a Fa∣ther, he will be ever a Father to his Chil∣dren. Only then (in the second place) labour we every of us to make sure this Relation, Make sure this Relation, that God is our Father. that God is once our Father. Our Father, and that not only by Creation, which he is to all Creatures; nor yet only in respect of an outward visible Cove∣nant, as he was to Israel, I am a Father to Israel, Jer. 31.9 and is to all within the pale of the
visible Church; but by Adoption, that he hath by a speciall grace adopted us into the dignity of his children. Which we may be assured of when once we have received that Spirit of Adopti∣on, which the Apostle speaketh of, Rom. 8.15. , the holy Spirit of God regene∣rating of us, and working effectually in us, working in us a childe-like disposition, filiall affections towards this our heavenly Father, a filial fear, a filial love, a filial affiance, causing us to fear him as a Father, to love him as a Father, to trust in him and depend upon him as a Father. Finding such a disposition, such affections in our hearts, now may we be assured that God is our Father. And being our Father let us now call him so. Call God our Father. This is that which the Lord saith of his servant David, Psal. 89.26. He shall cry unto me, thou art my Father. And it is that which he requireth from his people the Jewes, Jer. 3.4. Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, My Father? viz. from the time that he had admonished them of their duty, and corrected them for their sins. And so again vers. 19. of the same Chapter, I said, thou shalt call me My Father, that is, so own and acknow∣ledge me. And this let all the Lords people do. This is the language which the Spirit of Adoption teacheth all Gods children, to call God their Father. Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father, (saith Paul to his Ro∣mans) Rom. 8.15. And the like to his Galathians, Gal. 4.6. Because ye are Sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. And this do we, call God our Father, and that not only with our tongues but our hearts, so
looking upon him, so owning and acknowledging of him. Which do we at all times, in all estates and conditions, God to be looked upon by his Chil∣dren as a Fa∣ther. in Adversity as well as Prospe∣rity, in whatever God doth to us, or we to him, still look upon him under the notion of a Fa∣ther. 1.  As (first) in receiving of mercies and bles∣sings from him, In receiving of mercies. take them as from the hand of a Father, as pledges and tokens of his love, therein acknowledging his Fatherly affecti∣on. 2.  So also in confessing of sins, and begging pardon for them, In confessing of sins. come unto God as unto a Fa∣ther. So doth the Prodigall Son in the Parable, Luk. 15.18. I will arise (saith he) and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee.] 3.  So again, in deploring of wants, spirituall or temporall, In deploring of Wants. and making suit for a supply of them, come unto God as a Father. So our Saviour teacheth us to do in that Pattern and Form of Prayer which he hath left us, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, Luk. 11.6. di∣recting Christians to make all their addresses un∣to God under that notion, as a Father. When thou pray st pray to thy Father, Math. 6.6. 4.  And so again in Deprecations of evils feared, when God seemeth to be coming against us, In deprecating of evils feared. yet call him Father. So did David his Father-in-law, King Saul; when he was coming out against him, hunting his soul to take it, (as he speaks) yet even then he calls out to him. My Father, 1 Sam. 24.11. And the like do we to our heavenly Father. Though he come against us as an enemy, yet still call him Father. So doth our blessed Saviour, when he
saw this bitter Cup coming towards him, appre∣hended his Passion at hand, He fell on his face, (saith the Text) and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup passe from me, Matth. 26.39. 5. And the like also in Evils felt. When the hand of God lyeth heavy upon us, In present sufferings. pressing us sore, yet still call him Father. So doth the Church in those Texts forecited, when God hid himself from her, dealt most severely with her, yet still she challengeth her Relation, calling him her Father, Doubtlesse thou art our Father, Isa. 63.16. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father, Cap. 64.7. And so doth our blessed Saviour in the Paroxisme of his Passion, hanging upon the Crosse, still he retains his former language, calling God his Father. Father forgive them, Luk. 23.34. And when the pangs of death were upon him, he breatheth out his soul with those words, Father, into thy hand I commend my Spirit, vers. 46. of that Chap. And the like do we, stirring up our hearts to a holy imitation of this our hea∣venly Pattern. In all our afflictions and suffer∣ings of what knide soever they be, yet still call God Father; so look we upon him, so apprehend, and acknowledge him. A good sign of a gracious spirit so to doe, To call God Father, when he frowns, a sign of a gra∣cious spirit. (I scarce know a better,) then to call God Fa∣ther when he frowns upon us, is angry with us, hath a rod in his hand, when he is correcting us. An easie matter it is so to do whilest he is smiling upon us, whilest we receive or expect blessings and favours from him. Blesse me my Father (saith Esau to Isaac) Gen. 27.34. But when he hath (as I said) a rod in his hand, and we feel the smart
of it, when his hand lyeth heavy upon us, when he writeth bitter things against us, when he is turned to be our enemy, fighting against us by his Judgements, then to call him Father, so to look upon him, so to apprehend and acknow∣ledge him, surely this is no other but a fruit of that Spirit, the Spirit of Adoption. And this let all Gods children stir up their hearts to doe, To look upon God as a Fa∣ther, of great use in Afflicti∣ons. thus to look upon God in all their afflictions. A thing which will be of great use to us for the quieting, and comforting, and supporting our spirits under whatever sufferings. So long as a man looketh upon God as an Enemy to him, or as a severe Judge coming against him, he can have no comfort, being conscious to him∣self of his own demerits, but when once he cometh to look upon him as a Father, this sweetneth the bitterest Cup, making a man drink it the more willingly, whilest it giveth him a comfortable hope and assurance of a wise and mercifull mo∣deration of his Affliction, a gracious support un∣der it, and a seasonable issue out of it; all which it doth. Q. How this may be attained. But how shall we attain to this, thus to look upon God in our suffering conditi∣on. A. Learn to live by faith. For this, learn to live by Faith. So lives the Righteous person, as the Prophet Habakuk tells us, Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by his Faith; Live by it in all estates and conditions. This is the Anchor which he rideth by in whatever storms and tempests. When sense and feeling fail he lives by Faith. And thus let us learn to live. So lived our blessed Saviour in his Passion upon the Crosse; when sense and feeling failed him, so as
he did not finde those sweet influences, and gracious communications from God his Father as formerly he had done, as to his present ap∣prehension he had even forsaken him, (of which he complains) yet even then he lives by Faith, setting that awork, still calling God his God, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Matth. 27.46. Thus did he by this eye of Faith see one contrary in and through another, Mercy in the midst of Judgement, a tender Father in the habit of an angry Judge. And thus learn we of him to live. This is the proper life of a Christian, to live here, not by sense, but by Faith. The life which I now live in the Flesh I live by the Faith of the Son of God, (saith Paul of himself) Gal. 2.20. Whilest he lived in the Flesh, in the body, he lived by Faith, Faith in Christ, resting and re∣lying upon Gods grace through him. And thus let us live; and that in all estates. Whatever our condition be, however the Lord be pleased to deal with us. Suppose as (Hezekiah complains, Isa. 38.13.) he breaketh all our bones as a Lyon, or that with Job, we feel the Arrowes of the Almighty sticking in us, the Poyson whereof drinketh up our spirits, and the terrors of God set themselves in array against us, as he speaks (Job 6.4) or that, with Paul, we are troubled on every side, having fight∣ings without, and terrors within, (as it was with him, 2 Cor. 7.5.) being exercised both with Tem∣porall and Spirituall conflicts, in the outward and inward man, (both which Gods dear∣est children are subject to in this life) yet even in this condition set faith awork to look through all these clouds, that so we may behold our Fa∣thers face, see the light of the countenance of
a reconciled God and Father in Christ, making discovery of his yet continued love and favour to us. Q. But how shall Faith make this disco∣very? A. Why, by looking through the Glasse of the Promise, which represents God as he is, not as he seemeth to be. And this let us have recourse unto, hearkening what the Promise will say to us. In our saddest extremities when sense and feeling represent God unto us as an Enemy, now hear what the Promise saith. That will give us assurance of what we have heard, that being once our Father, he will be ever our Father. So as though he may be angry with us, yet he will not utterly reject those whom he hath taken in∣to Covenant with himself. If they break my Sta∣tutes, &c. I will visit their transgressions with the Rod, and their iniquities with stripes; neverthelesse my loving kindenesse will I not utterly take from him, (so runs that Promise forecited.) Now the word of Promise is a sure word, a word of truth, which God will not fail in the performance of. I will not suffer my faith∣fulnesse to fail; my Covenant will I not break, (so it there followeth.) And therefore, whatever sense and feeling say, hear what the Promise saith, casting our Anchor upon that ground, living by Faith in it. It is the want of this that maketh Christians so dejected under their afflictions and troubles as often they are. Living by Sense, a cause of great de∣jections. They live by sense and feeling, apprehending God to be as they feel him. Whereas if Faith were acted, and set a work as it might be, what a constant clear Sunshine day might the life of a Christian be? Were a man
aloft above the Clouds, he should see the Sun shining clearly in the darkest gloomiest day of Winter; and were the soul mounted, (as it might be) by Faith upon the wings of the Promi∣ses, what a constant apprehension of Gods love and favour might it injoy? beholding God as a reconciled Father even then when there is nothing but wrath and anger in his face. Which let all his Children endeavour to doe. To close up this point, (in the last place) Is God thus a Father when he strikes, Christians to receive cor∣rect on from God, as from a Father. then re∣ceive we correction from him as from the hand of a Father. So our blessed Saviour here taketh this Cup, as from the hand of his Father. And so take we all those Cups which he shall reach forth unto us, all those Afflictions and Crosses wherewith he shall please to exercise us, take them as from the hand of a Father. Q. And how is that? A. Why, With a quiet and humble submission. with a reverent and humble sub∣mission and subjection; neither slighting of them, nor fainting under them. My Son despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of his correction (saith the Wise man to his Son) Prov. 3.11. But quietly and contentedly submit to his Dispensations. Humbling our selves under his hand, (as St. Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 5.6) So do children, if ingenuous, well-natured and nurtu∣red, receive correction from the hands of their naturall Parents, and in like manner receive we chastisements from the hand of our heavenly Fa∣ther. That is the Exhortation which the Apostle presseth, and that upon this very ground. Heb. 12.9. Moreover (saith he) we have had Fathers of
our bodies which corrected us, and we gave them re∣verence; should we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits? For within the next Verse he subjoyneth a Reason. For they verily for a few dayes chastened us after their pleasure, but he doth it for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holynesse, vers. 11. Naturall Parents sometimes prove unnaturall to their children, correcting them in passion, it may be out of some mistake, or out of a corrupt judgement, so doing more hurt then good by their Corrections. But so doth not our heavenly Father; who being a wise and mercifull God, never correcteth his children but where need is, and then he doth it in such a manner as may be for their spiritual advantage, so as they may be the better for it. And there∣fore whatever the Rod be, kisse it; whatever the Cup be, take it as from the hand of a Father, drinking it not only patiently, but willingly, sub∣mitting our wills to his will. So doth our hea∣venly Pattern, our blessed Lord and Saviour. However, he could have wished that this Cup might have passed from him, yet he submits his will to the will of his heavenly Father. Neverthe∣lesse, not as I will, but as thou wilt, Mat. 26.39. And this he doth willingly. The Cup which my Father hath given me shall I not drink it? But of this I shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. Thus I have done with the Agent, who it was that presented this Cup to our Saviour, My Fa∣ther.] Come we now (in the next place) to the Action it self, The Action. which is, The Giving of this Cup, The Cup which my Father hath given me.] .
So it was, it was God the Father which gave this Cup to his Son Christ. God the Father gave this Cup to his Sonne, gave his Son to dye. Mark it. Here is the chief and principal Do∣ctrine that this former part of the Text affords us. God the Father gave this Cup to his Son Christ. Which in effect, and for substance speaketh one and the same thing with that of the Apostle, Rom. 8.32. God spared not his own Son, but deli∣vered him up for us all. So was it in the Type, Abra∣ham offered up his Son. By Faith Abraham, when he was tryed, offered up Isaac, and he that received the Promises offered up his only begotten Son, (so the Apostle to the Hebrewes hath it,) Heb. 11.17. And St. James the like. Was not Abraham our Fa∣ther justified by works, when be had offered up Isaac his Son upon the Altar? Jam. 2.21. This did he intentionally, in affection and resolution, bind∣ing his Son, and laying him upon the Altar, stretching forth his hand with the sacrificing Knife to slay him, as the story sets it forth, Gen. 22.9, 10. Which in Gods acceptation was all one as if he had done what he purposed and in∣tended to doe. And so was it in the truth of that Type. God the Father offers up his Son, his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, offers him up upon the Altar of the Crosse. Where, (as the Prophet Isai describeth his Passion) Isa. 53.10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he hath put him to grief; when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, &c. Thus did God the Father give this bitter Cup to his Son; giving him to suffer, and die that painfull, shame∣full, accursed death of the Crosse. Obj. But was this the Fathers act, How is Christ said to give himself. (here to re∣move a stone which lyeth in my way, to meet with an obvious Objection) Did God the Father
give this Cup to his Son, give him to the death, how then is Christ said to give and offer up himself? So we finde it frequently elsewhere expressed. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us, Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for our sins, that he might redeem us from this present evil world, Gal. 1.4. Who through the eternal Spirit offered up himself, Heb. 7.27. He poured out his soul unto death. Isa. 53.12. So runs the phrase of Scripture ordi∣narily, speaking of the Death and Passion of Christ as his own voluntary act. I lay down my life for my Sheep, Joh. 10.15. Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, vers. 17. And again (as it followeth) No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of my self, I have power to lay it down, &c. vers. 18. How then is this here attributed to the Father, that he should give this Cup to him? A. To this the Answer is obvious. 1. Christ as God co-working with his Fa∣ther. If we look at Christ as God, the Son of God, here that trite, but true Maxim will be of use, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa. All the external works and actions of the Trinity, such acts as they do out of themselves, for or upon the Creature, they are common to all the three Persons, so as they may be indifferently referred and attributed to all, or any of them. Such was the work of Creation, the joynt work of all the three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and so attributed sometimes to one, some∣times to another. And such was this work of edmption, however undertaken by one, yet it was designed by all the three Persons, being done by the mutual consent and agreement of all, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; all concurring in
the design; though not in the execution of it. What Christ as Mediator suffered he did it by the joynt consent of all the three Persons. And there∣fore is it sometimes attributed to one, sometimes to another. Sometimes to the Father, and some∣times to the Son; who as they are one God, so they have one will, and one work. The Son can do nothing of himself (saith our Saviour) but what he seeth the Father doe. For what things soever the Father doth, these also doth the Son likewise, Joh. 5.19. Thus did Christ the Son, not only imitate his Fa∣ther, doing works like unto his, but Cooperate with him, doing the same works. And hence is it that the same Action is attributed sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other. Thus we here finde the giving of Christ to the Death, which yet was his own act, attri∣buted by him to God his Father, he being the first worker in respect of Order, and manner of working, The Gup which my Father hath given me.] But (secondly) look upon Christ as Man, or rather as Mediator, as God and Man, As Mediator subservient to him. so we shall finde him subservient to his Father, readily doing his will. Lo I come to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10.7, 9. And as doing, so suffering it. Which he did in obedience unto him. He humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, Phil. 2.8. And thus, as his Father gave the Cup, so he drank it, so giving himself to the Death. Even as it is not without ground conceived concerning the Type forementioned, Abrahams offering of his Son Isaac. This was Abrahams act, and yet so as his Son concurred in it, and that more then as a meer Patient, being obedient to his Father,
at his command carrying of the Wood, yielding himself to be bound, and layd upon the Altar, all which he did willingly. So was it with our blessed Saviour. Being acquainted with his Fa∣thers will, he yields himself to be bound,—which he was first in the Garden (as we have it in the verse after the Text.) and then by Caiaphas, (as we finde it Mar. 15.1.) bears his Crosse, sub∣mits unto the Death. Thus the Father gave his Son, and yet the Son gave himself. But not to in∣sist upon this. Q. What God the Father did, in and about the passion of his Son. The way being thus cleared, now come we by way of Explication to make enquiry, what God the Father did in and about the Passion of his Son, that he is here said to give the Cup to him. The resolving of this Question will clear up this great and usetull truth. A. This concur∣rence consist∣ing in divers particulars. The Action and concurrence of God the Father, in and about the Death and Passion of his Son it consisteth in divers particulars. Take we notice of five or six of them. 1.  He was privy to it, he foresaw it, he fore∣knew it. He foresaw it. This he did from Eternity. So he doth all his Works. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the World, Act. 15.18. What∣soever God bringeth to passe in time it is known to him before time: And so was this work, the work of Redemption, wrought by the sufferings of Christ, it was foreseen, foreknown by God from Eternity. This none will question. 2. Foreseeing of this before it was done, he also permitted it to be done. Foreseeing what∣ever should be done to his Son Christ by Satan and his Instruments, he gave way to it, permit∣ing Satan to enter into Judas, and Judas to be∣tray
his Master, and the Officers to apprehend him, and carry him away, and Pilate and the rest to sit in judgement and passe sentence upon him, and to execute that sentence. All which he could have hindered if he had pleased. Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more then twelve Legions of Angels, (saith our Saviour to Peter) Math. 26.53. God the Father wanted no power to have hindered all that was done to his Son, but he permitted it. Thus far Bellarmine, and the whole Church of Rome will go along with us. But we must not stay here. The phrase in the Text imports more. Gods giving this Cup to his Son imports more then a bare provision or permission. And therefore here leaving them, passe we on. 3. In the third place, God as he foresaw and permitted this, so he willed it. He willed it. Bradward. con∣trà Pelagianos. lib. 1. cap. 33. So he doth whatever he permits. So Bradwardine rightly determins it. Respectu cujuscunque est Dei permissio est & ejus volitio actualis. Whatever God permits to be done he also actually willeth that it should be done. And so he did the Death and Passion of his Son. So much we may learn from those words of our Saviour, Math. 26.39. where praying that if it were possible this Cup might passe from him, he subjoyns, Neverthelesse not as I will, but as thou wilt. God did not only permit his Son to dye, but he willed his death. Upon which account it is that the Prophet Isai there saith, It pleased the Lord to bruise him, Isa. 53.10. Dominus volut. It was his will, his pleasure that he should suffer what he did; having in his secret Coun∣sell decreed and determined it from eternity.
For this expresse is that known Text, Idem est , et 1 Pet. 1, 2. nam  in his li∣bris Decretum soepe significat. Grot. Anno. in loc. Act. 2.23. which informs us, that Christ was delivered by the determinate counsell, and foreknowledge of God; That is, by his decree, for so are we to under∣stand the word (knowledge) there, not barely of a simple prescience, a foresight, but of a de∣terminate and absolute decree. So we finde the word elsewhere used, as 1 Pet. 1, 2. where Be∣lievers are said to be elect according to the fore∣knowledge of God, that is, according to his De∣cree. And so was Christ delivered according to the foreknowledge. the determinate Counsel of God. . God in his eternal Counsell and Purpose had decreed that his Son should suffer and dye. Upon which account (among some other) he is said to be the Lamb slayn from the foundation of the World. Rev. 13.8. He was so in Gods Decree, who had determined that he should dye. The Circum∣stances of Christs death all determined by his Father. And determining the thing he determined al∣so all the circumstances concerning it. As what kinde of death he should dye, even that accursed death upon the Crosse. So much our Saviour intimated to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.14. where he tells him, that As Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wildernesse, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, , oportet exaltari, must be lifted up, so. Patris decreto (as Grotius there rightly) according to the Decree of God the Father lifted upon the tree of the Crosse. And the like to the Jewes, cap. 12. of the same Gospel, vers. 32. where speaking in the same language, he tells them, that If he were lift up from the earth he would draw all men unto him, This he said, (saith the next verse) signifying what death he
should die; viz. the death of the Crosse. And so also the Time, when he should dye, which till it was come, his enemies could not lay hands on him. As yet no man layed hands on him, (saith that Text, Joh. 8.20.) for his hour was not yet come, the time appointed by his Father for him to suffer in. And as the time so the place. So much he declared to his Disciples, Math. 16 21. where he tells them that he must goe to Jerusalem, Neque enim hic aut de praefi∣nito Dei consilio, aut de utilitate rei agitur, sed res futura nudè praedicitur. Grot. Annot. in loc. and suffer many things of the Elders, and be killed. , (where I know not any just ground why Grotius should refuse to expound the word () as he did in that former Text,) Oportet eum ire, He must go thither: It was not a thing left to his own liberty, or choice, but being determined by his Father, it was now necessary; necessitate decreti divini, in regard of Gods Decree which was immutable, (as Pareus expounds it.) Haecerat aetrrni Patris voluntas immutabilis. Pareus, Com. in loc. And the like we may say for the Persons, who should be Actors in this Tragedy, and what part every of them should act, what they should do. Never a circumstance but was predetermi∣ned by God. So that one Text sets it forth most fully, Act. 4.27, 28. Of a truth (saith Peter) a∣gainst thine holy Childe Jesus, whom thou hast anoynt∣ed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel were gathered together to doe whatsoever thy hand and thy Counsell had determined before to be done. Thus did God the Father (as I said) appoint and order all the severall Ingre∣dients; every grain that was to be put into this Cup, decreeing and determining whatever his Son was to suffer. 4. He revealed his will con∣cerning it. And (fourthly) having thus in his secret Counsell decreed this his suffering, he also re∣vealed
it, making known his will concerning his Son, that he should suffer and die. This he had done by Types and Figures. As that of Abrahams offering his Son, his only Son, in whom all the Na∣tions of the earth should be blessed, (of which I spake before.) So also in and by all those bloody Sacri∣fices under the Law, all which were shadowes of what was to come, representing the death of Je∣sus Christ, who was to be offered up a true Pro∣pitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the World. But more clearly by Prophesies, divers of which we meet with in the Old Testament. Among which that of the Prophet Isai is most clear, Isa. 53. where he describeth the Death and Passion of Christ, rather like an Evangelist then a Pro∣phet, as if he had been a Spectator of it. And so other of the Prophets, they foretold what things Jesus was to suffer. As St. Peter sets it forth, Act. 3.18. These things (saith he) which God before had shewed by the mouth of all his Prophets, that Christ should suffer, he hath also fulfilled. Thus God reveald what before he had decreed. Which our Saviour taking notice of, he here speaks of his Passion after this manner, Non loquitur dubitativè, for∣tasse Pater c vult, sed asser∣tativè, Calicem quem dedit. Ferus Com. in Text. calling it the Cup which his Father had given him. Being fully ac∣quainted with his Fathers will, he speaks of what he was to suffer non dubitativè, sed assertivè, (as Ferus notes upon it) not as a thing doubtfull, but certain. The Cup which my Father hath given me.] 5.  Yet further, God having thus decreed, and made known his purpose concerning his Son, He delivereth him up. he also delivereth him into the hands of those who were to execute that his decree. Who was delivered for our offences, (saith the Apostle
speaking of Christ) Rom. 4. vers. last; , delivered unto death by God his Father, as that other forecited Text explains it, Rom. 8.32. He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. This he did when by his all-disposing pro∣vidence he brought him into the Garden, where the Officers should come to apprehend him, and so delivered him into their hands, and into the hands of other his enemies. 6. And lastly, having delivered him into their hands, he also impowred them for the doing of what they did to him. So our Saviour upon his Arraignment tells Pilate, Joh. 19.11. Thou couldest have no power against me at all except it were given thee from above. That Authority which Pilate had to sit in Judgement and passe sentence upon him, and so that power which others had to execute that sentence, they had it from above, from God. In all these they were but Instru∣ments made use of by him, in the mean time it was he that had the main stroke in the work, he being the chief and principal agent. Thus you see how God did concur in the death and Passion of this his Son. He not only was privy to it, and permitted it, but he decreed and determined it, and every circumstance in it, making known his will concerning it, delivering him into the hands of his enemies, and giving them power to execute what he had decreed. So as put∣ting all these together, well may we conclude, what our Saviour there asserts concerning this Cup, that it was given him by his Father. But was it so? From hence now arise two Queries, two scruples, Two questions of great im∣portance. calling for satisfaction before we proceed any further. If God the Fa∣ther,
did thus give this Cup to his Son Christ, why then, 1. How did the Jewes sin in putting him to death? And (secondly) if they did sin, How then is Ged free from being the Author of that sin, or from partaking in it? Two Questions of great importance. I shall endeavour to give a full solution to both. To begin with the first. If God thus gave this Cup to his Son, How the Jewes finned in executing of what God had thus decreed. so concurred in this his Passion as we have heard, how did the Jewes sin in putting him to death? Quaeritur, si Pater dedit Christo hunc calicem, quid pecaverunt Judaei, qui cum Christo dede∣runt, intulerunt, & propina∣verunt. Carthus. Enar. in Text. When as they were but Instruments, onely reaching this Cup to him, God himself being the principal Agent, how were they culpable? To this let me return a threefold An∣swer. They were voluntary In∣struments. 1. Distinguishing of Instruments; which are of two sorts, Meerly Instrumentall, or Ministerial. Meer Instruments are such as have no activity, nor efficacy in themselves for the doing of any thing further than as they are acted by ano∣ther. Such is the Axe in the hand of the Car∣penter, and the Sword in the hand of the Soul∣dier. But such were not the Jewes, they were not meer, but Ministerial Instruments, voluntary Agents, doing what herein they did, not by any
coaction or constraint, but freely, willingly. Impii dum pec∣cant non sunt proprè Instru∣menta Dei, mota sc sine in∣terno principio motus, sed me∣taphoricè, ita sc. mota ut libe∣rè moveant se∣metipsa. D. Ames Bellarm. Enerv. t. 4. c. 2. Hominis volun∣tas est quodam∣modo Dei In∣strumentum, non purum & me∣rum, sed libe∣rum, Alvartz. Disput. 68.5. Such an Instrument is man in the hands of God. Being a reasonable creature, indued with under∣standing and will, what he doth, he doth it freely, there being no violence in any thing offered to his will. True it is, the will of man also is Gods In∣strument, but such an Instrument, not a meer, but a Ministerial, a free and voluntary Instrument. Be∣ing moved it moveth of it self, not being sub∣ject to coaction or compulsion. Voluntas si coge∣retur desinit esse voluntas. If the will could be compelled it should cease to be a will; it ever acteth freely. And so did the Jewes in putting the Lord of life to death, they were not meer Instruments, but volun∣tary Agents, and so cannot be excusable in what they did. 2. The Jewes were culpable in acting of that which God had decreed and determined, inaf∣much as they had no warrant, They had no warrant for what they did. no rule for what they did. Nay, they went against the rule. What is the Rule by which all the actions of men ought to be squared? Why, Gods secret will no war∣rant for man. it is the Revealed will of God. As for his secret will, that is his own rule, not Mans. Secret things belong unto the Lord, but revealed things to us and to our children, Deut. 29.29. Obj. Why, but was not this will of God re∣vealed to them? Whether this will of God was revealed to the Jewes, that Christ, should die. Caiaphas the High-priest by a Prophetical Spirit tells it them, that it was ex∣pedient for them, that one man should die for the peo∣ple, Joh. 11.50. so prophesying, that Jesus should die for that Nation; and not for that Nation only, but that he might gather together in one the chil∣dren of God that were scattered abroad, (as it there followeth) vers. 51, 52.
A. Yet had they no word of command to put him to death. But suppose they had understood this, (which yet Caiaphas himself did not; This spake he not of himself, (saith that 51. vers.) God only made use of his Tongue, to utter an Oracle which he knew not the true sense and mystery of) yet could not this have been an excuse for them, inasmuch as they had no direction, no word of command from God to put their hands to this work. This it is which is mans warrant for all his actions, without which, actions which in themselves seem to be good and commendable, become evil and sinfull. Sauls sacrificing, take it with all the circumstances of it, and it seemeth at least not to be so great an evil, yet haing no rule, no such warrant for it, it was displeasing to God, and proved fatal to him, and his. And so Ʋzzahs putting his hand to stay the Ark when it was in danger of falling, it was to the out∣ward shew a pious action, yet being irregular, without warrant, it became to him a mortall sin, he was struck dead for it. So on the other hand, Actions which seem to be, nay in some respects, are unlawfull and sinfull, yet if Gods word of command come upon them, it is like the Kings Stamp upon a base piece of Metall, which maketh it currant, it maketh them not only excusable, not sinfull, but an acceptable service. If Judas and the High-priests, and the rest who imbrued their hands in the blood of this sacrifice, who had a hand in putting Christ to death, had had but a word of command from God for the do∣ing of what they did, and in obedience to that command had done it, this had been no more sin in them then it had been in Abraham to have actually offered up his Son, which he intended
to have done; or then it was in the Israelites to spoyl the Egyptians, as they did, by borrowing what they never intended to pay, Exod. 3. vers. last; or then it is in an Executioner, to execute that sentence upon a Malefactor which is pass'd upon him, which another might not doe. It was their swerving from the Rule, acting with∣out a Warrant, which made this act of theirs so horrid and sinfull. It matters not what God had purposed and determined in his secret Coun∣sell, that was no rule to them, nor can it be any plea for them. 3 And again, (in the third place) however, here∣in they did nothing but what God had decreed and determined, This Act of the Jewes done by them, yet was this evill and sinfull in them, inasmuch as they did what they did out of an evill principle, and to an evill end. 1. Out of an evil and sinfull principle. Out of an evil Principle. What was it that put them upon the doing of what herein they did? Why in some of them it was base covetousnesse, as in Judas. What will you give me, and I will deliver him unto you? (saith he) Matth. 26.15. In others it was malice; so it was in the High-priests, Scribes and Pharisees, and some other, His Citizens hated him, (saith the Parable) Luk. 19.14. They have hated both me and my Father, Joh. 15.24. In some it was fear, as in Pilate, who being willing to content the people, released Barab∣bas unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified, (as St. Mark sets it forth) Mar. 15.15. Out of a base servile fear he would complie with a giddy, inraged multi∣tude, doing what they would have him, though against his own conscience. And others out of a
blinde and furious zeal. So was it in many of the vulgar, for whom our Saviour in his Passion puts up that charitable Prayer, Father forgive them, for they know not what they doe, Luk. 23.34. Now this Evil principle rendred the Action sinfull in them, though it had been warrantable in it self. Secondly, it was also evil in the End. What was it that herein they aimed at? To an evil End. it Not the Glo∣ry of God, not the fulfilling of his will, not the salvation of his Elect people, but the executing of their own covetous, ambitious, malicious purposes, in taking that great Prophet out of the way, and so extirpating of that Doctrine which he had preached amongst them. As for Gods ends they never came into their thoughts. Unde nec excu∣santur, quia nec ea intentione Christum occi∣derunt quâ pa∣ter voluit eum mori. Carthus. Enar. in loc. As it was with Sennacherib the King of Assyria, (of whom I spake before.) God sendeth him a∣gainst the people of the Jewes, that he might be a scourge unto them, to punish them for their sins. This was Gods end, but this was not his end. Howbeit (saith the Text) he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so, but it is in his heart to destroy, and to cut off Nations not a few. Isa. 10.6. His intent and purpose was, not to obey God in executing of his will, but to satisfie his own cruel and ambitious desires. Even so was it here. God delivereth his Son into the hands of the Jewes to be crucified, which he did for just and righteous ends. But this came not in their thoughts. The ends which they propounded were sinister and wicked. As it was with Josephs Brethren in selling him into Egypt, However God meant it unto good, to save much people alive, yet they thought evill against him, (as he tells them) Gen. 50.20. they thought to make
him away, that they might never see, or hear of him more. So here, however God had a gracious purpose in this delivering up of his Son, even the saving of many people, of all his Elect, yet the Jewes thought evill against him, thinking by this means to take him out of the way, that they might never hear of him, nor of his Do∣ctrine any more. Now where the end is evill, the Action cannot be good. Thus were they guilty of sin in executing of what God had decreed and determined. Being voluntary Instruments, acting without warrant, against the revealed will of God, out of an evill Principle, to an evil End. Thus you have the former of these Questions resolved. Passe we to the latter. How cometh God to be free from this sin of theirs, so as not to be the Author of it, How God was free from this sin. or a Partaker in it? A scruple of great intricacy. Give me leave a little to wade into the depth of it, so far as I shall conceive you able to follow me. The Protestant Doctrine vin∣dicated, that God is not the Author of sin. Which I shall the rather doe, for the vindicating of the true Protestant Doctrine from that odious Charge which Papists and Arminians would fasten upon it, viz. That it should at least by necessary conse∣quence, make God to be the Author of sin. A Doctrine which all our Divines have with one consent disclaimed, as a Doctrine to be ab∣horred. And so it is, being directly contrary to Scripture, which every where asserts God to be a just, a holy God, free from all iniquity. The Lord is a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and righteous is he, (saith Moses, in that his Swan∣like Song) Deut. 32.4. And we finde the Apostle
seconding him, What shall we say them? Is there unrighteousnesse with God? God forbid. Rom. 9.14. And so St. John, 1 Ep. 2.16. All that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not in the Father.] He is not the Author of any sin. Let not any think to charge their sins, in whole, or in part upon him. Let not any man say, (saith St. James) when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evill, neither tempteth he any man, Jam. 1.13. Sin is no wayes Gods work. At the first his works were all good, very good. And God saw every thing which he had made, and behold it was very god, Gen. 1. last. He did not then create Evil; neither hath he done it since. The evil of sin I mean. As for the evill of Punishment, that he challengeth to be his Creature. I create evil, Isa. 45.7. the evil of Punishment. Not so the evil of sin. That was the Devils Creature, having him for the Author of it. Thence it is that our Saviour tells the malicious Jews; Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father you will doe, Joh. 8.44. And St. John layeth it down as an universall truth, He that committeth sin is of the Devil, 1 Joh. 3.8. So much of sin as there is in a man, so much of Satan; he being the proper Author of it. When he speaketh a lye he speaketh of his own, for he is a lyar, and the Father of it, (saith our Saviour in the former of those Texts) Joh. 8.44. And the like may be said of all other sins; they have Satan for their Father, their proper Author. Whence it is that he is called by the name of , The, (or that) evil one, the wicked one, 1 Joh. 2.13. and else∣where. As for God, he being absolutely good, evil
is inconsistent with him, it cannot dwell with him, (as the Psalmist hath it) Psal. 5.4. Being holy∣nesse it self, he hateth sin, cannot behold it with∣out abhorrence. Thou art of purer eyes then to be∣hold evil, and canst not look on iniquity, (saith the Prophet) Hab. 1.13. Such an utter Antipathy there is betwixt the pure and holy nature of God, and Sin, that he cannot look upon it with∣out detestation. It is the only thing which he perfectly hates; so hating it, as that he hateth the Workers of it, for its sake. So it there followeth, Psal. 5.5. Thou hatest all workers of iniquity. So hateth them as that he will not let their sins goe unpunished. Fulgent. l. . ad Monym. Now (as Fulgentius rightly) Deus non est ejus rei Auctor cujus est ultor. God can∣not be the Author of that whereof he is the Avenger. This is the true Protestant Doctrine, which as it hath been, so let it ever be held and maintained, that God neither is, nor can be the Author of sin, any sin, or yet a partaker in it. Q. But what say we then to the case in hand? The case in hand cleared. Was not he the Author of this sin, the horridest sin that ever was committed, the putting of the Lord of life to death, which if he so concurred in as hath been declared, how can he be free from it? A. For answer hereunto, The Evasion of some Romish Doctors. Actum Judaeo∣rum non voluit Deus, passionem vero Christi voluit. Et psteà] Voluit itaque tota Trinitas ut Christus pateretur, nec taen voluit ut Judaei occiderent; quià voluit poenam Christi, sed non voluit culpam Judaeorum. P. Lumb. Sent. l. 1. Dist. ult. Cap. 2.  Non volebat Deus actionem Judaeorum quae mala erat, sed volebat passionem nm, Idem. cap. 3. ibid. if we will consult with some of the Romish Doctors, they will here help us with an Evasion. God the Father (saith P. Lumbard) did indeed will the death and suffering
of his Son Christ, but not the Act of the Jewes in putting him to death; the one whereof was good, the other evi. That Christ should suffer, it was good, but that they should lay hands upon him, was evill. In malis operi∣bus saepe acci∣dit ut actio sit mala, & passio bona. Bellarm. lib. 2. De Amiss. Grat. c. 11. And to the same purpose Bellarmine, treading in his steps, determines the case after the same manner. God (saith he) did indeed will and determine that Joseph should be sold into Egypt, and that Christ should be slayn, but the wic∣ked Acts of those who sold the one, and crucified the other, he neither decreed nor willed, but only foresaw and permitted. Thus would they here have it, that God gave this Cup to his Son to drink, Deus igitur voluit ac prae∣definivit opera ista virtutum quae in passione consistunt, cum voluit ac prae∣definivit ut Jeseph venderetur, & Christus occideretur. Opera autem mala vendentium Joseph, & occidentium Christum, non voluit, nec praedefinitiv, sed praescivit & permisit. Idem. ibid. but not to Judas, and Pilate, and the rest, that they should hand, and reach it unto him. He willed that he should bear this punishment, not that they should inflict it: His passion being good, their Action evil. But as for this, Retracted and rejected. we finde it ingenuously re∣tracted by some of their own. Suarez, a late learned Jesuite, states and concludes the point generally and confidently; Dicimus tàm esse certum Deum influere immediatè, ac per se in omnem actionem creaturae, t id negare erroneum sit in fide. Suarez Metaph. tom. 1. disp. 22. Sec. 1. num. 7. and that not as his own private opini∣on, but as agreed upon by the most approved Schoolmen, that God hath an immediate influence upon every action of the Creature, and that to deny this, is Eroneum in fide, an Error in the Faith. Yea it is positively layd down by another of them, as the common Tenent of the
Schools (though the Pope could never be brought to determine it one way or other) that the very Act of sin, as it is an act, Thom Cajer. Ferrar. Ca∣preol. Albert. Alexand. Greg. Scotus, ibid. citati. Actus peccati in quantum ctus est, à Deo est tanquam à Causâ. Alvarez. Disp. 24. is from God as the Cause of it. And it must needs be so, inasmuch as the Creature, as it hath its being from God, so also its motion, Man living in him also moveth in him, and from him, according to that of the Apostle, In him we live, and move, and have our being, Act. 17.28. And therefore to leave them. For the returning of a full satisfactory An∣swer, Two things here cleared up I shall clear up unto you these two things, (which I shall do with as much plain∣nesse as I can.) 1. How God willed the death of his Son: And 2. How he concurred with Judas and the rest in putting him to death, and yet both without sin. For the First. God gave this Cup to his Son, he willed that he should suffer, and dye. Gods willing that his Son should die, which he might doe And this he might doe, in as much as 1. He hath jus Supremi Dominii, a right of Supreme and absolute Dominion and Soveraignty over his Creatures; so as he may dispose of them as it pleaseth him. This may not Man doe, In respect  his supreme & absolute de∣minion. in as much as he is not such an absolute Lord over what he injoyes. It is not properly his own. He is but usu fructuarius, having only the use of what he possesseth, not properly a Proprietary of any thing. Neither his life, nor estate are his own. He is but Gods Steward, and so must be accountable. But God is an absolute Lord, and so may dispose of all his Creatures according to his own pleasure; and who shall challenge him of in∣justice? This is that which warranteth all those
actions which we read of in Scripture to have been done by his command, being in themselves against the Rule. As that act of the Israelites in spoyling the Egyptians of their goods. This they did by an Order from God, with his allowance, which made it warrantable, inasmuch as he hath a Supreme and absolute right to the goods and estates of men, and so may dispose of them at pleasure, giving them from one to another. Is it not lawfull for me to doe what I will with mine own? (saith the Lord of the Vineyard to his Labourers) Matth. 20.15. And so again for Abrahams slay∣ing of his Son, this was no more then what God might require him to doe: Inasmuch as he is the absolute Lord, as over the estates, so over the lives of men, which he only lends them to use and improve for him, and so may without any injustice call for them at what time, and in what way he pleaseth. And so for the Case in the Text, Gods delivering his Son to the death, it was no more then he might doe, being his Soveraign and ab∣solute Lord. This maketh the act in him not to be unjust. 2. Gods giving his So to dye an act of justice. Nay Secondly, this was in him not only not unjust, but it was an act of Signall justice. Christ having taken upon him the sins of the World, become a Surety for his Elect, ingaged himself to make satisfaction to the Justice of God his Father, it was no other but Justice to exact this Debt. Christ being now become a Male∣factor, a sinner by Imputation, made sin for us, (as the Apostle hath it, 2 Cor. 5. last) yea, the greatest sinner that ever was, having a world of sin charged upon him, for God not to spare him, but thus to deliver him up, was (as I say) signall justice.
3. And thirdly, as this was an act of Justice, An act of grace & favor. so of grace and favour. As of Justice towards his Son, so of Grace and Favour towards his Elect people, for whose sake he did what he did, in giving up his Son, that so by the giving up of one, many might be saved; which the High-priest judged to be a thing most expedient; It is expe∣dient for us that one man should die for the people, and that the whole Nation perish not, Joh. 11.50. These were the motives and ends which God had an eye at in thus giving up his Son: Which being far different from those which the Jewes propoun∣ded to themselves, maketh that to be sinfull in them, which was not so in him. But not to in∣sist upon this, which will be yielded at all hands. For God thus to dispose of his Son, thus to give this Cup to him, to will his suffering and death, it was no more then he might doe. But what was it for him to concur with Judas and the rest, How God concurred in this Act, yet without sin. in such a manner as hath been de∣clared, not only to foresee what they would doe, and to permit them to doe it, but to will, decree, determine whatever they should doe, and to give them power for the executing of it, how shall we here free him from concurring and partaking with them in the sin? yea from being the Au∣thor of that their sin? here lyeth the main diffi∣culty. For the clearing hereof, The former particulars re∣flected upon. let me briefly reflect upon every of these now mentioned particulars, shewing you, how that there is not that in any of these which can fasten any such charges upon God. 1. For the first, his foreseeing of this; His foreseeing of the sin, no cause of it. this he might doe, and yet be no cause of it. The Sun
shineth upon noysome Dunghills and Kennels, yet is it neither the cause of those offensive Va∣pours which are exhaled from them, nor yet in∣fected with them. 2. Nor his per∣mitting of it, which he might doe. being not bound to hin∣der evil. He permitted that wicked act to be done, which he could have bindered; so he doth all other; and it is no more then he may doe, inas∣much as 1. He is not bound to hinder what evil he can, which man is; and that maketh this to be sinfull in man. For him to permit sin, when he can hinder it, is all one as to act it. Malum qui non impedit, quando potest, facit. Inasmuch as the Law requires it from him. But so is it not with God. He is not bound to hinder sin, to afford his re∣straining grace unto his Creature, to hold it up from falling into this or that sin, though he could doe it. 2. And knowing how to bring good out of it. And again, he certainly knoweth how to order it, how to dispose both of the sinner and sin, so as to bring good out of evill. And therefore he may permit it. A man that rideth upon a mettalled Horse, so long as he holdeth the Bridle in his hand, he may let loose the reins, and so suffer him to flie out, because he knoweth how to check, and take him up, or turn him at his pleasure. Such a Bridle hath God upon all the Sons of men, (I will put my book in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, (saith the Lord to Sennaeherib, Isa. 37.29.) He can restrain or turn them at pleasure, knowing how to dispose of them and all their sinfull actions, how to turn them to good. This cannot Man do. And therefore as he may not upon this account act sin, for any to say, Let us doe evill that good may come, this Paul
chargeth as a most desperate and damnable Do∣ctrine, Rom. 3.8. so neither may he willingly permit it. But this God can doe, and that certain∣ly, infallibly. He who at the first brought light out of darknesse, can bring good out of evill: This was his design in permitting Josephs Brethren to sell him, he meant it to good (as I have shewen you.) And so it was in permitting the Jewes to crucifie his Son, he knew how to bring the greatest good out of this worst of evils, which also he did, and therefore he gave way to it; which upon this account he might doe. 3. And (thirdly) he not only permitted, but also willed this action of theirs. But how? God willed this not with a will of Ap∣probation, but Permission, & Ordination. Alsted. Posm. p. 465. Here we must distinguish. There is a twofold will in God, Voluntas approbationis & complacentiae, and Voluntas Decreti, Permissionis, & Ordinationis. A will of approbation, whereby he willeth that a thing should be done, as well-pleasing to himself. And a will of Permission and Ordination, whereby he willeth to permit a thing to be done, and to order it in the doing, and when it is done. Now in this latter way did God will this wicked act of the Jewes; not by way of approbation, giving them any allowance for what they did, but only by way of permission and and Ordination, he willed to permit them to doe it, and then to order what they did, making use of it for those righte∣ous and gracious ends which he had propounded to himself. Fourthly and lastly. He did conour in the very act it self, as in delivering his Son into their hands, Gods concur∣ring in this Act not sinful. so in powering them for the executing of what he had dcreed.
Quest. But how could this be without sin? Bellarmine left to his shifts. To this Bellarmin and some of the later Jesuites return Answere. Deus non efficit actionem illam quae homini est peccatum, ut causa particula∣ris, sed ut causa universalis, praebens vim, & influxum quendam in∣differentem & communem ad illam actionem, & ad contrariam, qui à concursu secundae causae Innitaur. Bellarm. ubi suprà. That God doth concurre with the Creature in finfull actions, not as a particular, but as a generall, an universal cause, affording to it only a kinde of generall influence and assistance, which in it self is indifferent to carry it this way, or that way, to the doing of this action, or the contrary to it, good or evill, the deter∣mining whereof is left to the Creature it self, to the liberty of mans own will. But as for this new device of theirs, Gods concur∣rence in hu∣mane Actions more then ge∣nerall. Vid. Alvarez. Disp. 21. we finde it justly rejected by others of their own, who look upon it, (as well they may) as not a little derogating from the wise Providence of God, making it to be confused and imperfect, and al∣together uncertain, which it must needs be, whilest it dependeth wholly upon the Creature for the determining of the event of it. Absit quod De∣us quicquam velit in univer∣sali & consuse, & illud nolit in particulari & distincte. Brad∣ward. l. 1. c. 34. For a man to spur and put on his Horse, leaving him to choose his own way, all would conclude it to be no wisdome in the Rider. And for God thus to leave the Creature to it self for the determining of its own actions, whilest he only affords such a generall concurrence, it derogates not a little from his Wisdome. In every sin∣ful Action two things, the Act it self, and the Deficiency in it. And therefore to leave them. More soundly, for the resolving hereos, take we notice, that in every sinfull Action there are two things, the Materiale and the Formale (as
some call them) there is the Act it self, and the Inordination or Deficiency in that Act. A known Distinction, usually explained and cleared up to vulgar capacities by those plainer and obvious similitudes. In a horse that halteth there is his going, and his halting, the one is the act it self, the other is the deficiency in that act. So in a crackt Bell, when it is struck, there is the sound and the jarring. Even so in every sinfull actien, in sins of Commission, (for in sins of Omission there is no∣thing but deficiency) there is the Act it self, and the inordination in that act. Instance in the case in hand, the Jewes putting Christ to death, there was the Act, their crucifying of him, and the in∣ordination in that act, the evilnesse of the action, which was their doing it without a warrant, and with such evil intents and purposes as they did. Now to apply the distinction. As for the Act it self, God the Au∣thor of the one, not of the other. that action in the doing whereof the Creature sinneth, God hath a hand in it, and that not only in the ordering and dis∣posing of it, but concurring in it, he being the principal Agent, and the Creature only his Instru∣ment in acting of it. But for the deficiency, the inordination, wherein properly lyeth the evil of the Action, and so the sin, that is the Creatures own, God is not the Author of that, nor any cause of it at all. This is a mans own work, the fruit of his own Corruption, which is properly the Mother of all sin, as Satan is the Father of it. How this may be, those forenamed similitudes do very fitly illustrate. A man that spurreth a lame horse, or strikes a cracked Bell, he is the cause of the motion of the one, and of the sounding of the other, but not of the halting or jarring; that is from
themselves. So here, the motion or action is from God, without whom (as I told you) the Crea∣ture cannot move, but the deficiency therein is from man himself. Siene aer sole Iucente per vi∣trum coloratum, lumen habet a sole, colorem a vitro, sic homi∣num actiones malae habent a Deo ut sint, ab hominibus ut malae sint. Alsted Theol. Polem. p. 402. And so that other made use of by some later Divines expresseth it well. The Sun shining through a coloured glasse, it is the cause of the light, but not of the colour, that is from the glasse it self. Thus doth God make use of man as his Instrument in doing of this or that acti∣on, in acting whereof the man sinneth, the action here is Gods, the sin is the mans own. So is it with all sinfull Actions, they have their exi∣stence, their being from God, their evilnesse from man. Now apply this generall to the particular case in hand, Applyed to the present cse. God did concur with Judas, and the High∣priests, and the rest in all those acts which they did in putting Christ to death. They were herein but his Instruments, it was God that acted in them, and by them. Thus the Act was his, but the sin was theirs. So it is, No action in it self is simply evill, as it is an action. To put a man to death is not evill in it self. The Judge pronounceth sen∣tence against a Malefactor, and the Executioner ex∣eutes it, and it is evil in neither. But to put a man to death without Authority, or without cause; to do it wrongfully or cruelly, there is the evill. That Christ was put to death by the Jewes it was Gods action, and in him (as I have shown you) not unjust, but that they did it without warrant, without cause, maliciously and cruelly, that was their sin, How Gods Providence reacheth to the evill of sinfull actions. which God had no hand in. Q. But what then, doth the Providence of God reach only to the Actions, doth it not extend also to the evil of the action, to the sin it self?
A. To this I have in part returned Answer al∣ready. Take it again briefly. It doth. However God be not the Author of the sin that is acted, yet his Providence is exercised about it. And that (as I said) 1. In permitting it to be done. Which he doth not simply for it self, In permitting it. but in order to those just and righteous ends which he propoundeth to himself. 2. And secondly in Ordering it. Gods permissi∣on is not a bare Negative permission, In ordering it. a not hin∣dering of the evill which is done, but an Opera∣tive, an Effectual permission, (so Melancton, Dicitur autem permissio effi∣cax, non quod Deus peccatum efficiat, sed Or∣dinem illius. Alsted. ubi suprà. and Beza, and some other of our Divines call it,) Efficax permissio, not that God effecteth the evil of sin, but ordereth it. Thus did his Providence ex∣tend to this sin of the Jewes in crucifying of Christ; which he so permitted, as that he or∣dered it, making it subservient to his own designs in effecting that great and good work by him intended, the redemption and salvation of his Elect people. And thus have I endeavoured to clear up unto you this important truth. Which if I have not done so clearly as you could have wished, let it be imputed to the depth of the matter, and not to any affectation of obscurity in my handling of it. To close it up with a word of Application. Three Attri∣butes of God shining in this Glasse. Did God the Father thus give this Cup to his Son, here behold and admire Wonderfull wisdome, Exemplary Justice, Ʋnparallel'd Love; all clearly shining in this Glasse, manifested and declared in this one Act.
1.  Wonderfull wisdome. Such is the wisdome of God which he hath manifested, Won derfull wisdcome. as in the work of Creation, so of Redemption, in finding out a way and means of restauration and salvation for lost Mankinde. Which is effected in a wonderfull way, such a way as all the wisdome of Men and Angels could never have thought of, viz. by giving this bitter, this deadly Cup unto his Son, which being drunk by him might be a Cup of sal∣vation to all that believe on him. Were it so that a Physician could finde out such a medicina∣ble Cup as would cure all Diseases, who but would therein admire his skill? Of such vertue is this Cup which God the Father gave unto his Son, a true Catholicon, sufficient for the cure of all soul∣diseases in them who shall apply it to themselves through faith. Herein admire we the wisdome of God in finding it out; in finding out such a means whereby, satisfaction being made to his Justice, there might be way made for the full exercise of his grace and mercy towards forlorn sinners. Never was the wisdome of God more wonderfully manifested in any act then in this. Thence is it that the Apostle speaking of Christ, and Christ crucisyed, he calleth him the wisdome of God. 1 Cor, 1.24. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jewes a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishnesse, but unto them which are called Christ the Power of God, and the wisdome of God. A crucifyed Christ was, and is to the Jewes a scandall, a stumbling-block. They having dreamed of a Temporall Messiah, that should be outwardly pompous and glorious, armed with power for their deliverance, they could not indure to think of a crucified Saviour. He who could not save himself was no Saviour for
them. He saved others, himself he cannot save, (say some of them in a scoffing and deriding way, when they saw him hanging upon the Crosse,) Math. 27.42. And in like manner he was to the Greeks foolishnesse, who could not by all their supposed wisdome see any Reason, why salvation should be expected in such a way, from such a Saviour. But to them that are called] called out of darkness into light, indued with a right understanding of this sacred mystery, to them is Christ the Power of God, and Wisdome of God,] so called, in as much as the Power and Wisdome of God were won∣derfully manifested in him and by him; and that as in his Life, so in his Death, His Power in con∣quering his and his Churches Enemies, Sin and Satan, His wisdome in this way and by this means executing his most wise Counsell and Decree, touching the Redemption and Salvation of his Elect people. Here was wisdome. We speak the wisdome of God in a mystery, (saith the same Apostle speaking of the Doctrine of the Gospell) 1 Cor. 2.7. And hereof give we unto God the glory, admiring and adoring it; saying with that Apo∣stle what he doth upon another account, Rom. 11.33. ! O the depth of the riches both of the wisdome and knowledge of God. 2. Aud thus beholding his Wisdome, do we the like by his Justice, Exemplary Justice. which was also in this act won∣derfully declared and manifested, in God the Fa∣thers thus giving this Cup to his Son. His Son ha∣ving undertaken for his Elect, to make satisfacti∣on for their sins, he being thus become their Surety, God his Father spareth not him, but delivereth him unto the death. So just, so im∣partial is God in the punishing of sin, not sparing
it wherever he meeteth with it, but requiring satisfaction to his Justice; which because men of themselves are not able to make, there∣fore he required it of this their Sure∣tie. 3.  (in the third place) behold we here unparallelled Love, Unparallelled Love. Herein is love (saith St. John) that God sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our sins, 1 Joh. 4.10. Herein is love,] , that love. God hath in many other passages ma∣nifested his love to his Elect people, but in none like unto this, his sending his Son into the world for their sakes, and that not only to teach and instruct them by his Doctrine and Example, but to be a Propitiation for their sins, to redeem them by his blood, to die for them. Here was un∣parallelled Love, as in God the Son in thus giving himself, so in God the Father in thus giving his Son. Herein did Abraham expresse his love to God, in offering up his Son to him. And here∣in did God the Father expresse his love to us, in offering up his Son for us. Give we unto him the glory of this grace. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, saith the Church in that ancient Hymne, giving us to take notice that there is a peculiar glory which is due unto each of the Persons in the blessed Trinity. And so there is from this work of Redemption. Besides the glory which is due unto the whole Trinity, whose joynt design this was, there is (as I may call it) a Personal glory due unto each Person. Glory to the Father for giving his Son, Glory to the Son for giving himself, and Glory to the Holy Ghost for revealing this mystery to us, and in us. Now give we to each what is their
due. As to Christ the glory of his suffering, his drinking of this Cup, (of which I shall (God will∣ing) speak hereafter,) so unto God his Father the glory of this act of grace in him, his thus giving his Son, giving him this Cup to drink for us. And thus have I done with this Second Particular in the former part of the Text. By whom it was that this Cup was thus presented, viz. by God the Father. The Cup which my Father hath given.] The third is yet behinde, to which I now come. To whom this Cup is here said to be given. To Whom. To Me.] God the Father gave this bitter Cup to his Sonne Christ; This Bitter Cup given to Christ. He was the Subject of this Passion. Jesus Christ the Son of God. So Scripture every where asserts it. God so loved the World that he gave his only begot∣ten Son, Joh. 3.16. He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up, Rom. 8.32. To him was this bitter Cup given. But how to him? And wherefore to him? The resolving of these two Questions will be sufficient for Explication and Illustration. For the former, How is this Cup said to be given to Christ? Whether to Christ as God, or as Man, or both. How was he the subject of this Passion, whether as God, or as Man, or both? To this take the Answer briefly. This Cup was given to the Person of Christ. Whole Christ was the subject of this Passion. Whole Christ the subject of this Passion. It was that Person who was both God and Man which
suffered, dyed. It was not the humane nature a∣lone, as abstracted and separated from the Divine, which thus suffered, but whole Christ; Christus , Christ God and Man. It is a true Rule, that all the Actions and Passions of Christ, what∣ever he did or suffered as Mediator betwixt God and Man, they are all to be attributed unto his whole Person, as God and Man. And such was this work which he did upon the Crosse, the satisfacti∣on which he there made it was Opus Personale, a Personal work, wherein both the Natures were interested. Not the Manhood alone, or the God∣head alone, but both together in one Person, The Cup which my Father hath given me,] . The word is Personall. It was not given to him as God, or as Man, but as both God and Man in one Per∣son. Q. Yet suffering only in his Humane na∣ture. August de Hae∣res. c. 70. , Deipassiarii, Superiore etiam saeculo in Ger∣mania nostra quidam ausi sunt asserere Christum se∣cundum utram∣que naturam passum esse, Polan. Syntag. l. 6. c. 18. The Divine nature im∣passible. But what then, did both Natures drink of this Cup? Did Christ suffer in, and according to both natures? A. So indeed some Hereticks of old asserted it, that Christ suffered not only in his humane na∣ture, as Man, but also in his Divine nature as God. From whence they were called by the name of Theopassians; who have not wanted some to follow them in after-ages, and some of late times. But this is justly condemned as an Error, a gross one, asserting a plain impossibility. True it is, all things are possible with God, viz. to doe them, but himself not passible in any thing, so as to suffer from his Creature. Christ as God he could not suffer, he could not dye; the divine nature being impassible, as well as immortall. A Truth fitly illustrated by a familiar similitude. Whilest the Axe heweth a piece of Timber upon which the
Sun shineth, the Wood is cut, but the Sun-beams not touched, they still remain impassible. Even so was it in the Passion of Christ; the humane na∣ture suffered, but not so the Divine. Though uni∣ted unto the humane whilest it suffered, yet it remained impassible. As it is with the soul and body in man, though both be united together whilest the man suffereth some corporal punish∣ment, yet the Body properly feeleth the smart of it, the soul not suffering, save only by way of sympathie. So was it here in the sufferings of Christ, the Godhead and Manhood were both united in the Person suffering, but the Godhead suffered not. So as we must then conclude it, that the whole Person of Christ suffered, but properly in, or according to his humane nature. So Scripture explains it self. Christ suffered for sins, &c. being put to death in the Flesh, (saith St. Peter) 1 Pet. 3.18. And again, in the Chapter following, vers. 1. Christ suffered for us in the Flesh.] It was Christ that suffered. The Person of Christ, he who was both God and Man, but how? What, in his di∣vine nature? Not so, but in his humane, in the flesh, , that is, according to his humane nature. This is that which St. Paul meaneth, 2 Cor. 13.4. where he saith, that Christ was crucifyed through weaknesse. , that is, through the weak∣nesse of his Flesh, his humane nature, which was subject to all humane infirmities, sin only except∣ed. In this nature it was that Christ suffered, in his humane nature, and only in that. As for his God∣head, it suffered not. Q. No, How God is said to have suffered and dyed. (you may say) what then means that of the same Apostle, Act. 20.28. where he tells the Elders at Miletum, that God purchased the Church
with his own blood, . And that other Text, 1 Cor. 2.8. where he saith of the Jewes, that they crucified the Lord of Glory. And so St. Peter, Ye have killed the Prince of life, , the Author of it, Act. 3.15. Texts made use of by those Hereticks of old for the maintaining of the suffering of the divine nature in Christ. A. To this the answer is obvious and easie. In Christ there are two natures, which are so uni∣ted as that they make but one Person. And from this union floweth a communication of properties, Passio Christi Divinae naturae tribuitur Dialecticâ tantum & verbali, (ut aiunt) praedicatio∣ne, non autem Physicâ & reali, per , Da∣naeus de Haeresib. c. 73. Vid. Engl. N. Annot. in Act. 20.28. (as they call it) whereby that which is proper to one nature is sometimes attributed to the other, or rather (as some of our Divines doe more warily and soundly explain it,) that which is proper to one nature is attributed to the Person denomi∣nated from the other nature. In hoc utroque loco quod propri∣um est humanae naturae tribuitur Personae à divina natura deno∣minata per communicationem Idiomatum. Polan. Syntag. ubi suprà. And so look we upon it in those Texts. To shed his blood, to be crucifyed, killed, it was proper to the hu∣mane nature of Christ, but it is there attributed to the whole Person being denominated from his Divine nature. God shed his blood, that is, that Person who was ruely God, as well as Man, shed his blood, not as God, but as Man. Deus sed non qua Deus, God, but not as God. Deus sed non Deitas, God in the Concrete, not the Godhead in the Abstract. The Lord of glory was crucifyed, the Author of life was killed, that Person who was so in respect of his divine nature, was crucified, kill∣ed in his humane nature. That which is proper to one nature is attributed to the person. So is it
with man, in whom soul and body are united, that which is proper to one of these is attributed to the Person. As when the Body is sick, wounded, buryed, we say the man is so. So in the suffer∣ings of Christ, it was his Manhood which suffered, not the Godhead, yet it is attributed to the per∣son. Which is (as I say) sometimes denominated from the one nature, sometimes from the other. It was the humane nature of Christ, or the Person of Christ in and according to his humane nature, which properly suffered. And this he did in his whole man, Christ suffer∣ing in his whole man. In his Body. both in his Body and Soul. 1. In his Body. This it was which was bound, scourged, spit upon, Crowned with thorns, which first bare the Crosse, and then was born of it, which was pierced by the Nayls, and the Spear, which shed its blood. Thus did he bear our sins in his own body on the Tree, (as St. Peter hath it) 1 Pet. 2.4. And we are said to be sanctified, (that is, freed from the guilt of sin, and conse∣crated to the service of God) through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, Heb. 10.10. 2. But not his Body only, but his Soul also. In his Soul. That also did bear a part in this suffering; which it did not only by way of sympathy with the Body, but immediately in and by it self. So it did in that Agony of his in the Garden, where he made that sad complaint to his Disciples, My soul is ex∣ceeding sorrowfull even unto death, Matth. 26.38. And afterwards upon the Crosse, where being under a sad Eclipse, the light of his Fathers countenance being hid from him by that black Cloud, the sins of the World, in that conflict he cryeth out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Matth.
27.46. Thus did he then suffer in soul. His soul being made an offering for sin, (as well as his Body, (as the Prophet Isai hath it) Isa. 53.10. Thus did he suffer in his humane nature, in his whole man, both Body and soul. Q. But (it may be said) what then, did not the Godhead also act a part in this Tragedy? Was that only a Spectator, a Looker on, whilest the Manhood suffered. A. The Godhead acting in the suffering of the Manhood. Not so, the Godhead at this time was not idle, though it did not bear, yet it acted a part in this Passion. Though it did not suffer with the humane nature, yet it concurred with it in suf∣suffering. Which it did in divers particulars. Take we notice of Four or Five of them. 1.  Voluit. It willed that suffering. Christ as God willed that his suffering as Man. Willing that it should suffer. So much he intimates unto his Disciples, Joh. 10.17, 18. where he tells them, I lay down my life, that I may take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of my self. He layed down his life, how? why by the same power by which he took it up again, by the power of his divine nature, accor∣ding to which he is properly called the Prince (or Author) of life, Act. 3.15. By this power it was that he raised up his body from the death, and by this power it was that he gave it up to death. It was not the power of his humane na∣ture that could doe this, to lay down his life, and take it up again at pleasure. This was an act of his divine nature, as well as his hu∣mane. 2.  Quievit. As the Godhead willed that the Manhood should suffer, Resting that it  suffer. so it rested that it might suffer. The divine nature was not withdrawn and
severed from the humane in the time of its pas∣sion, the union betwixt them being indissoluble, but it rested, not putting forth its power in any way of resistance, which if it had done, it was not all the Powers of Hell, all the Men and De∣vils in the World that could have brought him to the Crosse. The Godhead rested, slept (as it were,) even as Sampson did whilest his locks were cut off) which it did for those three dayes, during which time Christ seemed to be wholly left in the hands, under the power of those his bloudy enemies, for them to execute their rage and malice upon him. Thus the Godhead though (as I said) not separated from the Manhood, (which it never was, even then when Soul and Body were separated the one from the other, the Godhead was severed from neither) yet it rested. Even as when a man is asleep, his soul is not departed from his body, yet it seemeth to have left it, in∣asmuch as it doth not exercise those operations which before it did, not looking out by the Eye, not speaking by the Tongue, not working by the Hand, &c. So was it here. The Godhead being still with the Manhood, dwelling in it, and that (as the soul doth in the body) Bodily, In ipso inhi∣tat plenitudo divinitatis cor∣poraliter, quià in Templo habi∣taverat umba∣lite. Grot. Annt. ex August. in loc. (that is Pauls word, Col. 2.9.) , Non umbrali∣ter, (as Augustine explains it) not in the shadow, as it dwelt in the Temple, but Corporaliter, Bodily, that is, Personally, substantially, yet it rested for a time, not shewing it self, not exercising its wonted operations. The Godhead rested that the humane nature might suffer. 3. Sustentavit. Though the Godhead thus rested that it might suffer, Supporting it in suffering. yet it secretly supported and bare it up in suffering, inabling it to drink
this Cup, to suffer that which otherwise of it self it could never have been able to have done, viz. the wrath of God due unto the sins of the World. An insupportable burden. Such is the least drop of it; Who knoweth the power of thine anger? Psal. 90.11. What is then such a full Viall of it as was poured out upon Christ in his sufferings? This could his humane nature of it self never have borne. But it was secretly sup∣ported by the divine nature. As it is in Man, where (as the Wise man hath it, Prov. 18.14.) his spirit sustaineth his infirmities, the soul being of a cheer∣full temper beareth him up under his bodily ail∣ments. So here that Eternall spirit, which dwelt in the humane nature of Christ, sustained and bore it up under those otherwise unsufferable sufferings. 4.  And not only bare it up under those suf∣ferings, And making it a Conqueror. but made it a Conqueror in them, and over them. Such was Christ, and that even upon the Crosse. Having spoyled Principalities and Powers, he made a shew of them openly, triumphing over them in it, (saith the Apostle) Col. 2.15. , In and upon his Crosse, that being to him as a Chariot of Triumph, where he conquered and triumphed over all the powers of Hell. This did he by the power of his Godhead. Which was to his Man∣hood (as one maketh the comparison) even as the hook is to the Bait, Rous in Synibol.  Cypanum. which not only keepeth it from being devoured by the Fish, but taketh the Fish which swalloweth it. Such a bait was the Flesh, the humane nature of Christ, a Worm, (as David saith of himself, Psal. 22.6. I am a Worm) frail weak flesh; and this bait was exposed to those Levithans, Satan, Hell, Death, all which
bite at it, ready to devour it, Hell opened her mouth upon him, the Grave swallowed him up, so as he seemed now for ever lost; I but there was a hook within this bait, the divine nature, which was (as it were cloathed and covered over with this Flesh, and by the power hereof this Infirmity of Christ (as the Apostle there calleth it in that Text forenamed) his humane nature, though in it self weak and frail, was made not only able to suffer, but to overcome in suffering. So as to lead Captivitie captive, even as the Fish is taken by the Hook which it had swallowed down. 5. Efficaciam dedit. The Divine nature gave effi∣cacy to the sufferings of the Humane, Giving effica∣cy to those sufferings. making them effectuall for the ends intended, for the sa∣tisfying of divine Justice, and the meriting sal∣vation for his Elect people, which without the concurrence of the divine nature they could ne∣ver have been. So Damascene rightly, Patienti carni conjuncta est divinitas. Patienti carni conjuncta erat Divin me∣nens impssib∣lis, &  u  essent sal. Damac O∣thod. Fid. 3. c. 15. To the Humanity of Christ suffering was joyned the Divinity, which in it self remained Impassible, yet gave vertue and efficacy to those sufferings, making them meri∣torious and saving▪ As for the humane nature a∣lone, that could have merited nothing, at least not for others. Though it had sulfilled the Law, (as it did) yet could there not have been any super-erogation in that due obedience, so as the merit thereof should extend beyond it self. And whatever it had suffered, yet being in it self but finite, it could not have made an infinite satisfacti∣on, such as the Justice of God required for the sins of the world. It was the divine nature con∣curring, which made this Obedience of his, both
Active and Passive, so meritorious; which gave such vertue to these his sufferings, causing the merit thereof thus to overflow the banks, to extend to the whole world of his Elect. This it was which made this satisfaction in the value of it infinite, inasmuch as though it was made in a finite nature, yet by an infinite person, God shedding his blood, that Person who was so. The divine nature being personally united to the humane whilest it suffered, it gave efficacy to those suf∣ferings. Thus did this our High-priest, the Lord Jesus (as the Apostle telleth us, Heb. 9.14.) through the eternall spirit offer up himself unto God. His divi∣nity offering up his humanity, (as Aaron did the sa∣crifices, who was therein a figure of Christ as God,) and giving efficacy to that sacrifice, ma∣king it to be of an infinite value and vertue for satisfying and sanctifying. Here have you an enumeration of five particulars; wherein the Godhead of Christ concurred with his Manhood in suffering. But I shall no longer insist upon this. Thus you have the first of these Queries resolved, How this Cup was given to Christ, how he was the subject of this Passion. The Second is yet behinde, of which briefly. Why did God the Father thus give this Cup to his Son Christ? Why God ave this Cup to his Son. Why to him? And Why only to him? So we may divide the Question into two. Q. 1. Why did God the Father give this Cup unto him? Why to him.
A. This he did, not for his own sake, not that he deserved any such thing, Not for his own sake. not that there was any fault in him. As to this we have his Judge for his Compurgator. Pilate having throughly ex∣amined him, though (questionlesse) he sought matter against him, before he passeth sentence upon him, acquits him, declaring to his Accu∣sers, that he found no fault in him, I finde in him no fault at all, vers. 33. of this Chapter, whereof the Text is part; which he inculcates once and again in the Chapter following, Cap. 19. v. 4. & 6. , no cause at all why they should proceed against him in such a manner as they desired, nothing worthy of death. Man could finde no fault in him, nor yet did God his father finde any; who by a voyce from heaven gave this testimony to him at his Baptisme, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased, Mat. 3.17. He was then well-pleased with him. Neither had he any cause to be afterwards displeased with him, he being obedient to his Father in all things. So he was throughout his whole course; not be∣ing guilty of any sin, whether in his nature or life. He was that immaculate lamb of God, as St. Peter calls him, 1 Pet. 1.19. , The Lamb without blemish, and without spot.] Without blemish, free from Originall corruption. That holy thing which shall be born of thee, (saith the Angel to Mary, speaking of her Son, Luk. 1.35. And without spot] Free from all actual sins and transgressions. He did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22. Thus was he, (as the Apostle describeth him, Heb. 7.26.) Holy, Harmlesse, undefiled, separate from sinners. So as there was no desert in him why his Father should
give this Cup to him, why he should afflict and put him to grief in this manner that he did. This was not for his own sake. But it was for our lake. But ours. He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, Rom. 8 32. Even as Joseph was sold into Egypt, that he might save much people alive; and Jonas was cast over∣board, that the rest which were in the Ship might not perish. Thus was this bitter, deadly Cup given unto Christ, that it mgiht be a whole∣some Cup, a Cup of salvation unto others: He suf∣fered for us. So the Prophet sets it forth most fully in that known Text, Isa. 53. Surely he hath born our griefs, and carryed ou sorrowes, vers. 4. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, vers. 5 all we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord hath layed upon him the iniquity of us all, vers. 6. For the transgression of my people was he stricken, vers. 8. Thus did he suffer, not for his own sake, but ours. Christ hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. Having taken upon him the sins of the World, he was now made sin, who knew no sin, a sinner by Imputation. And being so, God giveth this Cup unto him, as standing in the room of his Elect, requiring satisfaction to his Justice from him. Q. 2. But why was this Cup given only to him, why not to any other but him? Why only to him. A. For this take a threefold Reason. 1.  No other was able to drink it but he. It is our Saviours speech to the Sons of Zebedee, Matth. 20.2. No other able to drink it. Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of? So it is, others may taste of this Cup,
sip of it, but none to drink it. Not this Cup. Mihi hic calix datus est, noa alteri, nemo enim ad hoc sufficit, praeter unum me, Ferus in Text. As for the Cup of castigatory afflictions, Gods own people may, and often doe drink deep of it. So did those two sons of Zebedee, to whom he there speaketh, James and John, whom he tells in the next verse, Ye shall indeed drink of my Cup, vers. 23. this accordingly they did, the one of them (James) being Martyred, Act. 12.1. the other (John) after many sufferings, banished, Rev. 1.9. But for the Cup of satisfactory punishment, which properly was Christs Cup, none could drink that without perishing by it, but himself, none but he who was more then Man, God as well as Man. 2. As none other was able to drink it, None else needed to drink it. so none else needed to drink it, his sufferings being sufficient, sufficient for all Men, and all sins. He is the propitia∣tion for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world, 1 Joh. 2.2. of all Believers, in all Ages and Nations, whether Jewes or Gentiles. The bloud of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin, (c. 1. v. 7. of that Epistle) from Originall sin, Actuall sin. He gave himself to redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14. Now this one Cup which was given to Christ, being such a Pan-pharmacon, such an all-sufficient remedy, there needed not a second of the same kinde to be given to any besides him. 3. This Cup was given only to him, that he might have all the honour of this great work, That he might have all the honour of this work. the work of Mans Redemption. I have tiodden the Wine-presse alone, and of the people there was none with me, (saith the Lord, speaking of the destroy∣ing of his, and his Churches enemies, which he would do by himself alone,) Isa. 63 3. And so
did Christ in his Passion, (of which the greatest part of Expositors, (though not so rightly,) un∣derstand that Text,) he there trod the Wine-presse of his fathers wrath, and he did it alone, having no creature, whether Man or Angel for his Co∣adjutor. And this he did that all the glory of this great work, the work of Redemption, might redound unto him. Which accordingly we finde acknowledged by that Quire of Angels and Elders in that Song of theirs, Rev. 5. Thou art worthy, &c. for thou hast redeemed us unto God by thy blood, v. 9. And again, Worthy is the Lamb that was slayn to re∣ceive power, and riches, and wisedome, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing, v. 12. Thus have I dispatched the Doctrinall part of this other important truth, touching the subject of this Passion; wherein I have showen you, to whom it was that God the Father gave this Cup, viz. to the Person of his Son Christ, who suffered in and according to his Humane nature, having the Godhead concurring with it; And why he gave it to him, and not to any other besides him. That which now remains of this is Ap∣plication. Which let it be directed these four wayes, Applic. By way of Information, Terror. Comfort. Instruction. 1.  By way of Information. Did God thus give this Cup to his Son? Information. give him to suffer in this manner? Here again reflect we upon what was touched upon before, the strictnesse of Gods Justice,
the greatnesse of his love; both wonderfully appear∣ing in this dispensation. The strictnesse of Gods justice. 1. The strictnesse of his justice in punishing of sin, which he would not spare in his own Son. Jesus Christ had not offended his Father in his own Person, (as I have shewen you) he had no sin of his own, whether Originall or Actuall, yet taking upon him the sins of others, and so become a sinner by way of Imputa∣tion, God his Father will not spare him, but causeth him to seel the smart of it. If ever sin∣ner might have hoped to have met with a fa∣vourable connivence, surely he that was only made sin in such a way, especially being a Person so nearly related to, and dearly beloved of the Father might. But we see how far God was from indulging of sin in him. He prepareth a bitter Cup for him, and giveth it to him, causing him to drink it, bruising him and putting him to grief, powring out a full Viall of his wrath and indig∣nation upon him. The most exemplary and sig∣nall piece of Justice that ever was. The drown∣ing of the World with water, the destroying of Sodome and Gomorrah by fire, the plagueing of Egypt, and the like, they were remarkable de∣monstrations of divine justice. But none like to this, Gods not sparing his own Son, but giving him to the death. Such is his Justice, so strict, so impartiall, that he will not spare sin in what subject soever he meeteth with it. The reason whereof is, because he hateth sin as sin. Now à quatenus ad omnes, &c. (say the Schools) he who loveth or hateth a thing for it self, loveth or hateth it wherever he findes it. And thus God hateth sin. It being contrary to his nature, he
hateth it for it self, and therefore wherever he findes it, he will not spare it. Such is the strict∣nesse of his Justice. 2.  Behold the greatnesse of his love, his love to his Elect people, The greatness of his Love to his Elect. which he expressed in giving this Cup to his Son for their sakes. This Cup was their due, the desert of their sins, The soul that sinneth it shall dye; yet here God was pleased to finde out a Surety, and to lay their iniquities upon him, even upon his own Son, not sparing him, that he might spare them, delivering him unto death, that he might deliver them from death. Never was there such a declaration of love as this. When Abraham had layed his Son upon the Altar, ready to sacrifice him in obedience to Gods command, from hence the Lord concludes the truth and sincerity of his affection towards him, Now I know (saith he) that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me, Gen. 22.12. And from hence may all true Believers conclude the intirenesse of Gods af∣fection towards them, saying in like manner un∣to him, Now Lord we know that thou lovest us, see∣ing thou hast not withheld thy Son thine only Son from us, but hast given him up to the death for our sakes, giving this bitter Cup to him, which otherwise we must have drunk, laying the bur∣den of our sins upon him, which otherwise we must have lyen under unto all eternity. Won∣derfull, unparallel'd love, to be for ever admi∣red and adored by all those who can evidence their interest in it. But this I have touch∣ed upon before. This by way of Informati∣on.
2. By way of Terror. Did the Lord thus deal by his Son, his dear Son, Terror to Gods Ene∣mies. to give such a bitter Cup to him, what then may his Enemies expect and look for? This is the Application which our Sa∣viour himself maketh hereof. Luk. 23.31. If they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in a drye? Christ himself was as a green tree, which having sap and moisture in it, is not so combusti∣ble, so apt to take fire, the Jewes were as a drye tree, fit Fuel for the fire. Now if this green tree were thus used, Christ himself, who was a just and a righteous person, having no guilt, no just matter of condemnation in him, (save only as he stood in the place of sinners) if he were thus left to suffer such things as he did from them, what then had they cause to expect, who in re∣gard of their manifold impieties were fit fuel for the fire of Gods wrath to feed upon? And let it in like manner be applyed to all wicked and ungodly persons, who being no better then drye trees, having no sap of grace in them, voyd and destitute of all goodnesse, and so no other but Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, (as the Apostle calleth them, Rom. 9.22.) if it was thus done to this green tree, this so just and righteous a per∣son, what do they think will become of them? This use St. Peter makes of the sufferings of Gods Saints, wherewith God is pleased sometimes to exercise them, 1 Pet. 4.17. If Judgement first be∣gin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospell of God? If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinners appear?] If the righteous,] such as being true Believers, are justified by faith, and endeavour to prove themselves righteous to God and Man; if they
scarcely be saved,] passe through so many diffi∣culties, meet with so many sufferings in their journey to Heaven; where shall the wicked and un∣godly appear?] Unbelievers, such as live in a state of sin, being wholly given up to it, and as it were drowned in it, what shall become of them when Christ shall come to judge the world in righte∣cusnesse, and to give to every man according to his works? And such use make we of this deal∣ing of God with his own Son after this manner. Did God his Father give such a Cup to him, not∣withstanding that he was in all things his obedient Son, (as the Apostle tells us, Phil. 2.8.) Oh what then may the children of Disobedience expect and look for? Certainly there is a black Cloud which hangeth over their heads, even the wrath of God, which without repentance shall be poured out upon them. Because of these things (saith the Apostle, speaking of wicked and ungodly courses and practises) cometh the wrath of God upon the chil∣dren of disobedience, Eph. 5.6. And this let all such make account of, taking notice that God hath a Cup for them, and that a dreadfull one. In the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, (saith the Psalmist) and the wine is red, it is full of mixture, and he poureth out of the same, but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them, Psal. 75.8. So it is, God the Su∣preme Moderator, and wise disposer of all things, he hath appointed and measured out afflictions and sufferings to all the Sons of men, so as his own people have their share in them, they are made to drink of this Cup, to taste of it, I but the wicked and ungodly shall drink of it after another manner, they shall wring out the dregs
thereof, and drink them. God hath terrible Judgements in store for them such as shall end in endlesse despair, and utter destruction. Ʋpon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstome, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their Cup, (so the Psalmist sets it forth) Psal. 11.6. And O that this were but seriously thought of by all of this number! that all profane, and ungodly persons would but consider this! that amidst their Oath-Cups, those Cups of abomination, wherewith they are intoxicated, they would but take notice of this Cup in the hand of the Lord, this Cup of red wine, his fierce wrath, which is reserved for them to drink! Certainly the very thought here∣of, being let into their souls, it could not but fill them with horror and terror. So did the ap∣prehension of this Cup, which our blessed Saviour saw coming towards him, work upon him, it put him into a strange and unheard of Agony, (as the story sets it forth.) And certainly such ope∣ration would the like apprehension have upon the most obdurate and obstinate sinner, did he but seriously think of the fierceness of that wrath which one day without repentance he shall be sure to feel, it could not but work horror and terror in his soul. Now then suffer (I beseech you) this Medita∣tion to take place with you, What wicked men must ex∣pect. you who lye in a state, and go on in a course of sin, daring to give allowance to your selves in any known evil; what, did God so severely punish those sins which were only imputed to his Son Christ, and so were not properly his, save only as he was a Surety for others, how can you ever think that he should passe by those sins, which you dare with
so high a hand commit against him? It is that which the Prophet Jeremie saith unto Edom, the Edomites, the Posterity of Esau, Jer. 49.12. Be∣hold, they whose judgement was not to drink of the Cup have assuredly drunken, and art thou he that shalt goe altogether unpunished? Thou shalt not goe unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink of it. Seeing God had not spared his own people, his people Israel, who in regard of the Covenant which was betwixt him and them, might have expected more favour then others, much lesse had those accursed Edo∣mites, who had no such Relation, any reason to hope that they should be spared. And so say I here concerning the sufferings of Jesus Christ. Did he, whose judgement was not to drink of this Cup, drink it? Did the Lord Jesus, who had so neer a Relation to God his Father, and of himself had deserved nothing but well at his hands, did he yet suffer what he did? And are you, you wicked and ungodly wretches, they that shall go altogether unpunished? No, you shall not go unpunished, you shall surely drink of this Cup, the wrath of God sooner or later shall be poured out upon you. However for a time he may spare you, (which he sometimes doth, with much long-suffering he indureth the Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, (as the Apostle there hath it, Rom. 9.22.) not presently executing his judgements upon ungodly sinners according to their deserts) yet he will not ever so doe. My spirit shall not alwayes strive mith man, Gen. 6.3. No, this Cup here given to Christ sheweth, what all those who are out of Christ, even all unbe∣lieving and impenitent sinners, who stand charge∣able with their own sins, must expect and make
account of. The Cup of the Lords wrath shall be reached forth unto them, and they shall drink it; yea so drink it as the Prophet Jeremy saith the Churches enemies should drink of that Cup which he brought unto them, Jer. 25.27. They shall drink and be drunken, and fall, and rise no more. This by way of Terror. 3. By way of Consolation. Did God the Father thus give this Cup to his Son, his naturall sonne, Consolation to Gods Chil∣dren. here is comfort for all his Adopted children, who by this means are freed and delivered from those sufferings which otherwise they had deserved, and must have undergone. The justice of God being in this way satisfied, they are discharged. This Cup being given to Christ as standing in their room and stead, they are hereby freed from the drinking of it; viz. The Cup of satisfactory punish∣ment. True indeed, as for the Cup of Affliction, Fatherly chastisements and tryals, this they must make account to taste of. That which our Sa∣viour said to the Sons of Zebedee, Matth. 20.23. may be applyed to all the Sons and Daughters of God, They shall indeed drink of Christs Cup, and some of them drink deep of it, being thus made conformable to him in his sufferings, so filling up that which is behinde of the Afflictions of Christ in their flesh, (as the Apostle speaks of his own sufferings, Col. 1.24) but as for satisfactory punishments, issuing from the wrath of God, and inflicted by the hand of Revenging Justice, that was the portion of Christs Cup, which being given to him, and drunk by him, there remaineth no more suffering of this kinde for them. There is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Rom. 8.1. Who shall nw lay any thing to the charge
of Gods Chosen? vers. 33. who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that dyed, vers. 34. This will not God himself do. Nay, (with reverence may we speak it) this in Justice he cannot doe. Justice requi∣reth satisfaction but once. Now, shall not the Judge of all the earth doe right? Gen. 18.25. Sa∣tisfaction being, and that by a mutual agree∣ment betwixt the Father and the Son, once made in the Person of Christ, as a Surety for his Elect, for all that shall believe on him, God will no more require it from them. This God the Father exacted from his Son, and he Answered it. So that Text before mentioned, is most properly read, Isa. 53.7. It was exacted, and he answered; So the Originall hath it word for word, a Text which (as our late Annotator observes upon it) be∣ing so rendred, and rightly understood, ma∣keth much for the vindicating of the Doctrine of Christs satisfaction. So it was, satisfaction was required and exacted by God the Father for the sins of his Elect, a full satisfaction, and in this he was answered by his Son Christ, and that to the full. So then, this debt being thus discharged, it standeth no longer upon the account of those that are Christs, for whom he undertook, which he did for all those that should believe on him. A ground of everlasting Consolation to all those who can evidence to themselves their Interest in this blessed Mediator, their Interest in Jesus Christ; being in him, they satisfied in him. This Cup (as hath been shewn) was given unto Christ not for himself, not upon his own account, not that either he had deserved to suffer, or that  designed to merit any thing for himself by suffering, but it was upon the account of Gods
Elect, whose Iniquities were laid upon him, as the sins of the people were upon the head of the Scape-goat, Lev. 16.21. And being layed on him they were taken away by him, (as their sins were carryed by the Scape-goat into the Wildernesse,) taken away as to the Guilt of them. So as justice being in this way satisfied, all true Believers may now come, and come with boldnesse to the throne of Grace, looking upon God as a reconciled Fa∣ther in Christ. Thus is this bitter Cup which was given to Christ to drink, a sweet Cup, a Cup of Consolation to all those that are his. Being given to him, it shall not be given to them. In the Fourth and last place, Instruction. by way of In∣struction. Did God thus give this Cup to his Son, then let every of us take heed of giving any way unto sin, through hopes of mercy. Take heed of giving allow∣ance unto sin. He that did not spare sin in his naturall Son, when it was only imputed to him, will not spare it in his Adopted children, if it shall be willingly committed by them. However, (as hath been said) this Cup was Christs peculiar portion, and so belongeth not unto those that are Christs, yet God hath other Cups even for them, and those bitter Cups too. Moses, and Elie, and David, and many other of the Dear Saints of God have found the truth hereof in their own experience. Let not any presume of better then what they found. Shall we dare to give allowance to any known sin, how sweet soever it may seeme to be for the present, it will be bitternesse in the latter end. As Abner told Joab, when he was pursuing his brethren in such a revengefull way as he did, Knowest thou not (saith he) that it will be buteresse
in the latter end? 2 Sam. 2.26. So let it be said to all those who shall dare to pursue any sinfull way or course; how pleasing soever for the present it may be to corrupted nature, yet let them know, it will be bitternesse in the latter end. So were the sins of others unto Christ. And so will the sins of all impenitent sinners be to themselves. Give not allowance to any sinne. Nor yet spare it. Not sparing it, This would not God doe in his own Son. This let not us doe; spare not sin wherever we meet with it. Not in others. In others. Though the person be never so neer, never so deer to us, yet let not that plead a toleration for his sin. Accursed is that affecti∣on, which so blindeth a mans eyes, that either he should not see sin in another, or seeing it, should connive at it. God spared it not in his Son, being imputed to him. Let not Parents spare it in their Children, nor Masters in their Servants, nor yet Husbands in their Wives, so as not to reprove and restrain it what they can. We know what old Elies indulgence to his Sons cost him, I will judge his house for ever (saith the Lord) for the iniquity which he knoweth, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not, (he frowned not upon them (saith the Originall) 1 Sam. 2.13. And whilest we doe not spare sin in others, Much lesse in our selves, but taking ven∣geance upon it. much lesse doe it in our selves. But here take we vengeance upon it; dealing by our sinfull lusts, as the Jewes did by our Saviour, crucifying them. This Paul maketh to be a Property of those that are Christs, Gal. 5.24. They that are Christs have crucifyed the flesh, with the affctions and lusts. And
this dowe. Looking up unto the Crosse of Christ, and there taking notice how dear our sins cost him, let us crucifie them, mortifie them, not living in them. Which if we doe, the same Apostle will tell us what we must look for. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, but if through the Spirit ye do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Rom. 8.13. Thus take revenge upon our sins. And taking revenge upon them, And upon our selves for i. take we also a holy kinde of revenge upon our selves for them, and that by the renewing of the exercise of Re∣pentance and Mortification; giving a bitter Cap to our selves, afflicting our selves with godly sor∣row for them. Which will prove no lesse whole∣some to our souls, then Cups of Wormwood, or other bitter Potions oft-times are to our Bodies. Thus practising upon our selves, we may escape the hands of God, which otherwise we must make account to feel of. If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged, 1 Cor. 11.31. The only way to prevent Gods judgements, Temporall and Eternall, is to forejudge our selves, by examining, arraigning, and condemning our selves at his Bar, and so humbling our selves before him. Thus giving unto our selves this Cup, we may hereby prevent Gods giving unto us some other bitter Cups, which otherwise we must expect to drink of. And thus have I done also with this Third Particular, the subject of this Passion, to whom this Cup was given, and so with the former part of the Text, the presenting of this Cup by God the Father to his Son Christ. Come we now to the latter, which is,
The Sons submission in drinking of this Cup. Part. 2. The Sons sub∣mission. [The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?] Shall I not drink it?] What meant by Drinking this Cup. In the words there is no difficulty. The metaphor having been explain∣ed before, in shewing you what is here meant by the Cup, viz. the bitter death and Passion of Jesus Christ, which was then at hand. So then to drink this Cup is no more but to suffer that death. A metaphoricall expression of frequent use among the Heathen, with whom Eodem peculo hibere, to drink of the same Cup, was a Proverbial speech, signifying a partaking of, and communi∣cating in the same calamities. So in phrase of Scripture we meet with it often, both in the Old Testament and New. As in that Text which I have formerly had recourse to, Jer. 25. where the Prophet is sent by God with the Wine-cup of his fury to cause the Nations to drink it, vers. 15, 16, 17. & 26, 27, 28. (in every of which we meet with the same words used in the same sense) that is to partake in the Judgements and Punish∣ments which God would bring upon them. So we finde it plainly expounded in the 49 Chap. of the same Prophesie (a Text also before made use of,) where the Prophet speaking to the Edo∣mites, vers. 12. Behold (saith he) they whose judge∣ment was not to drink of the Cup, have assuredly drun∣ken, and art thou he that shalt goe altogether unpu∣rished? thou shalt not goe unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink of it; the one explaining the other, To drink of the Cup is to seel the Judgements of God. So again in the New Testament. Are ye
able to drink of the Cup that I am to drink of? (saith our Saviour to the Sons of Zebedee, Matth. 20.22.) that is, to suffer what I am to suffer. Thus they who worshipped the Beast, or received his mark (the followers of Antichrist) are threatned, Rev. 14.10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his indignation. Which the next words explain, [And he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone] Thus to drink is to suffer. So look we upon it in the Text. The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? that is, suffer what he hath appointed and layed out for me. Shall I not drink it? ; This Interro∣gation con∣taining a Re∣prehension & Resolution. The Inter∣rogation is emphaticall, carrying with it a double force; of a Representation and a Resolution, a Check and a Choice. A Reprehension or Check to Peter, and that a Tart one, a Resolution or Choice as to Christ himself, and that a strong and firm one. You shall finde them both in the handling of them, which I shall do severally; beginning with the former. The Reprehension, or Check to Peter, which is here plainly intimated. A Reprehen∣sion to eter. Vim tu prchi∣bre quo in as impleam quid Patri placet, Grot. Annot. in loc. The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? As if he had said, What, wilt thou goe about to crosse the determinate Counsell of God, and to hinder me from yielding obedience to his will, and so fru∣strate that great design which I have now in hand? Whatever it is that mine enemies shall inflict, or my self shall suffer, it is no other then what my Father hath appointed, who hath sent me into the world for this very end, that I should suffer and dye, and so by this means purchase
the Redemption of his Elect people. Non vis tu ho∣mo, Creatura, servus, quod vult Deus Crea∣tor, & emnium Deminus? Ferus Annot. in loc. And what, wilt thou who art but a Man, a Creature, a Ser∣vant, dare to interpose, goe about to resist the will of thy Creator and Lord? And wilt thou stop me in the course of my obedience, and so hinder that great and good work which I am now a∣bout? What, hath my Father mingled this Cup for me, and is now reaching it unto me, and wilt thou take it out of his hand, and from my mouth, hinder me from the drinking it? The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?] Here then take we notice of a threefold evill, A threefold Evill, each de∣serving Repre∣hension. each deserving a just reprehension in whomsoever shall attempt them: 1. To resist Gods will, 2. To take man off from his duty. 3. To hinder his salvation. All these was Peter at this time guilty of in this unadvised act of his, and for all these he is here reprehended by his Master. And the like doe they justly deserve, who are, or shall be guilty of any of them. Let me touch upon them seve∣rally. They who make resistance to Gods will. Mking resi∣stnce to Gods wid. This did Peter in going about to keep this Cup from his Masters mouth; herein he resisted the will of God his Father, who had given it him to drink; and upon that account he is here checked by his Master, for that his unadvised zeal. And so was Abishai by his Master King David, when he offered his service to him in taking revenge upon Shimei for reviling and cursing of him in that manner that he did. A service, no question, ten∣dred out of a loyall affection which he bare to
him. But what saith David to it? You may read it 2 Sam. 16.10. What have I to doe with you ye Sons of Zerviah? (speaking to him, and his Brother Joab, who, as is most probable, had given that counsell to Abishai, though he alone offered to execute it,) so let him curse, because the Lord hath said unto him, Curse David; who shall then say, Wherefore hast thou done so? Thus David look∣ing upon this as willed by God, ordered by his disposing Providence, and intended as a Rod of correction for the chastising and further hum∣bling of himself, he would not permit that any should go about to crosse Gods design therein, but giveth Abishai a check for that his proffered service, which otherwise in it self deserved ac∣ceptance and thanks. And this do all attempts and endeavours deserve, which have any such tendency, as to make resistance to Gods will. And not without cause; Inasmuch as, 1. They are vain attempts, such as cannot ex∣pect successe. Who hath resisted his will? Rom. Which is a vain attempt. 9.19. This have many attempted, but all in vain. What are we stronger then he? (saith the same Apostle) 1 Cor. 10.22. This have they need to be who shall make resistance to another. But this is not Man then God. O Lord thou art stronger then I, (saith Jeremy,) Jer. 20.7. Alas, compare man with God, and there is no com∣pare. The very weaknesse of God is stronger then men, (as the Apostle hath it) 1 Cor. 1.25. And as the former part of that verse hath it,) The foolishnesse of God is wiser then men; that is, that which the men of this world count foolishnesse and weaknesse. In vain is it then for any, whe∣ther
by power or policy, to think to frustrate his Counsels, to crosse his designs, to resist his will; Why doe the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? Psal. 2.1. So is it for any to take coun∣sell against the Lord, and against his Anoynted, to oppose themselves against God and Jesus Christ, thinking to resist their will. Such was this at∣tempt in Peter here, a vain attempt. 2. Impious. And as such attempts are vain, so impious. Gods will being the Creatures Law. Such is his revealed will, which the creature is bound to comply with, and yield an absolute obedience to, without either quarrelling or questioning the equity or expediency of it. And for his se∣cret will, this also Christians are to submit unto, desiring that it may be done. So their Master hath taught them in that Pattern of Prayer, which he hath left them. Thy will be done; not only his Revealed, but secret will. So then, to make re∣sistance to this will, where it is known, is no other but down-right impiety; and where it is not certainly known, yet being through preposte∣rous and unadvised zeal opposed, this though it may excuse a tanto, yet not a toto, though in part, yet not in whole. Still such resistance is justly blame worthy. Which let all of us be exhorted to beware of. Not only of a designed and purposed resistance: Christians to beware of such resistances. This is that which Stephen chargeth the Jewes with, Act. 7.51. Ye stiffe-necked, and uncircum∣cised in heart and ears, ye do alwayes resist the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye. They resisted the will of God clearly revealed, and made known to them by his Prophets, as also by Christ and his Apostles. This (as I said) is down-right impiety,
which let all, as they love their souls, beware of. But also of all unadvised opposing of it through rash and inordinate zeal. This was Peters case in the Text. What he here did, he did it (as you have heard) out of a good intention, out of zeal for his Master, yet inasmuch as this act of his tended to the opposing of Gods will, the crossing of his design, therefore he receiveth a check from his Master for it. And let such zeal never expect better acceptance at the hands of God. Take we heed of making resistance any way to his will. Obj. But what then, Whether means may be used for the removing or diverting of Evils. A fanaticall Conceit re∣jected. may not Christians make use of means, for the defending and securing of themselves or others, for the removing or divert∣ing of evils felt, or feared? A. So indeed some fanaticall spirits have con∣ceived, who taking notice, that all things come to passe according to the determinate counsell and appointment of God, thereupon they re∣fuse to make use of any means for the preserving or freeing themselves from any present, or im∣pendent evils. As in case of sicknesse they will not make use of Physick for the recovery of health, or saving of their lives, lest that in so doing they should seem to resist the will of God, who hath measured out their dayes, determined, as that they shall dye, so when, and where, and how they shall dye. And so in other cases, they will not make use of means of preservation or deliverance, as not willing to put from them that Cup which God giveth unto them. Me s may & must be used. But this is justly rejected as erroneous and unchristian. Christians in such cases not only may, but ought to make use of means, and Remedies, knowing
that God bringeth his purposes to passe by means. God who had decreed and promised unto Hezekiah that he should recover of his Disease, yet prescribes him a Receipt, willing him to apply a Plaister of Figs to his Sore, Isa. 38.21. Which however some look upon as no more proper for his trouble, then the Clay and spittle which our Saviour gave to the blinde man was to recover his sight, yet by others it is con∣ceived to have been a proper remedy, Figs ha∣ving in them a mollifying, ripening, and dissol∣ving property, and so fitly applyed to such a malignant Ulcer as his was. Means, where God either injoyns, or affords them for our good, whe∣ther spirituall or temporall, they may not be neg∣lected. They who upon this ground neglect means for their Bodies, may upon the same ground also as well neglect them for their Souls, neglect all Ordinances, inasmuch as God hath determi∣ned what shall become of the one as of the other. To neglect means is a tempting of God, which our blessed Saviour would by no means incur the guilt of. And therefore when the Devill would have tempted him to cast himself down from the pinacle of the Temple upon the assurance of a Divine protection, which he had the promise of, he repells his temptation with that Scripture Text, It is written, thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God, Mat. 4.7. He would wait upon God in the use of means for his coming down from thence. And the like are Christians to doe. They not only may, but must use means for the diverting of evils. A threefold Provio. Only take it with these few Provisoes and Cautions.
1.  Provided that the will of God be not revealed to them to the contrary, his absolute will, That Gods will be not revealed to the contrary. so as they may take notice of it. Upon this ground it was that our Saviour here would not admit of any resistance to be made to those who came to ap∣prehend him, because he was acquainted with his Fathers will. And upon this ground was Peter here justly reproveable for making this re∣sistance, inasmuch as his Master had before ac∣quainted him herewith, shewing to him, and the rest of his Apostles, that he must goe up to Jerusa∣lem, and there suffer and dye, Mat. 16.21. and withall, had given him a sharp reproof for his ad∣vising him to the contrary, vers. 23. And but even now he had been again put in minde hereof in and by that Sacrament, whereof he had been a parta∣ker, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, wherein the breaking of the Bread represented the breaking of the Body of Christ, and the powring forth of the wine re∣presented the shedding of his blood, as Christ him∣self had expounded to him, and the rest of his Apostles, the mystery and meaning thereof. So as Peter could not be ignorant what was the will of God, and his Masters will herein. And there∣fore, for him to doe what he did in a way of re∣sistance to that will, it was in him justly blame∣able. 2.  Provided again that these means be not vnlawfull means. That also was Peters case here. That they be lawfull means. Privato homini non licuit contrà eoinsurgere qui publicâ outho∣ritate istructi erons. Calv. Com. in Tex. The means which he used for the rescuing of his Master was unlawfull. Inasmuch as he, being but a private person, ought not in such a way to have resisted publick Authority, by drawing his Sword upon their Officers. In this he acted out of the sphere of his Calling, which Christ would not give allowance to.
3.  And (thirdly) being lawfull means they must be used lawfully. Used lawfully. As Paul saith of the Law, 1 Tim. 1.8. The Law is good, if it be used lawfully, that is, as a rule of Obedience, not so as to seek Justification by it, and so to rest upon it. So may I say of many means which are usefull unto men for self-preservation and safety, they are lawfull if used lawfully; if used in obedience to God, with submission to his will, so as not to trust in them, but in God, who is able either to blesse or blaste. With these cautious means of preservation from, and deliverance out of tem∣porall evils both may, and ought to be used. But not so as to make any resistance to the will of God. Which whoso doth, whether advisedly or rashly, deserves a just Reprehension. And so I have done with the first of these Particulars, upon the account whereof Christ here giveth this Check unto Peter, his making resistance against the will of God his Father. Passe we on to the Se∣cond. His going about to take Christ off from his duty, and obedience to his Father: Taking off o∣thers from their Duty. For this again, instead of thanks, Christ giveth him a Check. And such entertainment are Christians to give unto those Counsels or attempts, Non est toleran∣dus qui à divi∣norum observan∣tiâ mandata∣rum abducit, etiamsi in verbis praeferat pieta∣tem, led i ce∣pandus, &c. Ferus Annot. in Text. which do any wayes tend to the taking them off from their duty and obe∣dience to God their heavenly Father, by whom∣soever they are offered, and out of whatever in∣tention, yet hearken not to them, but reject them. Peter here an Apostle, a faithfull servant to his Lord and Master Christ, out of that in∣tire affection which he bare to him, ingageth for him, and that not without hazard of his own life, and this he did out of a pious intention.
Yet inasmuch as this service of his tended to the interrupting and hindring of Christ in the course of his obedience, see what entertainment it findeth with him. His heart riseth against it, he re∣jects it, and that not without a holy anger and indignation, giving a check to the undertaker of it. The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? What, will you go about to hin∣der me in this last act of my Obedience? So far was he from accepting this well-meant service, this service of love, (for so it was, of carnal love) in him, that he giveth him a secret rebuke for it. And what he doth here more closely, we finde him elsewhere upon a like occasion doing in plainer terms, Mat. 16.21. (A Text even now made use of.) Where Peter hearing his Master declare unto his Disciples, what sufferings waited for him, how he must goe up to Jerusalem, and there suffer many things, from the Elders and chief Priests, and Scribes, and be killed, hereupon he ta∣keth him aside, and (as the next vers. hath it) he began to rebuke him, saying, It be far from thee, Lord, (or, spare thy self, ) this shall not be unto thee. This did Peter out of a tender affection to his Master, as tendring his life. And if we look upon the Counsell it self, at the first hear∣ing it may seem such as might deserve a kinde reception. But what saith our Saviour to it, and him? That we have in the next words, vers. 23. But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee be∣hinde me Satan, &c.] Never did any hear tarter language come out of that mouth. He who was afterward led as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep that is dumb before the Shearer, so opened he not his mouth, Isa. 53. Who, when he was reviled,
he reviled not again, when he suffered he threatned not, 1 Pet. 2.23. Whatever wrongs and injuries his enemies did unto him, he bare all patiently, not giving an ill word to any of them; yet see here how he taketh up Peter for this his friendly ad∣vice. Not only rejecting the Counsell, but the Counsellor also, whom he would not indure in his sight, bidding him Avant, Get thee behinde me,] Language one would think fitter for a Dog then a Disciple, an Apostle, a chief Apostle. Nay more, Get thee behinde me Satan,] Satan, the word sig∣nifieth properly an Adversary, and therefore in Scripture commonly given to the Devil, the Arch-adversary to God and Man. And this tearm (then which he could not have found a worse) doth our Saviour give unto Peter for his suggest∣ing of this counsell to him, wherein he was an Adversary to God, opposing his will, and an Ad∣versary to Man, going about to hinder his salva∣tion; as also an Adversary to Christ, in taking him off from his work, from his obedience. Thus did our Saviour there look upon him, as an Instrument of Satan, actuated and set awork by him in the handing of this Temptation, which tended to the taking him off from the work, which his Father had given him to doe. And there∣upon he rejecteth his counsell, and that with in∣dignation, though to flesh and blood never so acceptable. Never should the counsels, sug∣gestions, attempts, endeavours of any finde bet∣ter entertainment with a Christian, which tend to such an end, to the hindering of him in the course of his obedience unto God, whether in doing or suffering his will, whatever the Person be from whom they come, though never so neer,
whatever the Affection be from which they pro∣ceed, though never so dear, whatever the In∣tention be, though never so good, yet herein hear∣ken not to them, but looking upon them as In∣struments of Satan, actuated and set awork by him, reject their indeavours. So did holy Job, when his Wife gave him that counsell which we meet with, Job 2.9. bidding him, Curse God and die, or (as it may be read) Blesse God and die, for the word Barach there used signifieth both, Be∣nedicere & maledicere, Blessing and Cursing, and in Scripture it is most frequently used in the for∣mer sense, seldome in the latter, and so Chari∣ty, which still inclines to the better part, may induce us to construe it there; But however it be, her meaning was, she would have Job use some means, that he might have a speedy riddance out of that trouble and misery wherein he was, which she thought to be best for him. Now what saith Job to her? You have it in the next verse, v. 10. Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh. Thus he who in all his sufferings before had not shewen any the least Passion, save that of sorrow, not an angry posture or expression, now his spi∣rit is stirred within him, so as he rejecteth this counsell of his Wife not without indignation, casting it back in her face with a tart Reprehen∣sion. Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh, or, as a wicked woman, (for so that word [foolish] in Scripture is often taken.) And why is he so an∣gry with her? Why inasmuch as this counsell of hers (make the best of it) tended to the ta∣king him off from the course of his Passive Obe∣dience, to make him throw away the bitter Cup which God had given him, before he had drunk
it out. So himself giveth the reason of this his impatience in the next words; What, shall we re∣ceive good at the hands of God, and shall we not re∣ceive evil? Shall we drink the sweet Cup of Pro∣sperity, and shall we not also drink the bitter Cup of Adversity, if God see it fitting for us? Thus doth he reject that counsell which tended to the taking him off from his suffering work, and so from his obedience to God. And the like let all of us be exhorted to do. Christians to rejct such counsels and indeavours in whomsoever. Never giving better entertainment to such sug∣gestions, such counsells, such attempts or indea∣vours as tend to such an end, whoever be the conveyors of them, or actors in them. Such is Satans policy that he often insinuates himself in∣to the bosomes of men, through the mediations of such as are neer and dear unto them. Thus did he at the first convey that poysonous Apple to our first Parent Adam, through the hand of his second-self, her that was nearest and dearest to him, his Wife, Gen. 3.6. And thus doth he often convey his Temptations through the tongues or hands of unsuspected Instruments, by which means they finde the readyer acceptance. Poyson reached forth by the hand of a friend is least su∣spected, and so more easily swallowed down. And so do poysonous suggestions, being con∣veyed by a friend, a familiar, and so mixed with declarations of affection and love, they finde an easier passage to the heart, they are more readily received and embraced. Great need therefore have we to be wary and cautious, not taking the services of others (whoever they be) upon trust, knowing that they being subject to be deceived themselves, may become Instrumen∣tall
in deceiving of others. And therefore bring we them to the Touchstone, to the ballance of the Sanctuary, trying and examining whether they be for God, or against him; whether they perswade obedience to his will, or disswade from it. If they be for God, putting us on forward in the course of our obedience, receive them, embrace them, though coming from the hand of an Enemy. If otherwise, come they from what mouth, from what hand, from what heart they will, reject them. Herein Christians must learn warily to distinguish betwixt Satan and their Friends, be∣twixt their Friends speaking and acting, and Sa∣tans speaking and acting i them, and by them. If they perswade any thing contrary to the minde and will of God, it is not so much they that speak, as Satan in them. So then, love and re∣spect thy Friend still, but abhor Satan, though in a friend. Peter was the same in Christs eye still, when he disswaded him from going up to Jerusalem, that he was before, still he loved Peter, I, but Get thee behinde me Satan. Take we heed of so respecting our Friends, as to hearken to Satan in them. An usuall thing it is when God calleth any to services of difficulty and danger, for friends to interpose themselves, (as Peter here did betwixt his Master and those who came to apprehend him,) to hinder them from the under∣taking of them. What more common with the Martyrs of all Ages? Being called forth to some eminent sufferings, to seal the Truth of Christ with their blood, presently what importuning of Friends, what soliciting of Acquaintance, what beseechings of Kinsfolks, what tears, cryes, heart∣breaking intreaties and supplications of Wife,
Children, and other near and dear Relations? every one crying out in Peters language, Master, Friend, Brother, Father, Husband, favour thy self, these things shall not be unto thee. It was Pauls own case, Act. 21.11. when Agabus had prophesied and foretold of his bonds and sufferings at Je∣rusalem, presently the Disciples, his friends, with others of Cesarea, they come about him, ear∣nestly beseeching him that he would not goe up thither. God having made known his minde and will what service he had for Paul to do for his name, they presently perswade him to fa∣vour himself, to decline it, not to come upon the Stage where he was to act that part, not to come near where the danger was. (An ordinary thing for some or other thus to attempt to pull the Cup from the mouths of Gods servants which he hath given them to drink.) But what saith Paul to the motion? what ear doth he lend them? what Answer doth he return them? you may read it in the verse following, (v. 13.) What do ye weeping and breaking my heart? I am ready not only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. See how this service of carnall love in them (for such it was) meeteth with a check, a rebuke from him. And no better in∣tertainment let those unfriendly services of such as out of the like carnall affection, shall indeavour to hinder us in our duty to God, from doing or suffering his will, meet with at our hands. Do they goe about to withdraw our necks from his yoke? shake them off. It is our Saviours advice, Math. 5.29, 30. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee. If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee. Now what greater
offence can there be to a Christian then to goe about to hinder his obedience unto his God? Get thee bhinde me Satan, thou art an offence to me, (saith our Saviour there to Peter upon this ac∣count.) Accursed is that Relation, that Affection, which shall weigh down our Relation, our Affecti∣on to our heavenly Father, so as to take us off from our duty to him. As for our Obedience to God, that is absolute. Others must be respected and obeyed only in him, and for him. If they advise, request, command any thing that is con∣trary to his will and our duty, stop the ear a∣gainst them. If they be Superiors, and so com∣mand, sear them not, rather suffer then yield, remembring what Peter and the other Apostles there tell the Rulers, Act. 5.29. Increpandus si subditus, si aqualis, penitus non frendus, si verò superior sit, nullo medo timendus est. Ferus Annot. in Text. We ought to obey God rather then men. If Equals, and so advise, regard them not; If Inferiors, and so intreat, re∣ject, rebuke them. So did our Saviour here to this his servant, his Apostle. Going about by this his rash interposure to hinder him in the course of his Obedience, he giveth him a check for it. What wilt thou do such a disservice to my Fa∣ther and me, thus to take the Cup from my mouth which he hath given me to drink? The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? And so I have also done with this Second Particular. Briefly of the Third, the attempting of that which may hinder the salvation of others. The hindering the salvation of others. This also was Peters case here. In making this attempt he did, as much as in him lay, hinder that great work which Christ was then about, the work of Mans Redemption, so as had he had his will, him∣self and all others must have perished, and been
for ever lost. And upon this account again our Saviour here giveth him this Check. The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? Non vis ut ego cum bibam? Quis ergo alius cum thet? Si ego hunc calicem non bibam, ater∣nâ siti omnes peribitis. Ferus Annot. in loc. As if he had said, What wilt thou not have me to drink this Cup? Who then shall? If I do not drink it, you must all perish with everlasting thirst: No such disservice can be performed by any to their brethren, as to be any wayes Instru∣mentall in hindering or endangering their salva∣tion. This is that which our Saviour chargeth upon the Scribes and Pharisees, Matth. 23.13. They would neither enter into the Kingdome of Heaven themselves, nor suffer them that were en∣tring to go in. A heavy charge. Take we all of us heed of any wayes coming under the guilt of it, Christians to beware of doing this, whether of being any wayes accesso∣ry to such a disservice, of hindring the salvation of any. Which may be done divers wayes. 1.  By evil counsell provoking others unto sin. As Jobs Wife there did him, By evil coun∣sell. (if the words be ren∣dered as our Translation readeth them,) bidding him, Curse God and dye. And so David in the matter of Ʋiah, whom by his Letter he advised Joab to murder. 2 Sam. 11. 2. By evill ex∣ample. By evil example, whether drawing others into evil. As Peter, who by his Judaizing drew others into the like dissimulation, Gal. 2.13. Or preju∣dicing them against that which is good, as David, who by his scandalous sins of Adultery and Murther, gave great occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme, 2 Sam. 12.14. to think and speak evill of God, and of his people, and Religion. A thing which the Apostle chargeth upon the Jewes, who by their walking unanswerably to their Profession, made the name of God to be blasphemed among the Gen∣tiles, Rom. 2.24.
3. By False Doctrine, seducing others, draw∣ing them aside from the truth into error. By falle Doctrine. A thing which the Lord complaineth of against the Shepheards of Israel, Jer. 50.6. My people have been lost sheep, their Shepheards have caused them to goe astray. Which we finde elsewhere more plainly expounded, cop. 23. vers. 13. of the same Pro∣phesie. I have seen foy in the Prophets of Samaria, they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people to erre,] drawing them into Idolatry. And the like we finde charged upon that wicked Woman Jezebel, who calling her self a Prophetesse, she by her teaching seduced the servants of God to commit fornication, both Corporall and Spirituall, Idolatry and Adul∣tery, (which two goe oft times together) Rev. 2.20. 4. By laying stumbling-blocks in the way of others, giving them occasion of falling and miscarrying. By scandals. This we finde expressely charged upon Balaam and Bolack, Rev. 2.44. the one taught the other to cast a stumbling-block before the children of Israel, by setting fair and beautifull women before them, which being Idolaters, inticed them to Whore∣dome and Idolatry. And thus did the sons of Ely lay a stumbling block before the people, whom by their lewd practises they made to abhor the of∣fering of the Lord, (as we finde it 1 Sam. 2.17.) utterly to neglect his Worship and Service, when they saw it so polluted and prophaned by the horrid impieties of those who had the ma∣nagement of it. A thing which the Prophet Ma∣lachi also chargeth upon the Priests in his time, Mal. 2.8. Ye are departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble at the Law; through their wickednesse giving occasion to the people to
daisdain the Worship and service of God. And so do they who by the abuse of their Christian li∣berty offend, or endanger their weak brethren. A thing which the Apostle, as he disclaimeth it in his own practise, If meat make my brother to of∣fend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend, 1 Cor. 8.13. so he cautions his Corinthians against it, v. 9. of the same Chapter, Take heed lest by any means this li∣berty of yours, viz. (in eating meat offered to Idols) become a stumbling-block to them that are weak, (by inticing them to do the like, though against their own consciences) and so through thy know∣ledge shall thy weak brother perish for whom Christ dyed? his salvation may hereby be indangered. A caution, which upon the like occasion, he also giveth to his Romans, cap. 14. vers. 15. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ dyed. Fifthly and lastly (to name no more) This may be done by hindering others from the means of salvation, By hindering others from the means of salvation. keeping them from the means, or the means from them. This is that which our Sa∣viour chargeth upon the Scribes and Pharisees in that Text even now named, Matth. 23.13. de∣nouncing a Woe upon them for it. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdome of heaven against men. And how did they do this? Why by taking away the Key of Know∣ledge from them. So St. Luke explains it. Woe be to you Lawyers, (so he calleth the Sribes and Pha∣risees, who took upon them to be the Keepers and Expounders of the Lawy Ye have taken away the Key of Knowledge, keeping the people from knowing the true sense and meaning of the Holy
Scriptures, which they obscured and perverted by their false glosses. A thing which the Pope and his Clergy at this day stand notoriously, and palpably guilty of, who in like manner take away the Key of Knowledge from the Laity (as they call all but themselves) shutting up the light of Gods Word in a dark Lanthorn; so as it may give light to those that carry it, but not so to others, shut∣ting up the Scripture in an unknown Tongue, that so the vulgar may not be able to understand it. As also with-holding from them the Cup in the Sa∣crament. Even as Peter would have with-held from his Master this Metaphoricall Cup, so doe they from the people this Mystical Cup, so hin∣dering them from that which might be a means for the furthering of their salvation. Which let all Christians beware of thus hin∣dering the salvation of any; and that as in any of the aforesaid wayes so especially in this. By keeping the means of salvation from them, (which (though unwittingly) was Peters attempt here.) Or by keeping them from the means. Which Parents are guilty of in keeping their children from Bap∣tisme, not putting them under the Covenant, when God offers opportunity for it. And so Mosters of Families in keeping their Servants un∣necessarily from the Word. As also they who shall by their Examples, or otherwise, keep o∣thers from that other Sacrament, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Obj. But are not you your selves guilty of this, A Cavil an∣swered. (may some say) whilest you keep men from this Sacrament, which is a means of salvation, are not you therein hinderers of their salva∣tion.
A. A heavy charge, if true. But herein as our own consciences acquit us, so we doubt not but our Lord and Master, whose servants we are, will, whilest we only design the keeping of this Ordinance of his pure, by not prostituting of it to a promiscuous participation; whereby as the Ordinance would be polluted, so the souls of many would be indangered, who by eating and drinking at the Lords Table unworthily, might eat and drink their own Damnation. This we must professe we would not willingly be accessory to. But as for those to whom this Sacrament might be a hopefull means for the furthering of their salvation, such as are in any measure meet to be partakers of it, we are so far from keeping them from it, or it from them, that we hold it forth to them, desiring, intreating, beseeching, nay in the name of God requiring and commanding them, and that under a threatned penalty, (which in the language of the Parable is called a compell∣ing them, Luk. 14.23.) to come, and lay claim to this, which we acknowledge to be their right. Only we desire that this may be done in a regular and orderly way, so as that the hedge may not be broken down, and layed open, which should keep others at a distance from it, who have no such right unto it. But I hope that this is a thing so evident unto candid and unprejudiced spirits, as that it shall not need any further vindication. Thus I have also done with the third Particular here intimated unto us in this Interrogation; And so with the former consideration of these words, as they contain in them a Reprehension and Check to Peter.
Come we now to the second, to look upon them as expressing our Saviours Rosolution, Christs Reso∣lution. Shall I not drink it?] I will drink it, I will certainly drink it, nothing shall hinder me from the drinking of it. Thus did the Lord Jesus, not only patiently and contentedly, but willingly and resolvedly subject and yield up himself to his Fathers disposure, in suffering whatever he should inflict upon him for the satisfaction of his Justice, and Redemption of his Elect people. This Cup was a bitter Cup. And this our Saviour full well knew. Having but tasted the top of it, it put him into a sweat (as you have heard) such a sweat as the world never heard of before, nor since. What then would the dregs doe? Yet will he drink it, and drink it off. , not , not drink of it, taste it, but drink it, drink it off. Such was his Resolu∣tion, whatever God his Father should please to put into his Cup, he will drink it, and that every drop of it, suffering whatever he in his wisdome should think fit. Thus was the Passion of Jesus Christ in him a vo∣luntary act. Christs Passi∣on a voluntary Act. What he suffered it was not without his own consent and will, he did it willingly. A truth lately held forth to you from that Text, Tit. 2.14. which informs us that Christ gave him∣self for us. Not only was given by his Father, but gave himsef, which elsewhere we find plainly assert∣ed by himself. I lay down my life for the Sheep, Joh. 10.15. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of my self, vers. 18. Thus was this offering of his a free offering, his suffering a voluntary act. Upon the Doctrinall part, whereof I shall not now inlarge, having had occasion lately to insist upon it.
Only enquire we about the ground & reason hereof. What made Christ so will∣ing to drink this Cup. What it was that made Christ so willing to drink this Cup, to suffer this accursed death, that he would not be taken off from it. For this a threefold Reason may be assigned, This he did upon a threefold ground. 1.  The first and principal whereof is that which we meet with in the Text. His obedience to his Father. His Father had given this Cup to him to drink, and therefore he will drink it. The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? God his Father had de∣creed, willed that he should suffer and dye, and this his will he had made known unto him; And therefore in obedience to his command he thus willingly yieldeth hereunto. I lay down my life of my self, (saith he) but wherefore? Why, This Commandement I have received from my Father, (so himself there giveth the Reason of it,) Joh. 10.18. Even as Isaac (herein a type of him) in obe∣dience to his Father yields himself to be bound and layed upon the Wood to be sacrificed, Gen. 22. which he did willingly, without the least re∣luctancy or resistance that we read of. So did the Lord Jesus, in obedience to his Father, he willingly yielded up himself to the death. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Crosse. Phil. 2.8. Such an absolute and universal complyance there was betwixt Christ and his Father. What his Father willed that he willed. So himself declares it, Joh. 5.30. I seek not mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And again in the Chapter following, v. 38. I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. Thus did he, as God perfectly comply with the will of his Father.
Being one God with him, there was but one will betwixt them. What the Father willed, the Son willed. And as Man, he was in every thing sub∣ordinate to him. Not doing his own will. I seek not myne own will. As Man, if it had been consi∣stent with the will of God his Father, he could have wished that this Cup might have passed from him; which he doth Matth. 26.39. Father, if it be possible, let this Cup passe from me. There was the will of his humane ifirmity, Nature being desirous to preserve it self, which it might doe without sin. But this will he submits, and re∣solves into the will of his Father. Neverthelesse not as I will, but as thou wilt, (so he there limits his desire) And again, vers. 42. O my Father, if this Cup may not passe from me except I drink it, thy will be done. Thus was there a perfect conformity of his will as God, and subordination as Man, to the will of his Father. And from hence flowed this willing submission of his in drinking of this Cup. This he did in obedience to his Father. Which I shall (God willing) make some Application of here∣after, for the present passing it by. 2.  As herein he had an eye to his Father willing this, so also to his Elect people needing it. His good wil to his Elect people. Their redemption, their salvation depended upon it. As for what he had already done in his Active Obe∣dience, in fulfilling the Law, this alone could have been no wayes available unto them. The Justice of God required further satisfaction, even the suffering of death. This was that which the Law had threatned, In the day that thou eatest there∣of, thou shalt surely dye, (saith the Lord to Adam) Gen. 2.17. thou shalt die the death, be subject, and bound over unto death, not only temporall,
but eternall. And under this sentence do all the Sons of Adam by nature lye, being bound over unto death, not only in their Bodies, but in their Souls, bound over unto eternall death. Now this Law must be satisfied before the Elect of God could be redeemed. And how should this be without shedding of blood. Without shedding of blood, there is no Remission, Heb. 9.22. And upon this account again it was, that our blessed Sa∣viour was so willing to drink this Cup, to subject himself to this accursed death, not only to a na∣turall, but to that which was equivalent to an eternall death, to suffer the wrath of God due unto the sins of the World, that so he might free his Elect people from that Curse. Which he did out of an unspeakable love to them. This it was that induced God the Father to give this Gup to his Son. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, &c. Joh. 3.16. And this it was which also induced him so willingly to drink it, in this way to give himself for them. Who loved me, and gave himself for me, (saith Paul) Gal. 2.20. Christ hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering, and a sacrifice to God, Eph. 5.2. Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it, v. 25. This it was which (next to the will of God his Father,) put him forward upon this service with such resolution and willingnesse; even that ardent affection which he bare to his Elect peo∣ple. This will love doe. The power of intense Love. It beareth all things, (as the Apostle saith of it) 1 Cor. 13.7. Where it is in∣tense, it will make a heavy burden light. Jacob loving Rachel he served a Seven-years Appren∣tiship for her, And (saith the Text) they seemed
to him but a few dayes for the love he had to her, Gen. 29.20. And thus would men serve their God, did they but love him as they ought, though it were for many years, their service would not be tedious unto them. So was it here with our blessed Saviour. Loving his Elect peo∣ple with such an intense affection as he did, he thinks nothing too much, that either he could doe, or suffer for them. Applic. Where, before we passe any further, This Love of Christ to be admited. make we a stand a little, suffering our thoughts to be taken up with an holy Contemplation, and high admiration of this matchlesse love which our blessed Saviour doth herein expresse, in shewing himself so willing to drink this Cup. A Bitter Cup, So he had found it already. Yet behold, he not only submits to the drinking of it, but will not indure that it should be taken from his mouth, till he had drunk it off. The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? As if he had thirsted after it, no lesse then a thirsty man doth after a Cup of drink to quench his thirst withall. Thus was he carryed on to this his Passion with an earnest desire. Even as he was to the drink∣ing of that mystical Cup, concerning which he tells his Disciples, Luk. 22.15. With desire I have desired (that is, Earnestly desired) to eat this Passeover with you before I suffer, (meaning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper) so was he to the drinking of this metaphoricall Cup, (whereof that was a fore∣runner and a sign,) his Death and Passion, this was a thing which he was carryed to with the like earnest desire. This is that which he tells his Disciples, Luk. 12.50. I have a Baptisme to be baptized with, (so he calls his Passion,) and how am
I straitned till it be accomplished? ; Quomodo constringor? how am I pressed? (viz. in spirit) how earnestly do I desire the accomplish∣ment thereof? So we finde that word used, Act. 18.5. where it is said of Paul, that He was pressed in spirit, and testified to the Jewes, that Jesus was Christ. Intus  apud se astuabat prae tli ardore. Beza Gr. Annot. in loc. ; he had a strong motion upon his spirit, which put him upon that ser∣vice. .  Annot. in loc. And so is the same word here looked upon by some. How am I straitned? how am I pressed in spi∣rit unto this work. So it is explain∣ed by some of the Ancients. As by Epiphanius (taken notice of by Beza,) who readeth that Text thus. , &c. I have a Cup to drink, and how doe I hasten to the drinking thereof? And I have a baptisme to be baptized with, Grot, ad loc. ex Iren. and how doe I wish that I were even now baptized with it? And to the same purpose Irenaeus, (taken notice of by Grotius,) who citeth it, . I have another Baptisme to be baptized with, and I am carryed on with an earnest desire to it. And what he there tells them, he here maketh it good, by not induring that any should hinder, or delay his drinking of this Cup. And what an unpa∣rallel'd affection was this which the Lord Jesus bare to his Elect people, which should thus put him on upon this work, this service? That for their sakes he should thus endure the Crosse, and despise the shame, (as the Apostle saith of him, Heb. 12.2.) not so regarding whatever it was that
attended his Passion, as that he should with∣draw himself from it. Thus do we here see the truth of what the Spouse saith concerning Love, Cant. 8.6, 7. Love is strong as death, many waters cannot quench Love, neither can the floods of waters drown it. So it is with true love, where it is intense, it is inexpugnable and unconquerable, Omnia vincit amor. No dangers, no difficulties can quench or quell it. And such was this love which Christ bare to his Church; it was not the fear of death, though a painfull, shamefull, and accursed death; it was not all the waters of Marah, bitter waters, nor the Flood-gates of Divine wrath, which were now set open, ready to be poured out upon him that could quench this love of his. Come what will come, can come, nothing shall take him off from this undertaking, which he had designed for the Redemption and salvation of his Elect people. He had tasted of the bitter Cup already, and now he is resolved, how bitter soever, he will drink it off for their sakes. Which love let all those who have an interest in it, for ever admire. And admiring it, now study how to answere it. But how shall that be? Why, Chriians to answer this love. it is the nature of Love, it will be repayed in its own coyn. And thus do we answere this love of Jesus Christ with love; loving him who hath thus loved us. Which whoso doth not, the Apostle thundereth out an Anathema against him, and that a deserved one, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. Let him be accursed for ever. And this expresse we, (as in other waves, Being willing to suffr for Christ. so) in and by our readinesse to suffer for him. Which if
he shall call us to, do it willingly. Willingnesse in performance sets a marvellous glosse and lustre upon all the services of a Christian; as upon his Active, so upon his Passive Obedience. Shall Christ call any of us forth in any kinde to suffer for him, do it willingly. This is that which Paul pro∣fesseth in that Text forecited, Act. 21.13. I am ready not only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. And let the same minde be in every of us. Being ready even to die for him. This was Peters resolution, and had he not taken it up in his own strength, it had been highly commendable and exemplary; I will lay down my life for thy sake, Joh. 13.37. And the like take we up in the strength of Christ. Taking no∣tice that whatever we suffer for him, it is no more then what he hath done for us. No more, (say I) nay not the thousandth part so much. An infinite disparity and disproportion there is be∣twixt our sufferings for Christ, and his sufferings for us. Put all the sufferings of all the Martyrs, that ever have been, together, and suppose them all meeting in one and the same person, yet were they not worthy to be compared with the sufferings of Christ. One drop of the wrath of God poured out upon the soul is more then all the most exquisite torments that cruelty it self can in∣flict upon the Body. But behold here not drops, but Vials of wrath poured out upon the Lord Jesus. A full Cup measured out unto him by a measure of Justice, his sufferings being propor∣tioned to the sins of the World. Alas, as for those spittings, scoffings, buffetings, scourgings, the percing of his hands and side with the Nails and Spear, his sufferings in his body, (which we
would account eminent sufferings,) they were the least drops in his Cup. It was his suffering in soul which was the soul of his suffering. No com∣pare betwixt his sufferings and ours, his for us, and ours for him. And besides, A service ho∣nourable and profitable to them: Nt so to Christ. Christs suffer∣ings no Honor to him. there are many inducements which may put us upon suffering for Christ, and make us willing therewith. This is to us both an ho∣nourable and a profitable service. But for him to suffer for us, was neither. What honour could there be in that infinite abasure? That he, who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equall with God, (being coessentiall, and so co e∣quall wih his Father as God) should make himself of no reputation, (which the Apostle tells us he did, Phil. 2.8. , he evacuated, emptyed himself of that Glory and Majesty which he had from all eternity, reducing himself as it were to nothing,) and that he should take upon him the form of a servant, (as he there goeth on) subject himself to such a mean and servile condition as that was wherein he lived upon earth, this may well be looked upon as a strange and wonder∣full abasure. But what was it then for him, (as the Apostle there goeth on,) to humble himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Crosse; to such a shamefull, such an accursed death; and to do this for us, us poor worms, vile worthlesse creatures? Nothing lesse then honour in this fervice. Never was there suf∣fering in it self so dishonourable, so ingi∣rious. Neither was there in it properly more Profit then Honour. To us indeed it was profitable, Nor profit. as to our Holynesse and Happinesse, but not so to him?
It is but a groundlesse conceit of the Church of Rome, that by his sufferings, he merited the glorifying of his Humane nature. True indeed, this was the way by which he passed to his King∣dome and glory; so he tells his Disciples, Luk. 24.26. Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and so to enter into his glory? But not the meritorious cause of it. As our works are to us, so were Christs sufferings to him; Via ad regnum, non causa regnandi, the way to his Kingdome, not the cause of his reign∣ing. He had no need to merit any thing for him∣self: For, as he was God, so he was coequall with the Father, infinitely blessed and happy from all eternity, and so there could come no accession or addition of glory to him from his sufferings, only a reassuming of that glory, which for a time he had layd aside. And as he was Man, so (by the Papists own confession) he was compre∣hensor, non viator, even from the very first instant of his conception, he was made blessed, by the union of the divine nature with the humane, from which union also flowed the glorifying of the Humane nature after it had suffered. But I will not stand to dispute the Controversie with them. This we are sure of, the spirit of God in Scripture, speaking of the Death and Passion of Christ, it still refers the merit, fruit and benefit of it unto us. Hereby were we redeemed, and reconciled unto God. Hereby did he obtain for us delive∣rance from sin and death, with righteousnesse and eternall life. By his stripes we are healed; through the merit of his death the gates of Heaven are set open to us, which were shut before, as Para∣dse was against our first Parents. For all these Scripture is expresse. Thus all the profit is ours.
Yet did he undertake this dishonourable, this un∣profitable service for our sakes; and this he did willingly, resolvedly. And shall not we be ready to do the like for him? In our sufferings for him there are both these; Both Honour, And Profit. 1. Sufferings for Christ honou∣rable to the Christian. What service so honourable as to suffer for Christ? Wounds for his sake make honourable scars. Reproaches, revilings, spittings upon, such base aspersions as are cast upon us for his sake, are ho∣nourable badges. Which (as Job saith he would doe by whatever charge his Adversaries should bring against him, Job 31.36.) we may take upon our shoulders, and binde as a Crown to us. It is a mistake, if any shal think (what we are ready to do) that God and Christ are really honoured by their suffering for them. Alas, this honour reacheth not unto them, no more then David saith of his goods, or goodnesse, Psal. 16.2. It reflecteth wholly upon our selves. The honour of whatever we doe or suffer for God and Christ, is ours, not theirs. The Apostles when they had been beaten by the Jewes, for preaching of Christ, they departed from the presence of the Councell, (saith the Text) rejoycing that they were accounted worthy to suffer for his Name. Act. 5.41. This is an honourable service. 2. And no lesse Profitable. And no lesse profitable then honourable. Profirable here, making us like unto Christ, con∣formable to his death, (which the Apostle maketh so much of, Phil. 3.10.) Profitable hereafter. Not a wound, not a stripe, not a scoff, not a taunt, not a reproach which we have suffered for Christ, but shall turn to a good account another day,
meeting us in heaven with an abundant recom∣pense of reward. If we suffer with him we shall be glorified with him, Rom. 8.7. They who are here partakers of Christs sufferings, when his glory shall be revealed, they shall be glad with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4.13. No service so profitable as this, for which we have our Saviours own ensurance, Matth. 19.29. Verily, I say unto you, every one that hath forsaken houses, or lands, &c. for my Names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, (viz. now in this life, as St. Mark explains it, Mar. 10.30. of secular goods, if good for them, or of spiritual riches, which are better) and shall inherit everlasting life. And what a shame is it then for Christians to bear the Crosse of Christ so heavily, To bear the Cross of Christ heavly, a shame to Christians. as for the most part they doe. Alas, every thing that we suffer for Christ we are ready to think it enough, if not too much. How willingly do we withdraw our necks from his yoke? How willing are we to hearken to that counsel which Peter would have given to his Master, to spare and favour our selves? How ready to accept of all means for the taking of this Cup from our mouths? Herein how unlike unto Christ? How far from suffering for him, as he did for us? not only patiently but willingly. Such spirits indeed there have been in some of the Lords worthies. They have kissed this Cup, they have readily embraced and rejoyced in their sufferings, taking pleasure in them. So did Peter and those other Apostles, of whom I spake even now. And the like did Paul, who tells his Corin∣thians, that he took pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in perscutions, in distresses for Christs sake, 2 Cor. 12.10. And so did those Primitive Mar∣tyrs, who took joyfully the spoyling of their goods,
Heb. 10.34. And the like have many of the Mar∣tyrs in succeeding Ages done, who have gone to the Stake, as our Saviour here did to his Crosse, not as to a place of torment, but as to a Chariot of Triumph. Oh that there were the same spirit in all the Lords people! Beloved, they are but tri∣vial sufferings, which God calleth any of us to at this day for the cause of Christ; for the most part but Tongue-persecution: And what shall we not bear this with patience, nay with chearfulnesse? Was Christ so willing to suffer so much for us, and shall not we be willing to suffer a little for him? And being willing to suffer for him, Christians not to be unwilling to suffer for those that are Christs. be we not unwilling to suffer for his. Herein follow we his example. We see how willingly he offers up him∣self for his Church: Do we the like, if ever God shall honour us so far as to call us to such a ser∣vice. An honourable service, next to our suffer∣ing for Christ, to suffer for his Spouse, his Body, his Church. A service which we are tyed to by many bonds. We professe our selves Members of that Body. Now every Member should be rea∣dy to suffer for the whole. He who was the head of his Church, we see how free he was of his dearest blood for it. And shall we, to whom it is an honour, if we may be but accounted the meanest Members, the feet of that Body, be willing to part with so much as our Nayls for it? Such are our goods, our Estates to us, they are but as the Nayls to the Body, which though there be some use of, yet the Body may subsist without them. Such are our Estates, at least our super∣fluities, matters of conveniency, not of necessity. Doth God call for them in the behalf of hs
Church, with-hold them not. Such was the zeal of the Primitive Christians, that (as the story tells us, Act. 4.34.37.) for the relief of the Churches necessities, many of them sold their Lands and Houses, and brought the price thereof and laid it down at the Apostles feet. Being willing not only to part with the Rent, but with the Fee-simple of their Estates. And shall not they who pro∣fesse to walk in their steps, be willing to part with something out of their superfluitie for the Churches sake; and for the relief of their necessi∣tous brethren? And being ready to do and suffer for their Bo∣dies, Specially for their souls. much more for their Souls. Here if God call, not only for our Estates, but for our Liber∣ties, nay for our lives, even these should not in this case be dear to us. This is no more then Paul was willing to do for his Corinthians, whom he telleth, 2 Cor. 12.15. I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, , (saith the Originall) for your souls (as our Mrgin readeth it.) And the like he tells his Philippians, cap. 2. v. 7. If I be offered up, (, if I be poued forth as a drink Offering) upon the sacrifice and service of your Faith, I joy and rejoyce with you all. Thus should Christians prefer their brethrens souls be∣fore their own bodies. Such a minde we see there was in the Lord Jesus. And (as the Apostle exhorts) lt the same minde be in us that was in him, Phil. 2.5. Learning this our duty from him. So St. John presseth it, 1 Joh. 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he layed down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren, viz if God call us to it.
Thus have I shewed you two of those reasons and grounds, whereupon our blessed Saviour did thus freely and willingly subject himself to the drinking of this Cup. This he did in obedience to his Father. And this he did out of that love which he bare to his Elect. There is yet one other behinde, which I shall insist more largely upon. Thus did the Lord Jesus for our example. This was one, Christ thus suffered for an example to his people. Pertinet adeae∣emplum, quià eadem â nobis omnibus tole∣rantia exigitur. Calv. Com. in loc. (though not the only) end of Christs sufferings, as St. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. Such were the Actions of Christ, though not all, yet most of them were ex∣emplary. As he tells his Disciples concerning that act of his, in washing their Feet, Joh. 13.15. I have given you an example, that ye should doe as I have done unto you. And such also were his Pas∣sions, his sufferings being intended by him for an , (which is St. Peters word there) a Copy for others to write after (so that word pro∣perly signifieth) a pattern for us to imitate and follow. Which we are to doe, Christ to be imitated in the manner of his suffering. not so much in the matter, as in the manner of his suffering. The Cup which he drank, we are not able to drink it after him, (so he there tells the sons of Zebedee, Math. 20.22.) That wherein we are to imitate him, to follow his steps, is the modus, the manner of his sufferng. He suffered not only patiently, but willingly. Thus did he subject himself to the appointment of his Father. Not as a Malefactor, who subjecteth his neck to the stroke of the Axe, becuse cannot avoid it. But he doth it wil∣lng, the rully, resolvedly. Thus doth he here
professe to drink this Cup. And so are the Lords people to receive all such Cups from the hand of their heavenly Father as he shall please to reach forth unto them, to subject themselves to all such afflictions, tryals, sufferings, as he shall by his Providence lay out for any of them, not only patiently, and contentedly, but willingly, chear∣fully. A point, A point of generall and special con∣cernment. as of generall, so of speciall use to all and every of the Lords people in this vale of tears. Some other Truths may be more necessa∣ry as to their future salvation, none more need∣full, as to their present condition then this. There are none of us but either at the present have, or for the future must expect to have some of these Cups, bitter Cups, presented unto us to drink. Ye shall indeed drink of my Cup, (saith our Saviour there to them, which accordingly, (as you have heard) they did.) None of us but must make account in this way to be made conformable to our Head, to Christ, in suffering with him. Though not all alike. Some there are who drink deep draughts of this Cup, others only sip of it, but all must taste it. God is pleased to vouchsafe to some of his people great freedome this way, in comparison of others, yet no exemption for any. We must through much tribulation enter into the King∣dome of God, Act. 14.22. There are none of us here present (I suppose) who have not had our tryals in some kinde or other already. Some of us happily have sad pressures lying upon us at the present; but what bonds may wait for us, what sufferings God hath laid out for any of us for the future, that we know not. It is that which our Saviour tells Peter, Joh. 21.18. Verily, verily, I
say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst whither thou wouldest, but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thine hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not; which he spake (as the next vers. explains it) signifying by what death he should glorifie God; viz. by suffering upon the Crosse, which (as Histories tell us) he accordingly did. And thus fareth it with many. In their younger times they enjoy many comfortable dayes, a prosperous condition, yet before they go off the stage they have another part given them to act, seeing much affliction and sorrow. Now, quod cuivis cuilibet, that which doth happen to one, may happen to another. No tryall or affliction which hath befallen any of the people of God, or yet any of the Sons of men (for in these things, as the Preacher tells us, All things come alike to all, there is one event to the righteous as to the wicked, Eccl. 9.2.) but may for ought we know be our por∣tion, thy portion, my portion. What befalleth others to day, may befall us to morrow. And therefore pardon me if I shall here take a little more then usuall liberty to dilate and inlarge my meditations upon so usefull and needfull a subject as this, the Passive Obedience of a Christian, it being that which was chiefly in my eye when I first took this Text in hand. The Cup which my Father hath given me, An exemplary Resolution, to be taken up by every Christi∣an, willing to suffer what God will have him. shall I not drink it?] Behold here an exemplary resolution, fit to be taken up by every Christian concerning whatever Cups God at the present doth, or here∣after may present unto him, whatever tryals, afflictions, sufferings he is or shall be pleased to exercise him with, be it in body, in soul, in Rela∣tions,
in Estate, in good Name, in Liberty, in life, whatever they be, still in the purpose and reso∣lution of his heart to say of all and every of them in like manner, The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? So submitting unto his will and pleasure, and that not only patiently, but willingly. A duty held forth by Pat∣tern. For this we have a Pattern here in him, whose practise for the most part is a Rule. And it is no other then what we finde in some other of the Saints of God. This is that which Saint James saith of the Prophets, Jam. 5.10. whom he there propounds fot an ensample of suffering affliction. In particular, the holy man Job (whom he there in the next verse instanceth in) how patiently, how willingly did he drink this Cup, submit to the will of God in his many and great afflictions? When his Wife gave him that pernicious counsell, to make a speedy riddance of his trouble one way or other, What (saith he) shall we receive good at the hands of God, and not evill? Job 2.10. A resolution not unlike unto this of our Saviours in the Text. Jobs Cup, which he had tasted and drunk of already, was a bitter Cup, his sufferings many, and those sharp. In his Estate, in his Children, in his Body. Behold him bleeding (as I may say) in every vein already. And what greater tryals might be yet behinde, he knew not. Yet whatever for the present they were, or for the future might be, this is his resolution, he will receive evil at Gods hand as well as good. He had received blessings from him joyfully, thankfully, and he will with the same hand take Crosses from him, not only pa∣tiently, but willingly. Thus should a Christian be ad utrumque paratus; ready to take a bitter Cup
from Gods hand as well as a sweet one, Adversi∣ty as well as Prosperity, Crosses as Blessings. As he receiveth the one joyfully, so the other willingly, both thankfully. By Precept. And what we have thus held forth by Pattern, we shall finde also seconded by Precept, and that by our Saviour himself in that obvious Text, Math. 16.24. where having given Peter that tart check for the counsell which he gave him to decline his sufferings, he pre∣sently subjoyns as a Lesson for him and all other his Disciples, to take notice of. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his Crosse and follow me.] If any man will come after me,] that is, take upon him to be a Disciple of mine, a Professor of the Gospell, or follow me to Heaven, whither I am going, Let him deny himself,] lay aside all carnall Interests, all worldly respects, as to any inordinate affection towards them. And let him take up his Crosse.] . The phrase is emphaticall; Attollat crucem suam] i. e. Onere quantum∣vis duro & gravi in hume∣ros alacriter sublato, &c. Bez. Gr. Annot. ad loc. not only bear the Crosse when it is layed upon him, but take it up. Not only suffer what he cannot shift, as the beast beareth the burden which is layed upon it, and it cannot shake off. But willingly and chearfully submitting to Gods dispensations, in suffering what he by his Providence shall call him to. Thus we see the Duty held forth both by Pattern and Precept. Christians must subject themselves to their heavenly Father in drinking whatever Cups he presents to them, and that willingly, chearfully. Obj. Why, but it may be said, Christ seem∣ingly unwill∣ing to drink this up. did our Saviour so? do we not finde him deprecating this Cup, praying against it, and that earnestly, wishing that it might passe from him? how then did he
drink it willingly? And do we not finde him telling Peter in that Text even now cited, Joh. 21.18. that when he should goe to his Martyr∣dome, another should carry him whither he would not? And is it not so with the best of Gods Saints, doe not they suffer without, or against their wills? A. For answer to this briefly. There is a two-fold will. A twofold will, Natural and Spiritual. A naturall, and a spirituall will; or two motions of the same will, the one from Nature, the other from Grace. Now it is true, the former of these, is averse to suffering, flyeth from death, and all other like evils, which are destructive to it self. But the other in a regenerate person, it over-rules this, carrying the soul contrary to the inclinations of nature, to yield obedience to the will of God, and that willingly. So it was with our blessed Saviour, in whom we finde these two wills, or two motions. A natural motion incli∣ning him to wish that this Cup might passe from him (as there we have it.) But then a spi∣ritual motion over-ruling that naturall will of his, bringing it off to a willing obedience to the will of his heavenly Father. Neverthelesse, not as I will, but as thou wilt. And so it is with other of the Saints. However the stream of nature runneth one way, yet the winde of the Spirit carryeth them another. Nature seeking the preservation of it self, declines sufferings, but Grace submits to them, and that willingly. This stone being thus removed, To suffer is part of a Chri∣stians obedi∣ence to God, which must be willing I might now go on, and shew you why Christians are thus to suffer. Great reason for it. This is part of their Obedience unto God, their suffering work, which must be performed willingly, without which it
deserves not the name of Obedience. If ye be willing and obedient, (saith the Lord to his people) Isa. 1.19. And it is part of their Conformity to Christ, whom they are to imitate, as in his Active, Part of his conformity to Christ. so in his Passive Obedience, suffering as he suffered. But it is not my purpose to insist upon the Do∣ctrinall part. That which I aim at is the working of this Duty upon the heart by way of Appli∣cation. That I shall direct only two wayes;  By way of Reprehension, And Exhortation. 1. By way of Reprehension, Reprehension of 3 sorts. under which fall not a few. Reduce them into three ranks. Such as despise the Judgements of the Lord; Such as murmure at them; Such as faint under them. All which are far from this disposition which here we meet with in our blessed Saviour. To speak a word to each of them severally. 1.  Some there are who despise the Judgements of the Lord: Despisers of Gods Judge∣ments. As the Israelites are charged to have done by the Judgements of his mouth, his word, Ezek. 20.13. They have despised my Judgements. So doe they by the Judgements of his hand, Of which 4 sorts. his works of Judgement, they despise them: sleight them, un∣der which head come divers. 1 Such as put this Cup far from them. So did they of whom the Prophet Amos speaketh, Such as put this Cup far from them. 6.3. They put far away the evil day. In the midst of their other Cups, whilest they were drinking Wine in Boles, (as the 6 vers. there hath it) quaffing and carousing,
drinking by measure without measure, (as Drinkers of Healths (as they abusively call them) use to do) this Cup was far removed out of their sight. Whilest they were rioting and revelling, feasting and sporting, they little thought of the day of Calamity which was then coming upon them. And so is it with many. In the time of Prosperity, whilest they have the sweet Cup at their mouths, they never think of that bitter Cup, which sooner or later they may, nay must drink of. Never think of the day of Adversity, the day of Affli∣ction, the day of Death. And so they go on se∣curely in their sins, promising to themselves se∣curity, that they shall not feel of the Judgments of God. So was it (as with literall, Isa. 47.8. so) with Mysticall Babylon, Rev. 18.7. She saith in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow. Being in a prosperous and flourishing condition, she promiseth to her self that she should never see a change. But mark what fol∣lows in the next Verse. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, &c. See here what it is that all secure sinners may expect, such as putting this Cup, the Judgments of God, far from them, go on in their sinfull provocations: cer∣tainly God hath a Bitter Cup for them, which sooner or later they shall drink; and that it may be sooner then they are aware of. Expresse to this purpose is that known Text, (which I wish all of this rank may take notice of,) Deut. 29.19, 20. Where the Lord telleth his people Is∣rael, that if there should be amongst them a root that beareth Gall and Wormwood, (any wicked and ungodly person, whose sins are as distastefull unto
God, as the bitterest Gall or Wormwood are unto man) And it come to passe (saith the Text) when he heareth the words of this Curse, that he blesse himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the imagination of myne heart, to adde drun∣kennesse to thirst, (one sin to another) then mark what follows. The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousie shall smoke like fire against that man. The Cup of Gods wrath is not nearer to any than those who thus put it far from them. 2. And others there are not much unlike them, Such as will not see it when it cometh to∣wards them. who when this bitter Cup is coming towards them, yet they shut their eyes against it, so as seeing they will not see it. Such the Prophet Isai speak∣eth of, Isa. 26.11. Lord (saith he) when thy hand is lifted up they will not see. Notwithstanding God was at work, wonderfully declaring and manifesting his power, as in working miraculous deliverances for his people, so in executing strange and remarkable Judgements upon his and their enemies, yet they shut their eyes against it, not regarding what he did. Even so deal many. When Gods hand is lifted up, and his Judgements are abroad in the earth, this Cup is walking to and fro on every side of them, yet they shut their eyes against it, will not take notice of it so as to be at all affected with it. Though it be coming towards them, yet they hope it shall not come at them, so was it with those Edomites, whom I spake of before: Though the Cup of Gods fury went round among the Nations, so as all their Neighbours had drunk of it, yet they hoped they should not do the like. Even so is it with many secure sinners. In the midst of common
calamities, they promise to themselves immuni∣ty and freedome, that this Cup shall passe by them. So did the Jewes of old, though the Lord sent his Prophets to them one after another, every one with a Cup in his hand, (as the Prophet Jeremy there saith of himself in that Text fore∣cited, Jer. 25.) a Cup of wrath and fury, which they held forth unto them, threatning them with the Judgements of God, yet few of them gave credit to what they said. But what saith the Lord to them for this? You may read it (as often elsewhere, so) Amos 9.10. All the sinners of my people shall die by the Sword, which say, the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.] The Sinners of my people, pre∣sumptuous sinners, (such as the greatest part of them were) though God had threatned his Judgements against that Nation, yet they nei∣ther feared, nor cared for them, they would be∣lieve no more then they felt, still they flattered themselves, that the Judgements threatned either should not come, or not come at them, they should do well enough. Now as for such, the Lord there tells them what they should expect, they should be sure to dye by the Sword, whoever escaped his Judgements they should not. And the like let all secure sinners look for. Such as make a Covenant with death, and with Hell they are at an agreement, (as the Prophet Isai sets forth the se∣curity of the Rulers of Israel, Isa. 28.15) saying in their hearts, (as it there followeth) when the over∣flowing scourge shall passe through, it shall not come unto us. Thus do they (as he goeth on) make lyes their refuge, and under falshood do they hide them∣selves. But let all such make account that this Co∣venant of theirs shall be disanulled. So the Lord
there threatens it against those Rulers, vers. 18. Your Covenant with death shall be disanulled, and your agreement with Hell shall not stand, when the overflowing scourge shall passe through, then ye shall be trodden down by it. Secure sinners shall not escape the Judgements of God. They who when his hand is lifted up will not see, they shall see and feel. So the Prophet there threatneth them in that Text even now cited, Isa. 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they will not see, but they shall see and be ashamed, yea the fire of thine enemies shall de∣vour them.] The fire of thine enemies, the fierce wrath of God, wherewith he is wont to proceed against his enemies. When that should break forth upon them (as it should) then they should see what they would not see, they should feel the Judge∣ments of God to their cost and smart. But I pass on. 3. Others of this rank there are, Such as will not, let it down, are not affected with sufferings. who not∣withstanding God giveth this Cup into their hand, and even (as I may say) putteth it to their mouths, yet they will not drink it, they will not let it down. Whatever afflictions or sufferings God is pleased to inflict upon them they take them not to heart, they are not affected with them as they ought to be. Which ordinarily ariseth from one of these three heads. An evil arising from 1. Sometimes from a kinde of naturall stupidity, that same , Naturall stu∣pdity. (as Philosophers call it) a stupid senselesnesse. When men are like cold Iron, not sensible of the strokes of Gods hammer; Afflictions make no impressions upon their spi∣rits. So is it with some. God strikes them (as it were) in every Vein, yet they bleed not, he fol∣loweth them with sundry kindes of afflictions
and crosses, visits them in their Estates, in their Relations, in their Bodies, yet none of these reach unto the Soul, they are not moved there∣by. 2.  Sometimes from Atheisticall profanenesse, a profane contempt of God, A heisticall profanenesse. and of his dealings. Thus do some harden their hearts, and so bear up head against God himself, against his threat∣nings, and against his Judgements, as if they were not worth the taking notice of. No, come what will come, they are resolved it shall never come near their hearts. And out of this Principle, they will not let down those bitter Cups, which are given them to drink. 3.  Or (thirdly) from a false and erroneous Prin∣ciple. Eoneous Principles. So is it with some, who conceive it is not for a Christian to be affected or moved with tem∣porall losses, or crosses. Such was the conceit of the Stoicks of old, who held that it was not for a wise man to be subject to such Passions. And such a Stoicall Apathy hath, in the croud of other errors, at this day crept in among some! Christi∣ans, and that under the name of Religion. To be affected with the losse of Estate, of Friends, of nearest and dearest Relations, Husband, Wife, Children, they look upon it as a thing below them, as unworthy of and dishonourable to their profession. An error, a grosse and groundless one. Religion doth not stop the course of affections, or Passions, only it moderateth and rectifieth them. We finde our blessed Saviour weeping over Lazarus's Sepulchre, Joh. 11.35. To make so light of the hand of God, as not to be affected with it, it is a kinde of sleighting and despising his Chastisements; which whoso stand guilty of, upon what pretense
soever, deserve a just Reprehension. There are yet a fourth sort, who come within the compasse of this Reprehension, Such as cast in up again. such as drink this Cup, but they do not keep it. Like a queazy stomack, which having taken in a distastefull po∣tion, presently casts it up again, not retaining it till it have had the effect for which it was inten∣ded. So they, when afflictions fall upon them, are for the present affected with them, but they suffer them not to rest upon the heart untill the work be done for which they are sent. A usual case, when God strikes men in any kinde, pre∣sently they deal as men who conceive themselves struck with the Plague, or some such other malig∣nant disease, take something to drive it from the heart, which they do either by letting in Diaboli∣cal suggestions into the Soul, such as Satan is rea∣dy to dart into the hearts of men, for the hin∣dering of the kindely working of Afflictions; of which kinde are those common ones; Seeing it is no better, it is well 'tis no worse; in vain to grieve for what they cannot help; hereby they may hurt, but no way benefit themselves, &c. Or else, by seeking other wayes and means of di∣verting and taking off their thoughts; perhaps, vain Company, unseasonable Recreations, sports and pastimes. As Saul, when the Evil Spiri was upon him, calls for David, that by playing upon his Harp, he might drive it away, 1 Sam. 16. v. last. At the best, by immerging and plunging them∣selves into the affairs and businesses of the world. As Cain did, when flying from the presence of the Lord, he betook himself to the building of a City, Gen. 4.17. Now this is also a kinde of despising the Chastisement of the Lord; when men only tast:
of the Cup which God giveth them, and having sipped of it cast it away. A thing which many times provokes God against his own people, causing him to double his strokes upon them, to renew and increase their sorrowes and sufferings. Here is then the first rank of those who come within the compasse of this Reprehension; such as despise the Judgements or Chastisements of the Lord; either putting this Cup far from them, or when it cometh nigh them, shutting their eyes against it, or when it is put to their mouth, not drinking it, or having drunk it, cast it up again. Passe we now to the Second. A second sort there are who do drink this Cup, but it is with a great deal of loathing, Repners and Murmurers. they suffer Affliction, but it is with a great deal of impatience and discontent, repining and murmuring at it. Such entertainment do Afflictions ordinarily finde when they meet with an evil and unsanctified heart, especially if they be in any measure sharp and grievous. Presently what murmurings, what grudgings, what repinings, what secret discontents arise in the soul? A usual thing I say, with wicked and ungodly persons. If the hand of God lye heavy upon them, presently their hearts begin to boyl and swell within them, as if some hard measure were offered them. And many times this inward distemper breaketh forth in outward expressions, in gestures, words, acti∣ons, whereby either directly or indirectly they do blaspheme God himself. Thus we read, when the Angels were pouring out their Vials, men blasphemed the Name of God. So we finde it thrice repeated in that one Chapter, Rev. 16 v. 9.11.21. looking at him, as having power over those plagues,
(as the 9 verse hath it) instead of repenting and giving glory to him, (which they should have done, as it there followeth) they speak evil of him, and his dealings with them. Yea a spice of this distemper may sometimes (too often) be found even in Gods own people. An infirmity to which Gods own people are subject. Not only secret murmurings arising in their hearts, but even sometimes breaking forth at their lips; Passion venting it self in undutifull and unbe∣coming expressions. So it was with the people of Israel, when they came to the waters of Marah, they presently fell to murmure against Moses, Exod. 15.24. and so against God in him, (as Moses tells them, Exod. 16.7. and the Lord himself inter∣prets it, Numb. 14.29.) And the like they did upon other occasions, as in the want of bread, Exod. 16.2. Thus did they murmure in the Wil∣dernesse. And the like are the best of Gods Saints subject to. If God bring them to the wa∣ters of Marah, bitter waters, giving them some bitter Cup to drink, exercising them with some sharp afflictious, their gestures, their speeches, their actions are too ready to bewray the secret discontents and impatience of their spirits. Those instances of Eliah, Jeremy, Job, Jonah, are all ob∣vious. All eminent servants of God, and yet how were they surprized with this distemper? Now, O Lord, take away my life, for I am not better then my Fathers, (saith Eliah in the Wildernesse) 1 King. 19.4. Why is my pain perpetuall, and my wound in∣curable, which refuseth to be healed? Wilt thou be unto me altogether as a Lyar, or as waters that fail? (saith Jeremy to his God in a distempered Passion) Jer. 15.18. And again, O Lord thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived, thou art stronger then I, and
hast prevailed, I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me, cap. 20.7. And again v. 14. Cursed be the day wherein I was born, let not the day wherein my Mother bare me be blessed; and so he goeth on to the end of the Chapter, in a great deal of passionate lan∣guage, bewraying a strange distemper that was upon him by reason of the contempt and trea∣chery, and ill use which he met with. And the like we finde in Job. Though looked upon, and that deservedly, as a pattern of patience, yet we may hear him venting his Passion in the like language, cap. 3. where from the 3d verse to the 16th, he spends himself in such passionate expressions. Let the day be darknesse wherein I was born, &c. And so Jonah, when his gourd was withered, and the Sun lay hot upon his head, he breaks forth in Passion, not sparing to tell God to his face, that he did well to be angry, even unto death. Jon. 4.9. Strange distempers to be found in sanctified hearts. Is it so that any of us have found, or at any time shall finde any spice hereof in our selves, (as who can say he is free) take we the reproof to our selves; taking notice that it was far otherwise with our blessed Saviour, our heavenly pattern. Though his Cup was a bitterer Cup then ever any man upon earth tasted, yet we finde him far from murmuring or repining when he was to drink it. There are yet a third sort who drink this Cup, but they faint in the drinking of it. Such as faint un affli∣ctions. As the first sort make their sufferings too light, so these make them too heavy, their spirits drooping and sink∣ing under their burdens. A weaknesse very inci∣dent even to Gods own people, yea to the best of them. It is that which Jeremy saith of himself,
Jer. 8.18. When I would comfort my self against sor∣row, my heart is faint in me. And the like we may hear from the Church in her Captivity, Lam. 1. last: My sighes are many, and my heart is faint. Such deliquiums, such despondencies and faintings, the strongest of Saints (as I said) are subject to. It is that which David saith of himself, when he was in some eminent danger, My soul is bowed down, viz. through fear, Psal. 57.6. and elsewhere; being pursued by his implacable enemy King Saul, hunted as a Partridge in the Mountains, (as himself expresseth it) we finde him giving up himself for a lost man; He said in his heart, I shall now perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Sam. 27.1. An infirmity arising partly from the weaknesse of nature, An Infirmity from whence arising. which contributes much to these despon∣dencies; but chiefly from the weaknesse of grace. If thou faint in the day of Adversity, thy strength is small, (saith the Wiseman) Prov. 24.10. thy spiri∣tual strength, it argues Faith to be weak. This it is which supporteth and beareth up the spi∣rit under afflictions, keepeth it from fainting. I had fainted (saith David) unlesse I bad believed to see the goodnesse of the Lord in the Land of the living. Psal 27.13. Faith in God, believing his Promi∣ses, and resting upon his power, mercy, truth, it boyeth up the soul, keepeth the head above water. Where Faith faileth, no wonder if the heart fainteth. And it is often helped forwards by looking upon afflictions through false Glasses, which represent them greater then they are. As also by neglecting or refusing means of Consolation and comfort. As it is said of Rachel (the Benjamitsh women descended from Rachel,) when her children were carried into Captivity, she wpt (saith the Text)
and would not be comforted, because they were not, Mat. 2.18. Thus it is sometimes, when God withdraws one blessing, men overlook all others they enjoy, and will take no comfort in them. Like Chil∣dren, who if one of their toyes be taken from them, they presently throw away all the rest. But from what ground soever it ariseth, or by what means soever it is procured or promoted, it is a weaknesse, and that such a one as deserves a just Reprehension. It was not so with our bles∣sed Saviour. Never was there Cup like this Cup, which he was now to drink, yet behold here how he beareth up under it, betaking himself to his suffering work with a holy and steadfast resolution. The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? Thus much by way of Repre∣hension. From which passe we (in the second place) to that which I principally aim at, Exhortation, to follow this Pattern. Exhortation. Where let me set this pattern before you, pro∣pounding it for your imitation, exciting and stir∣ring up all who professe themselves the Disci∣ples of Jesus Christ that herein they would en∣deavour to shew themselves conformable to this their Head. Conformity to Christ, is that which God hath predestinated all his Elect people to. So the Apostle infoms us, Rom. 8.29. Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son, to be made like him, and that, as in glory, so in grace. Now as we desire the for∣mer, have we an eye to the latter, see that we imitate Christ in what was imitable in him, fol∣lowing his steps. So suffering as Christ did. Which do we, as in his Active, so in his Passive Obedience, so drinking those Cups which our heavenly Father shall give unto us, as
he here did this, which was given to him; not despising of, not murmuring at, not fainting under whatever Afflictions and Chastisements God shall please to exercise us with, but bearing and suffering them patiently, obediently, willingly. Eve∣ry of which particulars give me leave to spend a little time upon. The three former whereof are Negatives, shewing us what we are not to doe; the three latter Positives, shewing us what we are to doe. Begin with the former, the Negatives, Taking heed of 3 things. which shew us what we are not to doe, what to take heed of. The First whereof is Despising Gods Correcti∣ons and Chastisements. Despising Gods correcti∣ons, whether by This is the counsel which wise Eliphaz giveth to his friend Job; Despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty, Job 5.17. And the same doth the wisest of men give to his Son, Prov. 3.11. (as also the Apostle, taking it from him, doth to all Christians, Heb. 12.5.) My Son despise not the chastening of the Lord. Despise not.] a  fosti∣de, flocci∣facere. Altimeas (saith the Hebrew,) a word which sig∣nifieth both loathing and sleighting, each of which is a kinde of despising. And both these let Chri∣stians beware of. 1. Of loathing this Cup, so that word (Maas) is used by Job, cap. 7.16. Loathing of them.  Abominatus sum. where being weary of his life, he saith he loathed it. My soul chooseth strangling, and death rather then my life, I loath it. [Maaseti;] Let not us do so by the Afflictions and tryals wherewith God is pleased to exercise us. This flesh and blood, nature, is ready to doe. Even as a weak stomach loatheth the Potion which is presented to it to drink, so doth nature loath, and (as it were) turn away the face from the Cup of Affliction which God reacheth forth.
But herein let Grace correct, and rectifie nature. So reason doth sonse in a wise Patient. When the Potion is first brought to him, it is offensive to his senses, to his sight, to his smell, and much more to his taste, but being informed by his Phy∣sician how needfull and usefull it is for him, now he taketh and drinketh it off. And thus doth the wise Christian by the Cups of Affliction which his heavenly Father gives him, however nature is averse to them, yet Grace taking notice, and that from the great Physician God himself, that they are both needfull, and profitable, now it sub∣mits. So did our blessed Saviour. However, at his first entring into the Garden, his stomach (as I may say) rose against his Cup, which he saw coming towards him, he seemed to loath it, the thought of it set him into a sweat, put him into an Agony, and thereupon he betook himself to his prayers, praying to his Father once and a∣gain, yea a third time, and that with great ear∣nestnesse, that if it were possible this Cup might passe from him, (as we have it in that Chapter forecited, Math. 26.) yet taking full notice that it was his Fathers will that he should drink it, and of what concernment it was to his Church, see here how be submits to it readily, willingly, resolvedly, not induring to have this Cup kept from his mouth; The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? And the like work let grace have in e∣very of our hearts for the rectifying of nature. Though Nature be averse to such afflictions as God seeth fit for us, let Grace submit. Which let it doe upon this twofold consideration: The needfulnesse, And Profitablenesse of them.
1. Their needfulnesse. Afflictions needfull. Now for a season (if need be) ye are made heavy through manifold temptations, 1 Pet. 1.6. . God never maketh his people heavy but where need is. As a wise Physician will never minister a churlish potion to his Pa∣tient, but where his necessity requireth it. No more doth the most wise God dispense any sharp afflictions to his people, but where he seeth they have need of them. This happily themselves ap∣prehend not, not seeing the danger wherein they are, but God seeth it; and thereupon taketh this course with them for the preventing of some greater evill. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11.32. 2. Profitable. And as they are needfull for the preventing of evils, so profitable. Such are sanctifyed afflictions, they bring forth many blessed fruits. No chastise∣ment for the present seemeth to be joyous but grievous, neverthelesse afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousnesse unto them which are exercised thereby. Heb. 12.11. But of this (God willing) I shall speak more hereafter. Upon these accounts, let not any of us loath the Cup which our heavenly Father giveth us, so as to refuse the drinking of it, putting it from us, specially by the use of any indirect and unwarrantable means. 2. And as we are to take heed of loathing, so of slighting it. Sleighting of them. So the Apostle (following the Se∣venty) renders the word in his citing of that Text of the wisemans, Heb. 12.5. My Son despise not the Ghastening of the Lord. , ne parvi ducas, do not set light by it, (the word coming of , parvus, and , cura) do not disregard, and sleight it, as a thing not worth the taking
notice of. This do they (as I have shewn you) who are not, will not be affected with the hand of God lying upon them, they shut the dore of their hearts against their afflictions, and will not suffer them to enter there. This let not any of us doe. When God layeth his hand upon us, upon what part, in what kinde soever it be, he expects that we should lay it to our hearts. A Parent is not well pleased with his Childe when it laugheth at his correction. Gods hand ever to be layed to heart. This beware we of. Is God angry with us, and doth he manifest his displeasure in any tokens of it, see that we take it to heart, so as to humble our selves under his hand. So did the Church in her Captivity, Lam. 3.19, 20. Remembring my affliction and my misery, the Wormwood and the Gall; my soul hath them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me. And the like the Apostles, Peter and James, call for at the hands of all Christians in their afflicted conditi∣ons. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, Jam. 4.10. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God; 1 Pet. 5.6. This is a thing which God looketh for, to be thus acknowledged in his Judgements, and Chastisements. Not to be sen∣sible of his hand, not to be humbled under it, is no other but a high contempt. Which take we heed of. Afflictions are Gods Messengers, all sent by him, every one having an errand from him to us. Now this is a thing which Princes will not endure, to have their Messengers (how mean so∣ever) despised, sleighted, shut out of dores, sent away without a hearing. Do not we so deal by these Messengers, which are sent by God to us, but hear them, hearken to them. Hear the rod, and who hath appointed it, Mic. 6.9. Suffer every
affliction to enter into the heart; taking no∣tice of Gods hand in it, humble our souls under it. And let this our humbling be in measure pro∣portionable to our sufferings. Great Afflicti∣ons call for great hum∣blings. Great afflictions call for great humblings. Thus it is said of Manasseh, When he was in affliction, he humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, 2 Chron. 33.12. Not to humble the soul at all under the hand of God, or no wayes proportionably to the measure of Afflictions, is a despising of them, and of God in them. Which (I say) let us beware of. Doth God knock at the dore of our hearts by any Rod of his, open unto it, suffer it to enter, lay it to heart. And there let it lye, Gods Messen∣gers not to be sent away without their errand. till it have had the work for which it was sent. Do not send any of these Messengers away without what they came for. Take heed of whatever it is that might hinder the kindely working of these medicinable Cups. Take heed of those and the like Diabolicall sug∣gestions, which I spake of, which tend to the choaking and stifling of godly sorrow in the soul. Which though some of them may be truths in themselves, and are capable of some good use that may be made of them, yet being now un∣seasonable and tending to such an end, they are hurtfull and pernicious. Take heed also of such avocations as may unseasonably call the soul aside from the work it hath in hand; as of idle Com∣pany, vain Sports and Pastimes, and other un∣necessary employments. All which are but as the Devils Whistle, to call men aside from more savoury courses. It is a dangerous thing when men have taken a Purge to walk abroad. And
no less dangerous is it to the soul; when it is in a course of Physick, under the hand of God, to suffer it to wander abroad in such avocations as may hinder the kindely working of afflictions, take it off from the work of Humiliation. And therefore as we suffer the Affliction to enter when God will have it, so suffer it to rest upon the soul, untill it be kindely and throughly humbled, and broken in the sense of sin. A dangerous thing it is unseasonably to stop the course of godly sorrow in the soul occasioned by any afflictions, to hinder the working of Cha∣stisements upon the heart. By this means we may think to ease our souls; but alas, all the ease that will be in this way gotten, will be but like cold water in a burning Feaver, which cools for the present, but inflames the more after∣ward. The unseasonable casting away of the sense of an affliction will but make way for more and greater. This being Gods design in sending af∣flictions, to humble his people, he will not be crossed in it. Here have you the first of these Caveats concerning the drinking of this Cup; Take heed of despising it, whether by loathing or sleighting it. Passe we to the second. Take heed of Murmuring. A Caveat which the Apostle giveth to his Corinthians, Take heed of mrmuring. 1 Cor. 10.10. Neither murmure ye as some of them also murmured, (viz. the Israelites in the Wildernesse,) and were destroyed of the Destroyer. Murmuring speeches, or thoughts, how ill do they become the mouth of a Christian? Especially to murmure against God. To seek revenge upon Instruments is too much; a thing which David would not hearken to (as you heard) when Abishai offered his service to
him in that way. But to strive, to wrestle with God, what a Rebellion? Great need have Chri∣stians to watch over themselves in this particular, to watch over their hearts, and to set a watch be∣fore thee door of their lips, that so they may not do, what we find Job acquitted of; Job. 1. Last; Charge God foolishly; That rebellious thoughts may not arise in their hearts, or if they do, yet they may not break forth at their lips. To which end, to prevent the rising of them, or however, Murmurings how to be pre∣vented. to stifle them in the birth, make we use of two or three Meditations. Look we upon God, look we upon our selves, look we upon others. 1. Look upwards, look upon God, See God in e∣very affliction. beholding his hand in every affliction. This once apprehen∣ded and believed, will stop the mouth and quiet the heart. This it was that silenced Aaron, when Moses told him, that what had befallen his sonnes was the Lords doing, This is that which the Lord hath said, Then (saith the Text) Aaron held his peace. Lev. 10.3. And so was it with David; Who so long as he looked at secondary causes in his suf∣ferings, he had no rest in himself, His heart was hot within him, and he spake with his tongue, (as he tels us) Psal. 39.3. But coming to take notice of God, as having the chief hand in ordering of his afflictions, Now (saith he) I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord didst it: v. 9. Thus when the soul cometh to see that it hath to deal with God, that it is he that reacheth forth the Cup to it, that hath an over-ruling hand in what∣ever befals it, this quiets all. And well it may, if we consider in him, In whom con∣sider the Absolutenesse of his Sove∣raigntie, the unchangeablenesse of his Purpose, the Ir∣resistablenesse of his power.
1.  The Absoluteness of his Soveraignty, He is the Potter, His absolute-soveraingty. we are the Clay. So the Prophet tels the people of Israel, Jer. 18.6. O house of Israel, cannot I doe with you as this potter, saith the Lord, As the clay in the Potters hand, so are ye in my hand, O house of Israel. And who are we then that we shall dare to contest with him, to quarrel his dispensations? It is the Apostles argument which he maketh use of to stop the mouths of all those, who out of their profane curiosity shall inquire into the rea∣son, and question the equity of Gods eternall de∣crees of Election and Reprobation, why he chooseth some to be Vessels of Honour, electing them to Grace and Glory, whilst he passeth by others, ap∣pointing them to just condemnation for sin. Nay but O man (saith he) Who art thou that replyest against God, (or disputest with him about what he hath done, or shall do)? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? Hath not the Potter power over the Clay? Rom, 9.20.21. Such is Man in the hands of God; Who having an absolute Soveraigntie, and Authority over him, may dispose of him in respect of his eternall con∣dition according to his own good pleasure, with∣out giving any other reason for it but his will. He hath mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he bardneth. Rom. 9.18. Much more then may he do the like as to his temporall estate. However God is or shall be pleased to deal with thee or me, is it any otherwise then he may do? Is it not law∣full for me to do what I will with mine own? Mat. 20.15. May not he dispose of our condition from whom we have our being? 2. His unchange∣able Counsels, The unchangeablenesse of his purpose His counsels are immutable. , The immuta∣bility
of his Counsel. Heb. 6.7. My Counsel shall stand (saith the Lord) and I will do all my pleasure, Isa. 46.10. The councel of the Lord standeth for ever, Psal. 33.11. Surely as I have thought shall it come to pass, and as I have purposed so shall it stand, Isa. 14.24. Such are all the counsels and purposes of God, all like him∣self, unchangeable. What do we then by our murmurings and repinings against the pleasure of his will, but even dash our selves against a Rock, which may break us, but we cannot move it? To change or alter what he hath purposed and deter∣mined concerning us as a thing which we cannot doe? 3. Consider the Irresistablensse of his power, up∣on this account it is that the wise man saith that against a King there is no reising up, His irresistable power. Prov. 30.31. viz in regard of the prevalency of his power. So he elsewhere explaineth himself, Eccles. 8.4. Where the word of a King is there is power, and who may say unto him, what dost thou? It is not for a Subject to contest with his Soveraign, who as he hath Autho∣rity over him, so he is armed with power to exe∣cute his pleasure upon him. Much less then for Man to contest with his God, whom he cannot stop or hinder in his course. Behold he taketh away (saith Job) who can hinder him? who shall say unto him, what doest thou? Job. 9.12. Never did man get any thing by striving and strugling with God. W be to him that striveth with his maker, Let the Potsheard strive with the Potsheards of the earth (saith the Pro∣phet) Isai. 45.9. If frail man, who is but like a Pot∣sheard, a pece of brittle earth, will needs con∣tend, let him cope with his equall, with man like himself, but take heed of contesting with his ma∣ker, how he entereth the lists with him who is in∣finitely
stronger then himself, able to consume him with the breath of his nostrils. No striving with God. To repine at, murmure at him, at his dealing with our selves, is no less foolish then im∣pious, his Soveraignty being absolute, his Decrees im∣mutable, his Power irresistable. 2ly. From God reflect upon our selves. Where consider. Look upon our selves. 1. What we are, How base, how vile, how con∣temptible creatures in comparison of that God with whom we have to do. What we are. Poor wormes creeping and crawling upon earth. Man that is a worme, and the son of man which is a worm, Job. 25.6. And what are we then that we should lift up a hand, a tongue, a heart against the great God of Heaven and earth, who is able (as I said) to consume us with a touch of his finger, with the breath of his mouth? 2ly. What we have deserved. Lay our sins and sufferings together, What we de∣serve. and see how infinitely the one weighteth down the other. All the sufferings which here we meet with all are but temporall, the pu∣nishment due unto the least sin is eternal: Our Crosses may be many, but our sins more. So as loo∣king upon our deservings, we shall find that which may well stop our mouths, and cause us quickly to submit to whatsoever chastisements God shall please to exercise us with. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him (saith the Church) Mic. 7.9. Whatever the affliction be, yet murmure not at it, taking no∣tice of what the Church acknowledgeth, Lam. 3.22. What at Mercies we do still injoy. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consu∣med. And 3ly. What mercies we do yet enjoy in the midst
of all our miseries. Be our sufferings what they will, yet if we cast up our accounts aright, we shal find cause of thanksgiving, rather then of repining. It is two usuall a thing with men to have their eys wholly fixed upon what they want and would have, and that maketh them to overlook what they have. Lord God (saith Abraham) what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childlesse? Gen. 15.2. And so is it with others. So long as they want some one mercy which they would have, all others which they injoy are as nothing. But this is no o∣ther but high ingratitude. Whatever our condi∣tion be, yet if we look about us, we shall see some temporall mercies, or others, which we have cause to bless God for. However the spiritual bles∣sings wherewith he hath blessed us in Christ (I speak it to believers) these are of that worth and value that they may well weigh down all our temporall sufferings. So they did in the Apostles ballance, who had duely weighed them; I reckon (saith he) that the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be re∣vealed in us. Rom. 8.18. Thus looking upon our selves, what we are, what our deserts, what our injoy∣ments and hopes are, we shall see that which may keep down all murmurings. 3ly. Look upon others, what ever our Cup be yet we shall find some others whose cups are far grea∣ter and bitterer, whatever our affliction be, Look upon o∣thers who de∣serve better, but fare worse then our selves we shall see or hear of some others, who though hap∣ly they deserve far better, yet they fare worse, having an equal, nay a larger share of sufferings then our selves. What is it that we complain of? Is it a scantnesse in estate, look upon Lazarus ly∣ing at Dives? gate, begging his bread, whilst the
dogs being more compassionate then their Master licked his sores, Luk. 16. Is it the loss of a Child, one or more? Look upon Job, who lost all at once. Is it bodily sicknesse and weaknesse, look upon David, whom we may hear sadly bemoaning his condition unto God. (as elsewhere, so) Psal. 38. Thyne arrows stick fast in me and thy hand presseth me sore, v. 2. There is no soundnesse in my flesh because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, be∣cause of my sin. v. 3. My wounds stink and corrupt be∣cause of my foolishnesse, v. 5. My loines are filled with a loathsome disease, and there is no soundnesse in my flesh, v. 7. And so upon others, who are cast upon their beds of languishing, lying it may be under most exquisite torments, in the mean time wan∣ting many of the creature comforts, which we enjoy. The like I may say in other cases. Be our condition what it will, still we shall find some or other, with whom if we compare our selves, we shall see little cause to repine and murmure. An errour it is, and a usuall one, in comparing our selves with others; If it be in spirituals, then we are ready to look at them who are beneath us; If in temporals, then at those which are above us, and so the for∣mer of these breedeth in us contentation, where there should be a holy impatience, and the latter breeds impatience, where there should be a holy contentation. Taking notice of this errour, in comparing our selves with others, do it in a clean contrary way. In spirituals look at those who are above us, better then our selves, that will breed in us a holy emulation. In temporals, looke at those who are beneath us, in worse condition then our selves, (of which fort still we shall find some or other,) this will breed in us a holy contentation.
Thus stay we our hearts against all those repining, murmuring thoughts, which might arise in them at the drinking of this Cup. Which is the second Caveat that I propounded. Take heed of Murmu∣ring. And so (in the third place) of Fainting. Take heed of fainting. A need∣full Caveat, it being a thing which the best of Gods Saints (as I have shewn you) are subject to, in the drinking of this Cup to faint. This we finde Eliphaz charging upon his friend Job, cap. 4. v. 5. Now it is come upon thee and thou faintest.] And there was a truth in the Charge. The evil which he greatly feared was come upon him, (as him∣self telleth us in the Chapter foregoing, v. 25.) great trouble and affliction was befallen him, and he was not able to bear it. Notwithstanding he had been a Comforter of others in their afflicti∣ons, (as the Verses here foregoing have it, Cap. 4. v. 3, 4.) Behold thou hast instructed many, and thou hast strengthned the weak hands; Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou hast strength∣ned the feeble knees; yet now that it came to his own turn, now that the Cup was put to his mouth, he fainted at the drinking of it. [Now it is come unto thee and thou faintest,] it toucheth thee, and thou art troubled.] And truly so fareth it sometimes with the best of Saints, though strong men in Christ, such as have been able to comfort others in their afflictions, yet when they come to act the same part themselves, (God leaving them to the ex∣perience of their own weaknesse) they droop, they cannot bear up head and heart, as they should do, they are inordinately affected, even fainting under their burdens. But this Gods people are not to give way to, but strive against.
My Son (saith Solomon in the Text forecited, Prov. 3.11.) despise not thou the chastisement of the Lord, neither be weary of his Correction.] Nor faint when thou art rebuked of him, (so the Apostle citeth that Text) Heb. 12.5. Despising, sleighting of chastise∣ments, and fainting under them, are two Ex∣tremes, like Scylla and Charibdis, a Rock and a Gulf, the one opposite to the other. Now where Satan cannot dash men against the one, he will endeavour to drive them into the other. Where he cannot bring them to sleight Gods chastise∣ments, he will endeavour to make them sink un∣der them. Let Christians beware equally of both. Not despising Corrections, Chastisements, let them not be weary of them, faint under them. Which two words we finde the Apostle putting together, vers. 3. of that Chapter, Heb. 12. Con∣sider him that indured such contradictions of sinners a∣gainst himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your mindes. Thus do men, being wearyed in their bo∣dies, they faint in their spirits. Let it not be so with Christians under their Afflictions. Though they be heavy, and long, yet let not them be so weary of them as to faint under them. . Though they be broken in the outward man, in their Bodies, in their Estates, &c. yet let the Inward man be kept whole. Ne fran∣gantur animo, let them not be broken in their mindes, so as to faint under their burdens. This is the Apostles advise concerning well-doing, Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary of well-doing, for we shall reap if we faint not. And make we use of it as to well-suffer∣ing. Be not weary under Gods Corrections, so as to faint, when we are rebuked of him.
To faint under any Tryals, To faint under tryals, a thing unbeseeming a Christian. yea to be inordi∣nately affected with them, it is a thing unbe∣seeming a Christian, being dishonourable, and unsuteable to his Profession. What is it? A losse in Estate, that thus affecteth him? Why, he pro∣fesseth to have laid up his best treasure in heaven, where he hath a better, and an induring substance, (as the Apostle calleth heavenly glory, Heb. 10.34.) Is it the losse of some near or dear Re∣lation, Friend, Childe, Parent, Husband, Wife, (a thing which often sitteth as near the heart as any other tryall whatever?) Why, his Pro∣fession is, to believe the Doctrine of the Resur∣rection. And therefore, how is it that he or she should sorrow as others which have no hope? (as the Apostle saith of Christians immoderate mourning for the dead, 1 Thess. 4.13.) And so is it in other cases. Whatever the affliction be, yet to have the heart not only drencht (which it may be) but drowned in sorrow, so as thereby to be ren∣dered and made unfit for the duties both of ge∣nerall and particular calling, (as often it is) it is a thing unsuteable to a Christians profession, and no small disparagement to Gods Religion. Much it is that Nature, being well tutoured, is able to do in this way. Histories tell us of Heathens, such as knew not God, never heard of the name of Christ, what an excellent temper some of them had brought their Affections and Passions unto, so as not to be inordinately transported, distem∣pered, by any accidents that could betide them. And we see it in daily experience, how meer civil men, such as know not what the work of Grace means, have nothing but Reason to steer their course by, yet what an evennesse of spirit, what
moderation and temper do they oft times shew in beaing the burdens, the afflictions, which befall them? And shall Nature be able to bear up the spirit in such cases, and shall not Grace much more do it? Shall Reason moderate Affections and Passions, and shall not Religion do it? Great cause have Christians many times to check and shame themselves upon this account. Alas! with what shaking hands, what trembling hearts, do they often take those Cups which their heaven∣ly Father holdeth forth to them? Their hearts even faint at the thought and apprehension of them before they come at them. So was it not with our heavenly Pattern here. Here was a bit∣ter Cup coming towards him, which he had tasted of already, and was now to drink it off. And see with what a steady hand, what a strong and con∣fident resolution doth he receive it? The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? Herein let it be the endeavour of all those who professe themselves to be his Disciples, to imitate him, to receive, and drink their Cups without fainting. Q. I, (you may say) this is a thing indeed which Christians are to endeavour, How the soul may be kept from fainting under Afflicti∣ons. but how shall they attain unto it? Sometimes, many times, it so fall∣eth out that their burden far exceedeth their strength. So it fared with the Apostle himself, who tells his Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1.8. that by the trouble which hapned to him in Asia, he was pressed out of measure, beyond strength; . And so falleth it out sometimes with other of the Saints; There is a great dispropor∣tion betwixt their burden and their strength, the one great, the other small. Now how shall a
Christian be able to bear up in such a case, so to fortifie and strengthen his spirit, as that he may not faint in the day of Adver∣sity? A. A great and difficult work I confesse, Some sove∣raign Cordials prescribed. yet through the help of Grace attainable. To help you therein, let me prescribe unto you some So∣veraign Cordials, some spiritual Consolations, which may be, and being taken into the soul will be, very usefull for this purpose, for the sup∣porting and bearing up the spirit under whatever affliction this poor life of ours upon earth is sub∣ject to. These Consolations are many, as also our Afflictions are. I shall single out some of the choisest. Which I shall desire you carefully to lay up. Happily at the present you may have no great need of them, but how soon you may you know not. And therefore lay them up in the Closet of your hearts. They are not like the Apothecaries Drugs, some of which being long kept, lose their vertue. The day may come when some one of them may requite all your care and pains. In the First place then look at Afflictions them∣selves. Lok at Af∣flictions them∣selves, wherein consider. The Israelites in the Wildernesse were cured of the stinging of the Serpents, by looking upon the Serpent. And so may a Christian, by looking upon Afflictions, strengthen his heart against them. The Hony of the Bee is a medicine for the Sting: Afflictions, though never so bitter, yet will afford somewhat that may serve to allay that bitternesse. In them cast we an eye upon 4 or 5 particulars, which may be usefull this way.
The Quality, Quantity, Continuance, Commonnesse, Issue of them. 1.  The Quality of them. Here we shall finde, that in themselves they are a Curse. The Quality of them, as qualified by Christ. Such are all Afflictions, all fruits and consequents of sin, and punishments of it, every one being an Appendix to that first Curse, The day thou eatest thereof thou shalt dye the death; surely die, Gen. 2.17. that is, be subject to manifold evils, as in soul, so in body, tending to death, to the destruction of both. But by & through Christ their nature is now altered, the Curse is ta∣ken away. That was one, and the chief, of those In∣gredients, which was put into this Cup, which was given to Christ to drink, and which he did drink upon the Crosse. He being there made subject to that accursed death, that he might free us from the Curse of death, and of all its retinue. Christ hath redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. So that what the Apostle saith of Death it self, 1 Cor. 15.55. O Death where is thy sting? We may say the same of whatever afflictions and crosses can befall the children of God upon earth; their Sting is gone. Surely the bitternesse of death is past, (saith Agag, having (as he thought) armed himself against the fear of it, which is the greatest part of Deaths bitter∣nesse,) 1 Sam. 15.32. And the like may all true Believers say concerning all their Afflictions, and sufferings. The bitternesse of them is past, as to them, the Curse being taken away from them by Christ, which is indeed the chief part of their bitternesse. Even as Moses altered the quality of
those waters of Marah, took away the bitternesse of them, by casting into them that Tree which the Lord had shewed him, so hath Christ taken away the bitternesse of all the waters of Affliction by the Tree of his Crosse, to which he was designed by his Father. The bitternesse of Afflictions (as I said) was the Curse going along with them, they being in themselves all tokens of wrath. But now, that bitternesse, that Curse is taken away. So as to true Believers they are no longer tokens of wrath, but rather Love-tokens. Whom the Lord loveth, he correcteth, Prov. 3.12. chasteneth, Heb. 12.6. Yea, Pledges of Adoption. So it there fol∣loweth, Heb. 12.6, 7. He scourgeth every Son whom he receiveth. If ye endure chastenings, God dealeth with you as with Sons. Not to know what Chastisements mean, it is no good sign. If ye be without Chastise∣ment, whereof all (all Gods children) are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons, (so it there fol∣loweth) v. 8. For God to exercise his Children with afflictions, it is a sign that he owns them for his Children, and a demonstration of his fa∣therly love to them, and care of them. Thus do these Cups which Gods people drink of, they come from the hand of a Father, not of a Judge, being to them not satisfactory, but castigatory punishments. Not properly punishments, but Chastisements. Not tokens of wrath, but Love∣tokens. A usefull and comfortable meditation, for the soul of a Believer to feed upon in the midst of whatever distresse. What is it that maketh these Cups so bitter unto the soul? Why, when it look∣eth upon them, as they are in themselves, as Cups of divine wrath and fury. Now, no wonder if
it shake and tremble at the drinking of them. So long as a man apprehends these Arrowes which he feeleth to stick fast in him, to be poysoned Ar∣rowes, shot at him by the hand of a revenging God, now no wonder if the soul have no peace, no quiet. But look upon them as they are changed and altered by Christ, having the Curse taken away, and as they are tokens and pledges of Adoption, (which being sanctified they certainly are) the soul being perswaded of this, this will be as a soveraign Cordial to it, to keep it from fainting. Q. Yea, but (you will say) how shall a man know this, How Chastise∣ments may be known from Punishments. that they are so to him? that they are only Chastisements and not Punishments, and that they are tokens of love, and pledges of Adoption. When as they are tokens of wrath to some, how shall I know, that they are not so to me? A. To this I have in part hinted an Answere already. Take it a little more fully, yet briefly. 1.  How do you drink this Cup? how doe ye suffer these afflictions? Doe you quietly, pa∣tiently, By the manner of suffering them. contentedly submit to the hand of God in them? If so, now hear what the Apostle saith to you in that Text even now cited, Heb. 12.7. If ye indure chastning, God dealeth with you as with Sons. . Not, if you suffer affli∣ctions, for so do the worst of men. But if ye en∣dure chastening, receive Afflictions from the hands of God as Chastisements, kissing the Rod, hum∣bling your selves under the hand of God, as du∣tifull Children under the hand of a Father, now may you conclude these to be tokens of your A∣doption, that God dealeth not with you as Ene∣mies, but as Children.
2. What work have these afflictions in you? what effect have they upon your soules? By their effect. do you find your selves bettered by them? Hereby a sick patient may know that the Potion, which he hath taken was not poysonable, but medicinable; when, though for a time it wrought churlishly upon him he findeth himself the better for it, he findeth nature disburdened of these ill humours, which be∣fore distempered it and feeleth himself in some measure restored to former health. And thus may a Christian judge of his afflictions. If they have such a kindly working upon the soul, as to purge out corruption and to strengthen the in∣wardman, so as the soul is bettered by them, made more bumble, more watchfull, more fearfull of offending God, more carefull of walking be∣fore him in well pleasing, hence may a Christian conclude that these are medicinable Cups, fatherly chastisements, intended for his good. So doth David concerning his afflictions. Psal. 119.75. I know Lord (saith he) that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulnesse hast afflicted me, that God had therein a gratious purpose towards him, and that he intended his good. But how did he know this? why, by the working of those afflicti∣ons upon him, he found himself bettered by them. Before I was afflicted (saith he) I went astray, but now have I kept thy word, v. 67. And again, v. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes? Thus where afflictions have such a kindly work upon the soul, where Nocumenta are Documenta, where Chastening and Teaching go together, this is a good and a sure sign that they are tokens of Love, and not of Wrath, Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teachest
out of thy Law! Psal. 94.12. Doe we find this eff∣ect in our selves? Doe we find such a kindly ope∣ration of our afflictions? Doe we find them stir∣ring up in us filial affections towards God? not a servile and slavish, but a filial, a childlike fear of his Majesty, a fear to offend, to displease him? a religious care of walking before him, and appro∣ving our selves unto him? with an utter hatred and detestation of all sin? from hence conclude we our afflictions to be such, not Punishments, but Chastisements, not tokens of Wrath, but Love, which being rightly apprehended and believed, will be of great use to bear up the soul under them. Here is the first thing considerable in Afflicti∣ons, the Quality of them. 2ly. The Quantity Consider the quantity of them. And here, if rightly looked upon, we shall find them not great, not so great as they are commonly ap∣prehended. How ever some of them are heavier then others, yet all light. So Paul looked upon his sufferings, and the sufferings of the Saints, gi∣ving them this Epethite, Our light affliction. 2. Cor. 4.17. , for . Levi∣tas afflictionis, Afflictions of Gods children light. the lightnesse of our affliction. Such are the afflictions of Gods children, Light afflicti∣ons. Q. But how are they so? what in themselves? A. How said so to be. Not so, thus they may be, and often are great and heavie, none heavier. But they may be so called. 1. Comparatively being compa∣red h. Comparatively, A Cup (saith the text)  a drinking vessel, of which though some be grea∣ter then others, yet compared with other vessels, none of them are great. Thus is it with the affli∣ctions of Gods Saints, which they are exercised
with, however some of them are heavier then o∣thers, yet all comparatively light. Such they are being compared, 1. With that weight of glory, The weight of eternall glory. which those affli∣ctions (through grace) do work for them. So the Apostle there explaines his meaning in that 2. Cor 4.17. Our light affliction, &c. worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: Being put into the ballance against this, they bear no proporti∣on with it, they are not , as the same Apo∣stle elsewhere tels us. Rom. 8.18. I reckon (saith he) that the sufferings of this present time are not wor∣thy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. 2. And again, Their deser∣vings. compare them with our deser∣vings, our sins, here again we shall find them in∣finitely outweyed, there being no proportion betwixt them. 3. The sufferings of some others. And (3ly) Compare them with the sufferings of some other of the Saints of God, and we shall find them (it may be) but drops to their Cups. Thus, though heavie in themselves, yet comparatively they may be said to be light. 2. Made light by Grace suppor∣ting. Which also they are made to Gods people by the strength of grace supporting of them. Even as the Gates of Azzah and Postes belonging to them were to Sampson, though another would have sunk under the weight of them, yet by the power of supernatural strength they were made light to him so as he taketh them upon his shouldierr, and carrieth them up to the top of the mountain, Judg, 16.3. So have many of Gods Saints done, being strength∣ened in the inward man by the spirit of Christ, they have made light of those burdens, which to others would have beene insupportable, I can do
all things (saith Paul) through Christ that strengthenest me, Phil. 4.13. , I am able for all things, as for Actions, so for Passions, for sufferings, such as he there spake of in the verse foregoing, to be abased, to hunger, to suffer neede. And elsewhere, speaking of the greatest sufferings, Tribulation, Disiress, Persecution, Famine, Nakednesse, Perill, Sword. In all these (saith he,) We are more then Con∣querors through him that loved us. Rom. 8.35.37. Thus are afflictions, however heavie in themselves, made light to the people of. God through the power of the spirit of Christ dwelling in them, and strengthening of them. The consideration where∣of may also serve to bear up their hearts and spi∣rits, so as that they should not faint under their burdens, which, be they what they will, are com∣paratively so light, and by the power of grace can be made light to them. The 3 thing which I propound to considerati∣on is the Duration, The Duration which is but short. the Continuance of them, which, being rightly measured, will be found not to be long, A Cup (saith the Text,) which being but a draught, is soone put over. And such are the suf∣ferings of Gods people, but of a short continu∣ance. For a time, a season. Now for a season (if need be) ye are made heavie through manifold temptations, 1. Pet. 1.6. Their winter doth not last all the year long, their suffering time is but for a season, , (saith the originall,) Paululum nunc, for a while, a little while, a short season, A night, weeping may indure for a night, but joy commeth in the morning, Psal. 30.5. A night, nay an hour, The hour is come saith onr Saviour speaking of his passion, Mark. 14.41. Joh. 17, 1. I will keep thee from the hour of temptation (saith Christ to the Church of Philadelphia) Rev.
3.10. An hour, nay a minute, a moment, His anger indureth but a moment, Psal. 30.5. our light afflicti∣on which is but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17. , Thus is the spirit of God in Scripture pleased to ex∣press and set forth the short continuance of the sufferings of Gods Saints. They are but for a sea∣son, a little season, a night, an hour, a moment; At the most but for the present time, as the Apo∣stle there hath it, Rom. 8.18. The sufferings of this present time; , the time that now is, or this now season, meaning this present life, which being compared with eternity, is but a moment. And herewith let all Gods Saints comfort themselves in their suffering conditions. Though their suffe∣rings may be great, yet they shall not be long. Si gravis brevis, Far cariage (we say) maketh a light burden heavie, and a heavie one intolerable. But the burdens of Gods Saints shall not lye long up∣on their backs. What though at the present they lye under the pressures and oppressions of wicked and unreasonable men, either under their hands, or under their tongues, suffering by them in their estates, good names, liberties, Persons, yet let them bear up their spirits, taking notice of what the Psalmist tels them, The rod, (or Scepter) of the wicked (of Tyrannical oppressors) shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous. Psal. 125.3. It may be for the present they feele a thorn in the flesh, conflicting with some satanicall temptation, which is to their souls as a thorn sticking in their flesh, putting them to a great deal of smart and trouble, but let not this discourage them, taking notice of what the Apostle assureth them, The God of peace shall shortly tread down Satan under your feet, Rom. 16.20. At the present (it may be) they are under a
cloud a black cloud of spiritual desertion, God, hi∣ding his face from them, nay writing bitter things against them (as Job saith he did against him, Job. 13.26.) which of all them is the saddest tryall. No affliction like unto this, The spirit of a man can su∣stain his infirmity (his bodily? infirmity, which is much born up by a cheerful spirit, specially when there is peace of conscience with it) but a wounded spirit who can bear? Prov. 18.14. When God him∣self seemeth to turn enemy to a man, withdrawing from him the sense and feeling of his love, yea let∣ting fall some drops of wrath upon the soul, noe tryall, noe Affliction like unto this. Tranquillus Deus tranquillat omnia, Where God is at peace with a man nothing can disquiet him; but where God ma∣keth war against the soul who shall speak peace to it? Yet still let the true believer bear up, not gi∣ving way to despondencie, to fainting of soul. The Sun is often under a cloud, yet it breaketh forth again, and that sometimes suddainly, unexpected∣ly, and shineth it may be, more clearly then be∣fore it was so clouded, God will not hide his face from his people for ever. It is but for a while, a little while. For a smal moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercy will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, for a moment, but with ever∣lasting kindnesse will I have mercy on thee saith the Lord thy Redeemer, (so runs that excellent promise made to the Church, which every true beleiver may apply to himself) Isai, 54. v. 7.8. Thus if Christ do withdraw himself from the believing soul (as he did from his Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 3.) yet seeking after him, it shall find him again (as she there did, v. 4.) It was but a little that I passed from them (viz. the watchmen of whom she enquired
for him) but I found him whom my soul loveth. His withdrawings are but for a little while. So he tel∣leth his Disciples when he was to leave them, Joh. 16.16. A little while and ye shall not see me, and again a little while and ye shall see me. Though he with∣drew his Corporall presence from them, (which he did by his death) yet he would appear to them again (which he did after his resurrection,) and they should enjoy his spirituall presence upon earth, and his glorious presence in heaven, whi∣ther he was going. Thus those who are once tru∣ly united unto Christ shall never be quite separa∣ted from him. If he estrange himself from them, it is but for a season. And therefore in these ca∣ses let them live by faith, setting that awork to bear up the soul. Remember that whatever the affliction be, whether outward or inward, whe∣ther temporall, or spirituall, yet it is but temporarie. Suppose it be for weeks, months, years, nay for the whole life time, yet (as I said) compared with Eternity, it is but a minute, a moment, our life it self is no more; our affliction then cannot be long. And shal we then faint at the drinking of this Cup? what, could ye not watch with me one hour? (saith our Saviour to his disciples) Matth. 26.40. And so let me here say, what, can we not suffer with Christ one hour, one minute, who look to reign with him to all eternity? what ever our affliction then be, yet hold up head and heart for a while, a lit∣tle while. A while and for ever. Above the Moone there are no clouds, noe changes in heaven. It will not be long ere God shall wipe away all tears from the eies of his people, Rev. 7.17. There is the third Consideration, the short continuance of Afflictions.
Fourthly, The Commu∣nity. consider also the community, the commonnesse of them. That will contribute somewhat to this purpose. Affliction is not our portion alone. This Cup goeth round the Table. Those sufferings which Gods people are here sub∣ject to, they are but humane temptations. So the Apostle calleth them, 1 Cor. 10.13. There hath no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man. , tentatio humana, a humane tryall. Such are the tryals of Gods Saints here, they are no other then what other of the sons of men are subject to, Man that is born of a woman is of few dayes, and full of trouble, Job 14.1. Yea the Sons of God. What Son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? Heb. 12.7. And upon this account they may the better be born. So St. Peter telleth the believing Jews, to whom he writeth, and he maketh use of it as an argument for this very purpose, that they should not faint under their sufferings for Christ, 1 Pet. 5.9. Knowing (saith he) that the same afflictions are accomplished in your Brethren that are in the World. The persecutions which they met with they were no new thing, no other then what others of their Brethren had felt of. So it is, Brethren in the flesh, Brethren in the spirit, all Brethren in affliction, companions in tribulation. Not the greatest, not the best ex∣empted from drinking of this Cup. And shall we then faint at the drinking of it? We see, or hear, how those of the weaker Sex undergoe their pangs and throwes in Childe-bearing. Though one of the bitterest Cups upon earth, yet how contentedly do they pledge their great Grand∣mother Eve in it, to whom it was first given to drink? which they do upon the account of that
Law which hath made it common to all of that Sex, In sorrow shalt thou bring forth children, Gen. 3.16. And so may we look upon all other Cups, which God giveth us to drink, they are no other but common Cups, though not common to all individu∣als, all particular persons (as that is) yet to all sorts, all ranks and conditions of persons, good and bad, high and low, rich and poor, Prince and Peasant: Which may serve somewhat to allevi∣ate our burdens, and mitigate our sorrowes. Were it so that our case were singular, that we could truely say, what the Church in her Captivity maketh a Question of, Lam. 1.12. that there were no sorrow like our sorrow, no Cup like our Cup, that we had no partners in our sufferings, (which was the case of our blessed Saviour here, his Cup was, (as he here calleth it) , The Cup, such a Cup as was never given to any other of the sons of men, his sufferings peculiar to himself, being more then , a humane tentation, wherein he had none to bear him com∣pany, He trod the Wine-presse alone, and of the people there was none with him, (saith the Prophet) Isa. 63. v. 3. which (however intended) may be (as by many, most of Expositors, it is) applyed to the Passion of Christ, which was singular and pe∣culiar to him) then might we have the more colour for our despondency. But loe here is Company. Yea and good Company too. Good compa∣ny in suffering a comfort. It is not all Com∣pany that will ease or comfort a man in his suf∣ferings. It is no ease to the damned in Hell, that they have so many partners in their suffer∣ings, as they have. Nor was it any abatement of our Saviours sufferings, that he should be cruci∣fied
(as he was) betwixt two thieves. Such com∣pany rather aggravates, then abates the sorrow of sufferings. But good Company is a comfort. And such company have all Gods Saints in their sufferings, the same Afflictions are accomplished in their Brethren. And therefore let none faint at the drinking of this Cup, which is a common one. Christ himself began it, and all his Saints have, or must pledge him in it, being conformed to his Image, as in other things, so in his suffer∣ings. In the Fifth and last place look at the Issue, The issue and fruis of san∣ctified Affli∣ctions. the fruit of Afflictions. This it is that beareth up the spirit of the Childe-bearing woman in her travell, even the fruit of the Womb, the Issue which she expecteth and looketh for; which when she is delivered of (as our Saviour tells his Disciples) she no more remembreth the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world, Joh. 16.21. And this it was which made our blessed Saviour here so willing to drink this Cup, to have his soul made an offering for sin, even the assurance which he had of seeing his sed, of seeing the travail of his soul (as the Pro∣phet Isai sets it forth) Isa. 53.10, 11. the blessed fruit and issue of those his sufferings. And like use let all the Lords people make of the same consideration, for the bearing up of their spirits in their sufferings. Being sanctified to them they shall see a blessed Issue of them, they shall reap precious fruit from them, receive great be∣nefit by them. Upon this account it is that a sick person continues his course of Physick, ta∣king Cup after Cup, Potion after Potion, he ex∣pects and hopes to receive some good and bene∣fit by them. Afflictions may be bitter, but being
sanctified they are profitable. Though they have a rough stalk (like the Rose-tree) yet they bring forth pleasant fruit. To go about to shew you all these fruits, would be a long, if not an endless work. Single out some of the princpall. Reduced to two heads. Which we may reduce to two heads. They are either in this life, Or in the life to come. In this life Afflictions bring forth the fruit of righteousnesse. In this life the frut of Righte∣ousnesse. So saith the Apostle in that Text before made use of, Heb. 12.11. No chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous but grievous, never∣thelesse afterwards it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousnesse unto them which are exercised thereby. This doth Chastisement, , such Correcti∣ons as wherewith God as a Father is pleased to exercise his Children for their good, their a∣mendment, (which that word properly signi∣fieth) being sanctified, influenced by the spirit of Grace; now it brings forth this , This peaceable fruit of righteousnesse, even that Righteousnesse which bringeth peace to the soul. A blessed Fruit, the fruit of righteousnesse. Did ever Tree bring forth better fruit then this? It was the highest commendation that the Divell could invent to give of that Tree of Knowledge, that the fruit of it would make those that eat it like unto God himself, they should be as Gods, viz. in Knowledge, knowing good and evill, Gen. 3.5. What he spake falsly of that Tree, is true of this, of sanctifyed Afflictions, they will make men like unto God, bringing forth this fruit of righteous∣nesse and Holynesse, which is a part, yea a chief part of the Image of God; (as the Apostle tells us, Eph. 4.24.)
Q. How Afflicti∣on bringeth forth this fruit. But how doth Affliction bring forth this fruit? A. Why this it doth by purging out Corruption, and strengthning of Grace. Even as it is with Phy∣sick, it first evacuates, and purgeth out those peccant humours which annoy the Body; and then by the removall of them it strengthneth the naturall operations of it. Even thus doth sancti∣fied Affliction work upon the soul. 1. By purging out corrup∣tion. Purging out Corruption, sinfull lusts, whate∣ver is contrary to Righteousnesse. Hence it is that we finde it compared to Fire, and to the Fining∣pot. Zach. 13. last, I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, &c. (saith the Lord of the remnant of his people.) The fire, the Fining-pot refine the Metall, ta∣king away the Drosse from the Silver and Gold. Such are Afflictions to Gods people, they lose nothing by them but their drosse, their corrupti∣on. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin, (saith the Prophet Isai, speaking of Gods Cha∣stisements upon his people the Jewes) Isa. 27.9. When he hath tried me (saith Job) I shall come forth as Gold, Strengthning Grace. Job 23.10. 2. Corruption being thus in measure purged out, now Grace cometh to be strengthned. So Paul found it in his own experience. In his sufferings, (as he tells us) he fainted not, but though our out∣ward man perish, yet the inward man (saith he) is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. Thus did he gather strength in and from his sufferings. How∣ever the outward man, his Body, or the naturall man, was thereby weakned and impayred, yet his inward man, his soul, or the spiritual man, was
thereby confirmed and strengthned. And so fareth it with Gods Saints. Like Palm-trees, (to which we finde them compared, Psal. 92.12. The righteous shall flourish like the Palm-tree,) the more they are pressed down the more they spread, and the higher they grow. That which the Poets fained concerning their Antaeus, that in his wrestling with Hercules he gained new strength by every fall, is true in them. Nothing contributes more to their spiritual strength then their temporall weaknesses. Hereby God doth (to use Pauls word, 2 Tim. 1.6.) , stir up that heavenly fire of grace in the hearts of his people; making use of their Afflictions as his Bellowes to blow up those sparks which o∣therwise were subject to die. Graces strengthned by exercise in Affliction. And very use∣full they are in this way, for the stirring up, and thereby for the strengthning of every grace in the soul, by setting them awork, exercising them. Thus do they strengthen Faith and confidence in God. Paul telleth us, Faith. that he received the sentence of death in himself to this end, that he might not trust in himself, but in God, who raiseth the dead, 2 Cor. 1.9. And St. Peter tells the Saints to whom he writeth, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Now for a season (saith he) ye are in heavinesse through manifold temptations, that the tryall of your Faith being much more precious then Gold that perisheth, though it be tryed with fire, might be found unto praise, honour and glery, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. Gold is not more advanced by fire, then faith by sufferings. These are but as shakings to the Plant, which make it root the better, the deeper and surer. Thus the Christian being shaken by Afflictions, he
taketh the firmer hold of Christ, and is rooted more and more in him. And as Faith so Patience. Patiene. The trying of your Faith worketh patience, (saith St. James) Jam. 1.3. Upon which account in the Verse foregoing, he willeth Christians to be so far from fainting un∣der afflictions, that they should rather account them matter of joy, of great joy. My Brethren account it all joy () great joy,) when ye fall into divers temptations, viz. in regard of the blessed fruits of them, among which this is one, Patience. And as Patience, Experience. so Experience and Hope, which the Apostle joyneth to the former, Rom. 5.3. where he declares how Christians have matter of rejoycing and glorying, as in their Crown, so in their Crosse. We rejoyce (saith he) in the hope of the glory of God; And not only so, but we glory in Tribulations also. But wherefore in them? Why, in regard of the blessed Fruit, which being san∣ctified they bring forth; Knowing that Tribulation worketh Patience, and Patience Experience, and Ex∣perience Hope. The first an immediate, the latter mediate Fruits of such sufferings. Such is experience, of which a man gets more ma∣ny times by one days adversity then by many years of Prosperity, more experience of God and himself. Such was the fruit of Jobs afflictions, who when God had delivered him out of them, makes this acknowledgment unto him. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the eare, but now mine eye seeth thee. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Job 42.5.6. Thus that knowledge of his, both of God and himself, which before was Notio∣nall, was now made experimental.
And such is Hope, Hope. which is much confirmed and strengthened by this experience. This I re∣call to minde, therefore have I hope, (saith the Church, speaking of her Afflictions) Lam. 3.21. And the like we may say of Humility. Humility. Nothing more proper and effectuall for the producing and increasing of it, then Affliction. Remem∣bring mine affliction, and my misery, the Wormwood and the Gall, my soul hath them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me, (saith the Church there in the Verses foregoing,) Lam. 3.19, 20. This it was that brought the Prodigall upon his knees to his Father, his being reduced to extremities, Luk. 15.21. Pauls thorn in the flesh was to him a preservative against inordinate elevation, keep∣ing him that he should not be exalted above measure, 2 Cor. 12.7. And as Afflictions humble the heart, The heart in∣larged by Af∣flictions. so they also inlarge it. As they humble it before God, so also they inlarge it towards-him, in seeking of him. In their Affliction they will seek me early, diligently, Hos. 5. last. When nothing would bring Joab into Absaloms presence, the setting of his Corn on fire doth it, 2 Sam. 14.31. When the heart begins to be estranged from God, Af∣flictions bring it home again. And again, Obedience learnt in this School. nothing more usefull for the teach∣ing Christians that great Lesson, Obedience unto God their heavenly Father. This Lesson did Christ himself learn in this School. So the Apo∣stle tells us, Heb. 5.8. Alludit ad Proverbium Graecum, Gro Annot. in loc. He learned Obedience by the things which he suffered.  were to him  (as the Greek Proverb hath it, to which the Apostle may there
seem to allude.) By this means he came to know by experience what Passive Obedience meant. Yea, and by his lesser sufferings he was prepared for that last and greatest act of obedience, his Obedience to death. And the same lesson do Chri∣stians sooner learn in this School, then any o∣ther. Before I was afflicted, I went actray, but now have I kept thy word, (saith David there) Psal. 119.67. These and many other fruits there are of afflictions in this life, all which come under this generall head, the fruit of Righteousnesse. In the life to come take we notice of a double fruit. In the life to come prevent∣ting the great∣est evil, & pro∣curing the greatest good. The former, the preventing of the greatest evill, Eternall condemnation. When we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11.32. The other, the procuring of the greatest good, even that , which the Apostle speaketh of in that forecited Text, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light Affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternall weight of glory. Such shall the recompense be which Gods Saints shall meet withall in Heaven for all their sufferings upon earth. For Affliction they shall have glory, for light Affliction a weight of glory, for momen∣tany affliction an Eternall weight of glory, infi∣nitely exceeding the weight of all their sufferings here. And this doth their Affliction work for them. , It worketh, or worketh out, for us, not as a meritorious cause, deserving any such thing, but as a means preparing for it, and bring∣ing to it. Thus are Afflictions usefull to both these ends, furthering the work of grace here, they fit us for glory hereafter. Which, with the Apostle, we may take up and make use of as an
Argument to induce us to bear whatever tryals God shall please here to exercise us with. We have had Fathers of our flesh (saith he) which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much ra∣ther be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live? Heb. 12.9. Live, the life of grace here, of which he speaks in the Verse following, [That we might be partakers of his holynesse,] and the life of Glory hereafter. Which while a Christian hath an eye at, it may well keep his heart from fainting. So was it with our blessed Saviour, of whom the Apostle there tells us, vers. 3. of that Chapter, that For the joy that was set before him he indured the Crosse, despising the shame. And did Christians more think of the one, they would be lesse affected with the other; this would keep their hearts from fainting. This it is which maketh the Husband∣man so unwearied in all his hard winter labours, in ploughing and sowing, &c. even the hope which he hath of reaping a crop in the summer, which shall recompense all; And upon the like account let Christians do the like by their sufferings, being assured of what the Apostle tels them, Gal. 6.9. In due season we shall reap if we faint not. Thus you see a gathering of these fruits (some few among many) which afflictions being sancti∣fied doe yeild. All which, with the former con∣siderations are as meat comming out of the eater, and sweetnesse comming forth of the strong (as he said of the honey in the Lyons belly, Judg. 14.14.) usefull con∣solations extracted out of Afflictions themselves, serving to bear up the heart from fainting under them. I see the work swelleth in my hand, I shall be as succinct as I may in that which remaines. In the second place to keep the soul from faint∣ing
at the drinking of this Cup look upwards. In drinking this Cup look upwards. This was Davids course in all his troubles, to look up∣wards, I will lift up mine eyes unto the hils from whence commeth my help. Psal. 121.1. To the Hils, viz. Sion and Moriah, where was Gods dwelling place, his Sanctuary, a figure of the heavens. Thither will David look in all his distresses. The like do we, in all our afflictions, look upwards, heaven∣wards. The reason why the hearts of Christians so often fail them in the drinking of this Cup, in suffering afflictions, is, because they look so much downwards; either poring too much upon the Cup, the Affliction it self, or upon the hand that rea∣cheth it, the Instruments, and secondary causes, or else looking wholly at Creature succours, which fayling, their hearts also fayl. Would we bear up under our sufferings, look upwards, heavenwards. There shal we find that which we may cast anchor upon, which may serve to stay our soules in what condition soever. Where 1. At god our Fa∣ther. Look we at God our Father. So doth our Sa∣viour here, (as I have showen you,) The Cup which my Father hath given me, And the like do we. What ever befalleth us still have an eye at God our hea∣venly Father, staying our hearts upon him, and comforting our selves in him. So did David in that great straight wherein he was at Ziglah, when the Philistines in his absence had sacked and burnt the City, slain the men Inhabitants, and carried a∣way the women and children for slaves, among whom were both Davids Wives, of which we read 1 Sam. 30. A great straight was this wherein Da∣vid now was, having nothing left wherein to com∣fort himself. His wives, his chiefest earthly com∣fort, were gone, and his friends and followers,
whom he might have expected comfort from, they were so incensed and exasperated against him, loo∣king upon him as the chief cause of all their loss and misery, that they think and speak of stoning him. Now in this straight whither doth David look? Now (saith the sixth verse) he comforted or incoura∣ged himself in the Lord his God. Being now like one cast into a deep pit, he had no way to look but upwards, heavenwards; and thither doth he looke; fixing his eye upon his God, and comforting himself in him. Though the enemy had carried away his earthly comforts, yet they had not carried away his God. And this comfort hath a Christian alwaies left him what e∣ver befals him. As for other things, estate, good name, liberty, near and dear Relations, yea and life it self, may be taken away, but so cannot his God. Were it so that Satan or his instruments could so deal with a Christian as Rachel did by her Father Laban, Gen. 30. or the Danites did by Mi∣cah, Judg. 18. take away their God from them, then might they well complain, as Micah there doth, v. 24. Ye have taken away my Gods which I made and what have I more? And what is this that ye say un∣to me, what ayleth thee? Then might they well look upon their condition as deplorable, and altogether uncomfortable. But so long as they have God for their God, well may they comfort and in∣courage themselves in him. Such is Habacucks re∣solution in that known Text. Heb. 3.17.18. Al∣though the figtree shall not blossome, neither shal fruit be in the vines, the labour of the Olive shall faile, and the fields shal yeild no meat. &c, Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. Though all creature comforts should fail, yet still he would
not only stay himself upon his God, but rejoice in him. And truly there is that to be found in God, which (being ascertained that he is our God, our Father, our God by covenant) is abundantly sufficient to bear up the heart in the midst of what ever distresses. Not to insist here upon those at∣tributes of his, every of which is of soveraign use this way, His Power, Wisdome, Mercy, and Truth, &c. Only take we notice of these four particulars, all relating to our afflictions. 1. His Cognizance of us. 2. His Presence with us. 3. His Compassion towards us. 4. His Providence over us, each ministring some Comfort to the soul in its suffering condition. In whom con∣sider. A word of each. 1. His Cognizance of us, The knowledge which he hath as of our persons, so of our Conditions, The eyes of the Lord are in every place, His Cogni∣zance of us. beholding the evil, and the good, Prov. 15.3. Such a generall Cognizance hath God of al persons and passages, in all places upon earth. But he hath a speciall Cognizance of his own people; the eys of the Lord are upon the righ∣teous, Psa. 34.15, Ʋpon them that fear him, Ps. 33.18. he taketh special notice of them, as of their persons so of their concernments. The Lord knoweth the way of the righteous, Psa. 1.6. Knoweth how it is with him, what his condition is. His eye is upon him, as in prosperity, so in adversity, I know thy works, and tribu∣lation (saith he to the Church of Smyrna,) Rev. 69. God taketh speciall notice of the sufferings of his people. He seeth their tears, putting them into his Bot∣tle, registring them in his Book (as David saith) Psal. 56.8. And he heareth their sighing and groaning. All our desires are before him, and our groaning is not hid from him, Ps. 38.9. Be our griefs never so secret as to others, they are not so to him. The world it
may be knoweth not where our shooe pincheth us, but our God doth. Thou hast known my soul in adversi∣ties (saith David) Psal. 31.7. His presence with us. Others may take notice of the ailements of our Bodies, but God of our souls. 2. His presence with us, God doth not stand afar off from his people in their sufferings, as Davids friends did to him. My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore, and my kinsmen stand afar off, Psal. 38.11. They would not own him in his distress. But God, as he taketh notice of the afflictions of his people, so he is nigh unto them. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, Psal. 34.18. The Lord is nigh unto them that call upon him. Psal. 145.18. Present with them. God is our refuge and strength, a very pre∣sent help in trouble. Psal. 46.1. And what an incou∣ragement is this? So it was to David, who upon this ground resolves not to fear whatever evils should encounter him. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none evill. How so? For thou Lord art with me, Psal. 23.4. Such a true friend is God to his people. False friends are like Swallows, which are with us in the summer, but in winter they are gone. Paul complaines when he was to answer for his life, No man stood with him, but all men for sooke him, 2. Tim. 4.16. I, but then (saith he) the Lord stood with me; v. 15. Thus doth God stand by his people in all their distresses. When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, Isai. 43.2. Q. How God said to stand afar off from his peo∣ple. But doth not God sometimes stand afar off from his people in their troubles? A. Yes, in their sense and apprehension he may, not shewing himself to them, hiding him∣self from them. Of this David complains, Psal. 10.1. Why standest thou afar off, O Lord, why hidest thou thy self in times of trouble? God doth not al∣waies
wayes shew himself unto his people, yet he is still present with them. Behold he standeth be∣hinde our Wall, (saith the Church of her well-be∣loved) Cant. 2.9. Thus where sense doth not ap∣prehend Gods presence, yet Faith may. In truth God is never far off from his people. Though they see him not, yet is he with them. The Lord is with you, whilest you are with him, and if ye seek him, he will be found of you, 2 Chron. 15.2. 3.  His compassion towards us. Afflictions doe not abate Gods affection towards his people, His Affection towards us. but rather increase it. The sicknesse of the Childe stirs up bowels of compassion in the naturall Pa∣rent. God is never more affectionate towards his people then when they are in a suffering con∣dition. Now he pitieth them. Like as a Father pi∣tieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Psal. 103.13. Now his soul is grieved for them, His soul was grieved for the misery of Israel, Judg. 10.16. He even sympathizeth with them. In all their Afflictions he was afflicted, Isa. 63.9. My Bowels are troubled for Ephraim, Jer. 31.20. Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11.8. All Anthropopathies expressions of humane affection, setting forth the truth and greatnesse of Gods affection to his people in their distresses, which be they what they will, yet (as the Apostle assures us) they shall not, they can∣not separate the true Believer from the love of God in Christ, Rom. 8.35.39. 4.  His Providence over us. As God is truely af∣fectionate towards his people in their afflictions, His Provi∣dence over us. so he expresseth that affection by exercising of a gracious Providence towards and upon them. God is not present with his people in their
afflictions as Jobs Friends are said at their first coming to have been with him; who however they were much affected with his condition, at their first sight of him, they lifted up their voice and wept, and they rent every one his Mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads towards heaven, (as we have it) Job 2.12. Yet (as it there followeth in the next Verse) They sate down with him upon the ground seven dayes and seven nights, and none spake a word unto him; not ministring any comfort unto him. So is it not with God, God active in the sufferings of his people. he is not a bare spectator in the sufferings of his people, but active in them, ready to speak to them and doe for them, and that for their comfort. 1.  To speak to them if they will lend an ear to him, to speak comfortable words, Ready to speak to them. to speak peace to them. I will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints, (saith David) Psal. 85.8. Outward peace, when they are fit for it, giving out the word for their deliverance; however inward peace, quieting their Consciences with the apprehensions of his love and favour in Christ. 2. And thus speaking to them he doteth for them, exercising his providence, Acting for them. his gracious providence towards them, which he doth in divers acts of it. As 1. Ordering their afflictions, which he doth, as for the kind, so for the measure. Giving to his children no Cups but what he seeth fit and proper for them. And dispensing them (as you have heard) by measure. Proportioning the Affliction to their strength. God will not lay more upon man then is meet (saith Elihu) that he should enter into judgement with God, have any just cause to complain of him,
Job 34.23. God is faithfull (saith the Apostle) who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. Thus he proportions afflicti∣on to the strength of his people. 2. Supporting them under them. And (secondly) he comforteth them in their sufferings. Blessed be God who comforteth us in all our Tribulation, 2 Cor. 1.4. Supplying strength to the inward man. When Paul was brought before Nero, and all men forsook him, then (as he tells us) the Lord stood by him, and strengthned him, 2 Tim. 4.17. 3. Turning them to good. Like as the skill of the Physician turneth Poysons into Medicines, Turning then to Good. making a soveraign Treacle of the venomous Viper. Thus doth God bring good out of evill. Josephs Brethren thought and wrought evill a∣gainst him, but God turned it to good, good to him, and others, Gen. 50.20. 4. And (lastly) giving a seasonable issue and de∣liverance. Working deli∣verance. He will with the temptation make a way to escape, (saith the Apostle) 1 Cor. 10.13. , he will give an issue, finde out an outlet for them one way or other: When Gods people are beset on every side, yet he can finde a dore, or a window to let them out at. As in a literall sense he did for David, when his house was beset by Sauls Messengers, 1 Sam. 19.12. and so for Paul, when wait was laid for him at Damascus, 2 Cor. 11. last, they were both let down through a window, and escaped. So in a Metaphori∣call sense, be the strait never so great, yet God hath a Window for his people, at which he can, and in his time will, let them out, working deli∣verance for them some way or other. Such is the Providence of God, which he exerciseth towards and upon his people in their sufferings; Order∣ing
of them, he supplyeth strength for the bear∣ing of them, turneth them to good, and giveth a seasonable Issue out of them. All these, be∣sides many other, Consolations may the true Be∣liever fetch from the God of consolation, for the bearing up of his spirit in the midst of whatever afflictions. In the next place look we up unto Christ our Saviour. In him considering what he hath done, Look unto Christ our Sa∣viour. In whom Consider. what he doth for us. 1. What he hath done, how (among other things which he hath obtained for us by his death) he hath overcome the World for us. What he hath done for us, overcomming the World. That is the Con∣solation which he himself giveth unto his Disci∣ples, Joh. 16. last. In the World ye shall have tri∣bulation, but be of good comfort I have overcome the World. This hath Christ done for his Church and people, he hath overcome whatever is in this world which might be hurtfull unto them, Sin, Satan, his Temptations and Instruments, Death, with all its retinue, whatever might hinder or endanger their salvation, he hath conquered all, which he did for those who believe on him, that they may have the benefit thereof: So that, as Serpents which have lost their Stings, they may now hisse, but they cannot hurt. Christ by drinking of this Cup (as you have heard) hath taken away the bitternesse of it, the Curse belong∣ing to afflictions, he being made a Curse for us. 2. What he doth. How he sympathizeth with us, and pleadeth for us. 1. He sympathizeth, and even suffereth with us, being (as the Head in the naturall Body is) son∣sible of all the aylments of his Members. What he doth Sympathizing with us. We have not an High-Priest which cannot be touched with
the feeling of our Infirmities, Heb. 4.15. , cannot sympathize with us in our afflictions and sufferings, which he taketh notice of, and is affected with; (as before was shewn.) Pleading for us. 2. And sympathizing with us he pleadeth for us. Sitting in heaven at the right hand of his Father he maketh continuall intercession for us, He ever liveth to make intercession for those who come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25. By which means he maketh peace for them in Heaven, whilest there is war upon earth, reconciling God to them when he seemeth to be offended with them. This was his work when he was upon earth, He made peace through the bloud of his Cross, Col. 1.20. impetrating that Reconciliation for his Elect people, which upon their believing on him is actually applied to them (as the next verse there hath it.) And this work he still carrieth on being in Heaven, where he maketh peace by his Intercession. A sweet and comfortable meditation, as at all times, so speci∣ally in time of Affliction when God seemeth to be angry with his people, frownes upon them, lets flye the showres of his displeasure at them, yet then let them with Stephen lift up their eyes to to heaven, and there shall they see this their High Priest the Lord Jesus sitting at the right hand of his Fa∣ther, soliciting a peace for them; which being concluded in Heaven, let them not be inordinate∣ly troubled about whatever wars they meet with upon earth. And in the third place look we at the Holy Ghost our Comforter. Look  the Holy Gst our Saviour. So we find him often styled in Scrip∣ture, a comforter, the comforter, and this comforter Gods people have still with them. That is the promise
which our Saviour maketh to his Disciples, when he was to withdraw his Corporall presence from them, Joh. 14.16. I will pray the Father (saith he) and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may a∣bide with you for ever. And this promise will he make good to all who truly believe on him. When he withdrawes outward Comforts from them, let them but wait patiently for him, and he will send them another Comforter, even his Spirit which shall make a supply to them inwardly of what they want outwardly, that shall refresh and cheer up their hearts and spirits with inward Consolations in the midst of all their afflictions. And never so fit a time for this Comforter to come, as when all others Comforters have left a man. And if this Comforter be with us to support our spirits, and strengthen our hearts, what is it that should so discourage us as to cause us to faint under our sufferings? To these soveraign Consolations I might yet (x abundanti) add many more; The Minstery of Angels. As the Ministrie of An∣gels, who are as Guardians to Gods Saints. Are they not all ministring spirits sent forth to Minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? Heb. 1. Last. So they were to our blessed Saviour in the Wilder∣nesse, he there wanting food and other accom∣modations, The Angels came and ministred unto him. Matth. 4.11. And so were they to Peter and other of the Apostles, opening the Prison doors for them, and setting them at liberty, (as we have the stories recorded) Act. 5.19 and 12.7 And the like offi∣ces they are ready to doe to all Gods Saints (ma∣ny of which questionless they daily doe, though in invisible waies, so as they are not taken notice of) being ever at hand, ready to step in to them
with timely succours in their greatest straits. To which might be added (what is not to be sleighted) the Communion of Saints, The Commu∣nion of Saints. who as they bear a part with their brethren in their sufferings, drawing with them in the same Yoke, so they are ready to help them with the benefit of their pray∣ers. Which being a common stock, every parti∣cular believer hath a share in it. But I will not charge your memories any fur∣ther, presuming that what hath been already said may be sufficient. Only let me desire you to lay up these particulars, and keep them in safe cu∣stody, that as occasion is you may have them at hand to make use of. In the drinking of loath∣some and distastefull potions sick persons will have a Rosate, or Manus Christi, some sweet thing or other to put after them. In like manner when e∣ver God shall please to present to any of us any of these bitter Cups to drink, presently make we use of some of these, or the like Consolations, for the sweetning of our mouths, and strengthning of our hearts, that so we may be kept, as from loa∣thing of them, so from fainting at them. And thus have I dispatched what I propounded by way of Caveat, directing you how you may and ought to shun and avoid those three Rocks, upon which Christians in their sufferings are in danger of making shipwrack, viz. Despizing of Gods Cha∣stisements, Murmuring at them, Fainting under them. What then remaines, The positive part of the ex∣hortation. but that we submit here∣unto? suffering the Will of God, and that in such a manner as was propounded, Patiently, Obe∣diently, Willingly. There is the Positive part of the Exhortation, which I shall dispatch with what bre∣vity
conveniently may be. Thus did our heaven∣ly Patern, the Lord Jesus. he submitted to the will of his Father in drinking of this bitter Cup, and this he did Patiently, Obediently, Willingly, Christians to suffer as Christ suffered. And herein follow we his steps, so suffering as he su∣ffered. 1. Patiently. So did he suffer. He was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, &c, Isai. 53.7. Patiently. The sheep be∣ing driven by the Butcher goeth as quietly to the shambles, or slaughter house, as to the field or fold, where it was wont to feed, or lodge. And thus did this Lamb of God, the Lord Jesus here go to his passion, quietly and patiently, suffering whatever the Officers, or Souldiers, or High Priests, or any other of the people did unto him. And thus do we suffer what Afflictions and Tryals here we shall meet with, Patiently. A thing which in Scripture we are frequently put in mind of. Be ye patient Brethren, (saith Saint James) Jam. 5.7. Which in the next verse he repeats and inculcates, Beye also patient, v. 8.  Longanimi estote. Be long patient, or suffer with long patience (as the Margin explaines the word.) Be patient in Tribula∣tion (saith Paul) Rom. 12.12. , sustinen∣tes, induring it. So the same word is elswhere ren∣dered, Blessed is the man that indureth temptation, Jam. 1.12. , a word compounded of  and , properly signyfying to abide, or stand under some weight or burden, as the Portes doth under his load. And thus doe we bear those burdens which God our heavenly Father shall please to lay upon us, stand and abide under them neither shrinking, nor sinking, neither shrinking from them, nor sinking under them, both which are comprehended under that word.
1. Not shrinking from their su∣fferings. Not shrinking from them, not withdrawing our shoulders. This is one thing which the Levites in their Confession make acknowledgment of a∣gainst the Jews, Neh. 9.29. They withdrew the shoul∣der. A metaphor taken from the Ox, or Horse, which withdraweth the neck or shoulder from the Yoke or Collar. Thus did they withdrawe from the Lawe of their God, shrinking from their duty, not yeilding obedience to him in doing what he commanded. What they did in respect of their Active, take heed that we do not the like as to our Passive Obedience. What Yokes God shall please to put upon us, what Burdens he shall lay upon us, withdraw not our necks, our shouldiers from them, do not go about to put them from us by the use of any indirect or unwarrantable means. But submit with Patience, being contented to bear so much, and so long, as God shall think fit to lay on. Thus see that Patience have her perfect work, (as Saint James exhortes, Jam. 1.4. , holding out to the end. Not shrinking. 2. Not sinking under them. And not shrinking from them sink not under them, Not giving way to despondencies and fain∣tings, but in our patience possess we our souls (as our Saviour adviseth his Disciples, Luke. 21.19. La∣bouring to take out that Lesson which the Apo∣stle saith he had learned, In whatsoever state we are, therewith to be contented, Phil. 4.11. So exercising our Patience in bearing of whatever afflictions God shall please to lay upon us. To excite and provoke whereunto let me first set before you some paternes, Paternes of pa∣tience. Paternes of pati∣ence which invite us to the imitation of them. Of these we shall find some. 1. Among bruit Creatures. Among the bruit Creatures, As in the Lamb
and the Sheepe (of which I spake even now) which are Emblems of Patience. How patiently, how qui∣etly do these poor innocent creatures submit, not only to the shearers, but to the knife, parting not only with their fleece, but with their bloud, when ever their owner cals for it? And shall not we do the like to our God? Upon this account, (among other) it is, that our blessed Saviour cals his Disciples by the name of Sheep, rather then of any other Creature. The Sheep as it is an innocent and harmless, so a patient Creature, not harming others, but suffering harms from them. And here∣in are Christians to be like unto them. 2. Look a little higher, to meere Civill men, such as have nothing but Nature in them, Meere Civill men. noe light but that of Reason to guide themselves by, yet among them how many are to be found exem∣plarie in this kind, eminent for their Patience, and that under great sufferings? Such were Se∣neca and Socrates, and divers other among the Heathen, whome Histories commend unto us up∣on this account. And such in all places we may meet with some, who whatever befals yet possess their souls with patience, not being inordinately affected with what ever changes. Now what rea∣son teacheth them, shall not Religion teach us, (as I said before?) 3. From them rise a step higher, to Gods Saints. Gods Saints. Among whom we find some propounded to us for Paternes in this kind. Take my Brethren the Prophets (saith St James) who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an Ensample of suffering affliction, and of pa∣tience, Jam. 5.10. In particular, ye have heard of the patience of Job, (saith the next verse.) And such Examples we have heard of, and daily see many,
the Martyrs of Christ, and other Saints of God, who with admirable patience have drunke these bitter Cups, which have been given to them. Look we on them. 4.  But above all (in the fourth place) look we upon the Captain of our salvation, Christ himself the Lord Jesus. So the Apostle directeth us, Heb. 12.12. Loaking un∣to Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him indured the Crosse, &c. And again in the verse following, Consider him that indured such contradictions of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your mindes; v. 3. Thus did he indure and suffer, Patiently. Which he did (as for other ends, so) to set us an example, that we should follow his steps, (as St Peter tels us) 1 Pet. 2.21. Which let it be our indeavour to doe. To promote which work lay we to heart these few Considerations, Consideration promoting his Duty. some Moral, others Divine. 1.  Morak, such as Reason will furnish us with. Such are those obvious and usuall ones, Morall. which may be useful in this way. 1.  The evil of impatiency. Magnum malum, non posse ferre malum, The evill of impaiience. Seneca. (saith the Moralist.) Impatiencie in suffe∣ring of evils is a great evill; no waies easing or hel∣ping, but aggravating or increasing our sufferings: what gets the bird by fluttering or strugling with the snare, or limetwig? or the fish by striving with the hook? Hereby they are more intangled; the more they strive the worse they are. And so is the Christian under Affliction, his condition is made much worse by impatience, by striving and strugling under the hand of God. Hereby those evils which before were only external, reaching to the outward man, become Internall, entring through into the soul, Even as the fish by strug∣ling
brings the hooke into the bowels, which be∣fore was only in the Jawes. Great is the evill of Impatience. 2.  On the other hand great is the benefit and ad∣vantage of patience. Hereby. The benefit of patience. 1. A heavie burden is made the lighter. Levius fit patientia, &c. Whereas impatience adds to the burden, patience detracts from it. Both which Reason and experience will tell us. 2. To which ad, hereby a man commeth to possess and injoy himself, the best part of himself, his soul. Patience kee∣peth possession of the soul. In your patience possess ye your souls (saith our Saviour in that text even now cited,) Luke. 21.19. . Impatience doth (as it were) dispossess a man of his soul, so as he hath not the right use of the faculties thereof, understanding, Judgment, Will, Affections. Patience keepeth him in posessi∣on of it, so as whatever other injoyments he is de∣prived of, yet still he enjoyeth, what is better then all, himself. These are Morall Considerations, such as reason suggesteth. Of which I give you but a taste. 2. To these add we those of a higher strain, Divine, such as Scripture holdeth forth. Which willeth us to consider. 1. How patient God is towards us, how much he bea∣reth from us and with us, Divine Consi∣derations. The Lord is long suffering to us ward. 2 Pet. 3.9. Bearing much from us, being as it were pressed under our sins. Gds patience towards us. Behold I am pres∣sed under you as a cart is pressed that is ful of sheaves (so the Lord complaines against his people Israel) Jam. 2.13. Such is every sin unto God, as a sheafe to the Cart, being contrary to his Nature, it is a burden to him. Yet he beareth with us, nay daily loadeth us with his benefits (as the Psalmist speakes, Psal. 68.19.) Who load him with our daily provocati∣ons.
And shall not we bear a little from him, who beareth so much from us? 2. His modera∣tion in cor∣recting. In case his anger doth break forth against us, so as he doth correct us, yet it is not accor∣ding to our deserts. He hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities, Psal. 103.10. Be our suffering what it will, yet it answers not our demerits. Know thou (saith Zophar to Job) that God exacteth of thee lesse then thine iniquity deserveth, Job 11.6. And thus may it truely be said to every of us. However God is pleased to deal with us, yet are our sufferings no wayes propor∣tionable to our sins. That is the acknowledge∣ment which Ezra maketh in the name of the Jewes, Ezra 9.13. Thou our God hast punished us lesse then our iniquities deserve. However the Judgements which had been inflicted upon them were great, the Sword, Captivity, and Spoyl, (as the 7 Verse there hath it) yet were they no wayes answerable to what they had deserved. And the like must every of us acknowledge, whatever our condition be, yet our sufferings fall infinitely below our sins. And shall we not then bear the hand of the Lord which he layeth so fa∣vourably on us? 3.  If he do correct us, it is not for his pleasure, but our profit: His correcting us, for our Profit. So the Apostle layeth it down, assigning this as a difference betwixt Gods deal∣ing with his Children, and some earthly Parents with theirs, Heb. 12.10. They verily for a few dayes chastened us after their own pleasure, but he for our profit. . Now with what pa∣tience do Patients submit themselves to the hand of the Surgeon, to have their Ulcers launced and fearched, yea and if need be, to have a Member
cut off, whilest it is for their good, the saving of their lives. And shall not we in like manner submit to the hand of our heavenly Father, whilest whatever he doth to us, is for our bene∣fit, for the saving of our souls? 4.  To this adde, that patience in suffer∣ing is a Duty, Patience in Affliction a duty require which God requires at our hands. Be ye also patient. Jam. 5.8. In patience possesse ye your souls. Luk. 21.19. (as we heard before.) 5. And requiring it of us, he accepteth and ap∣proveth it in us. I know thy works, and thy labour, Approved. and thy patience, (saith the Lord to the Church of Ephesus) Rev. 2.2. And the like to the Church of Thyatira, v. 19. I know thy works and Charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience. As God taketh notice of other graces and duties in his people, so of their Patience; which he knoweth, and that with a knowledge of approbation, ap∣proving and accepting it (as that word there, and oft elsewhere, signifieth.) 6. And accepting it he will reward it, and that as with seasonable deliverance, Rewarded, so with an ample reward here, or hereafter. The Crosse being pa∣tiently born shall have a Crown set upon the head of it: Upon which account St. James pro∣nounceth the patient man a blessed man. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation, (that indureth it patiently) for when he is tryed, he shall receive the Crown of life. Jam. 1.12. Such is the reward of Patience. Only see that it be Christian patience. Caution. See that it be true Christian Pa∣tience. There is a Patience, (as I have shewn you) which is either Stoicall, or meerly Morall. Such was the Pati∣ence of those Heathens which I spake of. And
such is the patience of meer Civill men, who bear what they cannot help, upon the grounds aforesaid, meerly out of the Principles of Reason. See we that our Patience exceed theirs. What our Saviour said to the Jewes concerning the Righte∣ousnesse of she Scribes and Pharisees, Ma. 5.20. Except your righteousnesse exceed theirs, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdome of Heaven. I may say the like concerning the Patience of meer Marall, Civill men: Except our Patience exceed theirs, it shall never finde such acceptance with God, so as to obtain the promised reward. See we that ours be true Christian patience. Q. But wherein doth Christian patience ex∣ceed theirs? A. Wherein Chri∣stian Patience differs from morall. Why, as in some other particulars, so prin∣cipally in these two. It is Obedientiall, And Voluntary. Thus doth the true Christian suffer, obediently, and willingly, which the Morallist doth not. And thus see that we suffer, when God calleth us to it. Which are the two other branches of this part of the Exhortation yet behinde. Of which briefly. Suffering Patiently, suffer Obediently, in obedi∣ence unto God. Christians to suffer Obedi∣ently. So did not those Heathens, which knew not God: No more do meer Civil men, who regard him not. But thus let us suffer. So did our heavenly pattern here, the Lord Jesus. What he suffered, it was in obedience to his Fa∣ther. The Cup which my Father hath given me.] He humbled himself, and became obedient, Phil. 2.8. He learned obedience by the things which he suffered, Hb. 5.8. This was the principle which car∣ried
him on to, and through that work. And so let it be with us; whatever we suffer, looking upon it as a Cup coming from the hand of our heavenly Father, drink it in obedience to him. Thus are Christians to perform all duties, both to God and Man, As obedient Children; (as St. Peter hath it) 1 Pet. 1.14.  as Chil∣dren of Obedience, doing what they do in an obe∣dientiall way to God their Father. And thus also are they to suffer, so approving themselves the children of God, as by their Active, so by their Passive Obedience. And suffering obediently suffer also willingly. Willingly. So also did our blessed Saviour suffer (as you have heard.) The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? He drinks this his Cup, as patiently and obediently, so willingly. And so, drink we these Cups, which God our heavenly Father giveth unto us, thus suffer we those af∣flictions which his Providence layeth out for us, not only patiently and obediently, but willingly. Herein again true Christian patience differs from that of the meer Morall, Civill man; whose pa∣tience is patience per force, he suffereth what he cannot help. This being the Principle which he goeth upon, Feras, non culpes, quod vitari non potest, Sence. What you cannot shift, rather hear then quarrell with, (as that great Moralist hath it.) But such pati∣ence, how commendable soever it may be with Man, it is not so with God, who accepteth no service but what is willingly performed. That which St. Peter requires of Ministers in speciall, that they should do their work, their Ministerial service, feeding the flock of God, not by constraint, but willingly, 1 Pet. 5.2.
God requireth it generally at the hands of all his; people whatever service we do unto him, doe it not by constraint, but willingly. And so in our sufferings, be we willing to submit to his will. This is their Reasonable service which St. Paul calls for, Rom. 12.1. I beseech you brethren by the mer∣cies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacri∣fice, holy acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service. ; a service not like that of the unreasonable creatures under the Law (as Theodoret and Erasmus, and some other Ex∣positors interpret those words, and that truely, though not fully.) Those bruit Creatures, Sheep and Oxen, &c. they came to the Altar, but they were either drawn or driven thither. And there they suffered the sacrificing Knife to be put to their throats, but they were first tied and bound. Binde the Sacrifice with Cords even unto the horns of the Altar. Psal. 118.27. Now in opposi∣tion to this, the Christians sacrifice must be a reasonable service. As his Active, so his Passive Obe∣dience, must be not constrained and compelled, but willing. Which if it be not, he cannot ex∣pect his reward. If I do these things willingly, I have a reward, (saith Paul speaking of his Ministe∣rial service) but if against my will this dispensation is committed unto me, what is my reward then? 1 Cor. 9.17, 18. And what he saith of his acting, Two questions resolved. a Christian may say the like of his suffering, submitting willingly to the hand of God, he may expect a reward, which otherwise he can∣not look for. Whether, Christians may not pray against suffer∣ings. Q. But what then (it may be said) may not a Christian pray against these evils? And may he not use means to be freed and delivered from them?
A. The latter of these Questions I started be∣fore, and returned some answer to it. let me now speak a little more fully to it, and to the former. 1. Pray against evils, Temptations, Tryals, This they may doe. we may. For this we have our Saviours practise to warrant us, who in the Garden (as you have heard) thrice put up this Request. O my Father, if it be possible let this Cup passe from me. Which also he had done before, Joh. 12.27. Father save me from this hour. And what himself there did, he hath taught us to doe the like, putting in this for one of those six Petitions in that his form and pattern of Prayer which he hath left us, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evill. This a Christian may doe, pray against temptations, Evils, as of Sin, so of punishment, that he may be either kept from them, or delivered out of them. But take it with this Proviso, this Caution, Not Absolute∣ly, but con∣ditionally. It must be not Absolutely, but Conditionally, with submission to the will of God. So we finde it in our Pattern. Christ prayeth that this Cup might passe from him, but his request herein is not Absolute but Conditionall. If it be possible, let this Cup passe from me, Math. 26.39. . If possible, not simply and absolutely so, for so all things are possible with God, (which he elsewhere taketh notice of, Matth. 19.26. Mark 14.36.) but if it were consistent with Gods decree, Si tua decreta ferunt ut alio modo tuae gloriae & homirum saluti aequè con∣sulatur. Grot. Annor. ad loc. and might not be prejudiciall to his Glory, or the salvation of his Church and people (as Grotius well explains it.) Or, if it might stand with the will of God his Father: So he there explains himself, where to the aforesaid Petition he sub∣joyns
this Retraction, or rather Limitation, Never∣theless not as I will but as thou wilt. Matth. 26.39. Which he again insists upon, v. 42. O my Father, if this Cup may not passe from me except I drink it thy will be done. Thus doth he resolve his will into the will of his heavenly Father. And the like are we to do, However we may desire freedome from these evils which lye upon us, or threaten us, and may pray against them, yet let it be with submissi∣on of our wils to the will of our heavenly Father. Which in all our petitions and requests is still ey∣ther to be expressed, or implied. So much our Sa∣viour teacheth us in that form of prayer which he hath set us; where he directs us before we pray for any blessings for our selves, first to desire that the will of God may be done Thy will be done. This are we to pray for Absolutely resolving all our requests into it. Which whilest we doe we may pray against Evils incumbent or impendent, felt or feared. A 2. And so also use meanes to be preserved, or delivered from them. Thus Christians (as you have heard) not only may do, but ought to do That Law which saith unto us, Whether they may use means for preventing, or removing them. Thou shalt not kill, doth therein require us to use meanes for the preserving and maintaining of Life and Livelyhood, Neither doth our Saviours practise here in the text make any thing to the contrary. True, he refuseth meanes offered for his rescue, This they both may and ought so doe. but this he did as being ac∣quainted with the Councell and purpose of God concerning himself. Being of Counsell with his Father, of his privie Councell, he took notice what was decreed in heaven, and was now to be exe∣cuted upon earth. He knew that his bour was come (as St John hath it, Job. 13.1. and he himself tels his Disciples, Matth. 26.45. Mark, 14.41.) the
time precisly determined by his Father wherein he was to be offered up And thereupon it was that he resused al means of rescue. And the like might we do, yea ought to doe, were we in like manner acquainted with Gods secret will, as he was. But this being hidden from us, we must walke by the Rule of his revealed will, which not only permits and allows, but requires and commands, that we should make use of meanes for the diverting or removing of evils present, or imminent. Only here again take we a Proviso, or two. With these Provisoes. 1. Provided that these meanes (as I said before) be lawfull meanes Ahaziah in his sicknesse, is not blamed for advising with what Physitians or Sur∣geons he pleased, That they be lawfull. but that he should send to Baalz∣bub the God of Ekron, to aske Counsell of that Idol: this was his sin, which proved fatall to him, There∣fore thou shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art going up, but shalt surely die (so the Prophet Eliah sends him his doome.) 2. King. 1.2.6. And never let them looke for a better issue, who in cases of sicknesse, or any other distress shall con∣sult with Satan, or his Instruments, with witches, or wizards, or make use of spels or Charmes, or any other unwarrantable meanes. 2.  And (Secondly) being lawfull meanes see that they be used lawfully. Used lawfully. 1 Not being sought to alone. This was Asahs sin) In his disease he sought not to the Lord, Not sought to alone. but to the Physitian, 2. Chron. 16.12. Whilest we use meanes see that we take God along with them, who must either blesse, or blaste. 2. Nor yet sought to in the first place. This is an honour due unto God, still to begin with him, Not in the first place. to seeke to him in the first place. And this do we,
as in all our undertakings and businesses, so in see∣king deliverance from any evill, make our first ad∣dress unto God, begging from him that he would direct to the use of meanes. 3.  Use meanes, but trust not in them, Thus Da∣vid used his sword and his Bowe, Not trsted in. but not trust∣ing in them. I will not trust in my Bowe, neither shall my sword save me, Psal. 44.6. This honour he gave to his God, whom he made his sole trust, and confidence, (as he often tels us.) Thus look at Meanes we may, but neither in the first, nor yet in the last place. Make we God our Alpha, and Omega, our first and last. First seeking to him to direct unto meanes, and then seeking to him to bless those meanes. Thus look at meanes, but not so as to terminate our light in them. Look through them, look beyond them, resting only upon him whose word of com∣mand must make them effectuall to us for good. But of this heretofore. With these Cautions a Christian may use means for the diverting of evils, Still Gods will to be submitted to. and in obedience to God he is to make use of them, when providence offers them. Yet still so as in the use of them he so sub∣mits his will to Gods will, as to be willing with what he willeth. And thus let every of us indeavour, in imitati∣on of this our blessed Paterne, to submit to the drinking of whatever Cups shall be given to us, to suffer what afflictions and tryals God shall please to exercise us with, as not despising of them, so not murmuring at them, nor fainting under them, but submitting to them, Patiently, Obediently, Wil∣lingly. Here is the Generall Lesson, which all Christs
Disciples are to learn, and practise. Which I might now prosecute in particulars, by shewing you the several Cups which God giveth to his peo∣ple, the sundry sorts of Afflictions wherewith he is pleased to exercise them; As sufferings in their estates by losses and Crosses; in their good names by reproaches and ignominies; in their Relations, by parting with near and dear friends, Parents, Hus∣band, Wife, Children; in their Bodies, by sickness and weakness. As also how they ought to submit to God in every of these, and upon what grounds they are to do it. But this I foresee would be a long work. And I conceive that those Generals which have been already held forth are fitly ap∣plicable to every of these, or whatever other Particular cases. And therefore shall I not enter into that so large a field. Only looking into this Cup which our blessed Saviour was now to drinke, Two bitter in∣gredients in our Saviours Cup. His suffe∣ring in soul and suffering of death. I find in the bottom of it two most bitter Ingredients, which were the two chiefest parts of his suffering, viz. His suffe∣ring in soul, and his suffering of Death. Other things there were which he also suffered; As that Re∣proach and Contempt which was cast upon him. He indured the Contradictions of Sinners. Heb, 12.3. He was reviled, 1. Pet. 2.23. He was set at naught (as he himself foretold it) Mark 9.12. , sleigh∣ted, as nothing worth. So he was, as by the chief Priests and Rulers, so by the vulgar, who preferred Barrabas before him, Not this man but Barrabas, now Barrabas (saith the Text) was a Robber, Joh, 18.41. Thus was he despised and rejected of men (as the Prophet Isai foretold it,) Isai. 53.3. Made a scorn and laughing stock, having a scarlet (or Purple) Robe put upon him, a Rod put into his hand in∣stead
of a Scepter, a Crown of Thornes set upon his head instead of a Crown of Gold, (as the story sets it forth, Mat. 27. v. 28.29.) all to make him a scorn to the people, who in defiance spit upon him (as it there followeth.) Thus did he suffer in his Name, And so in his Body, being buffeed and caned, (as we find it, Matth. 26, 67. and 27.30,) as also scour∣ged, v. 26. Now all these were ingredients in this Cup, parts of his suffering. But the two principals, which made this his Cup so exceedingly bitter, were these, his suffering in Soule, and his suffe∣ring of death. Yet doth he thus submit to both these. And the like are Christians to doe if ever God shall call them to the like tryals. Christians to imitate him in suffering of both. The latter of which they are all sure to meet with, what man li∣veth and shall not see death? Psal. 89.48. And for the former none are sure of being exempted from it. Now as to these two particulars, being of so great importance, and having so just an occasion offe∣red from the Text, give me leave to speak to them severally. Begin with the former. Suffering in Soul. Thus did our blessed Saviour suffer, Suffering in Soul. not only in the outward man, but also in the inward, not only in his Body, but in his Soul. When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, Isai. 53.10. that is, the whole person of Christ, not bis body only; but his soul also, which suffered in this his passion. And that not only by way of Sympathie, and fellow feeling with the Body (as Socinions would have it,) but immediately. As man afflicted the one, so did God the other. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he hath put him to grief. (saith the Prophet in the text last named,) Afflicting him as in his
Body, so in his Soul, Which he did by inflicting on him a double Punishment, such as the damned in Hell lye under, a Punishment of Losse, and a Punish∣ment of Sense. Of Losse hiding and withdrawing himself from him, as to his sense and feeling. Which he did fully upon the Crosse, where being left under a cloud of spirituall desertion, he cryeth out in the anguish of his soul, My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me? Of sense pouring a viall of wrath into his soul, such as was due unto those sins which he had undertaken. So as now even The sorrows of Hell compassed him about (as David in another sense speaks of himself, Psal. 18.8.) This Cup did he drink upon the Crosse, a Cup of divine wrath. Which he had before tasted of, even here in the Garden. Where we find him in a strange and unparrallelled agonie, sweating as it were drops of bloud, falling to the ground, (as before we heard.) And what could it be that should thus affect his Body, but the anguish of his soul then conflicting with the apprehension of that wrath which he was now to feele, the wrath of God due unto sinners, in whose room he was now to stand as a surety and Redeemer? Thus were these waters even come into his soul (as David in a different sense speaks it of himself, Psal. 69.1.) And that (as I said) in an Immediate way. Hence is it that he complaines un∣to his Disciples, that his soul was exceeding sorrow∣full, Matth. 26.38 , beset and surrounded with grief and anguish. And St Mark reporting the same story, tels us, that he began to be sore a∣maz'd, and very heavy, Mark. 14.33. , Expavescere & gravissime ang, to be in great horrour, and anguish. Now what could it be that should thus affect him? surely not bare∣ly
the apprehension of those Corporall punish∣ments which he was to suffer. This were a thing very dishonourable to imagine, that whereas ma∣ny of the Martyrs have gone triumphing to the stake or gibbet, going singing to the induring of far greater torments, more cruell deaths then this was, that he who was their Leader, the Captain of their salvation, should fall so far below them in resolution and courage, as thus to tremble at the thought of his Crosse. Surely there was somewhat more in this Cup, which made it so bitter to him. And what should that be, But his suffering in soul? And yet see how, having recollected his spirits, he here submitteth to the drinking of this Cup, the suffe∣ring whatever his Father should please to inflict upon him. The Cup which my Father hath given me shall I not drink it? And thus are Gods Children to submit to the will of their heavenly Father, if he shall call them to the tasting of this Cup. The tasting of it (I say) As for the drinking it off, that they never shall. Christ having drunk off this Cup, hath freed those who are his from drinking in the like way that he did. They being justified by his bloud shall be saved from wrath through him. Rom. 5.9. This Cup is re∣served for wicked and ungodly men, who being Children of disobedience, are also Children of wrath (as the Apostle calls them, Ephes. 2.23.) having wrath for their Portion, The wrath of God commeth upon the Children of disobedience, Eph. 5.6. This shall be the portion of their Cup, which they shall drink, and drink it off, even wringing out the dregs thereof. But so shall not those that are Christs. They be∣ing Gods Children, and Children by Grace, the Grace of Adoption, they are freed and delivered
from wrath. Yet not so, but that they also may taste of this Cup, which sometimes some of them doe. Even the best of Saints being subject to spiri∣tuall desertions, soul sufferings; wherein God hi∣ding his face, with-holding from them the sweet sense and feeling of his love and favour, writes bit∣ter things against them, setting their sins in order before them, and letting some drops of his wrath (as it were) fall upon their souls, filling them with inward horrour and terrour. A bitter Cup, of all Cups the bitterest, of all tryals the sharpest. There being two things principally which make it so. 1. Because it seizeth immediately upon the soul, Suffering in soul the greatest suffe∣ring. upon the spirit. Those wounds in the body which come nearest the heart are looked upon as most deadly. And so is it with those sufferings which come nearest the soul. It seizeth up∣on the spirit. The Sword reacheth unto the Soul, (saith Jeremy) Jer. 4.10. It is bitter, because it reacheth unto thine heart, (saith the 18. v. there, explaining the former.) And so doth this Tryall, it seizeth upon the soul, and that immediately. As Hectick Feavers, and some other diseases in the body, which seize more immediately upon the spirits, and in that regard are more deadly: So doth this Tryall seize immediately upon the soul, and in that respect is the more grievous and in∣supportable. It is the soul, the spirit of a man that beareth up his head in all his sufferings, so as if that be wounded and broken, what shall sup∣port it? The spirit of a man will sustein his Infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear, (saith that Text forecited,) Prov. 18.14. 2.  And again in this Tryall God himself seemeth to turn Enemy to a man. In this tryall God appears an enemy. Whereas in other Affli∣ions he standeth by his people, comforting and
strengthning them, taking part with them, or else standing Neuter, in this he takes up Arms a∣gainst them, fighteth against them, and that in a more immediate way then in other conflicts. And upon this account this Cup must needs be more bitter then any other Cup. Yet if God shall please to hold forth this Cup unto his people, Yet to be sub∣mitted to. it is their duty even herein to submit unto his will and pleasure. Which they are to doe, as not despising it, (which they doe, who looking upon this Affliction of spi∣rit only as some Melancholick Passion, sleight it) so not murmuring at it, nor yet fainting un∣der it. Q. How this may be done with∣out fainting. I but how shall a Christian be able to do this to bear up under such a tryall without fain∣ting? A. A great and a difficult work to doe, (I con∣fess) yet through grace possible. To help you herein if ever God shall call any of you to it let me briefly propound unto you somewhat to be considered, and somewhat to be practised. 1.  By way of Consideration seriously meditate upon these three particulars. Considerati∣ons usefull to this end. 1. Look upon others who have had experience of the like conflicts. This is not such a Cup but others have tasted of it before us. Even this affliction hath been accomplished in many of our brethren, Look upon o∣thers wh have had experience of the like. in some of the dearest Saints and servants of God. Yea few there be but at some time or other do tast of this Cup, and some drink deep of it. So did Job, and David, both which among other their sufferings had experience of this, this Soul tryall of a spirituall desertion, God hiding himself from them, seeming to have forsaken them, and to be turned against
them. So we may hear Job complaining, Cap. 6. v. 4. The Arrowes of the Almighty are within me, the poyson whereof drinketh up my spirit, the terrours of God do set themselves in array against me. And again Cap. 13. v. 24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine Enemy? And v. 26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and makest me to possess the iniqui∣tys of my youth. And the like sad complaints we may hear from David. My God my God why hast thou for∣saken me? Psal. 22.1. Thou didst hide thy face and I was troubled, Psal. 30.7. Mine Iniquities have gone o∣ver my head; as an heavy burthen, they are too heavy for me. Psal. 38.4. Mine Iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to looke up; they are more then the haires of my head, therefore mine heart faileth me. Psal. 40.12. And we shall find that holy man Ho∣man the Ezrite joyning in consort with them. Psa. 88. Lord, why casteth thou off my soul: why hidest thou thy face from me? v. 14. While I suffer thy terrours I am distracted, v. 15. Thy fierce wrath goeth over me, thy terrours have cut me off. v. 16. Thus were they exer∣cised, not only in the outward man, but also in the inward, having sore conflicts in their soules with apprehensions of divine wrath. Now if God shall bring us into a like condition, look we upon them, and upon the end of the Lord, (as St James speaks, Jam. 5.11.) the issue of these their temp∣tations; which was very comfortable, the Sun in due time breaking out from under those clouds, God lifting up the light of his countenance upon them as formerly. But above all look we up (as the Apostle directs us) unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, Specially look upon Christ. who suffered the like, nay infinitely more of this kind, in the Garden, and upon the Cross (as you
have heard.) Now where a Patient seeth his Physi∣tian but taste of his Cup, it is some incouragement to him to drink it. And this hath Christ done for us, nay he hath not only tasted of this Cup, but drunk it off. So then, if God will have us to pledge him; to taste of the like Cup, be not dishartened and discouraged by it. Taking notice 1. That this is a part of our conformity to Christ. And 2. That Christ having been thus tempted him∣self, (which he was, how else saith the Apostle, that he was in all points tempted, like, , as we are, Heb, 4, 15.) having had experience of this soul-conflict, he knoweth, both how to pity, and how to succour those who are thus tempted, (as the same Apostle tels us) Heb. 2.18. Obj. I, But Christ had no sins of his own set before him, Christ had no sins of his own which we have, So as his condition was different from ours. A. Though he had no sins of his own yet he had the sins of others, Our sins were made his. our sins charged upon him, as be∣ing our surety, which by this meanes were made his own, He hath made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, (saith the Apostle) 2. Cor. 5.21. Howe∣ver he knew no sin experimentally, as being guilty of it in himself, yet he was made sin, viz. by way of imputation, having the sins of all his elect people put upon his account, in whose room he then stood. He his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, (or to the tree) , the tree of the Crosse, 1 Pet. 2.24. Now this was all one as if these sins had been his own, What is it that a Christian li∣veth by, not Assurance but Faith. as to the guilt of them. But to pass on. Let a second Consideration be, What it is that a Christian liveth by, what it is that his salvation de∣pends
upon. Not Assurance, but Faith. The just shall live by his faith. Hab. 2.4. Now Assurance and Faith are two different things. Assurance not being of the Essence of Faith (as by some it hath been mista∣ken,) Faith being properly a Recumbencie, a Reli∣ance and resting of the soul upon Christ. This is Faith, true justyfying and saving faith. A belie∣ving in Christ or on him. God so loved the World that be gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believeth in him shall not perish, Joh. 3.16. , In eum on him. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved, Act. 16.31. ,; which imports properly such a recumbency, a resting of the soul upon Christ. Which where it is, though there be not Assurance for the present, yet it is a true, and a saving Faith. As for Assurance, perti∣net ad bene esse, non ad esse, It belongeth to the well being, to the perfection of faith, (And upon that account it is earnestly to be sought after, and much set by) but not to the being. Sense and fee∣ling may fail, and yet faith hold out. I have pray∣ed for thee that thy faith fail not (saith Christ to Peter) Luke. 22.32. Not that thy Assurance might not fail, (which in the best of Gods Saints it is subject to,) but thy faith; which where once it is truly begun it shall never utterly fail. In the paroxisme of his passion, Christs assurance, his sense and fee∣ling were gone. Why hast thou forsaken me? Yet his Faith held, My God, my God. To these add (in the third place) the unchangea∣bleness of Gods Affection towards his people, The unchang∣eablenesse o Gods affecti∣on. and of his Covenant with them. His Covenant, (being the Covenant of grace) it is a Covenant of salt, an Ever∣lasting Covenant. Once their God, and ever their God, Once their Father and ever their Father;
In the midst of this spirituall desertion yet Christ calleth God his Father. The Cup which my Father hath given me. Though God did for a time hide his face from him, yet did not this dissolve that Relation which was betwixt his Father and him; noe nor yet make any alteration or change in his Affection towards him. Even then when his wrath brake forth most hotly upon him, yet his heart was towards him as much as ever. And the like may all that are Christians be assured of. Having once taken God for their Father, this is an ever∣lasting Relation, which shall never be dissolved. However God may represent himself unto them, yet he is still a Father towards them. Doubtlesse thou art our Father, Isai 63.16. And such is his affecti∣on to them. I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. Thus is God unchangeable, we may change as to our apprehensions of him, but he changeth not. I am the Lord, I change not, Mat. 3.6. Even as it is with the Sun in an Ecclipse, the moon interposing it self maketh a change of the face of it, but the Sun it self is not changed, which it soone sheweth by shining again as formerly. E∣ven so is it in these spirituall Ecclipses. The light of Gods countenance, through some dark cloud of temptation intervening, is for a time intercepted so as we see it not, as (it may be) at sometimes we have done, but God is still the same. And waiting upon him we shall by comfortable expe∣rience find him so. Here are a few of those Medi∣tations, which (among many other) being apply∣ed to the heart, will be of great use for the bea∣ring it up even under this greatest of tryals. In the second place by way of Practise, take on∣ly the like number of directions, Help by way of practise. because I am not
willing to load your memories beyond their bea∣ring. 1. In this case make use of the judgments of others, Make use of the Judgment of others. A man is not looked upon as a competent judg in his own case. And so is it here. In soul conflicts men usually take part with sin and Satan against themselves. And being parties, they are no com∣petent Judges. And therefore submit rather to the Judgments of others. Such as have had ac∣quaintance with our Persons and conditions. Spe∣cially herein lend an ear to the Ministers of Christ; whose office it is under Christ to bind up the broken hearted, Isai 61.1. To speak comfort to the afflicted, Isai. 40.1. To speak a word in season to him that is wea∣ry, Isai 50 3. As Gods interpreters to shew unto man his uprightnesse, Job. 33.23. To acquaint him with the truth of his condition, as also with his duty, to shew him what state he is in, and what course he is to take. Thus are they Gods mouth to his people, (as the Lord telleth Jeremie, Jer, 15.19.) And therefore, as at other times, so now specially to be hearkened to. Thus the Lord sends Saul to Ananias, that by him he might be restored to his sight, and instructed what he should do, Act. 9.6.12. And in the Chapter following he willeth Cornelius to send for Peter, that he might tell him what he ought to doe; Act. 10.6. Thus in matters of temporall Concernment, men being in a straight they will not rely upon their own Judgment, but will apply themselves to their Counsellours, whose profession and practise gives them to be skilfull in the Law. And the like let Christians do in their spirituall conflicts, intrusting themselves, hearken to the Ministers of Christ, such as they judge to be able and faithfull, and submit to their Judgment.
2.  In this case live upon former experience, as up∣on the experience of others, Live upon for∣mer experi∣ence. so of our own, Look back upon former times, and remember what our condition hath been, how it hath been with us as to our spirituall estate, what we have seen and felt of God heretofore. This was Davids pra∣ctise (if that Psalme be his, which it is supposed to be) Psal. 77. Being in a most disconsolate conditi∣on, so as his soul refused to be comforted (as he saith v. 2.) then (saith he) I considered the dayes of old, the years of ancient time I call to remembrance my Songs in the night, v. 5.6. I will remember the years of the right hand of the most high, I will remember the works of the Lord, Surely I will remember thy wonders of old, v. 12, 11. Now he cals to mind what God had done for himself and others, and herewith he stay∣eth and comforteth himself, being assured that God was still the same God. And the like do we in the like case. 3.  But above all (in the third place,) live upon the promises, Live upon the Promises. casting our selves upon them, as a ship∣wrackt man doth upon the rast that is cast out to him. Though for the present we find no comfort in them, or from them, yet lay hold upon them, casting our souls upon them, living by faith in them. So did Abraham, the Father of the faith∣full; Against hope he believed in (or under) hope, Rom. 4.18. . When naturall cau∣ses had left him hopeless as to any issue of his bo∣dy, yet grounding his faith upon the promise of God, he still hoped. And the like let all his Chil∣dren doe. When sense faileth live by Faith, resol∣ving, come what will come. not to let that hold goe. That was Jobs resolution, Though he slay me yet will I trust in him, Job. 13.15. A truly heroical
Resolution, which let al the Lords people take up. However the Lord shall deal with them yet let them not let go their confidence. Cast not away your Confidence, Heb. 10.35. If this be gone all is gone. Hope the Chri∣stians sheat∣anchor. This is the sheate anchor which Christ is to ride by in whatever stormes or stresses come down upon him. It is the Apostles own similitude in that known text, Heb, 6.19. Which Hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, If the Anchor be let slip, or come home, the Ship is exposed to the hazard of Rocks and Shelves, from which before she was safe. And so is the Soul of a Christian; if once his Hope, his Faith and confi∣dence in God through Jesus Christ faile, now it is in eminent danger, which before it was not. And therefore having once cast this Auchor within the vaile, fixed our faith in heaven, now whatever stormes come down upon the outward, or inward man, upon Body or soul, still ride by it, holding fast this our confidence, and hope unto the end, (as the Apostle minds us once and again, Heb. 3.6.14.) Thus however the Lord pleaseth to deal with us let us only turn unto him, and then hope in him. Even as the Ship in a stress turns to the Anchor, and rides by it, So do we in these soul-stresses, Turn to the Lord and trust in him. That is the advise which the Prophet Hosea giveth to the people of the Jewes, when God had a Controversie with them, and was turned enemy to them, Hos. 12.6. Turn thou to thy God (saith he) Keep Mercy and Judg∣ment, and wait on thy God continually, Fide deo tuo, wait on him by faith, trusting in him, And so let it be said to the distressed soul that labours under this saddest of tryals. Only turn thou to thy God, in∣deavouring to walk closesly with him, and then
wait upon him, trust in him. That is Davids coun∣sell, which out of his own experience he giveth to others, Psal. 27.13.14. I had fainted, (saith he) unless I had believed to see the goodnesse of the Lord in the Land of the living. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart, wait I say on the Lord, Many and sweet are the promises which God hath made to those who thus wait. They that wait upon the Lord (saith the Prophet Isai) Shall re∣new their strength (through a secret supply of the spirit of grace the inward man shall be strengthe∣ned,) they shall mount up with wings as Eagles (their souls being carried up aloft above all difficulties and discouragements) they shall run and not be wea∣ried, they shall walk and not faint. Noe such way to keep the soul from fainting as this; to wait upon God in all Estates. Which who so do the same Prophet speaks them blessed. Blessed are they that wait for him, Isai, 30.18. Whilest they wait for their God, he waiteth that he may be gratious unto them, (as the former part of that verse hath it,) only expecting a seasonable time to shew himself unto them in a way of mercy. And therefore (to close up this Direction,) however the Lord please to deal with us, though he seeme to withdraw himself from us, yet with patience wait for him, by faith resting upon the word of promise, staying our souls upon him. That is the advice which the same Prophet holdeth forth in that obvious, but excellent Text, Isai. 50.10. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darknesse, and hath no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God. And this let the Lords people doe, such as unfeignedly fear God, yeilding obedience to his
word, as in all other distresses so in this, let them trust in the name of the Lord and stay themselves upon their God, by faith resting upon him, that so their souls may be kept from fainting. Thus much for the former of these tryals, Soul-suffering. Passe we to the second. The suffering of death. This is the other Ingredi∣ent, which we find in the bottome of this Cup, The Suffering of death. the last Act in this Tragedie, the last thing that Christ was to suffer, his pouring forth his soul unto death. A bitter potion. The bitterness of death is past, (saith Agag) 1 Sam. 15.32. The fear of death, which of all other things he looked upon as most bitter. More bitter then death (saith the Preacher of the wherish woman) Eccles. 7.26. Intimating death of all things, which can befall the outward man, to be the bitterest. And yet see with what Pati∣ence, with what Resolution our blessed Saviour here submits hereunto. This was the Gup which his Fa∣ther had given him; He had appointed him to dye, to dye that painfull, shamefull, accursed death upon the Crosse. And this our Saviour was pri∣vy to, having before acquainted his Disciples with it, Mat. 20.18.19. Yet see how he submitteth to the will of his Father herein, as Obediently, he was obedient to the death, Phil. 2.8. So willingly, The Cup which my Father hath given me shall I not drink it? And herein again let all his Disciples follow his steps, Which Chri∣stians are to do Patiently and willingly. shewing themselves in like manner Obedi∣ent to, and in death, submitting to the will of their heavenly Father in drinking this Cup. when he shall give it them, and that not only Patiently, but Willingly. A great and a difficult work (my brethren.) A work above the strength of nature. A work passing the strength of Nature, which of it
self is not able to look this enemy in the face, noe more then the Isralites were Goliah, who when he shewed himself, and made that challenge of a sin∣gle combate to whomsoever should dare to incounter him, it is said that, when Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they were dis∣mayed and greatly afraid, 1 Sam. 17.11. And again, v. 24. And all the men of Israel when they saw the man fled from him, and were sore afraid. Such an enemy is death, being (as Bildad calleth it) The King of terrours, Job. 18.14. So it is to flesh and bloud, , (as the Philosopher saith of it,) of all terribles the most terrible. And great Reason for it, being so unconquerable an enemy, that never was there any that encountred with it, but have beene overcome by it, save only this our David, the Lord Jesus. And how shall nature ever work the heart to such a resolution to em∣brace that which is so destructive to it self? Na∣ture cannot do it. Noe, Ye above an ordinary mea∣sure of grace. nor yet an ordinary measure of grace. How have some of the stourest cedars in Lebanon, been shaken with this gust? Some of the most e∣minent Saints of God, how have their hearts e∣ven fainted when they have seen this Cup com∣ming towards them? David a man after Gods own heart, then whom none more daring in bat∣tell, yet in his cold bloud he tels us of the sor∣rows, and terrours of death which took hold up∣on him. The sorrows of death compassed me about, Psa. 18.4. The sorrows of Hell (of the grave) compassed me about. v. 5 My heart is sore pained within me, and the terrours of death are fallen upon me, Psal. 55.4. And so, Psal. 116.3. This it was that rung those tears from Hezekiahs eyes. Isai, 38. Though a holy
man, one who (as he appeareth to God in it, v. 2 of that Chapter) had walked before him in truth with a perfect heart and had done that which was good in his sight, Yet when the Prophet commeth and pre∣senteth this Cup to him, bringing to him that mes∣sage from the Lord, that he must die and not live: Now (saith the storie) Hezekiah turned his face to the wall (as not daring to look this enemy in the face) and he prayed unto the Lord, v. 2. Yea, (as the next verse hath it) he wept sore. And himself tels us, v. 14. that he chattered like a crane or swallow. So unwelcome were those tidings unto him. And St Paul, though inferiour to none in holy courage and resolution, which he shewed when he told the Disciples weeping about him, that he was rea∣dy not only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 21.13. Yet being (as he thought) arrested by this serjeant, having (as he saith) received in himself the sentence of death, he declares to his Corinthians, that he was pressed out of measure, above strength, 2 Cor. 1.8.9. , above the strength of nature, yea even above the strength of that grace which he had, which at the present (he being suddainly surprized) was hardly able to bear up his spirit under the appre∣hension of that eminent danger wherein he was. And if Cedars be thus pressed, how shall shrubs look to bear up head? Should God now send the like message to any of us (my Brethren) as there he did to Hezekiah, bidding us, Set thine House in order for thou shalt dye, and not live. Or should we here see such an hand writing upon the wal as Bel∣shezar once did, giving us to take notice, that our daies are numbred, and our course finished, put the question now to our own hearts, what entertain∣ment
we could give to such a message, such tidings. Are there not some of us, who would with He∣zekiah turn away our face, and weep at it as sore as ever he did? Nay would it not fare with some of us as there it did with Belshazar, of whom the story tels us, that when he saw that hand-writing, though he understood not what it meant, yet his guilty conscience suggesting that it portended no good to him, his countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loines were loosed, and his knees smote one against the other; Dan. 5.6. How few are there of us that would so receive the Messengers of such tidings as our blessed Savi∣our doth here these Messengers which were sent to apprehend him, so submitting to the will of God herein as he did? But yet know we this to be our Duty; Yet a Christi∣ans Duty. a Lesson which our Lord and Master by his own example hath taught us. And being so, let every of us ap∣ply our selves to the learning and taking of it forth, that we may thus submit to the drinking of this Cup, when ever God shall give it unto us. Which sooner or later he will do, how soon we know not. Q. And possible to be done. I but (you may say,) is this a thing possi∣ble to be done? to bring the heart to such a wil∣ling submission hereunto? A. Though not by Nature. To this I answer (as before) that to flesh and bloud it is not possible. Nature seeking the preser∣vation of it self cannot readily and willingly im∣brace that which is the destruction of it self. Es∣pecially if the eye of the Soul shall be opened to see death, as it is, and to see the Consequents of it, to look upon it as an inlet into a future Estate.
That which maketh meere naturall men some∣times so willing to dye is, because they are blin∣ded with mishapprehensions of it, they look up∣on it as a period to their troubles, as an end of all misery. Whereas did they apprehend it (as an inlet to Eternity, yea to an Eternity of misery, (which to them it is) as an entry into that dark dungeon where they shall be kept in those everlasting chaines under darknesse to the judgment of the great day, it is not possible that they should look upon it, or think of it without horrour and astonishment. Yet by grace. But to Grace this is possible. This being one of those ends wherefore Christ dyed, that through death he might deliver them who through fear of death were all their life time subject unto bondage (as the Apostle tels us,) Heb. 2.15. Such is the condition of all the Sons of men by nature, being continually subject unto death, they are in bondage through the fear of it. But this priviledge Christ hath by his death obtained for his Elect, that through grace, through faith in him, they may be freed and de∣livered from this bondage, this fear. Though not from the Naturall, yet from the slavish fear of it. As for the Naturall fear of it, that our blessed Saviour himself was not free from, noe more are the best of Saints. Not thus to fear death what is it but Hominem exuere, to put off humanity? But for the servile, slavish fear of it, that through grace believers may be freed from. Yea so freed from it, as to receive, and embrace death, readi∣ly, and willingly. This we find some of the Saints to have done. Lord now lettest thou thy Servant de∣part in peace (saith old Simeon) Luk. 2.29. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ (saith Paul) Phil. 1.23. In this we groan desiring earnestly to be cloathed
upon with our house which is from Heaven (saith the same Apostle of himself and other believers,) 2 Cor. 5.2. And again, v. 8. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord. So then, this is a thing possi∣ble for Christians to attain unto, to be willing to dye when God calleth them to it. Some and many have attained it, and others may if they be not wanting to themselves. Nay, A shame to Christians not to be willing to dye. it is a shame unto those, who professing themselves Christians, doe not in some measure attain hereunto. 1.  In as much Frist as this is contrary to their professions. Being contra∣ry to their pro∣fession. Being Christians they profess them∣selves strangers and pilgrims on the earth, as the Fa∣thers of old time are said to have done, Heb. 11.13. Now (as it there followeth v. 14.) They which say such things declare plainly, that they seek a Countrey that they desire a better Country, that is an heavenly (as the 16 verse explaines it.) Such is the Christians pro∣fession. Now then for them to be unwilling to passe through this Jordan to take possession of this their heavenly Canaan, it must needs reflect upon their profession, What doth the Christian pro∣fess (which he doth) to look upon this World as a troublesome and tempestuous Sea, and upon Heaven as his harbour, which he is continually ben∣ding his course to, and shall he yet be unwilling to leave the one, and put in for the other, when providence cals him to it? Such practise doth not answer the Christians Profession. 2. A disparage∣ment to Gods Religion. Neither is it a small disparagement to Gods Religion. What? shall Pagans and Heathens, who have nothing but false principles to ground their re∣solution
upon, viz. that there is no life after death; or some airye fances, as that by dying in an honourable cause, for their Country, or the like, they shall merit eternall honour to them∣selves, so living when they are dead; or some vain dreames, such as those Poeticall fictions of the Elysian fields, or of Mahomets Paradise, an imagi∣nary happiness after death; shall these (I say) up∣on such grounds be able to incounter this Enemy, to look death in the face, nay to make a mock and a scorn of it (as some of them have done?) And shall Christians tremble at the thoughts of it? What a dishonour is this to Gods Religion? As also unto Jesus Christ, the Captain of their salvation, whose Souldiers they professe themselves to be. Which taking notice of, let all those who pro∣fesse themselves, the Disciples of Christ labour to work their hearts to such a well grounded Reso∣lution, that they may be not unwilling to lay down their body, and yeild up their Soules, when God shall call for them. Q I but (you will say) how shall a Christian attain hereunto? How shall a Christian at∣tain hereunto. It is a thing indeed to be much desired, that the heart might be thus setled and stablished against the fear of death. I, but how shall it be brought to this frame, this temper? thus to look this last enemy in the face with such an unapalled countenance, thus to drink this bitter Cup, as our blessed Saviour here did, with such Resolution, such Willingnesse. A. A point of great importance, being of a general, an universal concernment, Helps prescri∣bd. well worthy of my paines in speaking, and your attention in hearing. Were it so that the heart of a Christian were once brought to such a frame, that he might
stand upon such tearms with death, as not to be afraid of it, how happy should he be both in life, and in death? Life would be sweet to him, and death would not be bitter. To help you there∣fore, and my self therein, give me leave to pre∣sent unto you some brief directions, which may be usefull in this way. Of these we may meet with many, there being no one there more copious then this. I shall only gleane (as Ruth is said to have done) among the sheaves which others have gathered, taking up some of those handfuls which they have let fall, selecting some which are obvi∣ous and usefull. These for the help of your me∣mories, I shall (as in the former point) reduce to those two heads of Contemplation, By way of con∣templation and Practise. and Practise. Begin with the former. 1. Contemplation, Where we shall find many useful truths, Contemplati∣ons. which being wrought upon the heart, Seriously pondered and considered, may serve as so many Antidotes for the preventing, or expelling of that slavish and inordinate fear, which hinders this resolution. Of these some are Morall, others Divine. 1. Morall. Morall, or Naturall Considerations, such as Sense and Reason hold forth. Of this kind are those two obvious ones, touching the Commonness of death, and the Inevitablenesse of it. 1.  The Commonnesse of it. This is a Common Cup which all our Fore-Fathers have drunk of; Death a com∣mon Cup. A suf∣fering, which daily experience tels us that all sorts and conditions of persons are alike subject unto. Be they young or old, rich or poore, Prince, or Pea∣sant, Wise or simple, How dieth the Wiseman? Even
as the fool, Eccle. 2.16. In this no difference. Do not all go to one place? Eccles, 6.6. And shal we see such crouds going before us, and yet be afraid to fol∣low after them? Have those who have been before us gone off from the stage of this world, to make room for us, And shall we be unwilling to do the like for those that are to come after us. 2. The Inevitablenesse, unavoidablenesse of it. Al must drink of it. As this is a common Cup, so all must drink it. As all sorts so all individuals, every particular person. What man is he that liveth and shall not see death, and shall he deliver his Soul from the hand of the grave, Psa. 89.48. I know that thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living. Job. 30.23. Now (as the Moralist reasoneth.) Stultum est timere quod vitari non potest. A vain and foolish thing it is to fear what we cannot shun. Whereunto may be added two other of the like kind, viz. The Vanity, and Misery of Life. 3. The Ʋanity of this life, there being nothing upon earth that can give any true contentment to the Soul. Vanity of Vanities saith the Preacher, The Vanity of life. Vani∣ty of Vanities, all is Vanity, (that is the Tekel which the wisest of men out of his own experience sets upon the world, and all things in it.) Eccl. 1.2. He had tryed all things (as he there telleth us,) what ever might promise any contentment, but he could never find what he sought for. But the con∣trary. So he informs us, verse, 14. I have seen all the works that are done under the Sun, and behold all is vanity, and vexation of Spirit. Not only not giving any true contentment, but creating a great deal of trouble and disquietment to the Soul, which
is inordinately addicted to them, or afflicted with them. So as there is nothing which this life affords which being weighed in a right ballance, should make a man so in love with it, as not to be wil∣ling to part with it. 4.  Nay there is enough in it to, wean the soul from it, The misery of it. viz. the misery of it. This Job renders as a Reason why he himself was not desirous to live but rather to dye, I am made (saith he) to possesse months of Vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to me. Job. 7.3. He found not only no delight and contentment in his condition, but a great deal of trouble and misery, which made him even weary of his life, And the like troubles, in some kind or other are all men here subject to. Man is born to trouble as the sparks flye upward (saith Eliphaz) Job. 5.7. Man that is born of a woman is of few dayes, and full of trouble (saith Job) Job. 14.1. Few and e∣vill have the dayes of the years of my life been (saith the Patriarch Jacob) Gen. 47.9. Few in comparison with many of his fore-fathers, and evill in regard of the manifold crosses which he met with. And the like, more or less, must every one make ac∣count to meet with upon earth, even a successi∣on of troubles, like waves of the Sea, where depth calleth unto deep, one Crosse following upon the neck of another. So as the more daies the more sorrows. All which serve to wean the heart from this world, as the infant is from the brest by laying bitter things upon it. 2. Divine. But I shall not any longer insist upon these or any other Arguments of the like nature, The Resolution of a Christian must be built upon better grounds then these. If God shall please to open the eyes of a naturall man to see death as it is, it is
not any, or all of these, or whatever other Ar∣guments Reason can suggest, that will bear up the soul against the terrors of it. They must be Cordials of a higher extraction that will strengthen the heart in this last conflict, divine Considerations, such as the word holdeth forth. Of these take a few among many. 1. In the First place, Look upon God, who hath appointed and determi∣ned. Let our eye be upon God our Father, whose Cup this is. So was our Saviours here. The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it? And so must theirs who would drink this Cup as he did, submit unto the stroke of death patiently and willingly, they must see God in the ordering and disposing of it, looking upon it as his appointment. Which it is, he ha∣ving 1. Appointed that men shall die. It is appointed to men once to die, Heb. 9.27. Appointed, viz. That men shall dye. by God, who as he is the Lord of life, so he is the ap∣pointer of death. Having passed a generall law for it, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shalt return, Gen. 3. Which Law also he executeth upon parti∣cular persons, bringing them to death. I know that thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living, Job 30 23. So it is, however secon∣dary Causes concur in bringing men to their Graves, yet God himself hath the principall stroke in it. Death being his Messenger, sent by him. He hath appointed that men shall dye. Which taking notice of, look we upon it as our duty to submit hereunto when he calleth us to it. 2. As he hath appointed that men shall dye, so when they shall dye. The time, when. Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? viz. how long he shall-live,
Job 7.1. His dayes are determined, the number of his Moneths are with thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot passe, Job 14.5. So certain are Gods decrees concerning the time of mans life, that he cannot go beyond the term limited; the Year, the Moneth, the Day, the Hour set down. Father the hour is come, (saith our Saviour, speaking of the time appointed for his suffering of death) Joh. 17.1. 3.  As the time, so the place. As the time when, so the place where, The place where. that is also determined by God. Goe up into Mount Nebo, and die there, (saith the Lord to Moses) Deut. 32.50. Our Sa∣viour must goe up to Jerusalem, and there suffer many things, and be killed, (so he tells his Disciples, Matth. 16.21. 4.  And appointing the time and place, he also appointeth the manner, The manner how. how men shall dye, what kinde of death, whether naturall or violent. So it was determined concerning our Saviour, that he should die upon the Crosse, be crucified, which he acquaints his Disciples with, Math. 20.19. And so concerning Peter, to whom our Saviour foretells by what death he should glorifie God, Joh. 21.19. And so is it determined concerning eve∣ry of the sons of men, as when and where, so how they shall dye. None of these are left to Chance and Fortune. Time, place, manner, all appointed by God. Which being seriously con∣sidered and believed, it will be of great use to bring the heart to a quiet and willing submission to the will of God in suffering what he hath so appointed. Thus look at God. In the Second place look we upon Jesus Christ, Look upon Jesus. the Captain of our Salvation, (as the Apostle calleth
him, Heb. 2.10.) Where behold we him 1. Drinking of this Cup before us. Suffering death And shall not we then pledge him? Shall the Captain goe be∣fore, and shall not the Souldiers follow after? Ma∣lus miles qui Imperatorem gemens sequitur. He is but an ill Souldier that weeps when he is to march af∣ter his Generall. Shall our Joshua go before us o∣ver this Jordan, and shall not we go after him? It was a good Resolution in that man, that Scribe, (had he held to it,) who said to our Saviour, Master I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest, Mat. 8.19. Such should be the Resolution of every Christian, to follow Christ when he cals him, to go after him, though it be to Mount Calvary, or Golgotha, the place of a skull, (as both those words signifie, and the latter of them is expounded Joh. 19, 17. and Mat. 27.33.) the Caemeterie, or Church∣yard, (as we call it.) 2.  And whilest we behold him suffering of death behold we also the issues of this his suffering. Conquering it as St James saith of Job; Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, Jam. 5.11. What Issue God was pleased to give him, which was very joyfull and comfortable. So here, look∣ing upon Christ submitting to his Father in suffe∣ring of death, behold we the end of the Lord, the issue of this his suffering; which was victorious and glorious. Victorious. Even as David cut off the head of the Philistine with his own sword, so did this our David, by dying he conquered death; which he manifested in his Resurrection. Where he brake the bands of death, rising again by his own power, and so became the first born from the dead (as the A∣postle calleth him.) Col. 1.18. Now the first born openeth the womb for those that come after him.
And so hath Christ opened the grave for all true believers, so as it shall be no more able to hold them then it was him. Thus was the issue of this his conflict with this his last enemy victorious. And as victorious so Glorious, we see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the Angels, for or through, , the suffering of death crowned with glory and honour, He. 2.9. In this way he entred into his glory, Luk. 24.26. Through this dark entry he went into his heaven∣ly palace. And so shall they who do herein follow his steps, being obedient as he was, Obedient to the death. 3.  Look we upon death it self, But here look upon it in, Look upon death it self, Not in the glass of the Lawe but gos∣pell. and through a right glass. Not that of the Law, but of the Gospell. The glasse of the Lawe presents the face of it as ghastly and terri∣ble, holding it forth as a Curse, which in it own nature it is; being the issue and wages of sin, and the very Gate of Hell. But look we upon it in the glasse of the Gospell; that we shall find represen∣ting it unto the believer under another shape, as being much changed and alterd by Christ. Newe names put upon Death. Where∣upon it puts new names upon it. Calling it some∣times a sleep, Our friend Lazarus sleepeth, Joh. 11.11. Them which sleep in Jesus, 1 Thes. 4.14. Such is the grave to the true believer. Not a Prison, but a Bed sor the Body to rest in for a time. They shall rest in their beds, Isai. 57.2. Elsewhere we find it called a Departure, Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace (saith old Simeon) Luke. Vid-Leigh. Cri∣tica Sara. 2.29. , dimitti, thou loosest, dismissst me, lettest me out of Prison. So the Syriack there renders the word, Now thou openest the Prison. And so we find it pro∣perly used, Act, 5.40. Where it is said that the Councell let the Apostles goe, , viz.
out of prison. Such is this life to the believer, noe better then a Prison, death is his dismission. A like word is that which we find used by the Apostle, Phil. 1.23. Where expressing his willingnesse to dye, I desire (saith he) to be dissolved, or to depart (as the new translation hath it,) , to re∣turn home. So the same word is used in his proper sense, Luk, 12.36. Where servants are said to wait for their Lord till he return to his home,  Such is this World to gods people, a strange Coun∣try, where they live as strangers and pilgrims, be∣ing from home. Ad remigratio∣nem. Beza. Now death is to them a Remigra∣tio, (as Beza there renders the word,) a removing, a returning to their own Country, their home. The Soul leaving the Body, where it lodged for a time, returns to God that gave it. Eccles. 12.7. Elsewhere the same Apostle calls it the dissolving of a Tabernacle. If our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved. 2 Cor. 5.1. Not destroyed. So is a house when it is pulled down, the materials of it being so broken as they can never be put together again, But not so a Tabernacle, or Tent, where the parts are only taken asunder for a time, but after∣wards put together, and set up in another place. Such is death, only a dissolution of the parts where∣of man is composed, a severing of the soul and Body for a time, which shall afterwards be reu∣nited. And so St Peter making use of the same Al∣lusion, he calleth it a putting off or laying down of a Tabernacle. 2 Pet. 1.14. Knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, , depositio tabernaculi mei, (as the vulgar Latine ren∣ders it properly,) The laying down of my Tabernacle is at hand. Such is the Body to the Soul, like a Tent to him that carrieth it about with him, a burden,
which being layed down he is eased. And so is the Soul by the deposition, the laying down of the Body in death. Which in the next verse that Apo∣stle there sets forth under another name, calling it his Exodus, after my decease. v. 15. . My Exodus. A word with the sound whereof you have been well acquainted, it being the Title gi∣ven to the second book of Moses, which is so cal∣led from the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, which is there fully described. Such an Exodus is death to the believer, a Translation of him from an Egypt, an house of bondage, into the Celestial Canaan, the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Thus hath death now new names put upon it, The Gospell representing it after another manner, with another face, then the Law holdeth it forth. And well may it have new names, The nature of death changed by Christ. when as the Nature of it is so changed, and altered, as by Christ it is. Who hath taken away the maliguity of it, that which was hurtfull in it. Having pulled the sting out of this Serpent. O death where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? so the Apostle trium∣pheth over this conquered Enemy, 1 Cor. 15.55. Bot the sting and strength of it are now gone. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be to God, who hath given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: (so the Apostle there goeth on.) This hath Christ done for all that are in him, having made satisfaction for sin, and ful∣filled the Law. So as now though death may threa∣ten, (as the Serpent having lost the sting may hiss) yet it cannot hurt. And why then should we fear a conquered enemy? Which is not only disar∣med, but lyeth as it were dead, before us, lke that Philistine when his head was off. In Christi morte
mors obiit. In Christs death Death died. Being thereby abolished, as the Apostle hath it, 2 Tim. 1.10. Who hath abolished death: , made it of none effect. So is naturall death, the fear and sting of it being taken away, it is now as a shadow without a substance. Thus is Death now qualified by Christ, as to all true Believers. Which being seriously considered, will be of speciall use to free them from the inordinate fear of it, and make them not unwilling to submit to God in the suffering of it. To passe on. In the Fourth place, thus looking upon death, Look beyond Death. look beyond it. Even as the timorous Passenger in ferrying over a River, where the water is rough, by fixing his eye on the bank of the other side, settles his brain, which otherwise might be troubled: thus let the timorous Christian, whose nature inclines him to fear death, look beyond it, look to the issues, the fruits and consequents of it. Here taking notice of two things: The Evils which it freeth the Believer from, and the Good which it bringeth him to. 1. The Evils which it freeth him from. Which are of two sorts: The Evils which it freeth the Believer from. Temporall, and Spirituall. 1. Temporall, (which I have touched upon al∣ready.) Such are bodily Infirmities, sicknesses, Temporall. some of them very dolorous and painfull; and such are losses and Crosses in Estate, with Re∣proaches and Ignominies, and many Vexations and Disquietments, with wearisome labours and Imployments. All these is the life of a Christian here infested with, this world being to him (as I said) a troublesome Sea. But Death is the Havens
mouth, which letteth him into a quiet Harbour, where he is at rest from all these. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, &c. that they may rest from their labours, Rev. 14.13. There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest. There the Prisones rest together, they hear not the voice of the Oppressor. The small and great are there, and there the servant is free from his Master, (so Job de∣scribes the state of the dead) Job 3.17, 18, 19. Thus doth God our heavenly Father make use of this as his Handkerchief, to wipe away all tears from the eyes of his Children (as we have it Rev. 7. last.) After death there shall be to them no more death, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, (as that other Text hath it, , Ae chylus. Rev. 21.4.) Death lets out the Christian (as it doth all men) from the sense and fear of all temporall Evils. 2.  Yea it freeth him from what is far worse, from Spiritual Evils, Spirituall. giving a Quietus est, as to the Body, so to the Soul. Freeing him 1.  From Sin. He that is dead is freed from sin, Rom. From sin. 6.7. So it is indeed with a mortified soul, a regenerate person that is spiritually dead, dead to sin, (which the Apostle there chiefly aymeth at) he is freed from it, viz. from the guilt and power of it. But this is but a partiall freedome, which is compleated and perfected in and by naturall death, by which the Believer obtaineth a perfect freedome. Being hereby so freed from sin as in this life he cannot be. Freed from the committing of it, From the inbeing of it, From the beholding of it. From the committing of it. 1. From the committing of it; which while he is here, he is not, cannot be. However (as the
Apostle hath it in the verse there foregoing, Rom. 6.6.) the old man being crucified with Christ, the Body of sin is so far destroyed, that henceforth the regenerate person doth not serve sin, he having thus suf∣fered in the flesh, ceaseth from sin, (as St. Peter hath it) 1 Pet. 4.1. Corruption being in measure mortified he doth not now sin as before he did, so as to make a custome and practise of it, yet through weaknesse he doth commit some acts of sin, and that daily. There is not a just man upon earth that doth good and sinneth not, Eccl. 7.20. But Death giveth the Believer a perfect discharge so as thenceforth he sinneth no more. He that hath entred into his rest (saith the Apostle) he also hath ceased from his own works, as God did from his, Heb. 4.10. God upon the seventh day kept a Sabbath, resting from his works of Creation, such as he had wrought upon the six dayes before. So doth the Believer, in death he entereth into his rest, that Eternall Sabbatisme, where he ceaseth from his own works, such works as he here wrought in the flesh, specially from the works of the flesh, sinfull works, Opera nostra vocantur labores & curas vo∣cationis nostrae, tùm opera car∣nis, & noturae vitiosae, pecca∣tae, quae vere sunt nestra, quia â nobis fiunt, nec probantur Dec, &c. Pareus Com. ad loc. which (as Pareus there noteth upon it) may most properly be called a mans own works, inasmuch as he doth them of himself, without any approbation or allowance from God. From these works the Godly man after death wholly ceaseth. Which the wicked man doth not, who being in Hell ceaseth not to blas∣pheme God: Like as the followers of the Beast are said to doe upon the powring out of the Vials, They blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains, &c. Rev. 16.9, 11, 21. so doe the damned in hell, because of their torments they blaspheme God, and commit other sins, such as
that their state is capable of. Which whether they be formally and properly sins in them not ly∣ing under a Law, as here they did, I shall not dispute, but Materially I am sure they are, being the same sinfull acts which here they committed. But from such acts shall the believer now cease, so as never more to commit any sin. Noe nor yet to be in any possibility of committing it. Such a state doth death bring Gods Children to, a state in this respect far more happy then that wherein our first Parents were in Paradise. There they were free from sin, but not from a possibility of sinning, which the event shewed. But Gods Saints by death are freed from this, being hereby put into an impeccable state, and so confirmed as that they shall never more have any will, or inclination to that which is evill. Thus are they freed from the acting, the Committing of sin. 2. From the inbe∣ing of it. And so (Secondly) from the Inbeing, the In∣dwelling of it. So it is that the best of Saints, while they are here they have sin dwelling in them. It is no more I that do it (saith Paul) but sin that dwelleth in me. Rom. 7.17. ; thereby meaning, Innolita illa pridem peccandi consuetndo. Grot. Annot. ad loc. not that Habit, and Custome of sin which is in an unregenerate person, (as Grotius expounds it) but that Naturall Corruption, which still clea∣veth to the Regenerate. This he found still dwel∣ling in him. And so it will in the most sanctyfied soul upon earth. And there dwelling, it will also be warring, seeming sometimes to Conquer. So al∣so that Apostle there out of his own experience complaines, v. 23. I find another Law in my mem∣bers, warring against the Law of my mind, and bring∣ing me into Captivity to the Law of sin, which is in my members. Such a conflict there is, and will be in
the best of Saints, Corruption striving against Grace. Yea and sometimes prevailing against it, Even as a strong tide carrieth the ship against the stroke of the Rowers. Which cannot but create a great deal of trouble to the Soul. So it did to that bles∣sed Apostle, who upon this account looked upon himself as a miserable man, crying out in the next verse (verse 24.) O wretched man that I am! who shal deliver me from the Body of this death? That Body of sin (as he elswere calleth it, Rom. 6.6.) which he found living in him, was to him a Body of death, making his life miserable to him. So would it be to a Child-bearing woman to have the Child lye dead within her, rotting and putrifying in her womb, whereof, notwithstanding all indeavours used, she cannot be delivered. Or to a living man to be tyed to a dead karkesse. Even so is it with a regenerate person, whilest he is here, the living and the dead are tyed together, Grace and Gorrup∣tion. And so tyed together, as nothing can part them, but death. Like as it was with that fretting le∣prosie, (of which we read, Lev. 14.45.) which having eaten into the Wals, there was no cure for it, but by pulling down the house. Even so is it with this Leprosie of sin, having seized upon the soul, and eaten into all the powers and faculties of Soul and Body, there is no way to be freed from it but by death. And this will do it. The house be∣ing pulled down the Leprosie ceased. And so doth sin in death. The dissolution of the Body, is the Abso∣lution of the Soul, freeing it from this impetuous inmate, which otherwise will not out, whatever warnings are given it. The death of nature is the death of sin, making that true, Filia devoravit matrem. The daughter devours the Mother. Sin which at the
first brought forth death, is destroyed by it. And were there no other Argument, Noe perfect freedome from sin but by death. how should this work upon the soul of a Christian, to make him not averse to the drinking of this Cup? it being the only Remedy for the perfect cure of this Malady. We see how it is in bodily diseases, having been long and painful, and all meanes ha∣ving been tryed for cure, but proving ineffectu∣all, this continuall conflict maketh the sick man weary of his life, so long for death, and to be glad when he can find the grave, (as Job describeth his condi∣tion, Job. 3.21, 22.) And such is sin to the Soul an inveterate, an uncurable malady, being an hereditary disease, which man brought into the world with him, and use what meanes he may, yet he cannot be freed from it; a continuall A∣ffliction. And so it will be, so long as life it self continueth. How willing then should this make a Christian to imbrace death? So did this Consi∣deration work upon the Apostle, who upon this account cryeth out, (as even now you heard,) O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? As if he had said, O that I were out of this mise∣rable mortall life, during which, doe what I can, sin will still dwell in me, and from the molestati∣on whereof I cannot be freed but by death. So long as a Christian carrieth this mortall Body about with him, he shall never be freed from this Body of sin. O how willing should this make us to lay down the one, that we might be rid of the other? Which the believe shall be by death. Hereby he shall be freed, as from the acting, so from the indwelling of sin. 3. From the be∣lding of it. Yea (in the third place) from the Beholding of it. As he shall henceforth have no more expe∣rimenatll
knowledge of it in himself, so he shall be no longer a be holder of it in others. Which is no small eye sore to a sanctyfied soul. So it was to righteous Lot, of whom St. Peter tels us. 2 Pet. 2.7. That being a just person he was vexed with the fil∣thy conversation of the wicked, viz. Of those wicked Sodomites; among whom he lived. So the next verse explaines it. For that righteous man dwelling a∣mong them, in seeing and hearing vexed his Soul from day to day with their unlawfull deeds. To see God so highly dishoured, his Lawes so shamefully viola∣ted, as by all kinds of abhominations they were, this was a continuall corrasive, and heart-brea∣king unto him. And so was it to David, who was in like manner affected with the sins of the times wherein he lived, as he sets it forth, Psal. 119. v. 136. Rivers of waters run down mine eys because they keep not thy Law. And again, verse 158. I beheld the transgressours, and was grieved, because they kept not thy word. And it cannot be otherwise with a gra∣tious spirit, to see the Abhominations of the times and places wherein he liveth, to hear the name of his God blasphemed, to see his Ordinan∣ces profaned, his worship sleighted, his messen∣gers scorned, his truths affronted, his waies evil spoken of, &c. this cannot but affect it. This it was that made David crye out in his Banishment as he doth, Psal. 120.5. Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesheck, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar, that is, amongst a savage and barbarous people, who had no knowledge, nor fear of God, whose lives and conversations were wicked and abominable. And truly such is this world in a great measure, where∣in a Christian shall meet with two many of this rank. The consideration whereof should make
him the more willing to leave it, to embrace Death when it cometh; which is Gods Fan, whereby he severeth his Wheat from the Worlds Chaffe, the precious from the vile, his own peo∣ple from others, so as they shall no longer be in danger of being seduced by evill doers, or yet be infested by them. The Goats being separated from the Sheep, they shall be no longer an an∣noyance to them, as here by the stinch of their unclean and filthy conversation they were. In that New Jerusalem, into which Death letteth all true Believers, there shall in no wise enter any thing that defileth, neither whatever worketh abomination, Rev. 21. last. Thus doth Death free them from this worst of Evils, sin, both from the committing, and inbeing, and beholding of it. To which may be added, that it freeth them also from the Temptations and molestations of Satan. Death freeth the Believer from Satani∣call temptati∣ons. Which in this life the best of Saints are subject to. Paul complains of the buffetings of Satan, which himself felt, 2 Cor. 12.7. And who but hath experience of his assaults some way or other? He being an unwearied Adversary, making it his work to goe to and fro in the earth, and to walk up and down in it, (as himself giveth account of it to God) Job 1.7. As a roaring Lyon walking about, seeking whom he may devour, (as St. Peter hath it) 1 Pet. 5.8. So as none can be secure from his attempts. He that spared not to set upon our Sa∣viour, as he did in the Wildernesse, plying him with Temptations one after another, will not spare to do the like to his Disciples. Simon, Simon, (saith our Saviour to Peter) behold, Satan hath de∣sired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat, Luk. 22.31. to shake him and the rest by tempting
or troubling them, seeking by all possible wayes and means to subvert and destroy them, in their bodies, or souls. And the like he doth to the best of Saints, having a speciall evill eye upon them, being ambitious to cast them down whom he seeth standing He maketh it his work either to draw them into evill, or to draw evill upon them, either to turn them out of the wayes of God, or to make them as rough and troublesome to them as he may. But Death sets the Believer out of his reach. The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, (saith Paul to his Romans,) Rom. 16.20. This God doth partly in this life, some∣times giving unto his people great victories over this their enemy, but he will do it fully in Death. By which they shall be carryed in their Souls where Satan cometh not. This Old Serpent being once cast out of heaven, shall never enter there again. Thirdly, as it freeth them from Satanicall, Also from divine tenta∣tions. so also from divine temptations, such as God is pleased sometimes to exercise his people with; those Soul-conflicts (of which I spake before,) where God hiding his face from his people, and letting in some apprehensions of wrath into their souls, maketh their condition for the present very sad and uncomfortable. Now from all these shall Death free the Believer. This gust shall blow away all those dark and gloomy Clouds, which here intercepted the light of Gods countenance, so as from thenceforth he shall never know what doubtings or fears mean, but shall enjoy a con∣stant Sunshine of Gods grace and favour to all Eternity. Thus you see what evils Death freeth the Believer from: Generally, Universally, from
the sense and fear of all Evils, both Temporall and Spirituall. And thus freeing them from Evils, it bringeth great Good to them, The great good which Death brings the Believer to, letting him into Paradise. or them to it. Letting them into Paradise. This day shalt thou be with me in Pa∣radise, (saith our dying Saviour to that penitent Thief) Luk. 23.43. meaning the Celestial Paradise, Heaven, whereof the earthly Paradise was a Type and shadow, so called from those transcendent pleasures, delights and contentments which are there to be found. Paul being caught up into this Paradise, he heard (as he tells his Corinthians) unspeakable words, such as himself could not utter, 2 Cor. 12.4. And so shall the soul ascending thither, see and enjoy unspeakable things, such as the tongue of man cannot expresse. Eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard, neither have entred into the heart of man the things which God hath prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. What things are layed up in heaven for them. And these shall Death let the regenerate soul into the possession of, letting it into life. Mors Janua Vitae. Tempo∣rall death is the dore which letteth into ever∣lasting life. Of this Tree shall he eat, who hath overcome this his last Enemy. To him that over∣cometh will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. to partake of eternall life; of those everlasting Joyes, to which Death is the Entry. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, (saith the Master, having reckoned with his good and faithfull servant) Matth. 25.23. Thus doth Christ reckon with all his servants at the day of death, then giving to them according to their works. This is the Evening, wherein those who have laboured in
his vineyard shall every one receive their Penny, Matth. 20.9. The reward of all the service which here they have done unto him; a superabundant recompense, infinitely exceeding whatever they have deserved. Even that , that eternall weight of glory (as the Apostle calleth it,) 2 Cor. 4.17. Then shall the Crown be set upon the heads of all Gods Saints, I have finished my course (saith St Paul,) henceforth is layed up for me the Crown of righteousnesse, 2 Tim. 4.8. All true believers they are Kings, while here upon earth, made so by Christ, who hath obtained that honour and dig∣nity for them. He hath made us Kings unto God and his Father. Rev. 1.6. Spiritual Kings. But they are as yet but Kings, Elect, heirs apparent to the Crown, having a right to it, but Crowned they cannot be til death. Now what Prince would be un∣willing to hear of his Coronation daies? And such is the day of death to the true believer, his Coro∣nation day. At which time, being divested of his rags, he shall have a Robe put upon him. A white Robe, He that overcommeth shall be cloathed in white rayment, Rev. 3.4. Thus was Christ himself cloa∣thed in his transfiguration on the Mount, His ray∣ment was white as the light, Matth. 17.2. And so shall his Saints be cloathed after their departure hence having white rayment, a garment of glo∣ry put upon them. Then shall they be cloathed up∣on with that their house which is from Heaven, when once they have laid down this earthly Tabernacle. The consideration whereof made the blessed A∣postle to groan so earnestly (as he said he did) 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. desiring his dissolution upon that ac∣count. Then shall they enter into their Glory. So did our blessed Saviour, by suffering of death he
entred into his Glory. Luk. 24.26. And so shall all they who follow his steps, imitate his obedience, death shall be to them, Porta Gloriae, The gate of glory, letting in the soul to the beholding and in∣joying of that glory and happinesse, which now cannot enter into it. Letting it into the presence of God, where it shall see him, Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God, Matth. 5.8. And see him as he is (as Saint John tels us) 1 Joh. 3.2. Have a full sight of him, see him after another manner then here it doth. Now we see through a glasse dark∣ly (saith the Apostle) but then face to face. 1 Cor. 13.12 Now we see God only in the glass of his word and works, which do but darkly represent him. But after death believers shall have a clear and full view of him. The behol∣ding of God a beatifical visi∣on. Then shall their Faith be turned into Vision. Which shall be to them (as the Schools call it) a truely Beatificall vision, making the beholders happy. Happy, in as much as hereby they shall be transformed into the Image of God, made like him, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, (saith St John there) 1 Joh. 3.2. This Belie∣vers in part are here upon earth. Whilest they behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord; they are chan∣ged into the same Image from glory to glory (As the A∣postle hath it) 2 Cor. 3.18. Beholding God in the glass of his word, thereby they come by degrees to be transformed into his Image, to be made like him in holinesse. But when they shall come to see him face to face, then shall they be made perfect∣ly like unto him, Death brings the Soul to perfection. so far as their finite natures are capable of partaking of his infinite perfecti∣ons. Then shal they be perfect as their heavenly Father is perfect. Perfect with a perfection both of Grace, and Glory.
1. Of Grace, Which is here imperfect. Such is Knowledge, and Love, Of Grace. and all other graces in the most sanctyfied soul. But upon the dissolution of the Body, the soul comming into the presence of God it shal attain a full perfection. A perfection of Knowledge. Now I know in part(saith the Apostle) but then I shall know even as I am known. 1 Cor. 13.12. Of knowledg. Many things there are which the most know∣ing men upon earth are ignorant of. Many myste∣ries in Nature, which by all their search they can∣not find out the reason of. Much more Celestiall Mysteries, concerning God and Jesus Christ. As the Trinity of Persons, in the unity of Essence. The Hypostaticall union of the two Natures, The God∣head and Manhood in the person of Christ. My∣steries too sublime for any of this side heaven to pry into. so as to comprehend, or yet appre∣hend them, otherwise then by faith. But these, with whatever else may any waies conduce to the happinesse of the soul to know it shal have a clear knowledg of after death Seeing God as he is, it shall see all in him, see all things after another manner then here it doth. When that which is per∣fect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be done a∣way, 1 Cor. 13.10. And as perfect knowledge, so perfect Love. Love. See∣ing God as he is, it cannot be but the soul must be inflamed with Love to him. And so perfect Holinesse This Christians are here called upon to endeavour after. Holinesse. Having therefore these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holynesse in the fear of God, (so the Apostle exhorts) 2 Cor. 7.1. But this while we are here we shall never attain unto. But com∣ming to see God, now shall we be like him, holy
as he is holy, being perfectly restored to that Image of God, wherein man at the first was crea∣ted, consisting in, Knowledge, Holinesse, and Righteousnesse. Such is the perfection of Grace, which the soul attaines by this beatificall vision. 2.  And as Grace, so of Glory. Like as silver or gold being set against the Sun, Of glory. by the beames thereof cast upon it, it becommeth radiant and shi∣ning. So shall it be with the soul, by beholding the glory of God it shall it self be made glorious. Such a glory had Moses put upon his face, when he be∣held the glory of the Lord, having so near a communion with him upon Mount Sina, the skin of his face did shine (saith the story,) so as Aaron and the rest of the Children of Israel were not able to behold him. Exod. 34.29.30. Such shall be the glory of the glorified soul, having communion with God in Heaven, and there beholding his glo∣ry, it shall be made glorious. This office doth death perform unto the believer; it letteth in his soul into the presence of God, whereby it becommeth perfect with perfection of Grace and Glory. 2. The believer by death brought into the presence of Jesus Christ, to have a full communion with him. To this add, It brings him also into the pre∣sence of Jesus Christ, from whom while he is here he is absent. While we are at home in the Body we are absent from the Lord. 2 Cor. 5.6. But now death brings the soul into his presence, to have a sweet communion with him. A consideration which made the Apostle not only averse to death, but desirous of it. I desire to depart and to be with Christ. Phil. 1.23. This it was that made him so confident and resolute as he was, not to regard life, or fear
death, (as he there telleth his Corinthians) 2 Cor. 5 6.8. Therefore we are alwaies confident, knowing that whilest we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord. We are confident (I say) and willing rather to be absent from the Body; and to be present with the Lord, Which elswhere he concludes to be far better for him, then to live here. Phil, 1.23. To see Christ, to be with him, to injoy him, to have a full communion with him, what happinesse shall this be to the soul? And this doth death bring the believer to. 3.  As also to Communion and Fellowship with blessed Saints and Angels. Also to Com∣munion with Saints and An∣gels. With them the believer hath Ʋnion whilest here upon earth. Ye are come un∣to mount Sion (saith the Apostle to his believing Hebews) and unto the City of the living God, the Hea∣venly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of An∣gels, to the generall Assembly, and Church of the first born which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. Heb. 12.22, 23. Being true believers they were now made members of the Mystical body, the Church, whereof the one part is upon earth, the other in heaven, they had union with Saints and Angels, being united to them by faith and Love, which all Believers are. But now by death they come to have a full Communion with them, to see them, to injoy them, to have converse and society with them, joyning with that heavenly Quire in sing∣ing Halelujahs to him that sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb for Ever and Ever. Here is now the good which death bringeth the believer to, and putteth him in possession of. The thought whereof being seriously set on upon the soul, it cannot but work it to a willing receiving and imbracing of such a
messenger as bringeth tidings of so great good unto it. Anticonside∣rations, or Objections answered. I, but (it may be said) though it be thus with the Soul yet in the mean time what becomes of the poor Body? Though the soul gain by death yet the body looseth. Though the soul he a gainer by death, yet the Body is a looser by it. Though that return to God that gave it, yet this goeth to the grave, where it is subject to Corruption. Which maketh our Saviours case and ours far different. As for him, he knew that though his Body, being severed from his Soul, for a time should lye under the power of death, yet it should not see corrupti∣on. So David had foretold it, Psal. 16.10. Where personating of Christ (as Peter expounds it. Act. 2.31.) He foretelleth what manner of death his should be, Thou wilt not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy one to see corruption. And this our Saviour himself well knew; who foretold his Disciples how, though he were killed, yet he should rise again the third day. Mat. 16.21. And upon this account he might be more willing to dye. But it is otherwise with other of the sons of men. That which Paul saith of David, that he saw Corruption, Act. 13.36. is noe less true of others, Be their Bodies never so richly embalmed, yet will not that preserve them from putrefaction. So much the Psalmist willeth the great men of the world to take notice of, Psal. 49.6, 7. They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches, None of them (saith he) can by any meanes re∣deeme his brother, (and so not themselves) that he should still live for ever, and not see corruption. Such is the common fate. None but must expect to have their bodies lye rotting in the grave, in that land
of forgetfulnesse (as the Psalmist calleth it, Psal. 88.12.) Where as they forget all that was done up∣on earth, so they are forgotten by those they leave behind them. Being laid up in the earth, there the worm feedeth sweetly on them, and they shall be no more remembred (as Job faith of the cruell Op∣pressours) Job. 24.20. Now this is a thing which flesh and bloud cannot but look upon with great reluctancy, the thought whereof may well make it loath to lay down the body upon such tearms. To return an answer to this and some other Anticonsiderations, or Objections of like nature, which men are ready to take up and make use of in this way, as discouragements hindring them that they cannot so willingly drink this Cup, submit to the stroake of death as our Saviour here did. 1.  Suppose this to be the condition of the bo∣dy, The Soul the kernell, the Body but the shell. that it suffereth after this manner in and by death, yet what of that, so long as it reacheth not unto the Soul? So long as the kernell is safe, what matters it what becomes of the Shell? So long as the soul, the better part, is a gainer by death, so great a gainer, (as you have heard,) what matters it what becometh of the Body, being so vile as it is? That is the Epithite which St. Paul giveth it, Phil. 3.21. Our vile Body. , this Body of vilenesse. Corpus humilita∣tis nostrae (saith the vulgar Latin) he Body of our humb∣ling. And it is noe other then it deserveth. The Body being no other but a Lump of clay, which is lit∣tle worth, and carrying that in it, or about with it, which may serve to humble the owner of it, and make him not to dote upon it as the greatest part do. Now being so vile as it is, why should men be so affected with what befalleth it.
2.  But (Secondly) the Body shall not ever con∣tinue in this estate. The bodies of Gods Saints shal be changed Whilest it lyeth in the grave it is but a grain of Corn sowen in the earth, (as our Saviour maketh the comparison, Joh. 12.24. As also the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.36.) Which though it lye rotting there for a time, yet after a few months it springs forth. And so shall the Body in due time, it shal arise, and then it shal come forth after another manner then when it was laid down. It is sown in corruption, it is raysed in incorrup∣tion, it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory, &c. (so the Apostle describeth the resurrection of the Bodies of Gods Saints at the Last day,) 1 Cor. 15.42. &c, Thus shall the Body also be a gainer by death as well as the Soul. 3.  In the mean time consider that inseparable union that is between Christ and the Believer. The union be∣twixt Christ and the Bodies of his Saints Death may separate his Soul and Body the one from the other, but separate either from Christ, that it cannot. As it was with Christ himself, when his Body lay in the grave, it was separated from his Soul, but stil the God-head was united to both. Such is the union betwixt Christ and the believer, an indissoluble union, death doth not dissolve it. That Body which was a member of Christ whilest living (which the Bodies of all Gods Saints are, Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ, (saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6 15) it still retai∣neth the same relation when dead. And being thus united unto Christ it shal by his power be preserved, and by his vertue raised up again at the last day. Even as the branches of a tree which seem to be dead in the winter, yet having union with the root, by a vertue springing from it, they revive in the spring time. So shal it be with the
bodies of Gods Saints. Though they be uncloathed by death (as the tree is of his leaves by the winters cold,) yet shall they be cloathed upon, having a vest, a Robe of eternall glory also put upon them; being changed by Christ, and made like unto his glorious body, (as the Apostle tels us) Col. 3.21. Thus is that first Objection readily answe∣red. And so may most of the rest which are made use of to this purpose. Of which let me take notice of those which are most considerable. As for those carnall ones which sway much with the men of this World, viz, their parting with their Riches, Carnal allega∣tions not worth the answering. their Pleasures, their Honours, and such other contentments as this world affords, which maketh them so loath to leave it. I look upon them as not worth the answering, all these being but shadows, the substance whereof is to be found in that other world, to which death bring∣eth the soul that is weaned from this. The Con∣siderations which I shall take notice of shall be on∣ly, such as may lay hold upon a sanctyfied soul, all which we shall find the text in hand meeting with. Such is that of parting with near and dear Relati∣ons, Wife, Children, Friends: Parting with near and dear Relations, and leaving them in an un∣setled condition Loath I am (may one say) to leave them behind me, specially to leave them in such a condition as I am like to do, not well knowing how they shal subsist when I am gone. But was it not so with our blessed Saviour here? When he was to leave the world, So did our blessed Saviour his Disciples and mother. did he not leave his beloved Disciples, and dear Mother, and left them in a low and unsetled estate, therein not un∣like
himself, scarse having a house of their own to hide their heads in? As for his dear Mother, the story tels us how when he was hanging upon the Crosse, he committed her to the care and custody of his beloved Disciple, Saint John, Joh. 19.27. not having of his own any subsistance to leave her. And for his Apostles he well knew in what condition he was to leave them, even as Sheep among Wolves, (as he told them when he sent them forth) Matth. 10.16. in a wretched World, where they should meet with Tribulati∣on enough, (of which he had forewarned them, Joh. 16. Last.) Yet doth not the thought hereof take him off from this act of obedience to his Fa∣ther in being willing to dye when he will have him. Repl: I but (may some say) his case was herein different from ours. But he did not leave them Comfortlesse. Though he did thus leave his Relations yet he did not leave them comfortlesse. That is his promise to his Disciples, when he had told them of his leaving them; I will not leave you comfortlesse, Joh. 14.18.  (saith the Greek.) I will not leave you Orphanes, Noe, he promiseth that himself would have a care of them, and that after a time he would come to them; so it there followeth, I will come to you; Which he made good after his Resurrection. And though himself were gone, yet he sent his Proxie, the Comforter to them according as he promised them, Joh. 16.7. If I depart I will send him unto you, viz. the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, who (as he assures them) should abide with them for ever, Joh. 14.16. performing all needful offices unto them, (as the 26 verse there hath it.) But so cannot we do (may some say) to our Relations, if we be gone all is gone with them.
What, all gone, Is your God gone too? Surely not so. Being your God he will be theirs. God a Com∣forter to the Widow and Fatherless. I will be thy God and the God of thy seed, Gen. 17.7. And being so, a God in Covenant with them, he both can, and will take care of them. Many are the promises and assurances which we meet with in Scripture to this purpose. The Lord preserveth the strangers, he relieveth the fatherless and Widows? Psal. 146.9. A father of the Fatherless, and a Judg of the Widow is God in his holy habitation, Psal. 68.5. Leave thy Fatherless children, I will preserve them a∣live, and let thy Widows trust in me, Jer. 49.11. In thee the fatherless findeth Mercy, Hos. 14.3. Thus when Father and Mother forsake their Children (as in death they do,) now as (David speaketh it of himself, Psal. 27.10.) The Lord taketh them up; exercising a speciall providence over such. This will he doe, being left a God in Covenant with them. And therefore no just ground why this con∣sideration should so far prevaile with any that are in Covenant with God, as to make them un∣willing to dye upon this account, which too of∣ten they are. In this obey God, and then trust in him. As for that other part of this Allegation prting with friends, and the loss of their society, Friends upon earth not to be compared with those, in hea∣ven. it can∣not sway much. Alas, what are thy friends up∣on earth which thou art to leave, in comparison of thy friends in heaven whom thou art to go to; viz God, and Jesus Christ, his blessed Saints and Angels, with whom thou shalt now have an everla∣sting Communion? Besides, thy friends and thou are not by this means for ever parted. It is but for a time, a little time. Though thou shalt not return to them (as David said of his Childe, 2 Sam. 12.23.)
yet they shall come to thee, meeting where you shall never part. But (saith another) I am not unwilling to dye upon any such account, Dying with∣out issue to con∣tinue the name. but rather the contrary. I have no issue to leave behind me, which might succeed in my place, inherit my estate, or conti∣nue my name. This was the thing which was con∣ceived to have wrought so upon that good King Hezekiah, that made the message which the Pro∣phet brought him concerning his death so unwel∣come unto him, so as he wept when he heard it (of which we heard before,) this he did as having yet no issue to succeede him, to bear his name, and sit upon his throne after him. And the like consideration oft times after the like manner worketh upon others. But was not this also the case of our blessed Sa∣viour here? The case of our blessed Saviour When as he was now to leave the world, being a single person, he had no issue of his Body? none to succeed him, to bear his name, his naturall name, after him. True indeed, as for his spiritual name he left enough to bear that, viz. his Apostles, and Ministers, whose office it is to bear the name of Christ, (as he tels Ananias that Paul should doe, Act. 9.15.) By preaching and publi∣shing of his Gospell. But as for his natual name, that dyed with him, he leaving neither Child, nor yet Brother, to succeed him. Yet was this conside∣ration of no avail with him. Notwithstanding this he knew that his name should be continued upon earth, and withall that he should have a better name in heaven, even that name above every name (as it is called, The good name of Gods Saints living when they are dead. Phil. 2.9.) And the like may all Gods Saints assure themselves of. Having by their Godly and examplary life and conversation got
them a good name whilest they were alive, that shall be to them a precious ointment (as the Preacher makes the comparison, Eccl. 7.1.) preserving and perfuming their memories when they are dead. Such is the name of Jesus Christ, Thy name is as oint∣ment poured forth, (saith the Spouse of her well-belo∣ved) Cant. 1.3. And such shall the names of his Saints be. When the name of the wicked shall rot (rot above ground as their bodies do under it, they ha∣ving left nothing but a stinking savour behind them) the memory of the just shal be blessed, Prov. 10.7. But however, They have in heaven a name better then of Sons and Daughters. though they be forgotten upon earth, yet they shall have a name in Heaven. Yea and that a name above every name, above whatever name upon earth. A name better then of Sons and Daughters, an everlasting name that shall not be cut off (as the Lord promiseth his people) Isai. 56.5. As for the name of Sons and Daughters, a name by issue continued, it often faileth, seldome lasteth to many generations. But the name of Gods people is an everlasting name, being a name written in hea∣ven. As for those names which are written in the earth, (which the names of worldlings are) they are written in the dust, and so shall perish. But so shall not the names of Gods Saints which are written in heaven, written in the book of life. Having then assurance of such a name, let not them be over ambitious of any other. I, but saith another, I am not unwilling to dye but I would not dye yet. And why not yet? Why? Being in the flower of age. as yet I am in the flower of my age, having lived but a little while upon earth, so as to me death seemeth untimely. A. Te case of our Saviour. And was it not thus also with thy blessed Saviour? was not he cut off in the flower of his age?
about the thirty third or thirty fourth year of his life? And yet doth not he look upon his death as untimely, now that the hour appointed by his Father was come. Though thy time be not come, yet if Gods be, do not think it untimely. I, But I might live to do God a great deal of service upon earth, Desire of doing more service to God. and upon that account I de∣sire a longer date of daies. And might not thy Saviour have done so too? Yet when his Father calleth him from his work, So might Christ have done. he is not unwilling to leave off. Repl: I, but he knew that his work was done. I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do, He knew that his work was finished. (saith he) Joh. 17.4. And upon that account was he so willing to be gone. But so cannot I say. A. But this thou maiest say. If God calleth thee hence, So is ours when God cal∣leth us from it. the work which he hath given thee to do is finished; though not the work which thou wouldest do to him. And therefore be not averse to his call. He who setteth thee to do his work, knoweth how long it is fit for thee to be at it. And if he cal thee off by that time thou hast wrought a few houres in his vineyard, and giveth thee thy pe∣ny, thou hast no cause to repine at it, or be unwil∣ling with it. I, but (saith another) I know not how bitter, how painfull, The bitterness of Death. my death may be. As for death it self, considering the miseries of life, and the gain that would come thereby, I am not unwilling with it. But the bitternesse of it, which I fear, deters me from imbracing it. And was not thy Saviours such? was not his Cup a bitter Cup, Christs death a bitter death. his death a painfull, yea a shame∣full and accursed death? And this he knew that it would be. And yet behold him not unwilling
to drink it, to submit to it. But as for thee thou knowest not what thy death may be. Happily it may be easie and gen∣tle. However, The paines of death misap∣prehended. not so bitter as thou apprehendest it. Few there be but indure more and greater paines in their life, then they shall do at their death. Neither is it properly death it self which is so painfull, but the forerunners of it. But sup∣pose it bitter, yet shall this deter thee from the drinking of this Cup, which is so profitable unto thee? I, but I know not what conflicts I may there meet with. Fear of soul Conflicts in death. I must expect that Satan will be then busie. And was it not so with thy Saviour The prince of this world commeth, The Case of our Saviour. (saith he foretelling his death) Joh. 14.30. What conflicts had he; as in the Gar∣den here, so upon the Crosse? And did not the powers of Hell then surround, and assault him? Now is your hour and the power of darknesse, (saith he to the Jewes) Luke. 22.53. Repl: I, but he had strength to grapple with this Enemy, and to overcome him, He had strength which others want. but my strength is weaknesse. A. Be it so, yet is not his power made perfect in weaknesse, (as the Apostle telleth thee? 2 Cor. He is able o strengthen o∣thers. 12.9.?) He that was able to bear up himself in these conflicts, is he not able to do the like for thee? Thou being his, one of his members, his Spirit is thine, in thee and with thee, and will be ready to succour and strengthen thee in this combate. Remember what Paul said of himself, When all forsook me, the Lord stood by me, and strengthen∣ed me, 2 Tim. 4.17. He that prayed for Peter, hath done the like for thee, that thy faith shall not fail.
I, But I want Assurance, assurance of Gods love and favour to me, Want of assu∣rance of Gods Love and fa∣vour. how then can I willingly sub∣mit to death? Not being assured how it standeth with me in reference to my future state and con∣dition. Of all arguments I confess this is the strongest. But stil was it not so also with thy blessed Saviour? The case of our Saviour in the Garden, and upon the Cross. Did not he in his Passion, as also before it, lye un∣der a spiritual desertion, God his Father for a time hiding his face from him, and seeming to have forsaken him? Yet in obedience to him he submits to what his will was. And the like do thou. How∣ever it standeth with thee as to Assurance; yet, acting thy faith, trusting in the mercies of God through the merits of this thy Saviour, shew thy self obedient to the will of thy heavenly father, e∣ven obedient to the death. But in the mean time labour for Assurance. Directions by way of practise. Let that be the first of those directions by way of Practise, which (having met with those Anticonsi∣derations, opposing the former Motives,) I shall now come to propound unto you. In the first place, (I say,) that we may not fear death, Labour for Assurance. but be willing to submit thereunto when God shall give this Cup to us, labour for Assu∣rance. 1.  Assurance, First that God is our Father, This it was which sweetned this bitter Cup to our blessed Saviour here, That God is our Father by Regeneration and Adoption. that it was given him by his Father. The Cup which my Father hath given me. And this it was which made him so willing to set upon this journey, to walk through the valley of the shadow of death, because he was to go to his Father (as he tels his Apostles, Joh. 14.12. and elswhere.) O let every of us labour to make sure to our selves this blessed
Relation that God is our Father. And that (as be∣fore was said) not only by Creation, (which he is to all his Creatures) but by Regeneration and Adop∣tion, that he hath begotten us again unto a lively Hope (which St. Peter saith all true believers are, 1 Pet. 1.3.) and that he hath Adopted us into the dignity of his Children. Both which we may rest assured of, when we find our selves made partakers of that di∣vine nature, of which St. Peter speakes, 2 Pet. 1.4. transformed into the Image of God, made like un∣to him in those divine qualities of Holinesse, and Righteousnesse, wherein (as the Apostle telleth us) his Image doth chiefly consist, Eph. 4.24. And made partakers of that Spirit of Adoption, (where∣of the same Apostle speaketh, Rom. 8.15.) Where∣by we cry Abba Father. Owning God for our Fa∣ther, and that not in word only but in deed, and in truth. As by making our addresses unto him up∣on all occasions, flying to him as Children to their Father, so by yielding unto him all such respects as are due to a Father, loving him as a Father, fear∣ing him as a Father, honouring him as a Father, trusting in him and depending upon him as a Father, and in all things obeying him as a Father. Being thus affected towards him now may we lay claim to this Relation, being assured that God is our Fa∣ther. Which whilest we are, what is it that should make us afraid of death? Which is but our Fathers Messenger, sent by him to bring us into his pre∣sence. So our blessed Saviour looked upon it, who speaking of his death cals it as you heard) a going to his Father. And may we but once come so to look upon it, that death is our Fathers Messenger, Not a Serjeant to arrest us at the suit of an offended God, and to bring us before him as a severe Judg,
to be sentenced by him, and to receive according to our demerits. (Such is death to all wicked and ungodly men, and so no wonder if the appre∣hension of it be terrible unto them, as the Officer is to the guilty Malefactor.) But a messenger, our Fathers messenger (such as Joab was to Absalom, 2 Sam. 14.) to bring us to our Fathers house, into his presence, to see him and to be with him to all eternity, this would make it not unwel∣come to us. Every of us then labour to make this sure to our selves that we have such an interest in God, that he is our Father. 2.  To which end labour to make sure our inte∣rest in Christ, That Christ is our Saviour. that he is our Saviour, never resting till we have got him in our armes. This when Si∣meon had done in a literall sense, then he cryeth out, Now Lord lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, Luk. 2.29. And the like do we in a spirituall sense, receive we the Lord Jesus being held forth unto us in the promise of the Gospell, and take hold upon him, clasping and imbracing him in the armes of our faith, receiving him as our Saviour, and Lord. As our Saviour, believing on him for the pardon and remission of all our sins. As our Lord, yielding up our selves to be guided and governed by him, by his word and Spirit. Which whilest we do, now shall we have no just cause to fear this Enemy, which is by this Captain of our Salva∣tion, conquered, and disarmed, so as now it can∣not hurt any of those that are his. O then let e∣very of us make sure our interest in him. Upon which depends all our hope and comfort, both in life and death. Christ being once ours, now we may hear the Apostle telling us, that all things are ours, 1 Cor. 3.21. All things, among which he
reckons Life and Death, with things present, and things to come. All ours, so is Life, even temporall life, so as it shall be continued to us whilest it is expedient. And so is Death, which when it comes shall not be hurtful, but advantagious, and be∣neficial. To me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain, Phil. 1.21. So are things present, the concern∣ments of this present life, as Crosses, so Comforts, both serving for our good. And things to come, Eternal glory and happinesse. Which whilest a Christian is assured of, why should not he be as willing to dye as live? 3.  Only (in the third place) look out also for the seal of the Spirit. Look out for the seal of the Spirit. Thus are Assurances made a∣mong men, by setting seals to writings, to bonds and bils and other conveyances. And such Assu∣rance labour we for, to get the promises sealed unto us, and that by this seal, the seal of the Spirit, which the Apostle calleth the earnest of our inheri∣tance, Eph. 1.13, 14. An earnest confirms the bargain, and assures the payment of the whole summe. And so doth the earnest of the Spirit, (as he elswhere calleth it, 2 Cor. 1.22.) the work of Regeneration and Sanctification begun in the soul, this is as Gods seal, which confirmeth his promises to his people, and giveth them assurance of their heavenly inheritance. Which being assured off, what should make them unwilling to depart hence, when God calleth for them? Having now another house to receive them, when they are turned out of this, and that infinitely better, as the A∣postle telleth them, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building not made with hands, eternal in the hea∣vens. Now what man would be unwilling to leave
a poor ruinous Cottage, which he holdeth only at the pleasure of the Land-lord, being subject to be turned out of it every day, when as he may have posession of a Royal palace, whereof also he shal have the fee-simple estate? And such is that heavenly house, that celestial glory and happinesse, which Christ having purchased for those that are his, is gone before to take posession of, and to prepare for them; (I go to prepare a place for you, Joh. 14.2.) it infinitely excelleth all earthly glory, far more then the most princely palace doth the meanest cottage. O labour we but to make sure this our Inheritance in that other world, this will make us not unwilling to leave this. Here is a first Direction. Seek after Assurance, that we have an interest in God, and Jesus Christ, and so a right to eternal life. And being thus assured of Life, now Prepare for death. Prepare for death by dying daily. So did the blessed Apostle, who tels his Corinthians, that he dyed daily, 1 Cor. 15.31. I protest by your rejoycing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I dye daily. Apprehending death continu∣ally hanging over his head, he was daily preparing for it. And the like do we, that we may be wil∣ling to dye once, when God calleth us to it, dye daily. Q. But how shall we do this? A. Take the answer in three or four parti∣culars. 1.  Dye daily to sin. This the Apostle telleth us Christ once did for us. To sin. In that he dyed, he dyed unto sin once. Rom. 6.10. This he did not for himself, (for he knew no sin) but for us, for the expiating of our sins, the taking away the guilt of them. And what he did once, doe we daily, daily dye to
sin for the taking away the power of it in our selves. A work which will not be done at once, (as that of our Saviour was.) True, the Apostle speaking of believers, saith, they are dead to sin, Rom. 6.2.11. in as much as they are not now under the power of it, as sometimes they were. But this is but an imperfect work, not done at once. Though sin hath received its mortal wound in them, yet it is stil alive. Though they be dead to it, yet it liveth in them. And therefore they must make this their daily, their continual work, to be dying to it, mortifying the body of sin, that it may dye before them. The life of sin is the life of death. So long as a man liveth in any one sin, he will never be wil∣ling to dye. And therefore set we upon the mor∣tification of all our sinful Lusts. Specially our belo∣ved Lusts, those which have been most near and dear to us, most strong and prevalent in us. Never resting until we find our hearts brought to an ut∣ter abhorrence, and detestation of them, and of all other sinful waies and courses, so as we can say with the Psalmist, that we hate every false way. Psa. 119.104. Thus Sin being dead, death will not be so terrible. As we get ground of the one, we shal get strength against the other. Secondly, Dye daily to the world, To the world. So did the A∣postle, who telleth us of himself that he was cruci∣fied to the world, and the world to him, Gal. 6.14. He had as little affection to the world as the world had to him, he was dead to that, and that to him. And it is the counsel which he giveth to others, 1 Cor. 7.31. that they should so use this world, as not abusing it. Not doting upon any thing here below, whether riches, o pleasures, or
honours. Not setting the heart upon them, If riches increase set not your hearts upon them, Psal. 62.10. And so for the rest. Not being inordinately affected with any contentments which this world can afford, but looking overly upon them, so using them as if they used them not. So run those fore∣going directions of the Apostle there, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30. This I say brethren, the time is short, It re∣maineth that both they that have wives be as though they had none, and they that weep, as though they wept not, and they that rejoyce as though they rejoyced not, and they that buy as though they possessed not. And this let every of us strive to do, to bring and keep our hearts in such a temper as that we may not be in∣ordinately affected with any thing here below, whether Crosses or Comforts. Not but that a Chri∣stian may be affected with both. He may both Weep, and Rejoyce, and that upon the account of temporal concernments. But see that it be not in an inordinate manner. And so may he buy and sell, seek and indeavour to get an estate in the world, to purchase and possess houses and lands. But take we heed we do not make them our chief possession. It is a good distinction, which Au∣gustine maketh use of, betwixt Ʋti and Frui, Ʋsing and injoying. Which let all of us learn, that so we may not be guilty of what he chargeth as a great impiety, viz. Ʋti fruendis, or frui utendis, only to make use of what we ought to injoy, or to injoy what we ought only to make use of. As only to make use of heaven and heavenly things, by think∣ing or speaking of them sometime, which we ought to make our injoyment; or to make the things of this world our injoyment, which we ought only to make use of; and that so using them as if
we used them not. Thus labour we so take of our hearts, that they may sit loose to the world. Which till a man do, he will never be willing to leave it. Surely this is it which maketh the men of this world so unwilling to hear of death, much more to see it, their hearts are glewed and fastned to the world, to the profits, or pleasures, or ho∣nours of it; Some thing or other there is to which they are wedded. And no wonder then that this Apparatour, Death, which brings to them a Bil of divorce, should be so unwelcome a messenger. Get we our hearts then weaned and taken of from all these, so as we may leave this world before it leaveth us, leave it in Affection before we leave it in Person. Which having done death will not be unwelcome. Q. But how shall we get our hearts thus wea∣ned from the world? How to get the heart weaned from the world A. Briefly, 1. By a serious consideration of the vanity of it, even all things upon earth. The mutability, uncertainty, with the vacuity and emptinesse of them, Consider the vanity of earth how they are such things as a man can have to assurance of injoying them, and whilest injoyed, cannot afford any true contentment to the soul, but oftimes breeding wormes in it, cares and fears vexations and disquietments. All which the wisest of men by his own experience found, as he sets it forth at large in that his Book of Retractions, Ecclesiastes. 2. Consider the transcendency of those Riches, The happinesse of heaven. Ho∣nours, and Pleasures which are to be found in that other world, in Heaven. Which being put into the ballance against these of this world, doe in∣finitely outweigh them. Those being (as the A∣postle
calleth them, Heb. 10.34.) A better and an induring substance, whereas these are only vain and vanishing shadows. Look we rightly, seriously and steadfastly upon the one, our eies will be so dazled with the splendor and brightnesse of them that they will never after be much taken with the glimmering of the other. 3. Have no unnecessary society or familiarity with the men of this world, the worlds minions and Favourites, men who mind nothing but earth∣ly things. But associate and acquaint our selves with such as are in their affections got above the earth, and have learned to contemn and make light of all things in it. 4. Single out the particulars which our hearts are most taken with, and fastest linked to, and make it our daily work to wean our soules from them. But I hasten towards a conclusion. Thus dye to the world daily. And thirdly, Dye daily as to the Death of nature. Which do we, Dye daily the death of nature 1. By inuring our selves to a quiet and pati∣ent bearing and suffering of lighter afflictions and Crosses. Submitting to lesser Crosses which are as petty deaths. Every of which is a kind of petty death; all of them deaths retinue forerunners of it and ma∣king way for it. Now inure we our selves to a qui∣et submission to the will of God in drinking of these lesser Cups, in suffering of these lesser tryals with patience and holy contentation, this will make us the more ready and willing to submit to this last stroak when it cometh, to suffer death it self. The new Cart in the Fable, which never bare any burden before, it made a noise at the first load whereas the old one, having been accustomed
thereunto, was silent. The soul which never in∣urd it self to bear the Crosse, to suffer lighter A∣fflictions with patience in obedience to God, will hardly be brought quietly to submit to his will in this last act. It is good (saith the Church for a man, that he bare the yoke in his youth, he sitteth alone and keep∣eth silence, because he hath born it upon him. Lam. 3.27. By being inured to the patient bearing of lighter afflictions, he quietly submits to greater when they come and so to death it self. 2. Seriously and frequently me∣ditate of death. And (Secondly) often acting this part with our selves in private, before we come to do it up∣on the publike stage. Dying daily by a frequent and serious meditation of death. Setting it continually before our eyes, often thinking of our latter end. Which is a great piece of true Christian wisdome. O that they were wise that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end (saith the Lord of his people Israel,) Deut. 32.29. Consider that we must dye. And here, do not put far off from us this evil day. Do not look upon death, as they do who look through the Optick glass, at the wrong end, whereby things near at hand seem at a great distance from them. Do not thus look upon death as a thing afar of, but near hand. A practise of great use, (as to other ends, so) to make death fa∣miliar, and consepuently not so dreadful. It is the forgetfulnesse of death (saith one) that maketh life sin∣ful and death terrible. And therefore, as he had his deaths head every meal set upon his Table, and the guize of mourners is to wear them in their rings, so do we often set death before us, frequently and seriously thinking of it. And looking upon it as near hand, so living every day as if it were our last
day. Continually standing upon our gard; waiting all the dayes of our appointed time till our change shall come (as Job saith he would doe, Job 14.14.) By this meanes, having been made account of, and looked for before it comes, it will not be so ter∣rible when it cometh. Thus prepare for death, by dying daily. And then (in the third place) work while our day lasteth. Work whilest our day lasteth. So did our blessed Saviour, I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day, Joh. 9.4. And the like do we, whilest the day of life lasteth, be we working the works of God, that so we may have finished our work before the night of death cometh. The labourer having wrought hard in the day, and finished his work, this maketh the night welcome to him, and his rest sweet and comfortable. And so will the night of death be to the soul that hath been working for God, it will now be to it a quiet rest. This made our blessed Saviour so willing now to dye, he had finished his Fathers work, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do, Joh. 17.4. And this made the Apostle so confident, as not to fear his departure, when he apprehended it at hand; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, 2 Tim 4.7. He had been faith∣ful to his Lord and Mster, in doing the work which he had committed unto him; And thence he concludes that he should now receive his Crown, that Crown of righteousnesse (as he there cals it,) an ample reward, which the righteous God would give him for all his service. Whereupon he is not unwilling to think of his departure. O that eve∣ry of us may indeavour thus to approve our selves
to God, and Jesus Christ, thus to work his work whilest our day lasteth. Then when the evening of death cometh, we shall be sure to have our Peny. Which being assured of, it will make us not unwilling to go to receive it. 4. Be frequent in casting up our accounts, Be frequent in casting up our accounts. betwixt God and our souls. The day of death is the recko¦ning day, wherein every one must give up his ac∣count unto God. Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou mayest be no longer Steward (saith the Master' in the parable to his Servant) Luk. 16.2. In this life we are all Gods Stewards, being betrusted by him with many Talents, which we are to improve for him. And hereof at the day of death we must give an account to him. O that the thought of that day may not be terible to us, make up our account aforehand. And this do we often. They who are frequent in casting up their accounts are not un∣willing to be called to a general reckoning, which they who have bin remiss & careless herein would be. Surely this is one thing which maketh men so unwilling to hear of death when it cometh, they have then all their accounts to cast up. Take heed it be not so with us. Be we strict and con∣stant observers of our own hearts and lives. Often calling our selves to an account, making it our daily work. Every night reflecting upon the day past, call we to mind (according to that trite di∣rection, , &c.) wherein we have transgressed, what evil we have committed, what good we have done, or left undone. So ma∣king even betwixt God and our souls, by suing forth our discharge in the name, and upon the ac∣count of Jesus Christ. This exercise, being con∣scientiously
performed, it will be of speciall use to make this great reckoning day not unwelcome to us, when it shall come. 5.  That we may not be unwilling to depart hence, Lay up a stock in heaven. and to leave this world, send somewhat afore us into that other world. Laying up a stock in heaven. 1.  A stock for our selves. That is our Saviours counsel, For our selves a flock of good works. Matth. 6.2. Laye up for your selves treasures in Heaven. This do we by doing of good works; as works of Piety, so of Charity. Sell that you have and give almes, provide for your selves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, (saith that parallel Text) Luk. 12 33. A man that hath his chief estate in another Country, which he hath made over by bils of exchange, or put into the banck there, he will not be unwilling upon a just occasi∣on to follow it. Now such are acts of charity and mercy, being done for Gods sake, they are as so many bils of exchange made over for heaven, a stock put into the banck, where he who hath so put it out, shal at his coming thither receive it again with abundant increase. He that hath pity on the poor lendeth to the Lord, and that which he hath given he will pay him again, Prov. 19.17. O, that rich men, to whom God hath given abundance of this worlds goods, and whose care it is to make the best im∣provement of what they have, would but take this Course thus to make themselves friends of their Mammon, (as our Saviour adviseth them. Luk. 16.9) that so when they fail (when they dye;) they may receive them into everlasting habitations. This would make them not so unwilling to dye, as for the most part they are, and that upon this account, because they must leave what they have in this
world, and have no stock layed up in another. 2. For others a stock of prayers And thus laying up a stock in heaven for our selves, do the like also for others, laying up a Stock, a Stock of prayer for them. Which whilest we do for all Gods people whom we leave behind us, do it in a special manner for our near and dear Relati∣ons. So did our heavenly pattern here, The Lord Jesus, whom, in the Chapter before the text, we find upon his knees, putting up a devout prayer unto God his Father, as for his Church in general so for his Apostles in speciall, I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast gi∣ven me, Joh. 17.9. And the like let them do who are to leave near and dear Relations behind them, Wives, Husbands, Children, kinred, friends, lay up a stock of prayers for them in Heaven, where∣of they may reap the benefit, when themselves have left them. This will make them the lesse un∣willing to leave those whom they have thus pro∣vided for. In the sixth place, having thus laid up our best treasure in heaven, Set the house in order. now set we our houses in order upon earth. That is the Counsel and charge which the Lord giveth to Hezekiah, when he sent him those tidings, that he must dye, he bids him set his house in order, Isai. 38.2. Set thine house in order for thou must dye and not live. A thing of great use, as in reference to the living, who shal be left be∣hind, so also to him who is to depart hence, who having thus setled his temporal concernments in this world, will be more ready for his removal into another, when God shall call him to it. And therefore let not this be neglected by those who have ought to dispose of. Let them be careful to
make their Wills and Testaments before hand. So also did this our heavenly pattern, the Lord Jesus, who at his last Supper, having ordered other things before, he then finished his Will and Testament, set∣ting his Seal to it. Of such use was that Sacrament then and there instituted, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being as a seal set by Christ to his Testament, for the confirming of all his former grants, and assuring of whatever he had promised. Now what he did as to Spirituals, let those who would be ready to dye when God will have them, doe as to Temporals. Setling them aforehand. Not putting off this work (as too many do) to the death bed; which as it is attended with many o∣ther inconveniences, so it often proves no small disquietment to the spirit of the dying person, making him loath to leave this world in so unset∣led a condition, as through this his former neglect in reference to his own relations, and concern∣ments, he is like to do. Set thy house in order. Which being done, now (in the last place, to close up all) what remains but to commit the Soul unto God? Commit the soul to God. Which that we may do quietly and com∣fortably in death, (as our blessed Saviour did who breathed out his Soul in those words, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, Luk. 23.46.) do we it before, do it in Life. So did David, Psal. 31.4. Into thy hands I commit my spirit. So did the Apostle who making a confession of his faith to his Son Ti∣mothy, 2 Tim, 1.12. there tels him, I know (saith he) whom I have believed, and I am perswaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day. His precious soul, this was his , his Depositum, that which he had committed to the
custody of God and Jesus Christ. And the like do we that we may be willing to depart hence, (as he was) commit we our souls unto God aforehand. Which do we, first by Faith, believing on him (which the Apostle there saith he did) casting our selves into the armes of his free grace and mercy through Jesus Christ. Then by obedience, committing the keeping of our souls unto him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creatour (as St. Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 4. last.) indevouring carefully and conscientiously to walk before him in all wel-pleasing all the daies of our life. So doing, now as we shall have comfort in life, so when death cometh we shall have no cause to be afraid of it. And thus have I now (through a gracious assist∣ance) preached this doctrine unto you, which I look upon as the hardest lesson in Christs school. Now what remaineth but that we all beg it of our great Lord & Master, that he would so effectually teach it us, that as occasion is, we may practise what we have heard, shewing our selves conformable to this our heavenly Pattern, as in his Active so in his Passive O∣bedience; being obedient to our heavenly Father as in doing, so in suffering his Will, even Obedient to death. For which let us now pray. FINIS.
