C193 E274_28 99868737 121093
The last Speeches AND CONFESSION OF CAPTAIN JOHN CADE and JOHN MJLS Constable: Who were hanged at VVaymouth, for endeavouring to betray that Garrison to the enemie, with all the severall ex∣aminations of the Plotters, and the sentences denoun∣ced against them and others of the said Conspiracie. By W. SYDENHAM, Col. Governour of Waymouth, and Captain VVilliam Batten, Vize-Admirall of the Navie, and the rest of the Counsell of War at Waymouth. With a Coppie of Sir Lewis Dives Letter to Colonell Sydenham about the same, and Colonell Syden∣ham his answere. Imprinted at London, by Iane Coe. 1645.
The last Speches, and Confession of Captaine Cade, and Iohn Mills Constable, who were hanged at Waymouth. I shall first of all present you with an insolent and bould letter sent by Sir LEWIS DIVES to Colonell SYDENHAM, as you may perceive by the contents there, directed thus. For Master Sydenham at Waymouth. SIR: IN your last civill letter, which your Trumpetter brought me; you charge me with treacherie, and Fabian Hod∣der and his wife, for Intelligencers, and Traitors: Look but upon your own heart, and there you shall finde that Character cleerly written, wherewith, you falsely and iniuriosly accuse other men. The desire I had to preserve their innocencie, from your barbarous inhumanity, was, for that I knew their ap∣proved loyalty to their Soveraigne, was a crime suffi∣cient
to make them expect the worst of ills, from Traytors hand. But doe your will, and heape venge∣ance on your owne head, by shedding more innocent blood: Pay shall die, deservedly by the Law of Armes; for having quitted the Kings service, wherein in he was entertained, and turning Rebell: And wheras you threaten others of a higher. Orbe shall follow him, know this, That were all my children under the power of your cruelty, I would not be diverted from justice to save their lives. And for noclusion, be bost assured, that if you put to death those innocent persons, I will vindicate their blood, to the utmost of that power wherwith God shall enable me, upon you and yours, without eve giving quarter to any who hath relation to you, which shall faithfully be performed by him that professeth himselfe your enemie. Sherborne  the 12. of March 1644. Lewis Dyves. To this malepart Paper, Colonell Sydenham returns this modest (but Souldier like) Answer, directed thus, For Sir Lewis Dives these, at Sherborn Lodge. YOu call my last Letter civill, and yet seem to be some∣what anory at it, which I should admire, had I not late∣ly given you sufficient cause; for I must confesse ingenuosly, had I livery and seizon of your Castle, I should not be so soon a slodged without some indignation, especially, if an Army of mine own party stood by and lookt upon it. You desire come
to look upon my heart, which I have done, and finde written there in the fairest Characters, a true desire of advancing Gods honour, maintaining the Kings just power, and con∣tending for the priviledges of the Parliament at West∣minster, and the liberty of the Subject: which when I finde you see maliciously opposing and despightfully stiling Treason and Rebellion, I am induced to think this age hath produced unparaleld Monsters, who are (without slander) pestes hu∣manigeneris; for Traytors I may not call you, who cannot be possibly guiltie of such a sin in the opinion of Aulicus, the onely Author, which it seems by your language) you are verst in. You are very tender of shedding innocant blood, and therefore Patie must die; but (good Sir Lewis) for what crime? He served (you say) on your side, I have heard twas (as you do) onely as a Scribe, and hath since turned Rebel, because he would not stand tamely still, whiles you were plun∣dering him, heú nefas infandum, for this, right or wrong, the poor man must suffer; and (setting honesty aside) you will be just for certain. May it please your VVorship to be merci∣full too, if not to him, yet to me and mine (when we fall in∣to your hands:) till when, your lote experience might re∣member you, that I am is far from fearing, as my present condition is far from needing your quarter, which I hope I shall have an opportunitie to dispute farther of with you, whom, or any man in England, I shall answer in this quar∣rell, in the mean know that I intend to make a  of your Letter to hang Hodder with, whose crime is the first contrivance of that treachery, which you after (though blessed be God, but simply) acted to the losse, of what you lately va∣lue a worth a crown. Patie you may hang but will not be able to bury, which may occasion a great mortality amongst you: And therefore be advised to forbear by him, to whom pro∣claiming
your self a professed enemy, you have invited me as professedly to subscribe my self, Yours W. Sydenham. March 15. 1644. Weymouth and Melcomb-Regis: At a Councel of VVar there held the first day of March, 1644. before the Governour, and all the Field Officers and Captains of the Garrison of Weymouth and Mel∣comb-Regis: And also before Captain William Bat∣ten, Vice-Admirall of the Navy, and Admirall of the Fleet then riding in Weymouth, and divers other Sea Captains then present. VVAter Bond of Waymouth on his voluntarie oath affirmeth that Thomas Samwaies of this towne Taylor, on Sunday last was fortnight about eight of the Clocke at night, in the house of William Philips, since deceased, in the presence of Iohn Scton, Io. Dry Tanner, the said William Philips, Leonard Symonds since dead Walter Mich. & Io. Mills, Constble, Samuell Takle Baker, and Iohn Lock say, that on that night, or the Munday night following he would have the doores of the Marshalsey broken upand that Portland men would come in and helpe, and that the gates of the towne would be opened unto them; And this Examinant saith, that all the persons before named, were in the house be∣fore he came in, and that he this Examinant stayed not there above a quarter of an howie, and went thence a Shipboard, and there stayed till about one of the
clocke, and then came home, and was going to bed, at which time Robert Bon, and Edward Dove, both of Portland, came to this Examinants house in Waymouth & caused him to go up to the North point saying, that it was taken for King Charles; And this Examinant went thither with the said Bun and Doby, and did service there in the North point and helpt leaded the Ord∣nance: and this Examinant saith that Humpherie Votier and he this Examinant both knew that the North point was taken, and this Examinant saith, that the said Iohn Dry said, at the same time, that he was to go to the pas∣sage to helpe on the Portland men, and then spake to the said Mils to go with him, to which hee made no re∣ply but smiled at it. Thomas Samwaies of this towne Tailor, on his volun∣tarie oath saith, that Fabian Hodder about a moneth sithence, at the Prison told this Examinant. That Sir Lewis Dives would gather his forces together, and would come and surprise this Town with the help of Portland∣men: And saith he, this Examinant after met with Cap∣tain John Cade, at Fabian Hodders house in the presence of Hedders wife, and had conference about the surpri∣zing of this Town, and saith, That the said Cade and Hedders wife told this Examinant, That on Sabbath day last was fortnight. Sir Lewis Dives and the Portland Forces would come and surprize this Town, and willed him to tell VValter Bond, Marriner, VVilliam Philips, and Leonard Symonds, of the time of the surprize. And this Examinant told the said Bond of it accordingly; vnto which Bond said, That he would be with his Ship in the Hole, and that if Portland men came, he would be ready to assist them in getting into the North Fort: And this
Examinant saith, That none was present but himself when he delivered the Message to Bond. This Exami∣nant further saith. That the said Cap. Cade on Tuesday of Wednesday morning, after the Forts werelsurprized by the enemy, met this Examinant at his door, spake to him, this Examinant, to this purpose, viz. Come let us get a Company, and seize upon the Main Guard, and let down the Bridge, and let over the Kings Forces, and seize on, and break open the prison door. Iohn Mills of Weymouth, Constable, confesseth, That on Sunday last was fortnight, he, this Examinant, about six of the clock at night, was in the house of the said William Philips, to look for Thomas Alexander, where were present, Walter Bond, Thomas Samwayes, Iohn Dry, William Philips, and Thomas Alexander, and saith, That he spake to no body there, nor any to him, and stayed there not half a quarter of an hour, and went thence to Thomas Alexanders, and there supt; and being charged, that the morning when this Town was sur∣prized, that he had a Handkerchief about his Arm in the Streets, denieth it, but saith, He had a Handkerchiaf on his Arm in the house. The said Thomas Samwayes, further voluntarily deposeth, That about a week before the Forts of this Grrison were sur∣prized, Fabian Hodder composed an oath in writing to this effect, viz. You shall swear by the Holy Trinity, that you will conceal the intended Plot; which oath, Fabian Hodders wife brought to this Examinant, and told him, that all that were made acquainted with the Plot, should take the said oath: And further, this Examinant saith, that Captain Cade told this Examinant, That before he discovered the said Plot to any, they should take the said oath. Captain Richard Yeardly, on his voluntary oath, affirmeth, That on the Munday, morning, when the Forts of this Town were surprized, he saw Iohn Mills, one of the Constables of this Town, with an Handkercheif, knit about his Arm, which was reported to be the signe used by Portland men when they came to surprize the Forts.
VVilliam Mineterne of this Town Marriner, on his voluntary oath saith, That about a weeke before the Forts were surprized, Captain Iohn Cade meeting with this Examinant between Rodpole and this towne, the said Captaine Cade said to this Examinant, that there were forces were comming to take this town of Way∣mouth, and Melcombe Regis, and asked of this Exami∣nant, whether hee would be one of those that would as∣sist in help gaining of the Town, and desired him to put his hand to a list in writting to that purpose, to be of the company for betraying of the Town. And fur∣ther saith, that the said Captain divers other times after solicited this Examinant, to further the designe upon the Town. The Examination of Anne the wife of Fabian Hodder of this Towne, Merchant: 3 March. 1644. VVHo saith, that shee, this examinants husband about Christmas last, had Writ to Sir Lewis Dive at Sherbourn, to this effect, that Portland men would come, and take the Forts of this Town, if the said Sir Lewis Dive would please to come and take the Towne of Melcombe, which Letters was unsealed and delivered by this Examinant to Elizabeth Wall widow, daughter of mystris Thomazine Dennis Widow, with the contents of which Letters, she this Examinant acquainted the said Elizabeth VVall, who undertook to convey the same Let∣ters to Sir Lewis Dive. To which Letters Sir Lewis Dive made answer in writing (which was sent to this Ex∣aminants husband by the said Elizabeth VVall) that he would come up with 1500, Horse and Foot, on Sabbath last
was three weeks, about midnight, which was neere about the time that the Forts were surprized by Portland men. And this Examinant further saith, that her husband a∣bout a vveek before the said forts were surprized, wrote another letter to Sir Lewis Dive to the like effect as the former, which this Examinant delivered to Thomas Samwaies Taylor, to be conveyed by the said Elizabeth VVall, which said Elizabeth did of ten come to this exami∣nants house, in messages from Richard Mighill, and ano∣ther Gunner sithence kild, who were put out of this Town, and afterwards lived in Portland. And this Examinant saith, that on Saturday last was three weekes, which was the day before the execution of the designe, the Governour of Portland and others there sent to this examinants hus∣band in writing, that they would come in the next day; which Letters was brought by the said Elizabeth VVall to this Examinant, and delivered by her husband. March 10. 1644. Iohn Barnes of Preston husbandman affirmeth, that Iohn Anthony, and Edward Flatman, on Thursday last, said that Robert Bowyer, John Bowyer, Andrew Gatrhell, Thomas Galchell, and the said Edward Flatman, and divers others to the number of thirtie and upwards, knew of the intention of the late surprisal of the forts of this Garrison, before they were surprised by the Cava∣liers, and knew that the word was Crabchurch and the signe was a white handkercheife about their Armes. March 11th. 1644. The said Robert Bowyer being examined saith, that about six weeks sithence, one of the souldiers in Arms
for the Parliament, left a musket at this Examinants house, which being demanded by the Forces in Armes against the Parliament, that lately came to this Gar∣rison, this Examinant told them he would serve in the sad Musket himself, to this intent (as this Examinant saith) to preserve the same Musket. And accordingly this Examinant took his Musket and marched with the Cavaliers unto Caseway, about a day or two after the Forts of this Garrisons were surprised by the Enemy, where this Exammant stayed about one houre, and half, and then in the evening returned unto his house in Sut∣ton with his Musket, and there staid and went abroad no more afterwards. And this Examinant saith, that he had some Match and Powder, but no Bullets, Bande∣leers, or sword, and that hee did not charge his musket. And further this Examinant saith, that Master Waad Clerke curate of Sutton, John Feildew, Edward Flat∣man, and Thomas Gatrhell, were all at Caseway in the company of the Cavaliers. And afterward they returned unto Sutton aforesaid, but whether any of them had Armes or no, this Examinant knoweth not, for that, as this Examinant saith, he was distempered with beere. And this Examinant saith, that he was not inlisted in any company, or under any command, And that in his march towards Casevvay, he discharged his Musket, which vvas loaden with Powder only; once or twice. The said Iohn Bovvyer being examined, saith that on Sunday, vvhen the Forts of this Garrison vvere sur∣prised about halfe an houre after sun-setting, William VVilsheer of Sutton aforesaid, came to this Exami∣nants house, and asked this Examinant, vvhether hee
would goe forth in the fields and see if the Kings Army was coming, upon which the Examinant, and the said Wilsheere, went into Sutton Cowleaze called ordan, Edward Flat∣man. Iohn Feildue, will Wilsheer, Tho. Cox, Iohn Meech Junior. Alexander Butcher, Iohn New, and two of Vpway, Iohn Bowyer, Johnbryer, &c. and there met with those named in the margent of this Examinants examination, who had no Armes save that Master Feildue had a Pistoll. And this Examinant saith, that all the same parties met in that place to meet the Kings Army, that were coming against the Town of Waymouth, and Melcomb Regis. And stayed about an hour and more, and thence went unto Week Oliver, and sate there a∣bout an hour and drank a pipe of Tabbacco and went thence to the higher end of Mr. Kains Ground in the Cowleaze, & layed there a houre: and thence came to Newhouse Master Kaines Dayrie house, and there a little above that house stayed about an houre to see the comming of the Kings Army, and there saw shooting against the Town, and did conceive the Town taken by the Kings Army, and said before that they conceived the Kings Army would not come down to take the Town. The said Andrew Gatrhell, alias Blanchard, being examined saith, that on Sunday night, before the Forts of this Garrison were surprised, Iohn Feildue came to this Examinant at his house about two houres in the night, and told him that the Kings forces were comming down to take this Town, and told this Examinant that he had gotten some company, and spake to the Examinant to go with him that night, saying that it would be worth to him five pounds, but this Examinant refused to go with him, and went to bed. The said Thomas Gatrhell, alias Blanchard being examined saith, that on Sunday night before the Forts of this town were surprised, Iohn Peildue about two hours in night came to this Examinant, and spake to him, to go with him that night, and promised him that it would be worth to him five pounds, but this Examinant saith that he refused to goe with him, and went to bed, and further saith that the Wednesday following hee this Examinant, and Roger Bowyer, Simon Wilsheere, Iohn VVand Clerke, Iohn Peildue, and Edward Flatman, went
to Caseway to see the Souldiers, because they were reported to be a great Army: And saith, that this Examinant and the said Robert Bowyer, and VVilliam VVilsheere, stayed at Causeway at the Ale-house, about two houres, and then returned back unto Sutton. The said Iohn Bryer being examined saith, That Iohn Feildue came to him that sunday night, before the Forts of this Town were surprised, and spake to him to go with him a mile or two that night, and this Exami∣nant saith, that about an hour or two in night, that Sunday night, Iohn Feildue, Iohn Bowyer, Iohn Meech the younger, William Wilsheer, Edw. Flatman, Tho∣mas Coxe, Alexander Butcher, Iohn New, and fixe or seven of Vpway and Broadway, whose names this Exa∣minant doth not know, met all in Rodpoll Field, about M. Kaynes Dairie House: And saith that they all staid there in that place, about three or four houres, untill a∣bout an hour after the beginning of the Onset on this Town by Portland men: And this Examinant saith, that during the sight, M. Feildue told the company, that he conceived that Portland men had entred the Nore: and saith; That the said Iohn Fieldue, the same Sunday af∣ter Evening prayer, at the widdow Bradfords house, none being present but the said Iohn Feildue and the said Examinant, that this Town would be taken that night: And further saith, That the said Iohn Feildue by the way as they went into Radpoll field, and in the field when they met all together, told them that the de∣signe was that Portland men were that night to surprise the North point, and Sir Lewis Dive with his Forces
were to make an onset on Melcomb, with the assistance of the said Feildue and the rest of the said Companie; and saith they all staid in Rodpoll field about two hours after the Onset by Portland men, expecting Sir Lewis Dives forces, and they not comming all of them retur∣ned unto Sutton, and their own homes; And saith, the Vpway men had long staves, and one of them a Welch hook, and Mr. Feildue a pistoll, and all the rest but sticks in their hands; And that the number of the per∣sons so met together, were in all about sixteen, and saith that Mr. Feildue told all the said Companie, that the word was Crab-church, and further saith, that the said Iohn Meech the younger, came down to this Town to fetch the word, but what word, this Examinant know∣eth not. The said VVilliam VVilsheere being examined, saith, That Iohn Feildue on Sunday in the Evening, be∣fore the Forts were surprised, sent Alexander Bencher to this Examinant, to have him come to the said Feil∣due which he did accordingly; And then the said Feil∣due spake to this Examinant, to go with him to VVeek Oliver, and thereupon this Examinant and Iohn New went to VVeek Oliver, and there met with the said Iohn Feildue, Iohn Bryer, Alexander Butcher, Edward Flatman, Iohn Meech the younger, Iohn Bowyer, and Thomas Coge, and there stayed about half an hour af∣ter this Examinants comming thither, and went thence to Rodpoll, by Mr. Kaynes Dairie house, and there met with Richard Keate and Iohn Hayne of Broadway or Vpway: And saith, that Mr. Feildue and the said Meech had Pistols, Haine, a VVelch hook, and the rest Cud∣gels: And saith that Iohn Meech told this Examinant,
that if the Town were taken they should have five l. a piece, and said that the Cavalieres word was Crab∣church. And the said Meech told this Examinant, that he had both words from the Town, and then Mr. Feil∣due told this Examinant and the rest of the Company, that Portland men would surprize the North Fort, and that Sir Lewis Dive would come with his forces, and make an Onset on Melcomb, and in expectation of the comming of his Forces, this Examinant and the rest stayed about an hour and halfe after the Onset by the Portland men, and then returned to their own homer. The Confession of Nicholas Chappell, taken the 17. of Febr. 1644. THat John Mills on Friday February the 7. went out of Portland to Fleer, and came back on Satur∣day night, and on Sunday Febr. 9. order was given at Portland Church, that all Islanders and Souldiers should appear at the Castle by five of the clocke, with their Arms; And a partie was chosen and sent along the Beach, whom John Dry a Tanner met at the passage, and conducted them to the Chappell Fort: A partie was sent by VVater, whom VValter Bond a Fisherman of Hope met at the Peere, and conducted them to the North Point: And the said Nicholas Chappell heard the Enemy say, the Gunners were consenting to the Plot, and that John Feildue was to come on Melcomb side with 60. men, and to be let into the Town, but by whom this Examinant knoweth not: And that the number of men brought over for the surprisall of the Forts were 120. with whom the Townesmen were to joyn.
There is already condemned by the Councell of War, Wal∣ter Bond a Sayler, Thomas Samwayes a Tayler, that dwelt in Melcomb, John Mills the Constable of the Town, and Captain Iohn Cade; besides an Irish Rebell a native Papist, that put a Rope about his own neck, and hanged himself. 1. Captain Iohn Cade is hanged, according to sentence de∣nounced against him by the Councell of VVar, whose confes∣sions is before amongst the Examinations: Besides which, he made no other at all; for when he was upon the Ladder, all that he would say before he died was onely this, that he could say no more then he had said already, and so died. 2. John Mills the Constable is also hanged according to sen∣tence denounced against him by the Councell of VVar, who died most desperately; what he said at his Exrmination, is be∣fore, since which nothing more would be confessed by him, nor any signe or token of sorrow or repentance: But when he was upon the Ladder, he most desperately threw himself off, not shewing any signes of humiliation, or calling upon God for mer∣cie on his soul, but carelesly in a most desperate manner died, not so much as praying to God to receive his soul. 3. VValter Bond Sailer, he was reprieved by the Councell of VVar, and is now in the prison, his Confession is before. 4. Thomas Samwayes the Tayler that lived in Melcomb, he was reprieved by the Councell of VVarre, and hath expressed much sorrow for his treacherous fact; He was brought to the Gallowes to be hanged, but upon his penirency and confes∣sion, he was reprieved and carried back to the prison. 5. The Irish Rebell hanged himself without judgement or execution, doing all upon himself. 6. Divers of them are slain; Fabian Hodder and others, are in Prison in Poole, and other places, not yet tried; and some are run away, FINIS.
