C2789 E199_40 99873628 157535
The Kings Maiesties SPEECH In the House of Lords in PARLIAMENT on Tuesday the 14. day of Decemb. 1641. For the raising of Forces to reduce the Irish Rebels to a Loyall subjection. Also a Letter sent by the Lord chiefe Justices of Ireland to the House of Parliament, Decemb. 14. 1641. concerning their miserable and distressed estate in the County of Conn; the Rebels being within 4. miles of Dublin. Likewise the Copie of a Letter sent from the Major of Plim∣mouth, discribing the insatiable Cruelty of the Rebels done to the Protestants in all places where they come. C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 1641.
His Majesties Speech the 14. day of December, 1641. My Lords and Gent. THe last time I was in this place J min∣ded you to make what speed you could to raise for∣ces to reduce the Irish Rebels to a loyall subjection. The same J shall now inculcate, for J above all things in this world prize the peace and safety of my good Subjects, and of all rebel∣lion J hate that of the Popish faction, J heare daily of the wofull estate of my Protestant Peo∣ple in Jreland, and doe vnderstand how my house of Commons have passed the Bill for raising of forces for this expedition; And that the Bill sticketh with you my Lords, for which J give you no thankes; As to the Declaration I have no pleasure in that, but that actions may be trans∣acted in a matters of this consequence. This is the full effect of the SPEECH.
The Report of Mr. John Pym Esquire, and one of the Burgesses in the Parliament-house, to the Commit∣tee concerning the affaires in Ireland. STill doth the Pro∣testants eccho forth lamentable and wo∣full complaints, and as it were despyre of safety. For it was reported to the Committee for Irish affayres that more Counties have col∣lected their forces and joyne with the Rebels. They are marched within foure miles of Dub∣lin, pillaging of houses and driving away Cat∣tell, and stop the passage from whence they re∣ceive provision, to the great griefe and feare of his Majesties poore Subjects the Protestants of Ireland.
The Rebels made publike Proclamation and maintained it with a generall oath for to bee all true unto the Church of Rome; also they pro∣claime and confesse that King Charles is their lawfull King and Governour, making a Protesta∣tion. They tooke up Armes in defence of their Religion, not in any mlice against his Majesty, to which intent they spake to the Lord Dillon to send Letters to the King, but this can be no lesse then dissimulation, for they which love the King will not persecute his Liege people by fire and Sword, as they have, and daily doe, and yet would they make us believe they love the King. From their power Lord keepe him for ever, and never let him be so vnfortunate as to fall into their hands, for then upon my life J am perswaded they would exile from their hearts both duty, Love, and mercy, two Sunnes must not shine in one Climate, Tyrone must have nothing to doe where King Charles hath authority Although now hee exalt himselfe as his Fa∣ther did before him. Let him quickly returne to his Spanish preferment, from England, Scot∣land, or Ireland. Other Letters came, that the Rebels expect Ammunition from forraine parts, that the old Proverb may be made true, the Devill helpes his servants.
Wherefore the Lord ChiefeJustices of Ire∣land, desired the Parliament to send their poore Subjects and friends some reliefe of men and money, about which there did arise some de∣bate concerning sending of men out of this Kingdome, I meane also concerning a presse un∣lesse it were done by Act of Parliament, but now it is resolved upon the question that ayd shall be speedily sent unto the poore afflicted Protestants of Ireland, the Commanders in London looke every day when their Commissi∣on should be sealed up, and then they enter in∣to pay. Their fingers itch untill they are amongst the Rebels to quell their pride, and release the Protestants from their bondage, in which mind that they may alwaies keepe I pray. There was a Letter sent from the Major of Plimenth to this effect. THat the Rebels had seazed upon divers strong Castles and Forts, and call themselves ambi∣tiously the Queenes Army. Oh impudence: what an unheard of large Kingdome hast thou? Thou hast usurped the Dominions of consci∣ence, as for Piety thou hast just nothing to do with it.
Thou art daughter to pride, and thy Father was a bloody murtherer. Thou hast joyned issue with the inhumane Rebels of Ireland, else would they not have da∣red to have prophaned the name of our Queene in so trecherous a designe. The Rebels want Armes, not above halfe of them are Armed according unto Martiall Dis∣cipline, the rest some arme themselves with skanes, others Dung-forks, others Pick-xes, nt having any thing else to defend their bodies, wherefore should the English and Scottish supplies make hast, they might easily be over∣throwne.
A Letter sent by the Lord chiefe Iustices to the Parliament upon the 14. day of Decemb. 1641. ON which day came Letters to this pur∣pose, Relating the dolefull persecution the Protestants of Ireland by the Re∣bels, besides that in the County of Conne, they cut of the Members of men, Ravish the women, put out their eyes, slit their noses, and they are upon March, and are arrived within foure miles of Dublin. Confound them O Lord as thou didst the Host of the Assyrians, let them not tryumph over the tribe of Iudah, turne thy face O Lord from their sinnes and ours, settle peace O Lord a∣mongst them there, and wee beseech thee continue is here, that with one voice and one heart we may praise and glorifie thy Holy name. FINIS.
