c4644 e84_44 99858918 155662
THE CLERGYES BILL of COMPLAINT, OR Submissive suite of one in the behalf of all the Orthodox and great Sorrow-suffering Church-men throughout England. EXHIBITED To the most honourable Houses of Parliament, Against Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Schismaticks, shewing amongst other things, How the materiall Churches on earth and our Reverend Divines are made despicable through their misdemeanors. BESIDES Necessary Annotations in the end, whereunto the Reader is respectively referred by certain Alphabeticall Letters, from A to T included in severall lines to this work. AT OXFORD, Printed for LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the Vniversitie, 1643.
The Clergies Complaint. I Am not ignorant, what a numerous and al∣most infinite issue of bastard Books daily comes to light: Even the very streets of the most populous Metropolis or Mo∣ther-City, being spread with petty Pam∣phlets not worth a rotten threed, of no value: Yea, this present day seemeth to procreate more bookes then Babes: the bookes (it skils not what they be) bing begotten even by Eunuches, and brought forth by the Baren; Certainly▪ if the late off-springs of the Presse, which this over-scribling Age hath extru∣ded, any one would number, Arithmetick could hard∣ly give him satisfaction. What need many words? A greater number of bookes hath been printed at London within this yeer and halfe past, then at either of the Vni∣versities from the very Cradle, or invention of the Ty∣pographicall Art. Insomuch as that complaint of Fami∣anus
Strada touching the prodigious plenty of bookes, is true. Obruimur libris, Oculi legendo, manus volitando dolent; that is, We are overcloyed with bookes, our eyes are pain'd with reading, and our hands with turn∣ing over leaves. (a) O egregious future spoyles for the Moths and Wormes, unlesse the most devoted lovers of the Nicotian Deity do in the interim sacrifice them in flames. Hearken thou Tobacco-sucker, (b) that spo∣kest nothing but fumes, and as the Virgilian Laws, Faucibus ingentem fumum, mirabile dictu Evomis, involvis{que} domum caligine caeca Prospectum eripiens oculis. That is, (b) Huge fume doest vomit, wondrous to be told, And with blinde darknesse doest thy house involve That none can once discerne it. Behold enought, and too many sheets that may last ever∣lastingly to light thy contagious herbe of many appella∣tions. (c) Sheets worthy to be burned in terrestiall flames, and the greatest part of their Authors (being the inventors of so many false and scandalous Relations) in infernall fire. Yet, O you reverend Churchmen, pardon me, and you endued with a soule divine, so many, as not onely with open mouth, but with publike pen (according to the Talents to you committed by the Almighty) have stoutly fought against the monstrous Hereticks daily springing up, especially Brownists, the most deepely
sworne enemies of our Church; your posterity, J dare say, comming long after you, shall for your vigilancie repay unto your memory most ample thankfulnesse. I only point at lurking Knaves, and such kinde of Rascals of no reputation, risen out of durt and dung, whose furi∣ous Pen defiles the sacred Orders and pious Ordinances with Cartloads of Contumelies. These things, If any one do dreame or surmise that J have slanderously utte∣red, surely he himselfe is a notable slanderer, and more blinde then a Mole, that denies those things which are well knowne to barbarous and bleere-eyed men, and most notoriously witnessed by many examples. I call to witnesse the neere numberlesse Pamphlets of men at the highest, but halfe learned. (d) For what do books of these dayes prefer, but an incredible multitude of injuries and reproaches? Can any wicked, execrable, inexpiable thing be devised, that such, so many, and immane swarmes of new bookes may not containe? Who now adayes betake themselves to write, that think not all liberty of malediction lyes open to their hand? (e) First of all the Prelats of the Church, chife Pa∣stors of the Christian flock, and supreme Rulers of the Sacred Orders, they inculcate and contemne even to loathing, as of the fraternity of, I know not, what Vto∣pian Antichrist, and that even by that name, because they bee setled in the most eminent degree of the Church: and to the end they may colourably deceive Idiots and (f) Globe head or Brownisticall-men. Texts out of the holy Scriptures they doe infinitely multi∣ply. That delight and Darling of the Muses properly said,
Et latro & cantus praecing itur ense viator; Scripturam Haeretici Catholici{que} legunt. that is, The theife and wary traveller goes guarded with a sword, The Heretick and Catholick, both read Gods holy word. (g) Moreover, our Liturgy, most like the formes of the former and purer age, and most honoured by us and our Grandfathers many yeares now past, with  poisoned stile and exulcerated heart they continuallie pursue. Ad∣mitt their victorious and overworn Objection. The Li∣turgie of Englad (say they) is exracted ot of the Ro∣mish Rites nd Popes Masses, and therefore to be utter∣lie shunned by those that are pure. O foolish and mad heads! By like right I will pronounce it altogether un∣lawfull to gather Gold from Dunghills to take pearles out of foule Shels and precious stones out of Toads and Dragons. Others, rather to be derided then confuted, as yet more audaciouslie do accuse it in their stinging and stinking Scribling scattered abroad to be full of impietie and (which is hainous to be utered) horrible blasphemy (g) Yea more the Lords Epitome or Abbreviation of the Gospell, the Cannon of Christians and the most om∣nipotent Prayer (to use th words of our German Elias) now beginnes (I tremble in the rehearsall) to be evill spoken of (h) But what should those Pies do with this sweet sounding sting? Asses (as they say) with this An∣gelicall hp! To conclude, our most religious Rites, as Popish Refeus and Relicks of Romish superstitions,
thy refuse and abhorre! Surelie in so great vanitie of manie which are of the Dregs of the vulgar, who yet do take unto them the honourable name of a Divne, it is no wonder, that so manie inglorious horrid things, (I will say nothing hardr) as well from press s as from pulpits, are propounded both to the Eyes and Eares of the foo∣lish Common people. But let these Patrons of unreve∣rendnesse beware, lest the same be verified of them which the last and also first of the Apostles said of foolish wise men. Rom. 1.22. When they accounted themselves as wise, they became foolish. For truelie I feare least they earnestlie avoiding the Charybdis of bread worship (J had almost said Self worship) unadvisedlie fall upon the Scylla of contumacie, while they not onlie disobey, but also like Enemies oppose themselves against the just Commands of their most loving and indulgent mother, (i) Here I say nothing (k) of Coblers and How∣ists and other Shameles Mechanicks, worthie to be chastieed rather with a Cudgell then  Quill, who, bla∣sted with a pestilent motion, ascend the pulpit with a sa∣crilegious boldnesse (o how great is the Licentiousnesse of men!) and there do handle with unwashed hands (as the saying is) or which is more true, do miserablie rak th word of God. If this be not with Icarus to she with∣out wings, I know not what that saving of Plantus means: I do also passe over the Brethren of ignorance (o what a breeding age is this of such Brethren!) to whom the white Garment, which we call a Surplice, is no lesse for∣mdable then the Coate of a certain Martyr, (his name I now remmber not) mbrodered with horrible images of  Spirits. I touch not the Anabaptists nor Ethylists
the plagues of our times, that use the best meanes they can to extinguish all humane learning, and by whose jud∣gements, most unjust, our Vniversities of Cambridge and Oxford (the most renowned mansions of the muses) do suffer as if they were the Seminaries of Heresie and the Apple of Contention. Finallie I do not mention the Giant boldnesse of those that honor the house dedicated to Almightie God (and therefore called Royall and Lord∣lie) no more then the Stable of Augaeus, and contemne Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint Ierome, &c. De∣fenders and Champions for the Standard of the Ortho∣dox Faith, as so manie old men overcome with Do∣tage. But lest anie one more perverse then others should say, what man is this? whence comes he? and when borne? who alone inculcates and reculcates these things even to loathing? I call to witnesse the sound Doctors of this and the age past, of whom, some have propagated with life, pen, tongue and bloud, the repurged Religion which we professe. Behold first the blessed Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, &c. in heaven now triumphing with purple Crownes of Martyrdom: next the most absolute men Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury, and Hooker at lowest lost, but of prime note, and others in the dayes of our English Deborah, and David numberlesse: lastlie, a thousand preachers of this age, whose names J spare, most worthy of double honour, as well for profound Doctrine as for Sanctimony of life on either part did with one tongue & pen generally affirme the Hierarchie, Liturgy, and our Church Rites to be most consonant and agreeable to that book of God.
If therefore any one do compare so many Di∣vines of the greater sort, with the upstart Smatte∣rers in Divinity of the common flock, rushing ra∣ther than entring into the: Sanctum Sanctorum, the Church of God; can he beleive that those (n. o.) night Owles do more sharply see the truth, than these Eagles; Nay rather, what man well in his wits, dares preferre a very few English Geneva Preachers of different minde, though otherwise not unlearn'd (and whose authority in other things may be sound) before so many heavenly wits of the Columnes or Staples of Christs Church? Neverthelesse, if they had beene somewhat more perverse than is meet, and more unjust than those blessed souls do think otherwise; let them faith∣fully compare the strong (p) arguments of those with the weak and slender reasonings of the dim∣sighted Schismaticks. For they not with sollid and invincible reasons, but only with scoffes, ob∣loquies, calumnies, cavells, and impudent re∣proaches and distractions, do scurriously handle their cause, and undeservedly desteine with many Criminations and Revilings. Some the best (in words Chrysostome, in deeds Polycarps) worthy to be honor'd with all kinde of duties, and maliciously traduce their fame, with more than a certain dog∣like rage or madnesse. (q) Yea more, the most Reverend Fathers and Do∣ctors of the Church (whom all our Orthodox Divines do reverence with the name of Saint) they vilifie as men unworthy of Sanctfiication; And the materiall Churches being Gods peculiar Hou∣ses
edified, and ordained for Preaching and Pray∣er, as in Gen. 28.13. to 18, Esay 56.7. and Mat. 11.13. which by our forefather of blessed life, were set apart and consecrated to divine Service, by the names of the holy Evangelists, Apostles, Martyrs, and other most Religious men; they most prophanely and irreligiously endeavour, not only by scandalous speeches, but by most abusive papers, to unsanctifie, or at the least, unsaint, and whom they cannot deny to be blessed Saints in in Heaven; will not acknowledge to be worthy of that appellation, some of them nicknaming; and opprobriously terming (as I have been credi∣bly informed) the Churches dedicated to the ho∣nor of S. John, S. Matthew, S. Bartholmew, S. Mary, and S. Thomas; Jacks church, Mats church, Bats church, Mobs church, and Toms church, hol∣den also, or seeming to hold themselves to be so just and faithfull, that they rather deserve to be sainted before others, and all Churches so Con∣secrated, fit to be utterly demolished, or converted to ware-houses and barns, or such other prophane uses. (r) O good God, pardon them I humbly and earnest∣ly desire, that know not what they write, thinke, or babble: Yet unto those men of desperate condi∣tion, that under the vaile of zeale and piety, both with a raging Pen, and Stentorean voice, either for the filling of their purses, or the catching of popular applause, have violated thy holy Orders, be thou asevere Judge and revenger. And you Heroicke Personages and Senators,
I being the meanest amongst the Students of sa∣cred Theologie, with all the reverence in my poore power do beseech; that with conjoyned strength and associated hearts, you would con∣serve the Church of England, the most beautifull Spouse of God, amended and defended, aswell from lightharnessed Souldiers, fighting not with Thunder, but with Haile thick enough (s) as especially from her capitall enemies aforesayd, that would put their Sieth (ahlas) too sharpe (unlesse they feared your Thunder due to Church-Robbers) deep enough into the Ecclesiasticall Harvest. Heare you Magnanimous Persons, I most hum∣bly entreat; what a Reverend and famous Divine, perfectly well and readily spake, of those Arch-hereticks and wicked wretches, whom he knew without and within. They corrupt (saith he) the Decrees of faith they break the Bonds of charity, and practise both with evill speeches to cur in pieces, and with evill deeds to rend asunder the seamlesse Coat of Christ; that is, our Church, flourishing in all-maintaining Peace, under most Royall Charles, her foster Father, amongst so many elsewhere, most turbulent Tempests of Controversies. The 32 Articles of the Brownists confession, impiously cry out, That either we must go out of the English Synagogue, or perish; And they doe both write and also thinke those things of us their Brethren which being christians
and English Protestants, which neither scourge-bearing Spaniard, nor mis-beleiving Turke, nor An∣tichristian Pope, nor any Jew, nor Judas himselfe if he were living, ever dream't of, neither barba∣rous Scythia, nor the savage Irish, nor fierce Herca∣nia, nor monster-breeding Affrick, nor the Sun it selfe the Worlds eye, hath beheld, or the earth brought forth any thing more inhumane, than the envy and cruelty of these men; hither that bles∣sed man. You therefore, the true Patriarchs of the English-Israel, and the most excellent Gentry thereof, succor with your benignity the labouring Church, opportunely quench the kindled fire-brands of Sedition, suppresse the monstrous opi∣nions now of late risen; and in a word, the rage of the Clergy scourging people and other Schis∣maticks, who if they be once permitted to ad∣vance the head, I do divine will become more terrible and cruell, than the very Irish, yea, than the Scythian, Anthropophi, or man-eaters, Tigers; these things carefully and seriously again I beseech you as heretofore your Ancestors (whose memory be blessed) have done with exceeding praise. Cam. Annal. R. El. pag. 71. and 275. Our most blessed and Almighty GOD grant from my soule I pray) that your course right well begun, you may happily consummate. This is my Prayer, and not mine alone, (u) With many others which are joyn'd in one. FINIS.
The Annotations whereunto you are referred by Letters placed in the lines of this precedent work. (a) This yeer hath produced great plenty of Pamphlets, there was almost no day, wherein 6. or 8. came not forth. Allusion to Plinii. lib. 1. Epist. 13. Many in these dayes itching with the scab of desire to write, have their braines (as the saying is) in their fingers, so great and inconside∣rate is the boldnesse to put any thing in writing. D. Will. Hall. (b) Regina Britaina libras ter centum mille quotanis Expendit, morbos accellerando novos. Non opus Helleboro, nam quis{que} Tobaccon ab aula Principis, ad caulam pauperis; us{que} bibit Doct. Vaugh. in Orph. Jun. englished thus, Great Britane new infirmities to hast, Three hundred thousand pounds doth yearly waste Wee need not Hellebore; for (though it stinke) From Court to Cottage all Tobacco drinke. (c.) An Indian root very well known by daily use called Herba Nicotiana, Medica, Petum; commonly Tobacco and perhaps Betele whereof Plutarche makes mention in lib. de facie in orbe Lunae. But facetiously said one, Quod vino madidis detur Tobacco, vocari, Do-Baccho cur non rectius ille solet. which may be thus Englished; Tobacco should be cal'd Do-Baccho rather, As by the use thereof wee well may gather, Do-Baccho signifies, I give thee wine, Which with that hearbe makes many sup and dine (d) A man half learned is a most pestilent creature. Pr. (e) In the booke of the holy Fathers, there is scarce a leafe, wherein the Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacons, with other Orders, and also Priests (which name some do greatly detest) are not na∣med with honor. (f) He that hath a head round like a Globe or bowle, is defective in his sence and reason, Alsted. Encycl. published in fol. 773. and thereof our simple Sectaries may be properly called Brownists. (g) Gallen said, he would give Momus 100 years to change the structure of mans body, even in the least part, and doubted not but he should be forced in the end to confesse, that it could be made in none other, or a more perfect man. The same I say to those that cavil against the English Liturgy. (h) In all Services, the Lords Prayer is sayd; for than is the salt and seasoning of the Sacrifice, Durand. rational. lib. 1. cap. 5. numb. 17. (i) Those of our Country (to omit Forreigne Nations) unanimously maintain, that the bowing of the knee to the holy Eucharist, is very proper. Bp. Winch. Conc. p. 991. Bp. Norw. tom. 1. p. 560. D. Boys. postil. p. 598. D. Don. in Conc. p. 115. D. Featl. in Conc. p. 393. D. Clark. in Conc. p. 264. D. Saunder. in Conc. p. 631. Kellet in his Tricaen. Christi p. 203.567.581.582.638.645.653. Sutores crepidam, tractent, fabrilia fabri. that is, Let Sowters meddle with the Last or Shoe, Smiths in their Art with what they have to do. (l) There are in heaven most honorable Crowns of dignity, either white, for Virginity, or purple, for Suffering, or lawrell, for Learning; S. Aug. (m. n) It is a wonder, if they were mules; and
many of one and the same time with us, not of so great name, are far better sighted than Argus. (o) Our late Soveraign Lord K. James of famous memory, overthrew the Innovators Rams, Anno 1604. for at that time the Church of England had most acceptable Halcionian dayes. (p) Amongst so great men, Mr. Hooker (a man of a most unreproveable judgement) in Polititia Ecle. gives most unreproveable Arguments. (q) The objections of such trifles, blinde Fisher (but in the holy Bible, sharp-ey'd enough) doth strongly confute defence of the Liturgy, written in English. (r) If our Bishops have committed any fault, they are men and may erre; sometimes good Homer slumbered, and sometimes holy Peter slept, who was the first, not the chiefe of the Apostles. Con∣stantine the Great piously sayd, That he would cover the crimes of his Priests with his Purple; a saying worthy to be written in gold on Cedar. (s) No man sees how the Cavaliers now a dayes bring into displeasure, and hurry into contention, and how much they move (I speak not of writings but of deeds) every where of strifes and calum∣nies for every small trifle. (t) See the Apology of the B. of Norwich, (whom some do call the christian Seneca, I Englands Chry∣sostome) against Brownists; Also Camd. Annals. Q. Eliz. in English pag. 257. and 403. (u) De la champ. in the Prayer of David. FINIS.
