C5033 E274_30 99868736 121092
THE ANSWERE AND VINDICATION of Sir WILLIAM COLE Knight and Collonel (presented to the Right Honorable the Lords and others the Committee of both Kingdomes, and by them sent to be reported to the Honourable the Commons house of Parliament of England at Westminster) unto a Charge given in by Sir Frederick Hamilton Knight, to the said Committee, against the said Sir Will: Cole. Wherein also will appeare, how frivolous, the aspersions are, which were endeavoured to be cast upon the said Sir William, and his Regiment, in a Pamphlet set forth in Anno Dom. 1643. Declaring the Services of the said Sir Frederick. Which chiefly occasioned this Answer from the Presse. To the Right Honourable the Lords and others the Committee of both Kingdomes. The Information of Sir Frederick Hamilton Knight and Col∣lone, against Sir William Cole Knight. Shewing: FIrst, That the said Sir William Cole had notice of the intended Plots of the Jrish to breake out into Rebellion above a fortnight before the Re∣bels tooke up Armes, as it is generally given out in Jreland; and yet did neither timely informe the State, nor his Neighbours for to prevent the mischiefe and to defend themselves. II. That having a Commission from his Maejesty to be a Collonel only of five Companies of Foot, he notwithstanding taketh on nine Companies, making them beleeve, as if he had Commission for a Thousand. And when hee had made use of their Service neere a yeare and a halfe, when provisions were sent him by the Parliament, whereof they expected a share, he casheer'd foure of the most deser∣ving Captaines and their Companies of purpose to gaine all the said Provisions to himselfe and his Sonne in law Deane Barkley, who was his Agent to the Par∣liament for those provisions. III. About the beginning of the Rebellion, there were two English Papist
whose sirnames were Hetherington, who joyned themselves with the Rebels, and plundered one Serjeant Abrels house, a Tenant unto Sir Frederick, and af∣terwards burned the House, which was certified to Sir William Cole by Sir Frederick, with the Depositions of certaine witnesses proving the same fact: and it was desired that Sir William Cole would make them sure for Iustice, they being then daily imployed by him, which he refused to doe, aleadging that they had done good service to him and afterward suffered them to escape. IV. That whereas Sir Frederick Hamilton had taken one Robert Parck, one that complyed with the Rebels and had him in custody a yeare and more, and had likewise gained the Command of his Castle, which was of great advantage and service to the Parliament; and by meanes whereof, the said Sir Frederick did daily much spoyle and annoy the Rebels: The said Sir William Cole know∣ing the consequence thereof, and how well affected the said Parck stood unto the Rebels, on a time after that horrid Cessation concluded with the Rebels, and when he knew that Sir Frederick himselfe, his Wife and children were gone for London-Derry, some sixty miles from Mannor-hamilton: The said Sir Wil∣liam Cole, upon the Marquis of Ormonds commands, sends his Ensigne with 40. Musquetiers unto Sir Fredericks said Garrison, and by permission of the said Sir Fredericks Lieutenant, who commanded in his absence, and correspon∣ded with him as it should seeme, hee tooke away the said Parck. And whereas he was by the said Order to have conveyed him unto London-Derry, and so to Dublin, he first feasted him at his Castle, and then returned him backe amongst the Rebels, who received him with all gladnesse, and after they had rejoyced a while together, they goe along with him to Dublin, where afterwards hee pro∣cures an Order of the State for restitution of his Castle with whatsoever Armes and goods were in it; which he accordingly obtained in Sir Fredericks absence: Which he and the Rebels now make good against the Parliament, to the great prejudice of the Parliaments service, and the danger and hazard of all those parts of Conaght. And this done, albeit, the said Sir William Cole, well knew that Sir Frederick had refused to deliver the said Prisoner upon severall Orders and Commands, sent unto him by the said Marquis for that purpose, as well knowing the said Parck to be an utter Enemy to the Parliament heere and their proceedings. And one for whom the Lord Viscount Taaffe (that Arch-rebell) had by his Letters solicited the said Sir Frederick for his delivery. V. That the said Sir William Cole did in the moneth of February next af∣ter the said Cessation, apply himselfe unto the Marquis of Ormond, who then and long before was declared an Enemy to the Parliament. And complained a∣gainst the said Sir Frederick and his souldiers to the said Marquis, for taking of a prey from the Rebels; which Rebels the said Sir William Cole had then protected: and gained an Order from the said Marquis for restitution thereof, which notwithstanding was disobeyed.
VI. That before the said Cessation the said Sir William Cole corresponded with the Rebels, and tooke 100. of them at the least into his Protection, and for∣med them into a Company consisting of a Captaine and Officers; and imployed them for some time with the rest of his Regiment, who did him service in get∣ting of Preyes, but did great dis-service unto the State, in giving Intelligence against all the Brittish of their proceedings; and more particularly did much grieve and offend Sir Fredericks Garrison at Mannor-hamilton, who at the last tooke their opportunity and turned Rebels againe. The said Sir Frederick could informe many other particular Omissions and Dis-services which the said Sir William Cole hath committed in this time of his imployment, since the Rebellion began in Jreland: which because they doe concerne himselfe in a more neere relation, hee shall therefore forbeare to mention. And the said Sir Frederick is ready to justifie him∣selfe in whatsoever that any man can object against him, And humbly prayeth, that this honourable Committee will not thinke the worse of him, for discharging his duty to God and the State, by the informing of these Miscarriages, which in Conscience he holds himselfe bound to relate in pursuance of his solemne League and Covenant. Frederick Hamilton. To the Right Honourable the Lords and others the Committees of both Kingdomes. The humble Answer of Sir WILLIAM COLE Knight and Col∣lonel, to the Information of Sir Frederick Hamilton Knight, ex∣hibited against him to your Lordships, the 26. of December, 1644. 1. FOr answer to the first Article, hee saith; That he had no certaine notice of the in∣tended Plots of the Irish to breake out into Rebellion as is suggested by the Infor∣mer; But saith, that upon the Eleventh of October, 1641. Bryan mac Coconaght Ma∣gwire Esquire, and one Flartagh mac Hugh, informed him of some jealousies and suspitions, that they then apprehended of some evill Intentions and practises of the Lord Magwire, Sir Phelem roe O Neill, Neill mac Kennay, Hugh oge mac Mahon, & others of the Irish Gentry of Vlster, of which he gave advertizement by his Letter to the then Lords Iustices and Councell of Ireland with all possible speed; Also intimating his desires, that their Lordships would be so pleased to take that matter into their serlous consideration, as that they would strictly Examine the said Lord Magwire and others of his Complices concerning the same, who he understood were shortly after to be at Dublin; which Letter or a Coppie thereof this Re∣spondent understands, was transmitted by their Lordships to the Parliament of England,
and remaines with the Clerke of the honourable House of Commons, and was one of the chiefest Evidences and motives (upon the Discovery made by Owin O Connallie) to induce the State to be upon their Guard, and also of the apprehension of the Lord Magwire, Hugh oge mic Mahon, Coconaght Magwire, Redmond Magwire, Tirlagh oge mac Hugh, and others of their consorts in Dablin, the 23. th of October, 1641. or thereabouts. And for proofe of this advertisement hee can produce their Lordships letter in answer of his, which he received before the Rebellion broke out. And further saith, that upon the 21. th of Octo∣ber, 1641. the said Plot being more fully discovered unto him, by the said Flartagh mic Hugh, by Direction from the said Bryan Magwire, and by one Fargus O Howen, how the Rebellion was to breake out universally by the Irish on the 23. th of that Moneth. Hee not onely posted away a Messenger with a second letter to signifie the same unto the said Lords Iustices and Councell (which was inter∣copted * Notice was given of this Rebellion, from the Respondent to Sir Fre∣derick Hamilton at London. Derry the 22. of October, 1641. by Francis Barnaby. by the way at Laghramar,) but also the same Day hastened eighteene Messengers with so many Letters, to notifie the same to his Neighbours at Monea, Castle-Balfoure, Newtowne, Newpurtton, Lowtherstowne, Archdale, Bowssland, Clogher, Glasslogh and else∣where, as farre as in so short and Distracted a time hee could pos∣sibly doe, being fully busied to draw his Neighbours and Tenants together, and to Arme and put them into a posture of Warre, for the Defence of the Castle and Towne of Iniskillin, and the parts thereabouts; and amongst others did then direct particular advertisement thereof to be given unto Mannor hamilton (where the Rebellion broke not out in a Moneth after) and of which the Informer could not afterwards be ignorant, though hee himselfe was then absent; and certainly of all men hath least reason to lay this as a cryme to the Respondents charge, had he not wanted other matter. II. 2. To the second article he answereth. That the Commission therein mentioned (as he hath heard) was the first ground of the Informers envie and discontent, not onely against this Respondent, but also against all the other Brittish Colloness then in Vlster, that received Commissions from His Majesty at that time for the raising of their Regiments and pro∣secuting of the Rebels, taking it in great disdaine, that there was not the like Commis∣sion then sent unto him; wheras for ought this Respondent could ever heare, none of the said Collonels knew any certainty of the said Commissions, vntill they were brought unto them, neither did this Respondent receive his said Commission vntill almost a yeare after the Re∣bellion began (at which time he gave notice thereof unto all his Captaines) for that (during the greatest part of that yeare) he was so inclosed on all sides with multitudes of the Enemies (being above forty miles distant from any that were able to give him reliefe) that he could not receive any intelligence how the state of the Protestants of that Kingdome stood, in any part thereof, though he had often used his best endeavours to gaine the same to his exceeding great charges, and the hanging of twelve or fourteen of his Messengers, by the Rebels. And the said Informer finding this Respondent next unto him, and conceiving him easiest to be dealt withall, hath ever since used his uttermost indeavours by invective Calumnies, to asperse and undervalue both him and his actions, which he hath ever envy∣ed, so that by extolling his owne unknowne services, he laboureth as much as in him lyeth to eclipse those well known services performed by this Respondent, and all other the Com∣manders and Officers in Vlster and Conaught; And this Respondent further sayth that by vertue of a Commission from the Lords Iustices and Councell of Jreland to him directed, at the beginning of the said Rebellion, for raising, Arming and Banding all the Brittish within the County of Fermanaugh, hee (with the helpe of his friends) raised, Armed, and Banded the nine Companies in the said second Article specified, together with a Troope of horse, by
vertue whereof also, hee might have raised, Armed and banded as many of the Brittish as he could have drawn together for their owne mutuall defence, and prosecution of the Rebels, by whose assistance (and Gods great blessings) sundry good services have been performed, whereof this Respondent did often give intimation, both to the Honourable Parliament, and to the Lords Iustices and Councell of Jreland, Humbly desiring that in reward of their good services they might be listed into the Parliaments pay, and Regimented under his Command. But inasmuch as he could not obtaine tha favour by reason of the troubles then heere, though earnestly sollicited by his friends, and that but 500 of his Foot and his Troope was inlisted and taken into the Parliaments pay, from the first of Iuly 1642. As appeares by Order of the 21. th of that Moneth, and Provisions of cloathes and Victuals be∣ing onely sent for them, upon the solicitation of his Agent Master Robert Barcklay, this Re∣spondent was constrained to deliver out the said cloathes unto the Officers and Souldiers of the said five Companies, (not being able to divide the said 500 suits amongst 900 men) vizt. unto his own Company, his Lievtenant Collonels, his Serjant Majors, to the Com∣pany of Captaine Iohn Cole and to the Company of Captaine Hugh Rosse, of whom three are Scottish Officers, and whom without prejudice to the others merrit, he conceived very de∣serving of the Imployment. Offering at the very same time to the other foure Captaines, and their companies an equall divident of all other provisions sent him then by the Parlia∣ment, and of what spoiles they could get from the Rebels, if they would continue with him in the service; promising also to use his best endeavours to have them taken into pay, and added to his Regiment. But the cloathes being thus divided (which could not be other∣wise) the said foure Companies were so discontented, that of their own accords they dis∣banded themselves and went to seeke their fortunes elsewhere, and yet the greatest part of their best and ablest men, were perswaded to continue in the Garrison. So that this Re∣spondent denieth, that he did Casheere foure of the said Captaines and their companies, of purpose to gaine all the said provisions to himselfe and his Sonne in Law Master Barcklay, as is suggested by the Informer, but was so farre from doing so dishonest an act, that du∣ring the stay of the said foure Captaines and their Companies in the Garrison; they recei∣ved an equall and proportionable share of the Victuals sent by the Parliament unto his five Companies onely, and moreover, he then, and about that time did procure upon the credit and Obligations of himselfe and his friends, worth 1300. l. more in Corne and other provisions for his said five Companies and Troope, besides those provisions before mention∣ed to be sent them from the Parliament, without which care and charge it was impossible for him to keepe his Souldiers together, and to do service for the publique, in a remote Garrison, invironed then with Rebels on all sides. III. 3. To the third Article this Respondent saith, that one Iames Dunbarre Esquire, Sonne and heyre of Sir Iohn Dunbarre Knight (whose Lands with a good-Yron worke thereon, lyes next adjoyning, to part of the Lands of the Informer, whose desire to intrude upon and gain their Rights to himselfe (as they often affirmed to this Respondent) begot much contention amongst them, (as it did betweene him and all others also who were his landed Neighbours) which bred such malice in the heart of the Informer against the said Iames, that he not on∣ly exceedingly thirsted after his life, but after the Lives also of his two servants the Hethering∣tons, in the said Article mentioned, (not Papists as therein is surmised) but then, and now Protestants, who as well to shun the malice of the Informer, as the fury of the Rebels, came with his said father unto this Respondent in December 1641. Who intrusted the said Iames with the custody of the Castle of Lissgole neere Iniskillin, with 74 persons with him, where he was assaulted the 18. of December 1641. or thereabouts, by a powerfull party of the Enemy under the conduct of Rorie Maguire, Brother of the Lord Maguire▪ who then took and burned the said Castle, and massacred all that were in it, except the said Iames Dunbarre,
whom the Rebels kept in Prison, untill May or Iune 1642, at which time hee made an E∣scape, and came againe (accompanied with the said two Hetheringtons) unto this Respondent where the said Hetheringtons, went to Church, and did many good and acceptable services, behaving themselves honestly and valiantly in all that time, and as hee is informed, or both together with their Master at this time in the service of this Honourable Parliament, under Generall Major Monroe (whose Kinsman the said Iames Dunbarre is) And where he and his said men are ready to answer ought the Informer can lay to their charge, but this Respon∣dent sayth, that hee never knew, or heard, that the said Hetheringtons, joyned themselves with the Rebels, or plundered the said Serjeant Abrels house, or afterward burned it, nei∣ther was their any proofe thereof, made by the said Abrel, or any witnesses upon Oath or otherwise produced before the Respondent, neither did hee deeme it requisit upon the bare Letters of the Informer, (knowing his malice towards them for their Masters sake) to com∣mit them to Prison where they might have starved, for want of sustenance, neither did hee suffer them, as fellons or Traitors to escape, for that they in the service did destroy divers Rebels, and Traytors, whilest they remained at Iniskilling under this Respondents command. IIII. 4 To the fourth Article of the said Information, this Respondent sayeth, that upon the First of Iuly 1642. or thereabouts, the said Informer having a designe upon the Town of Sligoe, about ten miles from his house, marched to the Castle of Robert Parck Esquire, in the said Article mentioned, an English Protestant, and a Iustice of Peace, which before the Re∣bellion was possessed of an estate of about 1000. l. a yeare, and one that was of very good repute and esteeme, amongst his neighbours, and who (as this Respondent hath bin often Informed by credible persons) had (to the best of his power) opposed the Rebels, in the beginning of that Rebellion, without complying or any way corresponding with them. And under colour of going forward with that designe, procured the said Master Parck with 30, or 40 of his Souldiers to accompanie him to Sligoe, and when they came neere the said Town, both Master Parcks Souldiers and those of the Informers entred the Suburbs thereof, and having burned some few houses in it, and received some Brittish Protestants, that esca∣ped unto them from the Rebels, they brought them unto the Informer where he stood aloofe, with the said Mr. Parck, two of the said rescued Protestants, namely Iohn Wetherspin the Fa∣ther, and Iames Wetherspin his Sonne, both Scotchmen, were questioned by the Informer; wherefore they were amongst the Rebels. The Father answered, that by reason of his age (being about 70 yeares old or upwards) and that hee was sick and Bedridden three Moneths before, he could not get away, but lived upon the Almes of the people; Whereupon one of the Informers servants told him, that this old man was formerly Tenant to one Iohn Wal∣drome Esquire, (a Gentleman that had an estate neere the Informers lands in that Country) and had borne witnesse upon Oath on his Land-lords part in matter of tytle of Land against the Informer, by meanes * Note, that this Iohn We∣therspin, conceived to have been the Father, was not the man the said Sir Frederick shot as aforesaid, yet was hanged by him, but it was another old sick bedridden Scotshman that was so shot and kild by him in manner aforesaid. whereof the cause was Decreed for Mr. Waldrom against the Informer, or matter to that purpose. Vpon which (without using any more words) hee shot and kild the poore decreped old man, which was the first, and last man the Informer kild with his owne hands since the Rebellion began in Ireland, as some of his owne servants and Soul∣diers affirmed. Whereupon being informed by Iames We∣therspin the sonne that the Forces of the County of Sligoe, were upon their March to joyne with the O Roirkes, for to trouble Mannor-hamilton, hee together with Mr. Parcks and both their Companies, haste∣ned backe to Mr. Parcks house, where at the importunity of the Informer (as this Respon∣dent hath beene credibly informed) hee got the said Mr. Parck and his Company (for the
better Guard of him and his men) to accompany him to Mannor-hamilton. And although in the way they were heard beset by the Rebels, insomuch as the Informer in a Bogge was unhorst, and his Horse with Furniture and Pistols taken by the Rebels, by whom hee had beene then slaine or taken, if by the care and valour of the said Mr. Parck and some of his Souldiers hee had not beene Horst againe and brought off. Yet when they had escaped that danger and were come to the Informers house (as this Respondent hath credibly heard) hee tooke the said Iames Wetherspin (for having formerly witnessed with his Father against him as aforesaid) and twisted a Cord with a wrinch about his Head so hard, that his blood streamed forth of his * Note, that there were Suites de∣pending both in Ireland and in England, betweene Sir Frederick Hamilton, and the said Iames Wetherspin, some yeares before the Rebellion. And that the said We∣therspin, being served in Ireland with a Command, Dated the 14. of Ianuary 1640. under the hand of the Speaker of the House of Com∣mons of England, at the instance of the said Sir Frederick; he appeared heere in London, 7. Aprill 1641. Where having attended the House to answer Sir Fredericks complaint vntill the 20. of September 1641. And (not being able longer to stay) bee returned into Ireland, where the said Sir Frederick became his Iudge and Executioner, as in this Answer is declared. Eares, Eyes, Nose, and mouth; In which tortures he continued him during his pleasure, and then easing him of that, did cast him into a Dungeon, where hee continued him languishing for hunger from Thursday untill the Wednesday following: And did cruelly punish a poore Scotshwoman, which in pitty did cast him an handfull of Oatmeale under the doore, which the miserable man, did licke with his Tongue from the Dirt, his hands and feet being fast tyed together with Coards or Withes; and upon the Wednesday fol∣lowing caused him to be Hanged. Who at the begin∣ning of the Rebellion, with a Horse, Sword, and Fow∣ling peece, came to him, offering his service against the Rebels, from whom notwithstanding hee tooke the said Horse and Armes, commanding him to be gone out of his Garrison, and that if he did not, hee would Hang him, or if ever he got him againe, he would be his Death; which he faithfully performed, as aforesaid. And also upon the Informers entrance into his Ca∣stle, hee made exceeding shewes of welcome to the said Mr. Parck, whilest in the interim, hee caused all his Souldiers to be Disarmed, and they put in restraint in severall lower Roumes in his house; and then when he perceived no danger of opposition, hee arrested the said Mr. Parck, charging him with Treason, and committed him close Prisoner, where hee detained him in Durance the space of a Yeare and upwards, without suffering any man, except Serjeant Major Iames Galbraith to speake unto him, which was but once, and that upon much importunity; whose extreame misery, was lamentably bewayled by all the men that were in that Garrison. And then hee not onely seized upon and kept his Castle of Newtowne, putting a Guard of his owne into it, but also Plundered, and converted to his owne use, all his Money, Plate, Armes, Housholdstuffe, Bedding, Furniture, and all other his goods whatsoever, which hee had then aswell without as within Doores there, not suffering his Souldiers to come out of Restraint, or use their owne Armes, untill hee had unlawfully compelled them, to take an Oath to serve as Souldiers under his onely Command. By rea∣son whereof, the said Mr. Parck was utterly disabled to performe farre greater and much more advantageous Services in every degree in that place for this honourable Parliament against the Rebels, then ever the Informer did, or could doe there, as this Respondent hath been credibly informed, aswell by the Testimony of sundry other honest men, as by the said Mr. Parck himselfe. Whereupon Sir Edward Povie Knight, whose Daughter was the Wife of the said Mr. Parck, together with others his Friends (being advertised of his extreame hard usage) Peti∣tioned the Lords Iustices and Councell of Ireland, for his removall to Dublin, to answer
such matters as the Informer had to lay to his charge, and entred into Recognizance of 10000. l. for his appearance, upon which their Lordships by Order dated in May 1643, or thereabouts, required the Informer, to set the said Parck at libertie, to be sent either to Cap∣taine Folliot to Ballyshannon, or unto this Respondent to Jniskillin, together with the mat∣ters that he had to object against him. That so he might be conveighed by them, or one of them to Londonderry, to be sent from thence to Dublin. But the Informer (notwithstand∣ing the said Order was shewed unto him) denyed obedience thereunto. And detained the said Parck still in durance, untill his said friends procured severall Orders commanding his inlargement, yet nothing would prevaile to that effect with him, untill that about the be∣ginng of September 1643, Captaine King comming with a Troope of horse from Conaght into Vlster, about some businesse he had with Sir William Stuart, and Sir Robert Stuart, he came about the 13. th of that Moneth to Jniskillin unto this Respondent, who sent his En∣signe with 50 Musquettiers to guard the said Troope to the Abbey of Boyle in Conaght, which is about 40 myles from Iniskillin, who were so farre from knowing, or allowing of the said Cessation mentioned in the said fourth Article, that they fought with and kild some Rebels in the passe of Ballinafadd, and tooke a pry from thence to the Boyle, whence upon returne of the said Ensigne, he came to Mannor Hamillon in his way, where he delivered a letter from this Respondent, to Lieutenant Lesley, the Informers Lievtenant, it being direc∣d to the Informer, or in his absence to the Officer in chiefe at Mannor Hamilton, with an Order of the Coppie of an Order which the Respondent received from the said Captaine Foliot in it directed also as aforesaid, from the Lords Iustices and Councell of Jreland, for the inlargement of the said Parck; to be sent to Iniskilin or Ballyshannon, which this Respon∣dent left to his choise to doe, or not to doe, as best pleased the Informer or his said Officer; who sent the said Parck along with the said Ensigne, and because he was sensible of the great misery which he had wrongfully sustained by his Captaines severity, he delivered to the said Master Parck, two of his owne horses, with some other little helpe toward his char∣ges, as the said Parck told this Respondent when he came to Iniskillin, before which time, this Respondent was never acquainted with him, neither did this Respondent know, or ever heard, that he was affected to the Rebels, neither did he know any manner of certainty, of the concluding of the Cessation with the said Rebels, untill he received advertizement toge∣ther with a Proclamation to that effect, from the Lords Iustices and Councell of Ireland the 23 of October 1643 or thereabouts, nor did he or could he obey the said Cessation before or since that day, neither did he take any notice, whether the Informer or his wife and chil∣dren were gone to London-derry, Neither was the Marquesse of Ormond at that time, Lord Iustice, Lord Deputy, or Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, nor did this Respondent receive any such Commands from his Lordship, to send to the Informer, as in the said fourth Article is surmized, neither did this Respondent looke for, or expect any indirect corresponding from the Informers Lieutenant. And this Respondent saith, That as a Prisoner and poore distressed Englishman his Countryman (being under bayle and mainprize as aforesaid) he gave some entertainment unto the said Parck, for some few weekes in his house, farre short of feasting as the Informer tearmes it, and not finding safety to convey him by the neerest way to Dublin, He sent a guard together with one Henry Langford, and other English and Scotchmen with him, to Mannor Hamilton againe, where he heard he was lodged for a Night, and where the Infor∣mer or his Officer might have detained him if they pleased. But from thence he was con∣veyed, by the said Langford and others to the Abbey of Boyle, whence after he recovered of a Feaver (whereof he had almost dyed) he repaired to Dublin, and according to the condi∣tion of his said friends Recognizance, appeared before the Lords Iustices and Councell at the Councell Board there, where how he was proceeded withall this Respondent knowoth not, Neither did this Respondent returne him back amongst the Rebels, neither doth he
know whether any of them did accompany him to Dublin, neither doth this Respondent be∣lieve that the state there would grant him an Order for Restitution of his Castle, with what∣soever Armes or Goods were in it, unlesse it appeared to them, that hee was wrongfully expulsed by the Informer. And this Respondent saith, that he heard, that by vertue of such Order of the State, the said Castle was restored unto him; and that hee keepes it, as the rest of the Brittish Forces in Conaght doth their Holds for the Parliament service. For upon the 25. th of March last past (as this Respondent hath been informed,) The said Parck his Souldiers of Newtowne, with the Informers Souldiers, did spoyle and prey the Rebels at Dromaheare, within six miles of Castle-hamilton, and two miles of Master Parcks Castle of Newtowne, so as the Informers alogation, that he and the Rebels makes good that Castle a∣gainst the Parliament, to the prejudice of the Parliaments service, and the danger and ha∣zard of all those parts of Conaght, is meerely surmized, invented, and devised, of purpose (as this Respondent conceives) to make him odious on the one side, that the Informer may thereby the better worke his malice against him, and on the otherside, to bring the said Ma∣ster Parck into the displeasure of the Parliament, whereby he may make way to gaine his Estate. And this Respondent further saith, that hee never knew, or heard of any Orders or Com∣mands, sent unto the Informer, by the said Marquesse of Ormond, to the said Master Parck, neither did hee know, or doth beleeve the said Parck to be an utter enemy to the Parliament or their proceedings, nor doth he know, neither doth it concerne him, whether the Lord Viscount Taaffe, did by his Letters solicite the Informer for the delivery of the said Parck. But this Respondent doth beleeve in his conscience that if the said Parck had but 1000. l. in the world, he would give 500. l. of it to be heere now, to be a most humble suiter to this ho∣nourable Parliament for remedy against the said Informer, for these and many other intol∣lerable wrongs, and high oppressions done him by the said Informer. And this Respondent humbly craveth leave, to declare further the behaviour of the said Informer, towards Tho∣mas Abbertromy Esquire, a Protestant and principall undertaker in that Plantation, and sometimes high Sheriffe of that County, whose Estate there bordered upon the Informers, within a mile of his Castle, whom he also Imprisoned, and kept in miserable durance, for a long time, out of the malice which in particular he bore to himselfe, and also unto his Father in law Sir Iohn Dunbarre Knight, and Iames Dunbarre Esquire, his brother in law, not suffer∣ing any to wash his linnen, but was necessitated, with his owne hands, to wash his shirts, in his owne Vrine. And at length being set at liberty, the poore Gentleman with his wife and children came (in great want of all necessaries) to Iniskillin to this Respondent, who used meanes to releeve them untill he conveyed them towards his native Country of Scotland. And further this Respondent saith, that (as he hath been credibly Informed by divers honest Protestants, who well knew the Informers evill carriages, to those that were under his command, and more especially to the Protestants that fled from Sir Iohn Dunbarres Iron workes to his house for safeguard of their lives) the Informer compelled many of them (without sending guards or convoyes with them) to depart from his Garrison, insomuch, as by their endeavouring to travell 20 miles over Mountainous wayes towards Iniskillin, many of them were murthered in their journey by the Rebels. And in particular twelve or four∣teene persons at one time, and divers of them famished through hunger and cold, which will be proved by sundry men and women of the same Companies, whose fortune it was (through Gods Providence) to escape those dangers. And are now resident partly under this Respondent at Iniskillin, and others of them dispersedly dwelling amongst other Regl∣ments, in Vlster and elsewhere. V. 5. To the fifth Article this Respondent saith, that he did not know in the Moneth of Fe∣bruary, after the said Cessation, whether or no the said Lord Marquesse of Ormond, was
Lord Lievtenant of Jreland; nor whether he was declared an Enemy to the Parliament, not did he heare any other then that he was gracious and acceptable unto the Parliament, untill this Respondent was now upon his journey to London, and sayeth that after concluding of the said Cessation (which how acceptable it was to the Parliament, this Respondent being so remote, understood not) He by vertue of a Commission dated in November or December 1641. from Sir William Parsons and Sir Iohn Borlace then Lords Iustices of Ireland, and the Councell there, did upon the 29 of Iannuary 1643 or thereabouts, receive Tirlagh Og Mac Gawran, and some followers of his, being Inhabitants of the Barony of Tallagaph in the County of Cavan, together with their goods into protection, appoynting them some quarters to dwell and grase upon, neere Iniskillin, untill directions to the contrary should come from the Parliament, and that upon agreement, that they should pay 70. I. in Money or Victuals by a time limited, towards the better subsistance of the Soulders of this Respondents Regi∣ment, for the preserving of that Garrison, whose provisions being then neere spent, had no hopes to be supplyed by the State there, and as little expectation to be furnished in due time from hence, and the said protected men having delivered in one of their Kinsmen unto this Respondent, to remaine in Prison at Iniskillin in pledge aswell for their Loyalties during their continuance upon the said Protection, as the paying of the said Contribution, and per∣forming other duties, conformable to their agreement, gathered their goods from remote parts, and upon the second of February 1643 or thereabouts, were comming tothe quarters assigned to them by this Respondent, but by the way the Souldiers of the Informer, incoun∣tering them, declared that they were in want of Victualls in their Garrison, and although they would forbeare to kill them (for so farre they agreed to the said Protection) yet they would and must borrow some Cowes from them upon ticket, to be payed by the State, out of their entertainment, and thereupon tooke from them 3 or 400 Cowes, whereof their Offi∣cers at Mannor-hamilton (upon the mediation of the Respondents Lievtenant Collonel) caused the greatest part to be restored againe unto the said owners, but refused to deliver the rest. Of which (upon the next occasion that this Respondent had to write to Dublin) at the request of the said owners, he gave intimation unto the then Lords Iustices and Councell and thereupon, the said Lord Marquesse being newly then, Lord Lievtenant of Ireland, did by his Warrant command, not onely the restoring of the refidue of the said goods unto the owners, but withall required better correspondencie to be observed for the future betweene the Officers and Souldiers of the Informer, and those of Jniskillin, and not to clash or jarre betweene themselves, but whether the said latter Order was obeyed as touching the restitution of the said Goods, this Respondent knoweth not, and sayeth that the Officers and Souldiers of the said Garrisons, not in obedience to that Order, but of their owne mutuall accords (have ever since the Informer left those parts) lived in better amitie, then ever they did, or could doe, whilest he continued there amongst them: Neverthelesse this Re∣spondent sayeth, that by reason of that impediment, offered by the Informers Souldiers as aforesaid, this Respondent and his soulders lost the benefit of that bargaine to the great pre∣judice of that Garrison. And sayeth further, that the Informer or his Officers, received into his Protection (by what authority this Respondent could never yet understand) one Owin, or Iames Mac Mur∣rey, Margaret Ny Cabe, and sundry other Rebels of the County of Letrym, and kept them and their goods upon his owne Lands of Glanfeare neere his Garrison in that County, which will be proved by Certificate and sundry Letters of the date of January 1643. under the hand of his own Lievtenant and others. VI. To the sixt Article, this Respondent denyeth that ever hee corresponded with the Rebels as by the said Informer is therein suggested, but sayth that by vertue of the aforesaid Com∣mission from the Lords Iustices and Councell of Ireland, he did receive into Protection one
Bryan mac Coconaght mac Gwire Esquire, with 40 or 50 of his friends, Servants and Tenants who had some Goods of their owne to live opon, taking Pledges from some of them for as∣surance of their loyalties, which Protection this Respondent humbly conceiveth was lawfull for him to grant unto the said Bryan Magwire for the Reasons following, vizt. First, for that upon the 21. th of October 1641. hee discovered unto this Respondent by Flartagh mac Hugh afore-named, the purpose of the Irish to rise into Rebellion upon Friday and Saturday, the 22. and 23. th of October aforesaid, advising him and all the English and Scottish Protestants in the Towne of Iniskillin, and County of Farmanagh, to be carefully upon their Defence; which this Respondent acknowledgeth was (by Gods mercy and provi∣dence) the principall Motive that prevented the Murthering of this Respondent, and of all those Protestants that escaped that bloudy Massacre thereabouts. Secondly, for that the said Bryan did refuse to joyne in any Action with the Rebels, deny∣ing to enter into their Oathes of Confederacy and association against the Protestants, for which hee was in great danger to be cut off by them. Thirdly, for that he preserved under his own Protection divers of the British Nation, Pro∣testants which together with severall of their goods he brought safe to Iniskillin, when he was so received into Protection, as Ambrose Carleton, Richard Irwing, Gawan Bettic, & many others. Fourthly, for that by receiving him, being an eminent man of Vlster, and allyed unto many Noble families, (both in Scotland and Ireland) It exceedingly abated the fury and cou∣rage of the Rebels, and distracted their Consultations in those Parts, and wholly dis-joyned the Forces of the Rebels in that County, by dividing themselves into factions; and no lesse disheartned those of the next adjoyning Counties, which in that interim, and for a long time acter did abundantly advantage and further the publique Service. Fiftly, for that in further Evidence of his loyaltie to the English Crowne and Govern∣ment, hee presented a Letter unto this Respondent, which came unto him from Owin mac Artt O Neille (Vncle of the Lord Magwire, and Generall of the Rebels in Vlster) who late∣ly before, arived in Ireland, with Men, Armes, and Ammunition, out of West Flanders, which Letter is as followeth, viz. To our loving and deere Cozen Bryan mac Coconaght Magwire. Loving Cozen, KNow that I am arrived at this Harbour, nine or ten dayes past, whether I sent before me asmuch Ammnuition as J deemed needfull to answer the Necessity of this Country: and that I have heere now, Men and Provisions such as (by the leave of God) will give great Comfort and succour unto this whole Kingdome. But beloved Cozen, I am given to understand that (notwithstan∣ding your sufferance and distresse) you are abundantly inclined to side with the English Nation, which indeed doth exceedingly grieve me; Wherefore I will have you from henceforth (as you tender your owne good) to banish those thoughts out of your mind, and not to pursue those Resolutions, which in the end may be the occasion of your owne Destruction, as I thinke it will be to all those whose minds will appeare contrary to ours, let these suffice with the addage of many sa∣lutes unto you, from Castle-Doe the 18. th of July, 1642. Your affectionate Kinsman, Signed, Owen O Nersle.
And besides, the said Bryan gained intelligence of great concernment, from the Enemy and discovered it at all times, and upon all occasions unto this Respondent, who made great use thereof for the furtherance and advancement of the publique Service; whereof this Respon∣dent made report by his Letters unto Sir William Parson, and Sir Iohn Burlase, then Lords Iustices of Ireland and the Councell there, to whom hee did send the said Bryan Magwire, to Dublin; who did not onely approve of this Respondents act in receiving of him and his men into Protection as aforesaid, but also (as this Respondent was informed) did further signifie unto this Hon: Parliament, the affection and service of the said Bryan, with their desires in his behalfe that hee should be rewarded for the same. And afterward their Lordships retur∣ned the said Bryan unto this Respondent, allowing him and his men to be continued upon Protection at Iniskillin; Necre unto which Garrison hee remaines loyall even at this time, but in a most miserable condition for want of Necessaries. And this Respondent denyeth that ever he did forme the said Protected men into a Company, consisting of a Captain and Officers, as in the said sixth Article is meerly devised and surmized, but did imploy them under the leading of some of the Brittish Gentlemen of his Garrison, upon service many times, with the rest of his Regiment against the Rebels, wherein they were of abundant use, aswell for Spyes and Guids, as by killing and destroying the Enemy as effectually as others did; And (for ought knowne to this Respondent) did no dis-service at any time unto the State, in giving Intelligence against all or any of the Brittish of their proceedings, and di∣vers of the said Protected men, being taken Prisoners at severall times, by the Rebels, were put to Death for taking part with this Respondent. But this Respondent denieth, that all the said Protected men did take their opportunity to turne to the Rebels againe as is surmized, but some few that did (leaving their Pledge which they gave for assurance of their loyaltie, in Prison at Jniskillin) this Respondent caused him to be Hanged, when they proved Dis∣loyall. And this Respondent humbly conceiveth, That as Rahab and her Parents, Family and friends for her sake, were preserved in Iericho for saving the two Spyes of Ioshua; so this Hon: Parliament will be pleased to thinke, that this Respondent did no Dis-service unto the State in Protecting and preserving of the said Bryan Magwire, and some of his Friends for his sake; who was the Instrument of the saving of the Lives of many thousands of Prote∣stants (even Gods people) from being utterly destroyed by the fury of the said bloudy Rebels. And for answer unto that expression where∣with * Note, that since this Answer was sent into the Commons house of Parliament, Sir William Cole received a Letter of the 8. of Ia∣nuary, 1644. written by one of the Captaines of his Regiment from Iniskillin; certifying that about that time, 40 Horse and 120 Foot of that Garrison, fought with and routed 500 Foot and 3. Troopes of Horse of the Rebels, conducted by Collonel Philip O Rely, wherein they not onely rescued their owne Cattle which were Plundered by the Enemy: but also killed 140 of them in the place, and tooke 55. Prisoners, whereof are Officers, one Serjeant Major, 3 Cap∣taines, two Lieutenants, with divers Gentlmen and other Officers. Whereby it appeares, that neither the said Sir William, or his Souldiers did any way correspond with the Rebels since the Cessation before. the said Informer seems to conclude his Information, by saying he could informe ma∣ny other particular omissions and dis-services, which the said Respondent hath cōmitted in this time of his imployment, &c. The Re∣spondent saith, that hee conceiveth the Infor∣mer meanes it, by the scandalous calumnies and aspersions digested in fifteene places of that Pamphlet, printed at London in An. Dom. 1643. wherein his Services are registred, and
wherein this Respondent and his Captaines, Officers, and Souldiers, are most injuriously taxed, with often reiterations of unworthy and meane cari∣age towards him, for that they did not wait upon him, upon all his calls, which this Respondent conceiveth was more then he was bound to doe fur∣ther then to this Respondent would seeme fit, for the good of the publique service; especially when as at the same very times (wch was long before the Cessation) he was imployed about services of farre greater and better concern∣ment in the Counties of Fermanagh, Cavan, Monaghan, Tirone, Donegall, Letrim, or Sligoe, which hath formerly been well knowne both in Ireland and elsewhere. And this Respondent further sheweth, that immediatly after the said Ces∣sation, this Respondents Regiment destroyed 295 of the Rebels and famish∣ed many hundreds of them, and also tooke in Rory mac Gwires Castle, which is now preserved for the Parliaments use; And afwell then as before did res∣cue, or otherwise redeem from the said Rebels 5467 English and Scottish Pro∣testants, and relieved them for many Moneths, out of the spoyles gained from the Enemy, untill that in his owne person hee guarded and conveyed great numbers of them towards London-derry, where further care was taken for their reliefe by the good people there: And saith also, that he this Respon∣dent was one of the first Collonels of the Brittish Regiments in Vlster, which did imbrace and take the solemne League and Covenant, which hee humbly conceives will not be deemed to be Omissions or Dis-services, as the Infor∣mer tearmes them: who since his comming hither, hath not onely laboured to Defame the Respondent, but also hath taxed the rest of the Collonels in Vlster for their Neglects in their service, who (in this Respondents opinion) have done much better Service than either of them. Yet did this Respondent severall times shew his desires in a most effectuall manner to helpe and relieve the said Informer; for having received a pitti∣full Message from him about the 26 of Iuly 1642. That hee, his Wife, Chil∣dren, and Souldiers, were like to be destroyed by Nine hundred of the Re∣bels that then besieged him; This Respondent immediatly sent a party of Foure hundred Horse and Foot for his Reliefe, with Orders that after they had releeved the Informer they should returne within 48 houres; This Re∣spondent being then threatned to be Besieged, by the Generall of the Irish Forces Owin mac Art O Neille with 6000 Men. But when the Respondents Lieutenant Collonel came to the Informer with this Partie, they found him not at all besieged nor in no such extremity as hee pretended, but per∣ceived hee sent this pressing Message, onely to get some of the Respondents men with him to take in the Castle of Dromoheare, which without Ord∣nance they could not have effected, though being come, at his importu∣nity
they attempted, in conclusion to no other purpose, then to destroy their Men. Whereupon his Officers and Souldiers returned on the 29. th of July from him having received many affronts and abuses. And on the 20 of May following this Respondent intending some service, in the Province of Co∣naght drew forth about 500 horse and foot, and Leaguring within two miles of the Informers Garrison, was importuned with much earnestnesse, to come unto him to Christen his Sonne, which the Respondent (conceiving to be an act of Charity and Christianity) consented unto, expecting, such civility, as might bee answerable to so neighbourly an Office. But both himselfe and those few Officers he carryed with him, received such grosse disrcspect, that he will not defile your eares with the hearing it. Neverthelesse, God having blest the Respondent in his journey with suc∣cesse against the Enemy, hee gave him for the reliefe of his Garrison Two hundred fifty nine Cowes; There going with him in his Journey of their owne accord of the men belonging to his Garrison, onely 38 Footmen and 12 Horse. He moreover then bestowed upon his good Lady 1000 Sheepe, and what he bestowed on those Gentlemen of his Ladies kindred, and his Officers, who went in a friendly manner with this Respondent, the Jnformer suffered them not to enjoy, but converted to his own use. These civilities, which this Respondent is most unwillingly drawne to mention, he conceived might deserve more thankes, and not to be himselfe and his Regiment, exclaimed against by the Informer, meerely to render him and them odious, in all places where his tongue gets any credit. In the time of Peace, his carriage towards his neighbours was so full of contention, that there was hardly any man of quality or worth neere him, in the Province of Conaght, that he had not laboured to injure and oppresse, either in their Estates or reputations, if not in both, so that before the Re∣bellion began, such his carriages made him extreamely distastfull to men of all conditions, that lived within 20 or 30 miles of him in that Province, which will be evidenced by divers of his Neighbours, of the best qualitie, now in this Citie, if they may be called upon for that purpose. And particularly this Respondent, representeth to your further notice, something of the Informers demeanour towards some of his distressed neigh∣bours in the hands of the Rebels, decyphered in these two short insuing Letters, Printed in the latter end of that Booke of his owne Services, Page 57. viz.
Sir Robert Hannay's Letter and other Protestants being Priso∣ners at Sligoe, are sent to Dromaheare Castle. Honourable Sir, WEe the undernamed persons having suffered in all our whole Estates, and being upon our banishment out of this Kingdome, under the safe con∣duct of Master Edmond Bourke of Ragagh and Master Walter Bourke of Ardagh, towards the North, but most opposed at Castle-Coner; Eniscromme Escagh-bridge, Downeill, Arnaglasse and Tomler, goe by severall bands of ar∣med men, purposely to set for our lives, were not there extreame violence suppres∣sed by the discretion, worth and care of those two Gentlemen, and we taken Priso∣ners by the MacSwines, brought before O Coner-Sligoe where we now remain, and intended to be sent to the Castle of Dromaheare, to be kept untill you Sir deliver sach Prisoners of the O Roirkes and others, as you have in your eusto∣dy, or to be dealt with, as you doe unto them, Sir you are Nobly disposed so that in honour, we hope, the meanes of reliefe being in your selfe, you will not suffer us to perish who will ever remaine Sir Yours truly obliged to serve you, Signed Robert Hannay, Andrew Adare, Alexander Mountgomorie, William Liston, Thomas Fullerton. These be the names and number of the Prisoners, Sir Robert Hannay, his Lady, his two Daughters, two Boyes, two men, and a gentlewoman, Master Andrew Adare and his wife and Sisters Son, Master Alexander Mountgome∣rie, his wife and eldest sonne, Master William Liston, his Wife and Daughter, Master Thomas Fullerton and his Wife, Patrick Deomand Mr. Adares man. Sir, after the writing of this Letter, we are brought to Dromaheare Castle, and Order left with the Captaine to bring us unto the Camp at Mannor-ha∣milton, where we must suffer death, if those Prisoners with you be not deli∣vered. Sir Frederick Hamiltons Answer to the Letter afore-mentioned. SIR, I have received your Letter, whereby I am given to understand of your treacherous surprisal notwithstanding of your safe conduct promised, for the which I am very sorry. But such is the trecherous falshood of those disloyal Tray∣tors generally throughout this whole Kingdome, that hoth made me Vow and
sweare in the presence of Almighty God, that I will never give or take quarter, with them or any of them, yea though my own Sons that discended from my loynes were in your estate, I had rather they should dye gloriously for the cause of Christ, then I should so abase my selfe, as to deale with such Traytors to God and his Majesty. Thus beseeching God Almighty to strengthen and incourage you that you may continue constant, untill it shall please God to give you deliverance ei∣ther by life or death. In the meane time I am perswaded that they will use you with no worse measure, then their Prisoners, who were apprehended by me in the action of Rebellion are used, so recommending you to God I rest. Your very loving friend, Frederick Hamilton. Castle-Hamilton, Ianuary the 19, 1641. And after he delvered this letter unto the Messenger, he hanged the chiefe of the Prisoners (being brother to Collonel O Roirke who was desired by this exchange) in the sight of the Messenger before he would permit him to depart, upon whose returne to the Rebels they in revenge thereof, Mur∣thered about 10 or 11 of the said Protestants, whereof two were Godly Mi∣nisters, and yet if their mercy, and Compassion in the midst of their Barba∣rity had not farre transcended Sir Frederick Hamiltons, they had likewise put Sir Robert Hannay and his Lady and Children and all the rest to death. And that his ill disposition may the more fully appeare, he hath with stri∣king and other ill usage so behaved himselfe, toward his Officers, that his Lieutenant, Ensigne, Minister and one of his Serjeants have all forsaken him, so that he hath now no Officers, but one Serjeant to Command his Company, at Mannor-Hamilton consisting of 70 men or thereabouts. And notwithstanding all this, the said Informer is labouring for the Go∣vernment of Londonderry, and because he conceived he might prevaile in that sure if his miscariages were not discovered, he moved this Respondent, that all the differences betwixt them, might be composed by the order of friends, which motion if this Respondent would then have accepted, he conceives this information had never beene heard of. And as touching the Government of Londonderry, aforesaid this Respon∣dent humbly desires leave to declare that once it was conferred upon Sir George Pawlet, a man whose temper in some things, was not much unlike this of the Informers, whose passionate demeanour in his Office, was not onely the occasion of the losse of his own life, but of the losse also of the lives of many of this Nation there, and the burning of that Towne, with the kind∣ling of a violent (though as it happened) but a short Rebellion in the Coun∣try thereabouts, which did put the State then, to much unnecessary expences in the suppressing of it.
All which together with the premisses, this Respondent humbly represent∣eth as pertinent instances, and reasons to induce the honourable Parliament, not to put the Government thereof into the power of the Informer, whose demeanour will never be brooked, by those good people that now inhabit there, upon whom, all the aspersions that are layd by any late reports or prin∣ted letters, (this Respondent beleeves) were invented and contrived by the Informer, or his Instruments, of purpose to make them detestablee to this Honourable Parliament, whom this Respondent is confident, are as Loyal, and well wishing to the Parliament as can be expected, and will really witnesse the same, by their ready and joyfull receiving and obeying of any Gover∣nour (except Sir Frederick Hamilton) that the Parliament will be pleased to appoint over them. But his conditions are so well knowne unto them, that they will quit their fortunes and stations there, which they have hitherto preserved, with so much expence and hazard, rather then submit unto his Command. And this Respondent most humbly desires this honourable Committee, would be pleased to pardon him if hee have trespassed upon your Patience, in answere to the Charge given in by the Informer, be∣ing necessitated thereunto, for his more ample Vindication, by lay∣ing open the disposition of the Informer, which hee hath most un∣necessarily drawne upon himselfe, without any provocations given to him, by this Respondent. And humbly prayes such reparations as in your Wisdomes shall be thought fit. Signed, WILLIAM COLE. Exhibited 11 of January, 1644.
