C6122 E349_15 99861613 159824
The Copy of A LETTER FROM The Commissioners about the Propositions for PEACE: DECLARED To the King, and his Majesties Answer thereunto, Sent from Newcastle to the Parliament, With other Papers from NEVVCASTLE. AND His Majesties Speech spoken before the Commissioners of both Kingdomes. And the Earle of PEMBROKES Answer. These are Examined, and Printed and published accor∣ding to ORDER, August. 6, 1646. London, Printed by Iane Coe, 1646.
A Copy of a Letter from the Com∣missioners (that delivered the Propositi∣ons of both Kingdomes to the King for Peace) to the House of Commons, signed by Sir Walter Earle, Sir Iohn Hipsley, Mr. Robert Goodwin, and Mr. Luke Robinson. WEE are sory wee cannot acquaint you with so good successe of our imployment, as wee have faith∣fully endeavou∣red in pursuance of our Instructi∣ons. This morning we took our leave of the King; and (though our impor∣tunities have been frequent and ear∣nest) we cannot obtain his Majesties consent nor answer, any wayes satis∣factory.
His Maiesty hath given us a Paper (o∣ther then which we could not procure; notwithstanding our much earnestnesse) containing offers to come to London, which we thought not fit to send, because we know not whether the House will bee pleased to take notice of it, being no direct Answer to the Propositions. We are hastening away with all speed to give you an Accompt of our whole pro∣ceedings. This we thought fit humbly to present, and take leave, being Newcastle the 2 of August 1646. Your faithfull Servants, Walter Earle. John HIppisley. Robert Goodwyn. Luke Robinson. SIR, THe Propositions being delivered by the Commissionees of both Kingdoms his Majesty answered to this effect▪ Gentlemen, I hope you do not expect a speedy answer, because the businesse is of high concernment: Whereupon the Earl of Pembroke answered they had but ten dayes e to stay after their comng to Town: Unto which the King answered, He would dispatch them in convenient ime and so they parted.
SIR, THe Commissioners after long atten∣tants, and frequent solicitations, have this Sunday morning received from His Majesty a Paper (other then which they cannot receive) with their Lordships. Sir, think no way satisfactory, or direct answer to what the Parliament sent to him for his assent unto, it conceives a desire of his Ma∣jesty to come to, or neer London, to receive satisfaction in divers matters, wherein yet he is unsatisfied, and that he will then grant what shall be desired or much to thi purpose. This Paper the Commissiners do not think fit to send up to the Houses be∣fore their coming to London, intending (God willing) to set forward from thence to morrow by for in the morning accom∣panied with the Marquesse of Arguile, and the Earle of Dumferling. SIR, Newcastle, August the 2. 1646. Your most humble Servant, to be commanded, E. R. Papers
TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAIESTY. The humble Petition of the Provost, Bayliffs, and Common Councell of E∣dinburg, the Representative Body thereof convened in Councell. VVHereas Your Maiesty hath been graciously pleased to cause publish a Proclamation here, de∣claring Your Pious and Royal Reso∣lutions for setling Religion and Peace in these afflicted Kingdomes, the Pe∣titioners bless God who hath put these thoughts into Your Maiesties Royall heart, and doe still pray the Almighty
God to confirm them, and in his wis∣dome and power to assist Your Ma∣iesty in the diligent and timous prose∣cution of the same. As for this Citie, the Petitioners acknowledge it their duty to testify to Your Maiesty, and all the world, that according to their many Protestations and solemne Co∣venants, they doe still as they did, ever entertain the consciences of all Loyall and Native duty to Your Maiesty, from which they shall never depart. And therefore from the like sence of duty, the Petitioners doe humbly sup∣plicate Your Majesty in this joynture of time, at which they conceive both Parliaments are to give in to Your Majesty, Propositions for a happy Peace, that it would please your Roy∣all Wisdome to take this opportunity to
make use of there wholesome counsell, for setling true Religion and Peace in all your Kingdomes, and for strengthning the union of the two Nations with your Majesty and betwixt themselves, whereby we are confi∣dent glory shall redound to God, honour and happinesse to your Maiesty and Royall Posterity, and comfort to all your Maiesties good Subiects, Which we shall be instant in prayer to the Almighty God for, and (as in all bound duty become, Your Maiesties most humble most faith∣full and obedient Subiects. Subscribed by the Provest and Bayliffs of Edenburg. FINIS.
