C7680 E154_17 99871593 156824
A CURRANT. 12 Julii, Stylo novo, 1642. OR, Some passages of great and dangerous Consequence in FRANCE. Also an exact RELATION Of the present state and condition of GERMANY, between the Imperialists Swedes, and others; And of the happy successe and progresse of the said Swedes. With other considerable matters fitting to be known in these times, wherein so many heads are employed against the Parliament of ENGLAND. London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and John Frank. 1642.
Paris, 12 Julii, 1542. Stylo novo. BY an Expresse to a great Person it's certified, That the Queen mother is dead, and is verily believed. Monsieur is gone, being of the Plot; and some say a great one that must be namelesse knew of it If M. Jermyn, M. Percy, and M Mounta∣gue had not been gone for Holland, there was order to have stayed them here. The Duke of Bulloyn is prisoner at Tu∣ryn; some say his brother is got into Sedan: There were many in this Plot, and it falls out happily it is discovered; for France and Spain had joyned, if the Plot had taken, which could not but
have produced dangerous effects to England in this sad time of distraction. As for the German News, the under∣written will fully satisfie you, being a most exact and impartiall Relation of the present state of those parts. The Prince of Transilvania seeing the happy successe of the Swedes, to∣wards the hereditary Countries of the Emperour, and believing he hath now found a fit occasion to execute his de∣signe contrived long since, which is, To make himself King of Hungaria, doth begin to arm very powerfully: that preparation, with the happy progresse of the Swedes, puts both the Emperour into great perplexity, and all Austria in∣to an Alarm; for Generall Tortonsen, after his taking of Necosse, having pur∣sued
the Imperiall Army into Mora∣via hath caused them to retire, and take their post toward the Frontiers of Hun∣garia, neer to Malsborgh, and Badison, whither Piccolomini is gone with all di∣ligence, to put the Imperiall Army in good order; but because the Troops which are come out of high Saxony and Franconia are dispersed, and for that the Swedes are come between them, they can very hardly joyn; besides some Re∣giments of the Emperours which are amongst them, are mutined, and have pillaged the Baggage of the Arch duke Leopoldus: Likewise it is not known whether it were the Swedes or Impe∣rialists that have pillaged 300 Wag∣gons laden with very rich houshold∣stuffe, which was intended to have been saved out of Moravia, by convey∣ing
of it to Vienna: In the mean time Conningsmarck, a Commander of the Swedes, hath taken the Town of Olmits, the Capitall of all Moravia, at the third Assault, and killed all which were found in Arms, from thence gone to Bruin, and it's believed at this time he will take it. Tortonsen threatens Gas and Prague; his Horse makes courses within 15 Leagues of Vienna, and doth expect speedily new succours out of Sweden. The Treaty with Luenburg goeth not forward, by reason that Hil∣desheim will receive no Garrison. Touching the Armies about the Rhyne, they remain in this state, each work up∣on their Bridges upon Boats, do fortifie their Camps with new succours: Hat∣feld hath received a new Supply of four Regiments out of Franconia and Swale,
and the Marshall de Guibriane, hath joyned to him his confederates the Hessens and the Weymerians; the first is encamped about Zoiet, and the other neer Ortingson: Don Francisco de Melo was not passed the River of Meise the first of this Month, but lodged between Riermond and Hepsemwert, and is in dis∣pute with Hatfeld for the highest Com∣mand: but the Prince of Orange, and Marshall de Guebriane agree very well, and their Camps are so neer together, that their Armies seem to be but one bo∣dy: there passeth in their quarters no∣thing but dayly Skirmishes, in which the Imperialists lose many men, besides those which dayly disband; but the want of Victual and Forrage will in the the end force one Army or the other to a Battell, or to dislodge from their
quarters. The Sea Fleet of the Dun∣kerkes was the third of this instant un∣der their Fort, which is as well appre∣hended in England as in Holland. FINIS.
