C835 E1008_1 99866951 119240
THE Morning Exercise METHODIZED; Or certain chief HEADS and POINTS OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION Opened and Improved in divers SERMONS, BY SEVERAL Ministers OF THE CITY OF LONDON, In the Monthly Course of the MORNING EXERCISE at GILES in the Fields. MAY 1659. Eccles. 12.11. The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one shepheard. LONDON, Printed by E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1660.
To the Right Honourable, CHARLES, Earle of WARWICK; NICHOLAS, Earle of SCARSDALE; PHILIP, Lord WHARTON; JOHN GLYN, (late) Lord Chief Justice of ENGLAND; Sir JOHN BROWNLOW Baronet: And to the Right Worshipful JOHN CREW Esq; GILES HUN∣GERFORD Esq; JOHN PIT Esq; THOMAS ROBINSON Esq; And to the rest of the Nobility, Gentry, and others the Inhabitants of Giles in the Fields: Grace, Mercy and Peace, from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Right Honourable and Beloved, IT is no small advantage to the holy life, to begin the day with God. The Saints are wont to leave their hearts with him over night, that they may find them with him in the Morning; when I awake I am still with thee, saith holy David, Psal. 139.18. Before earthly things break in upon us, and we receive impressions from abroad, 'tis good to season the heart with thoughts of God, and to consecrate the Early and Virgin operations of the mind, before they are
prostituted to baser objects. When the world gets the start of Religion in the Morning, it can hardly overtake it all the day; and so the heart is habitua∣ted to vanity all the day long; but when we be∣gin with God, we take him along with us to all the businesses and comforts of the day; which being seasoned with his love and fear, are the more sweet and savory to us. If there were no other benefit of the Morning Ex∣ercise, than to be an help to us in this setting the mind on work upon holy things, before it receive taint from the world, and the distraction of our or∣dinary affairs, it should upon that account be a very welcome guest to our dwellings. But there are other benefits, not a few that do attend it wherever it goes; namely, that it hath be∣come an happy occasion through Gods blessing of ma∣nifesting the Unity and Brotherly accord of the Ministers of this City; whilest by their mutual la∣bours they strengthen one anothers hands in the Lords work; and by a joynt testimony confirm those truths which each one apart, dispenceth to his own Auditory; for in the mouth of two or three Witnesses shall every word be established.2 Cor. 13.1. Besides, that by the course which this Exer∣cise hath hitherto held, each Auditory cometh to have a taste of the several gifts which one and the
same Spirit dispenseth for the use of edifying; and this not without some conformity to the antient pattern,Other fruits and advanta∣ges of the Morning Ex∣ercise, see in the Introducti∣on, Serm. 1. to∣wards the end. where the several Congregations of the same City, were not plures Ecclesiae Collaterales, divers Sister-Churches, but one and the same Church, meeting by parts in several places, fed and supplied by Officers in common, who by turns in each place dispenced the word to them, having their Government in common. Now this Morning Exercise hath the Lord once and again sent amongst you; there is a Providence that goeth along with Ordinances; the journeys of the Apostles were directed by the Spirit, as well as their doctrines, Acts 16.7. The course of this Exercise, though it hath been ordered by mans choice, yet not without Gods direction. To you is this word of Salvation sent, (saith holy Paul, Acts 13.26.) not come or brought, but SENT; and that as a message from our hea∣venly Father, without whose providnece a Sparrow falleth not to the ground. Now it concerneth you to see what use you will make of it: Sermons dye not with the breath in which they were uttered; If the dust of the Preachers feet bear witnesse against the despisers of the Gospel, their Sermons much more; Matth. 10.14, 15. Wherever the Word is preached, 'tis ; for a testimony; how for a testimony?
either to them, Matth. 24.14. or against them. Mark. 13.9. God keepeth exact account or reckoning what means and advantages each place or people have enjoyed: Three years have I come seeking fruit, Luke 13.7. alluding to the three years of his own Ministry, which then were fully elapsed. This SECOND Miracle did Jesus in Canaan of Galilee, John 4.54. He taketh notice of a first and a second; so 2 Pet. 3.1. This SECOND Epistle write I unto you; and Jer. 25.3. These THREE AND TWENTY years have I spoken the Word of the Lord, rising early, &c. You see God keeps a Memorial how many years the Gospel hath been amongst a people, yea, every day is upon account; for so it is added, even unto this day. What pressing Exhortations you have had; how many, and how long you have enjoyed them, all is upon the File; therefore it concerneth you to see that all this be not without fruit, and some notable good effect; that your account may be with joy, and not with grief and shame. The rather I urge this, because the Exercises of this Month have not been ordinary Morning Exer∣cises, but all the Arguments were picked and cho∣sen, (as the Preacher sought to finde out ac∣ceptable words, even words of truth, Eccl. 12.10.) and disposed into a certain order for the greater bene∣fit.
It is observed that the Psalms of David that are alphabetically disposed, are most exact in the com∣posure; so I hope I may say without offence, these Ser∣mons digested into a method, are the more accurate; with what perspicuity and strength they are managed, as to the Doctrinal part, and with what warmth and vi∣gour as to the Application, I cannot speak, being strict∣ly enjoyned silence by my Brethrens severe modesty; but the World will judge, and you I hope will evidence by your own growth in grace, and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. These Sermons which with so greedy attention you formerly heard with the hearing of the ear, are now written for a memorial; and that they may be subjected to your view and more deliberate consideration: I say they are written not only for the Churches use, but yours in special; and oh that they may be written upon your hearts, engraven there with a durable Character, such as shall never be defaced! Honourable and Beloved, I hope I need not presse any of you to get these books into your houses; I can easily presume it of the abler sort amongst you; and would earnestly presse it upon the meanest, even the ser∣vants in your Families, that they would abate not only of superfluous expences, but deny themselves some∣what, even of their ordinary conveniences, to purchase these Sermons; which, if the Ministry should fail, (a
judgement which England was never in such danger of since the Gospel was restored) and all other helps both in pub∣lick and private should be cut off, which God forbid; yet this one Book, next to your Bible, would be a stock of Divinity which might furnish you with the knowledge of the Essentials of Religion, and be like Manna to you in the Wil∣dernesse, till you come to Canaan. To that end therefore, that which I would with greatest se∣riousnesse urge upon you, is to get the substance and power of the truths contained in them into your hearts, and so to incul∣cate them, especially the general heads of them upon your chil∣dren and servants, that they may be trained up in the know∣ledge of these vital principles, which are of such use for the begetting and increasing of the life and power of godlinesse. It will be sad, if what was chiefly intended for your use, should finde least fruit amongst you; and that which is a common good, should be not a Monument only, but the aggravation of your unfruitfulnesse. But I hope better things of you my dearly Beloved, and things which accompany salvation, though I thus speak The good Lord who hath put this price into your hand, give you an heart to prize it, and to improve it; that you may not re∣ceive this grace of God in vain. In this hope I commend you to God, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. I am Yours in the service of the Gospel, THOMAS CASE.
The Preface to the Reader. NOt to increase the number of Books already grown in∣to a burden, and more apt to distract minds with their variety, than to edifie them with their Contents; but for a publick testimony to the truth of the Gospel, and to inform the ignorant, doth this Piece crowd into the World. Had many of the Brethren adhered to their own private in∣clination, and first aime in this work, these Sermons had only been published by word of mouth to the Auditory that then attended on them. To write to the World, is apprehended by them as a thing very distinct from preaching to a company of a few broken-hearted Christians, (who were willing to take this help along with them in their way to heaven) and to need more exactnesse of care and preparation. But upon the strong importunity of the Auditors, (some of them persons of great worth and honour) carrying with it the face of a Call from God, as valid as that which first invited them to the work, they were contented against their own private incli∣nation to yield to this way of publication for the profit of others; but with these CAUTIONS. First, That it be signified, that it was not intended to make up a Map or Compleat Body of Divine Truths, but only to handle some more necessary points, till Providence shall give opportunity to consider the rest. Secondly, That it was not designed to discusse these points in a Polemical, but positive way; and sutable to a popular Auditory. Thirdly, That it be understood that the Brethren that preached, were not acquainted with one anothers studies; but did every one ex∣presse his own sense in the point recommended to him. Fourthly, That this be not interpreted to be the work of the
whole Body of the London-Ministers, but of some of them, which they represent with the more tenderness. Partly, that the other very Reverend Brethren, who were not employed in this Turn and Course of the Morning Exercise, may not be charged with their weaknesses. Partly, because they have not without some regret observed that the larger English Annotations, in which but some few only of the late Assembly, together with some others, had an hand, are generally ascribed to the whole Assembly, and usually carry the name of the Assemblies Annotations, as if done by the joynt advice of that grave and learned convention. Fifthly, That since the preaching of these Sermons, there hath been no general review, but every one took care of tran∣scribing his own Discourse, and sending me the Copy, accordingly I sent it to the Presse. Sixthly, That if any of these points seem not to be discussed according to the full latitude and worthiness of the subject, it be remembred that each Exercise was to be punctually confined within the straits of an houre; in which time there was no room for larger excursions. Under the severity of these terms, my Brethren have consented that I should (if I saw fit) expose their labours to publick view, which I do with all chearfulnesse; Partly, that the world may be conscious to our Unity, soundnesse in the faith, and sobriety af judgement: And partly expecting from thence (I will say it, notwithstanding the restraints their modesty hath laid upon me) no small increase and return of fruit. The Lord by his good Spirit guide you into all truth. Yours in our Lord Jesus, THOMAS CASE.
The particular heads in Divinity discus∣sed in these several Sermons, are these. SErm. I. Introduct. Methodical systems of the special points of Christian Religion, useful and profitable for Ministers and people. Page 1. Serm. II. That there is a God. p. 29. Serm. III. The Trinity proved by Scripture. p. 65. Serm. IV. The Divine Authority of the Scriptures. p. 85. Serm. V. Man created in an holy, but mutable state. p. 105. Serm. VI. The Covenant of Works. p. 120. Serm. VII. The fall of man; or peccatum originale ori∣ginans. p. 134. Serm. VIII. Original sin inhering; or peccatum origina∣le originatum. p. 149. Serm. IX. The misery of mans estate by nature. p. 173. Serm. X. Mans impotency to help himself out of mise∣ry. p. 202. Serm. XI. The Covenant of Redemption. p. 216. Serm. XII. The Covenant of Grace. p. 233.
Serm. XIII. The Mediator of the Covenant, described in his Person, Natures and Offices. p. 261. Serm. XIV. Christs Humiliation, p. 258. alias 278. Serm. XV. Christs state of Exaltation. p. 305. Serm. XVI. The Satisfaction of Christ. p. 337. Serm. XVII. Of Effectual Calling. p. 353. Serm. XVIII. The true Believers union with Christ. p. 377. Serm. XIX. The nature of Justification. p. 403. Serm. XX. The Believers Dignity and Duty, or High Birth, and Honourable Employment. p. 433. Serm. XXI. Saving Faith. p. 455. Serm. XXII. Repentance not to be repented. p. 485. Serm. XXIII. Of Holinesse its nature and necessity. p. 554. Serm. XXIV. Of the Resurrection. p. 577. Serm. XXV. The Day of Judgement asserted. p. 605. Serm. XXVI. Of Hell. p. 621. Serm. XXVII. Of Heaven. p. 647. Serm. XXVIII. The Conclusion. p. 677.
The INTRODUCTION. 2 TIM. 1.13. Hold fast the forme of sound words which thou hast heard of me in faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus. IT was the Character which our Lord gave of Iohn the Baptist, He was a burning and a shining light: Such should every Minister of the Gospel be; shining with light, and burning with zeal;Joh. 5.25. he should have an head full of truth, that he may disseminate and scatter beams of Gospel-know∣ledge into the dark world; and an heart full of love, to that truth which he holds forth to others; that what he publisheth with his lips, he may be ready to witnesse with his life, and to seale up the testimony of Jesus with his dearest blood. Both these, our Apostle in this Chapter, (after a passionate salutation in the five first verses) commendeth to Timo∣thy, scil. 1. To look to his light; by stirring up the gift of God that was in him. Timothy must not suffer his gifts to lie sleeping under the ashes; but must blow them up, (as the, ignem sopitum suscitare. word signifieth) into a fire, by study, prayer and execrise.
2. He calls upon Timothy to look to his zeal, that that may not be extinguished; but that his heat may be equal with his light: And this he doth two ways. 1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively. Ver. 8.1. Negatively; Be not ashamed of the testimony of the Lord, nor of me his Prisoner. Ministers of the Gospel must neither be a shame to the Go∣spel, nor ashamed of the Gospel; no, although attended with disgrace and persecution from the reprobate world. And what herein he commends to Timothy, he first practised in his own per∣son, ver. 11. Though he was a prisoner for the Gospel, yet he was not ashamed of the Gospel: I suffer, &c. neverthelesse I am not ashamed.Rom. 1.16. 2. Affirmatively; The Apostle exhorteth Timothy to prepare for persecution;Ver. 8. Be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel. The Ministers of the Gospel should be so farre from being scan∣dalized at the sufferings of their leaders, that they should be al∣ways disciplining themselves for the same warfare; to preach the Cross of Christ, and to be ready also to bear the Crosse, makes a compleat Minister of the Gospel. This the Apostle urgeth upon a three-fold account. 1. A good Cause. 2. Good Company. 3. A good Captain. Timothy and other Evangelists, they have no reason to be afraid or asham'd of their sufferings; for, 1. They have a good Cause, ver. 12. For the which cause I suffer; what Cause is that? why, the Gospel, ver. 10. And this he presents under a twofold commendation. 1. The glory of the Gospel. 2. The manifestation of that glory. Ephes. 3.8.1. The glory of the Gospel: As having wrapt up in it the unsearchable riches of Jesus Christ; grace and glory, holinesse and happinesse: He hath saved us, and called us with an holy cal∣ling. Believers have begun their everlasting salvation on this side heaven.
2. The manifestation of that glory: It was given from eter∣nity; but it is revealed by the appearance of our Lord and Sa∣viour in the flesh; it lay hid in Gods purpose; but it is brought to light in the Gospel, ver. 9.10. Such a glorious gift, and so gloriously unveiled is worth, not only our sweat, but our blood; not pains only, but persecution; yea, to suffer in such a cause, is not more our duty, than it is our dignity. 2. They have good company: Saint Paul himself is in the Ʋan of them; who though an Apostle, by extraordinary missi n and commission, ver. 11. yet was not only a Preacher of the Go∣spel, but a Sufferer for the Gospel, ver. 12. For which cause I suffer these things: what things? scil. Imprisonment and affliction, ver. 8. A sufferer, and yet not ashamed of his sufferings: Neverthelesse I am not ashamed. They may be ashamed of their sufferings,Causa facit Martyrem, non poena. 1 Pet. 4.15. that suf∣fer for sinne; but sufferings for Christ and his Gospel, are mat∣ter of triumph and rejoycing, 1 Pet. 4.13, 16. Here is encou∣ragement for Gospel-sufferers. And Thirdly, They have a good Captain: Iesus Christ the Captain of our salvation. Who, that he might intender his own heart towards his suffering-followers by his own experience; was made perfect through sufferings; and accordingly he is very tender of, and faithful to all that endure persecution for his sake;Heb. 2.10. this was a ground of the Apostle his confidence, I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed: I know him by report, and I know him by experience: I know his faithfulnesse, and I know his All-sufficiency: I have deposited my liberty, my life, my body, my soul, my all in his custody; and I am perswaded as he is able, so he is willing to keep all safe, to his glorious appea∣rance: I may be a loser for Christ, I shall be no loser by him; whatever I lay down now, I shall take up again one day, with the advantage of immortality; he will keep the trust I have com∣mitted to him; it is but equity that I should keep the trust which he hath committed to me;. v. 12. . Ver. 14. 1 Tim. 1.11. even the glorious Gospel of the blessed God committed to my trust; committed to me upon those very termes, that I should not only publish it with my lips, but attest it with my blood. Thus in his own person the Apostle sets Timothy and his Suc∣cessors a Copy, and an Encouragement; which he windeth
up in the words of my Text; the sum of the Precahers duty. Hold fast the forme of sound words, &c. q. d. The pre∣mises considered; let neither pleasures nor persecution; the love of life, nor the fear of death, take thee off from a faithful and vigorous discharge of thy Ministerial office; but whatsoever it may cost thee, Hold fast the form of sound doctrine, &c. Briefly for the opening of the words. The form]  in the Greek, it signifies a Module or Platforme, a Frame of words or things, methodically disposed; as Printers set and compose their Characters or Letters in a Table.Types. Words] By words, we are to understand doctrine, evangelical truths, the principles of Christian Religion. .Sound] And they are called Sound words, either from the in∣trinsecal nature, when they are purely taught and delivered; E∣vangelical truths without mixture; the principles of Religion in their native purity and simplicity; Truth and nothing else but truth. Or else sound words, from their effect and operation, be∣cause they be of an healing vertue and influence, like the waters in Ezekiels vision, that issued out from under theEzek. 47.1. threshold of the Sanctuary; whichVer. 9. healed wherever they came. Which thou hast heard of me] It may be understood of the whole Platforme of Gospel-doctrine in general. Or, Else (very probably) of a Collection of some principal points of Religion, which the Apostle had methodically digested, and either preached in Timothy his hearing, or drawn up in writing, and committed to Timothy as a trust and treasure, not only for his own help and direction in preaching, but to transmit over to o∣thers, for the use and benefit of succeeding generations in the Church of Christ,. & 1 Tim. 6.20. so called in the next verse, That good thing which was committed to thee; and so expounded, chap. 2.2. The things which thou hast heard of me amongst many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men who shall be able to teach others also. Hold fast] Greek, ; the word hath a double signification; scil. to have, and to hold; and both of these the Apostle com∣mends to Timothy; namely,
1. To have such a form or collection of Gospel-doctrines, as a Type or Exemplar to which he should conforme in his Ministry. 2. To hold it; i. e. to hold it fast, Not to swerve from it in the course of his Ministry, but pertinaciously to ad∣here to it; not to suffer it to be corrupted by men of erroneous principles, nor to part with it upon any termes in the world; but to stand by it, and own it against all opposition and persecution whatsoever. This I conceive to be the sense of the words; which thus ope∣ned, may afford us some such Doctrinal Observations, as these; 1. Doct. Evangelical words are sound words; Or: All Gospel-truth is of an healing nature. 2. Doct. It is of great use and advantage boh for Ministers and pri∣vate Christians to have the main fundamental truths of the Go∣spel, collected and digested into certain Modules or Platforms; Or: Methodical systems of fundamental Articles of Religion, are very profitable both for Ministers and people. 3. Doct. Such Forms and Modules are very carefully and faithfully to be kept. 4. Doct. Faith and Love are as it were the two hands, whereby we may hold fast Gospel-truth. Other doctrines besides these might be raised from the words; but these are the main, and lie visibly in the face of the Text: And I intend to speak only to the second and third doctrine; the one (now) at our entrance upon this Morning Exercise; the other, at the Close, if God permit. The first and last of these doctrines may be of use in the hand∣ling of these two: In which doth lie the main designe, as of the Apostle here, so of the work which falls to my share in this month∣ly service. I begin with the first of them, scil. Doct. 1. Methodical systems of the main and special points of the Christian Religion, are very useful and profitable both for Ministers and people. In the managing of the doctrinal part of this Observation, I shall only give you two demonstrations. 1. Scripture-pattern. 2. The usefulnesse of such Modules. 1. Scripture-pattern.
The Word of God is full of such Maps and Modules of di∣vine truths necessary to salvation. The whole Scripture is a large Module of saving truth. Joh. 18.37.The whole Gospel (in general) is nothing but the great Plat∣form or Standard of saving doctrine. It was the great end and errand of Christ his coming into the world, to reveal unto us the truth of God; so himself testifieth, John 18.37. To this end was I born, and for this cause I came into the world, that I should bear witnesse unto the truth. It took up one whole entire office, where∣unto he was anointed of his Father; his Prophetical Office; so he was named many hundred years before his Incarnation by Moses: A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, like unto me, him shall you hear. The office of a Prophet was not only to foretell things to come;As Exod. 7.1. Aaron is call'd. but to reveal the mind of God, ac∣cording to the import of the Hebrew word Nabi, which signifi∣eth an Interpreter. Thus Jesus Christ came to be an Interpreter of his Fathers mind unto the world. No man hath seen God at any time; the onely begotten Sonne which is in the bosome of the Father,Joh. 1.18. he hath de∣clared him; , he hath expounded him; The whole Go∣spel which Christ preached was nothing else as it were but a pub∣lick testimony of the secret transactions between the Father and the Sonne concerning mans salvation; a transcript of that truth which was in the divine understanding from all eternity, John 8.38. & 15.15. And accordingly it is observable that the Sermons which Christ preached in the days of his flesh, have more of doctirne in them, than of perswasion; more of the Teacher, than of the Pastor; as more sutable to his Ministry, wherein he was to lay down a Module of Gospel-truth; and to leave it to the world, to be recei∣ved and believed unto salvation. The credit of our Religion is founded upon this important truth, that Christ was sent from God to reveal unto us the mind and will of his Father, and to be believed in all he delivered unto us; all other Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel are but Deputy Wit∣nesses to make report of Christs affidavit to the doctrine of salvation. And it is yet further remarkable, that this doctrine which Jesus Christ left us in the Gospel, is nothing else as it were, butNovum Testa∣mentum in ve∣tere velatum, vetus in novo revelatum. a Comment or Paraphrase of what was preached by Moses and the
Prophets in the Old Testament; as he cameMatth. 5.18. not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill them; so he came to expound and reconcile them with the doctrine which he himself taught; thus it is recorded by the Evangelist, thatLuke 24.27. beginning at Moses, he expounded unto his Disciples in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself. So that the result of all this in general, is this, that the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are nothing else but a full and perfect platform or Module of divine truth; given to the Church at first by Christ himself the great Pro∣phet, and transmitted by the Ministry of those who were succes∣sively the Amanuenses or Secretaries of the Holy Ghost;2 Pet. 1.21. from which no man is to recede upon pain of damnation. But now more particularly, we may observe, that besides this great universal Map or Synopsis of divine truth; there are to be found in Scripture more compendious and summary abstracts, and abridgements containing certain of the main heads and points of saving doctrine, methodized into lesser bodies and tables for the help of our faith and knowledge. And we find them accommodated by the Penmen of the Holy Ghost, to two special ends and purposes.Two ends of such Modules. 1. To instruct the Church and people of God in the more ne∣cessary and fundamental points and principles of Religion. 2. To antidote beleevers against the infection and contagion of unsound doctrine which have crept into the Church in the several ages and successions thereof. Of the first sort, In the Old Testament,To informe the Church in the principles of Religion. (though in a larger volume) is the book of Deuteronomy, which being interpreted, is the repetition of the Law. And because that (being so large) might seem too great a burden to the memory; Behold, God himself hath contracted it into a very brief, but full , The ten Com∣mandments, a brief abstract of the whole Law. Three Modules delivered by Christ in his first Sermon. or Module in the ten Commandments; which are called ten words, Deut. 4.13. because they are the briefest Epitome of the Law. And thus our Saviour as he laid down the great and larger draught of Gospel-doctrine; so also in his Sermons he hath left some shorter forms or types of necessary points and principles of Religion; exempli gratiâ; in his first Sermon after he entred upon his publick Ministry, he hath drawn up three very concise and most excellent Modules.
1. Of beati∣tudes, Mans summum bo∣num.The first Module contains the beatitudes. A list of parti∣culars, wherein mans true and chiefest happinesse doth consist, Matth. 5. from the third verse to the twelfth; wherein he doth totally crosse the judgment of the blinde world; writing bles∣sednesse where the world writes woe; and woe, where the world writes blessednesse. Credenda.These we may call the credenda; Articles of faith to be be∣lieved by all those that would be accounted Christs Dis∣ciples. The second Module contains a list of duties; things to be done by every one that would be saved. This our Saviour doth, by asserting and expounding the Moral Law; from the seventeenth verse to the end of the Chapter; confuting and reforming the false glosses which the Scribes and Pharisees had put upon the ten Commandm nts, thereby making the Law of God of none effect. Facienda.And these we may call the facienda, things to be done. The third Module contains a list of petitions, which in the sixth Chapter, from the ninth verse to the sixteenth, he commends to his Disciples, and in them to all succeeding generations of the Church, as a form or directory of prayer: Not that Christi∣ans should (alwayes) confine themselves to the words,Petenda. . but con∣form to the matter in their supplications at the Throne of grace. After this manner pray ye: And these we may call the petenda, things to be prayed for. The Apostles method in their Epistles. The Epistle to the Romans, the Christian Catechisme.The holy Apostels tread in our Saviours steps; you may observe in all their Epistles, that in the former part of them, they (ge∣nerally) lay down a Module of Gospel-principles, and in the latter part a Module of Gospel-duties. The Epistle to the Romans is upon this account justly called by some of the Antients, The Chri∣stians Catechisme:— As containing an , or list of the chief Articles of the Christian Religion; for although the principal designe of the Apostle be to discusse that prime Evangelical doctrine of justifica∣tion, in the negative and affirmative part of it. Neg. not in works. Affir. in a free gratuitous imputation of the righteousnesse of Christ applied by faith; together with the grounds, evidences,
and fruits thereof, yet occasionally according to the wisdome gi∣ven unto him, he doth with a most profound and admirable art interweave other deep and fundamental points of Religion, scilicet A parallel between theChap. 5. two Adams. The doctrine of Original sinne. The corruption and depravation ofChap. 7. nature. The doctrine of grace. chap. 7. The merit and efficacy of Christs death and resurrection.Chap. 6. The doctrine of AFFLICTION, and the use of it to believers.Chap. 8. The mysteries of Election and Predestination.Chap. 9. The excoecation and rejection of the Jews.Chap. 10. The vocation of the Gentiles,Chap. 11. with the restituion of the seed of Abraham, &c. And when he hath finished the  of doctrinal principles, he winds up the Epistle with a short, but full delineation of Evan∣gelical duties; wherein he doth bring down those principles unto practice: The former part of the Epistle is the DOCTRINE, the latter part is the ƲSE; I beseech you therefore brethren by the mercies of God, &c. The whole Epistle to the Hebrews is nothing else as it were, but a delineation of the THREE OFFICES OF JESUS CHRIST; King, Priest, Prophet.The Epistle to the Hebrews. Especially his Priestly office with a most profound, and yet dilucid Exposition of those Levitical types and figures, which did more obscurelyHeb. 10.1. shadow forth Christ under the Law; so that in that Epistle, as in a Table, Christians may behold the Law to be nothing else but Evangeli∣um velatum, veiled Gospel; and the Gospel to be no other thing than Lex revelata, unveiled Ceremony, or the Law with the Curtain drawn. But there be divers short Modules or Compendiums of Christian doctrine occasionally delineated by the Apostles in their several Epistles. In the Epistle to the Galatians, within the compasse of five ver∣ses, the Apostle gives two full Catalogues or Lists, chap. 5. The one of sinnes, ver. 19.20, 21. The other of graces, ver. 22.23.
In the Epistle to the Ephesians, chap. 5. & 6. you have an ex∣cellent and compleat Module of Relational duties; Of Ver. 22.Wives towards their husbands. Ver. 25.Husbands towards their Wives. Chap. 6.1.Children towards their Parents. Ver. 4.Parents towards their Children. Ver. 5.Servants towards their Masters. Ver. 9.Masters towards their servants. The Epistles to Timothy give us a type or table of Ministeri∣al offices and qualifications; yet so, as most beautifully adorned with other most precious Evangelical principles; the sum where∣of is CHRIST, 1 Tim. 1.15. This is a faithful saying, &c. And the principal comprehensive parts, FAITH, LOVE; faith apprehensive, and love active. These two in my Text, many learned men conceive to be intended by Saint Paul, as the two great comprehensive fundamentals of this  commen∣ded by him unto Timothy his care and fidelity: Hold fast the form of sound words; the two main branches whereof are FAITH and LOVE; but of this more hereafter. In the Epistle to Titus, the Apostle will furnish you with two short, but very perfect systems; one in chap. 2. ver. 11.12, 13, 14. Where you have Ver. 11.1. Gods grace made the original and fountain of all the good we expect from God, and perform to God. Ver. 11.2. And this grace issuing it self by Christ, for the salvation of the creature. Ver. 11.3. And appearing by the Gospel; (there you have Scripture inti∣mated;) and Ver. 12.4. Teaching us as to the Privative part of obedience, to de∣ny ungodlinesse and worldly lusts; terms capacious enough to comprise all sinne. As to the positive part, to live soberly; implying all personal du∣ties for the governing of our selves in our single capacity; Righteously implying all duties to our neighbours;Ver. 12. godly, no∣ting our whole Communion with God in the duties of his worship. More cannot be said as to the duty of man. Now 5. The encouragements are either from looking forward. backward. If we look forward,Ver. 13. there is the blessed hope, the full consummation
whereof we receive at the glorius appearing of the g eat God; the coming of Christ to judgment, ver. 13.Ver. 13. and there we have three grand Articles of faith asserted: 1. Heaven. 2. The day of judgment. 3. The Godhead of Christ. If we look backward, we are obliged to obedience, not only out of hope, but from gratitude, or the great benefit of redemption by Christ, ver. 14. and in that we have asserted, 1. Christs willingnesse to dye; for he gave himself.Ver. 14. 2. The purpose or end of his death; to redeem us from all iniquity. 3. The foundation of an holy life in our regeneration, And hath purified us unto himself. 4. The nature of a Church, to be a peculiar people. 5. The necessity of good works, in the last clause, zealous of good works, ver. 14. So that in this short Map you have a compleat summary of all that fundamental doctrine which doth animate and quicken to the life of holinesse. The next body of Divinity according to the exact method of the Palatine Catechisme, is in chap. 3. ver. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.Chap. 3. where you have, 1. Mans misery by nature, ver. 3. 2. His Redemption by Christ, ver. 4. set forth, 1. By the spring or first moving cause, the kindnesse and love of God, ver. 4. 2. The false cause removed, not by works of righteousnesse which we have done. ver. 5. 3. By the effects; justification, justified by his grace, ver. 7. Sanctification,Ver. 5. he hath washed us in the laver of regenerati∣on, and renewing by the Holy Ghost; ver. 5.Ver. 7. The consummation of all in glory, heires according to the hope of eternal life. ver. 8.Ver. 8. 3. The thankful life in a fruitful course of holinesse and good works, ver. 8. — Affirme constantly that they which believe in God may be careful to maintain good works. Another systeme of practical divinity you have in the second Epistle of Saint Peter, chap. 1. ver. 5.6, 7.Ver. 5. Adde to your faith vertue, &c. By vertue is meant the study of holinesse, which there is set forth by its furniture, and subjective parts or branches.
Ver. 5.1. The furniture of vertue, it is rooted in FAITH, guided by KNOWLEDGE,Ver. 6. armed on the Ver. 6.Right-hand by TEMPERANCE, or an holy moderation in the pleasures and comforts of the world: On the Left-hand by PATIENCE against the crosses and inconvenien∣cies thereof. 2. The branches or subjective parts of this vertue, are Ver. 7.GODLINESSE, a grace that guideth us in our immedi∣ate commerce with God. BROTHERLY KINDNESSE, a grace that directeth us in our duties to our fellow-Saints. CHARITY, helping us in the duties we owe to all men. In many other places do the Apostles lay the Doctrine of God in one intire view before our eyes, lest the minde should be di∣stracted by various and dispersed explications; or by dwelling too much upon one part, we should neglect the other. Second end of such Platforms to obviate er∣rour.A SECOND SORT OF MODULES: Or, A second end and design of such Modules, is, to obviate er∣rors, and to Antidote Christians against the poyson and infecti∣on of rotten pernicious principles; for no sooner had the good Husbandman sowed his field with good seed, but the envious man went out after him, and began to scatter tares. 2 Pet. 2.1.In opposition whereunto, the Apostles in their several Epistles were careful to furnish the Churches with such Modules and Platforms of truth, as might discover and confute those damna∣ble heresies. 2 Pet. 1.12. .Hence the Apostle Saint Peter calls them PRESENT TRUTHS; that is, Principles of the Christian Faith, most seasonable for those times wherein they were writ; as every Church and age had its present errors and false doctrines, where∣by the false Apostles did labour to undermine the truth, and to seduce the Professors of it; so the Apostles in that zeal to the truth, and compassion to the souls of men, did bestir themselves to Countermine those Seducers, and to stablish the Churches in the faith of Jesus Christ, by collecting some special heads and points of Gospel Doctrine opposite to those errors, and sending them to the several Churches, where they had planted the Gospel. These the Apostle calls the Present truth; Thus Saint Paul (a∣mong other places) in his first Epistle to Timothy chap. 4. from the first verse to the ninth verse.
The Apostle Peter in his second Epistle, chap. 2. throughout. St. Jude spends his whole Epistle upon the same design. But above all, the Apostle Saint John is very large and distinct upon this account. His first Epistle consists specially of a two-fold Module or Platform; i. e. 1. A form or table of Gospel Principles.Admodum arti∣ficiosa est hujus epistolae metho∣dus; nm ad modum catenae Christiana fidei mysteria & ax∣iomata conne∣ctuntur. &c. Dicson. 2. A form or table of Gospel-Evidences; both of them in op∣position to the false teachers of those times, those Antichrists, of whose numerous increase he gives them that solemn notice, 1 Epistle 2. chap. 18. verse. Little children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there MANY ANTICHRISTS. To Antidote Christians against the plague of the false do∣ctrines, which such Sectarian Antichrists had disseminated, doth the Apostle lay down, 1. An , or PATTERN of Gospel-principles, Ex. gra. 1. That God is a God of an infinite universal perfection and ho∣linesse. Chap. 1. ver. 5. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; This, against them that most blasphemously asserted,The Carpo∣cratians taught that men must sin, and do the Divels will, or else they could not enter into heaven. Epi∣phanius. Simon Ma∣gus, and after him Florinus Blastus, Apel∣les, Hermoge∣nes, Valentia∣ni, Marcionitae, &c. Priscillianistae Deum affirmant mendacem. Aug. de haerres. c. 70. GOD TO BE THE AUTHOUR OF SIN, &c. against whom also Saint James contends, Jam. 1. ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 2. That conformity to God is an inseparable concomitant of communion with God. This against them that were not afraid toEo tempore fuerunt quí m diimi societatem cum Deo, propter peccata censebant. The Gnosticks, Ebionitae, &c. ambulantes in tenebris jactitabant se Deo placere; falsitas doctrinae & turpitudo morum tunc vi∣gebat non solum in philosophorum scholi, sed & apud haereticeos. Cypr. affirm that ju∣stified persons being elected, let them live never so impurely, do remain in the favour of God, &c. (as some amongst us, and such as would be accounted Stars of the first Magnitude) that a man might have as much communion with God in sinne, as in the duties of Religion. If any man say, &c. It clearly implies there were that did say so. 3. A third principle he layes down, is the doctrine of original corruption, even in the regenerate themselves.Pelagiani ne∣gant. originate peccatum. Aug. cont. Mendac. Against
those that taught thePelagiani. Aug. contr. Mend. total abolition of original sin in and by Baptisme; or that denied the being, or at least the damnable nature of it; Verse 8. If we say we have no sin, &c. 4. The necessity of confession of sin, not only against themEpiphanius calls the Nova∣tians, , murderers of repentance. Ba∣sil. de poenit. that decried repentance for sin, and confession of sin, but a∣gainst them that denied pardon to themMontanistae, & Novatiani. Jerom. Ep. ad Marcel. de erroribus Montani. that repent. If we con∣fesse our sinnes, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, &c. 5. He asserts the doctrine of actual sinne in the regenerate, a∣gainst them that affirmed thatThe Simo∣nians, Gnosticks and other he∣reticks of that age, taught that there was no sin but un∣belief; that to the justified, all things were clean, however they live. vid. Aug. de perfectione justi. c. 21 Clem. Alex. &c. conceived the Apostles after the coming down of the Holy Ghost upon them, nullis esse pec∣catis aut passionibus ohnoxii Joviniani docebant, justum nec leviter peccare. a justified person could not sin; or (which is the same) that God sees no sin in his chil∣dren. If we say, that we have not sinned, we make him a lyar, &c. If we say we have no sin, there's the denial of original sin; if we say we have not sinned, there's the denial of actual sin; both make up the great heresie of theCatharists in the third Centurie after Christ. Catharists, who held perfecti∣on in this life. 6. The Apostle vindicates the preceptive obli∣gation of the moral Law, even over justified persons. Against the AntinomianThe Simo∣nians, Carpo∣cratians, Mar∣cionites, Mani∣ches did not on∣ly deny the moral law, but curse and blaspheme it, as given not by God, but by some unlucky nature. heresie, which presumptuously brea∣keth even that yoke (also) from the neck of the Disciples, Chap. 2. verse 3, 4, 5. Hereby we know that we love him, if we keep his Commandments. So early were these poysonous weeds sprung up in the Church of God. The other Module which the Apostle layeth down, is a Cata∣logue of Gospel-evidences, certain marks and signs of an inte∣rest in Christ,A Catalogue of Scripture-evidences. and of a right and title to life eternal: such as these.
1. Obedience to Gods Commandments, ut sup. 2. Contempt of the world, Ch. 2.15. 3. Stedfastnesse in the doctrine of the Gospel, verse 8, 19, 20,—24. 4. Conformity to Jesus Christ in holinesse. ch. 3. ver. 3. 5. Mortification, 6, 7, 8, 10. 6. Love to the Saints, verse 14. and chapter 5.2, 10, 11. 7. A believing confessionMost blas∣phemously de∣nied by the Si∣monians, Chry∣stolites, Potes. &c. Aug. de. haeres. of Gods sending Jesus Christ into the world as the promised Messias; with love to him, and thank∣fulnesse for him, chap. 4. In the four first verses of the fifth chapter, we have no lesse than seven evidences each lincking in with the other, and bearing witnesse to the other. As, 1. You have faith in Christ bearing witnesse to Regeneration; Whosoever believeth, &c. is born of God. 2. Love to God bearing witnesse to faith. He that loveth him that begat, &c. 3. Love to the Saints bearing witnesse to our love of God. He loveth him also that is begotten. Augustine understands it of our love to Christ; but the Context expounds it of our love to the Saints, for so it followeth, ver. 2. where we have, 4. Love to God reciprocally witnessing our love to the Saints. Hereby we know we love the children of God when we love God. 5. Obedience to Gods Commandments bearing witnesse again to our love; — And keep his Commandments. 6. Delight testifying the truth of our obedience. His Command∣ments are not grievous. 7. And lastly, Victory over the world bearing witnesse to Rege∣neration; For whosoever is born of God overcometh the world, Verse 4. It were easie out of this, and the other two subsequent Epi∣stles, to compleat the  of Gospel EVIDENCES; which are not thus expresly delineated, that by them only the Church might describe her members: (as some loose and vaine spirits fancy) but for the members of the Church to try and exa∣mine themselves by, whither they be real and living members yea or no. It were easie I say to adde to the Catalogue; but I have insisted too long upon the first demonstration; sc. Scripture Pattern.
I come now to the second demonstration: namely The advanta∣ges of such Modules. 1. For the Or∣nament of the truth.The excellency and advantage of such Forms and Collections of E∣vangelical truths. And, In the first place it addes much to the beauty and ornament of the truth; whither it be delivered from the Pulpit, or from the Press in such Systemes and Platforms, the Hearer or Reader, may, as in a Map or Table, (sometimes of one sort, sometimes of another) behold divine truths standing one by another in their Method and Connexion; mutually casting light and lustre upon each other. Every truth single, is very precious, and indeed of infinite va∣lue, as purchased with, and ratified in the blood of Christ; but to see the truths of the Gospel linked together in their proper union, facing one another like the Cherubims, Exod. 25.20. is very glorious. As the stones of the Temple, when they were squared and po∣lished in the Forrest, were very costly, for both matter and workmanship; but when they were layd into the building, and for∣med up into a Temple, what a beautiful and magnificent structure did they make? The Disciples beholding it, Luk. 21.5. were filled with delight and wonder! The Curtains of the Sanctuary, each by themselves were very rich, both for their materials and curious Embroyderies; but had you seen them in their Connecture, each Curtain fastned to the other with taches of gold, and so making up one entire per∣fect Tabernacle, sparkling and shining in all its native spendour, it would have been a ravishing sight. The very representation of many Countries in one Nation; of many Nations in one of the divisions or quarters of the world; and of all the quarters described in one Globe or Map, it is ve∣ry delightful to the eye of an intelligent beholder; at once dis∣covering the scite and cognation, the Longitude and Latitude, the distance and degree of every Kingdome and County; such globes and tables are full of delight and profit. It is in a most eminent manner observable in the Creation of the world; of every single days work, it is said, God saw that it was good; but when the whole Compages of heaven and earth was set together into one entire Fabrick and Creation, God
saw every thing that he had made,Gen. 1.31. and behold it was VERY GOOD. Such a rare piece are Gospel-truths in their variety and unifor∣mity; not lesse glorious a d admirable, than heaven and earth, Sunne, Moon, Starres, Elements, in all their order and or∣nament. Secondly,2. Help to knowledge. Such types and Exemplars of divine truths are of great help to the understanding; As the Collection of many beams and luminaries makes the greater light, so it is in tne judgement. A constellation of Gospel-principles shining toge∣ther into the understanding, fills it with distinct and excellent knowledge;2 Cor. 4.6. It gives us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. One truth doth irradiate and ex∣pound another. The truths of the Gospel in their method and series, are interpretative one to the other; while the understan∣ding by means hereof hath the advantage of dwelling upon them the object, and comparing spiritual things with spiritual things, as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 2.13. The truth is, he knows but little of the truth, that knows it only within it self; he understands it aright that knows it in its connexion and correspondence with other truths of the Go∣spel. That Christ dyed to save sinners, is a most precious truth, 1 Tim. 1.15. but he knoweth TOO LITTLE of it that knows it alone (as most of ignorant Christians do who perish with their knowledge:) he knoweth this truth to purpose, that knows it in its connexion with a lost estate, that knows it in its references to the fall, the wounds and bruises, and death contracted by it; he knows Redemption by Jesus Christ aright, that knoweth it in order to the GUILT and POWER of sin, and mans total impotency to save himself from either. He knows salvation aright, that knows it in the extent and ver∣tue of all Christs OFFICES, King, Priest, and Prophet, that understands salvation to be a saving of the poor creature, from the REIGN of sin by the Kingly Office of Jesus Christ, a saving of a man from IGNORANCE, ERROR, and those false rotten principles which are naturally radicated in the understanding by the Prophetical Office of Jesus Christ, as well as a saving him from HELL and WRATH TO COME by the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ.
He knows aright the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, not that knows it singly and nakedly only in the story and notion of it, but that knoweth it in the effectual application of it by the Spi∣rit for mortification and vivification, that knoweth it in its con∣nexion with, and influence into justification, and sanctification, &c. He that thus knoweth Christ and him crucified, knoweth him as the truth is in Jesus; His understanding is full of light. Alas, the ignorance and misery of our times, is not that peo∣ple are totally destitute of the principles of Christian Religi∣on; but that they know them singly only, and apart; and so they know them but by halfes, yea, not so much; for I dare be bold to say, the better half of every truth, consists in its method and necessary coherence with other truths; without which there∣fore, the knowledge men have of them, must needs be but dark and lifelesse. Thirdly, Such Patterns and Platforms, whether of larger or of lesser compasse,Advantage help to memo∣y. are a great help to memory. In all Arts and Sciences, order and method is of singular advantage unto memory. We do easily retain things in our mind, when we have once digested them into order; It is not so much multitude of objects, as their variousnesse and independency which is burdensome to memory; when once the understanding apprehends them in their natural union and fellowship one upon another, the me∣mory comprehends them with much more sweetnesse and fa∣cility. Hence it is that NUMBER and PLACE are of such rare use in the art of memory. The reason why people (generally) remember no more of the Sermons they hear, is for want of Catechizing, whereby they might come to know the principles of Religion in their or∣der, and methodical contexture. Usually in Sermons, truths are delivered single and apart; and the ignorant hearer knows not where the Minister is, nor what place the doctrine delivered ob∣tains in the body of divinity, nor how they are knit together; and so the memory leaks them out as fast as they are dropt in; or∣der is the very glue of memory. Method in a single Sermon, when the hearer is acquainted with it, gratifieth the memory, as well as the understanding; while it doth not only lodge things in
their own place, but locks the door upon them, that they may not be lost. When things are knit and linckt in one with another (as in a chaine) pull up one link, and that will pull up another, so that the whole chaine is preserved. But we may have occasion to speak again of this point; And therefore, Fourthly, such Modules serve to quicken affection.4. Advan∣tage to quick∣en affection. Sympathy and Harmony have a notable influence upon the affections. The sounding of a single string makes but little musick; let a skilfull hand touch them in their musical consent and symphonie, and it affects the hearer to a kinde of ravishment; So it is with evan∣gelical truths: place them in their proper rooms, that a man may behold them in their mutual correspondencies, and apt cou∣plings together, and truly, the Seraphims themselves answering one to another, and ecchoing to another, make not a sweeter har∣mony in their celestial Hallelujahs. Fifthly, It is a marvelous Antidote against errour and seduction. Gospel truths in their series and dependance, are a chain of gold to tie the truth and the soul close together. People would not be so easily trapand into heresie, if they were acquainted with the concatenation of Gospel-doctrines within themselves. As for instance, men would not certainly be so easily comple∣mented to worship that Idol of free-will, and the power of nature, were they well principled in the doctrine of the fall; The de∣sign of God in permitting of it, held out in Scripture in such large and legible Characters, that he which runs may read, Psal. 51.4. 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31, &c. If they did with sobriety of Spirit observe what the Scripture prclaimes concerning the impotency of the lapst and ruined crea∣ture, mans helplesse condition in himself, Rom. 5.6. Ephes. 2.1. Of the absolute necessity of the quickening, helping and stablish∣ing influence of the Spirit of Christ, &c. When a chaine of pearls is broken, a single jewel is easily lost; divine truths are mutually preservative in their social embra∣ces and coherence. Sixthly,6. Advan∣tage, growth in grace. Growth in grace is one blessed fruit of such systems and tables of divine truths. When oundations are well laid, the superstructures are prosperously carried on; want of distinct knowledge in the mysteries of Religion, is a great obstruction to the growth of grace; The great cause of the believing Hebrews
non proficiency was their defect in the foundation; the , the first principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. unskill∣fulnesse in the word of righteousnesse, made them that they were but babes in grace, ver. 13. Ʋse. Ʋse 1. In the first place, it serves to justifie the practice of the Churches of Jesus Christ, which have their Publick Forms and Tables of the fundamental Articles of the Christian faith, drawn up by the joynt labour and travel of their learned and godly Di∣vines, after much and solemn seeking of God by fasting and prayer, in the solemn profession whereof they all consent and a∣gree. Such were those antient publick Creeds. The Athanasian Creed. The Nycene Creed, and that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, which justly merits that title; if not be∣cause compiled by the twelve Apostles, every one casting in their Symbole or Article, as tradition goes; yet because colle∣cted out of the Apostles writings, and is as it were, a brief form or abridgement of the Doctrine taught by Christ and his A∣postles. An Epitomy of the Christian faith. And such are the Confessions which most of the Reformed Churches have drawn up for their own use, comprehending the most necessary and fundamental Articles of the Christian faith, to be generally owned and asserted by all within their Associations and Jurisdictions, whither Ministers or people. That Confession of faith which was compiled by the Reve∣rend and Learned Divines of the late Assembly at Westminster, and presented to the two Houses of Parliament, as their Advice in matters of Religion, was of this nature, and obtains the primacy amongst all the Confessions of the Reformed Chur∣ches, in the judgement of many Learned Orthodox Di∣vines. Such Formes and Modules are of excellent use in the Churches. Partly to be a bank or bulwark to keep error and heresie from breaking into the Church of God. Partly to prevent dissents and dissentions, which are very apt to rise amongst the Pastours and Teachers, as well as amongst the private members of such Congregations, where every one is left at liberty, to preach and practice, to hold, and hold forth what is right in their own eyes.
Partly to preserve the truth in its integrity and beauty, and the professors of it in unity and uniformity,Isa. 4.5. the glory of the Churches, and the defence upon that glory. Use 2. It serves to shew us the benefit and advantage of pub∣lick Chatechismes; whither larger, containing a more general collection of Gospel truths for the use of such as are of larger un∣derstandings, young or old; or lesser, containing only some few of the most necessary principles of Religion in the most facile and fami∣liar way, for the help of meaner capacities; amongst which, (al∣though there be some hundred several forms extant in the Re∣formed Churches, yet) those two forms or Modules drawn up by the late Reverend Assembly, their larger and shorter Catechism, obtain the general vote both abroad and at home for their excel∣lency and usefulnesse. And it is the wish of very learned and ju∣dicious men that there were yet some shorter and more easie form drawn up, that might be reduced to a few heads of the first and most necessary points of Christian faith for the institution of babes: The great advantage of such forms of Chatechistical doctrine is that thereby a Minister of the Gospel may acquaint his people with more of the necessary and saving truths of the Gospel in a few months, than he can well preach over in many years; and by the brief and frequent running over the principles of Religion, people of all sorts and ages, would be incomparably prepared for the Word preached, and profit more by one Sermon, than unprincipled hearers commonly do by twenty. Use 3. Hence also I might commend to young Students in Di∣vinity the reading of systems and compendious Abstracts and A∣bridgements, as an excellent entrance and manuduction unto their Theological studies, before they lanch into the larger tracts and treatises in that vast and immense ocean of Divine know∣ledge; of which we may say almost to desparation, Ars longa, vita brevis. The Shipwright that is to build a large and stately Vessel, doth first shape his work in a very small Module. And he that is to travel into the remote parts of the world, shall render his labour much more fruitful by reading Maps and Globes at home; for by that means he shall know where he is when he comes abroad; his eye and his understanding will mutually interpret one to the o∣ther; thus your curious workwomen do first make their borders and trails, and then fill them.
Use 4. It serves to commend Methodical preaching; that Mi∣nister that is wise and judicious to observe method in his Sermon, and method between Sermon and Sermon; a Scriptural connexion as (much as may be) between subject and subject, doctrine and doctrine; omne tulit punctum, he is a Preacher indeed; he shall not only profit, but delight his hearers; and make them not only knowing Christians, but distinct and judicious. Use 5. It commends (not least) constant and fixed hearing; especially when people sit under a judicious and methodical Mini∣stry;Varia lectio delectat ani∣mum, certa pro∣dest. Sen. loose hearing may please, but the fixed will profit; skip∣ping hearing for the most part makes but sceptical Christians; when people hear at randome, have a snatch here, and a snatch there; here a truth perhaps, and there an errour; here a notion, and there a novelty, &c. such mixt hearing makes up the gar∣ment of knowledge, but just like a beggars Cloak full of patches; they are never able to bring their knowledge into any form or me∣thod; ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; their knowledge is like an heap of pebbles, upon which a man can never raise a superstructure; whereas they that sit under a fixed Ministry, (one that is Master of his Art) they are ac∣quainted with the way and course, and project of his preaching; as the Apostle tells Timothy, 2 Epist. 3.10. But thou hast fully known my doctrine, purpose, &c. i. e. the designe and method of my Ministry. Such hearers (if judicious) can follow their Teacher through the series and deduction of his Ministery, from Subject to Sub∣ject, and from Text to Text, and from Head to Head, till at length they have, (before they take notice of it) an hypotypo∣sis, or collection of Gospel-truths formed in their understanding: Such an hearer begins where he left the last time, and so from time to time is still going on, shining and growing, and enlight∣ning unto the prepared day,Prov. 4.18. from faith to faith, from knowledge to knowledge, and from truth to truth, till he comes in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Sonne of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ.Ephes. 4.13. Various hearing makes variable Christians; St. James his professors (for the most part) double-minded men, unstable in all their ways,James 1.8. they are still beginning, but never able to make any prosperous and successeful progresse in the knowledge of Christ.
Sixthly and lastly, from hence give me leave to com∣mend to you the benefit and advantage of THE MORN∣ING EXERCISE, which the good hand of Providence brings to your doors this ensuing month, and begins to morrow morning in this place. Truly God hath been pleased to make this morning Lecture a great mercy to this City, ever since it was first erected, which was, WHEN LEYCESTER WAS BESIEGED;The fruits of the morning exercise in the City. it hath been like the Ark in the house of OBED-EDOM, a blessing where ever it hath come, a morning cloud which hath let fall sweet refreshing showres in every place. In special God hath made it instrumental 1. For the strengthning of the weak hands, and confirming the feeble knees of the people of God,Isa. 35.3, 4. Comfort a∣gainst fear. who in this time of Eng∣lands troubles have been of a fearful heart, and of a trembling spirit; many poor Christians who in times of publick dangers and confusions have come to these morning Assemblies (like the Ma∣ries to the Sepulchre of our Lord) with their hearts full of fears, and their eyes full of tears, have been dismissed those Assemblies with fear and great joy; their hearts have been revived,Matth. 28.8. and their hands strengthned in the Lord their God. 2.A preservative against Apo∣stacy. 2 Pet. 3.17. God hath made use of this exercise for the preserving of thousands from errour and damnable doctrines in these times of sad Apostacy. While many ignorant and unstable souls being led away with the errour of the wicked, have fallen from their own stedfastnesse, there want not multitudes (through grace) who are ready to acknowledge that they owe their confirmation and stability in the truth, (under God) in a very eminent manner to the labours of those godly Orthodox Divines, who have bestowed their pains in these early Lectures from time to time. 3.Conversion. God hath commanded his blessing upon it for the conversion of many souls to Jesus Christ. Blessed be God, the morning exercise hath not been childless since it was set up; some there be (to my knowledge) who have calculated their spiritual nativity from the time that this exercise was in the places of their habitati∣on, as in this place some can bring in their testimony, to the ho∣nour and praise of free grace. 4. It hath been a very choice instrument in the hand of the Spi∣rit, for the building up of Christians in their most holy faith.Edification.
Many of them that have attended daily at the gates of wisdome, waiting at the posts of her doors in this Ministerial course,Prov. 8 34, 35. have been observed to have made eminent proficiency in the School of Christ,2 Pet. 3.18. to grow in God, in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To all which blessed ends these morning Exercises have had some advantage above other Assemblies; Partly, by reason of the frequency and assiduity of them; Sabbath-day-Sermons, and Weekly-lectures being distanc't with such long intervals of worldly incumbrances, are (for the most part) forgotten before the return of their weekly course; whereas these exercises treading so close upon the heels one of ano∣ther, they that have constantly attended them, have as it were, li∣ved under a constant vision; the Sunne of the Gospel arising upon them as assiduously as the Sunne in the Firmament; whereby they have been carried on in a daily progresse of Gospel-proficiency. And Partly, the Preachers by a kind of secret instinct of the Spirit, having been directed in their order to preach seasonable things; , as the Apostle calls it, present truth; truth most proper to the present state of things, carefully obviating the errors of the times; and not only so, but sometimes as if there had been a designe laid by mutual consent, they have been guided to preach methodical truths; their Sermons have been knit together not without some natural connexion, into a kinde of , or Module of Evangelical doctrine; at least so farre as it hath not been difficult to finde out not only consent, but a kinde of depen∣dance between their successive discourses, that might be of more than ordinary help to their Auditors; as in thisThe morning exercise at Giles in the Fields, May 55. printed for Richard Gibbs in Chancery lane near Ser∣jeants Inne. place about this time foure years; and since in aThe word of faith, at Mar∣tins in the fields, Febr. 55. printed for Fran. Tyton, at the three Dag∣gers in Fleet∣street. neighbouring Congregation; by some short notes published for the help of weaker Christians, may appear. But now brethren behold I shew you a more excellent way: That which sometime hath fallen out providentially, and but in a very imperfect way, is now de indu∣stria, and by prae-agreement and consent, intended and designed among you in this course of the morning Exercise; viz. that which the Apostle here commends to Timothy his care and custody, an , or FORM of sound words: A Series or Deline∣ation of some of the chief points and heads of Gospel doctrine
methodically collected and digested as far as the narrow circle of so few days will contain. AND THIS WE WILL DO IF GOD PERMIT. What remaineth Brethren,Heb. 6.3. but that you stir up your selves in the strength of Christ,Cautions. 1. Prize these opportunities. 1. To prize such a precious season and opportunity, as Provi∣dence puts into your hand. God is bringing a very precious trea∣sure and depositum unto your doors;Psal. 147.20. He hath not dealt so with every Nation, &c. See my Brethren that you put a due value and estimate upon it, lest God challenge your contempt with that an∣gry question, Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdome, seeing he hath no heart to it?Prov. 17.1. 2. Frequen them. 2. To frequent it; Christians, be afraid of losing a morning; let not one such golden opportunity fall to the ground, you do not know what you lose. Borrow a little from your sleep, and from your worldly employments (if your Callings and Families shall not be too great sufferers by it) and bestow it upon your souls; will it not be fruit abounding to your account in the day of Christ? While ye have the light, walk in the light:Jer. 6.4. Know ye not that the Shadows of the Evening are stretched out! Redeem the time, the days are evil.Ephes. 5.15. 3. Stir up your selves to prepare your hearts for a solemn at∣tendance upon God in them:3. Prepare for them. Lev. 10.3. Remember what the Lord said to Moses, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me: Oh profane not your accesses to such holy things; I may bespeak you in the language of Moses to the people, Sanctifie your selves a∣gainst to morrow, for the Lord will come down amongst you; and remember if he be not sanctified by you,Ibid. he will be sanctified upon you; if he be not sanctified by us in holinesse, he will be sanctified upon us in judgment; before all the people I will be glorified. Christians, be much in prayer for your Ministers, that they may come unto you in the fulness of the blessing of the Gospel of peace; say with the Psalmist, Blessed be he that cometh to us in the Name of the LORD.Psal. 118. Pray for your selves,Acts 16.14. that God would open your hearts as he did the heart of Lydia, that you may attend unto the things which shall be spoken. Pray that you mayHeb. 4.2. mix the Word with faith,2 Thess. 2.10.— that you may re∣ceive the truth in the love of the truth, that you may not be given up to believe lies.
Pray for others that shall hear with you; pray as Christ prayed for his Disciples: Sanctifie them through thy truth, thy Word is truth.John 17.17. Pray that some may be convinced, some converted, that others may be edified by the Sermons which shall be preach't amongst you. 4. Stir up grace.4. Stir up your selves to come to these Evangelical exercises with Evangelical dispositions; those especially prophesied of in relation to Gospel-times,Isa. 2.3. Isa. 2.3. Many people shall go and say Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. — In this Gospel-promise you have three Gospel graces, Charity. Faith. Obediential Resolutions. Charity.1. COME LET ƲS GO, &c.] there's their CHA∣RITY, their mutual care and love to one anothers souls; they call upon one another, and consider one another, to provoke one another to a diligent attendance on the means of grace. Come ye, and let us go; gracious hearts would not go to Church, or to heaven alone;Psal. 122.1. I was glad when they said unto me Let us go into the house of the Lord. Faith.2. HE WILL TEACH ƲS OF HIS WAYS] here you have their FAITH; they come to the Ordinance with good thoughts of God; the same wherewith holy David doth en∣courage his own soul: Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners in the way;Psal. 25.8. though I am evil, yet God is good; though I am a sinner, yet God is upright, therefore I shall be taught of God; it is good to come to the Ordinance with great expectations upon God: You may easily over-expect men, and indeed for this God sends you home often with disappointment; you come to a Sermon, and you say (sometimes) Oh there is a rare man to preach this day; the man fails your expectation, and you return censuring and com∣plaining of the Preacher, not considering the fault was in your selves; God withdrew possibly wonted auxiliaries of grace to pu∣nish your carnal confidence,Isa. 2.22. to teach you to cease from man, &c. I say you may easily over-expect the creature, but you cannot over-expect God:Psal. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it; widen and
dilate the desires and expectations of your souls, and God is able to fill every chink to the vastest capacity; this honours God when we greaten our expectation upon him; it is a sanctifying of God in our hearts, he will teach us his ways. 3. WE WILL WALK IN HIS PATHS]Obediential resolution. there you have their obediential resolutions, highly becoming the children of God; if God be so gracious to teach us, they resolve not to be so ungracious as to refus to be taught; they come with a desire to know Gods will, and go home with a resolution o obey it. This is the method of Gospel proficiency,John 7.17. If any man will do my will, he shall know my doctrine. Behold, here's the pattern, GO YE AND DO LIKEWISE. 5.5. Rest not in the work done. Take heed of perfunctory and customary use of the Ordi∣nance; Rest not satisfied in a Popish opus operatum, the work done. As you should prepare before you come, so you should reflect when you go home, and not take up with notions in the head, without motions in the heart. Expressions in the lips, when separate from impressions upon the conscience, makes empty and formal pro∣fessors, and gives occasion to standers by to suspect the truth of Religion. A carelesse Christian that often heareth of the glori∣ous things of the Gospel, but feeleth nothing of them, doth put a temptation of Atheisme upon himself, and of scandal upon o∣thers; and while himself is not made better by his frequenting the means, others become worse, while he raiseth up an evil re∣port upon the wayes of God. Surely we need much quickning that we may not receive THIS GRACE of God in vain. 6. And lastly, when you have this , THIS FORM OF SOUND WORDS, let it be your care to keep it; when ye HAVE it, then HOLD it, which is the second acceptation of the word , and brings me upon the SECOND DOCTRINE. Doct. 2. SUCH FORMS AND MODULES ARE VERY CAFEFULLY TO BE KEPT: But of this in the concluding Sermon if God permit.
God is. HEB. 11.6. But without Faith it is impossible to please God; for he that cometh to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that dili∣gently seek him. IN this Chapter faith is represented as the principle of obedience, conveying vi∣gour and strength to other graces, where∣by they become operative unto several ends and objects; hence those acts which immediately spring from other graces as their proper stock, are attributed to faith, that being the principle of their heaven∣ly, working; in this respect, as the suc∣cesse of an Army redounds to the Generals Honour, so the Vi∣ctory which is effected by other Christian qualities, is here a∣scribed to faith, which animates them, and leads them forth as their chief Captain; this is intimated in the Text, in which we may observe,
1. A Proposition, But without Faith it is impossible to please God; that grace being the medium of our communion with God, as it gives through Christ an admission and approach to him; and in this respect is opposed to drawing back, Hebr. 10.38. This is the Heathens Cred . . Epicte∣tus.2. The Argument to confirme it, For he that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him: that is, our Addresses to God, are grounded upon a firme assent to Gods being and bounty. First, An assent to his being is absolutely necessary, other∣wise acts of worship are as a Ball struck into the open air, which returns not to us; without the entire assurance of a determi∣nate object, Religion will fail and vanish, this belief is general and speculative. Secondly, An assent to his bounty, that he will blesse those who diligently seek him; this is particular and applicative, and it follows from the other; for the notion of a Benefactour is included in that of a God; take away his rewards, you un∣god him: Now the stedfast acknowledgement of this, can on∣ly draw the soul to perform ingenuous and acceptable service; for the naked contemplation of those amiable excellencies which are in the Deity, can never conquer our natural feare, nor quench our enmity against him; the reflection upon his righteousnesse and our guilt, fills us with terrour, and causes a dreadful flight from him; but the hope of his remunerating goodnesse, is a motive agreeable, and congruous to the brest of a man, and sweetly leads him to God; Religion is the submission of our selves to God, with an expectation of reward. I shall Treat of the first Branch of the argument; He that comes to God, must believe that he is. The firm belief of Gods being, is the foundation of all Religious worship; in the di∣scussing of which, my design is to evince that Supreme Truth, that God is. The evdence of this will appear to the light of reason, and faih, by an appeal to nature, and Scriptures: I shall produce three Arguments from nature, which may con∣vince an Infidel there is a God. The first is drawn from the
visible world. The second from natural conscience. The third from the consent of Nations. First, in the Creation; his essence and Attributes are clear∣ly revealed, his absolute power, unerring wisdome, and infi∣nite goodnesse, are discovered to every capacity; therefore the Apostle urges this as the most proper Argument to convince the Heathens, Acts 14.15. that they should urn from their vanities, to the living God which made heaven and earth, and sea, and all things that are therein; to this they must natu∣rally assent; as shadows represent the figure of those bodyes from whence they are derived; so in the world there are such traces of the Divine perfections, that it is easie to inferre there is a Soveraign being which is the cause of it; all the creatures and their various excellencies, are as so many beams which reflect upon this Sun, or lines which direct to this Centre; nay, the meanest being carries some impression of the first cause, as the image of a Prince is stampt upon a penny, as well as upon grea∣ter mony; the beasts will instruct, and the mute fishes teach the Atheist there is a God; and though he is not discerned by the outward sight, yet the understanding will as certainly disco∣ver him, as it doth an invisible spirit in a living body; and that, 1. From the being of the world, and its parts; it is appa∣rent to sense, and acknowledged by all, that some things are of a late beginning, but those things could not proceed from themselves, for then they should work before they were, and the same things should exist, and not exist at the same instant, and in the same respect, but this implies a contradiction; it follows then they had their Original from without; we finde the experience of this in our selves; the number of our dayes declares there was a time in which we had no being, and therefore we could not produce our selves. Now, if man which is the most perfect of visible crea∣tures, presuppose a Maker, then may we sufficiently inferre a Creation, where we finde far lesse perfection; and this is true, not only of things which are visible, but of all other beings; till at last we arrive at the Supreme cause, whose being is necessary and independent.
Besides, if we consider that from nothing he hath produced their beings, and so united those two distant extreams of be∣ing, and not being, we may infer his power to be infinite; the greatest difference imaginable between two finite beings, admits of some proportion, and measure; but between that which is, and that which is not, the distance exceeds all ap∣prehension; so that from the meer existence of things, it is e∣vident that there is a first cause, which is independent and infi∣nite, and this is God. 2. We may certainly argue the being of God from the con∣sent of parts in the world, and their perpetual confederations to support the whole. Confusion is the effect of chance, but order is the product of Art and industry; when we consider in a Watch, how the different wheels by their unequal motions agree in distinguishing the houres, and with that exactnesse, as if they were inspired by the same intelligence, we presently conclude it to be the work of an Artificer; for certainly pieces of Brass could never have formed and united themselves in that method; proportionably when we view the Harmony of all things in the world, and how disagreeing natures conspire to∣gether for the advantage of the whole, we may collect there is a Divine Spirit, which hath thus disposed all things; we will not make a curious enquiry into this; an eminent decree of knowledge in several faculties, would but imperfectly dis∣cover the proportion and measures which the eter∣nal minde hath observed in the frame of nature; it will suffice to glance at those which are exposed to the view of all. The Sun which is the eye and soul of the world, in its si∣tuation and motion, is a sign to us there is wisdome and coun∣sel in its Authour; it's fixt in the midst of the Planets, that it may dispense its light and heat for the advantage of the lower world;Quid potest es∣se tam apertum, tamque perspi∣cuum, cum coelum suspeximus, caelestiaque contemplati sumus, quam aliquod esse numen prae∣stantissimae mentis quo haec regantur. Tull. in secundo de natura deorum, &c. lib 2. de divi∣natione; esse praestantem aliquam, aeternamque naturam & eam suspiciendam adorandam que hominum generi pulchritudo mundi odoque rerum coelestium cogit confiteri. if it were plac't in a higher or lower Orb, the jarring Elements, (which by its influence, are kept in an equal poise
and proportion) would break forth into disorders; and those invisible chaines and connexions which fasten the parts of na∣ture, would presently be broken; the regularity and constancy of its motion discovers a Deity; by its course from East to West, it causes the agreeable vicissitude of day and night, and maintains the amiable war of light and darkness; this distin∣ction of time is necessary for the pleasure and profit of the world; the Sun by its rising, chases away the shades of the night, to delight us with the beauties of the Creation; 'tis Gods He∣rald which calls us forth to the discharge of our work;Psa. 104.22, 23. this go∣vernes our labours, and conducts our industry; this animates nature, and conveys a pleasure even to these beings which are insensible; without the day, the world would be a fatal and disconsolate grave to all creatures; a Chaos without order, acti∣on, or beauty; thus by the Sun-beams we may clearly see a Divine providence. Besides, when it retires from us, and a Curtain of darknesse is drawn over the world, that proves the wisdome and goodnesse of God; the Psalmist attributes the di∣sposition of day and night to God, the day is thine;Psal. 64.16. and with an Emphasis, the night also is thine; notwithstanding its sad appearance, yet it is very beneficial; its darknesse enlightens us, its obscurity makes v sible the Ornaments of heaven, the stars, their aspects, their dispositions, their motions which were hid in the day; it unbends the world, and gives a short and necessary truce to its labours, it recreates the wasted spirits; 'tis the Nurse of nature, which poures into its bosome those sweet and cooling dews which beget new life, and vigour: the divine providence is also eminent in the manner of this dispensation; for the Sun finishing its course about the world in the space of twenty four houres,I speak of that part of the world which is inhabited. causes that successi∣on of day and night, which doth most ftly temper our labour and repose; whereas if the day and night should each of them continue six entire months, this division would be very incon∣venient for us: We may farther observe a wise providence in the diversity it hath used to lengthen and shorten the dayes and nights for the advantages of several Countryes; for that part of the earth which is under the line, being scorcht with immo∣derate heat, wants a continual supply of moysture; therefore the longest and coolest nights are there; but it is otherwise in
the Northern parts, for the beams of the Sun being very fee∣ble there; providence hath so disposed, that the dayes are ex∣tream long, that so by the continuance of the heat, the fruits may come to maturity and perfection. And as the difference of day and night, so the diversity of seasons proceeds from the motion of the Sun, which is a work of providence, no lesse admirable than the former; as the motion of the Sun from East to West,Psal. 74.17. Thou hast made the Summer and Winter. makes the day and night, so from North to South, causes Summer and Winter; by these the world is pre∣served; Summer crownes the earth with flowers and fruits, and produces an abundant variety for the support of living crea∣tures; the Winter which seems to be the death of nature, rob∣bing the earth of its heat and life, contributes also to the Uni∣versal good; it prepares the earth by its cold and moysture for the returning Sun; in the succession of these seasons, the Divine Providence is very conspicuous; for since the world cannot passe from one extream to another, without a dangerous alteration; to prevent this inconvenience, the Sun makes its approaches gradually to us, the Spring is interposed between the Winter and Summer, that by its gentle and temperate heat, it may dispose our bodyes for the excesse of Summer, and in the same manner the Sun retires by degrees from us, that so in the Autumne we may be prepared for the asperities of the Win∣ter: And to close this part of the Argument, the invariable succession of times and seasons is a token of the same provi∣dence; the Sun which runs ten or twelve millions of Leagues every day, never failes one minute of its appointed time, nor turns an inch out of its constant course, but inviolably observes the same order; so that there is nothing more regular, equal, and constant, than the succession of day and night; to ascribe this to hazzard, is the most absurd extravagance; for in the ef∣fects of chance there is neither order nor constancy; as we may see in the casting of a Dy, which hardly falls twice toge∣ther upon the same square; it is necessary therefore to con∣clude that an intelligent principle, guides the revolutions of the Sun, thus uniformly for the advantage of the world. Psalme 19.1, 2, 3. The heavens declare the glory of God, the firma∣ment shews his handy work. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night addes knowledge; There is no speech nor lan∣guage
where their voice is not heard; what is that language and voice, but a Universal Sermon to the world of Gods being and excellency? Let us now consider that vast extent of aire, which fills the space between heaven and earth; this is of so pure a nature, that in a moment it transmits the influences of heaven to the lower world, this serves as an arsenal for thunders and lighten∣ings, whereby God summons the world to dread and reverence; this is a treasury for the clouds, which dissolving in gentle showers, refresh the earth, and call forth its seeds into flou∣rishing and fruitfulnesse; this fannes the earth with the wings of the winde, allaying those intemperate heats which would be injurious to its inhabitants; this is the Region for the Birds, wherein they passe as so many self-moving Engines praising the Creatour, this serves for the breath and life of man; from hence we may conclude the wisdome of a God, who so go∣vernes the several Regions of the aire, as by them to con∣vey blessings for the necessities of man, and to send judgements for the awakening the secure to seek after God. Let us now descend to the Sea, and see how that informes us there is a God; 'tis a Truth evident to reason, that the proper place of the waters is next to the aire above the earth; for as it is of a middle nature between these two Elements, be∣ing purer and lighter than the earth, but more grosse and heavy than the aire, so it challenges a situation between them; that as the aire on all parts encompasses the Sea, in like manner the Sea should overspread the earth, and cover the whole sur∣face of it; that its natural inclination is such, appears by its continual flowings; who then hath arrested its course, and stopt its violence? who hath confined it to such a place and com∣pass, that it may not be destructive to the world? certainly no other, but the great God who first gave it being and motion; besides, that which renders the power of God more conspicuous, is that by so weak a bridle as the sand, its rage is bounded; when it threatens the shore with its insulting waves, you would fear lest it should swallow up all, but it no sooner touches the sand, but its fury is turned into froth; it retires, and by a kind of sub∣mission, respects those bounds which are fixt by the Creatour.
Now, that the fiercest Element should be represt by the fee∣blest thing in the world, and that which breaks the Rocks, be limited by the sand, is a wonder of providence; therefore the Lord alledges this as an effect only proceeding from his power, and challenges an incommunicable glory upon this account. Job 38.8, 9, 10, 11, verses, Who shut up the Sea with doores, when it brake forth as if it had issued out of the womb? when I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darknesse a swadling band for it; and brake up for it my decreed place, and set barres and doores; and said, Hitherto shalt thou come, and no farther, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed. Besides, its extent is no lesse worthy of admiration, it wash∣es the four parts of the world, and so it is the bond of the U∣niverse, by which the most distant Nations are united, the medium of commerce and Trade, which brings great delight and advantage to men, by it the commodities which are peculiar to several Countryes are made common to all; thus may we trace the evident prints of a Deity in the very waters; if we change the scene, and view the earth, we may perceive clear signes of a Divine providence: If we consider its position, it hangs in the midst of the ayre, that it may be a convenient habitati∣on for us; or its stability, the ayre its self is not able to beare up a feather, yet the earth remains in it fixt and unshaken, notwithstanding the stormes and tempests which continually beat upon it; from hence we must conclude an invisible, but powerful hand supports it; 'tis reckoned amongst the Mag∣nalia Dei, Job 38.4, 6. Where wast thou when I laid the foun∣dations of the earth? whereupon a e the foundations thereof fa∣stened? or who hath laid the Corner-stone thereof? Moreover the various disposition of its parts, the Mountaines, the Valleys,I might in∣stance in its productions; in plants, their roots whereby they draw their nourishment, the firmness of their stalk by which they are de∣fended against the violence of winds, the expansion of their leaves by which they receive the dew of heaven; or in fruits, which are produc'd answerable to the difference of seasons, those which are cold and moyst to allay our heat in summer, and those which are of a firmer consi∣stency in Autumn, that they may serve the delight and use of man in winter, from whence the notice of a Deity is afforded to us. the Rivers which are as the veins which convey nourishment to this great body, all intimate there is a God.
Thus if we behold the excellent order of the parts of the World, their mutual correspondence for their several ends, the heavens give light, the aire breath, the earth habita∣tion, the sea commerce;The World is stiled by Sa in Basil, ; the School of rational spirits, wherein they are instructed in the knowledge of God. we must break forth There is a God, and this is his work; but how few are there who read the Name of God which is indelibly printed on the frame of nature? who see the excel∣lency of the cause in the effect? who contemplate all things in God, and God in all things? from our first infancy we are accustomed to these objects, and the edge of our apprehensions is rebated; the commonnesse of things takes away our esteem; we rather admire things new than great; the effects of Art, than the marvails of nature; as the continual view of a glittering object dazles the eye, that it can∣not see; so by the daily presence of these wonders, our minds are blunted, we lose the quicknesse and freshnesse of our spirits. I shall finish this Argument by reflecting upon man, who is a short abridgement of the world; the composure of his bo∣dy, the powers of his soul, convince us of a wise Providence; who but a God could unite such different substances, an imma∣terial spirit with an earthly body? who could distinguish so many parts, assigne to them their forme, scituation, tem∣perature, with an absolute fitnesse for those uses to which they serve? we must joyne with the Apostle, Acts 17.27, 28.The meer consideration of the least part of mans bo∣dy, opened the eyes of one of the most learned Atheists in the World. Galen. l. 3. de usu partium, describing the use of our parts, saith, . He is not farre from every one of us; we may finde him in the activity of our hands, in the beauty of our eyes, in the vivaci∣ty of all our senses; in him we live, move, and have our being. And to look inward, who hath endued the soul with such distinct and admirable faculties? The understanding which exercises an Em∣pire on all things, which compounds the most dis∣agreeing, and divides the most intimate, which by the lowest effects ascends to the highest cause; the Will which with such vigor pursues that which we esteem amiable and good, and recoiles with aversation from that we judge pernicious and evil; the Memory which preserves fresh and lively the pictures of those things which are committed to
its charge. Certainly after this consideration, we must naturally assent there is a God who made us, and not we our selves. 3. We may argue there is a God from the operations of natu∣ral Agents for those ends which are not perceived by them. Al∣though in men there is a rational principle which discovers the goodnesse of the end, and selects such means as are proper for the accomplishing of it, and so their actions are the product of their judgement; yet 'tis impossible to conceive that the inferi∣our rank of creatures, whose motions flow from meer instinct, can guide themselves by any Counsel of their own: Now all their operations are directed to their proper ends without any variation,Si quid est quod efficiat ea quae homo licet ratione sit praeditus, facere non posset, id profecto est majus, & sortius, & sapientus homi∣ne. Chrysippus. & in that order as exceeds the invention of man. It is admirable to consider how brute creatures act for their preservation; they are no sooner in the world, but they presently flie from their enemies, and make use either of that force or craft which they have to defend themselves; they know that nourishment which is convenient to preserve them, and those remedies which may restore them. By what Counsel doth the Swal∣low observe the season of its passage? in the beginning of Autumn it takes its flight to a warmer Climate, and returns with the Sun a∣gain in the Spring. By what fore-sight doth the Ant prepare its store in Summer to prevent that ensuing want which otherwise it would suffer in Winter? Doth the Sun deliberate whether it shall rise, and by diffusing its beams, become the publick light of the World? or doth a Fountain advise whether it shall stream forth in a fluent and liberal manner? even the actions of men which are purely natural, are done without their direction: Nay, natural bodies will part with their own property, and crosse their own inclinati∣on for an universal good; the aire, a light and nimble body that does naturally ascend, yet for a general good, to prevent a breach in nature, it will descend: And those things which have a natural opposition,. Aristotel. l. de mundo. yet constantly accord and joyne together to preserve the whole; certainly then a Divine Spi∣rit guides and directs them. If we see an Army com∣posed of several Nations, (between whom there are great antipathies) yet march in rank and order, and with equal courage fight for the safety of a Kingdom,
we presently conclude there is a wise General who thus united them: And is there not greater reason to believe that a Soveraign Spirit governs the Host of heaven and earth, and unites them to maintain the peace of the World? To assert that ir∣rational creatures act for a general and unknown good, without the motion of a higher cause, is equally unreaso∣nable, as to say a curious Picture is drawn by a Pensil without the hand of the Painter which guided it in every line according to the Idea of his minde. We must then of necessity infer that those particular causes which cannot conduct themselves, are directed by an universal cause which cannot erre; and thus we see the whole World is an entire and continual Argument of Gods Being and Attributes. Secondly, The second Argument is drawn from natural consci∣ence, which is a subordinate God, and acts all things with respect to a higher Tribunal; as Saint Paul speaking of those visible Testimonies which God hath exprest to men in the Creation, saith, Acts 14.17. that he left not himself without a witnesse, gi∣ving them rain, and fruitful seasons; by the same proportion we may say God hath not left himself without an internal witnesse, having planted in every man a conscience whereby he is dignified above the lower order of beings, and made sensible of the su∣preme Judge, to whose Tribunal he is subject; now consci∣ence in its double work, as it accuses or excuses by turns upon good or bad Actions, proves there is a God. 1. Natural conscience being clear and innocent, is the life∣guard which secures from fears: vertuous persons who have not offered violence to the light of conscience, in times of danger, as in a fierce storme at Sea, or fearful Thunder at Land, when guilty spirits are surprized with horrour, they are not liable to those fears, being wrapt up in their own innocency;Parcus Deorum cultor & infre∣quens, insanien∣tis dum sapi∣entiae consultus erro nunc retrorsum vela dare at{que} iterare cursus cogor relictos: Nam{que} Diespiter igni corusco nubila dividens, fetum{que} per purum tonanteis egit equos volucrem{que} currum. Horat. ad 34. l. 31. the reason of their secu∣rity proceeds from a belief that those terrible works of nature are ordered by an intelligent and righteous providence which is God.
2. It gives courage and support to an innocent person, when op∣prest and injured by the unrighteous; the natural conscience so long as it is true to its self by adhering to honest principles, it is victorious against all attempts whatsoever; si fractus illabatur orbis; if the weight of all the miseries in the world should come rushing upon him at once, it would bear up under them all, and stand unbroken in the midst of those ruines; the spirit of a man is of strength enough to sustain all his infirmities; as a Ship lives in the rough Seas, and floats above them, the waters being with∣out it; so a vertuous person rides out all storms, and is preserved from sinking, because the fury of worldly troubles cannot reach beyond his outward man; the conscience which is the mans strength remains firme and unshaken; yea, as those Roses are u∣sually sweetest which grow near stinking weeds; so the peace, joy, and glory of a good conscience is then most sensible, when a man is otherwise in the most afflicted and oppressed state; now from whence proceeds this calmnesse and serenity, this vigor and con∣stancy of spirit, but from the apprehension of a supreme Judge, who at the last will vindicate their cause? 2. We may clearly evidence there is a God, from the accusati∣ons of a guilty conscience; this is that never dying worme which if a sinner treads on, it will turn again; this is a temporal hell, a spiritual Tophet; what torments are there in the Regions of dark∣nesse, which an accusing conscience doth not inflict on a sinner in this life! so intolerable are the stings of it, that many have took Sanctuary in a Grave, and run upon the first death to pre∣vent the miseries of the second. Now the shame, horror, de∣spair, and that black train of affections which lash an offender for his vicious acts, discovers there is a principle within which threa∣tens vengeance from a righteous and angry God: This Argument will be more pressing, if we consider that conscience attaches a sinner First, for secret crimes, which are above the cognizance of men; conscience is Gods spy in our bosomes, which mixes it self with all our thoughts and actions; let a man therefore take what course he will to hide his offence, let him sin in the closest retirement that
humane policy can contrive, where there is no possibility of legal conviction, yet his Accuser, his Judge, his Hel is in his own bosome; when the sin is most secret, conscience brings in the evidence, produces the Law, urges the penalty, passes the sen∣tence, begins the punishment; so that the sinner is , self-condemned for those sins which are not punishable by man; yea, sometimes a discovery of concealed sins (though certainly bringing temporal death) hath been extorted by the horror and anguish of an accusing conscience; the reason of all is because in secret sins, conscience appeals to Gods Omnisciency, who is grea∣ter than our consciences, and knows all things, 1 John 3.20. And upon this account it is praejudicium judicii, a kinde of antedated day of judgement, a domestical dooms-day, and brings upon a sinner the beginning of his sorrows. 2. It stings with remorse for those sins which are above the pow∣er of man to revenge; those who command Armies, and by their greatnesse are secured from the penalties of the Law, yet conscience sets their sins in order before their eyes; and these as so many armed men charge them thorow, and overwhelme them; many instances there are; Belshazzar in the midst of his cups and bravery, how was he invaded by fear and horrour, when he saw the hand-writing on the Wall! the whole Army of the Per∣sians could not discourage his spirit; but when conscience revived his guilt, and the apprehensions of Gods justice, he sunk under the burden; the hand-writing from without was terrible, because conscience opened a hand-writing within. Tiberius the Empe∣rour who was doubly dy'd in unnatural lusts and cruelties, could neither evade nor dissemble the horrors of his mind; Nero after the barbarous murdering of his mother, was always pursued by imaginary Divels, his distracted fancy representing to him furies and flames ready to torment him. How many Tyrants have trembled on the Throne, when the condemned innocents have rejoyced in their sufferings! from hence we may infallibly conclude the con∣science of the most powerful sinner is under the feeling of a Dei∣ty; for if there were no punishments to be feared but those the Magistrate inflicts in his own Dominions, why are Soveraign Ma∣gistrates themselves under terrors for their vitious actions! and
those who are not subject to any humane Tribunal, why do they with such fury reflect upon themselves for their crimes? certainly it proceeds from hence, that natural conscience dreads the supreme Judge, seeing nothing is able to shelter them from his Tribunal, nor restrain his power when he will take vengeance on them. In vain doth the Atheist reply that these fears are the product of a common false opinion, which is conveyed by education, to wit that there is a God who is provoked by sin; and that ignorance in∣creases these terrors, as little children fear bug-bears in the dark; for 'tis certain, First, That no Art or endeavour can totally free a sinner from these terrors, whereas groundlesse fears are presently scatte∣red by reason; and this argues there is an inviolable principle in nature which respects a God. We know there is nothing more disturbs the spirit than fear, and every person is an enemy to what torments him; hence the sinner labours to conquer conscience, that he may freely indulge himself in sin; but this is impossible; for conscience is so essential, that a soul cannot be a soul without it, and so inseparable, that death it self cannot divorce a man from it; perire nec sine te nec tecum potest; it can neither dye with the sinner, nor without him; 'tis true the workings of it are unequal; as the pulse doth not always beat alike, but sometimes more violent, and sometimes more remisse; so this spiritual pulse is not always in equal motion; sometimes it beats, sometimes it intermits, but returns again; those scorners who run a course of sin without controule, and seem to despise hell, as a meer noti∣on, yet they are not free from inward gripes; conscience arrests them in the Name of that God whom they deny; although they are without faith, they are not without fear; desperate sinners ruffle it for a time, and drench themselves in sensual pleasures, to quench that scintilla animae, that vital spark which shines and scorches at once; but all in vain; for it happens to them as to Malefactors, who for a time drown the apprehension of their danger in a Sea of drink; but when the fumes are evaporated, and they seriously ponder their offences, they tremble in the fearful expectation of the Axe or Gallows. A sinner may conceal his fears from others, and appear jolly and brave, when conscience stings him with se∣cret remorse; as a Clock seems to be calme and still to the eye;
but 'tis full of secret motions within; under a merry countenance there may be a bleeding heart: To conclude, so far is a sinner from being able to quench these terrors, that many times the more they are opposed, the more powerful they grow; thus ma∣ny who for a time breathed nothing but defiances to conscience, and committed sin with greedinesse, yet conscience hath with such fury returned upon them, that they have run from profanesse to superstition, as fugitive slaves are forc't back to their Masters, and serve in the vilest Drudgery, fearing severe punish∣ments. 2. The best men who enjoy a sweet calmness, and are not disqui∣eted with the terrors of conscience, they abhor that Doctrine which discards the fear of a Deity; so that those who are most freed from these terrors, believe them to be radicated in nature, and grounded upon truth; and those who esteem them vain, are most furiously tormented with them; in which respect the Divine goodnesse shines forth in the greatest lustre towards those who love and fear him, and his justice against those who contemn it; thus Caligula who was the boldest Atheist in the world, yet when it thundred, ran with trembling under his bed, as if God from hea∣ven had summoned him to judgement; whereas Socrates, who was the Heathens Martyr, died with the same tranquility of spirit wherein he lived. 3. 'Tis worthy of our serious thoughts that these terrors of con∣science are most dreadful when the sinner approaches death; the sense of guilt which before was smothered, is then revived; con∣science like a sleeping Lyon awakes and destroys at once; experi∣ence tlls us many sinners who have lived in a sencelesse, dye in a desperate manner; and from whence doth this proceed but from the presages of a future judgement! conscience antici∣pates the vengeance of God; then the Alarums are encreast, and the storme is more violent; for the soul being sensible of its immortal nature, extends its fears to Eternity, and trembles at him who lives for ever, and can punish for ever.
Argument 3. The consent of Nations agrees in the belief of a God; although the Gentiles did grossely mistake the life and essence of the infinite Deity, imagining him to be of some humane forme and weaknesse, and in this re∣spect were without God in the world; yet they conspired in the acknowledgement of a Divinity; the multiplicity of their false gods strengthens the Argument; it being clear they would rather have any God then none; and this belief cannot be an imposture, because 'tis First, Universal; What Nation so barbarous as not to worship a God? certainly that which is common to all men, hath a founda∣tion in nature. Secondly, 'tis perpetual; falshoods are not long lived; but the Character and Impression of God is indelibly sea∣led upon the spirits of men. Thus we see the Univer∣sal Reason of the World to Determine there is a God. 2. The Scripture proves there is a God to faith; Psal. 19. David speaking of the double manifestation of God by his Works and his Word, appropriates a converting power to the Word; this exceeds the discovery of God in the Creation, in respect of its clearnesse and efficacy: Psalme 138.2. Thou hast magnified thy Word above all thy Name. There are more apparent Characters of Gods Attributes and Perfections in the Scripture, than in the Book of Nature; in the Creation there is Ʋestigium, the foot-print of God; but in the Word there is Imago, his Image and lively Representation: As the Angels when they assumed visible bodies, and appeared unto men; yet by the brightnesse and Majesty of their appearance, discovered themselves to be above an humane Original; so the Scri∣ptures although conveyed to us in ordinary language and words, yet by their authority and sanctity evidence their Divine descent; and that there is a holy and righteous God from whom they proceed.
There is a vehement Objection urged by A∣theists in all Ages against a Divine Providence, and consequently against Gods Being:We may hear the Tragedi∣an thus resenting it: Sed cur idem, Qui tanta regis sub quo vasti Pondera mundi librata suos Ducunt orbes, hominum ni∣mium Securus ades? non sollicitus Prodesse bonis, nocuisse malis. Senec. Hippol. The af∣flicted state of innocency and goodnesse, and the prosperous state of oppression and wickednesse. Honest men suffer, whilest the unrighteous and profane swim in the Streames of Prosperity; hence they concluded fortuna certa, aut incerta natura, had the charge of these sublunary things; even the holy Prophet himself was liable to this temptation, Psal. 73.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. he saw that as the clean Creatures were sacrificed every day, the Tur∣tle and the Lamb, the Emblems of innocency and charity, whilest the Swine, and other unclean Creatures were spared;Plutarch and Seneca, and Cicero, have rendred satis∣faction concerning this me∣thod of the Divine Provi∣dence. So good men were har∣rast with troubles, when the wicked were ex∣empted, and this shook his faith; but by entring into the Sanctuary of God, where he understood their end, he comes off with victory; now for the removing this Objection, Consider First, we are not competent Judges of Gods actions; we see but one half of Ezekiels Vision; the Wheels, but not the eye in the Wheels; nothing but the Wheels on which the world seems disorderly to run, not the eye of Providence which governs them in their most vertiginous changes: The actions of God do not want clearnesse, but clearing: What we cannot acquit, is not to be charged on God as unjust; the stick which is streight, being in the water seems croo∣ked, by the refraction of the beams through a double medi∣um; we see through flesh and spirit, and cannot distinctly judge the ways of God; but when we are not able to com∣prehend the particular reasons of his dispensations, yet we must conclude his judgements to be right, as will appear by ob∣serving Secondly, The sufferings of the righteous do not blemish Gods justice.
1. God always strikes an offender, every man being guil∣ty in respect of his Law. Now though love cannot hate, yet it may be angry; and upon this account, where the judge∣ments of God are a great deep, unfathomable by any finite understanding, yet his righteousnesse standeth like the high Mountains, (as it is in Psalme 36.) visible to every eye; if the most righteous person shall look inward, and weigh his own carriage and desert, he must necessarily glorifie the ju∣stice and holinesse of God in all his proceedings. 2. The afflictions of good men are so far from staining Gods justice, that they manifest his mercy; for the least sin being a greater evil than the greatest affliction; God uses tem∣poral crosses to prevent or destroy sin; he imbitters their lives to wean their affections from the World, and to create in them strong desires after heaven; as long as the waters of tribulation are on the earth, so long they dwell in the Ark; but when the Land is dry, even the Dove it self will be wan∣dring, and defile its self: When they are afflicted in their out∣ward man, it is that the inward man may be revived; as birds are brought to perfection by the ruines of the shell: that is not a real evil which God uses as an instrument to save us. Who will esteem that Physitian unjust, who prevents the death of his Patient by giving a bitter potion? 3. If the Righteous be thus afflicted upon earth, we may conclude there is a reward in the next World; if they are thus sharply treated in the way, their Countrey is above, where God is their portion and happinesse. Thirdly, The temporary prosperity of the wicked reflects no dis∣honour upon Gods justice or holinesse; for God measures all things by the Standard of eternity; a thousand years to him are as one day. Now we do not charge a Judge with unrighteousnesse, if he defer the execution of a Malefactor for the day; the longest life of a sinner bears not that proportion to eternity; besides, their reprieve increases and secures their ruine; they are as Grapes which hang in the Sun till they are ripe, and
fit for the Wine-presse. God spares them now, but will pu∣nish them for ever; he condemns them to prosperity in this world, and judges them not worth his anger, intending to poure forth the vials of his wrath on them in the next. Fourthly, The more sober Heathens have concluded from hence there is a judgement to come; because otherwise the best would be most miserable, and the ungodly prosperous; from hence they have inferred, that because all things are dispenc't in a promiscuous manner to the just and unjust in this world, therefore there must be an after-reckoning. Fifthly, There are many visible examples of the goodnesse and justice of God in this World; either in rewarding afflicted innocen∣cy, or punishing prosperous iniquities. He that shall read the sto∣ry of Joseph, and consider that wonderful chain of causes managed by the Divine Providence; how God made use of the treachery of his brethren, not as a sale, but a conveyance; how by the Prison he came to the principality, must conclude there is a watchful eye which orders all things: And how many in∣stances are there of Gods severe, and impartial justice? there is no State or History but presents some examples; wherein an exact proportion in the time, measure and kind between the sin and punishment, is most conspicuous; the unnatural sin of Sodom was punish't with a supernatural showre of fire and brim∣stone: Pharaoh had made the River guilty of the blood of the He∣brew Infants; his first plague is the turning of the River into blood; Adonibezec is just so served as he did by the seventy Kings; Judas who wanted bowels for his Lord, wanted bowels for himself in life and death; for he hanged himself, and his bowels gushed out; and thus the punishment as a hand, points at the sin, and convinces the World of a Deity. Ʋse 1. This is just matter of terror to Atheists, which are of three sorts; 1. Vita. 2. Ʋoto. 3. Judicio.
First, To those who are practical Atheists vita, in life, who live down this truth, denying God in their lives; sad and certain it is, that many who pretend they know God, yet so live they, as if there were no Deity to whom they must give an account: Such are the secure, that sleep in sin, notwithstand∣ing all Gods thunder; and if ever sleep were the true image of death, this is the sleep. The sensual who are so lost in car∣nal pleasures, they scarce remember whether they have a soul; if at any time conscience begins to murmure, they relieve their melancholy thoughts with their company and cups, like Saul, sending for the Musick when the evil spirit was upon him. The incorrigible, who notwithstanding the de∣signes of Gods mercy to reduce them; although Providences, Ordinances conspire to bring them off from their evil ways; yet they persist in their disobedience: Let such consider it is not a loose and ineffective assent to the being and perfections of God which will save them; God is not glorified by an unactive faith; nay, this will put the most dreadful accent, and the most killing aggravations on their sins; that believing there is a God, they dare presumptuously offend him, and pro∣voke the Almighty to jealousie, as if they were able either to evade, or to sustain his wrath; 'tis the greatest prodigy in the World to believe there is a God, and yet to disobey him; this renders them inexcusable at the last. Secondly, To those who are Atheists voto, in desire, Psal. 14. The fool hath said in his heart there is no God; the heart is the Fountain of desires, he wishes there were no God; this Atishem springs from the former; men live as if there were no God, and then wish there were none; guilt always begets fear, and fear hatred; and that strikes at the being of the object that is hated; as Malefactors desire there were no Law nor Judge, that they might escape deserved punish∣ment. Well their desires are as visible to God as their actions are to men, and in the day of Revelation there will be a propor∣tion of Wrath answerable to the Wickednesse of their hearts. Thirdly, To those who are Atheists judicio, in opinion; these
low running dregs of time afford us many of these Monsters; for many to reconcile their principles with their practices, that they may undisturbedly enjoy their lusts, take this as an Opiate potion, that there is no God; but this is the most irrational and impious blasphemy. 1. Irrational; for the Name of God is written in so fair a Character upon this universal frame, that even whil'st men run they may read it; and therefore God never wrought a miracle to convince Atheisme, because his ordinary works convince it: Moreover, the notion of a Deity is so deeply imprest on the Tables of all mens hearts, that to deny God, is to kill the soul in the eye, to quench the very principles of common nature, to leave never a vital spark or seed of humanity behinde; 'tis as if an ungracious soul should deny he ever had a Fa∣ther. He that does ungod God, does unman him∣self. 2. 'Tis the most impious; 'tis formally Deicidium, a killing of God as much as in them lies; but there are no Athe∣ists in hell, the Divels believe and tremble; he that willingly quenches that light which is planted in his breast, he is passing from that voluntary darknesse to a worse; like an offender on the Scaffold, he doth but blinde his eyes to have his head cut off; he goes from inward darknesse to utter dark∣nesse. Ʋse 2. Let us stablish our hearts in the belief of Gods Being; in the latter times the World is wholly disposed to Atheisme; as the Scripture attributes the ruine of the Old World to their Atheisme and Profanesse, so it foretells the universal disease of the last Age will be Atheisme and Infidelity. Luke 18.8. Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, shall he finde faith on the earth? it were impossible there should be such a palpable contradiction be∣tween the lives of men and this fundamental of Religion, did they with assurance and certainty believe it. Psal. 14.1. The fool hath said in his heart there is no God; they are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that doth good.
Atheisme is the root of Profanesse; moreover, the spiritual myste∣ries of Religion, which exceed the flight of reason, are opposed by many upon the account of their Atheisme; they question the truth of Gods Being, and therefore disbe∣lieve supernatural Revelations; let us then treasure up this truth: First, As the foundation of faith; for all the truths of Religi∣on spring from this as their common principle; the watering of the root will cause the branches to flourish; so the confirming of this will render our assent to the doctrine of the Gospel more clear and strong. Secondly, As the fountain of obedience; the true and sound belief of every holy truth always includes a correspondency in the believer to the thing believed; and this must descend from the understanding to the affections, and the conversation: Now the fundamental duties which we are to pay to God, are, love, fear, dependance and submission to the will of his Law, and of his Providence. 1. Love: He is the supreme object of love for his excellen∣cies and benefits. Psal. 5.11. Let them also that love thy Name rejoyce in thee; the Name of God imports those glorious Attri∣butes whereby he hath exprest himself to us; all the excellencies of the creature meet eminently in him, and all their imperfecti∣ons are removed; in him there is nothing unlovely; in worldly things how refined soever they be, there is an allay of dregs; the all that is in them is mixed with corruption; but in God the all that he is, is perfection; in the most glorious creature as a crea∣ture, there is aliquid nihili, some imperfection, it is not exactly fitted for the soul; but God is the Adequate and compleat object of our love. There is such an infinite eminency in God, that we are obliged to a proportionable affection; the first and great Com∣mandment is, Matth. 22.36. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy strength; all the kinds and degrees of our love are due to him; we must put no bounds nor limits to it; in him it must begin, in him it must end;
a remisser love is a degree of hatred; we disparage his excellencies by the coldnesse of our affections. O had we but eyes to see his beauty, how would all the excellencies of the creatures become a very Glow-worme that only glitters in the night! Moreover, God planted this affection in the nature of man, that it might be terminated upon himself as its centre and treasure, as our natural faculties are fitted for their several objects; the eye for colours, the ear for sounds, the palate for tasts; so love is fit∣ted for God, that being as the Soveraign which sways all our pow∣ers. Love is called pondus animae, that sets all the wheels in the clock of the soul a going; this sets the understanding a work in the serious contemplation of the Divine excellencies; it diverts the thoughts from other things, and fixes them on God; it excites strong desires, and earnest aspirings after him; it stirs up zeal, which is flamma amoris, love in a flame to remove all obstacles which hinder the most intimate union with him; it produces joy, when the soul reposes its self in God, and with infinite sweetness possesses him; it causes the greatest diligence, alacrity, and reso∣lution in all our ways to please him: for love is ever the spring and rule of all our actions; such as it is, such likewise will they be: thus we may see that God (as there is in him a union of all excel∣lencies) challenges the most intense and vehement degree of our love, he being only fitted for it; and that our love being a super∣lative affection, is only proper to God; and therefore to love any creature without God, or in an equal manner to him, is to Deify the creature, to place it in the room of God, and so it renders us guilty of Idolatry in a spiritual sense. But such is the ignorance of mens minds, and the depravednesse of their wills, that few there be who love God; 'tis true, there may be something like love in natural men to God, grounded upon the perswasion of his glorious being, and the goodnesse of his nature, which is not ter∣rible to them; but when they consider his mercy is a holy mercy, and that it is never dispenc't to the prejudice of his justice, though they cannot hate God for his goodnesse directly, yet they hate him with it; for although he is the perfection of beauty and good∣nesse it self, yet they being evil, there is no congruity or conve∣niency between God and them; they love sin, and hate punish∣ment:
Now God, as Author legis, by the most strict Laws for∣bids sin, and as ultor peccati, inflicts severe punishments; from hence it proceeds, the most lovely and sweet Attributes of God cannot endear him to them; no more than the natural or moral excellencies of a Judge, the comelinesse of his person, or his wisdome and knowledge can draw forth the love of a Malefactor when he is condemned by him. Moreover, since the general nature of sin is an eternal contra∣riety to the nature and will of God; the love of it must needs ar∣gue the hatred of God; for as the Lord Jesus requires an univer∣sal, chearful and constant obedience, as the most clear evidence of love to him; if you love me, keep my Commandments; So the Argu∣ment will be as strong to conclude backward, If you keep not Gods Commandments, you hate him; to live in the practice of known sinnes, is a vertual and interpretative hatred of God. 2. The benefits which God bestows upon us deserve our love. How great an endearment did he passe upon us in our Creation? we might have been admitted into the lowest form of Creatures, and have only enjoyed the life of flies or worms; but he made us little lower than the Angels, and Crowned us with glory and honour, and gave us dominion over all the works of his hands, Psal. 8.5. Whereas the rest of the Creatures were the acts of his power; the Creation of man was an act of power and wisdome; in all the rest there was nothing, but he spake the word, and they were made, Psal. 148.5. But in the making of man there was a consultation about it, Gen. 1. Let us make man; he framed our bodies, so that all the parts conspire for the ornament and service of the whole: Psal. 139.15. Thine eye did see my substance being yet imperfect, and in thy book were all my mem∣bers written; and therefore Lactantius said truly, hominem non patrem esse sed generandi Ministrum; man is only the instrument which the Lord doth use for the effecting of his purpose to raise the beautiful Fabrick of mans body: Now if we are obliged to expresse the dearest love to our Parents, with how much greater reason should we love God, who is the fountain of all our beings.
He hath breathed into man a spiritual, immortal, ratio∣nal soul, which is more worth than the whole World; this is in some sort a spark and ray of Divine brightnesse; 'tis capable of Gods Image, 'tis a fit Companion for Angels, to joyne with them in the praises of God, and enjoy a blessed eternity with them. 'Tis capable of communion with God himself, who is the fountain of life and happinesse. The soul is endowed with those faculties which being terminated upon God, it enjoys an in∣finite and everlasting blessednesse. The understanding by know∣ledge rests in God as the first and highest in genere veri; the will by love embraces him as the last and greatest in genere boni; and so receives perfection and satisfaction, which is the incommu∣nicable priviledge of the rational soul. Beasts can only converse with drossy and material objects, they are confined to earthly things; but the soul of man may enjoy the possession and fruition of God, who is the Supreme and Soveraign good. Now this should inflame our love to God; he formed our bodies, he inspi∣red our souls. Moreover, if we consider our lives, we shall finde a chain of mercy which reaches from one end to the other of them. How many Miracles of Providence do we enjoy in our preser∣vation? how many unseen dangers do we escape? how great are our daily supplies? The provisions we receive, do serve not only for necessity, but for delight; every day we have the provisions of meat and drink not only to cure hunger, and all our thirst, but to refresh the heart, and to make us chearful in our work; every houre is filled up with the bounties of God: Now what shall we render to the Lord for all his benefits? he desires our love; this is the most proper return we can make; for love is of an opening and expansive quality calling forth the heart; our love within should break forth to close with Gods love without; the love of obedience in us, with the love of fa∣vour and bounty in him. 'Tis a principle of nature deeply im∣planted in the hearts of men, to return love for love; nay, the very Beasts are not deficient in this; Esay 1.3. The Oxe knows his Owner, and the Asse his Masters Crib:
Those Creatures which are of all the most stupid and heavy, respect their Feeders, and expresse dumb signs of love unto them. How much more should we love God, who spreads our Table, fills our Cup, and causes his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall on us? 'Tis an Argument of Secret Atheisme in the heart, that in the confluence of mercies we enjoy, we do not look up to the Author of them, as if common mercies were the ef∣fects of Chance, and not of Providence; if a man constantly relieves our wants, we judge it the most barbarous disingenuity not to repay love to him; but God loads us with his benefits every day; his wisdome is always busied to serve his mercy, and his mercy to serve our necessities, but we are insensible and unaffect∣ed; and yet the meanest mercy as it comes from God hath an ex∣cellency stamp't upon it. We should upbraid our souls for our coldnesse to God; everywhere we encounter sensible demonstrati∣ons of his love to us; in every moment of our lives we have some pledges of his goodnesse. Let us light our Torch at this Mountain of fire; let the renewed act of his bounty constrain us to love him; we should love him for his excellency, though we had no benefit by him; nay, though he hated us, we are bound to love him as he is truly amiable in himself; how much more when he draws us with the cords of a man, with bands of love? whosoever requites the love of God with hatred, (as every im∣penitent sinner doth) puts off the nature of man, and degenerates into a Divel. 2. Fear; this is that eternal respect which is due to our Crea∣tor; an humble reverence we owe to him, as he is infinitely above us; the holy Angels cover their faces when they have the clearest views of his glory: Esay 6.1, 2, 3.. The Lord is represented as sit∣ting on a Throne, and the Seraphims stood about, each having six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain his feet, and with twain did he flee; and one cryed to another, Holy, holy, holy Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory: The Angels are pure and innocent Creatures; they fear not his angry justice, but they adore his excellencies and perfecti∣ons; his is a dread, when a most Serene Majesty. Penal
fear is inconsistent with the joys of heaven, but the fear of ad∣miration is perfected there; and in this sense the fear of God continues for ever, Psal. 19.9. In all our addresses to him we should compose our spirits, by the awful apprehension of that infi∣nite distance which is between God and us. Eccles. 5.2. Let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in hea∣ven, and thou upon earth; the greatest distance in nature is but an imperfect discovery how much we are beneath God; 'tis the ef∣fect of grace to represent the Divine being and glory so to the soul, that in the most social duties it may have impressions of fear; Psal. 2.11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoyce with trem∣bling. We should fear his greatnesse and power, in whose hands our life and breath, and all our wayes are; the fear of God ha∣ving its actual force upon the soul, is operative and instrumental to holy walking, from whence the fear of God is taken in Scri∣pture for the whole duty of man, it being an introduction to it. The fear of God, and keeping his Commandments are joined together, Eccles. 12.13. This is the Prepositus which governs our actions according to Gods will; this is a watchful Centinel against the most pleasant temptations; it kills delight in sin, (by which the integrity of most men is lost;) for delight cannot dwell with fear; this is the guard and security of the soul in the days of trouble; the fear of God countermines the fear of men; this cuts off base and unworthy complyings; therefore the Lord brings this as an antidote against the base fear of men; Isa. 51.12, 13. Who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the son of man, that shall be made as grass? And forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that stretcheth forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the Earth? This exalts a Christian above humane frailty, and makes him despise the threatnings of the world, whereby many are terrified from their constancy. It is the most unreasonable thing to be Cowards to men, and fearless of God. Men have but a finite power, and so they cannot do that hurt they would; and they are under the Di∣vine Providence, and therefore are disabled from doing that hurt, which otherwise they could do; but the power of God is absolute and unconfined; therefore our Saviour presses with vehe∣mency upon his Disciples, Matth. 10.28. Fear not them which
kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell: He lives for ever, and can punish for ever; therefore when duty and life can∣not stand together, he that flies the danger by delivering up his soul, exchanges the pain of a moment for the torments of Eterni∣ty:Timent Carcerem, non ti∣ment Gehennam; timent Cru∣ciatum Temporalem, non poe∣nas ignis aeterni; timent modicum mori, non aeternum mori. Austin upbraids the folly of such; They fear the Prison, but they fear not Hell; they fear temporal torment, but they fear not the pains of unquenchable fire; they fear the first, but not the second death. 3. Dependance, in respect of his al-sufficiency to supply our wants; and Omnipotency to secure us from dangers First, his al-sufficiency can supply our wants; he is the Sun, Fountain and Mine of all that is good; from hence the Prophet glories in God, Habbakkuk 3.17, 18. Although the fig-tree shall not blossome, neither shall fruit be in the Vines; the labour of the Olives shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the Flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I will rjoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. He expresses not only things for delight, as the fruit of the Vine and fig-tree, but things for necessity, as the meat of the field, and the flocks of the stall, and the utter failing of these together; for otherwise the want of one might be sup∣plied by the enjoyment of another. Now in the absolute losse of these supports and comforts of life, the Prophet saw all things in God; want of all outward things is infinitely recompenc't in the presence of God: The Sun needs not the glimmering light of the Stars to make day; God without the assistance of the Creatures can make us really happy; in the enjoying of him we have all things, and that to the greatest advantage. The things of this world deceive our expectations, and draw forth our corruptions; but in God we enjoy them more refinedly, and more satisfyingly, the dregs of sin and sorrow being removed; by possessing God there is no burden which we are not able to bear, but he takes it aay, our wants, weaknesse and sufferings; and there is no excellency of his which we are able to enjoy, but he conveys
to us, his grace, his glory. There is true riches in his favour, true honour in his approbation, true pleasure in his peace. He is the treasure and triumph of the soul. Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, saith my soul, therefore will I hope in him: He is such a portion, that all temporal crosses cannot hinder its in∣fluence on us, and his influxive presence makes heaven; he is a portion that cannot be lost, he inseparably abides with the soul. The real belief and application of this will keep a Saint in an holy independency on earthly things;Cum mundus exarserit, cogi∣tat se nihil habere de tanta mole perden∣dum. the flames which shall burn the World, cannot touch his portion; he may stand upon its ruines, and say, I have lost nothing. Moreover, this will keep the soul upright in the course of obe∣dience; for all the exorbitancies and swervings from the Rule pro∣ceeds from the apprehensions of some particular good in the Creature, which draws men aside. Those who want the light of faith (which discovers Gods al-sufficiency) only admire present and sensible things; and to obtain these, they depart from God; but the more eagerly they seek after these temporal good things, the further they run from the Fountain of goodnesse, which alone can sweeten the best things we enjoy; and counterbalance their absence; the Creatures are but of a limited benignity, the ne∣cessity of their number proves the meanness of their value; but one God answers all, he is an infinite and indefective good; he is for all the powers of soul and body, to hold them in their pleasant exercise, and to give them rest; he is alone able to impart happi∣nesse, and to preserve that happinesse he imparts. Secondly, his Omnipotency can secure us from dangers. The Creation is a standing Monument of his Almighty Power; for what but Omnipotency could out of nothing produce the beautiful Fabrick of heaven and earth; man cannot work without mate∣rials, but God doth; and that which exalts his power, is, that he made it by his Word; he spake the Word, and they were made, saith the Psalmist, Psal. 33.9. There went no greater pains to the Worlds Creation, than Gods command.
Moreover, the World is preserved from perishing by the pow∣er of its Maker. Certainly, without the support of his mighty hand, the World had long before this time relapfed to its primi∣tive nothing: Many instances we have of his power, in those miraculous deliverances which he hath shewn to his people in their extremity; sometimes by suspension of the Works of Nature; his dividing the Red Sea, and making it as a solid Wall, that the Israelites might have a secure passage! his stopping the Sun in its course, that Joshua might have time to destroy his enemies! his suspending the nature of the fire, that it might not so much as singe the garments of the three Hebrews! his shutting the mouth of the devouring Lyons, and r turning Daniel in safety from that dreadful Den! And are not all these, and many others of this kind, not only the pregnant testimonies of his love, but the everlasting Characters of his Omnipotency. Moreover, that which expresses the power of God with as great a lustre, is the turning of the hearts of many cruel enemies from their intended rage to favour his people; thus did he change the heart of Esau, who had resolved the death of his brother; that instead of killing him, he exprest the greatest tendernesse, and the most endearing affecti∣ons to him; thus did he so sway the hearts of the Egyptians to∣wards the oppressed Israelites, that instead of securing them un∣der bondage, they encouraged their departure, by enriching them with jewels of silver and of gold, Exod. 12.35. Now our duty is to glorifie this power of God, by placing our trust on him. Psal. 121.2, 3. My help comes from the Lord, who made the hea∣vens and the earth; he will not suffer thy foot to be moved; by dependance on God the soul is composed in the midst of the most apparent dangers; as the upper Region of the Aire is calme and serene, whatever stormes are here below; thus David expresses the same courage in all Estates; when he was retired into a Cave to shelter himself from the fury of Saul, he sung the 57. Psal. which he then composed; My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed,Psal. 57.7. I will sing and give praise; and afterwards when he triumphed over Hadadezer the King of Zebah, he com∣posed the hundred and eighth Psalme, and sung the same words: O God,Psal. 108.1. my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise; i faith taught him the same song in the Cave, and on the Throne; in
all our exigencies we should apply the power of God; the cause of our perplexing fears, is our low apprehension of Gods power, and therefore when we are surrounded with difficulties and dan∣gers, then we are surprised with terror and dispondency; whereas when there are visible means to rescue us, we lift up our heads: but our duty is in the greatest extremities to glorifie his power, and to refer our selves to his goodnesse; and though we cannot be cer∣tain that God will by miracles rescue us from dangers, as he did many of his people in former Ages; yet we are sure he will so a∣bate the power and force of the most injurious enemies, as they shall not conquer the patience, nor break the hope of his people. 4. We owe perfect obedience to Gods will; vid. Subjection to his Commands, and submission to his Providence. 1. Subjection to his Commands. As he is the first cause, so he is the Supreme Lord; he that gave us life, must give us law: God hath an absolute title to our service as Creator; this made the Psalmist desire the knowledge of Gods Commandments in order to his obedience. Psal. 119.73. Thy hands have made me; and fashioned me, give me under∣standing, that I may learn thy Commandments; he may learn this from the universal obedience of all creatures, those which are without reason, sense or life, inviolably observe his commands. Esay 48.13. Mine hand hath laid the foundations of the earth, and my right hand hath span'd the heavens, when I call to them they stand up together, as prepared to execute his commands. The insensible parts of the World are so compliant with his will, as to contradict their proper natures to serve his glory; fire de∣scends from heaven at his command; the fluid Sea stands up as a solid wall in obedience to him; this upbraids our Degeneration and Apostasie, that we who are most indebted to the goodnesse of our Creator, should prove disloyal and rebellious, when the infe∣riour creatures with one consent serve and glorifie him. Lastly, we owe submission to the will of his Providence; there is no shadow of exception can be formed agit his Sovereignty; he may do by right whatever he can do by power, therefore we should acquiesce in his dispensations; this consideration silenc't
David, Psal. 39.9. I held my tongue, and said nothing, because thou didst it; as the presence of a grave person in authority qui∣ets a disordered multitude; so the apprehension of Gods supremacy composes our riotous thoughts and passions; unquietnesse of spi∣rit in troubles, springs from the ignorance of God, and of our selves; by impatience we cite God before our Tribunal, and do as it were usurp his Throne; we set up an antiprovidence, as if his wisdome should be taught by our folly; and sometimes in af∣flictions we eye the next cause, but do not look upward to the So∣veraign Disposer of all things, l ke Balaam, who struck the Asse, but did not see the Angel which opposed him; thus from a bru∣tish imagination we regard the visible instrument of our trouble, but consider not the Providence of God in all; from hence it is that our spirits are full of unquiet agitations; we live continually upon self-created Racks: Now the humble acknowledgement of Gods hand, and the submitting of our selves to his will, as it glorifies God, so it gives ease to us; as there is the greatest equity, so policy in our willing stooping to him. Rom. 14.11. As I live saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God; he engages his life and honor for this: if there is not a volunta∣ry, there must be a violent subjection to him; the wilful man ne∣ver wants woe; the spring of our daily misery, as well as our sins is, opposition to Gods will; but the chearful resignation to his Providence, what a blessed pill of rest is this to the soul? what a Sabbath from all those sinful and penal disturbances which discom∣pose our spirits; 'tis a lower heaven; for as in the state of glory there is an unchangeable agreement between the will of the Cre∣ator and the creature, so according to the same measure and de∣gree wherein we conform our wills to Gods, we proportionably enjoy the holinesse and blessednesse of that state.
THE TRINITY Proved by Scripture. 1 JOHN 5.7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. IN the fifth verse of this Chapter, the Apostle had laid this down as an Article of faith, that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Sonne of God. Who is he that ovcrcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Sonne of God:1 John 5.5. Now for the proof of so glorious a truth, the Apostle produces six witnesses, and ranks them into two orders, some bear record in heaven, and some bear wit∣nesse on earth; some bear witnesse on earth, as ver. 8.Ver. 8. of this Chapter, There are three that bear witnesse on earth, the Spirit and the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one; and some bear record in heaven, in the words of my Text: There
are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. In the words you may take notice of these particulars. 1. The number of the heavenly witnesses, or the number of those witnesses that bear record in heaven, viz. three. 2. Their dignity or excellency, they are in heaven. 3. Their act, they bear record. 4. The names of the witnesses, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost. 5. Their unity, and these three are one. I would observe from the context, That it is not an easie matter to believe that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Sonne of God: Whence is it else that the Apostle so often urges this point in this Epistle? whence is it else, that whereas it is sufficient for any truth to be confirmed by the mouth of two or three witnesses? here are no lesse than six witnesses produced to prove that the Lord Jesus is the Sonne of God; three heavenly, and three earthly; and indeed who can declare the great mystery of the eternal generation of the Son of God: I will give five wonders in five words. 1. God the Father communicates the whole divine essence unto the Sonne, and yet hath the whole divine essence in himself: If God communicates his essence, it must be his whole essence; for that which is infinite, cannot admit of any division, partition, or diminution; yet methinks, we have a faint resemblance of this here below. 'Tis not with things of a spiritual nature, as with things of a corporeal; spiritual things may be communicated without being lessened or divided; viz. when I make a man know that which I know, my knowledge is still the same, and nothing di∣minished; and upon his account, whether that Argument against the traduction of the soul, that if the soul of the Father be tra∣duced, the Father is left soul-lesse be cogent, I leave to the judg∣ment of the learned: 'Tis to be granted, that to communicate the notion is one thing, and the faculty is another, but both are things of a spiritual nature. 2. God the Father, and God the Sonne are one essence, and yet though the Father begets the Sonne, the Sonne doth not beget himself: The Father and the Sonne are one God, yet the Lord Jesus is the Sonne of God, under that notion, as God is a Father,
and not the Sonne of God, under the notion as God is a Sonne, and so not the Sonne of himself. 3. God the Father begetteth God the Sonne, and yet the Father is not elder than the Sonne, nor the Sonne younger than the Fa∣ther; he that begetteth, is not in time before him that is begot∣ten; if God was a Father from everlasting, then Christ was a Sonne from everlasting; for relata sunt simul natura, an eternal Father must have an eternal Sonne. 4. The Father begets the Sonne, yet the Sonne is not inferiour to the Father, nor the Father superiour to the Sonne: The Lord Jesus Christ being in the forme of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God; it was his right, and therefore it was no rob∣bery; as he is coeternal, so he is coequal with the Father. 5. The Father begets the Sonne, yet the Sonne hath the same numerical nature with the Father, and the Father the same numerical nature with the Sonne; an earthly sonne hath the same specifical nature with his Father, but then though it be the same in regard of kinde, yet it differs in regard of number; but God the Father, and God the Sonne have the same individual numerical nature. Let me entreat you that you would attend unto the record and testimony that is given by those witnesses; and for your encourage∣ment consider the difference between these heavenly witnesses in the Text, and earthly wi nesses, and so I shall proceed to that which I mainly intend. 1. On earth; there may be some single or one witnesse, but here are no lesse than three. 2. Earthly, witnesses are such as are lyable to exception, but these are in heaven beyond all exception. 3. As for earthly witnesses, it may come to passe that their names may not be known, these here are named; the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost. 4. Earthly witnesses, when they are produced, either may be silent, or it may be bear false witnesse, but these bear record, and their record is true. 5. Earthly witnesses may not agree in their witnesse, as the wit∣nesses brought against Christ; but there is a sweet consent and a∣greement amongst these witnesses, for these three are one.
6. Whereas Earthly witnesses, although they may be one in re∣gard of consent, yet they are not one in regard of essence; every man hath one particular individual essence of his own, but these are one in regard of essence: Now pray mark this, for if it be so, then the Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God. And therefore the Socinian, who denies the Deity of the Word, and of the Holy Ghost, will perswade you to believe that these words are to be expounded thus, these three are one; that is, sayes he, these three agree in one; but that this is not the meaning of the phrase, appears by the variation of it in the next verse; the words are,Ver. 8. There are three that bear witnesse on earth, the Spi∣rit, the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one: Now if both phrases note unity in consent, here is an occasion of of∣fence, and falling administred by the variation of them in these two verses; why is it not said the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost agree in one, as well as the Spirit, water and blood. And suppose we should grant that the onenesse spoken of in the Text is to be expounded of consent in will and agreement, yet it would prove the Godhead both of the Father, and Spirit; for in free Agents, where there is the same will, there is the same na∣ture, indeed with men it is the same specifical nature, not nume∣rical; because there is but one God only, therefore here it must be the same numerical nature. Observ.The doctrine I would speak more fully to, is the doctrine of the Trinity, or that there are three persons in the divine essence. In the prosecution of this point, I shall (by Gods assistance) observe this method. 1. I shall speak something to the notion of a Divine person. 2. I shall shew you that these are three persons in the Divine essence. 3. I shall speak somethig to the distinction of those pers s. 4. I shll speak to the order of these persons. 5. I shall enquire wheher the mystery of the Trinity may be found out by the light of nature. 6. The Use and Application.
1. I shall speak something to the notion of a divine person; what a divine person is, or wherein it consists. Resol. 1. Negatively; a divine person in the precise notion of it, is not a being or singularis substantia persona, & natura singularis clare distinguitur; there is a clear difference between person and nature, as you may perceive by these following consi∣derations. 1. Our Lord Jesus Christ assumed the nature of man, and yet not the person of men. 2. Those things which may really be separated are not the same; but that personality may be separated from nature, appears by the foregoing instance. 3. If a person were a being, it must either be finite or infinite; if finite, then something finite would be in God; if infinite, then there would be three infinites in God, or which is all one, there would be three Gods; now Deum trinum asserimus, De∣um triplicem negamus. 2. Positively; a person is modus rei, the manner of a being; and a divine person is modus divinae essentiae, the divine essence modificated, or the divine essences considered three manner of wayes; for istance, consider the divine essence as the fountain or principle of deity, so it is the first person; consider it as streaming forth from the Faher, so it is the second person; con∣sider it as breathed forth by Father and Son, and so it is the third person. I said before that the Father is the fountain or principle of de∣ity; now this must warily be understood; I do not say, the Fa∣ther is the cause of deity, but the principle; there is a wide dif∣ference between p incipium & causam, a principle and a cause. Omnis causa est prncipium, sed omne principium non est causa; the cause of a thing may be called its beginning, but the be∣ginning of a thing is not necessarily its cause; the beginning of a line, is not the cause of it. But to return, where we were, a divine person is modus divi∣nae essentiae, the divine essence modificated, the divine essence considered three manner of wayes; now the manner of a thing is neither ens, nor nihil; it is neither a thing, nor yet nothing; for instance, the folding of my hands, is not ens, for then I should be a Creatour, and make something; nor is it plainly no∣thing;
for there is difference between my hands folded, and my hands expanded. Now we use the word person, because it notes the subsistence of the most excellent kind of being, and hath more in it than subsistence hath; we say a beast doth subsist, but it is absurd to say a beast hath personality; because a person notes an under∣standing subsistent;Heb. 1.3. besides, the word person is attributed to God in the Scripture; in the Epistle to the Hebrews, you finde these words made use of by the Apostle concerning Christ; the brightnesse of his glory, and the expresse Image of his person. 2. I am to shew you that there are three persons in the di∣vine essence, and that from Scriptures, both in the Old Testa∣ment, and in the New. 1. By Scriptures in the Old Testament; to that purpose, take in∣to your thoughts these particulars. 1. A plurality of persons may be proved by that Scripture, Gen. 1.26.Gen. 1.26. where God speaks of himself in the plural number; Let us make man in our Image; this notes more persons in the Godhead than one; 'tis true, something is urged by way of Ob∣jection. Object. 1. God speaks by way of Apostrophe unto the Angels, that they should bear witnesse of the works of Creation; it is u∣sual in Scripture, for God to speak to the creatures; as in the Prophecy of Isaiah;Isa. 1.3. Hear oh heavens, and give ear oh earth, for the Lord hath spoken. Resol. 1. Although God is sometimes brought in in the Scri∣pture speaking unto the creature, yet it is impossible that this Scripture should be expounded after this manner; For, 1. Those unto whom God speaks, were companions with him in the work of Creation; Let us make man after our Image; now God did not make use of Angels as instruments in the work of Creation, not indeed could he so doe; For, 1. Every instrument must have subject matter to work up∣on; but Creation doth nor presuppose a subject, but make it. 2. Every instrument must have time to work in, but Creation
is in an instant; and therefore when we read that God created the world by Jesus Christ, as in the Epistle to the Hebrews;Heb. 1.2. by whom (speaking of Christ) he made the world; this particle per, or by, non est nota instrumenti, sed nota ordinis, notes not in∣strumentality, but the order amongst the divine persons; for as there is an order in regard of themselves, so in regard of their operations; operari sequitur esse; and hence it is, that although we read that God the Father made the world by Jesus Christ, yet we do not read that Jesus Christ made the world by the Father. 2. God speaketh unto those persons, after whose image man was to be made; Let us make man after our image; now man was not to be made after the image of Angels, but the image of God himself. Ob ect. 2. God speaks more magnatum, or more p∣incipium, after the manner of great ones, who speak in the plural number. Resol. 1. If God speaks more magnatum, after the manner of great ones, why doth he not alwayes, or at least frequently speak after this manner? you will find God speaking in Scri∣pture for the most part in the singular number; even in this very book of Genesis, Behold,Gen. 6.17. Gen. 9.9. Gen. 15.1. Gen. 17.1. I even I do bring a flood of waters upon the earth. Behold, I even I establish my Covenant with you. Fear not Abraham (saith God) I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward; and elsewhere, I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect. 2. If God speaks in the plural number after the manner of great ones, then certainly he would speak after this manner, when he discovers most of his royalty, and power, and Majesty, as he did at the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai; and yet there he speaks in the singular number; Exod. 20.2.Exod. 20.2. I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. 3. 'Tis likely the Princes did at first speak in the plural num∣ber, not to note their power and greatnesse, but their modesty and warinesse; that it was not their design to rule according to will, but according to counsel; that they were willing to ad∣vise with others, and to be guided by others; The wisest Kings on earth will have their counsel, and it is no more than
needs; plus vident oculi, quam oculus, many eyes see more than one eye;Eph. 1.11. but Gods Counsel is his Will; Who worketh all things after the counsel of his own Will. Nor indeed is it safe or fit for any to govern arbitrarily, or purely by will, but he whose Will is his counsel, it is so far from needing a rule, that it is the on∣ly Rule. Isa. 63.7, 8, 9, 10.2. As a plurality of persons, so a Trinity of persons may be proved out of the old Testament; I shall mention, and only mention for brievity sake, one place in the Prophecy of Isaiah, in the seventh verse you have mention made of Jehovah, or the Lord; in the ninth verse, of Jesus Christ, called the Angel of his presence; in the tenth verse, of the holy Spirit; but they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit. 2. You have this doctrine more clearly delivered in the new Testament, as will appear by several instances. Mat. 3.16, 17.1. At the Baptisme of Christ, the Trinity of persons were clearly discovered; you may read the history; And Jesus when he was baptized, went up strait way out of the water, and lo the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God des∣cending like a dove, and lighting upon him, and lo a voyce from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; Consider here, 1. We have three names given severally and particularly to three persons. 1. He who spake with a voice from heaven was the Fa∣ther. 2. He who was Baptized in Jordan, is called the Son. 3. He who descended in the shape of a Dove, is called the Spi∣rit of God. 2. There were three outward signes or symboles by which those three persons did manifest themselves. 1. The Father by an audible voice; the Word in heaven, is borne witnesse to by a word from heaven. 2. The Son in the humane nature. 3. The holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove. 3. They are described by three distinct actions. 1. The one cries by a voice from heaven, This is my well-beloved Sonne, heare him; this could not be the voice of the Sonne, for then he would be Sonne to himself; nor can this
be attributed unto the Spirit, for then Jesus would have been the son of the Spirit. 2. The second, after his Baptisme, prayes; Luke 3.21. It came to pass, that Jesus being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened. 3. The third descended in the shape of a dove, and rested upon Jesus Christ. Now to close this particular, why might it not be said, that the Father was baptized in Jordan as well as the Sonne? or that the Father descended in the shape of a dove, as well as the Spi∣rit; or that the Sonne did all this, speak with a voice from hea∣ven, and was baptized in Jordan, and descended in the shape of a dove; if this were not a truth, that there are three persons in the divine essence? hence the primitive Christians used to say unto any one that doubted of the Trinity, abi ad Jordanem & videbis, go to Jordan, and you will see a Tri∣nity. 2. This doctrine may be proved from the institution of the Ordinance of Baptisme; Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Sonne,Mat. 28.19. and of the Holy Ghost; and indeed, no wonder if God discovered himself to be three persons, and one God at Christs Baptisme, when the name of the blessed Trinity, is as it were in faire and legible Characters, writ upon the forehead of the Ordinance of Baptisme its self; Baptisme its self, is as it were, baptized in the Name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost; now these I call the words of institution; for although you have not here the first institution of Baptisme, John the Baptist, who was called so from this very Ordinance, administring this Sacrament, and the Disciples questionlesse from the Command of Christ himself; the Evangelist John tells us, that Jesus himself baptized not,Joh. 4.2. but his Disciples; yet here you have a solemn command for bap∣tisme, and the forme of the administration thereof unto all ge∣nerations. And here consider, 1. Christ commands them to baptize, not in the names, but in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; if you consider them personally, so they have three names, Father, Son, and holy Ghost; if essentially, then but one name; unum nomen,
una deitas, one God, one deity; and I observe farther, that which way soever we expound this phrase in the name, either calling upon the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost (as some) or in the name, by the authority, or at the appointment of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost (as others) or in the name, viz. for the service, honour, and glory of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost (as a third sort) you must either make these to be three Gods, or else three persons in the Godhead; for who is the object of our prayers but God? who hath authority to appoint Ordinances for his Church but God? whom are we to serve and worship but God alone? Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God,Mat. 4.10. and him only shalt thou serve. 2. They were to baptize, not in the name of the Father by the Son, or by the Spirit; but in the name of the Father, Sonne, and Spirit, which notes the equality of the three per∣sons. 3. Father, Son, and holy Ghost, are so joyned together, that we are no lesse baptized in the name of the Sonne, and of the Spirit, than of the Father; and therefore their deity is the same, their power and authority the same. 4. An Article is thrice prefixed, and added to every one, baptizate in nomine , that Fa∣ther, that Son, that holy Ghost; that Father whose voice you have heard from heaven; that Sonne, whom as yet you see in the humane nature; that holy Ghost, whom you have seen descending upon me in the shape of a Dove; Surely the repetition of this Article, doth not want its sin∣gular Emphasis, that Father, that Sonne, and that holy Ghost. 3. This doctrine may yet further be cleared from that say∣ing of our Saviour;John 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter; hence is plainly proved the personality of the Holy Ghost, he is called another Comforter; now he who is di∣stinguished from the Father and the Sonne, in the manner as to be called another comforter, is either distinguished in regard of his essence, or in regard of his personal subsistence; not in re∣gard of his essence, for then he would be another God, and therefore he is another in regard of his personal subsistence.
4. You have a clear proof for this doctrine in the words of the Text; There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one; and to that purpose, consider, 1. You have mention here of three witnesses; now three wit∣nesses are three persons. 2. The Word and holy Ghost are conjoyned in their Testimony with the Father, which is not competible to any creature; and lest we should doubt of this, it is expresly said even by Saint John himself, to be the witnesse of God; Verse 9. If we re∣ceive the witnesse of men, the witnesse of God is greater; for this is the witnesse of God which he hath testified of his Son; and con∣cerning Christ, it is said that he is the true God; ver. 20. This is the true God, and eternal life; let the Socinian shew me where any creature is called the true God; Concerning the Spirit also in this Chapter, it is said ver. 6. that he is truth it self; It is the Spirit that beareth Witnesse, because the Spirit is Truth. 3. If there be three witnesses, whereof every one of them is God, the one not the other, and yet not many Gods, but one true God; the point is clear, there are three distinct persons sub∣sisting in one divine essence, or (which is all one) there are three persons and one God. 3. I am to speak something to the distinction of these three persons; though they cannot be divided, yet they may be, they are distinguished; many things in nature may be distinguished, which cannot be divided; for instance, the cold and the moisture, which is in the water, may be distinguished, but they cannot be divided; Now that those three persons are distinguished ap∣pears, 1. By what hath been already said, the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the holy Ghost the Father or the Son. 2. By the words of the Text; here are three heavenly wit∣nesses produced to prove that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Son of God, namely, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost; now one and the same person, although he hath a thousand names, cannot passe for three witnesses, upon any faire or reasonable account whatever; you may be sure that God reckons right, and
he sayes,John 8.13. Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, to be three witnesses; there are three that bear record in heaven; so in Saint Johns Gospel, the Pharisees charge our Saviour that he bare record of himself; (say they) thou bearest record of thy self, thy re∣cord is not true; now mark what Christ replies, ver. 17, 18. It is written in your Law,Ver. 17, 18. that the Testimony of two men is true; I am one that bear witnesse of my self, and the Father that sent me, beareth witness of me; where you have our Saviour citing the Law concerning the validity of a Testimony given by two witnesses; and then he reckons his Father for one witnesse, and himself for another. 4. I shall speak a few words to the order of these divine per∣sons; in order of subsistence, the Father is before the Son, and the Son before the holy Ghost. The Father, the first person in the Trinity, hath foundation of personal subsistence in himself; the Sonne the second person, the foundation of personal subsi∣stence from the Father; the holy Ghost the third person, hath foundation of personal subsistence from the Father and the Sonne. Now although one person be before the other in regard of order, yet they are all equal in regard of time, Majesty, glory, essence; this I conceive to be the reason why in the Scripture sometimes you have the Sonne placed before the Father; as 2 Cor. 13.14.2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost be with you all, A∣men.Gal. 1.1. So Gal. 1.1. Paul an Apostle not of men, neither by men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead. Sometimes the holy Ghost is placed before the Father, as Eph. 2.18. Through him we have an accesse by one Spirit, unto the Father.Eph. 2.18. Rev. 1.4, 5. Sometimes before Jesus Christ, Rev. 1.4, 5. John to the seven Churches in Asia, Grace be unto you, and peace from him which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven Spirits which are before the Throne (by the seven Spirits there, is meant the holy Ghost) and from Jesus Christ who is the faithful witnesse, &c. The consideration of this cau∣sed that rule amongst our Divines; ab ordine verborum nulla est argumentatio; there is no argument to be urged from the order of words. Now this shews, that although one person be before another in regard of relation, and order of subsistence,
yet all are equal one with another in regard of essence. And therefore beware lest you derogate the least jota or tittle of glory, or Majesty, from any of the three persons. As in na∣ture, a small matter as to the body, may be a great matter as to the beauty of the body; cut but the haire from the eye brow, how disfigured will all the face look. If you take away never so little of that honour, and glory, which is due to any of the di∣vine Persons, you do what in you lies, to blot, to stain, to disfigure the faire and beautiful face of the blessed Trinity. 5. I am to enquire whether the mystery of the Trinity may be found out by the light of nature. Resol. There are two things in the general, that I would say in an∣swer to this question. 1. That the light of nature without divine Revelation, cannot dis∣cover it. 2. That the light of nature after divine Revelation, cannot op∣pose it. 1. That the light of nature without divine Revelation, cannot discover it; and for that purpose take into your thoughts these following considerations. 1. If that which concerns the worship of God cannot be found out by the light of nature, much lesse that which concerns Gods nature, essence, or subsistence; but the Antecedent is certainly true; For, 1. As for the part of the worship and service of God, which is instituted, and ceremonial, it is impossible that it should be found out by the light of nature; for instance, what man could divine that the Tree of life should be a Sacrament to Adam in Paradise? How comes the Church to understand what creatures were clean, what were unclean? that the Priesthood was set∣led in the Tribe of Levi, and not in the Tribe of Simeon, or the Trible of Judah? certainly these lessons were not learned by the candle-light of nature. 2. As for that part of the service of God, which is moral, all of that neither is not discoverable by natural light; For, 1. If you consult the seventh to the Romans, you shall find that there were some secret moral wickednesses which Paul did not see, which Paul could not have seen by the light of nature;
no, although a Pharisee, and by that means very expert in the let∣ter of the Law;Rom. 7.7. Rom. 7.7. I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shalt not covet. 2. If the light of nature be imperfect in us since the fall, which I suppose you will grant, then there may be many things moral now imperceptible by the light of nature, which it might and did see in its state of perfection; and therefore it must needs be of dangerous import, to make the Law of nature a weak, faint, shadowing, imperfect light, the perfect rule, and only mea∣sure of moral duties; to cry up the Law written in our hearts, is in this case to cry down the Law written in the Scriptures; this is as it were to pull the Sun in its noon-day brightnesse, in its greatest lustre and glory out of the firmament, and to walk by the light of a Candle, a stinking snuffe in the socket, al∣most gone out; this is to make the Primmer, the Horn-book, the A. b. c. of natural light, the highest piece of learning in morality. The Law of nature (to our shame and grief we may speak it) is so obliterated and darkened, that it cannot show a man the least part of his wickednesse. Pelagius was a man of great lear∣ning, and by his studies and diligence, had snuffed the Candle of the Lord, and made it burn with a clearer shine; yet how lit∣tle could he see into this matter? It was his affection, that we are borne as well without vice, as vertue, tam sine vitio, quam sine virtute nascimur; and we see all Popery to this very day, hold motions to sinne not consented unto, to be no sinnes, but necessary conditions arising from our constitution, and such as Adam had in innocency. But I forbeare; the issue of this particular is thus much, if that which concerns the worship and service of God, cannot be found out by the light of nature, much lesse that which concerns his essence and subsistence. 2. The doctrine of the Gospel is called by the Apostle a my∣stery, and a mystery without controversie; great is the mystery of godliness! and what greater Gospel-mystery is there than the Trinity, which neither men nor Angels can comprehend, and both men and Angels must adore! Now if this doctrine be dis∣coverable by natural light, it is no more a mystery. The works of the flesh are manifest,Gal. 5.19, 20. saith the Apostle, Gal. 5.19, 20. Now
why are they said to be manifest? because they stink in the nostrils of nature, and are discernable by the dimme eye of conscience. Object. 1. Possibly some may say, man hath as it were the i∣mage or likenesse of a Trinity within himself; there are three prime faculties, understanding, will, and memory, in one and the same reasonable soul. Resol. 1. A similitude doth not prove a thing to be, but only represent a thing to our fancy, which at present hath, or at least had a being one way or other; for instance, it is impossible that any Sonne should know his fathers picture, unlesse first he hath seen or heard, that his father was such a per∣son as the picture doth represent; and by that means hath before hand, his fathers idea and image presented in his own soul. 2. 'Tis denyed that these faculties in mans soul, bear the i∣mage or likenesse of a Trinity; neither can any man by a reflex act upon his own soul, attain to the knowledge of this great my∣stery; but such notions as these are the luxuriant extravagancies of some curious braines, that would advance earth as high as heaven; and do indeed rather darken, then illustrate this truth; as he who would adde any colour unto light, doth rather ble∣mish it than adorn it; what a piece of folly would it be to under∣take to emblazon a sun-beam? Object. 2. The doctrine of the Trinity was known to several of the Heathens, which had not the Scriptures, and therefore is dis∣coverable by the light of nature. Resol. 1. If the Heathen had any notions of the Trinity, they might receive them either by tradition, from those who had read the Scriptures, or out of the Scriptures them∣selves, and not by the improvement of natural light. 2. 'Tis very probable that these notions of a Trinity, which are found in Plato, and Trismegistus, were not writ by them, but foisted into their works by some that lived in after ages; my Reasons are these. 1. Those writings which go under the name of the Ancient Fathers, are not all truly such, but a great part of them supposi∣titious, and forged; as Mr. Dally proves largely in that learned piece of his, called A Treatise of the right use of the Fathers;
where he gives you an account of whole books that were publish∣ed under the names of the Apostles, as Saint Peter, Saint Bar∣nabas, and others which were not such. Now if men durst be thus bold with the Apostles, no wonder if they did not stick to deal thus with Heathens. This imposture in the Primitive times was very ordinary; yea, the fathers themselves have used this Artifice to promote their own opinions, as you may read large∣ly in the third Chapter of that book. 2. Some are apt to believe, that there are clearer notions of a Trinity in some of the books of the Heathens, than in the books of Moses; and so by consequence, the Heathens should know more of the Trinity, than the Israel of God, which is flat contrary to the Scriptures.Psal. 76.1. Psal. 76.1. In Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel; He hath not dealt so with a∣ny Nation; and as for his judgements, thy have not known them; praise ye the Lord. And thus I have done with the first Assertion in answer to this question, whither the mystery of the Trinity may be found out by the light of nature? viz. that the light of nature without divine Revelation, cannot discover it. 2. The light of nature after divine Revelation, cannot oppose it. For, 1. As the judgement of sense ought not to be urged against the judgement of reason; so the judgement of reason ought not to be urged against the judgement of faith. The judgement of sense, ought not to be urged against the judgement of reason; for instance, sense tells us that some of the Stars are as small as spangles (I am apt to believe, that some Country men think the Sunne to be no bigger than their Cartwheele) here reason in∣terposes, corrects sense, tells us, that there being a vast di∣stance between us and them, they must needs be very great bo∣dies, or else they could not be visible. There are thousands of Stars that cause the white streak in the heavens, called the Mil∣ky-way, which are invisible upon the account but now menti∣oned. Sense tells us, that the Sunne is of greater magnitude in the morning, and evening, than at noon; here reason again interposes, corrects sense, tells us, it onely apeares so because of the densenesse, or thicknesse of the air or medium; and that for the same reason, if you put a piece of money into a bason
of water, it will appeare of a larger size, than if it were in a bason without water; that which I aim at is this, that as rea∣son doth thus correct sense, à pari, faith should correct reason. 2. Philosophical Axiomes, must be kept within their pro∣per bounds, and limited to a finite power; for instance, Ex nihilo nihil fit, that out of nothing proceeds nothing, is a truth, if it be understood with reference to a finite power. So A priva∣tione ad habitum non datur regressus, is a truth upon the same termes. Sic una numero essentia non potest esse in tribus perso∣nis; that one and the same numerical essence, cannot be in three distinct persons, is a truth limited, as before; I mean, with reference to a finite power; but all this, and ten thou∣sand Arguments more of this nature, cannot overthrow this principle, that there are three persons, and one God; for we are not speaking now of that which is finite, but of that which is infinite. Suppose this Question should be started; how the same numerical essence can be in three persons? pos∣sibly an answer might be returned thus. Suppose a father be∣gets a sonne, and communicates to him the same numerical soul and body which he hath still himself, and both of these should communicate the same soul and body to a third, here would be three distinct persons, yet the same essence in them all; but I know a reply would quickly be made, This is impossi∣ble; answer must be made, It is true, as to that which is finite, but not unto that which is infinite, &c. The time allotted for this exercise being spent, in the handling of the doctrinal part of this Observation, I can speak but a few words to the Use and Application. Use 1. This doctrine should establish us in the truth of the Gospel, even this mystery which hath been hid from ages, and from generations, but now is made manifest unto the Church; the Heathens as we have heard, could not attaine unto this knowledge by the light of nature; Oh what a com∣fort is this, that we serve an incomprehensible God! one God, and yet three persons; to comprehend is to environ, and keep in all that God is; for my part, I would not wor∣ship that God that I could comprehend; the doings of God know no bounds, much more his essence and subsistence.
Kings have their Crowns, a circle about their head, and should also have a circle about their feet, they should not go which way they please, but keep themselves with n the limits of Law, both of God and man, and this speaks them to be creatures, though in a greater letter, finite beings; but it is otherwise with God; as he will not have any Articles put upon him, so he cannot have any circles or lines drawn about him; for an infinite God to be finite and limited, is a contradiction in adjecto. 2. Let us study this doctrine of the Trinity; and as a motive to this consider, we cannot worship God aright, without some know∣ledge of this truth. As God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, are the object of divine faith, so are they the ob∣ject of divine worship; we must worship Trinity in unity, and u∣nity in Trinity; you may direct your prayers unto God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; but you must not pray unto either of the persons, but as united unto the other. Gerard tells us in Loc. com. de sanctissimo Trinitatis mysterio, cap. 1. that it is absolute∣ly necessary in some measure to know this truth; and that not on∣ly the denial of the Trinity of persons, but the ignorance of it is damnable;Eph. 2.12. the Apostle tells the Ephesians, that sometime they were Atheists, we render it without God in the world, but in the o∣riginal it is , Atheists in the world; and the reason of this you have in the beginning of the verse, because they were  without the knowledge of Christ; although a man acknowledges there is but one true God, yet if he knows not this God in Christ, he is an Atheist. 3. Blesse God for the cleare discovery of this truth under the Gospel; Blessed are our eyes for we see, and our eares for we heare; 'Tis Gods method to discover himself by degrees; we know more of God now than the Jews did; and we shall know more in hea∣ven, than we know on earth. Now God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, lead us unto all truth, and bring us at last unto himself, that we may enjoy him, and have a more full and clear discovery of him, unto all Eternity, Amen.
READER, BE pleased to take notice that the worthy Authour of this Sermon not long after he had preached it, by a very sad hand of God fell sick and dy∣ed; so that he had not opportunity himself to bring it forth into light; you have it here as it was taken by a good Noter, yet so as it hath been compared with the Authours own Notes; which yet being for the most part wrote in Characters, the Comparer could not make so much advantage of them as he desired. Had the Lord been pleased to spare him his life, this Discourse had come forth more exact and accurate than now it doth; but such as it is, it here presents it self to thee; and 'tis hoped, though that is wanting which might please the learned eye, yet there is that in it which may profit the judicious Christian; you will here see the difference of Treatises put forth by the Au∣thours themselves, and by others, which is as great as the difference betwixt the childe whom the mother nurses her self, (which is full and faire, and lusty) and that which is put out after her death, (which is too often infirme, lean, and starv'd.) If thou findest any thing in this Sermon that is for thy pro∣fit, blesse God for it, and pray that no more such hopeful instru∣ments may be cut off in the prime of their days.
THE DIƲINE AƲTHORITY OF THE Scriptures. 2 Tim. 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, &c. YOu have heard there is a God, and you have had a discourse concerning the Trinity; I am now to clear and prove to you the Divine authority of the Scriptures; therefore I crave your attention to what the Scripture reports of it self in 2 Tim. 3.16, &c. It was motive enough to the Ephesians to plead and zealously to conte d for the image of Diana, because they said it was that which fell from Jupiter, Acts 19.35. Sure then you will have reason to plead for, and to hold fast this blessed book which we call the Bible, if I shall be able to make it further evi∣dent, that it is tha book which God himself hath writ. An Argu∣ment which you need to hear, and which you had need seriously
consider; for (as I shall anon presse it upon you) if you did be∣lieve the glory the Scripture speaks of, and the dreadful misery that remains for impenitent sinners in hell; if things as they are stated in the Scripture were looked upon as real truths, it would cause you presently to return to God by godlinesse. There were even in the Apostles time seducers, (so you finde in the beginning of this Chapter) persons that would resist the truth, as Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses; Not only in the present age, (which is like the dregs of the world in comparison of the Primitive times) but even then also there were seducers and deceivers; there are Comets among the Stars, as well as ignis fatuus that creep upon the earth; what must Timothy do? ver. 14. Continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom than hast learned them; and that from a childe thou hast known the Scriptures, &c. [From a childe] Jos phus in his book against Apion tells us, the children of the Jews were so instructed in their Laws, that they could scarce name a Law to them, but they could tell it; more shame to us Christians that take no care to teach Religion, that may much more easily be learned than the Jewish Religion could. [From a childe thou hast learned the Scriptures] And it would be a shame for a person so long instructed, not to continue in this doctrine; a shame for an old professor well educated to desert the principles of his Religion, and forsake the truths of Scripture; do not forsake them, why? this verse gives two reasons; first, it is of divine revelation; secondly, it's profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse. A little to explain the words. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God] Scripture in the Text, is the same with the Holy Scriptures, ver. 15. for you must know that in the Bible, the word Scripture is commonly taken for the holy Scriptures; so search the Scripture; ye erre, not know∣ing the Scripture;John 5.39. Matth. 22.29. John 10.33. the Scripture cannot be broken; so you must understand it here, all Scripture, that is not every thing that is written, but the holy Scripture. Is of Divine inspiration] the meaning is, that the things writ∣ten are not of humane invention, are not the contrivance of any mans wit, or any mans fancy; but they are the real revelations of the minde and will of God: And yet those things which were
thus reveal'd, good men were excited to write them, and assisted in it: I say, the inspiration of God comprehends in it these two things. First, the truths contained in this Scripture were not in∣ventions of mans braine ot fancy: Secondly, that they who writ them were excited to it, and were assisted in it by the Holy Ghost. The Text is both explain'd and confirm'd by the parallel place, 2 Pet. 1.21. Knowing this first, that no prophesie of the Scri∣pture is of any private interpretation; for the prophesie came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. That you may a little understand this Text, give me leave to glosse upon it. In ver. 16. the Apostle said, we have not fol∣lowed cunningly devised fables, &c. That which we have propo∣sed and preached to you, was nothing cunningly devised by us, when we made known to you the power and coming of the Lord Jesus Christ; we saw him transfigured; we did not go about to tell you the story our selves; but if you will not believe that, ver. 19. We have also a more sure word of prophesie: There are predicti∣ons concerning Christ in the Old Testament, whereunto ye do ve∣ry well that ye take heed as unto a light that shineth in a dark place untill the day dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts: Not as some Enthusiasts would interpret this, that men should mind the Old Testament till the Spirit of God should tell them the truth of this Scripture, and then throw away the Old Testa∣ment: No, it's a light that shines in a dark place untill the day dawns, and the day-star arise in your hearts. I'le give two inter∣pretations; either first, that this heart is the dark place till the day-star arise, and so the word [untill] shall not refer to the word take heed, but only to dark place; mans heart is the dark place. But I rather take it till they saw the accomplishment of those Prophesies; till you see that really fulfilled which hath been Prophesied: Take heed, why? knowing this that no Prophesie of Scri∣pture is of any private interpretation, &c. so we read the word; in the Greek it is, they are not of any private incitation and impulsi∣on; for the word hath reference to the custome of Racers; now you know Racers do not set out when they please themselves, but when he watch word is given: Now no Prophesie is of any pri∣vate interpretation, they did not go about nor set about it till God
really put them upon it; for it was not the effect of their own will, choice or invention, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Say the Papists, the Scripture is of no private interpretation; therefore you cann't understand it; but that is just as if I should say. you must not put what mean∣ing you will upon my words, and therefore you cann't understand them: The Scriptures being from God are not to any of private interpretation; (that is) to put any other meaning upon them than what God means; but it doth not follow what God means, cannot be understood; Luke 1.70. its said that God spake by the mouth of the holy Prophets, &c. The Apostles before they preached, were endued with power from on high, as you read in the Acts. Paul saith of himself, it pleased God to reveal his Sonne in him, Gal. 1.15, 16. by the Revelation of the Gospel; 1 Cor. 14.37. If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord. Quest. The grand enquiry will be, how may any man be truly sa∣tisfied, that this book is the Word of God? or that it hath Divine authority, or Divine inspiration? I confesse 'tis an undertaking too great for me, but yet some∣times you have seen a little boat follow a great ship. That I may distinctly do it, and offer my own thoughts in this great enquiry, I shall give you what I have to say in these seven Propositions. Sol. 1. Prop. That there may be a Revelation from God, no man can doubt but an Atheist that thinks there is no God. That there has been a Revelation from God is acknowledged by the Gentiles; for they looked upon their Oracles as answers of their gods; and it is acknowledged also by the Jewes, who tell us that Moses had their Laws from God upon the Mount, and all the Prophets were moved and excited by God to deliver their er∣rands to them; since there is a God, God may make a Revelation of his minde. 2. Prop. That there should be a Revelation of Gods minde and will, every man cannot but grant it to be highly reasonable; for alas, poor man is a sinner, a pitiful dark blind thing; now he cannot but confesse though he hath no Bible, yet surely he is not what he was when he came out of Gods hand; but he is now ig∣norant, and does not know all his duty, and he is backward to do
that which he does know, and if he was not backward, he could tell whether God would accept of it or not; therefore man can∣not but say it is a thing h ghly reasonable that there should be a Revelation of the will of God, that he might know his duty; and if he did do it, God would take it kindly at his hand. 3. Prop. We ought to have good satisfaction for that which we entertain as a Divine Revelation; for there are more per∣sons come in Gods name, than have Gods commission; a great many more say Thus sayes the Lord, then ever were bid to speak Gods Word; As we cannot believe we know not what, so we can∣not believe we know not why; whoever believes any thing, he hath some reason why he does believe it: 2 Tim. 3.14. Continue in the things whereof thou hast been assured;. Hesych. Quorum firma seu plena fides tibi facta est. Fulleri Miscel. lib. 1. cap. 19. not those things which are concredited and trusted to thee, but those things of which thou hast been assured: Now saith our Saviour, John 4.22. Ye worship ye know not what; intimating persons ought to under∣stand what, and why they worship; we are not born with this notion that this Bible is a beam of the Sunne of righteousness; we must therefore see why we entertain it. That rule is excellent, though I must not nor cannot give a reason of every thing believed, (for many things far transcend all that my short understanding is able to reach) yet I must, and I am bound to give a reason of all that I believe, because God hath said it. When the Gospel was preached, the Bereans were commended for examining whether those things were so or not. I am satisfied this Book is Gods Word, I have reason enough to believe whatever is reveal'd; for God is too good to deceive, and too wise to be deceived; and therefore shew me but that God hath said it, and that it is really Gods minde, I have all the reason in the world to believe it; but now I must have some reason for which I believe that this book is the revelation of Gods minde and will. 4. Prop. Where we ought to be satisfied, there 'tis certain God hath given minds desirous of satisfaction to see some ground for it; I mean since 'tis so great a matter, we ought not to be fondly credulous: No question but God hath given sufficient evidence of that he would have us maintain as the manifestation of his own pleasure; for thus I argue, If we neither have nor can have any thing to discern what is from God, and what is not from God, then we must either resolve to believe nothing at all, as never
knowing but that we may be cheated; or else believe what comes first to hand, be it what it will; therefore I say where God would have us entertain any thing of his minde, 'tis certain he gives us sufficient evidence 'tis so. I say, God intended to give satisfaction to a minde that's desirous of it; not to a man that is peremptory, wilful and resolute of his own way, let God say what he will. God will not satisfie every angry Jew that will hold fast his own preju∣dices; nor every sensual Gentile that lives in nothing but pro∣fanesse; but an ingenuous spirit that willingly gives up himself to the truth of God, and lays down every prejudice, and is willing to be taught by him, this is the person to whom God intends real satisfaction. 5. Prop. All the evidence which we have of any thing, is ei∣ther from reason or sensation: As it is impossible a man should give credit to that which can no way be made credible; so what∣soever is made credible to us, is made so from some faculty; now all our faculties are either ratiocination or sensation; either the workings of our understanding, or else things we feel; believe such a thing, why? I feel it, see it, hear it. 6. Prop. We have rational evidence this book we call the Bible is Gods Word, and of Divine Authori y. 7. Prop. Good men have inward sensations that this book is from God. Now I am come to the grand businesse. I have told you there may be a Revelation from God since there is a God; it's highly reasonable there should be such a Revelation; we ought to have satisfaction in what we entertain as a Revelation of God; where we ought to be satisfied, God hath given it to a minde willing to entertain it; all the evidences we can have of a thing whereby we should be satisfied, must either be from our reason or sense; And now we have rational evidence, this book we call the Bible, is of Divine Authority. I will dwell but upon this one Argument, and before I speak to it, give me leave to ask you this one question; What would you desire to give you assurance that any particular book or Revelati∣on is from God? this is a considerable question; for whatsoever a sober man could desire to give him assurance this book is from God, he hath it; and if God say, thou hadst all I could give thee, it would non-plus all at that day if they be found unbelievers.
I can possibly desire nothing but these three things. First, Methinks whatsoever should come from God, should presse holi∣nesse and godlinesse; should presse such a Religion, that if men love it, they should be happy by it; and should give such Argu∣ments to engage men to this Religion, as should be proper to per∣swade. Secondly, I should think that the Publisher of this Do∣ctrine should himself be an exemplary person; for I could not ea∣sily imagine God would send such a person to bring in such a Re∣ligion as should destroy it by his own life, and bring to ruine by his works what he had spoken with his mouth. Thirdly, I should expect such a person should work miracles to give us assurance he had a Divine Commission. Now let us make an enquiry whether we have not all these things; this great Argument Comprehends many things in it. First, This book presses holinesse and godlinesse so as never did any in the world before nor since, and gives such Arguments for it as never was heard of, nor the wit of man could ever have thought of. He that would walk in the Wildernesse of Paganism, might hear and there spy a flower growing amongst many weeds; now and then a Philosopher that gives you some good directions that concern righteousnesse and external behaviour; but the Scri∣pture is a garden wherein whatsoever hath been recommended by all the sober men in the world is put together, and wherein they were defective that's there made up; for they were defective e∣specially in this one great point, deep humility; and though you shall finde many things that concern the exercise of some Christi∣an graces, yet in the real practice of humility, a man would won∣der how incredibly they fell short. But as for the Scripture; what would you have? it bids you live soberly, righteously, godly;Tit. 2.12. it bids you lie at Gods feet as his crea∣ture, to do with you what he will; it would have you like God himself; that's the end of the promises, that we should partake of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. it bids you be holy as God is ho∣ly, 1 Pet. 1.15. it charges upon you whatever thing is good, is just, is lovely, Phil. 4.8. it commands your very thoughts; it's so far from suffering you to do hurt to your brother, as not to suffer you to think hurt; it's so far from allowing to act rapine and in∣justice, as not to allow to do any thing that savours of coveting;
it binds the very heart and soul: O what a place of universal calm∣nesse would this world be, should all serve one another in love; should all study each others good, we should never do injury; if any did, we should forgive him, we should endeavour to be per∣fect as God is;Trypho calls them . therefore the Jew could not but say the precepts of the Gospel were wonderful, great, excellent and transcendent indeed. Behold the Scripture is a doctrine according to godlinesse, 1 Tim. 6.3. truth according to godlinesse, Tit. 1.1. the mystery of godlinesse, 1 Tim. 3.16. so that in one word, whatever God would think fit for man to do to that God that made him; what∣ever is fit for a sinner to do to a holy God against whom he hath trangressed; and between man and man; all that is the designe of the Scripture. And what the Scripture thus commends, it presses by incomparable Arguments; shall I name a few? 1. Behold God is manifested in the flesh for this purpose, 1 Tim. 3.16. Is it nothing sinner, that thou wilt live foolishly, vain∣ly? what wilt thou think to see God dwelling in humane nature? to see God live a poor, scorned, reproached, contemned life; intimating this great truth, that it's not so unseemly a thing for the Sonne of God himself to live a poor miserable life, as 'tis for a man to be an impenitent sinner; if you remain a wilful and im∣penitent sinner, thou wouldst in thy pride be like God, and have no Superiour above thee: Behold God condescends and becomes like to thee, that if possible he might bring thee back again; thou that art a sinner, suspectest whether God will do thee good; behold how close he comes to thee, he dwells in thy own nature. 2. Behold the beloved Sonne of God dying upon the Crosse for thee. What would you think if any of your Parents should suf∣fer their childe to dye on the behalf of an enemy? would you not think it should move that enemy? Behold my Sonne in whom I am well-pleased! methinks God takes not a quarter of that content in the whole Creation, which he does when he speaks of his Sonne; yet this Sonne suffered for sinne, the just for the un∣just, that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. methinks this love should constrain us, 2 Cor. 5.14. Poor soul, thou art ready to think God is become thine enemy; when sicknesse and death comes, thou art ready to say, hast thou found me O mine enemy? here's trouble in the world; how shall I know whether God in∣tends
good? Behold it's beyond peradventure, God intends good to a sinner because he dwelt in our nature, and his Sonne dyed for us, and his Sonne felt pain and infirmity, and therefore he may love thee, and you need not question any thing of this nature is a hindrance of Gods love; the case of a sinner is not so despe∣rate, but that a man may be accepted and loved of God for Christs sake; will not this move you? 3. You have promises of eternal life, and threatnings of eter∣nal misery: Never did any Philosopher or any other man threaten, If you will not observe such and such precepts, Il'e throw you in∣to eternal torments, nor never did any man say I will give you such glory in heaven; but the Scripture does; behold life and immor∣tality are brought to light by Christ; there's a future resurrecti∣on, and this body is like an old house pull'd down, by and by it will be a brave building again, a spiritual body, and we shall shine like the Sunne in the Firmament, and be equal to the Angels of God, Matth. 13.43. and he like God and Christ: Now we know not what we shall be, but when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is, 1 Joh. 3.1, 2. And having this hope, who would not purifie himself even as God is pure? who would not live soberly, righteously and godly, looking for that blessed hope, &c? If you did but apprehend this glory,Tit. 2 13 were not your minde senselesse, its impossible you could be quiet with∣out getting an interest in it. And how great the day of judgment will be, it tells you; how our thoughts, words and actions, and every thing we go about shall come under a severe scru∣tiny. 4. The worth of our souls; we minde our bodies, but a soul is better than a world. The Scripture saith, the Sonne of God dy∣ed for souls; we never understood so much what souls were wor h as now we do, when we see God taking such care, and having such designs and thoughts from all eternity. 5. The fairest and the most reasonable condition of eternal happinesse, and the greatest strength to perform it, that's offer'd in the Gospel: Suppose we were sensible we were liable and obnoxi∣ous to Gods wrath, and could go to heaven and beseech God that he would be pleased not to execute that wrath upon us, do but think what terms you would be willing to propose to God; would you come and say, Lord, punish me not for what is past, though I
intend to do the same thing; but he that should say, Lord, forgive me, I am sorry for that which is done, and it shall be the businesse of my life to live more circumspectly to thee; this is the great thing the Scripture proposes to us: Godlinesse in the Scripture hath the pro∣mise of the things of this life,1 Tim. 4.8. and of things to come; whatever is good here, we are sure of it in the practice of piety; and in the world to come as sure of that happinesse; but no more can tell what it is, then we can tell what the thoughts of all men have been since the first Creation. What Arguments can you imagine possibly God himself could propose greater or stronger than these? what should hin∣der me from returning to God? That's the first part of the demonstration. Secondly, we would expect the Publisher of this Doctrine should himself be exemplary, and so was Christ; Austin said, the whole life of Christ was doctrinal, to lead us to piety and good practice, he went up and down doing good. Did any reproach him? he reproached them not again; was he reviled? he reviled not again; when he came to suffer, Father, not my will, but thine be done; there's not such a word as that in all the pieces of Philosophy, not such an expression of humility and surrender, Fa∣ther, not my will, &c. An innocent person, so saith the Text; he is always denying him∣self, he will not be rich and great in the world; why? he prest you to lay up treasures in heaven; he hath not a hole where to lay his head; why? because he bids you to live upon Gods providence; he lived a single life, bacause he would have you be as though you had not such and such relations; his very enemies could object nothing against him; have nothing to do with that just person, said Pilates wife. I finde no fault in him, saith he that condemned him; not the Jews themselves were ever able to instance in any evil practice; they only charged him, (and so do still) that he wrought miracles by the Divel, which was the greatest mi∣racle; but they never could charge him with any evil practice; leaving us an example, 1 Pet. 2.21. Learn of me, I am meek and lowly. Now what servant would not be willing to do that which his Master does before him?
Thirdly, we would expect he should work miracles to testifie that he had his commission from God; for he that shall come to set up a new Law, a new Oeconomy, a new frame nd constitu∣tion of Religion, had need assure us that he is Gods messenger; if he work miracles, we cannot tell what to have more; for we certainly conclude that God will not suffer a long series of things extraordinary and quite beyond the course of nature to be done to attest a lye: Miracles were bagun by our Saviour, and continued many hundred years after, just as props that are set under weak Vines; so these under the weak faith of the world when it first began.. Basil. One said excellently, that those whom the speaking tongue did not convince, the seeing eyes might certainly convince; that these were proper to convince that Christ came from God, ap∣pears, Matth. 11.3.4. where when John sent to know, Art thou he that should come? that is, Art thou the Messiah? Go and tell John what you hear and see; The blinde receive their sight, the lame walk, &c. John 3.2. Nicodemus saith, No man can do these miracles that thou dost, except God be with him; and John 9.13. the blinde man saith he hath opened mine eyes, and how come you to ask how he did it? great signs shall follow them that believe, Mark 16.17. and these continued in Justin Mar∣tyrs, Tertullians, Cyprians time, Gregory Nyssens time,Vid. Montacut. Apparat. in Praefat. and some part of Chrysostoms time. Concerning these miracles, give me leave to lay down three Propositions, then you will see the strength of the whole Ar∣gument. 1. They were famous and illustrious, for they were done be∣fore multitudes, Matth. 9.8. Matth. 12.22, 23. not done in a corner, John 9. when Lazarus was raised, they said, they could not deny it; at his death the Earth quaked, the Temple rent, there was darknesse for three houres which was observed by Hea∣thens as well as Christians. 2. As they were done before a multitude, so there were a mul∣titude of miracles, insomuch that John saith, they were so many, that if all should be written, the world could not contain the books that should be written, John 21.25. That is an Hyperbolical expression for a very great number.
A learned man hath observed Elisha did but twelve miracles, Elijah not so many; Moses wrought about seventy six; and they which were done by them and all the rest of the Prophets from the beginning of the world to the destruction of the first Temple, a∣mounted but to one hundred and fifty miracles; in three thou∣sand three hundred twenty eight years there were not as we finde in Scripture, so many wrought; but now Christ went about healing all manner of sicknesse, and curing all manner of diseases, Mat. 4.23. Acts 10.38. Questionlesse a very vast number. 3. They were of all sorts and of all kinds; a woman that had an issue of blood twelve years, Matth. 9.20. and a woman that had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, Luke 13.11. and one that had an infirmity thirty eight years, John 5.8. the dead were raised, the Divels were cast out, the Sea commanded, the winds o∣bey; they are of all sorts and kinds. Observe also this, that you do not read or finde by any thing that there was the least of them done out of any ostentation; there was no such thing done by Christ or his Apostles, to call men out and say, Come, Il'e shew you what I can do, that should shew any kind of arrogant affectation to themselves; but the greatest hu∣mility and modesty runs through all the exercise of this mighty power, and this practice was ordinary among the common Pro∣fessors then; yea, the Galatians they received that spirit by which miracles were wrought among themselves. Secondly, such famous miracles were a sufficient ground to make men believe this holy doctrine, who saw the miracles wrought by them that preached it; for if they did not, it must be either because they questioned whether the things were done, or whether done by God or not; they could not question whether the things were done; for they saw some raised out of their graves, &c. Nor could they question whether this was from God or not; for observe, Where I see miracles wrought, there I am bound to believe that they give testimony to what is preached by him that works them, except that which is preached, is that of which I am infallibly assur'd already, it cannot be true, except God does by some greater miracle contradict the testimony of those miracles; as now the Egyptians they wrought miracles, but God contradicted all their testimony by Moses. Now observe, the end of all Christian Religion is to preach truth, to glorifie God, to honour
God, to save a mans soul. Never was there any exerting of Gods power to contradict it; so that if a man may not believe a do∣ctrine thus holy, a doctrine thus practised by him that published it, and confirmed by miracles, then a man is under an impossibility of ever being satisfied from any thing from God; for what shall satisfie? If God speak to us from heaven, we should as much sus∣pect that, as if an Angel come from heaven we should suspect him; but since we believe and know there's a God, and he is just and merciful, it's impossible the divine goodnesse should consent to such Impostors. But you will say what are these miracles to us? I say therefore thirdly, they are a sufficient reason to engage us to believe the divinity of this holy doctrine, though we never saw them. You do not see Christ your selves, nor did you see him dye nor work miracles, but would you have had Christ live alwayes a∣mong you? If you would, he must then never dye, and the great comfort of our life depended upon his death; he dyed, is risen, and gone to heaven; would you have him come down from hea∣ven, and dye that you might see it? and would you have him dye quite thorow the world at the same time? which must be if you would imagine we must see every thing our selves; it's a great piece of madnesse to believe nothing but what we see our selves: Austin was troubled himself in this case,Lib. 6. Cones. cap. 4. he had been cheated be∣fore, and now he was resolved he would believe nothing but what should be plain to him; at length (says he) O my God thou shewed'st me how many things I believed which I saw not; I con∣sidered, I believed I had a father and mother, and such persons were my Parents; how can I tell that ? a man may say, it may be he was drop't from heaven, and God made him in an extraordina∣ry way; so if I never were out of this Town, it's madnesse for a man to say there's never another Town in England; or to say there is no Sea because I saw it not. Nay, if a man come and tell me there's this doctrine that teaches me all self-denial, mortification, weanednesse from the world, and say this is of God, and when he hath done ventures life, children, family, have we not reason to believe it? If you will not believe, 'tis either because the first persons were deceived themselves, or else because you think they would deceive you; now deceiv'd themselves they could not be, when they saw so many miracles done; and deceive you, that they
would not neither; for would any good man to deceive an other, undo himself? they dyed for it, and writ this book, and sealed it with their blood; and therefore there can be no reason to doubt of it; they were witnesses, and delivered what they saw, Luke 1.2. 7. Prop. As we have rational evidence the Scripture is the Word of God, so we have evidence also from inward sensation; born we are with principles of conscience, and the truths in this book are so homogeneal to man, that he shall finde something within himself to give testimony for it. 2 Cor. 4.2. By manife∣station of the truth, commending our selves to every mans con∣science in the sight of God. Joh. 5.44. Men believe not, be∣cause they receive honour one of another; and in Scripture they that would not believe, are they that would not repent, Mat. 21.28 to the 33. men that practice drunkennesse, whoredome, sensuality, covetousnesse, pride, and know that these things are sinnes, they are the great unbelievers, because they are loth to leave their sins; offer the greatest reason in the world for a thing, if it be against a mans interest, how hard, and almost next to im∣possible is it to convince him? A man would believe that the Romans were in England that reads the Roman History; but if he shall finde the coyne of the Roman Emperour, he will much more believe it. Do a bad action, O the secret terrours that a man finds within him, as if he felt something of hell already! Do a good action, and the secret sweetnesse, joy and peace that attends it, that he cannot but say I believe it, for I feel some degrees of it already! 1 Cor. 14.24, 25, &c. he speaks to the inward princi∣ples of his conscience. The reason men believe not the Scri∣ptures, is not because 'tis unreasonable to believe them, but be∣cause they have a desperate love to sinne, and they are loth to en∣tertain that that should check their interest. There is in every life that certain sagacity by which a man apprehends what is natu∣ral to that life, what nourishes that life; a man that lives accord∣ing to the Law written in his heart, finds there's that in this Reve∣lation that feeds, nourishes, and encourages it; so that this man finds experimental satisfaction in it. Doth the Word of God tell me the wayes of God are pleasant? I thought they were hard and difficult, now I finde the yoke of Christ is easie, and that no hap∣pinesse like this, and no blessednesse like that; I thought if I did
not comply with such things I could never be blessed; now I finde I need nothing to make me happy but my God; he finds and feels these things are certan, true and real. Thus I have done with the demonstration. You will easily observe I have neither taken notice of what the Papists tell us, we must believe the Scripture because the Church saith it; we cannot tell what the Church is till the Scripture had told us. And though I have not mentioned the testimony of the Spirit, yet I suppose I have spoke to the thing; for I cannot understand what should be meant by the testimony of the Spirit, except we either mean miracles wrought, which in Scripture is called the testimony of the Spirit of Christ, Acts 15.8, 9. the giving of the Holy Ghost, it's the giving of those extraordinary miracles that fell down among them, so Heb. 2.4. Acts 5.32. I say if by the testimony of the Spirit you mean this, then you can mean nothing else but the Spirit assisting, enabling, helping our faculties to see the strength of that Argument God hath given us, and by experience to feel what may be felt, which comes under the head of sensation. APPLICATION. First, then study the Scripture: If a famous man do but write an excellent book, O how do we long to see it! or suppose I could tell you that there's in France or Germany a book that God himself writ, I am confident men may draw all the money out of your purses to get that book; you have it by you, O that you would study it: Wnen the Eunuch was riding in his Chariot, he was studying the Prophet Isaiah, he was not angry when Philip came, and as one would have thought asked him a bold question; Ʋnderstandest thou what thou readest? he was glad of it, Acts 8, 27, 28. one great end of the year of release was that the Law might be read, Deut, 31.9. it's the wisdome of God that speaks in the Scripture, Luke 11.49. therefore whatever else you mind, really and carefully study this Bible. Secondly, in all enquiries into the truths of the minde of God consult those sacred Oracles; here are Mines of truth, O dig here, make them the rule of faith and life; while a Papist makes the
Church his rule, and the Enthusiast pretends to make the Spirit of God his rule, do you live by Scripture; consider what I say, 2 Tim. 2.10. consider (there's thy duty) what I say, (there's the Scripture) yet Timothy was as good a man as any of us; and the Lord give thee understanding, (there's the work of the Spi∣rit to assist our faculty.) But how shall I finde out truth by Scripture? For thy own satis∣faction remember this, have an explicite faith in all that plainly appears to be Gods minde, and have an implicite faith resolving to be of Gods minde in all the rest; be it what it will be, believe it, because it appears to be of God; while a person resolves to be of the Churches minde, be thou of Gods; only use all means where∣by thou mayst come to know; to wit, 1. Take heed of passion and sensual lusts. 2 Tim. 4.3. you read of some that will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall heap to themselves Teachers. A lust or passion is like a whirle-pit, a man is suck't up in it; ambition, sensuality, any of these darken and blinde a mans minde; when a man studies any thing the minde had need to be quiet; lusts and passions are always busie and boisterous, and make a man have a great interest against God. 2. And beware of prejudice; Christ said, Go preach to all Nations, Mat. 28.29. but Peter lived under prejudice, and he said, Lord, I never eat any thing common or unclean, when God bade him go to the Gentiles, Acts 10.11. 3. Beware of taking truth upon the Authority of men, for that is fallible: Modesty requires you should have a fair respect to Preachers, and the Church of God where you live; but as to the vitals of your Religion, do not take them upon Authority; though a man would not willingly deceive you, yet he may be deceived himself in things controverted. In plain things of Scripture, that we must be humble, holy, believe, repent, all the world should not perswade you out of your Religion; and as for your duty you understand it; never a one but knows what he is to love when God bids us love him; if we would but familiarize our Religion, we could not but understand it; but in matters wherein there's a di∣spute & controversie in the world, be quiet and sober, and not con∣fident that such and such things must needs be so, because such say so?
many pretend a kinde of sanctity, and pretend for God, and a Ship may carry very broad sails, yet not very well loaden; but thus it is, one man draws a multitude, and then a multitude pre∣vails upon particular persons, and shall I go against a multi∣tude? I say therefore take not things upon authority, see and examine thy self; if it be plain in Scripture, mind it, and own it, and charge thy self with it: if it be ob∣scure, think it no farther concerns thee than God hath made it manifest. 4. Beware of Idlenesse; search the Scripture, 2 Tim. 2.7. Consider what I say, &c. They that are busied for veines of sil∣ver, they hold the rod even poized in their hand, till at length it moves in that vein where it lies in the earth; So hold your souls even in a diligent enquiry into the Scri∣ptures. 5. Beware of pride; the humble man God will teach; proud men scorn others, they will not be taught; and pride, that will make a man to neglect prayer. 6. Charge your selves with that which is the end of the Scri∣pture, to live well; Who would go about to read a piece of law, that he may learn Mathematicks? or read the statutes to learn Logick? you may as well do so, as read the Scripture to talk only; but the intent of the Scripture, is to shew how you ought to live godly, to be just, righteous, sober, to act by rule. No∣thing hinders knowledge so much as a bad life; for sin brought in ignorance, and holinesse will bring in the best light. There's a great deal of difference betwixt wit and wisdome. Many have parts enough to be witty, but none but sober and conscientious persons will have true wisdome. Prov. 14.9. A scorner seeks knowledge, and finds it not. Scorners usually are witty men, men of brave parts; a man that hath a mind only to practice wit, is never satisfied in the things of God. He that doth my will, shall know the doctrine that is of God. There are a thousand things disputed in the world, errors upon errors, but I thank God it is plainly revealed, God hath mercy for a sinner in Christ; I understand well what 'tis to live soberly, righteously, godly; I know what 'tis to honour my Parents, and do in my relations what becomes me; and I know these are the
conditions of eternal happinesse; I can but use all humane en∣deavours, I can but beg of God, and charge my self to love what I know; so that I am able to say at the day of judgement, what appeared to be the mind of God I observed it; what did not appear, I used all means to understand it; I would not hasti∣ly determine my self till I saw thy mind, because I knew there were impostors; and if this be done, if men will rangle and make controversies where God hath made none, let them, for there will be no end of vanity and folly. Thirdly, Seek dayly that your belief may be strengthened, that this book is of divine authority; for what will enable you to resist temptation, if you do not believe the Scripture? 1 John 2.14. I write unto you young men, saith the Apostle, because ye are strong; Why? the Word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the evil one; you will never be strong and overcome the evil one but by vertue of the Word of God. If sin tempts you, if you look into the Scripture there's peace, good consci∣ence, the joy of God, and eternal life; and shall I for a trifle lose these? no, while we have Scripture, we have an Antidote against all the devils poyson. Again, what will bear you up un∣der your afflictions if you lose the belief of the Scriptures? you will need it when you come to be sick and dye; when you bury your friends and relations, what will satisfie a mans mind? there's an after-glory; when friends come after me, or go before me, we shall all meet in joy; Did I but believe this glory, as I be∣lieve when the Sun sets it will rise again, were I but perswaded what God hath said is true, as now I am perswaded I speak, how should I long for this glory? how would every child wail for this in∣heritance? how ful of prayers? how chearful in our spirits? how should we welcome death? how should we long til these Tabernacles of dust were crumbled to nothing? when affliction comes, how should I re∣joyce in that I believe that all shall work for good because I love God? with what a quiet spirit should I passe through the great Wildernesse of this World? The devil knows if he can but beat you from this sort, he will quickly beat you out of all other sorts. Let the Word of God come to you with much assurance, 1 Thes. 1.4, 5. With the full assurance of understanding, Co∣lossians 2.3. you must not understand there he speaks in refe∣rence
to their persons, to assure them they were the children of God, but that their faith had a good foundation in it self, that this was from God, the truth of a good assurance in judgement. Take this further advice, If you would keep up your faith, be true to your faith; be sure you live well; you will alwayes finde men make shipwrack of a good conscience and of faith together, 1 Tim. 6.10, 21. 2 Tim. 3.8. 1 Tim. 1.19. Remember the A∣postles advice, Rom. 12.2. Be not conformed to this world, but be renewed in your minds, that you may prove what is the good and acceptable Will of God. Never fear it, while thy mind is but willing to be rul'd by God, while thy soul is teachable and tra∣ctable, this will give thee evidence this book is from God, ex∣cept melancholy overcome thee, which leads men to be Scep∣ticks, except in that case which is the proper effect of a mans bo∣dy, and must be cured by physick; but let a man have a mind to live well, and to be rul'd by the Word, the Bible is the best thing in the World to such a one. I might have spoken to a case of conscience concerning the as∣sent of Christians to the Word of God, that it is not equal in all, nor equally in the same person alwayes; and that a man may really believe that in the general of his life, which at some particular times he may doubt of; and a man may not be fully satisfied in the truth of the Scriptures, yet that man may really live under the power of it. To conclude all with this: since we have this reason to be∣lieve the Scripture is Gods Word, then never wonder that you find Ministers, Parents, Masters, to presse real piety upon you, and see what great reason you have to entertain it. Alas, it may be you wonder we Preach and presse Religion; we are ve∣rily perswaded, if you do nor love this Religion, you will be intolerably miserable; and we have so much compassion for you, that since we know this to be Gods Word, better to be burned in the hottest fire, than to lie in those torments. We know since God hath said it, there is no comfort too great to them that comply with it; no judgement too ter∣rible to those that will oppose it; therefore you cannot won∣der if we do from day to day presse it upon you.
Consider if it be Gods Word, then the threatenings are true, and the Promises are true, and you shall either have the promises or the threatenings within a while; God knows which of us shall be next, for 'tis but a little while be∣fore death, and judgement come; then either Come ye bles∣sed, or Go ye cursed; As a man hath wrought, so he shall have, for he will render to every one according to what he hath done in the flesh; therefore knowing the ter∣rour of the Lord, we perswade you; we know this is of Divine stamp and Authority. I conclude all with the 20. of the Acts 32. &c. And now, Brethren, I com∣mend you to God, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.
MANS CREATION IN AN HOLY, BUT MƲTABLE STATE. Eccles. 7.29. Lo this only have I found, that God hath made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions. IN these words you have the result of a serious inquiry into the state of mankind. In the verse immediately foregoing, the Preacher speaks his own experience, touching each sexe distributively; how rare it was to meet with a wise and good man, how much rarer with a prudent and vertuous woman (so he must be understood, though these qualities are not exprest) then in the Text gives this verdict touching both collectively, ten∣ding to acquit their Maker of their universal depravation, and convict them. Lo this only have I found, &c. The words contain two Propositions. The first touching mans perfection by his creation, God made, &c. The second touching his defection by sinne, but they have sought, &c.
Together with a solemn Preface introducing both, and recom∣mending them as well-weighed truths, Lo this only have I found, &c. q. d. I do not now speak at randome, and by guesse; no, but I solemnly pronounce it, as that which I have found out by serious study and diligent exploration, That God made man up∣right, &c. The Termes are not obscure, and are fitly render∣ed. I find no considerable variety of readings, and cannot need∣lessely spend time about words. Only in short, By man] you must understand man collectively, so as to com∣prehend the whole species. Making him upright] you must understand so as to refer making not to the adjunct only, supposing the subject pre-exi∣stent, but to both subject and adjunct together; and so 'tis mans concreate and original righteousnesse that is here meant. By inventions] understand (as the antithesis doth direct) such as are alien from this rectitude. Nor is it altogether im∣probable that in this expression, some reference may be had to that curious desire of knowing much that tempted Adam and Eve into the first transgression. Many inventions] seems to be spoken in opposition to that simplicity and singlenesse of heart which this original rectitude did include; truth is but one; falshood, manifold. God made man upright, i. e. simple, plain-hearted, free from all tor∣tuous windings, and involutions (so the word rendred upright in the Text doth signifie; and Jeshurun derived therefrom, which God thought a fit name for his people Israel, the seed of plain-hearted Jacob to be known by; answerably whereto Nathanael is said to be a true Israelite in whom was no guile)John 1.47. Such man was at first; now in the room of this simplicity, you find a multi∣plicity; he was of one constant uniform frame, and tenour of Spirit, held one straight, direct and even course; now he's be∣come full of inventions, grown vafrous, multiform as to the frame of his spirit, uncertain, intricate, perplexed in all his wayes. Sought out] this notes the voluntarinesse, and perfect sponta∣neity of his defecti n; 'twas his own doing. God made him upright; he hath sought out means to deform and undo him∣self. The words thus opened, afford us two great Gospel-truths.
1. That God endued the nature of man in his creation, with a per∣fect and universal rectitude. 2. That mans defection from his primitive state was purely vo∣luntary, and from the unconstrained choice of his own mutable and self-determining will. (Though the latter part of the Text, would afford a sufficient ground to treat of the state of man now fallen; yet that being by agreement left to another hand, I observe no more from it then what concerns the manner of his fall, and that only as it depended on a mutable will.) In handling these truths, I shall 1. Open them in certain explicatory Theses. 2. Improve them in some few praictcal and applicatory infe∣rences. 1. About the former, that God endued, &c. take these Proposi∣tions for explication. 1. All created rectitude consists in conformity to some rule or Law. Rectitude is a meer relative thing, and its relation is to a rule. By a rule, I here mean a law strictly taken; and therefore I speak this only of created rectitude. A law, is a rule of duty gi∣ven by a Superiour to an Inferiour; nothing can be in that sense a rule to God, or the measure of increated rectitude. 2. The highest rule of all created rectitude, is the will of God, considered as including most intrinsecally, an eternal and immutable reason, justice, and goodness. 'Tis certain, there can be no higher rule to creatures than the divine Will;Rom. 7.12. Rom. 12.102. Ezek. 18.25, ch. 33. and as certain that the government of God over his creatures, is alwayes reasonable and just, and gracious; and that this reasonablenesse, justice and goodnesse by which it is so, should be subjected any where but in God himself, none that know what God is (according to our more obvious notions of him) can possibly think. 3. Any sufficient signification of this Will, touching the rea∣sonable creatures duty is a law, indispensably obliging such a creature. A law is a constitution de debito, and 'tis the Legislatours will (not concealed in his own breast, but) duly expressed that makes this constitution, and infers an obligation on the Sub∣ject.
4. The Law given to Adam at his creation was partly natural, given by way of internal impression upon his soul; partly positive given (as is probable) by some more external dis∣covery or revelation. That the main body of laws whereby man was to be governed, should be at first given no other way than by stamping them up∣on his mind and heart, was a thing congruous enough to his in∣nocent state (as it is to Angels and Saints in glory) it being then exactly contempered to his nature, highly approvable to his rea∣son (as is evident in that being faln, his reason ceases not to ap∣prove it, Rom. 2.18.) fully sutable to the inclination and ten∣dency of his will, and not at all regretted by any reluctant prin∣ciple that might in the least oppose or render him doubtful about his duty. Yet was it most reasonable also, that some positive commands should be superadded, that Gods right of dominion and govern∣ment over him as Creatour, might be more expresly asserted, and he might more fully apprehend his own obligation as a crea∣ture to do somethings, because it was his Makers Will, as well as o∣thers, because they appeared to him in their own nature reason∣able and fit to be done (for so the whole of what God requires of man, is fitly distinguished into some things which he commands, because they are just; and some things that are just, because he commands them.) 5. Adam was indued in his creation, with a sufficient ability and habitude to conform to this whole Law, both natural and positive; in which ability and habitude his original rectitude did consist. This Proposition carries in it the main truth we have now in hand, therefore requires to be more distinctly insisted on. There are two things in it to be considered. The thing it self he was endued with. The manner of the endowment. 1. The thing it self wherewith he was endued, that was upright∣nesse, rectitude, (otherwise called the image of God, though that expression comprehends more than we now speak of, as his immortality, dominion over the inferiour creatures, &c.) which
uprightness or rectitude consisted in the habitual conformity, or conformability of all his natural powers to this whole Law of God; and is therefore considerable two wayes, viz. In relation to its Subject. Rule. 1. In relation to its subject; that was the whole soul (in some sense it may be said the whole man) even the several powers of it. And here we are led to consider the parts of this rectitude, for 'tis coextended (if that phrase may be allowed) with its sub∣ject, and lies spread out into the several powers of the soul; for had any power been left destitute of it, such is the frame of man, and the dependance of his natural powers on each other, in or∣der to action, that it had disabled him to obey, and had destroy∣ed his rectitude; for bonum non oritur nisi ex causis integris, ma∣lum vero ex quovis defectu.Davenant de justitia habitu∣ali, &i. And hence (as Davenant well ob∣serves) according to the parts (if I may so speak) of the subject wherein it was, Mans original rectitude must be understood to consist of 1. A perfect illumination of mind to understand and know the Will of God. 2. A compliance of heart and will therewith. 3. An obedient subordination of the sensitive appetite, and other inferiour powers, that in nothing they might resist the former. That it comprehends all these, appears by comparing Col. 3.10. where the image of God, wherein man was created, is said to consist in knowledge, that hath its seat and subject in the mind, with Ephes. 4.24. where righteousness and holiness are also mentioned; the one whereof consists in equity towards men; the other in loyalty and devotedness to God; both which neces∣sarily suppose the due framing of the other powers of the soul, to the ducture of an inlightened mind. And besides, that work of sanctification (which in these Scriptures is expresly called a re∣novation of man according to the image of God wherein he was created) doth in other Scriptures appear (as the forementioned Authour also observes) to consist of parts proportionable to these I mention, viz. illumination of mind, Ephes. 1.18. conver∣sion
of heart, Psal. 51.10. victory over concupiscence, Rom. 6.7. throughout. 2. Consider this rectitude in relation to its Rule; that is the Will of God revealed,1 John 3.4. or the Law of God; sin is the transgres∣sion of the Law; and accordingly righteousnesse must needs be conformity to the Law, viz. actual righteousnesse consists in a∣ctual conformity to the Law; that habitual rectitude which Adam was furnished with in his Creation (of which we are speaking) in an habitual conformity, or an ability to conform to the same Law. This habitual conformity, was, as of the whole soul, so to the whole Law, i. e. to both the parts or kinds of it, natural and positive. He was furnish't with particular principles incli∣ning him to comply with whatsoever the Law of nature had laid before him, and with a general principle, disposing him to yield to whatsoever any positive Law should lay before him as the Will of God. And if it be said (in reference to the former of these) that this Law of nature impressed upon Adams soul, was his very rectitude; therefore how can this rectitude be a con∣formity to this Law? I answer, Aquin. Summ.1. A Law is twofold Regulans. Regulata. 2. The Law of nature impressed upon the soul of Adam, must be considered 1. As subjected in his mind; so it consisted of certain practical notions about good and evil, right and wrong, &c. 2. As subjected in his heart, so it consisted in certain habitual inclinations to conform to those principles. Now these incli∣nations of the heart, though they are a rule to actions, they are yet something ruled in reference to those notions in the mind; and their conformity thereto makes one part of Original rectitude. And those notions, though they are a rule to these inclinations, yet they are something ruled in reference to the Will of God signifi∣ed by them; and in the conformity thereto, consists another part of this Original rectitude. 2. We have to consider the manner of this endowment. And as to this, 'tis much disputed among the Schoolmen, whether it were natural, or supernatural. I shall only lay down in few
words, what I conceive to be cleare and indisputable. 1. If by natural, you mean essential (whether constitutively, or consecutively) so Original righteousnesse was not natural to man, for then he could never nave lost it, without the loss of his being. 2. If by natural you mean connatural, i. e. concreate with the nature of man, and consonant thereto, so I doubt not but it was natural to him. 6. This rectitude of mans nature, could not but infer and include his actual blessednesse, while he should act accor∣ding to it. According to the tenour of the Covenant, it could not but in∣fer it. And consider this rectitude in it self, it must needs in∣clude it: The rectitude of his understanding including his know∣ledge of the highest good; and the rectitude of his will and affe∣ctions, the acceptance and enjoyment thereof;Aug. de civitate Dei. as Augustine in this case, nullum bonum abesset homini quod recta voluntas optare pos∣set, &c. Thus far of the holinesse and blessednesse of mans first state. It follows to speak of the mutability of it, and of his fall as de∣pending thereon. 2. That mans defection from his Primitive state, was mearly voluntary, and from the unconstrained choice of his own mutable and self-determining will. For the asserting of this truth, take the following Propo∣sitions. 1. That the nature of man is now become universally depraved and sinful. This Scripture is ful of1 Kings 8.46. Psal. 14.1. Rom. 3.12. — &c. cap. 5.12, 13, &c. 1 John 5.19. &c., and experience and common observati∣on puts it beyond dispute. 'Tis left then, that sinne must have had some Original a∣mong men. 2. The pure and holy nature of God could never be the Origi∣nal of mans sin. This is evident in it self. God disclaims it, nor can any af∣firm it of him without denying his very being. He could not be the cause of uholiesse, but by ceasing to be holy, which would suppose him mutably holy; and if either God or man must be confessed mutable, 'tis no difficulty where to lay it; whatever
he is, he is essentially; and necessity of existence of being always what he is,James 1.17. remains everlastingly the fundamental attribute of his being. 3. 'Tis blasphemous and absurd to talk of two principles, (as the Manichees of old) the one good per se, and the cause of all good; the other evil per se, and the cause of all evil. Bradwardine de causa Dei.Bradwardines two Arguments: 1. That this would suppose two Gods, two Independent beings; 2. That it would suppose an evil God; do sufficiently convince this to be full both of blas∣phemy and contradiction. 4. It was not possible that either external objects, or the temptation of the Divel should necessitate the will of man to sinne. External objects could not; for that were to reject all upon God; for if he create objects with such an allective power in them, and create such an appetite in man as cannot but work inor∣dinately and sinfully towards those objects, it must needs inferre his efficacious necessitation of sinne, being it would destroy the truth already established, that God created man with such a recti∣tude as that there was a sufficient ability in his Superiour powers for the cohibition and restraint of the Inferiour, that they should not work inordinately towards their objects. The Divel could not do it for the same reason, having no way to move the will of man but by the proposal of objects; yet that by this means (which he could in many respects manage most advantagiously) he did much help forward the first sinne, Scripture leaves us not to doubt. 5. The whole nature of sinne consisting only in a defect, no o∣ther cause need be designed of it than a defective; i. e. an understanding, will and Inferiour powers however originally good, yet mutably and defectively so. I shall not insist to prove that sinne is no positive bang; but I take the Argument to be irrefragable, (notwithstanding the Cavils made against it) that is drawn from that common Maxime,. Dion. de Div. nom. that omne ens positivum est vel primum, vel à primo. And that of Dionysius the Areopagite is an ingenuous one; he argues that no being can be evil per se; for then it must be immu∣tably, to which no evill can be, for to be alwayes the same,
is a certain property of goodnesse; 'tis so even of the highest goodnesse. And hence sinne being supposed only a defect, a soul that is on∣ly defectibly holy, might well enough be the cause of it; i. e. the deficient cause. Nor is it in the least stranage that man should be at first created with a defectible holinesse; for if he were immutably holy, either it must be ex naturâ, or ex gratiâ; ex naturâ it could not be, for that would suppose him God; if it were ex gratiâ, then it must be free; then it might be, or might not be; therefore there was no incongruity in it that it should not be. And indeed it was most congruous that God having newly made such a creature, furnished with such powers, so capable of government by a Law, of being moved by promises and threats, he should for some time hold him as a viator, in a state of tryal unconfirmed, (as he did also the innocent Angels) that it might be seen how he would behave him∣self towards his Maker, and that he should be rewardable and pu∣nishable accordingly, in a state that should be everlasting and un∣changeable: The liberty therefore of the Viators and the Compre∣hensors Gibieuf well distinguishes into inchoata or consummabilis,Gibieuf de li∣bertate Dei & creatur. ae and perfecta or consummata; the former such as Adams was at his Creation; the latter such as is the state of Angels and Saints in glory; and as his would have been had he held out and persisted innocent through the intended time of tryal. It was therefore no strange thing that man should be created defectible; 'twas as little strange that a defectible creature should deficere. For the manner of that defection, (whether errour of the un∣derstanding preceded, or inconsideration only, and a neglect of its office) with the great difficulties some imagine herein, I wave discourse about them; judging that advice good and sober, for to con∣sider how sinne may be gotten out of the world, then how it came in. Though 'tis most probable there was in the instant of temptation a meere suspension of the understandings act, (not as previous to the sinne, but as a part of it) and thereupon a sudden precipitation of will,Estius in scil. as Estius doth well determine.
6. Man being created mutable as to his holinesse, must needs be so as to his happinesse too. And that both upon a legal account, (for the Law had deter∣mined that if he did sinne he must dye) and also upon a natural; for it was not possible that his soul being once depraved by sinne, the powers of it vitiated, their order each to other, and towards their objects broken and interrupted, there should remaine a disposition and aptitude to converse with the highest good. The Use follows which shall be only in certain practical Infe∣rences that will issue from these truths, partly considered singly and severally; partly together and in conjunction. From the first. 1. Did God create man upright as hath been shewn, then how little reason had man to sinne? how little reason had he to desert God? to be weary of his first estate; Could Gods making him, his making him upright, be a reason why he should sinne against him? was his directing his heart, and the natural course of his affections towards himself, a reason why he should forsake him? what was there in his state that should make it grievous to him? was his duty too much for him? God made him upright, so that every part of it was connatural to him; was his priviledge too lit∣tle? he knew and loved, and enjoyed the highest and infinite good. O think then how unreasonable and disingenuous a thing sin was! that a creature that was nothing but a few houres ago, now a reaso∣nable being, capable of God! yet sin! Urge your hearts with this, we are too apt to think our selves unconcerned in Adams sin; we look upon our selves too abstractly, we should remember we are Mem∣bers of a Community, and it should be grievous to us to think that our species hath dealt so unkindly and unworthily with God; and besides, do not we sinne daily after the simi∣litude of Adams transgression? and is not sin as unreasonable and unjust a thing as ever? 2. Was our primitive state so good and happy, how justly may we reflect and look back towards our first state? how fitly might we take up Jobs words?Job 29.2, 4, 5, 14, 20. O that I were as in months past; — As in the dayes of my youth; — When the Almighty
was yet with me; — When I put on righteousnesse and it cloathed me; — When my glory was fresh in me, &c. With what sadnesse may we call to minde the things that are past, and the beginnings of Ancient time? when there was no stain upon our natures, no cloud upon our minds, no pollution upon our hearts; when with pure and undefiled souls we could embrace and rest, and rejoyce in the eternal and incomprehensible good? when we remember these things, do not our bowels turn? are not our souls poured out within us? From the second. 1. Did man so voluntarily ruine himself? how unlikely is he now to be his own saviour? he that was a self-destroyer from the beginning, that ruined himself as soon as God had made him, is he likely now to save himself? is it easier for him to recover his station than to have kept it? or hath he improved himself by sin∣ning? and gain'd strength by his fall for a more difficult undertaking; is he grown better natur'd towards himself and his God, than he was at first? 2. How little reason hath he to blame God, though he finally perish? what would he have had God to have done more to pre∣vent it? he gave his Law to direct him, his threatning to warn him; his promise for his encouragement was evidently implyed; his nature was sufficiently disposed to improve and comport with all these; yet he sins! is God to be charg'd with this? sins upon no necessity, with no pretence; but that he must be seeking out inven∣tions, trying experiments, assaying to better his state, as plainly despising the Law, suspecting the truth, envying the greatnesse, as∣serting and aspiring to the Soveraignty and Godhead of his Ma∣ker. Had we (any of us) a minde to contend with God about this matter, how would we order our cause? how would we state our quarrel? if we complain that we should be condemn'd and ruin'd all in one man; that is to complain that we are Adams children. A childe might as well complain that he is the sonne of a Beggar or a Traytor, and charge it as injustice upon the Prince or Law of the Land that he is not born to a Patrimony; this is a misery to him, but no man will say it is a wrong. And can it be said we are wrong'd by the common Ruler of the world, that we
do not inherit from our father, the righteousnesse and felicity we had wilfully lost long before we were his children? If we think it hard, we should be tyed to termes we never consented to: Might not an heire as well quarrel with the Magistrate, that he suffers him to become liable to his fathers debts? and to lie in prison if he have not to pay? But besides, who can imagine but we should have consented, had all man-kind been at that time existent in innocency toge∣ther? i. e. Let the case be stated thus; suppose Adam our common Parent, to have had all his children together with him before the Lord, while the Covenant of Works was not as yet made, and while as yet God was not under any engagment to the children of men: Let it be supposed, that he did propound it to the whole race of man-kind together, that he would capi∣tulate with their common Parent on their behalf, according to the termes of that first Covenant; if he stood they should stand, if he fall, they must all fall with him. Let it be considered, that if this had not been consented to, God might (without the least colour of exception, being as yet under no engagement to the contrary) have annihilated the whole species; for wherein can it seem hard, that what was nothing but the last moment, should the next moment be suffered to relapse into nothing a∣gain? Let it also be considered, that Adams own personal in∣terest, and a mighty natural affectton towards so vast a proge∣ny, might well be thought certainly to engage him to the utter∣most care and circumspection on his own and their behalf. It must also be remembred, that all being now in perfect innocen∣cy, no defect of reason, no frowardnesse or perversenesse of will can be supposed in any, to hinder their right judgement, and choice of what might appear to be most for their own advan∣tage, and the glory of their Maker. Can it now possibly be thought (the case being thus stated) that any man should rather chuse presently to lose his be∣ing, and the pleasures, and hopes of such a state, than to have consented to such termes? It cannot be thought. For consider the utmost that might be objected; and sup∣pose one thus to reason the matter with himself; Why? 'tis a mighty hazard forme to suspend my everlasting happinesse or misery upon the uncertain determinations of another mans
mutable will; shall I trust my eternal concernments to such a Peradventure, and put my life and hopes into the hands of a fellow-creature? It were obvious to him to answer himself, I but he is my father; he bears a natural affection to me, his own con∣cernment is included, he hath power over his own will, his obedience for us all, will be no more difficult than each mans for himself; there is nothing required of him, but what his nature inclines him to, and what his reason (if he use it) will guide him to comply with; and though the hazard of an eternal misery be greatly tremendous; yet are not the hopes of an everlasting blessednesse as greatly consolatory and en∣couraging? and besides, the hazard will be but for a time, which if we passe safely, we shall shortly receive a full and glorious confirmation and advancement. Certainly no rea∣sonable man, all this considered (though there had been no men∣tion made of a means of recovery in case of falling, the consi∣deration whereof is yet also to be taken in by us) would have refused to consent; and then what reasonable man but will con∣fesse this to be a meer cavil, that we did not personally consent; for if it be certain we should have consented, and our own hearts tell us we should, doth the power of a Creatour over his crea∣tures, signifie so little that he might not take this for an actual consent? for is it not all one, whether you did consent, or cer∣tainly would have done it, if you had been treated with? Cove∣nants betwixt Superiours and Inferiours, differ much from those betwixt equals; for they are Laws as well as Covenants, and therefore do suppose consent (the termes being in se reasona∣ble) as that which not only our interest, but duty would oblige us to. 'Tis not the same thing to Covenant with the great God, and with a fellow-creature. Gods prescience of the e∣vent (besides that no man knows what it is, yet) whatever it is, 'tis wholly immanent in himself (as also his decrees) therefore could have no influence into the event, or be any cause of it; all depended, as hath been shewn, on mans own will; and therefore if God did fore-see that man would fall, yet he knew also, that if he would he might stand.
From both jointly. 1. Were we once so happy? and have we now undone our selves? how acceptable should this render the means of our re∣covery to us? That 'tis a recovery we are to endeavour (which implies the former truth) that supposes us once happy, who would not be taken with such an overture for the regaining of an hap∣pinesse, which he hath lost and faln from; 'tis a double misery to become from an happy estate miserable; 'tis yet as a double happinesse to become happy from such misery; and proporti∣onably valuable should all meanes appeare to us that tend there∣to. Yea, and 'tis a recovery after self-destruction (which as∣serts the former truth) such a destruction as might reduce us to an utter despaire of remedies, as rendering us incapable to help our selves, or to expect help or pity from others. O how welcome should the tydings of deliverance now be to us!Rom. 3 24, &c. 1 Cor. 1.30, 31 Eph. 1.6, 7. Tit. 2.11.—14 how joyful an entertainment should our hearts give them upon both these accounts? how greatly doth Scripture com∣mand the love and grace of Christ under the notion of Re∣deeming? a word that doth not signifie deliverance from simple misery only, but also connote a precedent better state as they expound it, who take the phrase as Scripture u∣ses it, to allude to the buying out of Captives from their bon∣dage. And how should it ravish the heart of any man to have mercy and help offered him by another hand, who hath pe∣rished by his own? how taking should Gospel-grace be upon this account? how should this consideration engage souls to value and embrace it? 'tis urged (we see) to that purpose Hosea 13.9. O Israel, thou hast destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help; and verse 10. it follows, I will be thy King; where is any other that will save thee, &c. And chap. 14.1. O Israel, return unto the Lord, for thou hast fallen by thine ini∣quity. Now (friends) do but seriously consider this. If you be∣lieve the truths you have heard, how precious should Christ be to you? how precious should the Gospel, the Ordinances, and Ministry of it be? Do you complain that formerly you were not treated with? by all these God now treats with you. Now your own personal consent is called for; not to any thing that hath
the least of hazard in it, but what shall make you certainly hap∣py, as miserable as you have made your selves; and there's no∣thing but your consent wanting; the price of your Redemption is already paid; 'tis but taking Christ for your Saviour and your Lord, and living a life of dependance and holinesse for a few dayes, and you are as safe as if you were in glory; will you now stick at this? O do not destroy your selves a second time, and make your selves doubly guilty of your own ruine. 2. Was our state so good, but mutable? what cause have we to admire the grace of God through Christ, that whom it recovers, it confirmes? It was a blessed state, that by our own free will we fell from; but how much bet∣ter (even upon this account) is this, which by Gods free grace, we are invited and recalled to?
THE COVENANT OF WORKS. GEN. 2.16, 17. And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, of every Tree of the Garden thou mayst free∣ly eat; but of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely dye.—Hebr. Dying thou shalt dye. THe next head in the body of our Religion which falls this Morning to be spoken to in Course, is, Gods Covenant made with Adam before the fall, which we call a Covenant of Works; and we ground our Discourse upon the Text read to you. When God would communicate his goodnesse to the creatures,
he made the world out of nothing for his own glory, but especial∣ly man after his Image; this inferiour world he provided for mans house and habitation; but he dresseth and trimmeth one part for him especially, and calls it Paradise. In the Paradise or pleasant Garden he was not to live idly, but must dresse and keep it. In the midst of all mans enjoyments which the Lord allows him with a liberal hand, yet he lets him know withall he was under subjecti∣on, though Lord of all, and therefore gives him a command; obsequii examen, & obedientiae quoddam rudimentum;Calvin. a test and tryal of his obedience to which God trains him up. As Lords when they let out their Lands to Husbandmen, re∣serve somewhat to themselves which the Tenants are not to med∣dle with, that they may have some check upon them;Muscul. so God here. That which the Lord commands Adam was no hard mat∣ter; he grants him a vast latitude to eat of all freely,Oecol. only one sort excepted, in which exception, as God was not envious to him, (as the Envious One suggested) so was not this Com∣mandment grievous to him. Object. It may be objected from 1 Tim. 1.9. The Law is not made for a righteous man; why then for Adam in his righ∣teousnesse? Resol. Paul means good men do not so need the Law as bad men do; for good Laws rose from evil manners; yet in a sense the Law is given for righteous men, not to justifie them, for it finds them justified already, and past the condemnation of the Law; it finding them also sanctified,Beza. it treats them not as ene∣mies, but leads them, and delights them consenting to it. This serves to explode the errour of Antinomians and Libertines; so then God to declare his Soveraignty, and mans subjection, gave Adam though innocent, a Law. Mark how God bound mans obedience with a double fence; first, he fenced him with a free indulgence to eat of all but one, this was an Argument to his in∣genuity; secondly, by a severe prohibition upon pain of death; by the first the Lord wooes him by love; by the second he frights him by the terrour of his justice, and bids him touch it if he durst. Observe among all the Trees of the Garden there are two here mentioned in a more peculiar manner; the Tree of life, and the Tree of knowledge, which are called by Divines two Sacraments,
in a large sense; in which sense also, the Ark of Noah, the fire which descended and burn't the Sacrifice,Polanius. the Baptisme of the Red Sea and Cloud, the Manna, the water out of the Rock, the pouring out of the blood of the Sacrifices, the Land of Ca∣naan, the Tabernacle, Temple, Ark of the Testimony, the pro∣pitiatory, the golden Candlestick, the twelve stones taken out of Jordan, with the pool of Bethesda; all these I say in a large sense are Sacramental Symbols of the Covenant of Grace, or extra∣ordinary Sacraments; but the Tree of knowledge, and Tree of life, are called Sacraments of the Covenant of works. By these the Lord did signifie and seal to our first Parents, that they should alwayes enjoy that happy state of life in which they were made, upon condition of obedience to his Commandments; i. e. in eating of the Tree of life, and not eating of the Tree of knowledge. For it was called the Tree of life, not because of any native property and peculiar vertue, it had in it self to convey life; but Symbolically, Morally and Sacramentally, it was a sign and ob∣signation to them of life natural and spiritual to be continued to them, as long as they continued in obedience unto God. Aug.In like manner the Tree of knowledge of good and evil was spoken, from the sad event and experience they had of it, as Sampson had of God departed from him when he left his Naza∣ritish haire by Dalilah. Now that a Covenant of Works lay in this Commandment is clear; 1. Because that was the condition of mans standing and life, as it is expresly declared; 2. Because in the breach of that Command∣ment given him, he lost all. This obedience as it was Characteristical to Adams Cove∣nant, and Contradistinguished to the Covenant of Grace, was perfect, personal, and perpetual. In a sense, though different from the other, those three things are required in our obedience under the Covenant of Grace, not in reference to the Covenant, nor to justification; neither is our personal righteousnesse perfect, I mean legally; yet is it perfect, though not in us, but in our surety; nei∣ther was the Covenant made primarily with us, but with him, and with us in him, and on his account; even as God made the Cove∣nant of Works primarily with Adam, and with us in him as our head inclusively.
Now for our better opening this doctrine to you I shall pro∣pound and answer some questions. 1. What is meant by Covenant? 2. What ground we have to call it Adams Covenant, or a Cove∣nant of Works. 3. Wherein doth the Nature and Tenour of it consist? 4. Whether the Covenant of Works was revived and repeated to Israel? 5. How long it lasted; whither till now unto any? Quest. 1. What is meant by Covenant, name and thing? Answ. The word in the Hebrew is  Berith, which hath a threefold derivation, very fit to be taken notice of for clearing of the nature of the Covenant. 1. From Barah to choose, because the persons are chosen be∣tween whom the Covenant or Agreement is made: Indeed Gods Covenant with man is not only with his elect and chosen ones, but a fruit and effect of our election; yea, the Lord doth encline our wills to make choice of him, and of his terms. I have made a Covenant with my chosen; so again, Choose you whom ye will serve; ye are witnesses against your selves this day,Psal. 89.3. Josh. 24.15, 22 that you have chosen the Lord. 2. Or else this word Berith Covenant may be taken from Ba∣rah to eat,Illyricus. because they were wont to eat together of the Sacri∣fice slain and provided at the making of the Covenant, at which time they had a Feast; hence the Apostle speaking of the Eucha∣rist, the signe and seal of the Covenant, and which is a spiritual Food and Feast upon a Covenant account, saith, This Cup is the New Testament, or New Covenant in my blood, 1 Cor. 11.25. 3. Or from Bathar to cut and divide asunder, by transposing a letter; for so the sacrifice was divided, and the Covenanting parties were to passe between the parts: Thus Abraham entred into Covenant with God, and he took a Heifer, Shee Goat,Gen. 15. Ver. 9.10. and a Ramme, and divided them in the midst, and laid one piece against another, Ver. 9.10. And behold a burning Lamp passed between those pieces,Ver. 17.18. in that same day the Lord made a Cove∣nant with Abraham. This cutting of the sacrifice into pieces, and passing thorow was a lively and dreadful signe, that the party who should break Covenant, should be cut asunder, and into
pieces, as he well dse ved, and as he at least implicitely impre∣cated upon himself; notable to this purpose is that in the Prophet Jeremy, I will give the men that have transgressed my Cove∣nant,Jer. 34.18, 19, 20. which have not performed the words of the Covenant which they made before me, when they cut the Calfe in twaine, and passed between the parts thereof, the Princes of Judah, the Princes of Jerusalem, the Eunuchs and the Priests, and all the People of the Land, which passed between the parts of the Calf, I will even give them into the hand of their enemy, into the hand of them that se k their life, &c. — that is, to be slain and cut in pieces by the Sword. And herein I take the Emphasis of the ex∣pression to lie,Lev. 26.25. I will bring a Sword upon you which shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant; i. e. by cutting them asunder. And this custome was conveyed to the Gentiles, they went be∣tween the fire, and carried a Sword in their hands, and so took an oath;Lib. 10. contra Jul. as Cyril proves out of Sophocles. Thus Virgil speaking of Romulus and Tatius, Aeneid. 8. Hinc foedus à foedo animali foedè mactato.—Caesae jungebant foedera porcae. They cut a Swine in sunder, and made a League; and to name no more, Titus Livius speaking of the League between the Romans, and Albans, the Foecialis, Herald or Minister of those Ceremonies, cryed, If the Romans shall falsifie by publick and wicked fraud, in that day O Jupiter do thou so smite the Romans, as I smite this Swine, and so knock't the Swine on the head with a stone. By all which it appears that Covenants have been ever held so∣lemn, and sacred things, and that men by breaking of them de∣served dreadful punishments. In like manner there was the shedding, dividing, and sprinkling of blood at the making of Covenants, and hence it was called the blood of the Covenant;Exod. 24.6, 7, 8. Moses took half the blood and put it in Basons, and half of the blood he sprinkled on the Altar, and he took the book of the Covenant, and read in the audiene of the people, and they said, All that the Lord hath said, will we do, and be obedient; and Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people and said, Behold the blood of the Covenant which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words: Note, He
sprinkled the Altar instead of God, who being incorporeal, and a Spirit, could not be sprinkled, yet being a Covenant party, would have the Altar sprinkled for him. So much shall serve for the first Question, setting forth in our Answer to it the name and nature of a Covenant in gene∣ral; the second Question follows. Quest. 2. What ground we have to speak of Gods Covenant with Adam, and to call it a Covenant, there being no mention of it here in the Text, nor elsewhere in Scripture do we read of Gods Covenant with Adam. Answ. However the name be not here, yet the thing is here and elsewhere, comparing Scripture with Scripture; it is a nice ca∣vil in Socinians to call fot the word Satisfaction; others for the word Sacrament, others for the word Trinity, others for the words Faith alone justifying, others for the word Sabbath for Lords day, &c. and thence to conclude against Satisfaction, Sa∣craments, Trinity, Justification by faith alone, and Sabbath, for want of expresse words, when the things themselves are lively set down in other words; so in this case of Gods Covenant with Adam, we have 1. Gods Command which lays man under an obligation. 2. We have Gods promise upon condition of obedi∣ence. 3. We have Gods threatning upon his disobedience; 4. We have their understanding it so, as appears in Eves words to the Serpent. 5.Chap. 3.3. We have the two Trees as signs and symbols of the Covenant. 6. We have a second Covenant, and a New Covenant, therefore there was a first and Old Co∣venant; a Covenant of Grace supposeth one of Works. Object. If any shall say by first and old Covenant was meant Gods Covenant with Israel, and not with Adam; and so by Co∣venant of Works the same is meant, namely that which the Lord made at Mount Sinai. Answ. Hereunto I answer; There is a repetition of the Covenant of Works with Adam in the Law of Moses,Hebr. 8.7, 8, 9. Gal. 3.12. Rom. 10.5. as in that of the A∣postle to the Galatians, The Law is not of faith, bt the man that doth these things shall live in them; so likewise to the Ro∣mans, Moses dsscribes the righteousness which is of the Law, that the man who doth these things shall live in them: Thus it was with Adam principally and properly; therefore he was under a Covenant of Works, when God gave him that command in my Text.
Quest. 3. Wherein then doth this Covenant of Works consist? what is the nature, tenour and end of it as such? Answ. 1. This Covenant required working on our part as the condition of it for justification and happinesse; therefore called a Covenant of Works;Gal. 3.12. thus before, the man that doth these things shall live. Working indeed is also required under grace now; but 1. Not to Justification; 2. Not from our own Power;Ephes. 2.8. Jam. 2.20. 3. Not previous to faith, which worketh by love, and lives by working, but man lives by faith. 2. A second Characteristical signe of the Covenant of Works is this, that in and under it man is left to stand upon his own legs and bottome, to live upon his own stock, and by his own indu∣stry; he had a power to stand, and not to have fallen; this is meant when it is said, God created man in his own Image.Gen. 1.27. Eccles. 7.29.And again, This only have I found that God made man upright. 3. In the first Covenant, namely, that of Works; man had no need of a Mediatour; God did then stipulate with Adam immediately; for seeing as yet he had not made God his enemy by sin, he needed no days-man to make friends hy intercession for him. Gen. 1. ult.After mans Creation God said, He saw every thing which he had mude, and behold it was very good; and after the Covenant made in chap. 2. its said, They were naked, and they were not ashamed; i. e. they had not contracted guilt by commit∣ting of sinne, from whence onely ariseth shame; there∣fore under the Covenant there needeth no Mediatour. And hence Moses Law was not properly a Covenant of Works,Gal. 3.19. because that Law was given in the hand of a Mediatour. 4. The Covenant of Works once broken, God abates nothing of his justice, no not upon repentance, but the soul that sinned, dyed. Mark our Text, Thou shalt dye the death, by which dou∣bling of the words in the Hebrew Idiom of speech, is meant Ʋehemency and Certainty,Vatablus. which was effected, and so had con∣tinued inevitably, without the help of another Covenant hinted in that first promise, Gen. 3.15.
For the first Covenant gives no relief to a poor sinner when he hath broken it, but leaves him hopelesse and helplesse un∣der a fearful expectation of wrath and fury indignation. 5. The Lord in the Covenant of Works accepts the person for the Works sake; that is, he mainly looks at the work how ade∣quate it is to the command and rule which he so exactly heeds, that upon the least failer his justice breaks out in wrath, neither can a∣ny personal excellency in the world salve the matter;Deut. 27. ult. Cursed is he that continueth not in all the words of the Law to do them, and all the people shall say Amen; a doleful Amen;Jam. 2.10. and whosoever keeps the whole Law, and offends in one point, is guilty of all: Note that whosoever, God respects no mans person in that case. 6. The Covenant of Works in performance of the condition leaves a man matter of boasting and glorying in himself, and makes God a debtour to him. Where is boasting? it is excluded; by what Law? of works?Rom. 3.27. Nay; as if he had said; the Covenant of Works affords matter of boasting to him that worketh to justification by his own personal power and righteousnesse. Now to him that worketh is the reward reckoned, not of grace,Rom. 4.4. but of debt; i. e. it obligeth God to pay it him as a due, which is the language of Pharisees and Papists; which were justly chal∣lenged and claimed; 1. Were we indeed under a Covenant of Works, and not of Grace; 2. Were our works perfect: 3. Did we not lye at Gods mercy for our guilt; All which declare man impotent, and grace necessary, and withal Jews and Papists, to be enemies to the Crosse of Christ and Covenant of Grace, and under a Covenant of Works, of which more anon. 7. The Covenant of Works leaves a man still in doubt while resting in it, in that state, because it is a mutable state at best; he had all in his own hands, and then Satan cunningly rooked him of all: God puts him into a good bottome, and leaves him to be his own Pilot at Sea; the Divel assaults him, and sinks him; and therefore the second Covenant takes all into Gods hands, that it may continue safe under his Father by care and custod∣dy; 1 Pet. 1.4, 5. John 10.28, 29. and so gives the soul good security against death and danger, which Adam had not while he stood; much lesse can any rich or honourable man in his
fools Paradise here in this world, say his Mountain is unmoveable, his glory unchangeable, seeing it passeth away as a Pageant, 1 Cor. 7.31. if Adams Paradise was so mutable, much more theirs; if he stood not in his integrity, how shall they stand in their iniquity? 8. The Covenant of Works was made with all men in Adam, who was made and stood as a publick person, head and root in a common and comprehensive capacity; I say it was made with him as such, and with all in him: Quo mansit remanente, & quo pere∣unte peribat; he and all stood and fell together; for even the E∣lect may say, We are all by nature the children of wrath as well as others;Rom. 3.19. and that of St. Paul, We know that what things soever the Law saith, it saith to them who are under the Law that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. But the Covenant of Grace is a discriminating thing; it takes in some, and leaves out others; Christ is not a head in Covenant with all, as Adam was, but of his Elect only; for we finde ma∣ny in the world under the headship of Satan and Antichrist, and old Adam, who are out of Christ, not only because unconver∣ted as Saints themselves are before regeneration, but out of Christ in the account of Gods Election, Donation and Covenant, who have none of his special love, nor ever shall have. Thus I have briefly opened the distinguishing Characters of the Covenant of Works, which might have been more enlarged by those of the Covenant of Grace, which is easily done by way of opposition and comparison one with the other; and therefore, and for brevities sake I omit it; and come to the next question. Quest. 4. Whether this Covenant of Works made with Adam, was revived and repeated to Israel in Moses time; and if so, in what sense, and why? Answ. I answer affirmatively, that in some sort the Covenant of Works was revived and repeated to them, which appears from these grounds. 1. They were tyed to Commandments under a curse. Gal.3.10. Deut. 28 1, 2. & ver. 15.16.2. Blessing is promised to obedience; they are both set down by Moses at large in Deuteronomy, chap. 28. and elsewhere.
3. It is expresly called a Covenant, I mean the giving of the Law for obedience. The Lord God made a Covenant with us in Horeb.Deut. 5.2. 4. It is opposed to the Covenant of Grace as another Cove∣nant upon this very distinguishing account of obedience and faith, works and grace, as you may see at large among other places in that of the Hebrews.Hebr. 8.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, &c. Now there are foure principal ends which the Lord had in so doing. 1. That he might hereby make men know what sin is, how prone we are to it, and how averse and head-strong against all good; this is done by a Law of Works, Rom. 7.7. to the 13. ver. This in∣deed is Gods clear glasse by which he discovers to us the moral and penal evil of sin; so Rom. 3.20. 2. That hereby the Lord might hold men in to obedience by a strong curb; because we are so apt to break fence, he hedgeth up our way with thornes, Hos. 2.5, 6. 3. That God might stop every mouth, and make all guilty be∣fore him, Rom. 3.19. 4. That men may hereby be lash't and driven to Christ as with a School-masters rod, to see an absolute need of him, and to make out hard after him, Gal. 3.22, 23, 24. For men care not to run to a City of Refuge unlesse the avenger of blood follow behinde at their heels; neither do the whole need or regard the Physician, but the sick and wounded. Yet notwithstanding all this, they were not properly under a Covenant of Works, neither was the law given to them as such a Covenant meerly. 1. Because as the Law was to convince of sin, so it shewed the expiation of sin, and therefore their Sacrifices were killed and the blood shed and sprinkled, Heb. 9.22, 23. 2. The Covenant at Mount Sinai was not made with all with∣out exception as Adams was, but only with a select people, even with Israel. 3. Because the Lord still puts them in minde of his pro∣mise to Abraham, which included Christ, and faith in him,Gal. 3.16, 17. and was not null by the Law. Quest. 5. The last question is how long this Covenant lasted, and whither any be under a Covenant of Works?
Answ. Most strictly it was but to the giving of the first pro∣mise, for then the Covenant of Grace began, but was more large∣ly and clearly revealed (till the coming of Christ) by the Law and the Prophets; but was most perspicuously and fully by Christ himself in his doctrine and death, and by the abun∣dant pouring out of his Spirit. Howbeit all along and to this day every natural man is under a Covenant of Works, because out of Christ, therefore under the Law, and the curse of it; for which cause the Covenant of Works is by some called the Covenant of nature.Faedus naturae. Again, all they which look for righteousnesse and salvation by the power of their wills, by the strength of nature, and by per∣formance of duties, as Jews, Turks, Philosophers, Papists, So∣cinians,Gal. 4.24, 25. Pelagians, these are all under a Covenant of Works, they are not under grace; they are of Hagar the Bond-woman, of Mount Sinai which answers to Jerusalem which now is, which is in bondage with her children, as the Apostle speaks in his elegant Allegory. I come now to draw some Corollaries from this doctrine of the Covenant of Works thus propounded, in a practical way of ap∣plication, and that briefly. Corol. 1. It serves for admiration, to wonder with a holy asto∣nishment at the Lords infinite condescending love in making a Covenant with poor man. 1. Because it was a free act in him to do it, he lay under no compulsion to it;Rom. 9.15, 16. nothing of merit or profit in a despicable worme appears as a motive to it; it was a royal act of glorious grace from the King of heaven to vile creatures: O wonderful! 2. Because as it was free for him to do it, so he bound his hands by it, and as it were lost his freedome by it; for his truth holds him fast to it,Hebr. 6.18. by which its impossible for him to change. O wonderful! 3. He made the first offer, he prevented us by his grace, he loved us first, 1 John 4.10, 19. all this appeared in the first Cove∣nant with us,Bullinger de fdere Dei uni∣os, & aeterno. in vouchsafing us to make any at all with him: Ineffa∣bilis misericordiae Divinae Argumentum quod ipsum numen, ipse inquam Deus Aeternus faedus ipsum primus offert, nullis ad hoc hominum meritis adactus, sed merâ & nativâ bonitate impulsus; nec scio an humanum ingenium hoc mysterium vel plenè toncipere,
vel dignis laudibus evehere possit. Unspeakable mercy that the eternal God should first offer to league with us, moved to it by no merit in us, but by his own native goodnesse only; a mystery which the minde of man cannot conceive, nor his tongue praise to the worth of it; thus a grave Authour, which will the more inhance the love of God; if we 4. Consider that he makes Covenant upon Covenant after breaches and forfeitures, renews them again, and ratifies them stronger than ever, as he did the new Covenant after the old was broken by our high and hainous provocation in the fall; and which he doth to every elect soul in the Sacraments, and after grosse and grievous Apostasies; See Jerem. 3.1. Ezek. 16.60, 61, 62, 63. Hos. 2. O admire and adore this love! Corol. 2. Seeing there are two Covenants on foot, one of Works, another of grace; and very many, yea, the farre greatest part of the world are under a Covenant of Works, which is a most sad and doleful estate, because a state of wrath and death, a most wretched and accursed condition; O try under what Cove∣nant thou art; for if thou art in the state of sinful nature, a sprowt of old Adam, never yet cut off from his root of bitternesse, nor graffed into Christ, thou art undone; to be under such a Cove∣nant is to be an enemy to God, and to be lyable to all his plagues; O make haste then, and flee as a Post, and as the young Roe into Christs Armes. For consider, how thou canst stand before the Bar of God in thy sins, in thy nakednesse; Adam fled away from the presence of God afraid and ashamed, hiding himself in the Thicket, be∣cause he was naked; but where wilt thou hide thy nakednesse in that dreadful day of the Lord! there will be no shelter in that day for a sinner: Corol. 3. Labour to understand and discern aright the nature, tenour and termes of both Covenants. 1. Because they are easiiy mistaken, and many do mistake them; Rom. 10.2, 3. 2. Because the mistake is dangerous, like a man in the dark as he travels, findes two wayes; one way is wrong,Prov. 14.12. yet it seems as good and safe as the other; he goes on in the wrong, which leads him to a Rock, where he falls down headlong, and breaks his neck; so many a poor soul imagines he is under a Covenant of Grace,
and in a safe way to heaven, when alas he is yet under a Cove∣nant of Works, and in the high-way to hell; Labour then to discern the difference, search Scriptures, and thy own heart, go to the Lord by prayer,Job 33.23. and to his M nisters, that they may shew thee thy way, lest thou go on to thy destruction. And therefore, Corol. 4. Improve the Covenant of works for the convicti∣on of sin, righteousness, and judgement; for till the Lord lets thee see what it is to be under such a state, thou wilt never see the evil of it, nor ever desire to change it. Corol. 5. Renounce thy Covenants with sin, Satan, and creatures, or else thou wilt never be admitted into Covenant with God; if thou break not with them, God will never close with thee; if thou be a Covenant-servant to them, thou art no Covenant-servant of the Lords; for how canst thou serve those two Ma∣sters,Matth. 6.24. 1 Joh. 2.15, 16. God and Mammon? both which crave thy whole man, and thy whole work, and which are utterly inconsistent with each other. Corol. 6. Labour to relieve thy self under thy greatest straits and sears by Covenant promises; I mean the promises of the new Covenant which are called better promises,Hebr. 8.6, 10, 11, 12. Joh. 15. because abso∣lute prmises; because they work that in us and for us which God requires of us, when of our selves we can do nothing. As the new Covenant is the best Covenant, and the promises of it the best promises,Isa. 55.3. Acts 13 34. so the mercies of it are the best mercies, for they are the sure mercies of David, 2 Sam. 23.5. Corol. 7. Blesse the Lord that ye are under the best dispensati∣on, and clearest discovery of the Covenant of grace, better than Adams after the promise was made to him upon his fall; bet∣ter than Noahs after the flood, better than Israels in the Wil∣dernesse, yea, better than the Patriarchs and Prophets who had much legality and obscurity in their administrations, in com∣parison of us who behold with open face the glory of God, 2 Cor. 3.18. That it is the lot of us Gentiles to be brought into the know∣ledge and participation of the Gospel in the last and best time; I mean after Christs appearance in the flesh.
The Apostle compares the Church to a Tree,Rom. 11.16, 17. which hath the same root Christ, but several branches; now that the natural branches should be cut off to make way for the ingrafting of us wildings,Pet. Mart. is matter of praise to the High God for his rich grace to us Gentiles, Ephes. 3.8. Corol. 8. Labour for a spirit of self-denial and debasement; for as the Old Covenant spirit is a spirit of pride and boasting to ad∣vance natural abilities,Rom. 3.27. Rom. 10.3. to glory in our own personal endowments and performances; so a New Covenant spirit is contrary to that, and is a spirit of faith, self-denial and debasement. Corol. 9. Watch against Satan; as soon as ever God and man were in Covenant, he set himself to break that Covenant, and prevailed; for he beguiled their simplicity by his subtilty, 2 Cor. 11.3.Gen. 3. Now albeit the New Covenant stands on a surer foundation, yet he will very much weaken our comforts, and increase our sor∣rows by drawing us under Gods displeasure by sin, forfeiting Co∣venant mercies by Covenant breaches, which mercies though they are not lost finally to Gods Elect, yet are they often to be re∣covered, renewed and secured to our souls by a clear evidence. Besides Satan will perswade men to slight and renounce their Baptisme, as when he makes Witches, and turns Christians to be Mahumetans, because thereby he knows they renounce their Co∣venant with God to make one with himself; there are that upon fairer pretences, neglect or deny the Seals of the Covenant; Satan had a fair pretence also to draw away our first Parents, and make them break with God, which they little thought would have cost so dear; but the sad e∣vent shewed the sinfulnesse of that sinne; wherefore Wa ch and pray that ye enter not into temptation; Be not ignorant of Satans Devices in these back-sliding and fedifragous times, Remember from whence ye are fallen, and walk stedfast in Gods Covenant; you that stand,1 Cor. 10.12. learn by others falls to take heed.
THE FALL OF MAN. Rom. 5.12. Wherefore as by one man sinne entered into the world, and death by sinne, and so death pas∣sed upon all men, for that all have sinned. THis doctrine of Original sin, is not more diffi∣cult to understand, than necessary to be known, more full of knots than uses: if we consider, 1. The several batteries that are planted against this truth, by Rabbins, Pelagians, Socinians, Flaccians, Arminians, Anabaptists; batte∣ries raised by Pelagius his pride, Philosophers ignorance, Papists policy, and Hereticks idolized reason. Or 2. if we consider the dependances of other doctrines upon this truth. Augustine writing against Pelagius, thought the summe of Religion consisted in the right knowledge of Original sin; As we
know the pleasantnesse of a garden by the noysomnesse of a dunghill; the gratefulnesse of a day from the darknesse of a night; so we cannot know the benefits of Christ so well as from the knowledge of our Original guilt and sin. By a strict sur∣vey of Original sin, we may better understand the honour of ju∣stification, the power of grace and sanctification, the sweetnesse of a Christ, the necessity of a Gospel, the preciousnesse of a Ministry; and therefore it was a futilous and malicious asserti∣on of Celestius of old, to call the doctrine of Original sin, rem questionis, non fidei; a matter of debate, not faith; and the Hereticks of late, to reproach it with the stile of Austins fig∣ment. 3. If we consider the influence of this truth upon our practice; The knowledge of Original sin; it is the curb of pride, the foyl to set off grace, the glass of man, the spurre of indu∣stry; it is that which makes the best of Saints to weep in the best of duties, and the worst of sinners to look pale in their greatest pro∣sperities; so that you see the doctrine is most useful, let it there∣fore be most grateful. Now this Original sin, Divines usually distinguish in peccatum Originali Originans, & in peccatum Ori∣ginali Originatum; into Original sin Originating, and into O∣riginal sin Originated; into the Cause, and into the Subject of this sin, the fountains and its streames; one man infecting, and all men infected; the first is my task, the second is referred to a more worthy hand. In the latter part of this chapter, where the Text is, the Apo∣stle carries on a double design. 1. To shew the excellency of Christ, and grace by Christ. 2. The necessity of faith in Christ; and both these he demon∣strates by a full and large comparison between the first and the second Adam; the losse by the first, the gain by the second; the sin of the first, the grace of the second; the condemnation we are obliged in by the first, and the pardon we are enriched with by the second, the first is a poysonous spring, the second is a cleansing fountain. The Text, if you look at the design of it, it points at the po∣stern, where sin and death first entered the world; and that was by Adams eating the forbidden fruit; the prohibited Apple, was the first Apple of contention between God and man-kind. If we look at the parts of the Text, they are three.
1. We have an unhappy Parent, viz. Adam; not only by his offence undoing himself, but making a bankrupt world. By him sin entered the world. 2. In the Text we have an unhappy posterity, not only to be linkt to the loynes, but the sins of the first Parent. The whole world had sin entered into it, and all have sinned, saith the Text, viz. in him. 3. We have an unhappy portion; sin and death the inseparable twins of misery; so saith the Text, sin enters, and death by sin; sin came by Adam, and death came by sin; the one fell in pell mell into the world with the other; and both are the unhappy inheri∣tance of every child of Adam; indeed the Saints are exempted from the second, but not the first death; sin and death were mar∣ried in Adam, and they shall not be divorced in any of the sons of Adam; believers dye temporally, though not eternally; they feel the stroak, though not the sting of death. Now for the further clearing of my way, it will not be a di∣gression, to take off the veile from the Text in a short explica∣tion. By one man] and him we may consider; 1. His name, A∣dam, and this comprehends his person, sex, and kind. 2. His order; he was the first man, 1 Cor. 15.45. 3. His person in the individual. And so Original sin properly is not derived from the proximate Parents, but the prime-parent. 4. His nature; A∣dam was one, non tantum in individuo, sed in specie; one com∣prehending the whole root, representing the whole stock, the seed and generation of man-kind; so Adam is taken for the spe∣cies of man. Sinne] The Apostle here speaks of sin; not sins, as if he would precisely determine it of that one root of sin, distinct from those many following fruits; this sin hath been the Original, the in∣centive, the cause of all sinne; this sinne stained the world. Entered into the world] viz. by propagation; sin entered like death; Now death is actually propagated, as he said, scio me genuisse mortalem; I know I beget a dying child, a child subject to death; sinne entered not by example, but ge∣neration. The World] By the world, we must not understand terrenam,
& corpralem vitam, the pleasure and delights of the world; for the Saints are crucified to the world, in this sense, Gal 6.14. and so Original sin should not seize on believers; Nor, 2. In locum mundi; for as Pareus observes, the Angels first sin∣ned; and sin first entred by them into the place of the world. Nor 3. In Paradisum, into Paradise; for sin was first commit∣ted by Eve in Paradise. But 4. We must understand the inha∣bitants of the world; Ʋniversum genus humanum, all man-kind,Martyr Gorranus. as Mart. Gor. And death by sinne] The query among Divines is, what this death is; Some suppose the death of the body, as Ambrose; some the death of the soul, as the Pelagians; but as Haymo observes, mors animae & corporis in omnes pertranstit; the death both of soul and body passed on all; for as Origen saith,Orig. Mors corporalis umbra est spiritualis, the death of the body, is only the shadow of the death of the soul; so that by death in the Text, we must necessarily understand the death of soul and bo∣dy, with all the antecedents and consequents of both,Willet. sick∣nesse, weaknesse, corruption, guilt, horrour, despair. Death passed upon all men] Corporal death on all; the most holy, most flourishing, most probable to live; spiritual and e∣ternal death on all men, in the sentence, not in the execution, Rom. 3.19. the sentence is reversed, the execution for ever forborn to believers For all have sinned] For the opening of this, I shall only give you the glance of Musculus; In Adam omnes fuimus, in lumbis ejus, &c. we were all in the loynes of offending A∣dam; from that masse we sprung; and therefore as Levi paid tythes in the loyns of Abraham, Hebrews 7.9, 10. so it is no wonder, if we being in the loyns of Adam, are found sinners in him. Now the mournful truth that the Text presents us with, is this, viz. That our first Parent by his transgression, hath left an un∣happy portion of sinne and death to all his posterity; thus much the Text expresseth, thus much it confirms; we have this un∣welcome entail from our first Parent. Concerning death, I shall not dilate, because the shade of death doth alwayes ac∣company the body of sin; but I shall only insist on that part of our portion, sin. We are entituled to Adams sinne; 'Tis a de∣rivation
from the root to the branches; as poyson is carried from the fountain to the Cistern; as the children of Traytours have their blood tainted with their fathers Treason; and the chil∣dren of Bond-slaves are born in their Fathers condition. Om∣nes in Adamo peccaverunt,Aug. quia omnes unus ille fuerunt, Aug. All were entangled in Adams sin, because all were folded up in Adams person; And the same Father in another place, Traxit reatum homo, quia unus erat cum illo à quo traxit; Man drew down guilt upon himself, because he was one with him from whom he drew it.Greg. And it is an excellent observation of Grego∣ry, Genus humanum in parente primo velut in radice putruit; Man-kind putrified in the first parent as in a root. Adam is as the poysoned root, and the clusters are envenomed, because the root was poysoned; had Adam stood and preserved his per∣fection, his glory, as a royalty had descended to his seed, to man-kind; but by his offence, forfeiting his beauty, and con∣tracting on himself both guilt, and an universal loathsomenesse; both losse and loathsomnesse he transmits to his posterity; and it is upon his breath, that every child that comes into the world, sucks in poyson with his first breach; and is no sooner a living creature, than a deformed sinner. This truth we find early con∣firmed in the world; so Adam begat Seth according to his own likeness, Gen. 5.3. non ad similitudinem Dei, sed ad similitu∣dinem sui;Brockman. and it is very considerable the Original phrase, , in his image, in his likeness; the word is as it were re∣doubled, to set the greater brand upon corrupt nature; in his image, nay, in his likeness. And to shew the necessity of our drawing corruptness from Adam, holy Job expresses it by a quick and smart interrogation, Job 14.4. Nay, th s truth Da∣vid seems to bedue with tears, and deplore with sighs, Psal. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sinne did my mo∣ther conceive me. In the times of the Gospel, this spot is more clearly discernable, and from whence we received the contagi∣on, Rom. 5.19. By God we are creatures, by Adam we are sinners; so that Text; By one mans disobedience, many were made sinners. And so most remarkably, 1 Cor. 15.49. And as we have borne the image of the earthly, &c. Nor is that gloss of Cyprian upon the place to be over-passed; Imaginem terre∣ni portavimus,Cypr. peccandi propensnem, & mortem; imaginem cae∣lestis
portemus, constantiam in sanctitate, instaurationem ex mor∣te & corruptione, ad vitam & immortalitatem; (i. e.) We have borne the image of the earthly Adam, a propensity to sin and death; let us bear the image of the heavenly, a constan∣cy in holiness, and instauration from death and corruption to life and immortality. I shall only adde one Scripture more, E∣phes. 2.3. We were by nature the children of wrath, as well as o∣thers. Now there are three things which are considerable for the di∣spatch of the doctrinal part of the Text. 1. To demonstrate more particularly the transmission of Adams sin to us. Now Adams sin is transmitted to posterity two wayes. 1. By imputation. 2. By inhaesion; the guilt, and the stain of his sin is propagated to all his posterity. 1. The sin of Adam is derived to us by way of imputation; and that upon a double demonstration may be evidenced. 1. Ratione faederis, by the reason of the Covenant of Works which God made with Adam, we were in him all of us legally; when God first made a Covenant with man, it was not with A∣dam, ratione individui, as an individual person; sed ratione a∣turae, as he bore our nature with him, as the representative of man-kind; God makes his Covenant with Christ as Head and Mediatour of his Church, with Abraham as the father of the faithful, with Adam as the stock of man-kind;Isa. 53.11. Psal. 40.8. we were in him parties in the Covenant, and had interest in the mercy which should accompany the keeping of it, and were liable to the curse which should follow the breach of it; Now Adam vi∣olating the Covenant, the guilt of that violation descends upon all his posterity, Rom. 5.19. Constituti sunt peccatores,. Chry. they were constituted sinners; It is to be noted, that God never makes a Covenant with a single person, personally and indivi∣dually, that all others are unconcerned in it; but with whomso∣ever God enters into Covenant, that person is a representative of others, and is to be looked upon as a publick person; other∣wise God should make as many Covenants, as there are persons, which is the greatest absurdity to assert; and so in Covenan∣ting with Adam, he looked on him as the stock and root of man∣kind.
2. Ratione Collationis. The Apostle in two places makes a re∣markable comparison between Adam and Christ, the first and second Adam, comparing the good of the last, with the evil of the first, the grace of the one, with the sin of the other; the life conveyed by the one, with the death transmitted by the other, Rom. 5.12, &c. 1 Cor. 15.45, &c. Now the righteousnesse of Christ redounds to believers to justification; so the sin of A∣dam redounds to his posterity to condemnation; by Adam we are cast, by Christ we are cleared; by Adam guilty, by Christ in∣nocent; the comparison would else be wholly insignificant; as by Christ we are made really righteous, so by Adam we are made really sinners; we are Princes in Christ, Prisoners in Adam; Crowned in Christ, cursed in Adam; this is is one great drift of the comparison. 2. The sin of Adam is derived to us, not only by way of im∣putation, but by way of inhaesion; we receive from offending A∣dam,Adamus genus nostrum tabifi∣cavit. Aug. vitiositatem, libidinem, morbidum affectum, a vitiosity, lusting, and a contagious distemper; we receive not only a de∣fect of holiness, but deordination, pravity, evil disposition, propension to mischief,Ephes. 4.22. John 3.6. Jam. 3.15. Col. 3.5. aversion to all good; this sometimes the Scripture calls the Old man, the flesh, divelish wisdome, the hell that sets the whole course of nature on fire, earthly members. And that Adams sin is propagated to us by way of inhaesion, is likewise demonstrable by a double evidence. 1. From the confession of some of the best of Gods Saints, Psal. 51.5. The soul of David was no sooner united to his bo∣dy, than sin was united to both; he had not only a Crown of gold, but grace; he was not only a King after mans desire, but a Saint after Gods heart;1 Sam. 13.24. yet this sinful leprosie he drew from A∣dam, this Original staine clave to him; he was a sinner in the womb, though a Prince in the Throne, and a Saint in the San∣ctuary. And so Paul, that excellent Apostle, how doth he moan this inward spot which he drew from Adam? how doth he complain of indwelling sin? Rom. 7.17. of an evil within him, verse 19. of a law of his members, verse 23. These groans of such eminent Saints are too pregnant an argument, that the sin of Adam transmitted to us, doth not only cast guilt on our persons, but filth on our natures; lay a charge to us, but throw a stain upon us.
2. As Christ doth not only vouchsafe believers imputed, but infused righteousnesse; the merit of his obedience, but the gra∣ces of his Spirit; to justifie, but to renew and sanctifie us;1 Cor. 1.30. so the first Adam not only conveighs guilt to condemn, but filth to defile us; else the work of sanctification would be wholly un∣necessary, and the comparison between the first and second A∣dam, would be maimed and imperfect; Christ makes us heaven∣ly, as well as pronounceth us heavenly; and Adam makes us earthly, as well as leaves us to the punishment of those that are so. The full comparison between the first and second Adam, speaks this clearly; Adam had sin to defile,Rev. 1.5. Christus valne∣ra sanarit, quae Adamus porta∣vit. Cypr. and therefore Christ had blood to wash; Here may that observable passage of Au∣stin come in, Vidi ego zelantem puerum, &c. I have seen, saith Augustin, a child with his eye full of envy, venting his malice, &c. Whence comes this incurvation and wayward∣ness of nature, but from Adam? happily the parents of this child, were true and eminent believers; so that there must be a tabes, a disaffectednesse transmitted from Adam to his poste∣rity, against the opinion of Peter Lumbard and the School∣men. 2. The second thing to be opened for the dispatching of the doctrinal part of the Text, it is this, To vindicate the righte∣ousnesse of God in this transmission and conveyance; And the justice of God is most glorious in this propagation of Adams sinne; and this may be cleared in a double Demonstra∣tion. Adams sin is ours as well as his; as a Learned man most e∣legantly, Si quis peste laborans alios inficiat, hi moriuntur;Pet. Martyr. di∣citur illorum quis{que}, non alienâ, sed sua peste mortuus esse. Now there is a double Argument to prove Adms sin ours. 1. Else God did punish us for anothers sin, that fault which is not our own, which is against divine justice. God doth not u∣sually strike the son for the fathers crime, and make the son feel the bruise of the fathers fall, that the father should merit the stroak, and the posterity feel it; this is against his own prote∣station, Ezek. 18.2. 2. The Antithesis between Christ and Adam, would not hold, if Adams was not to be reputed ours; for as the righteousnesse of Christ, ita communicatur membris, ut quis{que} fidelis dicere possit,
illam esse suam, &c. as Bucan well observes, is so communicated to us, that every believer may say, This righteousnesse is mine; so the iniquity of Adam is so communicated to all his posterity, that every child of Adam may sadly say, This iniquity is mine, and I am righteously punished for it. And now therefore I say, if Adams sin be ours in the guilt and stain of it, let us ac∣knowledge Gods justice in the transmission of it. 2. Had Adam stood, we expected the entaile of perfection and happinesse; that the Crown should have descended to us as his issue and off-spring; we expected that the beauty of his mind, the harmony of his will, the holinesse of his desires, the absolutenesse of his Soveragnty should have fallen to us as a Princely inheritance; and therefore Adam falling, it is but just that the entaile of sin and death should be fixed up∣on us. 3. Now the third thing to be opened, in the finishing of which, the doctrinal part will be dispatcht, is to shew, that A∣dams sin is not propagated to us by imitation, but by gene∣ration, against the heretical Pelagian. And this shall be briefly coucht under the evidence of a five-fold Argu∣ment. Arg. 1. As our Divines seasonably observe, Christs righteousnesse is not only proposed to us to be imitated; we should then all fall sho t in writing after the copy; but those that lay hold on his righteousnesse by faith, they are changed and renewed in their minds; there is a physical communication of this righteousness; they feele the power of his death in the crucifying of their lusts; and the vertue of his resurrection in their newnesse of minde and life,Rom. 6.5. Phil. 3.10. as the Apostle most pathetically; So Adams sin is not on∣ly our Copy, but our corruption; it doth not only seduce, but defile our natures; not only entice, but condemne our per∣sons; Adam was not only a sinful pattern, but a sinful Parent; the plague of his sin hath infected the humane nature; not only me, but man-kind. Arg. 2. Baptisme that is administred to little ones, to our infants, it cannot be thought to blot out sins of imitation; for they are guilty of none; then Baptisme would in vaine be administred to our infants; and this raises the feud of Anabaptists against this great truth of Original sin. They deny the sin of Infants, that
they may deny the Baptisme. Now we cannot conceive that tha blessed Ordinance of Infant Baptisme should be administred for no designs and purposes; and why doth the Apostle call Baptisme the Laver of Regeneration? Tit. 3.5. were there no stain in Infants, what need of a Laver, or of washing? Arg. 3. And as Ambrose observes; David ait, ante usuram lucis,Ambrose. se accipere originis injuriam: David complains that he lay under the stain of original sin, before he was blest with the first light of the Sun; he was dog'd with native corruption; when the womb bore him, it bore a living, but a leprous childe; he was wrap't in sin, before he was wrapt in swadling cloaths. Arg. 4. And how many offend in the world, who think nothing of Adam; they transgresse, and look not on his Copy: And what is murder, so often acted in the world, to the earing of an Apple? What proportion is there between those two Sins, A∣dams eating of an Apple, and Cains shedding of his brothers blood? How many transgressours are there in the world, that ne-ever heard of his offence, or that ever there was such a man in the world? whom did Philosophers imitate in their sin, that opi∣nionated the world to be eternal, as Aristotle and his followers? Arg. 5. And that Argument of a learned man is most conside∣rable; Si peccatum originis sit tantùm ab imitatione, Paulus non dixisset ex Adamo fluxisse peccatum, sed à Diabolo; quia ipse peccandi exemplum dedit: (i. e.) If original sin were only propagated in a way of imitation, Paul would never have said, that sin entred the world by Adam, but by Satan; for he set the first pattern of sinning. And now the doctrinal part is dispatch't, I shall only annex some few things for the clearer evidence of this truth. 1. If the guilt of Adams sin be not imputed to us, why do our Infants of en labour under the wracking torments of some distem∣pers? and why often is the Cradle turn'd into a Coffin? why come they crying and moaning into the world? why doth palenesse of face, plenteousnesse of tears, and a multiplicty of diseases seize upon them, as the prisoners of sin? Surely God cannot forget the bowels of a Father; this could not befall our Infants, were not the hand of justice armed with sin and guilt; let us not con∣ceive God trying practice upon poor moaning innocents.
2. If Adams sin be not inherent in us, why have we not free will to good? why do we not naturally burn in love to Jesus Christ? and flourish with all vivacity in duty; why flye we not to the San∣ctuary as to our Paradise? but on the contrary, why do we draw the Chain of a body of death after us? Duty is our burden, sin our Element;Rom. 7.24. the world our beloved, the creature our Idol; How are we dragg'd to service? we flye to sin, but are drawn to duty: And in a word, how come our understandings to be prisons of darknesse? our wills stages of rebellion, our affections heaps of dung or drosse; for naturally we love sin or the creature; what was then the inoffensivenesse of infancy, thus to envenome our natures? how came in the evil heart of unbelief? Hebrews 3.12. 3. This Truth of original sin was generally held in the Church till Pelagius, who liv'd in the fifth Century▪ confirmed by di∣vers Councels in the Primitive times;Quis ante Dis∣cipulum Pelagii prodigiosum Cael estium, rea∣tu praevarica∣tionis Adaege∣nus humanum negavit esse astrictum. Concilio Melevitano, Con∣cilio Toletano, &c. and the sixth Council of Carthage. This truth hath been acknowledged by Heathens; Plato complained, Homines naturâ suâ esse pravos, & induci non posse ut justiti∣am colant; (i. e.) That men were naturally very evil, and could not be induced to the embracement of what was righteous: And Cicero lamentatus est homines à naturâ novercâ in lucem edi; Cicero complains that men were brought into the world by nature their step-mother; the Heathens themselves universally enjoyned a strict Discipline to curb the ranknesse and untowardnesse of na∣ture.Actus ille Ada∣mi, quo ipse pec∣cavit, omnibus imputandus est & censendus omnium esse proprius, &c. A lap. Nay, this truth hath been confirmed by the most learned of the Papists; A lapide in his Comment on the Romans acknow∣ledgeth that that one act of Adams in eating the forbidden fruit, wherein he offended, is to be imputed to all men, and is to be repu∣ted the sin of all men; and from hence it comes to passe that every childe of Adam hath contracted a necessity of sinning even with his first breath; Nay, the very Rabbies have attested this truth; and we finde it clearly, though sadly witnessed by our constant and much to be bemoaned experiences, and here we might sup∣pena and summon two witnesses for the further verification of it; our own aversenesse to good, and our natural propensity to evil. 4. Nor was this truth ever opposed, but upon some designe: The Pelagians opposed it to maintain the perfection and power of
nature, which is mans proper Idol: The Papists have opposed it to establish merit: The Socinian to overthrow the satisfaction of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ: And the Anabaptist, to subvert the precious Ordinance of Infant Baptisme; (as was before hinted.) But that this truth may leave off its mourning as to us, let us be carefull in the application and improvement of it; which may be diversly. Use 1. Let this check those who pride themselves in their no∣ble descent; that they are of a worthy family, of an elder house, of a noble lineage, their Scutchion is blazond with more than ordina∣ry honour; these should do well to look back a little further, and observe what their great Progenitour Adam left them, nothing but poverty, shame and guilt; and this would make them wrap the silver Star in Cypres, and cover their honour with mourning; this would put a half Moon into their Scutchion, and clip the Plumes of their boast: Indeed a noble descent, it may be our pri∣viledge, it must not be our pride; such vain-glorious persons should sometimes think of their first Parents: Adam left them nothing but a stock, not of glory, but of sinne to trade with. 2. Let our losse by the first Adam be an incentive to us, to pursue advantage in the second Adam: Musculus observes,Muscul. this is one of the general uses we should make of this doctrine; ut gratiam Christi eò subnixiùs ambiamus; (i. e.) That we should be the more importunate in our pursuits after the grace of Christ; rags and wants bring beggars to the door; we are bankrupts in the first, let us look after an estate in the second Adam; the first A∣dam hath betrayed us, let us study that the second may betroth us; that our forfeiture in the first may be abundantly repaired in our fe∣licity by the second; Adams fall should make us more sensible to rise by Christ. 3. Let us see what a miserable piece of Pageantry a gaudy sinner is; you see happily what he hath received by his im∣mediate parents; but you do not see what he hath received from his first parent; you see his rich apparel, his fair complexion, his full estate, his great attendance, his splendid pomp; but ye do not see those Mountains of guilt that lie upon him, those waves of corruption, which rowle up and down in the dead Sea of his cor∣rupted
nature; ye observe not the unhappy portion that Adam left him; his immediate parents may leave him the heir of an Estate, but his first Parent left him the heire of Con∣demnation. 4. Let this truth be the plumb-line to measure out the length, the depth, the breadth and heighth of the love of Christ in the work of our Redemption, and of that work that Christ is pleased to work in the heart of every believer; how much sin must he re∣move? sin imputed upon the account of Adam, besides the mani∣fold accessions of his own; and what blood must quench that hell of sin within:Peter Mart. as Peter Martyr well observes, Commendat ma∣litia hujus peccati, dignitatem satisfactionis acceptae per Christum. The knowledge of original sin puts a glosse upon the satisfaction of Christ. The work of Christ upon the soul, receives its ad∣mirable rarity from the full knowledge of our sin by Adam. 5. Let us not triumph over our inferiour, afflicted, and distres∣sed brother, that Providence hath bruised with its frowns and stroaks, and happily cast down in the dust; Adam left him and thee an equal portion of sin and misery; so that all the distinction arises not from thy dignity, but from Gods pity; and if God hath had more compassion for thee, wilt thou have more scorn for thy brother? Gods pity should not be food for thy pride: Adam left thee as large an enditement as him, as corrupt a nature as him, as great a losse of original beauty and perfection as him; and shall the opening of Gods hand to thee, procure the lifting up of thy heel against him? you and your despised brother, were both co-heirs of original sin; Adam divided that portion exactly be∣tween you. 6. Let us see the nature of sin; one sin of Adam can subject the whole world to pollution and destruction. As we see the scorch¦ing Sun doth not only dry up a Field, but bring a drough upon the whole Land; sin is of a poysonous and propagating nature; if ye would view sin in its native and real deformity, look on it in the glasse of Adams fall; Adam falls, and his whole posterity feel the bruise; one man (saith the Text) is sufficient to bring sin into the world; sin like chain-shot, it can cut off many as well as one; how should this raise our holy zeale against sinne? and how should we arme our selves with holy resolutions against this ruinous evil? sin is a ball of poyson that can destroy a world.
7. Let all Parents be cautionated by the example of our first Parent Adam; he propagated dea h to his posterity: Oh that Pa∣rents would study, as instruments, to propagate life to their poste∣rity! he propagated sin, let us study to propagate holinesse to our children; I mean instrumentally, as moral, not as natural in∣struments; Adams fall should be every Parents Alarum: Our first Parent unravel'd the happinesse of his seed; let us that are Parents endeavour to build up the felicity of our issue; sinful Pa∣rents that are miscarrying copies to their children, and serve to poyson the creature of their own generation, they are indeed the true children of Adam, they are in some sense like Sampson,Job. 16.30. that will destroy others with themselves. But let Adams example be our caution, his folly our warning piece; sometimes shipwracks make them that follow more cautelous; and let us study to imi∣tate the second; not the first Adam; this ruines his off-spring, but the other saves his seed and issue: The forgetfulnesse of A∣dam might put bowels into every Parent towards the souls of their children. Now there are three ways for Parents to preserve their Families, which Adam left to ruine. 1. By their holy pattern: Fathers are the childrens Looking-glsses for to dresse themselves by; we know the old Aphorisme, Ducimur Exemplis, we are guided and led by Examples; we more follow Copy, than Command; children will more minde the mo∣thers Conversation, than the Ministers instruction; let us study to build up our Families by a holy life. Adams sin ruin'd his issue; let our holy Conversation preserve our issue; and though Adam were our common Parent, let him not be our authentick pattern. 2. By their watchful care: When Adam sinned, he more min∣ded his sense than his seed; to please the one, than to preserve the other: Let Adams neglect of his posterity move us to a greater watchfulnesse over ours; we are often very solicitous to make our children rich in gold; let us be more solicitous to make them rich in grace: Not so much that they may be rich in Fields, as in faith; let us watch over them till the morning of conversion appear in them. 3. By their importunate prayers: Adam destroyed his posterity by a wanton eye; let us study to save ours by a weeping eye, by prayer mingled with tears; Hannah by prayer obtain'd a Samuel, let us by prayer endeavour to make our children Samuels; the God
of grace can give grace to our issue upon the account of prayer: Prayer may obtain that from the second Adam for thy children, which they lost in the first. 8. Let us consider this with our selves; that though from A∣dam we receive sin and death, yet that we charge not our sin and death upon him, as if we dyed by his fall, and not by our folly; it is true, our original guilt comes from him, but from whom comes our actual? he left us a stock of sin, but who hath impro∣ved this stock? Perditio nostra ex nobis; our destruction is from our selves; his sin is ours, as we were in him; but O those innumera∣ble iniquities we our selves have adventured upon! we had the Egge from Adam, but the Serpent is from us that stings to death; we cocker lust, and warme corruption with our desire and delight, that it engenders into killing transgressions. Adam hath left us death by original, but we apply this death by our actual sin. And therefore as our perdition was hatched by Adam, so it is fledged by us; it is seminally from Adam, but ripen'd by us, we our own selves perfect our own misery; we put the seal to our own destru∣ction, by our fostering of our own lusts, and by our actual rebellions.
OF Original sinne INHERING. Rom. 6.6. Knowing this: that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed; that henceforth we should not serve sin. THe Apostles drift throughout the whole Chap∣ter, is clearly to beat down sin, and to pro∣mote holinesse. It was not known in his hap∣py dayes, how to ascend the Throne of glory, but by the steps of grace. Those Primitive, and truly inspired Saints, never thought of com∣mencing any degree in happinesse per sal∣tum; knowing that without holinesse they should nt see God. Now to urge his already believing Romans to further sanctity, the Apostle uses the consideration of their Baptisme as a special
motive in the 3.4, 5. verses, and indeed those Ordinances in which we receive most from God, are greatest obligations of the soul unto God. There are these mercies with him that he may be feared. When the direct beam of love from God to them is strongest, the reflexion of love and duty from them towards their God is hottest; then they are constrained, and cannot as it were,2 Cor. 5.14. any longer choose but live to him that dyed for them. This is that which the Apostle in this verse takes for granted. Knowing this; or we all know and grant this (the participle by an Hebraisme being put for the verb) which hath reference un∣to the foregoing part of the Chapter.A Lapide in locum. Of which the words fol∣lowing in my Text, are the sum and conclusion, viz. That our old man is crucified with him, &c. Which words contain, 1. A duty or priviledge; for in Religion the same thing is both; it being our happinesse to serve so good a Master, and to be employed in so good a ser∣vice. 2. The end of that duty or priviledge; That the body of sinne might be destroyed, &c. But my task being only to speak to some of the terms we here meet withal, I would not be curious in the division of the words. I am only to unfold a word or two in each part,Paraeus, Chrys. viz. Our old man, the body of sinne, and sinne, all which signifie one and the same thing; that is, they all are put here to expresse our Original pravity, and inbred corruption. Concerning which — I suppose you have in the former Ser∣mon seen this fountain of death opened. I am only to shew you the streames that are from it overflowing in every one of us. Original pra∣vity inhering in us, spoken to in the general.And in the handling of this subject, give me leave to propound some things first more generally, (remembring that this discourse is intended partly in the nature of a common place,) and then I shall speak to it more particularly from the words now be∣fore us. Considered first, that there is such a pravi∣ty.That which more generally I am to speak unto, is, First, That there is a pravity, naughtinesse, and corruption in every one. Secondly, What this corruption, and spiritual pravity is
1. That there is such a pravity, will partly appear from the forced consent and common experience of all men.Arguments to prove it. To prove which I need not quote those passages which Austin hath formerly ob∣served out of Plato and Cicero, or adde any other; for certainly the wickednesse man naturally tends unto is so grosse,Contra Julian. Pelag. that the dim sight of nature may easily discover it; were this to be read of Pagans, I would confirme my assertion as Paul did his, Acts 17.28. Certain of your own Poets have said it: But I remem∣ber I have to do with Christians, and therefore to the Law and to the Testimony. Alas, these poor men, like those that admired Nilus's streams, but were ignorant of its spring-head, they could not see so far as to the true cause of all this sinful misery; they could complain that none were content with their condition; but qui fit, how, or whence it came so to passe, they could not tell. Nay more, the wisest Heathen with the plummet of reason could never fathom the depth of this corruption: St. Paul,Rom. 7.7. till a Convert, and savingly instructed in the Law, did not know this lust. And this I the rather premise, because I shall take my self tyed up to Scripture-evidence and proofs in the businesse in hand. Scripture makes only a full discovery of this disease, and of its cure too. Here only invenitur venenum, here only nasci∣tur antidotus. Hence then I shall chiefly fetch these Arguments instead of many. The first Argument of our sinful condition by nature may be taken from Gen. 5.3. where 'tis said that Adam who had been created in the likenesse of God, ver. 1. after his fall by sin,Arg. 1. From mans begetting children in his own image. begat a son in his own likeness, who had now made himself like unto the beast that perish, or far worse, for an Oxe knows his Owner, &c. Now what is it for God to create man in his likenesse? 'tis sanctus sanctum. A holy God creared man holy; and by consequence for Adam to beget Seth in his likenesse, is corruptus corruptum; defiled Adam begat defiled, polluted Seth; and indeed who can bring a clean thing out of that which is unclean?John 14.4. if the root be corrupt, the fruit is not sound; if the fountain be poyson'd, the waters are not wholesome; if the Parents be leprous, or infected with some other disease not to be named, they entail their malady as well as their nature upon their unhappy off-spring. No∣thing can exceed the vertue of its cause, which is the ground
of our Saviours assertion, John 3.6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh. It is very remarkable that the like phrase is not used when Scri∣pture speaks of Adams begetting Cain, or Abel, (though both these were begotten in Adams likenesse too) because Abel be∣ing to dye without issue, and all Cains progeny to be drowned by the flood, it is noted the rather of Seth by whom all mankind hath hitherto been continued in the world; that he, (from whom as well as from Adam we all came) was begat in Adams own image, that into which by sin he had transformed himself; and not in that likenesse which was Gods, in which God at first made him. Nay, though the Parents be regenerated, yet their children by nature are altogether defiled; because they beget children as they are men, not as they are holy men; though the Parent be circum∣cised, the childe brings into the world an uncircumcised foreskin with it, as the purest wheat that is cast into the Field comes up with husks and stalks. I might adde that the holiest men upon earth, are but holy in part, they have a dark side as well as a light side, and proles (as conclusio) sequitur deteriorem partem; their children are like to what they were by nature, and cannot without the same Almighty mercy be like what they are through grace, witnesse Josiah's and Hezekiah's children; but there are too many sad Evidences of this amongst us daily. Arg. 2. From the Redempti∣on of man by Christ.Our second Argument for to prove our corruption by nature, the Apostle furnishes us with 2 Cor. 5.14. If Christ dyed for all, then were all dead. And the stresse we lay upon it, it will very well bear; for what need all that are saved, to be saved by Christ, if in them∣selves they are not ruined? Destruction is first asserted to be from our selves, and then it follows, but from me is your health; is not Christ made to all those that shall come to heaven and happinesse, wisdome,1 Cor. 1.30. righteousnesse, sanctification and redemption? Does not his death satisfie for their debts? his Spirit sanctifie their hearts? Thus none go unto the Father but by him, and whosever would but see the Kingdome of God, must be borne again, John 3.3. This very reason St. Austin urges concerning children. I shall give this,Arg. de verbis Domini. serm. 8. and some larger passages in English that I might
not overmuch entangle the thred of my discourse. Whosoever sayes, that infancy hath nothing from which Jesus should save us, he denies Christ to be a Jesus to infants baptized in his Name; for what is a Jesus? Jesus is by intrpretation a Saviour, a Sa∣viour is a Jesus; those which he does not save, be ause they have nothing that he should save them from, or cure in them, he is not to them a Jesus. Now if your hearts can endure that Christ should not be a Jesus to such, I know not whither your faith can be sound, &c. Thirdly, Scripture Ordinances prove this corruption to be in us; for else what need their institution to take it from us?Third argu∣ment is taken from Ordinan∣ces, Sacra∣ments, &c. If there be no pollution in the foreskin, why was Circumcision appointed to do it away? if we have no filth, what needs ba∣ptismal washing? and if we may borrow light from any shadows of the Ceremonial Law, why should women be so long un∣clean, and need solemne purification after their child-birth, if the fruit of their womb had been so immaculate and pure as some would make us believe? 'Tis true, the Virgin Mary offer'd, though she brought forth a holy Childe,Isa. 53.11. but he was by im∣putation sinne; for we know he bare in Gods account our iniquities. Saint Austin upon the bringing of Children unto Christ,August. serm. 36. In Evangel secund. Lucam. ob∣serves this also, Children (sayes he) are brought to be touched; to whom are they brought to be touched but to the Physitian? if they come to a Saviour, they come to be cured; and presently after he addes video reatum, I see there is guilt in them. Another passage of his I shall the willinglier quote, because many that oppose this truth, pretend much to reverence antiquity.De verbis Apo∣stoli. serm. 8. Wherefore dost thou say this childe, or this person is sound, and hath no disease? why then dost thou runne to the Physitian with him? art not afraid lest he should say unto thee, Take him away that is sound? — The Sonne of man came not but to seek, and to save that which was lost; why didst thou bring him unto me, if he were not lost?Lib. 1. And in his tract against Julian the Pelagian, the same father quotes several that were his predecessors in the maintaining of this very truth, as Irenaeus, Cyprian, Hilary, Ambrose, &c. but I proceed be∣cause we have heard a greater than all these, God himself so a∣bundantly attesting of it.
This corruption shews it self by its effects; if we be so spiritu∣ally foolish,Fourth argu∣ment. The sad effects prove it as not to believe there is such impurity in us from a∣ny other Arguments produc'd for the proof of it, experience may be our Mistresse to teach it. 1. The misera∣ble effects.1. Experiences of multitude of miseries that flow from it. This is that Pandora's box, which the Heathens so much talk of, out of which all manner of mischiefs flow abroad in the world. Why do we come into the world crying, rather than laughing? but as a sad Omen of the world of evils we are ever after here to meet with.De Civitate Dei. lib. 21. cap. 14. But if there were no sin, there would be no suffering in those tender yeares. And what have these sheep done? When I see a childe lying bound hand and foot in its swadling clouts, skreaming and crying out, I cann't believe but God and nature would never have dealt so hardly with it (so noble a creature e∣specially) if guilt had not procur'd these bonds and miseries; nay, methinks they speak its desert to be bound hand and foot for ever, to be speechlesse for ever, and to be cast too (unlesse in∣finite mercy prevent) where there is weeping and wailing, and gnash∣ing of teeth for ever. And all these things Scripture makes only the products of sin; that only is the fruitful Parent of all evils. Wherefore does a li∣ving man so much as complaine? 'tis for the punishment of his sinne, Lam. 3.39. Death which raigned over all, Rom. 5.14. is the wages of sinne, Rom. 6.23. Nay, of that sin too which is communicated to man-kinde by Adams fall; 1▪ Cor. 15.21, 22. By man came death; death is not of Gods making, but of mans, of our sinnes; and so are all sicknesses and miseries (the tendencies to death) of sin's making; for God doth not afflict willingly; no, not to a bare grieving of the children of men, Lam. 3.33. but as it follows in Adam all dye.1 Cor. 5.22. 2. The sinful effects.2. As the experiences of misery, so of the abounding of ini∣quity attest this; there must be a root of bitternesse, where there is so much bitter fruit. Our Saviours question, Does a man ga∣ther figs of thornes? it may in this case with the same strength of reason be inverted; Does any man gather thornes of a fig-tree, or thistles of a vine? if our nature be yet so sweet and good, whence do the unsavoury fruits of vanity and rebellion (in the youngest ones) that I do not say of blasphemy and impurity, whence do these grow? why must young ones be so long un∣der
the menaces and rods of their Parents and Masters, and as the event testifies all too little too, to restrain them from undoing themselves, and damning their immortal souls? is not vertue as amiable as vice, if we did but look upon them indifferently? can there be more said for the ways of sin, than for the ways of God, which are pleasantnesse. its self, &c? and why then hath God so few, and the world, nay, sinne and Satan so many servants? They that converse with children, or are any way concern'd in their education, can set to their seal that this is true; how often do they see puerum zelàntem, if not worse, wilful and obstinate chil∣dren; folly so deeply bound in their hearts, that the rod of correction can hardly drive it out?Prov. 22.15. I shall omit many other Arguments which might be brought for the further evidencing of this pollution in us; but I know it is not their number, but their weight that is considerable: And I hope by these God will reveal so much of his light, that we may see and be convinced of our own darknesse. The second thing more generally concerning this subject to be considered, is,2. What this corruption and spiritual pravi∣ty is. what this corruption and inbred pravi∣ty is? There are many names which Scripture and Antiquity have given unto it; those which the Antients call it by, you may read more largely in Aug. contra Julianum, lib. 1. cap. 2. By him, or about his time it began to be call'd original sinne, which word we shall henceforth more frequently use; for though it be not found in Scripture, yet that which we intend by it, being so clearly grounded on Scripture, the name cannot distaste any, who have not a quar∣rel against the thing; no more than the name of Trinity or Sa∣craments, and the like.1. From its name. And in these too, conveniunt rebus nomina; there is good rea∣son why 'tis so call'd. For 1. 'Tis call'd original sinne, because 'tis in every one from his original; it may say to every one, as soon as thou wert,Rivet in synops. Theol. I am; Or, 2. Because 'tis derived from Adam the original of all Man-kinde, out of whose blood God hath made us all:Acts 17.26. Or, 3. Because 'tis the original of all other sinne; it is the seed and
spawn out of which they all grow; this is that lust which when it hath conceived bringeth forth sinne, James 1.15. As for Scripture names, Chemnitius in his Common place upon this subject reckons up above twenty whereby it is called in the Word of God: I shall not insist on any besides those which I shall have by and by out of this Text to speak unto. Which I should be too much prevented in, if I should set down any certain definition of it to be here explained, besides what every one may gather from what hath been already said; only I cannot but mention those three things, which make up as it were, this original sinne, and into which Anselm divides his definition of it. 1. There is in original sinne the absence of original righteous∣nesse,2. And parts it consists of. which is the image of God in which he made man at first; for he makes him upright, and all his workmanship (when look∣ed over) is exceeding good. 2. There is present in man its contrary image, that is unrigh∣teousnesse, concupiscence, &c. A heart evil, and only evil; viti∣ous habits, even before there were vitious acts; as afterwards a man hath the habits of grace infused before he acts gra∣ciously. This souls disease is like unto those of the body, where there is not only a privation or absence of the former good constitution, but a present indisposition, &c. And though original sinne be not actual, yet 'tis active; actuosum, though not actuale. The flesh lsteth against the Spirit, and sinne worketh all manner of con∣cupiscence, Rom. 7.8. To understand these things the better, we must know: 1. That the soul of man cannot be indifferent to, or altogether without either of these images or likenesses; it hath either the i∣mage of a holy God, or of a sinful man upon it; to think that it is rasa tabul, like white paper without any thing good or bad written in it, is but a Philosophical fiction, which Scripture no where owns, and Christianity every where explodes; there are but two Cities made out of mankinde,Aug. de Civi∣tate Dei. Jerusalem and Babylon; there will be but two sorts at the last day, Sheep and Goats, and unto which should these neuters or indifferent ones belong?
2. As none can be without one of these images, so none have both of them. A mans soul cannot be as some artificial picture representing on the one side a beauty, on the other side a Mon∣ster; light and darknesse; God and Mammon; Christ and Belial are too much opposite to enter into any fellowship or agreement in his soul. No, but 'twill be ask'd, whose image and superscription (in the singular number thus too) hath it? 3. And as by this sin there is both the absence of Gods image, and the presence of his enemies; that is, man by it, is not what God is, holy, &c. and is what God is not, unholy, &c. so third∣ly in this sin, is considerable that debt which man owes unto Di∣vine Justice, to satisfie for this hs irregularity. God might re∣quire, that man should make him satisfaction for this injury; and 'twill be exacted of all men out of Christ. It is no small crime to break the seal, to throw away the image and picture of any Prince or Soveraign. Now as the former ingredients into this sin, made us altogether sinful, so this consideration makes us by nature altogether miserable. And thus I have spoken to this subject i'th general, and more by way of common place. I shall now confine my self in that which is behind, to speak of it only under those notions which this Text affords. As, 1. 'Tis called here our Old man. 2. The body of sinne. 3. This is that also which in the last words is called sin. As to the first of these.Original sin spoken to more particularly. 1. As our old man. 1. Why call'd man. Original sinne is represented to us under our old man; and that not without special reason, whither we lay the emphasis upon Old or Man. We will first enquire why it is call'd Man; not our old under∣standing, or affections, &c. only, but our old Man. And I will only give you these two reasons for it,Mr. Burgesse. to omit others which are given by that learned Authour who hath writ so fully on this subject. 1. Because this sin runs parallel with our being men,1. It attends us whilst men. or par∣taking of mans nature in this world. This sin and our nature in us are twins in life and death; they live and dye together; we shall not cease to be sinful, before we cease to be men. Our whole Fabrick is so overspread with this leprosie, that it can ne∣ver be sufficiently cleans'd, till it be wholly taken down. Its
strength indeed is abated; it does not rule in a child of God as formerly; nay, it's deaths wound is received, it is crucified, or fastened upon the Crosse, as my text hath it; yet it will not to∣tally expire but with our latest breath: it can be no more whol∣ly parted with,Gerrhard. then our very soul it self; Quod natura nobis in∣est deponi non potest; Whatsoever is in us by nature, will stick by us till the dissolution of nature. 2. This sin is call'd man, because it hath overspread the whole man;2. It over∣spreads the whole man. that as the subjectum  is every man in a natural way propagated from Adam: it may be said of every such one, he is guilty of this sin, he is infected with this Original sinne; So the subjectum , or the subject unto which this sin ad∣heres, and in which it is, is every part of every man. It is not in this spiritual malady as in corporal, where the head akes ma∣ny times when the heart is hail; the Foot is wounded, when the hand is whole; but by this soul distemper, every man is a very hospital of spiritual diseases; neque manus, neque ps, nei∣ther hand nor foot, neither head nor heart is as it should be, or does as it should do. And because this is so material to our present purpose, I will shew,1. It infects the soul in its chiefest facul∣ties. 1. That this sin cleaves to the soul; and 2. It infects the very body also. 1. The under∣standing.First, It hath overspread the soul, and that in its most noble faculties; I mean those two which do so much advance man a∣bove the common sort of creatures; Reason and Will, under∣standing and affections; the highest and inmost powers poor man hath, are suprized by it. This sin appeares in the mind, the eye of the soul; 'tis dim-sighted in natural things; 'tis quite out as to spiritual truths. 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God. What those things of the Spirit are, the Context tells us, no other than the plainest truths of the Gospel; nay, he counts these foolishnesse. Those things which are the wisdome of God, the product of infinite wisdome, he slights and disesteems; and no wonder, for he cannot know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Spiritual truths as such, are no more within the cog∣nizance of the natural eye of the soul, than spiritual substances are within the view of the eye of the body. There is none that
understandeth, Rom. 3.11. If Peter and some few other here and there in the world may be recepted, no thanks to them, but to the Father, who hath reveal'd these things unto them.Mat. 11.25. Certain∣ly did we know the things of God more, we should love them bet∣ter; Good, when discover'd, is attractive; if a child pre∣fers an apple before a piece of gold, it is because he does not know the difference; and when the children of men prefer themselves, or any creature else before God, the reason is, they do not know, they do not consider. And hence it is that in our spiritual recovery the eyes are anoin∣ted with eye-salve. Christ came to open the eyes of the blinde; and his Spirit is a Spirit of illumination and revelation:Luke 4.18. Revel. 3.18. ult. Believers were darknesse, but now they are light in the Lord, Ephes. 5.8. What needs St. Paul to have prayed so earnestly that the eyes of the Ephesians understanding might be enlightned, if they of them∣selves had not been blinde? Ephes. 1.18. The will is distemper'd with tis sin also;2. The will is perverted with it. it hath not seized only up∣on the head, but upon the heart. The imagination of the thought of mans heart is evil, and only evil, Gen. 6.5. & Gen. 21.17. Jer. 9. I for∣bear glossing upon those places; hence it is that there is so little love unto, or desire after heavenly things; can any man give a reason (which he will not be ashamed of at that great day) why he loves God no more? What iniquity have ye found in me?Non amo — nec possum di∣cere quare. says the Lord. As the Elements have their proper principles of motion, gra∣vity and levity, whereby they tend to that place in the Universe that best suits them; and sensitive creatures have their wings or feet to carry them towards those objects which are most convenient for them; so God hath endued rational creatures with a will and affections to carry them forth towards the enjoying of himself who only is the Center of their happinesse, and without whom they can never be at rest. But does the will of man by nature do him this good office to carry him unto God as his only blisse? why then do we see and hear of so many that are in the search of other things, not once to be named with God? how many are there of whom it may be said, God was never thus to be sure in all their thoughts! like the Israe∣lites they are scattered up and down gathering straw; nay, drosse and dung in the Apostles sense, is frequently preferr'd before Jesus
Christ. How many may sadly say as that good man, Quantum Mercator pro lucro, &c. I have not done so much for my God, as the Merchant doth daily for his gain, or the Hunts-man for his game: and yet what gain or pleasure is comparable to our enjoying of, and communion with God? but further, 2. The body is not free from it.The body bears a part with the soul in this sore evil; 'tis compa∣ratively I confesse but a small part, for it can according to its na∣ture bear no greater. Our Apostle speaks of sinne reigning in our body, Rom. 6.12. Every member of our body is ready to act in a sinne; to be an in∣strument of unrighteousnesse, ver. 13. a servant to uncleanness, ver. 19. The temper or rather distemper of the body enclining often, sometimes to one, sometimes to another sinne, which the Divel (who is best seen in our constitutions) makes much use of in suiting his temptations; hence he frequently tempts those that are melancholy to despair, and the sanguine he tempts to presume, with no small disadvantage to their souls from the several inclinati∣ons of their bodies. To be sure, whil'st a man is or should be providing for his soul, the body too often interrupts him with What shall I eat? what shall I drink? wherewith shall I be cloathed? And if there be any fear of suffering, though for Christ and his Gospel, the body cryes Spare thy self, this may not come unto thee, &c. So that with Adam by reason of sinne we need a cloathing for, and may be asham'd of our very bodies. Even they also should be the Tem∣ples of the Holy Ghost, but are now become Cages for these unclean Birds.1 Cor. 6.19. Put but these things together, and 'tis too sadly appa∣rent that this original sinne is as extensive as any thing in meer man can be. A short draft of Adams i∣mage in us. Aug. de Ger. ad lit. cap. 24.So that in every one methinks I see another Adam; if you consider the parallel, you shall finde Adams image and likenesse in each of his unhappy off-spring. Take it with some enlargement out of Austin. 1. Adam after his fall had his understanding darkned, he thought to hide himself from that God from whom nothing can be hid, Gen. 3.8. And are we not thus blinde? does not man promise himself more security for a secret, than for an open im∣piety? The Adulterer, the Oppressor, the Proud and the Envious
person saith, None seeth me, Isa. 47.10. Durst men undertake that wickednesse under the sense of Gods seeing of them, which they would be asham'd of if men look'd upon them, were they not thus blind? 2. We finde Adam flying from Gods presence; his will and affections were defiled, or he could not have been averse from com∣munion with God. Being now stain'd with sin, he trembles to heare him, whom before it was his chiefest delight to be with all. And this also sin hath brought upon the posterity of Adam; they do not delight in communion with God; in their hearts and lives too they forsake God. We do not read that Adam after the commission of his sin, did so much as once think of God, till he heard the voice of the Lord, walking in the garden in the cool of the day, in order to the calling of him to an account for his sin, and then he is a∣fraid, and flies, &c. So his wretched children () seldome think of God, at least seriously, and as they ought, till towards the end of their lives, when God by the voice of some extraordinary sicknesse, is a calling of them to judgement; and then no wonder if they be afraid. 3. I might observe a similitude we have in our bodies unto A∣dams sinful body, but that our very cloathes as I hinted but now, sufficiently evince it. We have the same use and necessity of them which he by sin fell into; The best apparel being but as playsters which this soare calls for; howsoever too too often man makes himself proud of them. Now whither these faculties of soul and body being so nearly conjoyned, do corrupt and infect one another; as Ivy while cleaving to the Oak, draws away the sap from it, and destroyes it, I shall not here contend; I confesse there are many difficul∣ties concerning this subject, of which we may say, as of other depths in Religion, with the Woman of Sa∣maria, John 4.25. When the Messias comes, he will teach us all things. I have been too long upon this first consideration in explaining, why Original sin is called Man. I must be the shorter in what fol∣lows; why it is call'd Old man. 1. Because it is derived from the eldest or first Adam;2. Why Origi∣nal sin is called Old man. for though Christ as God, was from eternity; yet as an Adam, or
common head, he was the latest — Man must be fallen in the one, before he can be raised in the other. Willet in locum. 1 Cor. 15.46.2. Original sin is the Old man, because corruption is first in e∣very one. Esau comes out first; first that which is natural, then that which is spiritual. Heb. 8.13. 2 Cor. 5.17.3. 'Tis call'd Old, because it is to be done away., This old man, all old things are to be done away. Compare it to the new man, or the work of grace, and then you will say indeed, There is no lovelinesse in it, for which you should retain it; were there not an eternity of happinesse or misery to put into the ballance, vertue would out-weigh vice. 4. It may be call'd Old, because of its cunning and craft; as old men by reason of their abundant experience, are more wise and subtle than others. This old man, this corruption is cun∣ning to deceive. Oh what excuses does it bring for sin, what pretences? you have heard it hath much of Adam, but know it hath somewhat of the wise and old Serpent too, for it was begot betwixt them both. I shall passe this first particular only with this note, instead of fur∣ther Application, viz. Observe (with Paraeus) that when the Apostle calls Original sinne our old man, he distinguishes it from our selves. It is ours, too nearly cleaving to us, but it is not our selves. Whence we must learn to put a difference betwixt the corruption of nature, and nature it self. Mans nature is from God, but the corrupti∣on of mans nature is from himself. And this original sinne is not ,Rom. 7.20, 21. any substantial part of man, but  as the Apostle sayes of it, Heb. 12.1. The sin that so easily besets us. Thus at length we are come to the second particular which the Apostle uses to expresse original sinne by;The second particular ex∣pressing Ori∣ginal sin, the body of sin. 'tis the body of sinne. And herein I have only to shew how this Original sin is a body; for the other, how it may be call'd sin, or a body of sin, will be consider'd in the third Appellation which is here bestowed upon it. Now Original corruption is a body of sin, Why called a body.1. In that a body, though it seems never so beautiful and fair, yet 'tis in it self but a stinking carcasse, made of base, loath∣some
matter, &c. So sin and wickednesse, though it may seem spe∣cious and alluring, yet 'tis but an abomination, as Scripture in a hundred places calls it; adultery, covetousnesse, excesse, and all the parts of this body are not as they seem to be when varnished or painted over. They say there is no stench comparable to that of a humane body, when not salted or animated with the soul. I am sure nothing so noysome as this body of death; Paul that could with rejoycing endure scourgings and stonings, imprison∣ments and shipwracks, yet cryes out mightily of this, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me! Rom. 7.24. 2. As a body being material, is visible; so original sin disco∣vers its self to every one that without prejudice will look to finde it. It is discernable in its effects daily. Though we cannot see the soul, yet from the motions and actions it causeth, we know a man hath a soul; so we may know every one hath original sin, from that vanity and sin that is put forth by it. 3. As the body hath divers members, so this sinne; it is not so much one sin, as seminally and vertually all sin;Peter Martyr. there is a conca∣tenation of vertues and vices; Scripture speaks of both under that notion; hence a single eye, a pure heart, &c. And on the other side that sin is a body, and is thus universally in us, the Apostle shews, Rom. 3.13, 14. and the Prophet saith it hath over-spread us; from the soles of the feet even unto the head there is no sound∣nesse, Isa. 1.6. As the waters in Noah covered the highest Mountains, so these raging waves of iniquity over-flow the high∣est and choicest faculties of humane nature. 4. I wish I could not adde as a body is beloved and provided for, so is this sin: We make provisio for the flesh to fulfill its lusts;Rom. 13. ult. Who would willingly part with the least member of his body? men do not willingly forgo any sin; but if something of this body must be parted with, 'tis but haire and nayles, &c. such as are rather excrements than members, and will soon grow again, which we are content to cut and pare off. And thus till that day in which God puts forth his Almighty power to make us willing, we are loth to leave any sin, unlesse such as for the present are trouble∣some to us, or may ere long grow again, and be with more ease or credit enjoyed by us. 5. This sin as a body hath strength in it, and Tyranny is exerci∣sed by it. The body leads poor Captives whether it lists, and
says to this man G, and he goeth, &c. so does this sin, we are held Captive by it,Faius. till the Son of God sets us free. Man is not ingenuus, but libertus; he is not by nature born free, but by grace made free; untill he be established by the free Spirit, he goes and comes as the winde and Tyde of corruption drives him. And this is farre more sad than to be possessed, or to have our members acted by the Divel himself; for the incestuous per∣son was given over to Satan (which some interpret thus) for the good of his soul,1 Cor. 5.5. that his soul might be saved; but none are left under the power and command of their corruptions, but to their certain and inevitable destruction. 6. It is call'd here especially a body by the Apostle, to answer to the other Metaphor of crucifying in the words before; only bodies can be crucified,Paraeus. and this sin is crucified with Christ. Which by the way shews the state of original sin in the people of God, and how it should be in all others, especially such as are baptiz'd; it should by faith be nayl'd to the Crosse of Christ, we should by believing fetch vertue from Christs death to crucifie it; it must hang on Christs Crosse, , a Metaphor ta∣ken from those that are crucified, who hanging on the Crosse up∣on nailes, grow weaker and weaker, till they expire and dye; so must original sin be in us, (dead already as to its reigning power, and) dying daily as to its in-being moving power, having every day lesse strength than other. The third ex∣pression of o∣riginal corrup∣tion in the Text, 'tis sin.We have now but the last expression the Apostle uses for this ori∣ginal corruption; he calls it here sin, to shew that it is so; it is sin. 1. Properly and truly. 2. Eminently and especially. 1. Properly.It is truly and properly sin, it is not only a defect, but a sin; it is against the holy will of God, and is chargeable upon us by the justice of God; every soul disease is not only a punishment, but a sin, and therefore farre worse than the worst disease that is inci∣dent to the body; and our sinful state should be more terrible to us than our dying condition. To convince us of this, know that this original corruption becomes our sin. 1. By imput∣tion.1. In that God imputes the guilt of Adams sin to us, which I suppose you have had vindicated in the foregoing Sermon: I shall
only say this to it, that God may as well by imputation make Adams sin become our sin for condemnation, as he may by imputation make Christs righteousnesse become our righteousnesse unto salvation; and yet Christ is made of God unto us wisdome, righteousness, &c. and we have no other righteousness to ap∣peare in for justification before him at that great day.In Thesi de pec∣cato Orig. Hence Ri∣vet well observes, that the Church hath ever found and still does, that those very men who are enemies to the doctrine of Origi∣nal sin, are enemies also to the doctrine of the grace of God in Christ. Thus the Socinians, who deny that we have contracted any debt by Adams sin, deny also that Christ satisfied, and paid our debts to divine Justice; and if they take away this, let them take all. 2. Though Original corruption be truly sin by imputation,2. By inhaesion. yet 'tis not sin by imputation only. It is our sin by inhaesion, inhering in us, and making of us otherwise than God made us. To blot a letter in a fairly writ Copy, to draw a black line over a beautiful picture, cann't but prove a fault; what is it then to mar Gods curious workmanship, which this sin does in man? Consider that God is many moneths in the framing of the body, (for we are wonderfully made by him) and when this body is fitted, he unites it to a soul more worth than a world of bodies. This great-little creature man,Psal. 139.13, 14 hath many prerogatives too that ad∣vance him, especially in that Gods delight is said to be with him. Now when all this care and paines are taken, this cost and charges expended by God to make man for himself, this corruption comes and mars all, and will God hold it guilt∣lesse? No, this sin is exceeding sinful; for,2. 'Tis sin emi∣nently. 1. Extensive. 1. 'Tis more extensive than other sins; every actual sin hath some particular faculty in soul or body, which it does defile and charge with guilt, wherein it was conceiv'd, or whereby it was acted; but original sin stains all alike, so farre as by their seve∣ral natures they are receptive of its defilement; it ruines the whole little world of man. It does not only overspread the whole earth; mans baser part, the body; but his celestial part, his heaven-born soul is contaminated by it; the sun, moon, and stars in it are turn'd into blood. 2. This Original sin is diffused, derived, and communicated,2. Diffusive.
whereas actual sins are not. Personal faults of Parents are not imputed to Children, and defile not their Children, unlesse imi∣tated or unbewail'd. Childrens teeth are not set on edge by the sowre grapes their Parents thus eat, but Original sin being the sin of the nature of the Parent, becomes the sin of the Child, and will be entailed further to the last man upon earth; for Children have the nature, but not the person of their Pa∣rents. An Objection answered.And let it not seem strange, that God should suffer this ori∣ginal sin to be so vastly diffusive, that he should not exempt his own people wholly from it. There is the same reason that cor∣ruption should remaine amongst them, which there was for the abode of the Canaanites amongst the Israel of God of old; It tryes them and brings them often to Bochim, and makes their life a vall y of teares; and whilst they go on their wy weeping and crying unto God by reason of it, they beare precious fruit; for God does make good come unto believers out of this great evil, making it an Antidote against carnal confidence, and self-love, a meanes to exercise their faith, and a sure evidence of his own power and presence in the keeping of them. Besides, it is farre better for us by this occasion to be under the second Adam, then ever it could have been being under the first. The first Adam was a head of clay, of the earth earthly. The second Adam is a head of gold,1 Cor. 15.47. The Lord from heaven. Though we were made holy in the first Adam, yet having a mu∣table will, we might under him perish everlastingly; but they that are in Christ shall not perish, but have everlasting life; a glory beyond what we could have had, if we had continued in innocency; for under that first Covenant, we could have ex∣pected only a reward answerable to our own works; but under the second we hope for glory, in some measure proportionable to Christs merits. Though we know not what that glory is, yet this we know, that when he appeares, we shall be like him, 1 Joh. 3.2. And in the mean while as the Israelites who were before but Brick-burners, and potters, by reason of the Canaanites amongst them, learn'd the art of warre, and became Renowned soldiers; so the true Israel of God by this meanes put on their whole spi∣ritual Armour, and dayly fight the good fight of faith, and be∣come
more than Conquerors (to conquer a lust, being more glo∣rious than to conquer a Kingdome) through Christ that streng∣thens them; when these Philistines are upon them, (as upon Sampson) then the Spirit of the Lord comes upon them , and what lust is able to stand before his Spirit?Josh. 10 24, 25 As Joshuah took the five Kings and shut them up in the Cave at Makkedah till the Battel was over, and then slew them: So the Lord is pleased to shut up and restrain the corruption of his people in the Cave of their body, untill their warfare be finished, but then he brings them out and slays them; they shall then never see these enemies more. And therefore holy Paul who cryes out,Rom. 7.24, 25. Who shall deli∣ver me? addes presently, I thank God, &c. as if he had breath∣ed the same breath out in praise, which he had taken in, in prayer for deliverance; so soon does God answer prayer made against this sin according to his will. And thus we have seen something towards the explaining of this difficult matter.Application. The nature of this undertaking being more to informe your judgments, than to deal with your affections; I shall the rather hope to be excus'd if I be not proportionably so large in the Application, which I am now come unto, and shall lay down what I intend to speak to, under these two heads. 1. Of Instruction. 2. Of Exhortation; to inform your judgment, and to quicken your practice. 1. If we all have corruption thus by nature inherent in us,1. Use of In∣struction. it may silence all complaints against God for exposing of us to such wants and miseries at our very entrance into the world, and so all along during our continuance in it; , whence come evils? was a question which did much puzzle the Philosophers of old; here we are resolved of it: The evil of sin, and sorrow coms from this root. No wonder now that our children are more miserable than the young ones of Beasts or Birds, because they are more siful. 2. Hence it follows that in the very best there is a mixture, borh in their principles and actions. There was two in Rebecca's womb, there are two in their hearts; the Old mn, and the New man; nature ad grace; flesh and Spirit: Hence that stri∣ving, that ombate betwixt them daily. The unregenerate per∣son this sin reigns in; his body is as a Temple, and his soul as a Shrine for this his Diana. This keeps the house, and all things
are in peace; In the glorified Saint, this sin is wholly done away; this unclean thing does not go with him into the new Jerusalem. Only the gracious person is the field in whom the flesh warreth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh. He is like the Moon which hath its spots when it receives the fullest influence from the Sun. sin in him will not dye willingly, but, as a dying man, multiplies his stroaks at his enemy, though they are compa∣ratively but weak ones. 2. Use of Ex∣hortation.For Exhortation, let me recommend these following Duties. 1. To a right knowledge of this sin.1. Get a right knowledge of thy self according to this doctrine; it is folly in men to have travel'd much abroad, and to be strangers in their own Countrey. It will be found the greatest folly for thee to be never so knowing in other things, if thou beest a stranger to thine own heart, and dost not know that it is desperately wicked. The very Heathens apprehended this precept, , Know thy self, to be of such consequence, as to grace it the more, they said it came down from heaven; I am sure it is Gods message unto you from this truth this day. Know your selves. unlesse you know your selves thus lost, Christs coming will be in vain unto you;John 3.4, 10. for he came only for the lost sheep. Nicodemus had never doubted so much of Regeneration, and a new birth, had he un∣derstood the defilement of his first birth. I am afraid there are many Masters in Israel that are ignorant of this still, or else they would labour not only to reforme their lives, but especially to get new hearts also. thou canst not kill one lust unlesse thou layest the Axe to the root of it that is in thy heart; if thou cuttest but the branches off, and for a while refrainest only the outward acts of sin, upon the next temptation or occasion they will grow the faster; as Rivers that have for some time been kept up by Banks, run the more violently after they have broken them down. 2. To confessi∣on of, and hu∣miliation for it.2. Be perswaded to make confession of, and be humbled for this sin, this original sin; some think that Moses who was the penman of Psalme 90. ver. 8. understood those words of this sin: Thou hast set my secret sins in the light of thy countenance. Remember this corruption, though never so deeply hid in thy heart with all the parts of it, is as perfectly seen by God, as if it were set in the light of his countenance; which is a thousand
times brighter than the Sun in all its glory. We read of Ahabs mourning, as well as of Davids; and of Judas's repenting, as well as of Pauls; and why were not Ahabs and Judas's sor∣row accepted as well as the others? O e remarkable difference I will observe in them; Ahab that we read of, mourned only for the judgement denounced; and Judas repented only of the outward act committed, but neither of their tears or sorrow went to the root, to bewaile the Original of all this their impiety, which we have seen Paul did, and we know David practis'd; Psal. 51.5. He sayes not only, Deliver me from blod-guiltinesse, but I was conceiv'd in sin, &c. and that is as well matter of his sorrow, as the other. Possibly you would think much if I should recommend Au∣stines example to you, who confessed he had need of mercy not only to pardon those sins which he had committed, but for those sins, which if grace had not restrained him, he should have com∣mitted; and certainly we owe as much to this soul-physitian, for preventing those diseases which otherwise we should have faln into, as we owe him for recovering of us out of those diseases which we did fall into; nay, plures sunt gratiae privativae, quam positivae, thus too; And therefore let me bespeak Gods dearest children in the words of the Prophet to Babylon,Isa. 47.1. Come sit in the dust. Gods own inheritance is as a speckled bird, as he com∣plaines Jer. 12.8. Oh be not Ingrati gratiae, Unthankful to grace. You have heard a sad parallel between Adam and you; but Oh that you might be like Adam in one thing more;Sensus peccati, & conscientiae. stimulus, &c. Ger. when he had sinn'd; 'tis said, his eyes were opened, Gen. 3.7. by which some understand that God gave him a sight of his sin, awakened his conscience, so that he saw from what blisse, and into what mise∣ry by sin he was now cast. He thus by lamentable experience un∣derstood good and evil. Oh that your consciences were awakened, that your eyes were opened too! I shall pray for you as the Prophet did for his ser∣vant, and afterwards for the Syrians that came to take him; Lord open the eyes of these men, 2 King. 6.17, 20. I am sure the more grace ye have, the more sense of this sin you will have al∣so. Paul a Christian complains of it, though Paul a Pharisee did not.
If ye have been prevailed with by the other exhortations, ye will yield up your selves to the power of this.3. Exhortation. Look out for remedy and help against it. Did you but understand your condition by reason of this sin, and were hum∣bled for it, you would engage all that you could against it. First then In your selves.Set your selves against this sin in your own hearts. Thou canst not be a man after Gods own heart, till thy heart be cleansed, and made like unto God. A true Christian takes more care to get rid of the evil, than to rejoyce in the good that is in him (though both be a duty) being it is better not to see a friend which we know will do us no hurt, then not to see an enemy which (un∣seen) will certainly kill us. When Elisha would cure the waters of Jericho,2 King. 2.21. he did not cast salt into the pots or dishes (that might take it up) but into the spring that sent it forth. Labour to get thy heart which is the spring and issue of life or death, season'd with grace.Means to be u∣sed. Blessed be God, there are meanes to cure you of this evil. 1. Faith in Christ. Cast the wood of his Crosse into these bit∣ter waters; he was circumcised, yet had no filthy foreskin of his own, but of ours to do away. 'Twas our filth that was washed off in his Baptisme. 2. The in-being of the Spirit of Christ, prevails against the in-dwelling of sin. Behold I have shewn you a mystery, if ye would not all die, and that eternally, ye must all be chan∣ged. 3. Prayer is a means in order to this. David, Paul, others were troubled with this evil, and they pray'd; go thou and do likewise. Let it be thy daily prayer,Armado homine meipso libera me Domine. From the evil one my self, good Lord deliver me; thou complainest of bad times, oh complain more of a bad heart. The flood came upon the whole world, not so much for their actual abominations though great, as for their heart-corruptions, Gen. 6.5. Gen. 8.21. If we ever be o∣whelmed with sufferings, it is for th s Abomination in chief. Oppose thy self against this sin in thy relations; weaken the Kingdome of Satan everywhere,2. In our relati∣ons, childlen e∣specially. especially in thy children; If their head-ake you pity them, and enquire after remedies for them; alas, spiritually every part is distempered; they are blind, lame, poor, naked, and what not that speaks misery? Oh hard-hearted
Parents, that have not once gone to the heavenly Physitian for their poor children! 'tis usually said, venenati non patiuntur inducias; they that are poyson'd must not be dallyed with, but presently some antidote (if I may so call it) given them. They do but pledge you in this cup of deadly wine, and will ye not the rather be instrumental to help them to the cure, being ye have help'd them to the disease? Wherefore do ye think your ch ldren came into the world in such a piteous manner? what do they cry for?Vox naturae clamantis, &c. the Naturalist will tell you 'tis out of want that some body might cloath them, feed them, care for them, &c. But a Christian will tell you, God hath given them bitter teares and cryes to lament their spiritual necessities, and to beg spiritual re∣medyes. Their insignificant voice signifies thus much; whil'st they are yet dumb,Nihil aliud fa∣ciunt nisi depre∣cantur. they speak aloud in their man∣ner; Oh carry us to the Laver of regeneration; let us be washed in the fountaine set open for sinne, &c. Surely, God who hath not caused their tender voice to be in vain for their bodies, (though they know not what it means) would not have it to be in vaine for their soules; and he that hears the young Ravens when they call,Psal. 147.9. would not have you deafe in this respect, when your Children cry. Lastly, Let the consideration that Original sin is thus in us, weane us from the world,4. Exhortation. Be wean'd from the world by reason of it. and that immoderate desire of living in it. Alas, wheresoever we go we carry these chains of darknesse with us; if it be grievous to be in pain or want, how grievous is it to a gracious heart to sin? I know gravia non gravitant in eorum loco; sin seemes not heavy to a car∣nal man, to whose heart 'tis naturaliz'd; but if thou be∣est spiritual, and tender, sin is a burden to thee to pur∣pose. Now by death peccatum, non homo, moritur, it is sin that dies, a Childe of God does not dye, but only changes his life; this life for a better, these pleasures, relations, &c. for better; and if it be good to live, surely to live e∣ternally is best of all. Some have thought that the soule was put into the body for a punishment, as into a Prison; and who would not willingly be at liberty? If we consider what paines, care,
torments, and diseases (which are but the effects of sin) we endure, we cannot but be of Theophrastus his mind, that the soule payes a deare rent for the body which it dwells in; and 'tis but a house of clay, how finely soe∣ver dawb'd over. being then we cannot be without these enemies, these mischiefs, let us be content when God pulls down the house of sinne in which they all are, that he may bury them all in the rubbish of our mortality, and with the Spirit and the Bride,Rev. 22.17, 20. let us say Come, even so Come Lord Jesus Christ, come quickly. Amen.
THE MISERY OF MANS ESTATE BY NATURE. EPHES. 2.3. And were by nature the children of wrath even as others. YE have heard the Doctrine of Mans fall, and of Original sin opened and applied: This Text ge∣nuinely leads to speak of Mans misery through sin. As to the Coherence briefly, The Apostles scope is, to display the glory of the Lords grace, by comparing the sinful and cursed estate of the Ephesians and others by nature, with the dignity and priviledges conferred on them in Christ. He insists mainly on three heads.
1. He describes the natural estate and course of the Ephesians and all other Gentiles in them; their estate, ver. 1. You were dead in trespasses and sins; their course, ver. 2. Ye walked whol∣ly in sin, pricked forward by corrupt customes, which in several Ages had taken place, and were effectual to hold and hearten you in the same Tracts; and the Devil, that eminently bore sway in others, ruled and acted you likewise at his very will; this was yours, and the Gentiles estate and course. 2. He applies the whole equally and indifferently, to himself, and to the whole body of the Jewish Nation, ver. 3. among whom also we all had our Conversation, &c. q. d. such children of disobedience were we all to; as deep in sin, and open to wrath as you Gentiles were. He would by no means have any think that speaking so of the Gentiles, he exempted the Jews from the same ground of shame and despair in themselves; though he knew full well that this point went exceeding crosse to the grain of that people, who greatlyEzra 9.2. John 8.33. Gal. 2.15. Rom. 10.3. chap. 11.24. boasted themselves to be the holy seed, and children of Abraham, and despised the Gentiles as an idolatrous, unclean, bastard brood; and especially of the Pharisees, of whichActs 26.5. Phil. 3.5. leaven himself once was, who not only disdained the Gentiles, but thought and spake contemptibly of Gods heritage, viz. the com∣mon people of their own Nation as a base and cursed crew, John 7.49. & chap. 9.34. He pricks this bladder, affirming roundly of himself and all the Jews without exception, that as to their course, whilest unregenerate, they did whatsoever their sensual and carnal man willed, liked and inclined to; And as to estat; were children of wrath as much as others, even as the very despi∣sed Gentiles themselves were. The great temporary difference flowing from grace, Psal. 147.19, 20. hindered not their being the very same with the Gentiles by nature; this and no other was the estate and course of the Jews likewise. 3. He sets over against all this, in them both, the quickning and recovering grace of Christ; in the Gentile, ver. 1. and in the Jew, ver. 4. The words read, contain a brief comprehensive description of the misery that Jews, and consequently Gentiles with them, are under by nature. And in the words observe these two par∣ticulars.
1. The Case of all men, Jews and Gentiles alike described, children of wrath; Do not understand this actively, as children of disobedience, ver. 2. are disobedient children, so that children of wrath should be angry and wrathful people; but passively, that are obnoxious unto wrath indefinitely, which though it principally relates to that chiefest pressing insupportable burden; viz. the Lords wrath; yet includes consequently the wrath and power of Satan, the terrours and rage of conscience, the vengeance and assaults of every creature, &c. The Hebraisme, children of wrath, implies 1. Desert. Deut. 25.2. It shall be, if the wicked man be a child of beating, that the Judge shall cause him to lye down, and to be beaten before his face, &c. which the Sept. solidly renders, , worthy of stripes. And so the Tar∣gums in like manner concurrently with our Bibles, a sonne guilty and worthy to be beaten; so Mat. 23.15. Ye make him twofold more the childe of hell; that is, more worthy of hell-fire, than your selves. 2. Tendency, bent and addictnesse to involve themselves under wrath, John 17.12. But the sonne of perdition, which poured out himself in ways of self-destruction. He had many and excel∣lent means to the contrary, but nothing would hold him back; self-damnation is not proper to Judas, but a very common sin; and men ordinarily, Rom. 2.5. treasure up to themselves wrath, Prov. 8.36. love death. 3. The event and issue which shall befall them, if they do a∣bide such; viz. that they shall be destroyed, and the eternal wrath of God abide upon them; so Judas gave up himself to those sins, that not only deserved and tended to destruction, but would certainly destroy him; so 1 Sam. 20.31. he is the son of death; viz. deserves to dye, and shall surely dye. Now gather all these things together, our estate and course is such by nature as deserves destruction, tends and leads to destru∣ction, and will end and the Lord hath peremptorily fixed and ordained without a change, shall end in Eternal de∣struction. 2. The rise of this case expressed, by nature, which implies
1. The term from which this commences; viz. the very first receiving of our natures and beings from our Parents; from the first original, and moment of our being, we received with all a li∣liablenesse to the wrath and curse of God, Psalme 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me! 2. The ground for which this wrath impends and hovers; viz. nature, not first created, for that was upright after God; but the corrupted nature which is conveyed and derived with our beings:Eccles. 7.29. Gen. 1.27. This very nature leads to, deserves, and will lodge under eternal wrath, every mothers child in whom regeneration and transplantati∣on into Christ are not found. The Doctrine then comprising the summe of the Text, is this. Doctr. Every man and woman from their very first concepti∣on, through a corrupted nature, are under the Lords wrath, and continuing such, not new-born and engraffed into Christ, that wrath shall abide upon them for ever. We may not mince and extenuate here with the Pelagian, as if this only were by imitati∣on. Flatterers of nature may lessen the wound, but Heires of grace should and will rather magnifie their Physitian. Nor may we limit and confine this truth as if it concern'd native Turks,Mat. 23.15. canker'd Papists, and the Proselytes of the Pharisees only to be children of hell, when it knocks at every of our doors, Jew and Gentile promiscuously: Neither people nor Ministers, not Apostles can exempt themselves; great and small, rich and poor, those which the Lord hath not appointed unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by their Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thes. 5.9. yet by nature are children of wrath, even as others. This wrath in the Scriptures hath several Names; respectively to the Law-giver, it is called wrath; respectively to the Law it self, the curse; respectively to the effects of both, it is transla∣ted vengeance, Rom. 3.5. Man by nature is exposed unto all these. 1. He is exposed to the wrath of the Law-giver: Here, 1. Take some Cautions, that we may duly conceive of wrath, the root of all penal afflictions on Gods part, as sin is the merito∣rius root on mans part. All wars with men begin in wrath;
Animosities first boyle within, and then wars break out. James 4.1. From whence come wars and fightings among you? Come they not hence, from your lusts which war in your memb rs? and in special, this of wrath; so there is somewhat proportiona∣ble in God, if understood sutably to his glorious Being; namely, wrath perfectly clean from all dregs of, 1. Folly; the fool ne∣ver more peeps out than in passion. Prov. 14.29. He that is hasty of spirit, exalteth folly; that is, sets it aloft that every body may discern, and take notice of it; but the Lord is, 1 Sam. 2.3. A God of knowledge by whom actions are weighed. 2. Injustice; Gods wrath is a clear fire without any smoke of un∣righteousnesse. Rom. 3.5. Is God unrighteous that inferreth wrath? he cannot be. We plough with an Oxe and an Asse;. mingle drosse with our zeal, &c. 3. Perturbation; the wrath of men is the rage of men, who disjoint and discompose themselves as well as others; but the Lord acts, and suffers not in his wrath;Prov. 11.17. he strikes, wounds, destroys from the infinite holinesse and justice of his nature, declaring it self against all sin with the exactest serenity and oneness of minde and frame within himself from ever∣lasting to everlasting. This is the root of all wars with sinful men; Moses saw the plague growing up out of this root. Num. 16.46. Wrath is gone out from the Lord, and the plague is begun. Job 21.17. He distributeth sorrows in his anger. 2. Consider what this wrath implies; two things. 1. That the Lord is highly displeased with men and women in their natural estate; though never so goodly a vernish of Religion be above, yet if nothing but nature be underneath; Isa. 10.6. an hypocritical Nation are the people of the Lords wrath. No created understanding can conceive exactly what this displea∣sure is. Psal. 90.11. Who knoweth the power of thy anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. Take some short ladders that our thoughts may a little climbe up by; and consider seriously and deeply, 1. What a Kings wrath is. Prov. 20.2. The fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lyon; who so provoketh him to anger, sin∣neth against his own soul; that is, acteth as an enemy to his own life; and Prov. 16.14. The wrath of a King is as the Messen∣gers of death, but the wise man will pacifie it, as that which he cannot resist. Eccles. 8.4. Where the Word of a King is, there
is power, and who may say to him What do thou? that is, where not only the name, but the reality of a King is, he sustains the person of the Common-wealth, and hath the strength and power of all put into his hand; and hath power to execute his wrath, and will not be controlled nor expostulated with. And what can a Branch do against the whole Tree? The King is wroth, and Hamans face is covered. Prov. 27.3. A stone is heavy, and sand is weighty; but a fools wrath, that is, that hath pow∣er, is heavier than them both, to crush a weak person that stan∣deth in his way. All these are but toyes to the power and weight of Gods wrath. 2. What an incensed brothers wrath is, that hath a little more power. Rebecca understanding Esau his wrath against Jacob, packs him away till that wrath be over. Gen. 27.43, 44. If a mother dare not venture a childe into an angry sons presence, nor a brother himself into an angry brothers presence, how insuffe∣rable will the angry presence of the Lord be? 3. What Gods Fatherly refining wrath is against the drosse that mingleth it self with his Worship and Ordinances, and what dreadful Furnaces he hath put the Vessels of mercy into, to take away their tin from them. Mal. 3.2. Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a Refiners fire: If men cannot bear Christs coming with a refining fire, to purge out drosse, much lesse not his coming with flaming fire, 2 Thes. 1.8. to consume and burn up persons and drosse together. We have need of grace to serve him acceptably with reverence and godly fear; for our God, that is related to us in Christ, is a consuming fire, Hebr. 12.28, 29. 4. What afflictions are, how very bitter, yet separated from wrath, they may be born with comfort. The mingling of fire with the haile in Egypt, made it so very dreadful, Exod. 9.24. The fire of the Lords wrath mingled with stormes, renders them so grievous to be stood unde. Hell it self would not be so dreadful, did not the breath of the Lord, that is, the wrath of the Lord, like a streame of brimstone kindle it, Isa. 30.33. The Prophet submits to any stroaks, only deprecates wrath, as worse than any stroaks, and more deadly than death it self. Jer. 10.24. Correct me O Lord, but not in thine anger. Appre∣hensions of wrath were the dregs in Jobs Cup. Job 14.13. O
that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, and keep me in sec et till thy wrath be passed over. He cannot stand in the face of Gods wrath, though he knew it was passing, and not abiding wrath; and therefore begs a hiding anywhere, and in the very grave, till that wrath be over; who then shall dwell with abi∣ding wrath? John 3.36. With evelasting burnings? Isa. 33.14. with fire and brimstone, and tempest, that hath atred in it? Psa. 11.5, 6. 5. What the Lords glory is, when it is proclaimed, and passeth forth in a way of grace; only in a little more lustre and brightnesse. Moses needs putting in a clift of the Rock, and to be covered with the Lords hand, while the Lords glory passed by, Exodus 33.22. Peter is swallowed up at a glimpse of the power of Christ. Luke 5.8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, oh Lord; what then, when he speaketh in his wrath, and vexeth in his sore displeasure! Psal. 2.5. 6. What the Lords wrath is passing upon others. All the chil∣dren in the house tremble when the rod is taken down, though not with respect to themselves, but their fellows only. Take a man whose heart is touched with the sense of the Lords greatness, and that will be his temper. Isa. 2.19. They shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the Caves of the earth, for feare of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. 7. What the Lords wrath is, only hanging in the threatening. His rebukes made both the eares of Eli to tingle.1 Sam. 3.11. 2 King. 21.12. There is a ter∣rour when a Prince convenes and rates his Rebels for their con∣spiracies, and insurrections against him, though not yet brought to the barre or block. Hab. 3.16. When I heard, my belly trem∣bled, my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones, &c. Josiah his heart was tender, 2 King. 22.19. When he heard what the Lord spake against Jerusalem, and against the inhabitants thereof. 8. What Christ himself did, under the sense of this wrath to be poured forth,Col. 2.9. Heb. 12 2. though supported with all the fulnesse of the Godhead dwelling bodily in him, and saw the glory beyond, and the certainty of his resurrection, and the fruits of the travels of his soul that should be; yet sweats,Luke 22.44. and that clods of blood to the very ground; prayes, and that with strong cries and teares, that
if possible,Heb. 5.7. Luke 12 50. this cup might passe. Though other considerations made him drink it chearfully, yet nature droops, and cannot bear up under this burden. Those pills are very bitter, that very health it self doh hardly sweeten. You that are yet in the mire of meer nature, steep your thoughts in these things, that ye may have a little taste, what an evil and bitter thing it is, that Gods wrath and displeasure is out against you. But this is not all; God may be displeased, and ve∣ry highly with his own people. Isa. 47.6. I was wroth and polluted mine inheritance, viz. dealt with it as if a polluted and unclean thing. 2. God reckons, and will deal with men and women found in their natural estate, as his enemies. Gods tender-hearted ser∣vants, have not been able to bear the apprehension of this. Job 19.11. He hath kindled his wrath against me, and counteth me to him as his enemies; the plural number encreases the sense; as his deadly enemy. He that takes the Bible, and carefully turns it over, and considers the contents thereof, and what he hath said of those he reckons his enemies, will have a further glimpse of the dreadfulnesse of this condition. Nahum. 1.2. He reserveth wrath for his enemies; that is, he hath built and made wide the storehouses of hell, that there might be wrath enough in due sea∣son to be drawn forth for them. Luke 19.27. Those mine e∣nemies, that would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. Isa. 1.24. Ah, I will ease me of my Adversaries, and avenge me of my enemies. Heb. 10.27. Judgement and fiery indignation shall devoure the Adversaries. And this must be applied to both sorts of enemies. 1. Close. That go closely on in wayes of sin, secretly correspond with the Divel and his temptations, and their darling lusts, and will not lay the bucklers down, though they smile in the Lords face; and Isa. 58.2. Seek him dayly, and dlight to know his wayes, as a Nation that doth righteousness, and forsaketh not the Ordinances of their God. Flatter him with their lips, and lye to him with their tongues, Psal. 78.36. 2. Open enemies, that proclaime and declare warre against heaven, that do and will do what they please, let the Lord say and do what he will to the contrary. As Pharaoh, Exod. 5.2. Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? Psal. 12.4. Our lips are our own, who is
Lord ov r us? Luk. 19.14. His Citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man reign ver us. And understand, when the Lord so deals with this sort of sin∣ners, he takes a kind of comfort in it. Ezek. 5.13. Thus my an∣ger shall be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted. To others, the Lord distributes sor∣rows with sorrow; and speaks of himself as grieved, when he puts them to grief, Judg. 10.16. Lam. 3.33. Isa. 63.9. But here he is comforted, in making them the resting place of his fury, Prov. 1.26. The heat and height of his fury poured forth upon incurable sinners, is comfortable and pleasing to him. Isa. 30.32. In every place where the grounded staff shall passe, which the Lord shall cause to rest upon him, it shall be with Tabrets and Harps. Vengeance on such, is musick and delight to the Lord, Rev. 18.20. and to his people. This is the first, and not the meanest part of the misery of faln man, that he is under the Lords wrath; that is, such as God is displeased with, and will reckon and deale with as his enemies. 2. Every natural man and woman is exposed to and under the Curse of the Law. Is this nothing to have the Word against thee?Job 13.6. and to have the Lord write bitterly against thee in that ve∣ry Book which is the storehouse of comforts and supports to others? Dreadful is that language of Ahab, concerning Micaiah, 1 King. 22.8. There is yet a man by whom we may en∣quire of the Lord, but I hate him, for he doth not prophesie good concerning me, but evil. So that language of a natural mans heart. Gods mind is in that book, but I cannot abide to read therein, or to hear it opened and applied by a lively rowzing Preacher; for it only raises stormes and tumults in my conscience, and speaks not a word of comfort to me. The Word, 1. Rings many a sad peale in the ears of conscience, and which he cannot abde to hear or think of; in that it doth declare, 1. His sinne; The Word faithfully disovers Gods streightness, and mans crookedness, and swervings from that platforme and rule, to which he should be conformed as the Counter-part to the Original. This charges omissions, commissions, and bun∣glings in the good which he does do,Psal. 05.21. and sets all in order before
his eyes, if possible, to make him ashamed and confounded in himself. 2. The due and desert of sinne; every breaker of the Law, the Law pronounces and dooms to be cursed. There is that necessa∣ry connexion, that it is impossible to be chargeable with sin a∣gainst the Law, and not liable to the Curse of the Law. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continueth not in every thing that is written in the Book of the Law, to do it. Justification it self takes not away the desert of sin; pardoned sins are as well sins, and as much sins as they were; pardon makes not the Malefa∣ctour none; makes not that the fact was not committed, or not faulty, or that it deserved not death; for then he should have been legally acquitted, not graciously pardoned. Those will ne∣ver take heaven of grace, that take not hell as their proper de∣sert. The Lord will have his own weare this rope about their necks, the desert of hell in their hearts to the very grave. As∣surance, and in the very highest degree, takes not away the sense of the deserts of sin, but amplifies and enlarges them. The de∣serts of sin shall be perfectly acknowledged in the state of glory, and the Ransomer adored and admired upon this score. Nothing so heightens grace as this, that persons deserving to suffer, are yet freed in Christ from suffering eternal wrath, as if they had not deserved it. This desert, was no doubtful and dark point in the consciences of the Hearthens themselves, Rom. 1. ult. They know the judgement of God, that they which commit such things, are worthy of death. But the Word more distinctly layes this home to the heart; Prov. 11.23. The expectation of the wicked is wrath. There is nothing else that he can justly and solidly expect in that estate; and expecting otherwise, he does but cozen him∣self. 3. The sinners exclusion while in that estate, from any part in the great and precious promiss of the Gospel. The Word opens the promises, but knocks his fingers off from touching and eating of this Tree of life. This is none of the meanest heart-cutting ter∣rors to natural men, to see many come from the East and West, and sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the King∣dome of heaven, and themselves cast out, Mat. 8.11, 12. incor∣porated with the Patriarchs, into fellowship of the same grace, and title to the same glory, and themselves debarred from both to
view the unsearchable riches of Christ displayed, and themselves justled off from any intermedling, as to present application or grounds of application of them as their own. I met lately with a godly woman who heard a Sermon full of choice comforting sup∣porting promises to weary and heavy laden sinners, which warm∣ed her heart, but in the closure was strucken through with the first arrows of God, discerning her self excluded in her present estate, from any part in them. This makes the Gospel a fiery Serpent to sting them, which is the Pole holding up the brazen Serpent for healing to others. 2. The Word attaches and binds him over. Ye shall answer this at the day of Christ; and hangs the writ upon his door; as the man that is in Gods debt, and is to look for an Arrest, and to be dragged into prison till the utmost farthing be paid, unlesse a spee∣dy, timely peace be made; and inforces this partly from the will and justice of God, that hath made indignation and wrath, tribulati∣on and anguish the portion of every soul that goeth on to do e∣vil, Rom. 2.8.9. and partly from the nature and circumstan∣ces of sin it self. Debts may be so great, so long owing, so growing, and the negligence and boldnesse of the debtor such, that makes it necessary in point of wisdome, not to keep the writ longer off from his back. 3. The Word excites terrours. A man bound in a very great summe, in which the forfeiture will be his undoing, the very ob∣ligation troubles. There are no debts, but where any ingenuity is, induce answerable cares. And the Lord knowing the frame, and tendring the peace of his people, advises therefore against all debts, especially sticking under them, and not coming timely and carefully off. Rom. 13.8. Owe nothing unto any man; much more to be over head and eares in Gods debt, and no care to agree with him, is a very dreadful condition, Mat. 5.25. If these terrours actually are not, yet they are very subject eve∣ry moment to be excited. The Sea may be very calme, but the least storme makes it nothing but commotions; conscience, though now quiet, hath a very wide and clamorous mouth, when the Lord commissions and commands it to rebuke for sin. These terrours hold the sinner in bondage, or all his life time subject unto bondage, Heb. 2.15.
This is the second branch of the misery of a natural estate, to be in all these respects under the Curse of the Law, and to have the Lord fight against him with the sword of his mouth, Revel. 2.16. Here is patience, that the Lord will fight with this sword first, that he may reclaime and lead to repentance, rather than destroy him; and if this prevaile, then is the curse turned into a blessing, and the bondage ends in liberty indeed; but if this do not prevaile, then there remains nothing else but a certain fear∣ful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devoure the adversaries, Heb. 10.27. 3. Every natural man and woman is obnoxious to all the effects of the wrath of God, and of the curses denounced in his Word. 1. There are manifold effects of Gods wrath that are upon him, or are apt every moment to be rushing in upon him in this life. 1. Upon the body: Look upon all the breaches, flawes, de∣fects, monstrosities in the body, and set them upon the score of sin. Every man else had been like Absalom and much more. 2 Sam. 14.25. From the sole of his foot even to the Crown of his head there was no blemish in him; these argue not special sin, Joh. 9.2. yet had never been without sin; look upon all diseases natu∣ral or adventitious, John 5.14. Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee; there had never been a stone in the reins, or in the bladder, if not first in the heart. These crumblings by de∣grees into the dust, flow in by sin. We pity the ruines which War hath made in goodly Palaces, but those are nothing to the havock which sin hath made in the more noble Fabricks of our own bodies. Look upon the difficulties, cares, turmoyles for provision of us and ours. Gen. 3.17. Labour is with toyle, wea∣rinesse, vexation, disappointment: We plough and sowe, and reap not; earne and put in a bag with holes. Hag. 1.6. Look upon shameful nakednesse: We have lost our Robes of glory, and need now the spoiles of beasts to cover our shame with. How many trades are there, and what toile in them, meerly for this end, that the dishonour of the body may be hidden! Look upon the sorrows of the female sex, Gen. 3.16. which though miti∣gated and mingled with promises, yet still are arrows which sin hath shot into their sides, and grace doth not quite pluck them
forth. 1 Tim. 2.15. Look upon the assaults made even to our ruine, by those things that otherwise were under our feet, Psal. 8.6. But now withdraw from the yoke, serve with groans, re∣missnesse and much unserviceablenesse, and often lift up their heel, and turn and tear us; these are a very small part, and only bare hints of those confusions, and effects of the Lords wrath, which sin hath let into the body, which else had been invulnerable in the very heel. 2. Upon the soul; Consider, 1. The minde: O what blindness, ignorance, thick darknesse in the apprehensions of God, his very being, most self-evidencing Attributes, in the very mysteries of the first magnitude, which are the rules of our duty, and the grounds of our hope! incapableness, dulnesse, slownesse to believe; lothness to inquire or receive the light which shineth forth from heaven; doubts, distrust, mi∣stakes, wandrings after that which is not light, and into wayes that seem right, but the end of them are the ways of death, Prov. 14.12. The heresies of the whole earth are seminally in the blindnesse of the minde, and would grow up from thence, though there were none of our many sowers to scatter them, be∣ing nothing else but corrupt imaginations formed into a systeme. Ʋnprofitablenesse in the knowledge of truths, which we most clearly and distinctly conceive: Unsteadinesse, that we cannot fix and close upon holy thoughts, till the impressions thence be powerful, and work a real change. There is no Spaniel more wilde and running after every Lark and Butter-flye that rises in his way, than our thoughts are gadding after every thing that comes in our way. Yea, our minde gathers vanity to it self, when the eyes are shut, and no objects to divert and inveigle us with. These are sins, and yet are rushing in further, as the recom∣pences of former sins, which are meet, Rom. 1.27. 2. The memory: Things stick there that a man would gladly learn, and count it a singular mercy to attain the art of forgetful∣nesse of; and others leak and slip away though taught ofen plain∣ly; repeated, mused upon, and we felt the power of them in a degree upon our hearts; what Indispositions to the use of means in order to a cure? what Proneness to cumber our selves with by-matters, till they talk with us sleeping, and crowd in and suck away Lords-days themselves, and leave nothing but scraps
of prayer and preaching to us; sin first brought in these plagues, and wrath binds them on, and leaves judicially, the reins loose to them. 3. Conscience. The directing part is out of tune; and either gives no directions, as a Master that is no body in his Family; or gives wrong directions, as false lights on the shore lead the ships upon the Rocks and quicksands; forbids where the Lord commands, and urges to that which he forbids. John 16.2. Tit. 1.15. or gives right directions, and hath no authority. And the judging part of conscience is out of tune, and gives no judge∣ment of what is done; like a Bell whose clapper is out, or a dumb dog that cannot bark; or gives perverse judgement, and excuses where it should accuse; makes sin no sin, or very little; and stayes the heart with empty comforts; or accuses for having done that which he is bound to do, and disquiets with undue fears; or accuses rightly for the matter, yet with excesse, and so sinks the soul under despaire; so that there is as much need for consci∣ence to be overseen as to oversee, to b guided as to guide. These arrows abide in, and the venome of them invades more and more, and that is a very dreadful effect of the wrath of God. 4. The Will. There are sad strokes there. Aversenesse and im∣potence unto that which is spiritually good, Phil. 2.13. Psal. 110.4. Inclinations and byasses, to drink in the very first, and the very worst motions and suggestions unto sin. Lustings after evil things, Job 15.16. and against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. stubborn∣nesse, Rom. 8.3. Contempt of the offers of reconciliation, Joh. 5.40. Ezek. 33.11. incompliance with the counsels of the Holy Ghost, Act. 7.51. These are cords of mans twisting, and the Lord in dreadful wrath sayes, Be it so; and pinions him with them to the last judgement. 5. The affections fly upon unmeet objects, headlongly in∣clining to them, and C l spe, and cleave there, and cannot be gotten off. Recoile from that which is good, are stirred in re∣spect of evil to embrace it; and in respect of good to eschew and be weary of it. Ahab imprisons the true Prophets, and sets the false at his own Table, and gives them his ear and heart. Are full of disorders; more offended with our injuries than Gods: merry,Eccles. 2.2. and the Holy Ghost calleth it madnesse; mourn and swal∣lowed
up. Cannot be raised to things above, and settled on them.2 Cor. 2.7. We complain, and justly, of servants that are nimble and ex∣pert in any piece of knavery, and lozels at their work; this is the very temper of our hearts, nimble and wise to do evil; but in the things and wayes of God, and which are of greatest ne∣cessitie and advantage, we have no knowledge. And a sharper wrath is not, than the Lord to leave us to our selves.Psal 81.12. Psal. 78.30. These are hints, and no more of the Lords wrath upon the soul. 3. Upon the estate. Look upon the general estate of the whole Creation, impaired, groaning, and subject unto vanity; into the Publick state, Confusions, stumbling-blocks, under∣minings of civil and spiritual liberties, &c. into the particular estates of men, snarles, damages, wrongs, powlings; men ta∣ken and carried whither they would not, build, and dwell not therein, gather, and it melts as butter against the Sun, &c. 4. Upon Relations. Unequal marriages, yokefellows disloyal, wastful, idle, with-holding more than is meet; troubling their own flesh, dampers in the wayes of God, suddenly strucken, and the greatest comforts leave the smartest wounds after them, &c. Ʋnfaithful servants looking only to the Masters eye, invading that which is not theirs, imbezeling or suffering to go to wrack, that which by care they might and ought to preserve. Children sickly, unnatural, taking to no Callings, or not diligent and faithful in them, dispose themselves without consent, run them∣selves into bryers, and see their errour when too late to retreat. This is wrath in Domestique relations. And wrath as terribly mixeth in Publick Relations. Ministers preach not, oversee not, are not ensamples to the flock, have not experience, nor ability, or care, rightly to divide the Word of truth, and muzzle the gain-sayer. Misled themselves, and mislead others, &c. Magistrates mind not the things of Christ, are tight and vi∣gilant over the good, indulgent to the evil. Beare the sword in vaine, &c. Such vials there is much wrath poured through. 5. Upon the holy things of God, and of his people. Ours come not with acceptance to God. The Lords, not with savour,
closenesse, authority, &c. to us. The very book of the Covenant needs sprinkling, Heb. 9.19. The Law which is pure and clean, Psal. 19.8, 9. is made a killing letter, 2 Cor. 3.7. The Gospel which is the grace of God bringing salvation, Tit. 2.11. is made a savour of death unto death, 2 Cor. 2.16. the Lords Supper an eating and drinking judgmsnt to our selves, 1 Cor. 11.29. and Christ himself is made for falling, Luke 2.34. and a stone of stumbling, and rock of offence, 1 Pet. 2.8. without Christs blood taking away sin, the very book of grace had never been opened, Rev. 5.4. and though the choicest in it self, being opened, would never have been useful unto us; and sorer wrath cannot be, than to curse our very blessings, Mal. 2.2. and the very means of grace that they shall be uselesse, and for judgment. 6. Upon the whole man; the person is under the effects of wrath. 1. Inslaved to the Divel. This is plain, 1. From the Scri∣ptures. Else converting grac could notCol. 1.13. deliver from the power of darknesse; nor men be said when2 Tim. 2.26. God gives repentance, to re∣cover themselves out of the snare of the Divel that were taken captive by him at his will. 2. From the likenesse of mans work with Satans; ; Men of a Trade are ordinarily of a company together; but here the rule failes not; 1 Joh. 3.8. He that committeth sin is of the Divel; that is, by doing the same work discovers himself of communion with, and in thral∣dome to him. The first finders of a Craft, are Fathers; and Suc∣cessors and Imitators in the Craft are called children, Gen. 4.20. we naturally and freely do the Divels work; John 8.44. The lusts of your Father ye will do, and have no minde to the Lords work, nor can brook the same to be done circumspectly and exactly by others; Acts 13.10. Thou child of the Divel, enemy of all righte∣ousness. 3. From the community of principles; the very mind and will of Satan is engraven upon our spirits, and expresse themselves ineffi∣cacy and obstinacy of sinning. These principles are Satans image in∣stead of Gods. 4. From the natural mans subjection to the guidance of Satan; regenerate persons are led by the Spirit, but Satan filleth the hearts of natural men. He had possession of Judas his heart, and by a piece of mony rides deeper into him, and prevails to engage him
to betray Christ. This is a lamentable branch of the natural mans misery. 2. He is banished and separated from God, both from confor∣mity to, and communion with him, and doth electively banish and cast himself forth of the Lords presence: This ap∣pears, 1. From the former point; viz. mans fellowship with Satan; there cannot be fellowship with God and with Satan together. These communions are inconsistent, in the same Spirit, at the same time, in a reigning intense degree. 2. From Gods end, and his Apostles and Ministers, in the wri∣ting, explanation and application of the Scripture. 1 John 1.3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Were this fellow∣ship already in the state of nature, there needed not this means of rebringing into fellowship with God. Defiers of the evil one with their mouths, are not the lesse in league with him in their hearts. 3. From the language of the carnal heart; Job 21.14. De∣part from us, we desire not the knowledge of thee. This they speak internally, and the desire of their souls is to be rid of God; notions of God are a saplesse and burdensome piece of knowledge. Rom. 1.18. They did not like to retain God in their knowledge. To banish our selves is the heighth of mans sin and folly; and to be banished, the heighth of the Lords wrath, and of mans misery. Now do we know what a man loseth in the losse of God? that is impossible for any created understanding to conceive! The world is a Dungen without the Sun; the body a carrion without the soul; but neither so necessary as God is to the soul. A taste of the goodnesse of God, made the world and the lives of the Martyrs nothing to them. Psal. 30.5. In thy favour is life; & Psal. 63.3. Thy loving kindnesse is better than life. The very heaven of heaven lies in the enjoyment of God, and the hell of hell in the losse of him. The losse of him is the losse of the Fountain from which all kinde of good doth or can come.
The losse of the cause, is the losse of all the effects, of all the blessed affections, influences, and promises of God; The losse of all those blessed hopes that fill the soul with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. No prayer, praises, faith, love, fear, or any spark of other grace, are to be found in truth upon the hearth of that heart. Now the person in league with the Devil, and banished from, and without God in the world, must needs be mi∣serable and accursed. 3. He is discontented and unprofitable in every condition. Rom. 3.12. They are altogether become unprofitable. The Holy Ghost makes a natural man of no more use, than rotten things, which we cast forth to the dunghill for their unprofitablenesse; This is a dreadful ruine, that a creature so excellent, should be∣come unprofitable to others; and very far from comfort to him∣self in any condition. The wife having all for use, and the hus∣bands heart; hath nothing, because not the authority, dominion, and disposition, which is proper to the husband. Israel have bread and quailes from heaven, and water from the Rock that followed them; a table everywise furnished for need, and for delight, and yet grumble because not meat for their lusts. Many have all things very good, and the wisdome of heaven could not carve fitter and better things, and yet all not good enough. Let sin creep in, and Adam will not be content in Paradise, or the Apostate Angels in heaven, but leave their own habitation. Go from God, and take thy leave and farewell of contentment and sa∣tisfaction. 4. He is grown a Wolf and Devil to his brethren. Biting and devouring, Gal. 5.15. tearing, pulling, catching at advantage, flying upon the necks of the weaker. Men execute much of the wrath of God in these feuds among themselves; so that the Cau∣tion is very necessary, Matth. 10.17. Beware of men; in a sort, as of any wild beast, or the very Devils themselves. This is a glimpse of that wrath which the Lord draweth forth against natu∣ral men, in this life before the sons of men. 2. There are further degrees of this wrath that rush in at the end of this life. Rom. 6.23. The wages of sin is death. The bodies of the very heirs of glory, and which are Temples of the holy Ghost, lie trampled upon under rottennesse, and suffer losse of their appointed glory till the last day. The Lord batters them,
till the house tumble about their eares. He layes on load till the heart-strings crack; and to whom Hell is remitted, death is not remitted; those must dye, that shall not be damned for their sins, and death shall have dominion over them till the morning of the resurrection. There is a progress in Gods wrath, which will not stop in the midway, but goes on till it shall be accomplished, Ezek. 5.13. 3. The full vials and very dregs of this wrath,Psal. 78.38. shall be pou∣red out in the world to come, which now God reins in, and lets not get loose, and break over the banks; or if it do, calls it back and turneth it away, but then all his wrath shall be stirred up and let forth to the full. 1. There shall be the general judgement of the great day; in which the Lord himself shall descend from heaven in a shout,1 Thes. 4.16. with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, and shall be revealed. 2 Thes. 1.7. with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, terribly to execute the curses of that Law which was so terrible in the promulgation. Then shall the sinner be forced from his grave, dragged to the barre, arraigned, the books opened, all the secrets of darknesse, and of the heart made manifest; and the Goats put on the left hand, and have that dismal sentence, Go ye cursed, &c. Mat. 25.41. 2. There shall be dreadful and final execution, and this stands in two things. 1. In losse; expulsion from the Lords face, and presence, and glory. As incurable lepers, from the Camp and fellowship of the Saints. For the good things which they never cared for, and from the good things of the world which they grasped, and were their portion; from all hopes of grace, all preachings of peace, all strivings of the Spirit; never a friend to comfort, a sun to shine, a drop of water to cool the tongue, or any blessing to come near them any more for ever. 2. In sense; which is sometimes termed, suffering the venge∣ance of eternal fire, Jude ver. 7. Wrath to come, 1 Thes. 1.10. where there shall be with the damned Angels, subjection to the e∣ternal wrath of God, the worm of a guilty conscience that ne∣ver dies; where the Lord will beare up the creature with one hand, that it continue in being, and beat it with the o∣ther, that it shall be ever dying; in death alwayes, and never dead.
Use 1. Inform. We may clearly gather divers Corollaries hence. 1. This may inform us of the vast and woful change that sin hath made. Men could not come, possibly, such out of the hands of God. Gen. 1.31. God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good, and therefore blessed; but sin hath taken him from Mount Gerizim,Deut. 27.12, 13 and set him upon Ebal; and the misery now is such, that if the Lord should open the same to the conscience fully, the very view would drive men out of their wits, and men could not tarry in their beds, or rellish a morsel of bread till delivered, and blessed with some evidence of deliverance out of that condition. This may infome us of the causlessnesse of the offence taken at Ministers for preaching this point. Now consider seriously, 1. Is there a parallel to the offence, taken here in any other case in the whole earth? Who is angry with a watchman for giving notice that the house is beset, and ready to be broken up, or on fire; though all be disturbed, some half-frighted out of their wits, or wholly with the tydings; and very great pudder follows till the house be secured, and the fire quenched? men migh otherwise have been undone and destroyed in their beds. Who flies out against a Centinel that gives a true Alarme, and rowzeth the Souldiers at the deadest time of the night? he prevents their sur∣prizal, or throats being cut in their beds, and the Town from be∣ing sacked. Who storms at a passenger that sticks up a bough in a Quagmire, that other Travellers going securely on, may not be laid fast ere they think of any danger? Who takes it ill of a friend, that seeing a bearded arrow coming that would strike the stander next him mortally, puls him aside with that force possibly as to draw his arme out of joint, and the arrow goes not through his heart? Who thinks amisse of a Lawyer that opens the badnesse of his Clients cause to him, that he may not insist on a wrong point, in which necessarily he must be cast? 2. Should we to avoide your displasure, not give you warning, and so draw Gods displeasure,Ezek. 3.18, 19. Videsis Green∣hil, in loc. and the blood of you perishing upon our heads? is this good for you or us? 3. Do you well to provoke poor Ministers to bauke that part of their office which flesh and blood makes us too willing to have
our edge taken off in? Desire we to be messengers of sad tydings, or rather to come in the abundance of the comforts of the Go∣spel? A pettish Patient makes the Chyrurgion search the wound lesse than is necessary to a through cure. Ye tempt us to stop from speaking needfully of your danger, by your lothnesse to hear on that ear, and by your rage and regret against the teller. Those which have most need of faithful intelligce of the Lords wrath, have least upon this very score. Job 21.31. Who shall declare his way to his face, viz. that is respited, and prospers, and tramples the doctrine under foot, and turns again, and tears the Preacher? 4. This is no other than what the Scripture speaks, and con∣science upon retirements will speak; and Satan will lay in your dish, and the Lord will pay into your bosome. Will those flye in the Lords face, and of conscience, telling this story to them, and pronouncing the sentence against them? Oh profane partial spi∣rits that cannot endure such Preachers as themselves shall be unto themselves; that cannot bear the hearing of those terrours that themselves shall be relators and inflicters of upon themselves! Ye had better have the commodity at the first hand; consci∣ence will preach in another note and loudnesse than we do, and the more, because your ears have been stopped against our words. 5. There cannot be a greater madnesse than not to be able to live under the noise and news of this wrath, and yet stick under the wrath it self; the hearing makes the ears tingle, but the wrath does not make the heart quake. Ye had better hear the Heralds in the Princes name denouncing the war, and send out for peace, than have the Prince himself come with fire and sword into your bowels upon the contempt. 3. This may informe us of the righteousness and wisdome of the Lord in this wrath annexed and declared against sinne. 1. Consider the high rewards the Lord hath propounded: The Law is not so fiery in comminations against sin, but the Gospel is as full of1 Cor. 2.9. 2 Cor. 12.4. grace and promises to wayes of duty. Now bring things to the bar of reason it self, and may not the Lord an∣nex this dreadful wrath to sin, that doth annex such glorious in∣comprehensible promises to the duties and weak services of his
people? sin strictly deserves; these not. May not he punish se∣verely, that rewards eminently? how just is it that persons invi∣ted to the Supper,Luke 14, 24. and making excuses, should not taste thereof? that despisers of the recompences of God should suffer eternal losse of them, and be scourged with the contrary to them? 2. Consider the Ends the Lord hath designed to reach. 1. In the Elect. 1. To startle. Luke 12.5. I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him which after he hath killed, hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you fear him: Faith in the threatning engenders fear, as faith in the promise genders hope; faith and fear were conjoyned in Noah, Heb. 11.7. and wrought together in his obedience and preservation. 2. To make all things else little that meet them in the world, to shoulder them off from the truth and homage of Christ. A Merchant in a Storme throws his goods over-board; the wrath of God makes the startled sinner part with any thing, and incur any thing rather than incur that: Moses had rather incur the wrath of a thousand Pharaohs, than the wrath of God, because he knew the power of his wrath. As Gods people have rewards promised that out-weigh all that they are called to part with; so terrours propounded that all other terrours may be over-looked, and incurred rather than these. 3. To worme out the esteems of the world, and the sensual pleasures, honours and profits thereof, the fewel of lust; there is need of violence to pull out of this fire. Now he that propounds an end, pitches upon means fitted to compasse that end. A Cleaver of knotty timber, must have a wedge that will go through. The mother that will mean the childe, must lay such bitter things on the brest, as will make the childe loath the milk: So the Lord hath declared those wages to sin, that shall turn the edge of love and liking to sin. That had need be very bitter, that shall make those very sweets bitter to us: No lesser evils would work the sense of that evil of sin into the conscience. And those secretly grudge and complain of the pains as too great, to whom they are too little to awaken and lead them to repentance. 2. In the Reprobate. 1. That he may discover his perfect and infinite displeasure against sin; and in these great letters, that all the world may read his full hatred of it. Eli his faint checks,
proclaimed his faint dislikes of his sons sins. High dislikes pro∣duce answerable checks. Affections in men, are the feet the soul goes forth upon; and s rong affections goe a very nimble ea∣ger pace. The Lord much more, because of his infinite contra∣riety to sin. 2. That he may discover the power of his justice and wrath. Rom. 9.17. For this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my Name might be declared throughout all the earth. Those which glorifie not God in that manner which he would, he will glorifie himself in the manner that they would not. Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord? and trampled his authority and commands under foot. Now as he did sometimes bring light out of darknesse; and the Apothe∣cary doth Preservatives out of rank poysons; so the Lord not actively glorified, doth fetch the glory of his power and vin∣dictive justice out of sin it self. The walkers in greatest pride and scorne of God, the Lord will have everlasting glory in their ever∣lasting smart; and he will so punish, that heaven and hell shall ring of his justice and power, and displicence against sin, and that his threatnings to the utmost are made good, and were not scare-crowes. 3. Consider the dreadful aggravations of sin. It is, 1. A confederacy with the devil. A sworn servant about the Princes person, to contract amity, and hold correspondence with the worst of his enemies, makes the sin rise, and his judge∣ment without pity. Should a Christian fall from a mild and graci∣ous Prince without a cause, and side with the Turk, or worshipper of the devil, against him, we should think no punishment too much for him. 2. A defection from, and insurrection against God, and ateasing the Lord into the lists and field. 1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousie? are we stronger than he? Goliah challenges and defies the Host of Israel, till David comes forth, and sends a stone into his braines, and cuts his head off with his own sword, and gives his flesh to the fouls of heaven; so sinners, till they draw the Lord, and the weight of his infinite and eternal displea∣sure forth against themselves, even that weight which sinks them, and they are never able to rise from under it again. Now sins rise, as the quality of the person that they are done against. He that flies in my face, and gives me blows and wounds there∣by,
there is an Action of battery and damages to be had against him; He that doth the same against the Judge of Assize, or the King upon the Throne, that is Treason, and his life and estate are hardly enough to make amends for it. The infinity of God, makes the infinity of the evil and meritoriousness of wrath in sin. The Majesty rises, and so the guilt and demerit rises in∣finitely. 3. The contempt of all means used for fetching the Rebel in. How often would I have gathered you?Mat. 23.37. — and ye would not. Men stand out, and if they could have stood, would have stood out, and continued hostility against heaven for ever. How equal is it, that a creature nigh to God, falling off to the devil without a cause, and which chooses to have God his enemy, and that no means can reduce, though the danger and evil of sin be eviden∣ced, and his inability to stand, an act of oblivion offered, and highest preferment, and yet will not come in: How just is it, that he reap the fruit of his continuing at a distance from his Sove∣raign, and in disobedience against him? 4. This may inform us of the distemper and pride of mans heart, that will charge his misery anywhere rather than upon him∣self. 1. Upon instruments forreign that do inflict, rather than sin within, for which the same is inflicted. The Lord scourges sin by that which is the inflicters sin too. They have no Warrant to do, and yet we justly suffer from them as Organs of wrath in Gods hand. 2. Upon God himself. Prov. 19.3. The foolish∣nesse of man perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord. The Malefactour blames the Judge, when it was him∣self that delivered himself over into the Judges power, and Armed the Law with power of doing all that is done against him. 5. This may informe us of the grunds and advantages the Lord hath given us to humility, and self-abasement. Wipe the sweat off from thy brows, and say, This is the fruit of sin. See the cloaths on thy back, and these are the coverings of that shame which came in by sin; look into thy body, soul, estat, relations, person, whatsoever is crooked and afflictive, pertains to this ac∣count, and is to be set at the foot of sin. When beaten, consi∣der the fault that thou art beaten for, and accept of the punishment of thy iniquity, Lev. 26.41. Thy eye cannot turn, but there are re∣membrances
of sin, and provocations to lay thy self in the dust before the Lord. 6. This may informe us of their folly, that kindle this wrath yet more. The Princes spake well to the two Tribes and a half, Josh. 22.17. Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed untill this day? &c. So are those wrath-provoking pollutions of nature too little for us, by which we are so far defiled and troubled unto this day, that by increases of sin we should augment yet the fierce anger of the Lord? Num. 32.14. while abiding in this estate, ye do this more and more continually. Use 2. Exhort. and this is double. 1. To carnal and unregenerate persons: Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest, Micah 2.10. This is not an estate to be quietly abode one moment in. Motive 1. Who can dwell with this wrath which God describes to be 1. Burning wrath; Job 19.11. He hath kindled his wrath a∣gainst me. 2. Tearing wrath; this set the Bears awork, 2 Kings 2.23. Consider this yet that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces.Psal. 50.22. 3. Piercing wrath, that goeth down into the very inwards of the conscience, when all visible blessings stand intire round about, and not a haire of the head is ruffled. This curse often works in the middle of blessings, and ripens by them insensibly for hell it self. 4. Abiding wrath; the prisoners of which are bound hand and foot, and there is no starting, Zach. 5.4. 5. Surprising wrath; Job 20.23. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall raine it upon him while he is eating, and so of all other times, is most chearful. 6. Reserved wrath; Job 21.30. 2 Pet. 2.9. which like a wo∣man with childe will travel, till it have brought forth judgment against all the enemies of the Lord though upon Thrones, and ha∣ving Nations under their feet, Psal. 78.30, 31. Was Sodom a City fit to be dwelt in, especially for Lot, when the Lord had gi∣ven him notice of the cloud of fire and brimstone hovering, and ready to come down upon the same? This Climate is too hot for any that have spiritual senses, to dwell a mi∣nute in. 2. Shall all our warnings be lost, that tell you of the storme, meerly to drive you under covert; and that ye may understand and
favour that glorious name,1 Thes. 1.10. Jesus that delivers from wrath to come! The Avenger of blood is in your necks, to quicken your haste in∣to this City of Refuge. Why should ye make the Furnace-hot∣ter, and to the Fathers wrath which is quenchable in the blood of Christ, superadde the wrath of the Lambe, which is abso∣lutely unquenchable? Shall we only stand forth to clear the justice of the Lord against you in the last day? 3. The great and swaying care of all Gods people assoon as ever they saw themselves in the glasse of the Law of liberty,Jam. 1.15. was to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9. This was Pauls prevailing care, when sought for, and to be set to Gods bar, to be found cloathed with Christs righteousnesse, and to have his I∣mage legibly ingraven upon him; the like care should be ours. Directions.1. Stir up shame, and sorrow, and fear, and indignation a∣gainst your selves; no sins are heavier than those we count light of; Ezek. 8.17. Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here? Take this oppositely to a double evil. 1. Men pare and lessen their sins, and make a very small matter of them, and consider not, that lessening their own indignation, they increase Gods. Prov. 14.9. Fools make a mock at sin; chap. 10.23. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief: So those, Isa. 57.4. Against whom do you sport your selves? Against whom do ye make a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? They fell to other gods, and laughed the Prophet to scorne, that made such a businesse of it; so when Christ and grace, and life were offered, Mat. 22.5. they made light of it, and went their ways; that is, made light of grace, and of the sin of contempt of grace. 2. Men stick in vile practises, and think their sacrifices and prayers will salve all up again, which the Lord so earnestly declares against, Isa. 1.14. But stir ye up sorrow,2 Cor. 7.11. shame, displeasure; repentance hath these adjuncts, and proceeds to, and deals with, and chiefly, with this first bottome-sinne. 2. Lie down meekly at the Lords feet; this follows upon the practice of the first direction. 1. In submission to any the sharpest dispensations. As passions stir up passions, and one Coale kindles another; so our frettings, the Lords wrath. There are tangs of this sin in the godly themselves;2 Sam. 6.8. Jonah 4.5. but grace takes it by the throat.
Psal. 51.4. 2. In supplication.Jer. 10.24. Psal. 6.1. The Lords servants have hum∣bly and earnestly deprecated wrath. 3. Embrace the Lord Jesus in the force of all his blessed offices, and then go flie to, and lift up thy face without spot before the Father in him. Know 1. That it is a dreadful thing to have a settled Warre and plague in a Nation; much more to be in the Jews case, that rejected, and would not be under the blessing of Christ, and are under the curse of God, and wrath is come upon them to the uttermost; and hath rested already these One thousand six hundred years.1 Thes. 2.16. 2. That there is no other remedy propounded to remove this wrath, which we came into the world children and heires of, but only Christ. He hath the keyes of hell and death,Acts 4.12. Rev. 1.18. to let the soul out of the body, and into hell when he will; to in∣ferre and remove wrath. If any receive not him, this wrath tar∣ries still, and will cleave to, and abide upon him for ever.John 3.36. He speaks with authority. Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies— bring them and slay them before me; and it shall be done. 3. That the Psalmist makes it (as it is) a point of wisdome in the greatest, to kisse the Son with a kisse of homage and subjection,Psal. 2, 11, 12. least he be angry; what is the danger of that? and ye perish in the war; of your hopes and purposes, and never compasse grace nor glory. If his wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are all those which put their trust in him. 4. That then ye may plead with the Lord with humble boldnesse. Psal. 74.1. Why doth thine anger smoak a∣gainst the Sheep of thy Pasture? remember thy Congregation which thou hast purchased of old, the rod of thine inheritance which thou hast redeemed, &c. 5. And assure your hearts of welcome. Prov. 21.14. A gift in secret pacifieth wrath, and a reward in the bo∣some strong wrath. Mark their policy, Acts 12.10. and be assu∣red the relations of Christ, are beloved of the Father. Job 33.24. Then he is gracious to him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransome. 2. To those which the Lord hath translated out of their natural condition. 1. Bring the work often to the touchstone, that you may not boast in a false gift; gold will endure the test, and be more fully manifested to be gold indeed; and finding the work to be right, live with an enlarged heart to the praise of that grace which hath made this change.
2. Deal seriously in the mortification of sin, which God only strikes at; and in order thereto, count sin the worst of evils; if this were done; and throughly, and fixedly done in our spirits, there is nothing of any other directions would be left undone. To set up this judgement, there needs, 1. Ploughing carefully with the Lords heifer, viz. search into the Oracles of God; there, and there only are lively portraitures of sin, and the genuine products and traine of sin. 2. The eye-salve of the Spirit. We are blinder than Batts in this matter; and are indisposed very much, or rather wholly, to let this truth sink down into our hearts. 3. Applications to the Throne of grace. None but those which deal in good earnest in heaven, will see the hell and mystery of sin in themselves. He gives the Holy Ghost to them which ask him. 4. Excussions and communings with your selves. Prov. 20.27. The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly; and duly made use of, will tell many stories correspondent to the Word of truth; use conscience, and use therewith another and bigger candle, to rummage the dark room of thy heart with. Superadde to conscience, the succours of the Word and Spirit, and thou shalt do something in the search; and finde out convictively, the swarms of evil in thine own heart. 5. The work of grace. There will be else a beam in the eye, and plaine things will not be plaine to us; Gods work holds intel∣ligence, and is of amicable affinity with his Word; grace hath the only excellent faculty in looking through sin. 6. Attendance to the Lords administrations against sin; God writes in great letters in the world, what he had first written in the Scriptures; every breach by sin, should lead down into more ha∣tred, brokennesse of spirit, and shame before the Lord for sinne. This is the engaging evil; this engages God and the holy Angels, and Devils, and the very man against himself. Nothing can be his friend, to whom sin hath made God an enemy. Wo to the man that is in this sense alone, and hath heaven and earth, and hell, and all within the Continent of them, against him; it is impossible for that mans heart and hands to stand strong. This is the mighty prevailing evil. Never was man so stout, as to stand before the face
of sin, but he shivered, and was like a garment eaten up of moths. This hath fretted the joynts of Kingdomes in pieces,Psal. 39.11. and made the goodliest houses in the world a heap of rubbish;Zech. 5.4. will make Bab lon that sits as a Queen, an habitation of Divels,Rev. 18.2. and the hold of every foule spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful birds; made the Angels Divels, and heaven it self too hot for them. Never were the like changes made as by sinne; grace makes not changes of richer comfort, than sin doth of dismal consequence; it is made by the Holy Ghost an argument of the infinity of the power of God to pardon and subdue sinne, Micah 7.18. 3. Bear all afflictions incident to an holy course chearfully. The Martyrs went joyfully into the fire, because the flames of hell were quenched to them; bore their Crosse easily, because no curse and damnation to them in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.13. 4. Reduce your anger to the similitude of Gods, which is very slowly kindled, and is an intense holy displicence only against sin;Psal. 103.8. and is cleans'd from all dregs of rashnesse, injustice and discom∣posure; such zeal should eat us up.John 2.17.
MANS IMPOTENCY TO Help himself out of that misery. ROM. 5.6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ dyed for the ungodly. IN this Chapter there are two parts; in the first the Apostle layes down the comfortable fruits and priviledges of a justified estate; in the second he argues the firmnesse of these com∣forts, because they are so rich that they are scarce credible, and hardly received. The firm∣nesse and soundnesse of these comforts the A∣postle representeth by a double comparison. 1. By comparing Chr st with Christ; and 2. Christ with Adam. Christ with Christ, or one benefit that we have by him with another, from the Text to ver. 12. then Christ with Adam; the second Adam with the first, to the end of the Chapter. In comparing Christ with Christ, three considerations do occur. 1. The efficacy of his love towards us before justification, with
the efficacy of his love towards us after justification; the argu∣ment standeth thus; if Christ had a love to us when sinners, and his love prevailed with him to die for us, much more may we ex∣pect his love when made friends; if when we were in sin and mi∣sery, shiftless, and helpless, Christ had the heart to die for us, and to take us with all our faults; will he cast us off after we are justi∣fied and accepted with God in him? this love of Christ is asserted in the 6. verse, amplified in the 7. and 8. verses; and the conclusion is inferred verse 9. much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. The second Comparison is of the efficacy of the death of Christ, and the efficacy of the life of Christ; 'tis absurd to think that Christ rising from the dead, and living in heaven, should not be as powerful to save, and bring us to God, as Christ dying was to reconcile us to him. The third Comparison is the privative mercy, or being saved from hell, with the positive mercy, or obtaining a title to heaven. Verse 11. and not only so, but we joy in God, as having now re∣ceived the atonement. 2. For the comparison between Christ and Adam, the sum of it is, that Christ is more able to save, than Adam to destroy; and therefore justified persons need to fear nothing. As Adam was a publick person, and root of man-kinde, so is Christ a pub∣lick person; for Adam wasThe figure of him that was to come. Rom. 5. . Adam was a pub∣lick person, but a finite person, having no intrinsick value in himself, and only was all us by divine institution; but Christ be∣sides the institution of God, was an infinite person; and there∣fore there is a , a much more upon Christ; his sacred vertue exceedeth that cursed influence of Adam in many par∣ticulars, amply set down in the latter end of the Chapter by the Apostle. The words begin the first Comparison. In them, 1. The condition wherein we are by nature, is set forth by two notions, ungodly, and without strength; the one noteth we have no worth to move God to help us, for we were ungodly; the o∣ther, that we have no power to help our selves, for we were with∣out strength; we were without strength, and so need help; ungodly, and so refused help.
2. The means of our recovery, Christ died for us. 3. The s asonablenesse of our redemption, in due time. For the first notion whereby our natural estate is expressed [ungodly] I shall pass it by; the next notion [without strength] will yield us this point: That man faln, is destitute of all power and means of rising again, or helping himself out of that misery into which he hath plunged him∣self by sin. This will appeare if you consider his condition with respect to the Law, or with respect to the Gospel, and those terms of grace which God offers in Christ; the former more properly falls un∣der the consideration of this place; but because of the method of this exercise, you expect the discussion of the latter also, I shall take occasion from hence to speak of that. 1. With respect to the Law; that will be understood by a view of that Scripture that expresseth the tenour of the Law; Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continueth not in all the words of this Law to do them; where is considerable, 1. The duty is exacts. 2. The penalty it inflicts. 3. The operation that both these have upon the faln crea∣ture. 1. The duty it exacts; an innocent nature that is presupposed for the person must continue; it doth not say Now being; the sen∣tence of the Law, doth not suppose man as lapsed and faln, or as having already broken with God, but as in a good and sound e∣state; and then universal, perpetual, perfect obedience is indispence∣ably required; he must continue in all things with all the heart, and that continually; if he fails in one point, he is gone; this is personally exacted of all men, as long as they abide under Adams Covenant; he that doth them shall live in them, and the sould that sinnes shall dye. Now if God should call us to an account, for the most inoffensive day that ever we passed over, what would become of us? Psal. 130.3. If thu shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who couldThat is, rectas in curia, be a∣ble to make a bold defence. stand? better never born, than to be liable to that judgement, when the Law shall take the sinner by the throat, and say, Pay me that thou owest; what shall he poor wretch do? so that here we are without strength, altogether unable to come up to the obedience of the Law of works. Rom. 8.3. The Law can
make nothing perfect, because 'tis become weak through our flesh; to faln man it establisheth a course of punishing sin, not of taking away sin; we may increase the debt, but we cannot lessen it; if our obedience were exact for the future, (let us suppose it) yet the paying of new debts doth not quit old scores; they that could not keep themselves when intire and innocent, cannot recover themselves when lost and faln. 2. The penalty it inflicts, Cursed is every one; how cursed? cursed in all that he hath, Deut. 28.15, 16, 17, 18. All his enjoyments become a snare, and temporal comforts do but harden him, and prepare him for a greater misery. Cursed in all that he doth; his prayer is turned into sin; his hearing, the savour of death unto death; all his toyle and labour in outward service is to no purpose. Prov. 21.27. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomi∣nation, how much more when he bringeth it with a wicked mind? At the best 'tis but an abomination, God will not accept an offe∣ring at his hands, much more when 'tis pulluted with sinful and evil aimes; but this is not all; he is cursed for evermore, the Law bindeth him over body and soul to everlasting torments, and in time he shall hear that dreadful sentence, Matth. 25.41. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Divel and his Angels; there is but the slender thread of a fraile life that hinders the execution of this sentence upon him; a sinner stands upon the very brink of hell, and ever and anon is ready to be cast in, where he shall eternally lie under the wrath of God; so that here we are without strength, because we cannot satisfie the justice of God for one sin, but are alwayes satisfying, and can never be said to have satisfied; like a poor man that pays a debt of a thou∣sand pounds by a farthing a week. 3. Consider how this works with him; an exaction of duty un∣der so severe a penalty, doth either terrifie, or stupifie the consci∣ence; he that escapeth the one, suffereth the other; or else thirdly, doth irritate corruption; or fourthly, obtrude us upon a sottish despaire, so as to give over all endeavours and hope of salvation. First, Sometimes it terrifieth, that's easily done; the conscience of a sinner is a sore place; they are all their life time subject to bondage, Hebr. 2.14. There is a hidden fear in the heart of a wicked man not alwayes felt, but soon awakened, either by a sound
conviction from the Word, or some sore judgment, or by the ago∣nies of death, or serious thoughts of the world to come; Foelix trembled when Paul did but mention Gods judgment, Acts 24.25. the Prisoner makes the Judge tremble; a sinner is afraid to think of his condition; if God do but a little break in upon his heart, do what he can, he lies under the bondage of a wounded spi∣rit, and where ever he goes (like the Divels) he carrieth his own hell about with him. Secondly, If it terrifieth not the conscience, it stupifieth the conscience, that they grow senslesse of their misery, past feeling, Ephes. 4.19. and that's a dangerous Crisis and estate of soul, when once a man comes to that, and goeth like a fool to the cor∣rection of the stocks. Thirdly, it irritateth their inbred corruption. Rom. 7.9. The Com∣mandment came, that is, in full conviction and power, and sin revi∣ved, and I dyed; the more we understand of the necessity of our subjection to God, the more opposite is the soul to him; as a Damm makes a River or strong streame the more violent, or as a Bullock at the first yoking becometh the more un∣ruly. Or Fourthly, It breedeth a sottish despaire. Jer. 18.12. There is no hope, therefore we will walk after our own devices, and do every one according to the evil imaginations of our own heart; 'tis to no purpose to speak to us, or strive further about us; (as if they had said) there is no hope, and therefore we will live as we list without any further care of turning to God; this is the worst kinde of despaire, when a man isPsal. 81.12. given up to his own hearts lust, and runneth headlong in the way of destruction without hope of returning; there is more hope of them that are under despairing fears, or a terrified conscience, than there is of those which are under despairing resolutions, or a stupid and sottish ob∣stinacy: thus as to the Law man is helplesse. 2. Consider man as to terms of grace offered in the Gospel; he is still without strength, not only in a damnable condition by the Law, but without grace, unable to accept the Gospel; this will appear by two considerations. 1. By those emphatical terms of Scripture by which the Case and Cure of man is set forth.
2. By those positive assertions whereby all power is denied to man to convert himself to God, or to do any thing that is spiritu∣ally good. 1. Those emphatical expressions which represent His Case. His Cure. 1. His Case; the Scripture sets forth mans condition thus, that he is born in sin, Psal. 51.5. and things natural are not easily altered; greedy of sin, Job 16.15. He drinketh in iniquity like water; it noteth a vehement propension; as greedy to sin, as a thirsty man to drink; thirst is the most implacable appetite, hunger is far better born; but this you will say is but now and then in a great temptation, or vehement passion; no, Gen. 6.5. Every imagination of the thought of his heart is evil, only evil, and that continually; by how many aggravating and increasing circum∣stances is mans sin there set forth! there is in him a Mint alwayes at work, his minde coyning evil thoughts, his heart evil desires, and carnal motions, and his memory is the closet and store house wherein they are kept. But may not a man be reclaimed, is not this his bondage and trouble? no, his heart is a heart of stone, Ezek. 36.26. that is, inflexible, insensible; when God useth the Word, some common motions of his Spirit, some rouzing provi∣dences, yet all in vain; for mans heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9. inventing shifts and excuses to avoid God, and to cheat it self of its own happinesse. But is not the New Testament more favourable than the Old? or is not man grown better, since there was so much grace discovered! I answer, No; there is a perfect harmony between the Testaments; there you will finde man represented as a childe of wrath by nature, Ephes. 2.3. even the Elect as well as others, to be a servant of sin, Rom. 6.17. Never such an imperious Master, never such a willing servant; sin never leaveth commanding, and we love the work; you will finde him again expressed as one averse from God, alienated from his life, Ephes. 4.18. 'Tis a melancholy thought to a carnal heart to think of the life of God, as an enemy to the Law, Rom. 8.7. One that neither can, nor will please God; as blind, and knoweth not what to do, 2 Pet. 1.9. and this blindnesse spiri∣tual, is worse than bodily; a man that is blind in body, seeketh
for a fit guide, as Elymas when he was stricken blinde, sought a∣bout for one to lead him by the hand, Acts 13.11. as weak and without strength here in the Text, yea, stark dead in trespasses and sins, Ephes. 2.5. yea, worse than dead; a dead man doth no more hurt, his evil dieth with him; but there is a life of resistance and rebellion against God that goes along with this death in sin. Now put all this together, and you may spell out mans misery, what a wretched impotent creature he is in his natural estate; the Scripture does not speak this by glances or short touches; neither is it an Hyperbole used once or twice, but every where, where it professedly speaks of this matter; certainly man contributeth lit∣tle to his own conversion; he cannot hunger and thirst after Christ, that drinks in iniquity like water; there is nothing in nature to carry him to grace, who is altogether sinful; if the Scri∣pture had only said that man had accustomed himself to sin, and was not born in sin; that man were somewhat prone to iniquity, and not greedy of it; and did often think evil, and not continu∣ally; that man were somewhat obstinate, and not a stone, an ada∣mant; if the Scripture had only said that men were indifferent to God, and not a professed enemy; if a captive of sin, and not a servant; if only weak, and not dead; if only a neuter, and not a rebel; then there might be something in man, and the work of conversion not so difficult, but the Scripture saith the quite contrary. 2. The Cure; certainly to remedy so great an evil requires an Almighty power, and the al-sufficiency of grace; therefore 'tis good to see how conversion is described in Scripture; sometimes by enlightning the minde, Ephes. 1.18. and the eyes of your understandings being enlightned, &c. Man the wisest creature on this side heaven, is stark blinde in the things of God; though he hath the light of nature, and can put on the spectacles of Art, and dresse his notions of divine things by the glasse of the Word, yet ere the cure is wrought, something must be done upon the fa∣culty; the eyes of our understandings must be enlightned, as well as the object revealed; I but this infusion of light is not all; the Scripture speaks of opening the heart. Acts 16.14. He opened the heart of Lydia; God doth not only knock at the heart, but open it; he knocks many times by the outward means, but findes no entrance; yea, as one that would open a door, he tries key
after key, till he hath tried all the keys in the bunch; so does God use means after means, but till heCant. 5.4, 5. putteth his fingers upon the handles of the lock, the door is not opened to him; well then the mind must be enlightned, and the heart opened; if these words are not emphatical enough, you will finde conversin expressed by regeneration. Joh. 3.3. Except a man be born again, &c. Mark, we must not only be reformed, but regenerated. Now because ge∣neration is an ordinary work of nature, and often falls out in the course of second causes, therefore 'tis expressed by the Metaphor of resurrection, Ephes. 2.5. But that which hath been, may be a∣gaine; therefore 'tis called a Creation, Eph. 2.10. we are  his workmanship, 2 Cor. 4.6. 2 Cor. 5.17. Psal. 51.10. yea, further 'tis expressed by victory, 1 Joh. 4.4. or the beating and binding the strong man, by one that is stronger than he. Luk. 11.21, 22. by bringing into Captivity every proud thought, 2 Cor. 10.5. All these expressions doth the Scripture use, to set out the mystery of grace; one expression may not enough be heeded, and therefore are many types and figures of it used, that what is wn∣ting in one notion, may be supplied by another; as let us gather them up a little, there must be not only light in the mind, but the heart must be moved, and that not a little stirred, but chan∣ged, fashioned anew, born again; and because generation suppo∣seth a previous disposition in the matter, not only is it called regeneration, but the term resurrection is used, in which the mat∣ter is wholly unprepared; but yet because still here is matter to work upon, therefore 'tis called Creation, which was a making all things out of nothing; God works faith, where there is no faith; and repentance, where was no repentance; and calls the things that are not, as though they were; but now because sin makes us worse than nothing; and as in Creation, as there was nothing to help, so there was nothing to resist and hinder; there∣fore 'tis expressed by victory, implying the opposition of Gods work, and the resistance that there is in the heart of man, till it be over-powered by grace. 2. The next proof is from those assertions, whereby all power is denied to man to convert himself to God, or to do any thing that is spiritually good; as when 'tis said he cannot know, 1 Cor. 2.14. he cannot believe, Joh. 6.44. he cannot obey, Rom. 8.7. nay to instance in single acts, he cannot think a good thought of
himself, 2 Cor. 3.5. he cannot speak a good word, Mat. 12.34. How can ye, being evil, speak good things? he cannot do any thing, John 15.5. He doth not say, nihil magnum, but, nihil; not no great thing, but without me ye can do nothing. Well then, when man can neither know, nor believe, nor obey, nor think, nor speak, nor do any thing without grace; surely man is with∣out strength, wholly impotent and unable to turn himself to God. But here is an Objection; If it be so, how can these things stand with the mercy of God, as the Creatour of man kind, to require the debt of him that is not able to pay? with the Justice of God as the Judge of the world, to punish him with eternal death, for the neglect of that which he could not performe? or with the wisdome of the supreme law-giver, to exhort him by promises which hath no power, to do what he is exhorted un∣to? I answer to the first; God doth not lose his right, though man hath lost his power; their impotency doth not dissolve their obli∣gation; a drunken servant is a servant, and 'tis against all reason the Master should lose his right to command by the servants de∣fault; a Prodigal debtour that hath nothing to pay, yet is liable to be sued for the debt without any injustice; God contracted with us in Adam; and that obedience he requireth is not only due by Covenant, but by Law; not only by positive Law, and contract, but by immutable right; 'tis harsh men think to suffer for Adams fault, to which they were not conscious, and actually consenting; but every man will finde an Adam in his own heart; the old man is there, wasting away the few remaines of natural light and strength; and shall not God challenge the debt of obedience from a debtour that is both proud and prodigal? we are proud; for when we are miserable, we think our selves happy; and when we are poor, we think our selves rich; and when we are blind, we con∣ceit our selves very seeing; and when we are naked, we think our selves well clad, Rev. 3.17. and therefore God may admonish us of our duty, and demand his right, if for no other reason, but to shew us our impotency, and that we may not pretend that we were not call'd upon for what we owe; and as man is proud, so he is Prodigal; we spend what is left, and throw away those relicks of conscience, and moral inclinations, which escaped out of the ruines of the fall.
2. As to the second, How God can with justice punish him for the neglect of what he could not do? I answer, our natural impotency is voluntary. We must not con∣sider man only as impotent to good, but as delighting in evil, and loving it with all his heart; as man cannot, so he will not come to God, John 5.40. our impotency lies in our obstinacy, and so man is left without excuse; we refuse the grace that is offered to us, and by continuing in sin, increase our bondage, our inveterate customes turning to another nature. 3. As to the last, how God can exhort and per∣swade us. For answer, suppose we should say, This is only for the elects sake, who certainly are the called according to purpose, Rom. 8.28. whereas others are called obiter, by the by; and as they live intermingled with them; if the elect did dwell alone, and were a distinct community by themselves, the objection were plausible; but they are hidden amongst others, and therefore the Reprobate have the like favour in the external means with them; the world standeth for the elects sake, yet the Sun doth not shine upon them alone, nor the showres fall upon their fields alone; or let me illustrate it thus, The sun shineth, though blind men see it not; the raine falls upon the Rocks and Mountains, as well as the fruitful Ʋalleys; so are exhortations of duty promiscuously ren∣dred to good and bad; this might be answer enough: but that which I rather say, is, that these exhortations have their use, for they carry their own blessing with them, to them to whom God means them for good; the word has a ministerial subservi∣ency to the power of God; as when Christ said, Lazarus come forth, it raised him out of his grave; as for others that are not converted by them, 'tis for their conviction, and to bridle their fiercenesse, and a means to civilize them, and keep them from growing worse, whereby many temporal blessings do accrue to them; as Pagan Rome flourished in all manner of vertue and successe, as long as moral precepts were in force; but of this more in the next objection. 2. Objection. If man be so altogether without strength, why do ye presse him to the use of means? I answer, though man cannot change himself, yet he is to use the means; and that for several reasons.
1. That we may practically see our own weaknesse. Men think the work of grace is easie, till they put themselves upon a trial; the lamenesse of the arme is found in exercise; apply thy heart to understanding, then cry for knowledge, Prov. 2.2, 3. Whosoe∣ver sets himself in good earnest to get any grace, will be forced to cry for it before he hath done; we never seek strength at Gods hands in so feeling a manner, till our experience convince us of our weaknesse; when a man goes to lift up a piece of tim∣ber heavy, above his strength, he is forced to call in help. 2. The use of the means we owe to God, as well as the change of the heart; we lie under a moral obligation to use them; God that hath required faith and conversion, hath required prayer, hear∣ing, reading, meditating; and we are bound to obey, though we know not what good will come of it; asHeb. 11.8. Abraham obeyed God, not knowing whither he went; and Peter, when there was little hope, saith, Luke 5.5. Howbeit, at thy command, &c. our great rule is, We are to do what he commandeth, and let God do what he will. 3. To lessen our guilt; for when men do not use the means, they have no excuse, 'tis plaine lazinesse, and want of will, not want of power; when we will not so much as try to come out of our con∣dition, we love our bondage, and shut the door upon our selves; or as that phrase is, Acts 13.46. judge our selves unworthy of eter∣nal life; passe sentence upon our own souls; 'tis a sign you care not whether God shew you mercy yea or no, for you will not so much as bestow a thought upon it; and so come under the censure of wicked and sloathful servants, Mat. 25.26. 4. There is encouragement in the use of means, many wayes. 1. If we do not something, we shall grw worse; standing pools are apt to putrifie; man is of an active nature, either growing bet∣ter or worse; when we do not improve nature, we deprave it; Jude 10. They corrupt themselves in what they know naturally; vo∣luntary neglects, draw on penal hardnesse, and so your impotency is increased; there is this benefit of using meanes; it prevents much sinne and hardnesse of heart; 'tis like the embalming of a dead body; it keeps it from stinking, though it does not re∣store life.
2. Without the use of means they can never hope for any thing. Rom. 10.14. How shall they believe without a Preacher? If ever I meet with God, with Christ, it must be in this wayJohn 5.3, 4, 5; 'tis good to lie at the Pool, as the poor man did who was unable to get in when the Angel stirred the waters; marriage is instituted for the propagation of mankinde; yet the soul is of God only: no man abstaineth from marriage because he cannot beget a reaso∣nable soul; so grace is of God; but hearing, reading, pray∣ing, are the instituted meanes, and we must not abstaine from these means, because grace is not of our selves, but of God. 3. It may be God will meet with us; 'tis the ordinary practice of his free grace so to do, and its good to make tryal upon a com∣mon hope. Acts 8.22. Pray if it be possible, &c. There is a great uncertainty; yet pray; 'tis Gods usual way to meet with them that seek him. Luke 11.8. For his importunities sake; , for hisAnd so fitly expressing our restlessnesse in the use of means. impdence, God is not engaged, but who knows what importunity may do? he may, and he may not give grace, but usually he doth; 'tis Gods usual way to bless mans industry, and yet all they that labour have not an absolute certain∣ty of successe; who would forbear ploughing because in one year of ten there may happen a dearth or a lean harvest? Act, God may come in (for usually he doth) with his influence and blessing. Let me now give you some reasons why God permits this weaknesse and want of strength to lie upon the falne creature. 1. To exalt the freeness, and power of his grace; first, the free∣nesse of his grace, for God hath shut up all under the curse, that there may be no way of escape but by his mercy; their eternal ru∣ine and damnation is else certain and inevitable. Rom. 11.32. God hath concluded them all under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all; , that's the word, the state of unbelief is there compared to a prison; made sure and fast with iron bars and bolts, and by Gods permission man hath shut up himself▪ in such a prison, that mercy alone might open the door to him; Jew and Gentile lies fast bound with a chaine that can be Loosened by no hands but Gods; so Gal. 3.22. The Scripture hath con∣cluded all under sin, that the promises by faith might be given
to them that believe; 'tis the same word and notion, we may mourn and sigh through the grates of the flaming prison, but can never get out till God look upon us in mercy thorough Christ: And so also the power of his grace, in rescuing us out of this misery; 'tis a mighty power that works in them that believe, Ephes. 1.19. When we consider it, we may wonder at it that ever such a change should be wrought in us that are so carnal, so obstinate. 1 Pet. 2.9. Wo hath called us out of darkness into his marvellous light; 'tis indeed marvellous that ever we should get out of the prison of sinne; more miraculous than Peters getting out of prison, having so many chaines and doores, and keepers upon him, Acts 12. 2. To humble the creature throughly by a sense of their own guilt, unworthinesse and nothingness; in our natural state we are ungodly and without strength; why has God permitted it? that e∣very mouth might be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. Rom. 3.19. , liable to the processe of his revenging justice, and so to humble us for our ina∣bility and obstinacy that we may go complainingly to God, saying, Lord, I am as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. Jer. 31.18. Whosoever hath passed this tryal, doth sensibly finde it. Use of all; 1. To the unconverted, to be sensible of their condition, and mourn over it to God, acknowledge the debt, confesse your impotency, beg pardon and grace, and in an humble sense of your misery endeavour earnestly to come out of it. By such Doctrines as these, men are either cut at heart, Acts 7.54. or pricked at heart, Acts 2.37. which is the far more kindly work; some mens hearts and lusts are exasperated, and they rage and starme when they are warned of their danger by a closer application; Oh 'tis better to bemoane your selves, than fret against the Lord, and yield to a sottish despaire; there is some hope when conviction ends in groaning rather than mur∣muring: And you do not fret against the Lords Soveraignty, but complaine to him of the naughtinesse of your hearts, beg∣ging his grace for Christs sake; therefore go and lie at his feet, and say, Lord, I have a blinde minde, a froward heart, none more; I shall never of my self flie the evil forbidden, performe the good commanded, renounce these bewitching lusts,
take up such a course of service to thy blessed Majesty; O take away this stony untractable heart, &c. You are in Prison, but you are Prisoners of hope if you do so. 2. To presse the Converted to thankfulnesse; we were once in such a pitiful case till God plucked us as brands out of the burning; we were utterly miserable and destitute of all good. O blessed be God that opened the Prison door, and proclaimed deliverance by Christ to poor Captives, and not onely pro∣claimed it, but wrought it for us; none but an Almighty arme could loosen the Bolts, and shut back the many Locks that were upon us. Peter, when the Angel made his Chains fall off, considered the matter, Acts 12.12. and went to give thanks among the Saints: Oh when there were so many Doors and Bolts upon you, such difficulties and disadvantages in the way of your conversion; Consider it, and bless God for your escape. Blessed be the Lord that gave me counsel in my reines, Psal. 16.7. 3. Let us compassionate others that are in this estate, poor souls in what a sad condition are they! We have not usually such a deep sense of their misery as we should have; Israel was to pity strangers, because they were once strangers in the Land of Egypt; we our selves have been in the house of bon∣dage: O pity poor captive souls: Especially doth this concern the Ministery; they that do induere personam Christi, that stand in the stead of Christ, should induere viscera Christi, put on the bowels of Christ. Phil. 1.8. God is my Record how greatly I long after you in the bowels of Christ Jesus; when we were ungodly, and without strength, Christ dyed for sinners, and wilt not thou labour for them, and employ thy Talent to Edification? Oh if we had more weighty thoughts about the worth and danger of souls, we would not do the Lords work so sleepily as usually we do, but as co-workers with God we would beseech you with all earnestnesse not to receive the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. Every advantage should be taken hold off; as a sinking, perishing man, if it be but a bough in the waters catcheth at it, so should we presse you to improve all closer applications and Ministerial helps, and that with compassion and tendernesse, as having our selves been acquainted with the heart of a poor impotent captive sinner.
THE COVENANT OF Redemption OPENED. Isa. 53.10. When thou shalt make his soule an offering for sinne, he shall see his seed, &c. O Fall the Prophets, this Prophet Isaiah was the most Evangelical Prophet; (Non tam Pro∣pheta dicendus est quam Evan∣gelista. Ep. ad Paulam & Eu∣stochium. tom. 3. p. 9. Quanto Prophe∣ta hic aliis an∣tecellit Prophe∣tis, tanti haec e∣jus, c. 53. edita Prophetia caete∣ris ejus praest∣are videtur ora∣culis. Mous. in Praef. ad com. in c. 53. Isaiae. Hierome calls him Isaiah the Evangelist) Of all the Prophesies of this Prophet, that which you have in this Chapter, is the most Evan∣gelical Prophesie. I do not remember any one piece of Scripture in the Old Testament, so often cited in the New Testament, as this 53. chapter of Isaiah, it being cited there no lesse than eight or nine times.
The Eunuch you read of in the Gospel, was converted by a part of it; after God by the Ministry of Philip,Acts 8.30, &c. had opened his eyes to see Christ held out in it. In the whole Chapter you have a most lively and full descripti∣on and representation of the humiliation, death and passion of Jesus Christ; which indeed is so exact, and so consonant to what hath fallen out since, that Isaiah seems here rather to pen an History, than a Prophecy. That Christ all along is here treated upon,Ingenuè prosc∣or illud insum cput ad fidem Christianam me adduxisse; nam plus millies, il∣lud caput perle∣gi, &c. Joh. Is. Levit. vid. Hor∣neb. contra. Jud. l. 6. c. 1. p. 408. and not the suffer∣ings of the Jewish state, I shall not now insist upon. Philip when he had this Scripture before him, he preached Jesus, Acts 8.35. — Christ brings it down to himself, Mark 9.12. — And the matter of it is so convictive, from that cleare light that goes along with it, that several of the Jews in the reading of this Chapter, have been brought over to the Christian Reli∣gion, as not able to stand out against the light and evidence of it. The time allotted for this exercise being but short, I must fall upon my work presently. I come to that Branch which I am to insist upon, When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, &c. In the verse before you have Christs innocency, he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth; why then did he undergo so much? It pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief. How could the Father, salvâ justitiâ, deale thus with an innocent person, and with his own Son too? I answer, Christ had now put himself in the sinners stead, and was become his , his surety, and so obnoxious to whatever the sinner had deserved in his own person; and upon this the Father might, without any injustice, and actually did, for the manifestation of the unsearchable riches of his wisdome and love, bruise him and put him to grief. The Lord Jesus had no sin in him by inhaesion; he was holy, harmless, undefiled,Heb. 7.26. &c. but he had a great deale of sin upon him by imputation; He was made sin, that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him.2 Cor. 5.21. It pleased Christ to put himself thus under our guilt, and there∣fore it pleased the Father thus to bruise him.
If you ask further, what had Christ to encourage him either to, or in these sufferings? Though there was infinite love in Christ to put him upon all this, and to carry him thorough all this, yet there must be something more; you have therefore here very preciousMr. B. looks upon these ra∣ther as Prophe∣sies, than as promises. Ap∣pend. p. 39. Verse 10. Ver. 11. Ver. 12. promises, made to Christ upon this his un∣dertaking; as that, he should see his seed, he should prolong his dayes, the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his hand, he should see the travel of his soul, and God would divide him a por∣tion with the great, and he should divide the spoile with the strong, because he had poured out his soule unto death, &c. This very briefly to clear up the Coherence of the words; I pass over the various readings of them; and also what might be spoke for the explication of them (that will come in afterwards) be∣cause I hasten to that which is my businesse this morning, name∣ly, the opening of the Covenant of Redemption. You have heard of the misery of man by Nature, of the inability of man to help himself in this lost condition, &c. I am now to speak something to his recovery or restauration, or rather to that which indeed is the foundation of his recovery, and that is the Covenant here cal∣led, The Covenant of Redemption. By which Covenant, I mean that faederal transaction that was betwixt God the Father, and the Son from everlasting, about the Redemption of lost and fallen man. Understand me here aright; I am not to speak to the Covenant of grace, but to the Covenant of Redemption. We make a difference betwixt these two. 'Tis true, the Covenant of Redemption is a Covenant of grace, but 'tis not strictly and properly that Covenant of grace, which the Scripture holds out in opposition to the Covenant of works; but rather the means to it, or foundation of it. Amongst other things wherein these two Covenants do differ, this is one, they differ in the faederati; for in the Covenant of Redemption, the faederati are God and Christ; but in the Covenant of grace, the confederates are God and Believers. I lay down this as my judge∣ment with much submission, because I know herein I differ from some of great repute,Masculus, &c. Dr. Preston, Mr. Rutherford, As∣semblyes greater Catech. whom I very much honour in the Lord. The Lord Jesus I grant is the very kernel and marrow of the Co∣venant of grace; the Mediator of this better Covenant, Heb. 12.24. the surety of this Covenant, Heb. 7.22. the Testator
of this Covenant, Hebr. 9.16, 17. The Messenger of this Co∣venant, Mal. 3.1. All this is very clear; all that I say is this, that Christ is not the perona foederata, but believers. The Covenant of Grace was not made with God and Christ, (as a common head) but 'tis made with God and believers; and there∣fore whereas the promise is said to be made to the seed, and that seed is Christ, Gal. 3.16. you are to take Christ there not per∣sonally, but mystically as you have it taken, 1 Cor. 12.12. So also is Christ. I only say this to clear up my way,Bulkely on the Cov. pag. 28, &c. Blke on the Cov. ch. 6. p. 24. Baxter, his Ap∣pend. to his A∣phor. p. 35, &c. and therefore shall not lay down any Arguments for the confirmation of this opinion; he that desires satisfaction in th is point, let him peruse the Authours cited in the Margent. To the Businesse in hand: The Covenant of Redemption (I say) is that foederal tran∣saction, or mutual stipulation that was betwixt God and Christ in the great work of mans Redemption. I call it a foederal tran∣saction, or mutual stipulation, because therein lies the nature of a Covenant; 'tis (as Civilians define it) a mutual stipulati∣on or agreement betwixt Party and Party upon such and such Termes, with Reciprocal Obligations each of the other. That the businesse of Mans Redemption was transacted betwixt the Father and the Son is very clear. Zech. 6.13. The Counsel of peace shall be betwixt them both; the Counsel of Reconcili∣ation: How man that is now an enemy to God, may be reconci∣led to God, and God to him; (for whatever the Socinians say. the Reconciliation is not only on the sinners part, but on Gods al∣so) this Counsel or Consultation shall be betwixt them both; (that is) Father and Son. I know some interpret it of Christs offices; the Priestly and the Kingly office of Christ, both conspire to make peace betwixt God and man; but I rather take it in the other sense. That this transaction betwixt these two glorious persons, was al∣so foederal, or in the way of a Covenant, and that too from everlasting, is to me a very great truth, (though I am not ignorant that some learned men are not so well satisfied a∣bout it.)
For the Explication and Confirmation of this great mystery, I will lay down these seven Propositions. The first is this: God the Father in ordr to mans Redemption stands upon Satisfaction; the sinner shall be justified, but first God will be satisfied. Man is now fallen from that happy state where∣in at first God made him, and by this fall he hath offered an affront to God, and wronged God (so far forth as he was capable of such a thing;) in this case therefore God will have satisfaction, in the Reparation of his Honour, in the Manifestation of his Truth, in the Vindication of his Holinsse and Justice. 'Tis true, He being the Personal laesa, he might freely have remitted the of∣fence, and done what he pleased; but supposito decreto, (some go higher, even to Gods nature, which necessarily puts him upon the punishment of sin.) I say, supposing Gods decree, he having decreed thus and thus, and also threatned thus and thus, he will have satisfaction; and therefore though he doth in Election give such and such freely unto Christ; yet for the carrying on, and ex∣ecution of his purpose herein, he stands upon terms for the satisfy∣ing of his justice, (which Attribute God will advance as well as his Mercy; for all are alike dear to God) he will have an offer∣ing for sin in an expiatory and propiatory way; a price and ran∣some shall be paid him down,Isa. 33.10.  Tim. 2.6. or the Captive shall never be relea∣sed: And in order unto this, or for the manifestation of this, you do not only read in Scripture of Election as to believers, but also as to Christ, whom God calls his Elect, Isa. 42.1. The Father chooses him,. and sets forth, or ore-ordains him, as 'tis Rom. 3.25. To make satisfaction, without which fallen man shall not be taken into his favour again: who shall be redeemed and justified, but in such a way that God may declare his righteousnesse: The Apostle doubles his Expression as to this, To declare his righte∣ousnesse for the remission of sins; To declare I say his righteous∣nesse, that he might be just, and the justifier of hm which be∣leveth in Jesus, Rom. 3.25, 26. You will have this great truth more fully insisted upon by another in the carrying on of this exer∣cise; I will here say no more to it. Secondly, The Father you see demands satisfaction; well, To this he annexes many excellent, great and precius promises; that if Christ would engage in this work, and undertake thus to satisfie, (for he alone could do it) he would do thus and thus for
him; as that he would fit him for the work, own him and streng∣then him in the work, succeed and prosper him in the work, and then reward him for it. And all this the Father makes good to Christ. 1. He fits him for this work, both in a large effusion of the graces and gifts of the Spirit upon him. John 3.34. God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him. And also in the preparing of a body for him, Hebr. 10.5. 2. He strengthens him, and supports him in the work. Isa. 42.1. Behold my servant (Christ is our Lord, but in the work of Redemption he was the Fathers servant) whom I uphold; and therefore you finde when Christ was put upon the greatest tryals, God gave in eminent succour to him; as in the case of temptation, Matth. 4.11. and in his agony in the Garden, Luke 22.43. And there appeared an Angel unto him from heaven, strengthning of him. And certainly if Christ had not had support and strength from the Godhead, he had never been able to have bore up under, and carried thorough his terrible sharp work: You finde him encoura∣ging himself, and acting faith upon this, that God would own him, and stand by him in this undertaking. Isa. 50.7, 8, 9. The Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded; Therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed; He is near that justifyeth me; who will contend with me? Psal. 16.8, &c. I have set the Lord al∣wayes before me, because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved, &c. 3. Further, God the Father succeeds and prospers him in the work. When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. This was promised, and also made good to Christ in the numerous body of believers, past, present, and to come. I might here enlarge upon a threefold gift which the Gospel holds forth▪ There's the Fathers gift, the Sons gift, and the Believers gift. The Fathers gift lies in Election; such and such individual persons he gives to Christ; Thine they were, and thou gavest them me, John 17.6. We are a free gift to Christ in Elction, as Christ is a free gift to us in Redemption. The Sons gift lies in the giving of himself for us, Who gave himsel for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, &c. Tit. 2.14. And then there is
the Believers gift, and that is, he gives up himself to Christ, to be ruled by Christ, disposed by Christ, saved by Christ; he gives up himself to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5. The Father giving believers to Christ, and promising that believers in time should also give themselves to him, was a great encouragement to Christ to give himself for believers; and if you read John 17. you shall see there, that Christ when he had done his work, takes much notice of the accomplishment of this promise to him, in believers (who are his seed) owning of him, and closing with him. 4. Lastly, God will and doth reward Christ upon his underta∣king to redeem man; he tells him he shall not lose by it, His days shall be prolonged;Isa. 33.10. (i. e. his Kingdome shall be set up in the world to endure for ever) God would divide him a portion with the great, and he should divide the spoile with the strong, because he hath poured out his soul unto death.Ver. 12. And many such promi∣ses you have made to Christ; Accordingly; God hath exalted him far above all principality and power,Eph. 1.21, 22. hath put all things under his feet, made him to be head over all things to the Church, given him a Name which is above every name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bowe;Phil. 2.9. and all because (to give satisfacti∣on to his Father) he made himself of no reputation, and became obedient unto death,Ver. 7.8. even the death of the Cross. And thus you see what the Father demands, and what he doth indent and promise to his Son, in case he will engage in this undertaking; not as if the Son was unwilling so to do, (you must not so understand it) but the work being of such a nature, so hard, so grievous, it pleased the Father thus to Treat with him. In the third place: The Lord Jesus Christ engages in the work, accepts of the termes and conditions set before him, and undertakes to satisfie his Fathers demands. And in order to sa∣tisfaction, (which God stands upon as you have heard before) Christ is willing to fulfill the whole Law, which was the rule, or mea∣sure, or standard for this satisfaction: God had been dishonoured by the violation of his Law, and the disobedience and non-per∣formance of it was that which kept God and the sinner at a di∣stance, and therefore he will only be satisfied and reconciled upon the fulfilling of it; here is my Law saith God, satisfie it, and my justice is satisfied.
You must know this, that though a sinner as to himself, is ju∣stified upon the termes of the Covenant of grace, yet as to his sure∣ty, he is justified upon the Covenant of works; for the surety must pay the whole debt, and the Father will bate him no∣thing. Object. Where is then, some will say, the freenesse of grace in the justifying and acquitting of a sinner? if God will be satisfied to the utmost, what becomes of mercy? if the surety pay the debt to the Creditor, is it any great favour for the Creditor to let the debtor out of prison? Sol. To this I answer, Free grace is very well consistent with full satisfaction; and notwithstanding the latter the former is very glorious, partly because God himself found out this way of satis∣faction, partly because God accepts it for the good of the sin∣ner, as though he had made it in his own person: That place of the Apostle is observable, Being justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Rom. 3.24. Not∣withstanding Redemption by Christ, yet we are justified freely; as freely as though Christ had done and suffered nothing at all. But this is a digression. I say, the Father demanding the fulfilling of the Law,Quod requiit lex, nempe tum plenam paenae reatibus nostris debitae luitionē ut à condemna∣tione liberemur; tum plenam le∣gis praestationē ut ad aeternam vitam  inveniamur, ex illa promissione, Hoc fac & vi∣ves. Beza. Christ undertakes to do it; and therefore he willingly puts himself under this Law. When the fulnesse of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of Sonnes, Gal. 4.4, 5. And he submits not only to the duty of the Law, but also to the penalty of the Law; not only to do what the Law enjoynes, but also to suffer what the Law threatens; and the former he makes good by his active obedience, the latter by his passive obedience. To open this a little further, Christ here doth two things. First, He undertakes to performe the whole moral Law; and therefore when he comes into the world, his eye was upon this; Thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousnesse, Mat. 3.15. I am not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill, Mat. 5.17. And all this Christ did for our good, that the righteousnesse of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Rom. 8.4. a very convincing place for the imputation of Christs active obedience.
Secondly, Whereas a special Law was laid upon him, as he was our Meditour; he is willing also to obey that in order to our redem∣ption. That Christ should die was no part of the moral law, but it was a positive special law laid upon Christ; well, he makes it good: I lay down my life, this Commandment have I received of my Fathr, Joh. 10.18. Christ as Mediator had a command from his Father to die, and he observes it; And to be short, whate∣ver the Father put him upon in his whole Mediatory work, he did it all; so he tells us, I have finished the work which thou gavest me to d, Joh. 17.4. Fourthly, In this faederal transaction betwixt the Father and the Son, both parties were free; here was no necessity, co-action, or a∣ny thing of this Nature, but both were free. The Father was free in his demands of satisfaction; he might have let man alone in his state of guilt and wrath, he might have suffered all man-kind to have perished, and to be thrown into hell; he had been infinitely happy in himself, though there had been no such thing as Redemption by Christ. 'Tis true, without this, God had not had satisfaction to his justice, (for if Adam and his posterity had burned in hell to all eternity, all would have been nothing in a way of satisfaction) but there had not been the least diminution of his essential glory and blessednesse in him∣self. The Son is free too on his part; he freely consents to the terms of this Covenant; and in the fulnesse of time, freely engages in the making of them good. Heb. 10.5. Lo I come to do thy Will, O God. Psal. 40.8. I delight to do thy Will, O God, yea, thy Law is within my heart.Ver. 6. And therefore he sayes there, Mine ears hast thou bored. As the servant in the Law, when he was wil∣ling to stay with his Master,Exod. 21.6. and to do his work, hs eare was bo∣red; so 'twas with Christ, he was willing to serve his Father in this businesse, the greatest that ever was carried on in the world, and therefore sayes he, Mine eares hast thou bored. Christ was free in all his obedience; and if it had not been free and volun∣tary, it would not have been satisfactory or meritorious: what∣ever he did or suffered, it was from love, not necessity. This truth is so evident from the whole current of the Gospel, that I need not enlarge upon it.
Fifthly, Th se two persons in this blessed Covenant, they do mu∣tually tust each other; I say they do mutually trust each other, for their respective making good the termes of this Covenant: the Father trusts the Son, and the Son trusts the Father; the Fa∣ther trusts the Son for the making of his soul an offering for sin; the Son trusts the Father for the seeing of his eed: To bring ths assertion down to time; in the times of the Old Testament, the Father trusts the Son; in the times of the New Testament, the Son trusts the Father. Before the coming of Christ, the Father takes up the Patriarchs and others to heaven, upon assurance of this, that Christ in the fulnesse of time, would take our nature up∣on him, and therein make full satisfaction: Christ having pro∣mised to do thus, the Father takes his word, and so takes up old Testament-believers to glory. Since the coming of Christ, the Son now trusts his Father; for he hath offered up himself, paid down the full ransome, and yet he doth not reap the full benefit of it, many believers being not yet glorified; but he trusts his Father, that one by one they all shall be so in due time. This may seem to be but a notion. I confesse we have no place of Scripture posi∣tively asserting this, but the nature of the thing demonstrates it; for there being some distance of time in what was to be done by both persons, there must be a mutual trusting each of the o∣ther. In the sixth place; These two persons all along in their proper and peculiar transactions, they deal each with the other as under a Covenant, and they hold each other to the termes of the Covenant that was betwixt them. (Not that there's any question of their brea∣king of it; but thus we may with an humble reverence conceive of it) The Father holds the Son to the engagement on his part; he will not spare him, or bate him any thing; satisfaction he will have to the utmost, though it cost his life and blood;Rom. 8 32. And there∣fore you may observe the prayer of Christ, John 12.27. Father, save me from this houre; he seems to check or recall himself, but for this cause came I unto this houre: this is but that which I engaged to go through, and therefore I must do it: And his Fa∣ther answers him there accordingly. Ver. 28. Father, glorifie thy Name; (still Christs eye was upon that, his Fathers glory) well, saith the Father, I have both glorified it, and will glorifie it againe: He speaks thus not only upon the accompt of
his Soveraignty, but of the Covenant also that I am speak∣ing to. The Son also stands upon the termes of this Covenant; and therefore having performed the conditions on his part, he now makes his claime both for himself and his members, that the Father will make good the conditions on his part. Father, sayes he,John 17.4, 5. I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do; And now, O Father, glorifie thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. And for his members he speaks more in the language of a Covenant;Verse 24. Father, I will, that they also whom thou hast gi∣ven me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory, &c. I will; not only I pray, or beseech, but I will; I ask this as my right, by vertue of the Covenant betwixt us; I having done thus and thus, 'tis but my due (for though glory is a gift to us, 'tis a debt to Christ) and so I claime it, that those whom thou hast given me, may be with me in glory. I'le adde but one thing more, and then I have done with the Explicatory part. This federal transaction betwixt the Father and the Son, it was from all eternity. Here lies the difficulty, and this is that which stumbles some; I'le speak but a word to it. I say, this Covenant of Redemption; it was from all eternity; it was not made when Christ was just coming into the world, but from everlasting. Two Scriptures seem to hold out this, 2 Tim. 1.9. Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling; not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began. Here is the purpose of God, here is grace given in Jesus Christ; how? in the Covenant betwixt the Father and him; when was this gi∣ven? before the world began, (h. e.) from all eternity: So, Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot le, promised before the world began. How was this life promised before the world begun, but in this everlasting Covenant, wherein the Father pro∣mised unto Christ eternal life for all his seed? I have been speaking to you of a very great mystery, of which the Scripture speaks but little signanter; we have not the termes, but we have the sense and substance of this Covenant of Redem∣ption there laid down: If in any assertion I have seemed too
bold, I am very ready to take shame for i. I am sorry my work did lie in such an untrodden path, wherein I have but very few to give me any direction. I will shut up all with a little Ap∣plication. And first,Application. I would from hence stir you up to an high admirati∣on of the great and infinite love of God, of God the Father, of God the Son; what manner of love hath the God of Grace re∣vealed in this Covenant! Love, that for the freenesse of it, and greatnesse of it, we should admire in this life, as we shall admire it in the life to come. Both persons have discovered unconceiva∣ble love in this transaction; Oh let both of them be admired with the highest admiration. 1. Admire the love of the Father; we are more apprehen∣sive of the love of the Son, than we are of the love of the Father. I would not speak any thing to diminish the love of the Son; God forbid; Oh 'twas wonderful superlative love! only I would heighten your apprehensions of the Fathers love in the great work of our Redemption; Redemption was not only brought about by Christ, but the Father had a great hand in it; therefore 'tis said, The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand: And I have found a ransome; God so loved the world,Isa. 53.10. Job 33.24. John 3.16. that he gave his only begotten Son, &c. I might instance in several particulars to set out the Fathers love in our Redemption; but take only that which I have been upon: That the thoughts of God should be upon poor lost man, so as to finde out a way for his recovery; that he should call his Son, and say, Come, let us consult together, (I speak after the manner of men) Is there no way to be found that man may yet live? he is now obnoxious to me, and I might throw him into hell; but may not I be satisfied, and he saved too? I am not willing he should utterly perish. I say, that God should thus set his thoughts on work for wretched man, and treat with his Son, and strike up a Covenant with his Son, and therein lay such a foundation for mans recovery; let Angels and men, and all crea∣tures adore this love; and oh that you would return love for love; return your drop for Gods Ocean. We must honour the Son as we honour the Father, John 5.23. and we must love the Father as we love the Son. 2. And then admire the love of the Son too; he is willing to engage in this Covenant, he knew the termes of it, what the Re∣demption
of man would cost him, even his life and precious blood; yet for all this he willingly and freely binds himself to re∣deem poor sinners, whatever it cost him. O the heights, depths, breadths of this love!Ephes. 3.18. Blessed Jesus, that ever thou shouldst con∣sent to lay down thy life for me, to wash away my sins in thine own blood,1 John 3.16. Rev. 1.5. to give thy soul as an offering for sin, upon this en∣couragement and motive, that thou mightest se such a poor worme as I brought in to God, that thou shouldst set thy self as a Skreen betwixt Gods wrath and my poor soul, and do and suffer ten thousand times more than what tongue can ex∣presse, or heart conceive! What shall I, what can I say to all this? but fall down, and wonder at that Love which can never be Fathomed! So much for the first thing. Secondly, This Covenant of Redemption may be improved for the encouraging and strengthning of faith: Faith sometimes is ready to question the blessings of the Covenant of Grace, and the Continuance or Perpetuity of the Covenant of Grace; that's the great Foundation of Faith, and when it staggers about that, 'tis very sad with the soul. Now I'le lay down two things for the help of Faith. 1. The blessings of the Covenant are sure. 2. The Covenant of Grace it self is sure. First, The blessings of the Covenant are sure. They are called the sure mercies of David,Isa. 55.3. Isaiah 55.3. They are sure for Continuance, and they are sure for Per∣formance. 1. For Continuance; common mercies are dying, perishing, uncertain things; but Covenant mercies are stable, durable, lasting things. A great estate may come to nothing, Prov. 23.5. Riches are uncertain things,Imaginaria in saeculo, & nihil veri. Tertul. 1 Tim. 6.17. And so in all world∣ly comforts, they are but a fashion, matters of fancy, rather than of reality, and they passe away, 1 Cor. 7.31. But now grace, pardon of sin, adoption, &c. these are blessings that abide for ever, Rom. 11.29. 2. They are sure also for performance; I mean, whatever blessing God hath put into this Covenant, (as 'tis full of bles∣sings) all shall certainly be made good to believers; otherwise God would not be faithful to his Covenant, which certainly he
will be; Men may be false in their Covenants to God, but God will certainly be true in his Covenant to men. Hea∣ven and Earth shall passe away, rather than there shall be the least entrenchment upon Gods truth, in the not performing of his Covenant. Secondly, The Covenant of Grace is sure in it self; a Co∣vnant firme, unalterable, never to be broken; 'tis called an everlasting Covenant, Gen. 17.7. Hebr. 13.20. a Covenant that shall stand fast, Psal. 89.28. a Covenant ordered in all things, and sure, 2 Sam. 23.5. The Covenant of Grace is so firmly ratified, that there can be no nulling of it. 1. God hath ratified it by his Oath, Gen. 22.16. Hebr. 6.13,Si non credimus Deo promittenti, at credamus Deo juranti. Hie∣rom. Amant Scri∣pturae pro pacto ponere Testa∣mentum. Aug. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. His promise is enough, but surely hs oath must put all out of question; there's no room for unbelief, now God hath sworn to it. 2. God hath ratified it by the death of his Son: A mans last Will as soon as he is dead, is in force, and cannot then be disanul∣led. The Covenant of Grace is a Testamentary Covenant, which by the death of the Testator is so setled, that there's no altering of it. Gal. 3.15, &c. Hebr. 9.15, 16. Again, the Covenant of Grace is ratified by the seals which God hath annexed to it. What was sealed by the Kings ring could not be altered: Esther 8.8. God hath set his seal to this Cove∣nant, his broad seal in the Sacraments, his privy seal in the witnesse of his Spirit; and therefore 'tis sure, and cannot be reverst. And further than all this, 'tis ratified in and by that Covenant which hath been now opened; The Covenant of Redemption be∣twixt God and Christ, secures the Covenant of Grace betwixt God and believers. What God promises us, he did before pro∣mise unto Christ, and the Fther would not make good his pro∣mise unto Christ, if he should not make good his promises to the Saints. And therefore as in other respects, so in this also, the Covenant may be said to be confirmed of God in Christ, Gal. 3.17. with respect to that paction and stipulation that was betwixt them. I lay all this before you for the strengthning of your Faith, as to the stability of the Covenant of Grace; so long as that Covenant
stands, you are safe; and you see there's no question but that Cove∣nant will stand, which God hath set upon such firme pillars. This promise in the Text, He shall see his seed, will assuredly bring every believer into heaven. O that faith might triumph in the consideration of this, the Covenant of grace is sure. Davids Faith did so, when death was in his eye, and affliction in his eye; Yet he hath made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, 2 Sam. 23.5. When Faith begins to faint, look up to this Covenant, and reason thus; God will not alter his promise to me, but to be sure he will not alter his promise to his Son. I may fail in such and such conditions, but Christ hath been faith∣ful in all; every childe of God may take much comfort from this. In the third and last place, I would have you to enquire what this Covenant of Redemption is to you. Here's a blessed Cove∣nant betwixt the Father and the Son; how far are you and I inte∣rested in it, or like to receive benefit by it? Was it universal that all men should have an equal share in it? Some very learned men I know tell us of Pactum universale betwixt the Father and the Son;Daven. de mor∣te Christi, &c. but I crave leave to differ from them. 1. Because that which they make their Pactum universale, is rather a Proposition or a Promise, than a Covenant; as he that believeth shall be saved. 2. I know not how to believe that there should be a solemn Co∣venant betwixt the Father and the Son, upon which never any man should be the better; Did ever any sinner get any thing by this universal Covenant? 3. We may preach the Gospel to all upon an indefinite Propo∣sition, He that believeth shall be saved; and we need not to assert an universal Covenant, for the universal preaching of the Go∣spel. This was the great reason that prevailed with these worthy men to assert such a Covenant. I know no Covenant but that special Covenant into which the seed of Christ were only taken. I am loth to fall into the dusty roade of Controversies; all along in this Discourse, where I could not avoide them, I have but just cross'd them over, and so presently falne in again into some more quiet and private way.
Passing by therefore this universal Covenant of men more mo∣derate, and the universal Redemption of others who go higher; I shall only lay down that which I judge to be a great truth, viz. That 'tis the Elect only who are concerned in this Covenant: Such and such persons there were, (individually considered) whom God the Father in his Electing love doth freely give to Christ; for these, and only for these, doth the Lord Jesus engage to lay down his life: Redemption on the Sons part shall be no lar∣ger than Election on the Fathers part, that there may be a perfect Harmony and Agreement betwixt them in their love. So then Beloved, if you would draw down comfort to your selves from this Covenant, you must finde out this, that you are the Elect of God, chosen of him to be Vessels of his mercy be∣fore the world was; Christ undertook to give his life only for those whom the Father had first given to him; these he only pray'd for, and therefore surely these he only dy'd for. You'le say I put you upon a very difficult search; 'tis true, 'tis very hard for a man to know his Election, but yet it may be known; otherwise the Apostle would never have urged this as a duty upon Christians, To make their Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Paul knew that the Thessalonians were elected of God, 1 Thess. 1.4. And he did not know it by Revelation only; No, he gives ano∣ther account of it; he knew it by way of inference from what he saw of God in them: Ver. 5. For our Gospel came not to you in Word only, but also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost, &c. If Election may be known by others, why not by our selves? I grant à parte ante, so it cannot be known, so the book is clsped and sealed, and none can open it,Rev. 5.3, 5. but the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah; but à parte post, by such and such effects and operations upon the heart, so it may be known. Several of these might be set before you out of the Word, but I'le only instance in the grace of Faith. He that believes, is cer∣tainly in the number of Gods Elect, he's a chosen Vessel of mer∣cy. All the Elect shall believe, sooner or later they shall close with Christ upon the termes of the Gospel. John 6.37. All that the Father giveth me (there's Election) shall come to me. (there's Faith) Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life, be∣lieved. None but the Elect can savingly believe.
The sum of all then for the clearing up of your interest in this Covenant of Redemption is this, Have you the precious Faith of Gods Elect? Are your hearts wrought up to a blessed accepting of Christ?Tit. 1.1. Have you ever had such a sense of sin and guilt, and mi∣sery, as to go out of your selves, and only to rest upon the Lord Christ? Do you venture your souls upon his all-sufficient merits? And is this Faith a working Faith, an heart-purifying Faith, a sin-mortifying Faith,James 2.14. a world-overcoming Faith? a Faith that closes with Christ as a Lord,Acts 15.9. 1 John 5.4. as well as a Saviour? a Faith that is for obedience, as well as priviledge? Oh you that have this Faith, go away in peace, be of good comfort; This everlasting Covenant betwixt the Father and the Son is yours, your good was promoted and secured in this Treaty and foederal Engagement. How much doth this Covenant speak for the benefit of believers? if you be such, 'tis all yours. By it you are already brought into a state of Grace; by it you shall hereafter be brought into a state of glory. Upon this Covenant Christ now sees you as his seed, upon this Co∣venant you shall hereafter see him as your Saviour face to face un∣to Eternity. To this Father, to this Son, with the Holy Spirit be glory for evermore.
THE COVENANT OF GRACE. Heb. 8.6. But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the Mediatour of a better Covenant, which was established upon better promises. THE general design of this Epistle, is my special design in this Text, viz. to demonstrate to you, that you live under the best of gracious dispen∣sations; that Jesus Christ our deservedly a∣dored Mediator of the New Covenant, hath obtained a more excellent Ministry; and by the faithful discharge of that Ministry, more excel∣lent benefits than either Moses, the Messenger-Mediator, or the Levitical Priests, the Stationary-Mediators of the Old Co∣venant.
But now] now is not here a note of time, but of opposition; as in Rom. 7.17. now then] i. e. after the Law received; so Grotius; or if you will have it to note the time, 'tis the time of the Go∣spel, this last time. Hath he obtained] not by usurpation, but by election; he hath of divine grace freely receivedAnselm.. A more excellent ministry] , a Minister, is he that doth something at the command of another, Heb. 1.7. and so 'tis said of Magistrates, Rom. 13.6. they are Gods Ministers; but 'tis chiefly spoken of the Priests, Nehemiah 10.39. The Priests that minister; because they offer those things that God requires, they are said to minister, Exodus 28.35, 43. Christs ministry is more excellent thatn the Levitical; he executes it partly on earth, and partly in heaven; but he amplifies the excellency, chiefly from the excellency of the CovenantParaeus.; and therefore it fol∣lows, [By how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant;] If you take the old Covenant for the whole dispensation under the old Testament, as well Gospel-promises as those things which are more strictly legal; then we may truly say, he old and new Covenant, are for substance the same; and therefore the Comparison relates rather to the form, than to the matter of the CovenantCalvin.. The Covenant of grace is dispensed with more la∣titude, clearnesse, and power of the Holy GhostDodate.; and therefore it may be called a better Covenant. Which was established upon better promises.] . Chrys. He names that which may most affect them with joy, in saying it is established upon better promises. All Coveants consist in promises. The Covenants of Kings and Princes amongst themselves; consist in promises, of either not hurting, or helping one another; the Covenants of Princes and people consist in promises; the Prince promises justice, cle∣mency, and defence; the people promise love, obedience, and gra∣titude; so in the Covenant of grace, the first and chief part, whereof is [I will be thy God, and of thy seed] and we promise faith, obedience, and worship; the promises of the Old Covenant run more upon temporal good things; the promises of the New Covenant, are chiefly remission of sins, sanctification by the Spi∣rit, &c. and the Covenant is said to be established; the word
is , q. d. Legislatum. Law and Covenant are joyned together in Scripture; They kept not the Covenant of God, and re∣fused to walk in his Law, Psal. 78.10. The New Covenant con∣taineth certain precepts, which every one must obey that will ob∣taine the promise. Thus you have the meaning of the words; The [Observation] I shall commend to you, is this. The Gospel Covenant (or the new Covenant) is the best Covenant that ever God made with man. I will not stay you long in the general notion of a Covenant; the word sometimes signifies an absolute promise of God, with∣out any restipulation; as Gods engagement to Noah, Gen. 9.11. And I will establish my Covenant with you, neither shall all flesh be cut off any more, by the waters of a flood, neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth. Whatever mans carriage shall be, God promises that he will no more drown the world. So the promise of perseverance, Heb. 8.10. This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those dayes, saith the Lord; I will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. Our perseverance doth not leane upon imperfect grace, but upon divine favour; but I wave this, and shall speak of Cove∣nants, as they note the free promise of God, with restipulation of our dutyCamero.. A Covenant is, amicus status interfaederatos; so Martin. a friend∣ly state between Allies; 'pray 'consider the several Covenants the Scripture mentions, and they are three; namely the Natural, Le∣gal, and Gospel Covenant; the Natural commonly called the Covenant of Works, that flourished till the first sin; the Legal Covenant that flourished till the Ascention of Christ, and the pouring out of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, though it began to languish from Johns preaching, and began to grow old throuh∣out the course of Christs Minitry; the Gosp l Covenant that flourisheth from Christ till the end of the world. I shall speak but little of the first, something more of the second, but dwell upon the last. 1. The Natural Covenant, is that whereby God by the right of Creation, doth require a perfect obedience of all man-kind, and promiseth a most blessed life in Paradise to those that obey
him, and threateneth eternal death to those that disobey him, that it may appeare to all how he loves righteousnesse and holi∣nesse; how he hates impiety and wickednesse. In this Covenant I shall consider but these three things. 1. Gods condiscention, that he would enter into Covenant with man; God was at liberty whether he would create man or not; and when God had made this glorious Fabrick, there could be no engagement upon him, besides his own goodnesse to keep it from ruine. Matth. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? but man having an understanding, and will, to comprehend, and observe, the Laws given him, had a natural obligation to duty, which can no way be dissolved; there is no power in heaven or earth can disoblige man from loving and o∣beying God. Now that God will deale with man not summo ju∣re, not imperiously, and threateningly; but magna comitate, that God will deale with man, as with his friend; and though he may give what Laws he will, yet he will give none but what are easie, and yet make them more easie, by bountifully re∣warding an easie obedience; this speaks wonderful con∣discention. 2. The second thing considerable in the Natural Covenant is mans duty, which consisted in the knowledge, and love of God; whence would have proceeded piety to God, justice and love to man, this was mans natural duty; for we must distinguish the duty from the Symbole of duty. Natural duty consisteth in those things that are good in their own nature, and not in those things that are only good because God commands them; the Law about the forbidden fruit, was only for the tryal of mans obedience; for had not the divine command intervened, it would have been as lawful for man to have eaten of that Tree, as any other Tree in Paradise; but, 3. The last thing I shall mention concerning this Natural Co∣venant, is the Promise of Reward; now that consisted in a per∣petual life, flowing with all manner of good things, agree∣able to the soule and body of man in that perfect e∣state. 2. The second Covenant was the Legal; now the Legal Cove∣nant, is that whereby God did rquire of the people of Israel, obedi∣ence to the Moral, Ceremonial and Judicial Law; and to that obedi∣ence,
he promised all sorts of blessings in the Land of Canaan; and to the dis bedient, he denounced most severe curses and death; and all to this end, that he might bring them to the future Mes∣siah. Here I shall propose the same considerations, as in the former Covenant; only something more. Therefore consider: 1. Gods condiscention is singularly observable, that ever he would enter into another Covenant with man when the first was broken; this Moses useth as a mighty Argument to perswade Is∣rael to observe the Covenant, Deut. 4. from the 32. to the 40. verse. Ask now of the dayes that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man upon earth; and ask from the one side of heaven unto thie other, whether there hath been any such thing as this great thing is, or hath been heard like it. Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live? Or hath God assayed to go and take him a Nation from the midst of another Nation, by temptations, by signes, and by wonders, and by warre, and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched-out arme, and by great terrours, according to all that the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes, &c. thou shalt therefore keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, which I com∣mand thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and thy children after thee, &c. 2. Consider mans duty in the Legal Covenant, and that is obe∣dience to the moral Law; to which was added the Ceremonial Law, for a Rule and Direction in the worship of God; and the Judi∣cial Law, which was their divine policy for the government of the State. All these are comprehended in the ten Commandments; but the more-particular their directions were, the more plain was their duty; and the truth is, it was but need that they should have par∣ticular direction, when their Legal Covenant neither admitted of faith in the Redeemer, nor repentance of sin; for pardon of sin, and curse for sin are inconsistent. Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the Curse; for it is written, Cur∣sed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the Law, to do them; As many as depend upon the works of the Law for Justification, are under the curse; and the
Law discovered no other way of Justification but by Works. 3. The third thing considerable in the Legal Covenant, is the promise that God made to those that obeyed it, and that was per∣petual happiness in the Land of Canaan. [By the way to prevent mistakes, I do not say, neither will the Scripture at all warrant any such assertion, as that the Fathers un∣der the Old Testament had only temporal promises; they had sal∣vation promised them, and pardon of sin promised them; but thanks to the Gospel for those promises; the Apostle tells us, Gal. 3.17. The Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was foure hundred and thirty years after, can∣not disannull, that it should make the promise of none effect; the Morning Star of the Gospel Covenant that shone upon Abra∣ham foure hundred and thirty years before the Legal Covenant was given, did shine thorough that dark dispensation.] But to speak of the Legal promises as Lgal, so they are of temporal good things, and they were made to works, not to faith; Rom. 4.4. To him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt. 4. The fourth thing considerable in this Covenant which had no place at all in the former, is a Mediator; Now the Mediator of the Covenant strictly legal was Moses; for That needed on∣ly a meer man, it not admitting of satisfaction, nor reconciliation, of mercy, nor pardon; Moses might serve as a Messenger to make known the minde of God unto the people. Deut. 5.5. I stood btween the Lord and you at that time, to shew you the Word of the Lord; in the Natural Covenant, communion with God was natural unto man, and so there needed no Mediator. In the Legal Covenant, man was rather considered, as what he should be, than what he was; and so a meer man was able in the name of the people to promise obedience, and in the name of God to promise a reward, and this Moses did; you have both ve∣ry plain in Deut. 5. The people do as it were say, Go to God from us upon this Errand; Ver. 27. Go thou nar, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it, and do it; and God doth as it were say, Go, dismiss them with this bles∣sing if they will be obedient: Ver. 28.29, 30. And the Lord
heard the voice of your words when ye spake unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people which they have spo∣ken unto thee, they have well said all that they have spoken; O that there were such an heart in them that they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments alwayes, that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever; Go say to them, Get you into your Tents again; q. d. If they will keep their pro∣mise, assure them I will keep mine, and thus much concerning the Covenant strictly Legal. 3. The third Covenant is the Gspel-Covenant, and here Belo∣ved, here is (2 Sam. 23.5.) the Everlasting Covennt, ordered in all things, and sure; This is all our salvation, and all our de∣sire: Here is the better Covenant, established upon better pro∣mises! But I must explain it, before I admire it: The Gospel Covenant is that whereby God upon the condition propounded of faith in Christ, promiseth remission of sins in his blood, and a heavenly life, and that for this end, that he might shew forth the riches of his mercyCamero.. Here I shall propose the same considerations as in the former Covenant, only still something more, and more comfortably con∣siderable; in the consideration of the persons contracting, name∣ly, God and man, according to the proposed method. 1. Consider Gods gracious condescention. And now Beloved, that I have named Gods gracious condescention, were my heart but duly affected with it, it would constrain me to stop, and put in a large Parenthesis of admiration before I should speak a word more. Will God after the loss of the natural communion, where∣in he created man; will God, when man deads his Majesty, and trembles at his revenging justice; will God then as a mer∣ciful Father, enter into a Covenant of peace with poor undone sin∣ners, affrighted with the sense of sin and wrath! O the incom∣prehensible ondescention of such unsearchable riches of grace! that grace should abound according to sins abounding, when sin over-flow d all its banks; that God should make a way thorough the deep into the heavenly Canaan, never can we enough admire such Extasying grace! This is the first thing conside∣rable. 2. The second thing considerable, is the duty which God re∣quires in this Gospel Covenant, and that is Faith; faith whereby
we embrace the remedy offered us: We want a pardon, and no∣thing but faith can receive it; we want perfect Righteousnesse, and nothing but faith can furnish us with it; we want that which may make this Covenant effectual to us, and make it a blessing to us, and nothing can do any of these things but faith; faith is the Antecedent Condition, for which the Reward is given. 3. The third thing considerable in the Gospel Covenant, is the promise: Now the promise of the Gospel Covenant is com∣prehended in the word Salvation; therefore the Gospel is called the salvation of God: Acts 28.28. And this is the great busi∣nesse of Christ to be a Saviour; Isa. 49.6. That thou mayst be my salvation to the end of the earth; when the Angels prea∣ched the Gospel, they thought they could not expresse their news in better language, than to tell people of salvation; that must needs be great joy to all people. In short, when Gospel Mini∣sters come clad with garments of salvation, as Heraulds do with the garments of their Office, then Saints may well shout aloud for joy, Psal. 132.16. Now this promise of salvation con∣tains all Gospel promises in it, but they are reduced to these foure. 1. Justification; this is a priviledge which other Covenants were unacquainted with; and without this what would become of poor sinful man? And this may well be the first great Gospel pro∣mise; I might name, not some Verses, but whole Chapters to prove it. Rom. 4. and 5. Gal. 3. and 4. but in a word, if you would know the preciousness of this promise, Ask those that have but felt what sin is, and they will tell you. 2. The second promise contained in Gospel salvation, is San∣ctification. Rom. 8.2, 3, 4. The Law of the Sprit of life in Christ hath made me free from the Law of sin and death; for what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likenesse of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousnesse of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: q.d. The efficacy and power of the sanctifying Spirit which gives life to believers, frees us from the tyranny of sin and death; and whereas the Law by reason of the corruption of our nature, could not make us pure and perfect, but rather kindled
than extinguished corruption; God hath cloathed his Son with our flesh, to take away the guilt and power of sin, that his perfect righteousnesse might be imputed to us, and fulfilld by us; that we might not live according to the motion of our sinful nature, but according to the motion of his holy Spirit. 3. The third promise, is the resurrection of the body: You know the penaly of sin, is the death of soul and body; though the soul be immortal, yet its being miserable for ever, may sadly be called an Eternal death: Now let the guilt of sin be abolished, and you do therewith abolish the punishment of it; for gult is only an obligation to punishmen; let sin be pardoned, and the sinner is freed from death; and though believers dye, yet it is as a corne of wheat falls into the ground, they thereby obain a mul∣tiplied life. John 6.54. Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinkeh my blood, hath Eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. 4. The last promise is Eternal life, a spiritual, blessed, and im∣mortal life in heaven. John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have Everlasting life: The Covenant of Grace is excellent fitted to bring us to the chiefest good: Now the chiefest good consists in communion with God; that was bro∣ken by sin, and can never be perfectly recovered, till sin be abo∣lished; therefore when the guilt of sin is taken away by Justifica∣tion; and the filthinesse of sin is taken away by Sanctification; and the penalty of sin taken away by Resurrection; then, what can hinder our communion with God? when we have once obtained perfect holinesse, nothing can hinder us of perfect happinesse. Thus you have the promise of the Gospel-Covenant, which was the third considerable in it. 4. The fourth thing to be considered in the Gospel-Covenant, is the Mediator of this better Covenant, and that is Jesus Christ, God-man blessed for ever, through his dignity he hath purchased salvation. Hebr. 9.12, 14. By his own blood he entred in once into the holy place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us; how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the Eter∣nal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, &c. And he is not only the Author of Eternal salvation by his merit and efficacy, but the most absolute example and pattern to us, how we should
walk that we may obtain his purchased salvation. Rom. 8.29. God did predestinate us to be conformable to the Image of his Sonne, that he might be the first born among many brethren. 1 Cor. 15.49. And as we have born the Image of the Earthly, we shall also bear the Image of the heavenly. And this is the only Covenant whereof Christ is Mediator; the first Covenant needed no Mediator; the Old Covenant as Legal, take it without its sprinkling of Gospel, and so chiefly Moses, but in all respects meer men were Mediators; but of the New Covenant Christ was Mediator; but this I shall leave to be enlarged by another. 5. The fifth thing to be considered in the Gospel-Covenant, is the efficacy of it. I did not so much as mention the efficacy of the former Covenants; for there was never so much as any one made happy by them; 'tis sadly true, that the threatnings of punishment for the neglect of duty took hold of them; the threatnings seemed plainly to belong to the nature of those Cove∣nants; but in the Gospel Covenant 'tis otherwise; for it is said, John 3.36.  abides] which shews that the wrath was brought upon them by the violation of the former Covenant, he speaks as of that which was upon them already. [But yet mistake not, as if refusing the Gospel were no sin, or not punished; they sin more grievously, that sin against Gospel love, than they that sin only against Legal goodness; but wrath doth not properly belong to the Essence of the Gospel.] Thus you have the first thing I undertook, namely, the nature of the Covenant positively considered; the second is the compara∣tive excellency of the New Covenant above others: I will be brief in shewing its excellency above the Covenant of Works, more large in shewing you how 'tis better than the Old Covenant of Grace. [Only suppose, to prevent mistakes, that each Covenant is in its own kind most perfect, and most accommodated to the state of the people, and to the purposes for which they were in∣stituted. This premised:] First, The New Covenant of Grace is better than the Cove∣nant of Nature; I forbear to speak of the agreement and diff∣rence of them, I shall speak only of the excellency of this better Covenant.
1. The Covenant of Works was a Declaration of Gods Ju∣stice, than which nothing can be more terrible to a guilty sinner; but the Covenant of Grace is a Declaration of Gods mercy in Christ, and let the overwhelmed conscience speak, is not this better? 2. The Foundation of the Covenant of Works, was the Creation of man, and the integrity of his nature; the Foun∣dation of the Covenant of Grace, is mans Redemption by Jesus Christ. 3. The Promise of the Covenant of Works, was eternal life in Paradise; the Promise of the New Covenant, is eternal life in Heaven. 4. The Covenant of Works had no Mediator, no possibility of recovering the least slip; the New Covenant is ratified in the blood of the Son of God; 'tis composed on purpose for our reliefCamero.: Thus the New Covenant is better than the Covenant of Works. Secondly, The Gospel-Covenant is better than the Old Cove∣nant of Grace. Beloved, you may observe, I do not say better than the Covenant strictly Legal; but better than the whole Dispensation which the Jews, and all other Believers lived under, before Christs Incarnation; better than the Old Do∣ctrine of spiritual grace delivered by Moses and the Pro∣phets, openly promising Eternal life unto the Fathers; and the Dull people of the Jews, under the condition of perfect obedience to the Moral Law, together with the intolerable burdens of Legal rights, and yoke of most straight Mosai∣cal policy; but covertly under the condition of repentance, and faith in the future Messiah, prefigured in the shadowes and types of Ceremonies, that by this forme of Divine worship and policy, a stiffe-necked people might partly be ta∣med, and partly be brought to Christ, that lay hid under those Ceremonies. So that in short you see the Old Testa∣ment, or the Old Covenant, (for by a Metonymie they are chiefly one and the same thing; and the Apostle plainly so ex∣presseth himself, 2 Cor. 3.14. Untill this day remaineth the same vaile untaken away in the reading of the Old Testament, which vaile is done away in Christ; and this) contains these three things.
1. The old kind of doctrine which was openly and principally Legal; covertly, and lesse principally, Evangelical. 2. The old way of worship, and Legal Priest-hood. 3. That Mosaical policy which was tyed to one peo∣pleParaeus.. This Covenant was made by God to Adam, presently after the fall, G n. 3.15. afterward to Abraham and his posterity, Gen. 17.1, 2, 7, 8. The symbole of this Covenant was circumcision; from verse 10. to the 14. I forbear further particularising to whom it was often renewed and confirmed, whereupon it is called the Covenants, Rom. 9.4. Ephes. 2.12. Now the New Covenant of Reconciliation to God by Christ exhibited in the flesh, is the better Covenant. The Gospel is the Table of the New Testa∣ment, longè divinio quam smaragdina Hermetis, far beyond the Emerauld Table of Hermes, which the Chymists vainly boast to yield the Philosophers stone to enrich all persons; and the Pa∣nacea that cures all diseases; here's the elect and precious stone. 1 Pet. 2.6Crocii Syntag.. But I will come to particulars, only premising this Caution. Caution.Let not any thing I shall say be interpreted as if I put an ho∣stile contrariety between the Old Covenant and the New; in spi∣ritual practice they yield spiritual help to each other; Justin Martyr saith, that grace is not according to the Law, nor against the Law, but above the Law; therefore they are not adversa, but diversa; the Gospel in Scripture, is called the Law, Isa. 2.3. on∣ly 'tis the Law of faith, Rom. 3.27. and the Law of the Spirit, Rom. 8.2. therefore when we advance the Gospel, Rom. 3.31. do we then make voide the Law through faith? God forbid, yea, we establish the Law. Gal. 3.21. Is the Law then against the pro∣mises of God? God forbid; for if there had been a Law given, which could have given life, vrily righteousnesse should hav been by the law. The believers in the Old Testament, were saved by the free mercy of God in Christ.Gerhar. l. c. Heb. 9.15. He is the Mediator of the New Testament, and by means of death, for the Redemption of the transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. And their Sacraments and ours,Maccov. l. c. sealed the same hing, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. They did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spi∣ritual
drink, for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. This premised, I shall now shew you the excellency of the Go∣spel-Covenant. 1. The Gospel-Covenant is a better Covenant than the Legal, in respect of its Original, and manner of patefaction; 'tis true, they have both one principal efficient cause; but the Law may in some sort be known by nature; it was written in mans heart at the first, and the character is not wholly worne out; Rom. 2.15. The Gentiles shew the work of the Law written in their hearts; but now the Gospel was immediately manifested from God to the Church alone. Joh. 1.18. No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosome of the Fa∣ther, he hath declared him. Mat. 16.16, 17. And Simon Peter answered, and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; and Jesus answered, and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Fa∣ther which is in heaven; It so farre transcends the capacity of humane reason, that reason cannot so much as approve of it,Gerhard. Al∣ting. when it was revealed, without inward illumination, and perswasi∣on of the Holy Ghost; 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 14, 15. Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him; but God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God; but the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned; but he that is spiritual, judgeth all things; and hereupon it is called the Nw Covenant; not in respect of the time, that it had no being before the incarnation of Christ, but in respect of the knowledge of it; the knowledge of the Legal Covenant was born with us, and it was fore-known to nature; but the Gospel-Covenant was wholy new, revealed from the bosome of the Father, it was ad∣ministred by new Officers, confirmed by new Sacraments, let in∣to the hearts of people by new pourings out of the Spirit; there∣fore the Apostle prayes, Ephes. 1.17, 18.Maccovius. That the God of or Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the Spirit of wisdome, and revelation in the knowledge of him; the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what
is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his in∣heritance in the Saints. God would never have instituted the Le∣gal Covenant but for the Gospels sake, Galat. 3.24. Wherfore the Law was our School-master to bring us unto Christ; The Law was a sharp School-master, by meanes whereof, the refractory and contumacious minds of the Jewish people might be tamed; for Rom. 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to ev∣ry one that believeth. 2. The Gospel-Covenant is better than the Legal, in respect of the manner of it; the Law was a Doctrine of works, com∣manding and prescribing what we should be, and what we should do; Gal. 3.12. And the Law is not of faith, but the man that doth them, shall live in them. But now the Gospel requires faith in Christ for righteousnesse and salvation. Rom. 3.21. But now the righteousnesse of God without the Law is manifested; therefore saith Augustine, faith obtaines what the Law commands: we have no help from the LawGerhard.; the condition of the Law is simply im∣possible; it finds us sinners, and leaves no place for repen∣tanceCamero.; and notwithstanding the sprinkling of Gospel that there was with the Law, yet it was but obscure. And that shall be the next particular. 3. The Gospel-Covenant is better than the Legal, in respect of the manner of holding forth Christ in it; though the Gospel is one and the same whereby all Saints are saved in all times; for there was not one way of salvation then, and another since. Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever believeth in him, shall receive remission of sinnes. Yet the Doctrine of the Gospel was more obscure in the Old Te∣stament;Umbratili & per se inefficaci ceremoniarum observatione. &c. Amyrald. partly through Prophesies of things a great way off, and partly through types; Christ was wrapt up in shadowes, and fi∣gures; in the Gospel, the body of those shadowes, and the truth of those types is exhibited; the Land of Canaan was a type of heaven; Israel according to the flesh, was a type of Israel ac∣cording to the Spirit; the spirit of bondage, of the spirit of A∣doption; the blood of the Sacrifices, of the blood of Christ; the glory of divine grace was reserved for Christs coming; they had at most but starre-light before Christs coming *. When Christ first came, it was but day-break with them; Christ was at first but as a morning starre, 2 Pet. 1.19. though soon after he was as the
sun in the firmament, Mal. 4.2. The Apostle saith, Heb. 10.1. The Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things; and in this respect it was that the Apostle saith, the Gospel was promised to the Fathers, but perform'd to us, Rom. 1.1, 2. It was hid to them, and revealed to us, Rom. 16.25, 26. and not only by fulfilling of Prophesies, which we may see by the comparing of Scripture, but by the Spirit, Ephes. 3.5. The mystery of Christ in other ages, was not made known un∣to the Sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his holy Apostles, and Prophets by the Spirit; They had but a poor discovery of Christ, but we have the riches of this mystery made known unto us, Col. 1.26, 27Alting.. The old Covenant leads to Christ, but▪ 'tis a great way about; the Gospel Covenant goeth directly to him; their Ceremonies were numerous, brdensome, and obscure; those things that represent Christ to us, are few, easie, and cleareSynops. pur. Theol.. 4. The Gospel-Covenant is the better Covenant, in respect of the form of it, the promises are better promises; the promises of the Law are conditional, and require perfect obedience. Lev. 18.5. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgements, which if a man do, he shall live in them; the condition you see is im∣possible. Beloved, 'pray 'mistake not; there is expresse mention of eternal life in the Old Testament, Isa. 45.17. Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation; ye shall not be a∣shamed, nor confounded, world without end. Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake; some to everl∣sting life, and some to shame and everlasting contemp; and that the Law cannot save us, that is accidental, in respect of our dfile∣ment with sin, and our weaknesse that we cannot fulfill the condi∣tion. Rom. 7.12. The law is holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, and good; and it is the Word of life. Acts 7.38. Who received the lively Oracles to give unto us; and the Apostle brings in Abraham and David for examples of Justification by faith, Rom. 4.6, 13. but yet their promises were chiefly temporal; we have the promise of temporal good things in the New Testament, as well as they in the Old, only with the exception of the Cross. Mark 19.29, 30. Ʋerily I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or fathers, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the Gospels, but he
shall receive an hundred fold, now in this time, houses, and bre∣thren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with perse∣cutions; that was the exception, with persecution. We have three notable advantages in our temporal promises, beyond what they had in theirs. 1. The Old Covenant had special promises of temporal good things in the Land of Canaan, for the preserving of their Mo∣saical policy, untill the time of the Messiah to be born of that people; promises of long life, &c. The New Covenant hath promises of all good things necessary, without any such clog. All good works shall be rewarded, and he promiseth to give a pre∣sent temporal reward, in part of payment. Eph. 6.8. Whatso∣ever good thing any man doth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free; and which is more, 1 Tim. 4.8. God∣linesse is profitable unto all, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. 2. The temporal good things promised in the Old Testament, were symbolical; they prefigured spiritual benefits by Christ; we have them without any such adjoyned significations, Col. 2.17. They had a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ; They had a more sparing taste of heavenly good things in earthly benefits; we have a more streight and direct way unto eter∣nal life. 3. Promises of temporal good things, were in the Old Cove∣nant more frequent, in the New Covenant more rare; and this I name as their excellency, because they are thrown in, as meer additions to spiritual promisesAlting.. Ma. 16.33. Seek ye first the Kingdome of God, and his righteousnesse, and all these things shall be added unto you; this for temporal promises. And for spiritual promises, which are the best of the Gospel-Covenant; not only the conditions of those promises are more easie; for whereas it was, Do this and live, Gal. 3.15. now it is, Believe, and thou shalt not come into condemnationCamero., Joh. 3.18. but the condition is al∣so promised, Jer. 31.34. I will make a New Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah; not according to the Covenant, that I made with their Fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which my Cvenant they brake, although I was an Husband unto them, saith the Lord; but this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the
House of Israel; after those dayes, saith the Lord, I will put my law into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people, and they shall teach no more every man his Neighbour, and every man his brother, say∣ing, Know the Lord, for they shall know me, from the least of thm unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sinnes no more. Gods hearty good will is herein manifested. Jer. 32.41. I will rejoyce over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredl, with my whole heart, and with my whole soul. If you say, these are Old-Testament promises, and belonged to them to whom they were spoken, and were not only Prophetical, so as to con∣cern another peopleCalv. Instit., I grant it. Rom. 3.19. We know that what things soever the Law saith, it saith to them who are under the Law. But they had not that efficacy of the Spirit to make these pro∣mises so effectual, as was Prophesied and promised, for the times of the GospelSynop. pu. th.; Joel 2.28. And it shall come to passe afterwards; mark that, afterwards, I will poure out my Spirit upon all flesh, &c. The measure of the Spirit which they did receive, tended mostly to bondage, Gal. 4.24, 25. but the Spirit is to us a Spirit of Adoption, Rom. 8.15. And therefore the Gospel is specially cal∣led the Word of Gods grace, Acts 20.32. as if all the grace that God had formerly expressed, had been nothing in comparison of this. Rom. 6.14. Ye are not under the Law, but under grace; Law and grace, are opposed as condemnation and mercy; thus the Gospel is the better Covenant, in respect of the promises of it. 5. The Gospel is the better Covenant, in respect of the effects of it; the Old Covenant shews us sin, doth accuse us, and declares us guilty before the judgement of God. Rom. 3.19, 20. That every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God; therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified in his sight; for by the Law is the knowledge of sinne. It subjects us under the curse, and condemneth sinners, for the transgressing of Gods commands. Deut. 27.26. Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this Law to do them: and all the people shall say Amen. So Gal. 3.10. it is the ministry of death, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. but now the Gospel that proclaims pardon of sin, and lifts up with quickening consolation, Isa. 61.1, 2. in
the Law God is considered as reproving sin, and approving righ∣teousnesse; in the Gospel, as remitting sin, and repairing righ∣teousnesse; and therefore the Word of the Gospel is called good seed, Mat. 13.3. The seed of Regeneration, 1 Pet. 1.23. The Word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. The Ministration of the Spirit, Gal. 3.2. The Word of faith, Rom. 10.8. The Word of life, Phil. 2.16. The power of God, Rom. 1.16. That whereby the righteousnesse of God is manifest, Rom. 3.21. The destru∣ction of unbelievers is not the end of the Gospel; but that is through their own fault,Polan. Syntag. eventus adventitius, an accidental event. God abundantly declares in the Gospel, that he delights not in the death of sinners, but in the saving translation of them by faith and repentance, from the power of darknesse, into the Kingdome of his dear Son. The best effect of the Legal Covenant, is the bringing man into the Gospel-Covenant; and 'pray 'observe, how, when it is most effectual, it turns over the sinner to the Better Covenant. 1. It discovers sin to us. Rom. 7.7. I had not known sin but by the Law; but wherefore is it that we know sin at all? that we might be compelled to seek reparation in the Gospel-Covenant. Gal. 3.21, 22. The Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise of faith in Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. 2. The Old Covenant restrains sin; there is a natural stupid∣nesse in mens consciences; but then when the dreadful threat∣nings of the Law still sound in their ears, man is somewhat af∣frighted, and hath some reluctancy, though afterwards the Law of the minde is led captive by the Law of the members, and man forbears sin, as having a bridle put upon him; Ringente interim, & intus tumultuante appetitu corrupto; though he be restrained from sin, yet it is but a kinde of coactior; it ends best, when it ends in a spontaneous and voluntary inclination of the minde to forsake sin, and hate it, and that is the work of the Gospl-Co∣venant. 3. The Old Covenant works fear; when sin hath been com∣mitted, and the raging of the affections are a little appeased, then the minde returns unto its self, and the Spirit that was resisted, brings to remembrance those grievous and unavoidabl threa∣nings which the Law denounceth, whereupon there follows
, a Legal repentance; that is, a wishing that the Fact were undone, and that he had not committed the sin that causeth that trouble; but not that he is any better than before; for shew him a new temptation, and he presently runs after it, though under trouble of minde, and though expectation of wrath, incredibly full of anguish, doth sting and vex him intolerably. But now Beloved, where this ends well, there the Spirit insinuates some∣thing to put him upon panting after a Redeemer, and to get pow∣er against sin, and this brings unspeakable joy, and begets peace past all understanding; thus you see the best effects of the Law is the bringing men to the Gospel, which shews the fifth excellency of the Gospel-Covenant. 6. The Gospel-Covenant is the better Covenant, in respect of its objects or persons taken into Covenant, and that under a double consideration, their multiplicity, and their quality. 1. In respect of the number: The Old Covenant belonged only to one people; the New, to Jews and Gentiles; Abraham and his posterity were taken into Covenant, and all the world be∣side were excluded; those few others that were admitted, it was by extraordinary grace, and they were as it were planted into Abra∣hams family; but now the partition Wall is broken down, which as it were, shut up the mercy of God in the confines of Israel: Now peace is proclaimed to those that are far off, as well as to those that are near, that they might become one people; this is a great mystery, Colos. 1.26. Certainly all may well say so, as we are poor Gentiles, and we are made nigh by the blood of his Crosse, Col. 1.20, 21. 2. The Gospel-Covenant is better in respect of the quality of the persons taken into it; the Law is proposed to wicked, se∣cure, and hardened sinners. 1 Tim. 1.9. The Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless, and disobedient, for un∣godly, and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers, and murdrers of mothers, for men-slayers, for whore∣mongers, &c. to restrain and bridle them; but the Gospel lifts up broken-hearted sinners. Luk. 4.18. He hath sent me to heale the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and re∣covering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord: The
Law is to terrifie the conscience, the Gospel is to com∣fort itGerhard, l. c.. 7. The last excellency I shall name, is this, the Gospel-Cove∣nant is every way faultlesse, it is the last and best Dispensation of Divine grace. Hebr. 8.7. If the first Covenant had been faultlesse, then should no place have been sought for the second; as if he should say, the Covenant from Mount Sinai was not such, Quo non alterum posset esse perfectiusGrotius.; that man could not desire a better. Hebr. 7.18, 19. There is verily a disanulling of the Commandment going before, for the weaknesse and unpro∣fitableness thereof, for the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, by the which we draw nigh unto God; plainly, this is so excellent, we cannot desire a better. The Old Covenant is abrogated: 1. As to the circumstance, de futuro, it all related to the fu∣ture Messiah; Christ is come, and that consideration therefore ceaseth. 2. 'Tis abrogated as to the impossible condition of perfect obe∣dience; the Gospel sincerity of the meanest believer, is better than the exactest obedience of the highest Legalist. 3. 'Tis abrogated as to the burden of Legal Ceremonies, Priest∣hood and shadows; God gave these things to them, and the Gospel to us, as we give (nuces parvulo, & codicem grandiBeda.;) things of smaller value to a little childe, but a good book to him when he is grown up. They have lost their Temple, their Priesthood, their Unction; ,Chrysost. &c. We have Heaven for our Temple, and Christ for our Priest, and the Spirit for our Unction. 4. The Old Covenant is abrogated as to the yoke of Mosaical policy; we have nothing to do with the Judicial Laws of the Jews, any farther than they are Moral, or of a Moral equity: Luk. 16.16. The Law and the Prophets were untill John. Hebr. 7.12. The Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change of the Law: And thus I have doctrinally shewed you the excellency of the Gospel-Covenant. APPLICATION. 1. This retorts wicked mens Reproaches into their own faces.
They cry out against the Ministers of the Gospel for preaching terrour to them. Be it known to you, the Gospel is properly employed in celebrating the mercy of God in the pardon of sin, and comforting drooping sinners; but in your doing what you can to put out this comfortable light, you force us to fetch fire from Mount Sinai to take hold of you. 'Tis true, the Law was given with Thunder and Lightning, and terrible Miracles; the Gospel was attested with a comfortable voice from heaven, and healing Mi∣racles; but as sinners broken by the Law, needed some Gospel-balm to heal their wounds; so secure Gospel sinners need Legal threat∣nings to fright them out of their sluggishnesse, and sleepy security. If whispers of peace will not awaken them, we must cry aloud, to stir them up if it be possible, to break off sinning, and to minde salvation. Sirs, 'tis no pleasure to us to speak words unpleasing to you; you hinder us from work more purely Evangelical, and which 'tis a thousand fold more pleasure to us to be conversant a∣bout. 'Pray take notice that were it not in love and faithfulnesse to your souls, we would never be so poorly employed, as to be pelting at your base lusts. Do but try us: Break off your soul-undoing wickednesse, and you shall never hear us rate you any more, you your selves being Judges; ex. gr. Ask a sober man whether the lashing of drunkennesse makes him smart or not? Ask a chaste person whether the naming of such Texts as Prov. 22.14. The mouth of strange women is a deep pit; he that is ab∣horred of the Lord shall fall therein. Prov. 23.27. An whore is a deep ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow pit; reproach him? in short; Ask one that's conscientious, whether he thinks the Minister hath a spite at him in his Sermon, because he names, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not in∣herit the Kingdome of God? Be not deceived; neither Fornica∣tors, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with mankinds, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdome of God. Alas! all these will tell you they have no such thought, nor any cause for any such thought; through grace they abhorre these sins, and wonder that any are so besotted as to quarrel with a Minister for speaking against them. You see then, 'tis your consciences that reproach you, and not the Mini∣sters of the Gospel.
2. Here's matter of Admiration, Admiration of Gods rich Grace, and unparallel'd Providence to us; that God should cast our Lots in to such places and times, wherein we enjoy the best of the best gracious Dispensations. Acts 17.26. God hath made of one blood all Nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation. God hath been pleased so to dis∣pose of Christs little flock, that there shall be some in all times of the world, and in all places of the world, where he makes known his Name, to be the salt of the Earth. But now for us to be so disposed of, that among the several thousand years of the worlds continuance, and among the innumerable millions of places of the worlds Inhabitants; that we should be brought forth in such a nick of time, and in such a spiritual Paradise of place, that there's none in the world to equal it! Sirs, what doth this call for? what shall we render to the Lord for this — (I know not what to call it, 'tis such) unspeakable love? Belo∣ved, I must both give, and take time to answer this question; And O that you, and I may give a sutable answer to it. I know not at present what to say to it, unlesse we could, as overcome by it, faint away in a love-sickness into the bosome of our dearest Jesus; that Cant. 2.4, 5, 6. seeing he hath brought us where we may not only taste a draught out of a Bottle, but are brought to the great Vessels of spiritual comforts, where we may not only enjoy Christ a lit∣tle, but even to spiritual extasie. O that we now as sinking down in a Swoun, and as unable to stand under the thoughts of such love, might be even strowed and boulstered up with the comfor∣table doctrines of the Gospel-Covenant, and all through impati∣ence of love. The love of God to such inconsiderable persons, should carry the soul out of it self, to do more than languish with desire after more extasying communications; so that none but Christ with his right hand of Divinity, and left hand of Humani∣ty may be acceptable to us to embrace us. O Christians, I should be glad to send you all home heart-sick of love to Christ. But, 3. By way of Inference; Everyone of you that is not in the Gospel-Covenant, is in a dreadful state; 'tis your own wilfulnesse, you will not believe the Gospel. Though 'tis through Divine Grace that persons do close with the Gospel, yet it is your own
sin you do not close with it; for you are willing to be stran∣gers to it, you are willing to enjoy your lusts, which you must part with, if you embrace it. You may observe the dreadful estate of persons out of Covenant in these three parti∣culars. 1. The sin against the Gospel-Covenant is most dreadful. This sin hath the guilt of all other sins in it. John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloke for their sin. Sodom and Gomorrah, Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdome of heaven, before those that refuse the Gospel. God the Father invites men to the Marriage Supper; nay, you are wooed and entreated to be Christs Bride: You make light of it, you have the profits and the pleasures of the world, to take up your thoughts, you will not be perswaded to believe that Christ is better than your lusts; you will not be beat out of it, but that a bag of gold, is better than a Crown of glo∣ry; but that a filthy lust, is better than communion with God; but that the Divels slave and fool, is better than to be Gods Childe and Darling; Is this your choice? Then consider, 2. The penalty for the contempt of this Gospel-Covenant is most dreadful. John 3.19. This is the condemnation that light is come into the world, and men love darknesse rather than light; this brings persons under the very utmost of the wrath of God. 1 Thess. 2.16. when the Jews sinned against the Legal Dispensati∣on, then Dan. 9.12. Daniel complains, Under the whole hea∣vens hath not been done as hath ben done upon Jeusalem; but what now will become of those that refuse the Gospel? Heb. 10.29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God? Can any thing be worse than to dye without mercy? yes, saith the Apo∣stle; whats that? nay, he leaves it to your consideration, as being unpossible to be expressed. To poure contempt and scorne upon the pretious blood of Christ, wherewith the Covenant betwixt God and his people was made, and ratified; to offer a spiteful affront unto the Spirit of God, by contemning, and opposing his gracious motions; O what remains for such persons but a dreadful expecta∣tion of Gods terrible Judgment! But there's a third thing that I would have you consider, which is sensibly more dreadful than ei∣ther of these.
3. The sentence against Gospel-Covenant breaking is most ir∣reversible and peremptory, mercy, and grace, and patience, and compassion, when these are abused, all these become the sinners enemy; for that which is ordained a life, to prove death unto them, oh this is dreadful! for the blood of Christ to cry to hea∣ven against sinners, this is dreadful! this made Christ to weep o∣ver Jerusalem, Luke 19.40.41. These persons passe judgment upon themselves, though not with their lips, yet with their lives; they pronounce themselves unworthy to be saved, Acts 13.46. O Sirs, I beseech you consider, though persons brake the Cove∣nant of Works, there was salvation to be had by another Covenant; but if this be violated, there is no other Covenant to relieve this: The Gospel-Covenant is our Refuge, when the other Co∣venant pursues us. Hebr. 6.18. Contemptuous carriage against Grace is beyond all help; I beseech you therefore take heed of sinning against Gospel-light, and Gospel-love. O you will have that sting of conscience that no other sinners in the world have, that have not refused a Redeemer. Beloved, I would I could say, with due meltings of heart, it grieves me for you, to think how many hundreds in this Congregation are yet without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephes. 2.12. O Sirs, do you know what you do, when you cocker your lusts in despight of Christ? Can you hear Ser∣mons, and go on in sin? You do well to hear, but you make a desperate adventure, to do what you know, discovenants you from God, and hazards your eternal separation from God. Beloved, I must be plain with you; I beseech you consider how Jews and Pagans, and Divels will rise up in judgment a∣gainst you. 1. The Jew may say, I had a Legal yoke upon me, which neither I, nor my Fathers were able to bear; Christ invited me only into his Garden of Nuts, where I might sooner break my teeth with the hard Shell of Ceremonies, than get to the (little more than bitter) Kenel of Gospel promises; you have those promises in abundance with more ease. Cant. 6.11. q. d. Their Nuts were ripe, but their Pomegranates full of sweet Kernels of Gospel-grace, were not then budded. The Jew may complain, that in the best of their Sacrifices the smoak fill'd their Temple; smoak
only to provoke them to weep for a clearer manifestation. 2 Cor. 3.14. Those of the Jews that were most enraged against Christ, yet had they known him, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. 1 Cor. 2.8. The Jew may say, Though we could but groap after Christ, your eyes are dazled with his glory: We had but the Old Edition of the Covenant of Grace, in a Character very darkly intelligible; you have the Last Edition with a Com∣mentary of our Reection, and the Worlds Recep ion, and the Spirits Effusion; you have all that heart can wish! Oh had we but one of your days of the Son of man, we would not have sinned against so great salvation! Sirs, what do you think your conscien∣ces will be forced to reply? O true, true, must the Gospel-sinner say; I have known, own'd, and professed Christ, and have been angry with Ministers and Friends, when they did but question my being in Co∣venant; but I have not in any measure walked worthy of the Gospel. But I passe by the Jew; let's hear what the Pa∣gan hath to say against you. 2. I perish Eternally, may the poor Pagan say, without all possi∣bility of Reconciliation, and have only sinned against the Cove∣nant of Works, having never heard of a Gospel-Covenant, nor of Reconciliation by a Mediatour. Alas! should I have improved my Naturals to the highest, Reconciliation by Christ could ne∣ver have entred into my head. Oh had I heard but one Sermon! had Christ but once broke in upon my soul, to convince me of my undone condition, and to have shewen a righteousnesse unto me; but woe is me, I never had so much as one offer of Grace! But so have I, must you say that refuse the Gospel; I have, or might have heard thousands of Sermons; I could scarce escape hearing one or other, shewing me the danger of my sin, and my necessity of Christ; but notwithstanding all I heard, I wilfully resolved, I would have nothing to do with him, I could not indure to hear strictnesse prest upon me; it was all the hell I had upon earth, that I could not sin in quiet.
3. Nay, may the Divel himself say; 'tis true, I was ever since my fall maliciously set against God: But alas, so soon as ever I first sinned, God kick't me out of heaven, and told me he would never have mercy on me. And 'though I liv'd in the time of all manner of gracious Dispensations; I saw Sacrifices offered, and Christ in the flesh, and the Gospel preached; yet how could this choose but enrage me the more, to have God as it were say, Look here Satan, I have provided a remedy for sin, but none for thine! this set me upon revenge against God, so far as I could reach him. But alas, alas! had God ever entred into any Cove∣nant with me at all; had God put me upon any terms, though never so hard, for the obtaining of mercy; had Christ been but once offered to me, what do you think would I have done? would I have hearkened to any thing you could say, to Refuse Christ and Salvation? Could you, or all the Angels in heaven have kept me from minding Christ? But, Woe to me, may the Gospel-sinner say: I have as good a Remnant of the Covenant of Works in my nature, as the Pagans have. I have all the discoveries of God in the Legal Covenant, that the Jews ever had. I am un∣der a Better Dispensation than the Divels were under before their Fall. The Gospel of Grace is urged upon me. And therefore, O poor Jew! whatever may be said a∣gainst thy breach of Covenant, there's a thousand fold more to be said against mine. O poor Pagan! whatever is to be said against thy breach of Covenant, there's ten thousand fold more against mine. O wretched Divels! whatever may be said against your sinnes, there's infinitely more to be said against mine. I am the most Foolish, Mad, Wilful Rebel that ever waged war with the grace of God. Sirs, Is all this nothing to you? Can you hear these things quietly? I know you dare not think them over again, and sin at the same rate as before; if you think your souls any thing worth, or hea∣ven and glory any thing worth, now offer up your selves to Christ in
the Gospel-Covenant. Thus much for the first Inference, That their estate is dreadful that are not in the Gospel-Co∣venant. The second Inference is this; That their estate is com∣fortable that are in the Gospel-Covenant; I will only instance in two things. 1. The weakest and poorest faith, and service, is accepted through Christ in the Gospel-Covenant. The Covenant of Grace is made to poor, weak, sinful, fraile man through a Me∣diator; God doth not expect that we should be perfect here: Poor Christians have more ado to pardon themselves, than to have God to pardon them. They quarrel more with themselves for want of holinesse, than God quarrels with them for it. Be∣loved, here are some comfortable Riddles of Grace for you to resolve. The Covenant is meerly of Grace, Grace runs through all the veins, and arteries of it; all the life, blood, and spirit of the Covenant, are Grace, Grace, through Jesus Christ. And yet Beloved, though it be wholly of Grace, it is of Debt by be∣ing a Covenant; God is pleased to enter into Bond to make good his Deed of Gift. What God doth for the heires of promise, it is no more than what is debt to Christ, and what through him he is graciously engaged for us. O the com∣fort of being in Covenant with God! you will say so indeed if you adde, 2. This Gospel-Covenant is so made, that it can never be disa∣nul'd. Alas, we do not know where, nor how to make a Cove∣nant sure in the world; he that is my friend to day, may be my enemy to morrow; his Bond may be good to day, and may be to morrow insoluble. There are ways more than we know of to e∣vade the strictest Covenant, to disanull the strongest Oath; but now God hath sworn by himself, (Hebr. 6.13.) that he will cer∣tainly blesse those whom he takes into Covenant with him. God hath sworn by his holinesse, Psal. 89.34, 35. As if he should say, Let me not be accounted a holy God, if I break Covenant with any of my people. Nay, he swears by his life, Isa. 49.18, 18. The Prophet speaks there of Sion, as of a Mother-City, and of multitudes that should be brought home to her by the Ministry of the Gospel, and that they shall be as Jewels and Ornaments, matter of much honour to her by their e dowments with spiritual
graces: Thus Gospel-Covenanters shall be qualified. But you will presently say, there is no danger of Gods breaking Covenant, all the danger is on our part; but Christians, there is not so much danger on our part, as many fear; it is not every sin that pre∣sently breaks the Covenant; a wife may be foolish and passionate, yet the marriage is not thereby broken. And when we do slip into Covenant-breaches, Christ is ready to pardon us, and the Spirit of Christ ready to piece up our breaches. Provided that we do but make conscience in the whole course of our lives to keep Cove∣nant with God. Christians, I hope by all that hath been spoken, you will be perswaded to enter into Covenant, and to keep Co∣venant with God; if so, I have my End, and so hath my Sermon.
THE Mediatour OF THE COVENANT, Described in his Person, Natures, and Offices. 1 Tim. 2.5. And one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus. COmmunion with God is our only happinesse; 'tis the very heaven of heaven, and 'tis the beginning of heaven here on earth. The on∣ly foundation of this communion, is the Co∣venant of Grace; and 'tis the great excellen∣cy of this Covenant of Grace, that 'tis Esta∣blished in such a Mediator, even Jesus Christ. And one Mediator between, &c. This Epistle (as ot the substance and main design of it) is a
short directory unto Timothy, how he might faithfully discharge that great Office to which the Lord had called him in the Church of Ephesus. In the first Chapter, he instructs him concerning the doctrine he should Preach. In this Chapter concerning the persons for whom he should pray. 1. More generally. For all men, ver. 1. i. e. men of all ranks, conditions, and Nations in the world. 2. Particularly, and especially for Magistrates, ver. 2. The Magistrates of those times, were not only Pagans, but Persecutors;Diversus oran∣di modus ac scopus in diver∣sis hominum ge∣neribus accurate observetur. Non enim quidvis pro quovis oran∣dum est—quia sic precatio no∣stra divinae vo∣luntati repug∣naret. Conrad. Vost. in loc. strangers to Christ themselves, and enemies to e∣very thing of Christ in others, yet pray for them. There are in∣deed some persons, whom Christ leaves out of his prayers, Joh. 17.9. and would have us leave ot of ours, 1 John 5.16. But yet thus far we may and ought to pray for all men, the worst of men, that the Lord would either make them truly good, or else restrain them from doing evil; that he would either shew mercy to them in their own soules, or else keep them from being in∣struments of mischief unto others. That under them, you may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godlinesse and Ho∣nesty. The encouragements unto prayer in this extent, are, Non omnes sine discrimine, sed ex omnibus or∣dinibus. Parae. in loc.1. The good will of God to all men, ver. 4. i. e. men of all ranks and degrees; for though God by his preceptive Will com∣mands every individual man in the world, to mind his salvation, Acts 17.30. and by his approving Will, delights in saving lost creatures; nay, though he vouchsafe to all men, so much grace as will leave them inexcusable in their neglect of salvation: yet can we not from hence stretch the grace of God into that unli∣mited and boundlesse universality, as the Pelagians do from this Scripture; for did God peremptorily and determinately Will the salvation of every particular person in the world, mans stub∣bornnesse could not be too strong for God, nor could our impo∣tency resist his Omnipotent Will. 2. The Mediation of Christ, which lies open to all men to make use of; as God is not the God of Jews only, but of the Gen∣tiles also, Rom. 3.29, 30. so is Christ a Mediator for all. And one Mediator, &c.
In the words 1. The only way of friendly intercourse between God and man, 'tis through a Mediator. 2. The only Mediator between God and man, one Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus. 1. The only way of friendly intercrouse between God and man, 'tis through a Mediator; that's implyed.Burgesse Vindic. Leg. pag. 133.134, 135. Whether man in the state of innocency needed a Mediator, is disputed among per∣sons learned and sober; but in his lapsed state, this need is ac∣knowledged by all. God cannot now look upon men out of a Mediator, but as Rebels, Traytours, as fit objects for his Vin∣dictive wrath. Nor can men now look up to God but as a pro∣voked Majesty, an angry Judge, a consuming fire. And there∣fore were not it for a Mediator, (i. e. a middle person interpo∣sing between God and us who are at variance, to procure re∣conciliation and friendship, as the word  imports) we could not but so dread the presence of this God, that like our first Parents (in that dark interval 'twixt their sinning, and the succour of that promise, Gen. 3.15.) we should have endea∣voured to hide our selves what we could from the presence of the Lord.Gen. 2.8. 2. The only Mediator between God and men. One Mediator, i. e. but one. Papists acknowledge one Mediator of reconciliati∣on, but contend for many of intercession. But as God (in the for∣mer part of this verse) is said to be one God by way of exclusion of all others; so is Christ said here to be one Mediator, i. e. but one. This Mediator is here described partly by His Nature, The man. His Names, Christ Jesus. 1. His Nature, the man, i. e. that eminent man; so some;Singularis ille homo. Vorst. Pa∣raphr. in loc. qi factus est homo. Versio Aethiop. he that was made man; so others. Object. But why is this Mediator mentioned in this Nature only? Answ. 1. Negatively: Not by wy of diminution, as if he were not God as well as man, as the Arrians argue from this
Scripture; nor as if the execution of his Mediatorship, were ei∣ther only,In Christo non solus Deus est Mdiator nc solus homo, sed Deus-homo. or chiefly in his humane Nature, as some of the Pa∣pists affirme, though others of them deny; as Cornel. A Lap. in loc. asserting Christs Mediatorship secundum utram{que} naturam, according to both Natures. 2. Positively, to prove that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah whom the Prophets foretold, the Fathers expected, and who had in that Nature been so frequently promised; as in the first Go∣spel that ever was preached, Gen. 3.15. he is promised as the seed of the Woman. Besides, the Apostle mentions Christ in this Nature, only as an encouragement to that duty of Prayer he had before perswaded; to the like purpose he is mention'd in this nature only, Heb. 4.14, 15, 16. 2. His Names, Christ. Jesus, this was his proper Name; Jesus. Christ, his appellative Name. Jesus; that denotes the work and businesse for which he came into the world, as appeares from the reason which the Angel (that came from heaven as an Herauld to proclaim his incarnat∣on) gives of the imposition of this Name. Thou shalt call his Name Jsus, fr he shall save his people from their sins. This Name, though it be given to others in Scripture, yet to him e∣minently; to them as types of that compleat Saviour who should come after them, and save his people from their sinnes. Christ; that denotes the several Offices, in the exercise where∣of he executes this work of salvation. Christ in the Greek, be∣ing the same with Messiah in the Hebrew; i. e. anointed. Under the Law, the solemne ordination, or setting apart both of things and persons to special services, was by anointing; thus we read of three sorts of persons anointed, Kings, Priests, Pro∣phets; and in respect of all these Offices, Jesus is called Christ. From the words thus briefly explained, arise these two Ob∣servations. 1. That there is now no other way of friendly communion be∣tween God and man, but through a Mediator.
2. That there is no other Mediator between God and man, but Jesus Christ. Doctr. 1. That there is now no other way of friendly commu∣nion between God and man, but through a Mediator; and indeed considering what God is, and withal what man is; how vastly dis∣proportionable, how unspeakably unsuitable our very natures are to his, how is it possible there should be any sweet communion betwixt them, who are not only so infinitely distant, but so ex∣treamly contrary. God is holy, but we are sinful;Isa. 6.3. with Gen. 3.5. 1 Joh. 1.5. with Eph. 5 8. Rom. 7.1. in him is no∣thing but light, in us nothing but darknesse; in him nothing that's evil, in us nothing that's good; he is all beauty, we nothing but deformity; he is justice, and we guitinesse; he a consuming fire, and we but dried stubble; in a word, he an infiniely and incomprehensibly glorious Majesty, and we poor sinful dust and ashes; who have sunk and debased our selves by sin, below the meanest rank of creatures, and made our selves the burthen of the whole Creation; and can there be any communion, any friendship between such? Can too walk together,Amos 3.3. except they be a∣greed? And what agreement can there ever be but through a Mediator? If ever God be reconciled to us, it must be through a Mediator; because of that indispensible necessity of satisfaction,Rom. 8.7. and our inabi∣lity to make it. If ever we be reconciled to God, it must be through a Media∣tor, because of that radicated enmity that is in our natures to e∣very thing of God, and our impotency to it; and thus in both respects, that God may be willing to be a friend to us, and that we may not be unwilling to be friends to him, there needs a Mediatour, 2 Cor. 5.19. compared with Joh. 14.6. Doctr. 2. That there's no other Mediator betwen God and man but Jesus Christ. And one Mediator, i. e. but one.Opus est Medi∣atore ad Medi∣atorem istum. Bernard p. 262 Leo. 1. Papa. Ro∣man. Epist. 83. ad Palestinos Episcop. c. 4. The fond∣nesse of Papists in their multiplicity of Mediators, not only un∣to God, but to our Mediator himself, having no other foundation than only their superstition, cannot be of moment with them, who labour to be wise according to Scripture. That those mem∣bers of the Church who are contemporary here on earth, do in∣deed pray for one another, cannot be denied; but that they are therefore Mediators of Intercession, hath been denied by the more Antient Papists themselves. This Title of Mediator, is
throughout the New Testament appropriated unto Christ, Heb. 8.6. Hb. 9.15 Heb. 12.24. and indeed there's none else fit for so high a work as this, but only he. Resol. 1. The singular suitablenesse of his person to this emi∣nent employment. To interpose as a Mediator betwixt God and men, was an employment above the capacity of men, Angels, or any creature; but Jesus Christ in respect of the dignity of his per∣son, was every way suited for this work. Which you may take in these four particulars. 1. That he was truly God, equal with the Father, of the same nature and substance; not only , but , of the like nature, but of the same nature, as is excellently cleared by that famous Champion for the Deity of Christ against the Arri∣ans, Athanasius. Col. 2.9. In him dwelleth the fulness of the God-head bodily;Non  sed  non divini∣tatis sed deita∣tis. D. Prideaux. fasc. p. 76. 'tis not the fulnesse of the Divinity, but of the Deity; thereby intimating an identity of essence with God the Father, and holy Ghost. Though the Divine essence be after a several manner in the several Persons of the blessed Trinity; in the Father  without receiving it from any other; in the Son by an eternal generation; and in the holy Ghost by procee∣ding: yet 'tis the same essence of God, that is in all three per∣sons;Tylen. Syntagm. p. 401. Lysord his plain mans senses exercised. p. 82. because such is the infinite simplicity of this essence, that it cannot be divided or parcelled. Thus Christ (not to speak a∣ny thing concerning the other persons) is stiled so the Son of God, as one equal with the Father; for upon this it is that the Jews ground their charge of blasphemy against him, that he said God was his Father, making himself equal with God, Joh. 5.18. The force of their reason lies in this; the natural Son of God is truly God, and equal with God; as the natural son of man is man, e∣qual, and of the same substance with his father. Angels and men are the Sons of God by Adoption,Lyford. p. 93. but Christ is the natural Son of God, the only Son of God, and therefore truly God. I and my Father are one, Joh. 10.30. he thought it no robbery to be e∣qual with God, Phil. 2.6. For the further confirmation of this, take these Arguments. 1. He whom Scripture honours with all those Names which ae peculiar unto God, must needs be God. That Christ hath these Names ascribed to him, appeares from these instances. He is not only stiled God, the Word was God, Joh. 1.1. but God
with such additional discrimination,  neither Magistrates (who because they are Gods Depuies and Vicegerents here on earth,Psal. 82 6. are sometimes called Gods) nor ay creature is capable of. The great God, Tit. 2.13. The true God, 1 Joh. 5.20. The mighty God, Isa. 9.6. Over all, God blessed for ever, Rom. 9.5. The Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. The Lord from heaven, 1 Cor. 15.48. Yea, that great Name Jehovah the Lord (or Jehovah) our righte∣ousnesse, Jer. 23.6. 2. He in whom are those high and eminent perfections, those glorious attributes, of which no ceature is capable, must needs be more than a creature, and consequently God. 1. He that is Omnipotent, whose power is boundlesse and un∣limited, must needs be God. The highest power of creatures hath its non ultra, Thus far may it o, but no further; but Christ is said to be Almighty, Rev. 1.8. The Lord God Omnipotent, Rev. 19.6. 2. He that is Omniscient, that searcheth hearts, that hath a window into every mans breast, that can look into all the rooms and corners of our souls, that can see through all those Veils and coverings, which no creature-eye can pierce, must needs be God; and these are the excellencies ascribed to Christ. He need∣ed not that any should testifie of man, because he knew what was in man, Joh. 2.25. I am he which searcheth the heart and reines, Rev. 2.23. He knew their thoughts, Luke 6.8. so Mark 2.8. Joh. 13.19, &c. 3. He that fills heaven and earth, and all places with his pre∣sence, must needs be God; and thus was Christ in heaven, while he was on earth. The Son of man which is in heaven, Joh. 3.13. That where I am, Joh. 14.3. Christ as God, was then in heaven, when as man, he was on earth. So as God he is still on earth, though as man he sits at the right hand of God in hea∣ven. I will be with you to the end of the world, Mat∣thew 28.20. 4. He that is immutable and eternal, must needs be God. The heavens are the work of thy hands; they shall perish, but thou shalt endure, &c. but thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end, Psal. 102.25, 26, 27. so is Christ the everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. The same yesterdy, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8.
5. He that hath life in himself, and is the fountain of life to others, must needs be God; and thus is Christ the Prince of life to others, Acts 3.15. and hath life in himselfe, Joh. 5.26. 3. He to whom those works of infinitenesse are ascribed, to which no lesse a power is sufficient than that of Omnipotency, he must needs be more than a creature. He that laid the foundati∣on of the earth, that by a word commanded all things out of no∣thing, that preserves them from mouldring, and sinking into their first nothing again; that could pardon sin, destroy him that had power of death,Mark 2.5, 7, 8, 9, 10, &c. Heb. 2.14. subdue principalities and powers, Redeem his Church, carry his people triumphing into heaven; he must needs be God. And all these works of infinitenesse are ascribed to Christ; the work of Creation, Without him was nothing made of all that was made, Joh. 1.3. Of conservation, Ʋpholding all things by the Word of his power, Heb. 1.3. of redemption, which he purchased with his blood, Acts 20.28. 4. He whom Angels adore, before whom the highest and best of creatures fall down, giving that worship which is peculiarly due to God, must needs be more than a creature; and thus it is to Christ. Let all the Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1.6. so Mat. 2.11. I might adde the equality of Christ in all those solemn benedi∣ctions and praises upon Record in the New Testament; all which argue strongly, that he must needs be truly God. 2. As he is truly God, so is he compleat and perfect man; having not only an humane body, but a rational soul; and in all things was like to us, sin only excepted. That he had a real, not an imaginary body, appeares from the whole story of the Gospel. He that was conceived, born, cir∣cumcised,Gerhardi Loci Commun. Forbes Disputat. Histo∣rico. Theolog. L. 2. was hungred, athirst, swet drops of blood, was cru∣cified; he that went from place to place, and had all those sin∣lesse affections, which are proper unto bodies: had a true and real body; and such was the body of Christ. That he had an humane soul, is clear also from the story of the Gospel. He that grew in wisdome and knowledge, as 'tis said of Christ, Luke 1.80. Luke 2.40. he whose knowledge was bounded and limited, as was also said of Christ. Of that
day, and that houre knoweth no man; no not the Angels,Propterea totum hominem sine peccato suscepit, ut totum quo constabat homo, à peccatorum peste sanaret. August. Sicut totum ho∣minem Diabo∣lus decipiendo percussit; ita Deus totum suscipiendo salvavit. Fulgent. neither the Sonne of man, but the Father, Mark 13.32. As God he knew all things; as man, his knowledge was but the knowledge of a creature, and therefore finite; all which argue he had a humane soul, as well as body, and was compleat man. The whole Nature of man was corrupted, destroyed, and therefore 'twas needful Christ should take upon him whole man, that the whole might be repaired and saved. 3. He is God and man in one person. He had two Natures, but was but one person: there was a twofold substance, divine and humane; but not a twofold subsistence; for the personal be∣ing which the Son of God had before all worlds,Hooker Eccles. pol. pag. 293. suffered not the substance to be personal which he took, although together with the Nature which he had, the Nature which he took con∣tinue for ever; thus both Natures make but one Christ. He was the Son of God, and the Son of man, yet not two Sons, but one person. He was born of God, and born of a Virgin,Lyford. p. 100. but 'tis in respect of his different Natures. Thus was Christ Da∣vids Son, and Davids Lord; Maries Son, and Maries Savi∣our and Maker too. By the right understanding of this, we may be very much hel∣ped in reconciling those seeming contradictions, which fre∣quently occurre in Scripture concerning Christ. He is said to be born of a woman, and yet to be without beginning of dayes;Zanch. in Ephes. p 35. himself sayes his Father is greater than he, and yet he is said to be equal with the Father. All which may be cleared by this. He was but one person; and therefore as in man, who consists of soul and body, the actions of each part are ascribed to the per∣son: the man is said to understand; 'tis not his body, but soul that understands; yet this is ascribed to the person,Lyford. p. 101. though it be but the formal act of one part: so in regard of this hypostatical union of two Natures in one person, the acts of each Nature are ascribed to the person. Thus 'tis said the Jews cucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. i. e. they crucified that person who was the Lord of glory. Acts 20.28. God is said to purchase his Church by his blood; as God he could not shed his blood, but 'twas that person who was God. Thus is Christ said to be in hea∣ven, when he was on earth; i. e. as God, he was in heaven.
And so what is proper to each nature by reason of the hypostatical union, is ascribed to the whole person. 4. This union of two natures in one person, is without con∣fusion or transmutation; the natures remaining distinct, and the properties and operations of both natures distinct, notwithstanding this union. Some things are proper to the Godhead, of which the Manhood is uncapable; and some things proper to the Manhood, of which the Godhead is uncapable: We cannot say the Godhead was athirst, weary, dyed; neither can we say the Manhood was the Fountain of all being, the Creator and Preserver of all things; or that it is ubiquitary or omnipresent, though we may say all of the same person. 'Tis observed by learned Writers, that the dividing of the person which is but one,Hooker Eccles. Pol. p. 299. and the con∣founding of the natures which are two, hath occasioned those grand Errors in this Article of faith, by which the peace of the Church hath been so much disturbed. And sutably to these foure heads that have been spoken to, there have arisen foure several heresies. 1. The Arrians, denying the Deity of Christ, against whom the Council of Nice Determined that he was , truly God.Hooker ibid. .2. The Apollinarians, who maimed and misinterpreted his humane nature, against whom the Council of Constanti∣nople Determined that he was compleat and perfect Man. 3. The Nestorians, who divided Christ into two persons, because of his two natures,. against whom the Council of Ephesus Determined that he was God-man in one person. 4. The Eutichians, who confounded these two natures in one person,. against whom the Council of Chalcedon Determi∣ned that he was God-man in one person without confusion or mutation of natures. But in the foure above-named heads enough hath been said by way of Antidote against those dangerous mistakes. And all being duly considered, we cannot but see great reason why he should be called wonderful, Isa. 9.6. Well might the Apostle cry out by way of admiration, Without controversie great is the myste∣ry of godlinesse, God was manifest in the flesh, 1 Tim. 3.16.
5. The singular fitnesse of Christ for this work of Mediation, arises from his being God-man in two natures, united in one person without Confusion or Transmuta∣tion. 1. Had he not been truly God, he had been too mean a person for so high an employment; it was God that had been offended, an infinite Majesty that had been despised. The person therefore in∣terposing must have some equality with him to whom he interpo∣ses. Had the whole society of persevering Angels inter∣posed on mans behalf, it had been to little purpose; one Christ was infinitely more than all, and that because he was truly God. 2. Had he not been compleatly man, he had been no way ca∣pable of performing that indispensibly necessary condition, upon which God was willing to be reconciled; viz. The satisfying of that righteous sentence God had pronounced. Gen. 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely dye. That there∣fore he might be capable of dying, (which as God he could not) and that the justice of God might be satisfied in the same na∣ture by which it had been offended, 'twas necessary he should be man. 3. Had he not been God and man in one person, the sufferings of his humane nature could not have derived that infinite value from the Divine nature.Mediato Christi est . We could not have called his blood the blood of God, (as 'tis called Acts 20.28.) it would have been no more than the blood of a creature, and consequently as unavailable as the blood of Bulls, &c. Hebr. 9.12. Hebr. 10.4. 4. Had he not been God-man without confusion of natures; his Deity might either have advanced his humanity, above the ca∣pacity of suffering; or his humanity might have debased his Deity below the capability of meriting, which is no lesse than blasphemy to imaine. And this is the first reason, the singular fitnesse of Christ for this work, because of the Dignity of his person. Reason 2. The singular fitnesse of Christ for this employ∣ment in respect of the sutablenesse of his Offices. There is a threefold misery upon all men, or a threefold bar to communion with God.
1. The guilt of their sins which themselves are never able to ex∣piate, or satisfie for. 2. The blindnesse of their minds, the cure whereof is too diffi∣cult for any creature Physician. 3. Their bondage and captivity to sin and Satan, which are ene∣mies too strong for man to deal with. Sutably to these three great necessities, Jesus Christ is anointed of God to a threefold Office, of a Priest, a Prophet, a King; the former of which Offices he exercises on our behalf to God, and the two last, from God to us. 1. The Priestly Office of Christ is the great, the only relief we have against the guilt of sin; the work of the Priesthood consisted under the Law, chiefly of these two parts. 1. Satisfaction for the sins of the people. Lev. 4.16, 17, 18, 19, &c. 2. Intercession unto God on their behalf, Levit. 16.12, 13. Both which were verified in Christ our great high Priest, Hebr. 4.14. And hence it is that the Apostle encourages us to come with boldness unto the Throne of Grace, Hebr. 4.16. What was done by others Typically, was done by Christ Re∣ally. 1. His satisfaction in discharging those debts which his people had run into with Divine justice to the utmost farthing, and this he did by offering up that one single sacrifice which was infinitely more worth than all those multitudes of sacrifices offered up of old, and from which all former sacrifices had their vertue and effi∣cacy.Ephes. 5.2. The Priests of old offered up creatures, but this high Priest offers up himself; they offered the blood of Bullocks, &c. Hebr. 9.13, 14. but Christ the blood of God, Acts 20.28. They offered many sacrifices, and Christ but one, but such a one as infinitely ex∣ceeded all their many; such a one as perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Hebr. 10.14. One Sun is worth more than thou∣sands of Stars, and one Jewel than millions of ordinary stones; and so one Christ is more effectual than all Lebanon, or the cattel on a thousand hills.
2. His intercession; this is the other part of his Priest∣ly Office; his satisfaction, that was performed on earth; his Intercession is performed chiefly in heaven: by the former he purchased pardon and Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. compared with Verse 21. by the latter he applies the benefits he hath pur∣chased; his sufferings, though they were but while he was on earth, yet the benefit of them extends to all ages of the Church, both before and since his passion; and his Intercession is that which sues out these blessings for his people; and therefore that great Apostle joynes both together as the foundation of all his comfort, Rom. 8.33. Christ hath died, who still makes Inter∣cession; and both these are so full, so sufficient a relief against the guilt of sin, that as we have no other, so we need no other; as the High Priests bore the names of the people before the Lord, so does Jesus Christ the names of his Elect;Heb. 9.25. Heb. 9.12.24. Heb. 10.12. Heb. 11.25. 1 John 2.1. but the High Priests of Old, were at certain times only to appeare be∣fore the Lord, once a yeare to enter into the holy place; but Christ our spiritual High Priest, is not only entered, but sat down at the right hand of God, to negotiate constantly on his Chur∣ches behalf; He ever lives to make Intercession, Heb. 11:25. And besides the constancy, consider the prevalency of his In∣tercession; that God that regards the cry of Ravens, that will not altogether neglect the humiliation of Ahab, that God that is so ready to answer and honour the prayers of his own peo∣ple, cannot but much more regard the prayers of his on∣ly Son, praying by his blood, and praying for nothing more than what himself hath deserved and purchased. He that is such a great High Priest, is excellently fit∣ted in respect of this Office, for the work of Media∣tion. 2. The Prophetical Office of Christ, is the great,Deut. 18.15. Joh. 1.24, 25, 45. John 6.14. the only relief we have against the blindnesse and ignorance of our mindes. He is that great Prophet of his Church whom Moses fore-told, the Jews expected, and all men need∣ed; that Sun of Righteousnesse, who by his glorious beams dispels those mists of ignorance and errour, which darken the mindes of men, and is therefore stiled by way of e∣minency, that light, John 1.8. and the true light, Joh. 1.9.
The execution of this Prophetical Office, is partly by revea∣ling so much of the Will of God as was necessary to our salvati∣on, partly by making those revelations powerful and effe∣ctual. 1. In revealing the Will of God; for no man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bo∣some of the Father, he hath declared him, Joh. 1.18. The manner of revealing the mind of God, hath been different in se∣veral ages. 1. Sometimes making use of instruments; who were either ordinary; as under the Law, the Priests whose lips should pre∣serve knowledge; and under the Gospel, Pastors and Tea∣chers:Mal. 2.7. 2 Chron. 15.3. Eph. 4.11, 12, 13. Or else extraordinary; as Prophets under the Law; and Apostles, and Evangelists, in the first plantation of the Go∣spel. 2. For sometime instructing his Church immediately in his own person, Heb. 1.1, 2. 2. In enlightening effectually the souls of his people: in causing the blinde to see, and making them who were once dark∣nesse, to be light in the Lord, Eph. 5.2. Thus he instructs by his Word, and by his Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.12. and by that Soveraignty he hath over the hearts of men, o∣pens their hearts to receive his counsels. He that can thus speak, not only to the eare, but to the heart, is also in this Office, excellently fitted for the work of Media∣tion. 3. The Kingly Office of Christ, is the great, the only re∣lief we have against our bondage to sin and Satan. He to whom all power is given in heaven,Mat. 28.18. Eph. 1.20, 21, 22. Heb. 2.8. Phil. 2 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 15.27, 28. Isa 61.1. and in earth, Mat. 28.18. He whom God hath raised from the dead, and set at his own right hand in heavenly places, far above all principali∣ty and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come; and hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head over all things to the Church: It is he that restores liberty to the captives, and opens the Prison doors to them that are bound. This great Office of a King, he executes chiefly in these Royal acts.
1. In gathering to himself a people out of all kindreds,Gen. 49.10. Isa 55.4, 5. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 1 Pet. 1.3, 5. Eph. 4.12, 13. 1 Thes. 4.16, 17. Nations and tongues; and in making them a willing people in the day of his power, Psal. 110.3. 2. In governing that people by Laws, Officers, and Censures of his own ordaining, Isaiah 33.22. Ephes. 4.11, 12. Mat. 18.17, 18. 3. In bringing all his elect into a state of saving grace, and preserving that grace alive in their soules, which himself hath wrought, though it be as a spark of fire in an Ocean of wa∣ter, in carrying it on to perfection, and crowning it with glory. 4. In restraining, over-ruling, and at last destroying all his and his Churches enemies, Psalme 110.1. those who will not submit to the Scepter of his grace, he rules with his Iron rod, and will at last dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel, Psal. 2.9. And thus is Christ not only in respect of the dignity of his person, but the suitablenesse of his Offices, the only fit Me∣diator between God and man. The doctrinal part of this Scripture being thus cleared, take one word by way of application. Use. This may informe us of the unspeakable folly and mi∣sery of all such as despise this Mediator; there is but one Me∣diator, but one way of Reconciliation unto God, but one way of having sin pardoned, our natures cleansed, the fa∣vour of God restored, our lost condition recovered, and that is through the Mediation of Christ; and shall it be said of any of us? as Christ himself speaks of those foolishly ob∣stinate Jews, they would not come unto him,Col. 3.4. that they might have life, Joh. 5.40. There is in Christ the life of Justifica∣tion, to free us from that eternal death the Law sentences us unto; the life of sanctification to free us from that spiritual death we are under by nature; there is in him a sufficient relief against whatever is discouraging; and shall we be so little our own friends, so false to our own concernments, as to reject his profered help, notwithstanding we do so highly need it? 1. In rejecting this Mediator, you sin against the highest and greatest mercy that ever was vouchsafed to creatures; 'tis men∣tioned as an astonishing act of love in God, that he should so
love the world, as to give his only begotten Son, &c. Joh. 3.16. so] beyond all comparison,Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. John 15.13. compared with Rom. 5.8. so] beyond all expression; and oh what an amazing condescention was it in Christ, who though he thught it no robbery to be equal with God, was yet pleased to make himself of no reputation, and took upon him the forme of a servant, became obedint unto death, even the death of the cross; and all this as our Mediator? there is not any mercy we enjoy, but 'tis the fruit of this mercy. Eph. 2.12.2. You hereby reade your condition, the same with Pagans; the emphasis of whose misery, consists in this, that they are without Christ, and therefore without hope. Nay, the same with Devils, who have no Mediator interposing on their behalf to God; but as they sinn'd with a Tempter, so they perish without a Saviour; this is their misery, and shall this be any of our choice? 3. Your condition is hereby rendred in this respect worse than theirs, in that you despise that mercy which they were never profered. The danger of this sin, you may find awakeningly set down by the Apostle, Hebrews 2.3. Hebr. 10.28, 29, 30. He∣brews 12.25. Ʋse. Be perswaded then to make use of Christ in all his Offices, in whom you have an universal antidote against all dis∣couragements. Heb 12.24.Are your consciences alarum'd with the thunder of Scri∣pture-threats, and curses of the Law, fly to that blood of sprink∣ling, the voice whereof is much louder than the cry of your sinnes. John 3.14.Are you stung with the sense of your corruptions, look up to Christ as your Brazen Serpent, that he may cure these wounds and deliver you from death. 1 John 2.1. Heb. 4.14, 16.Are you discouraged from prayer, because your prayers have hitherto been so sinfully defective? consider the In∣tercession of Christ, and take encouragement from thence. Are you afflicted with your own unteachablenesse? look up to him as the great Prophet sent of God, and beg of him the inward and effectual teachings of his Spirit, and he would speak as powerfully in his Word to your dead hearts, as he once spoke to dead Lazarus.John 12.43.
Are you disquieted with doubts and feares, in respect of your own perseverance? though temptations are boysterous,Col. 1.11. and corruptions violent, look up to him who sits at the right hand, till all his enemies become his foot-stoole, that he would streng∣then you. Are you full of feares because of Zion, the afflictions, dangers,Psal. 110.1. Col. 1.21. enemies of the Church? remember he is the Head over all things to the Church. In a word, whatever your afflictions or troubles are, the Mediation of Christ is a sufficient relief; and therefore sit not down dejectedly mouring,Gen. 21.19. like Hagar weeping at the foun∣taine side.
OF CHRISTS Humiliation. PHILIP. 2.8. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Crosse. THis Chapter begins with one of the most pathetical and powerfully pressed Exhortations that we meet with in the whole Scripture: The Apostle is in one of his high streins and raptures of Rhetorick, con∣juring the Philipians (as it were) by all that they accounted dear and precious, unto brotherly unity and amity,Nullus jacen∣tem suscitat nisi inflexione sui. Nierem. and to this end, to humility of minde, and a mu∣tual condescension. He that will lift up, and embrace another that is fallen, must himself stoop down; and because men are rather drawn by example, than driven by precept, he propounds to them a pattern beyond all parallel: Let this minde be in you which was also in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, &c. As if he had said, Jesus Christ was as high as the highest, coequal with God, it was his right to stand upon even ground with his Father, and without any wrong to him might have pleaded his Peerage, and yet he strangely humbled, and a∣based himself; here is your Copy. How lowly should Christians be? seeing humanity, the form of a servant, nay, death it self were not accounted too low for their Lord; Christ himself hath just such another Argument; John 13.14. If I your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one anothers feet. Let no Christian stand upon his pantofles, seeing Christ humbled himself, and became obedient to death, the death of the Crosse. In which words we have, 1. The depth of Christs humiliation: 1. Specified, death. 2. Aggravated, even the death of the Cross. 2. The Manner of his humiliation, where we may note these two remarkable circumstances. 1. His voluntarinesse, he humbled himself. 2. His obedience, he became obedient unto death. The Scripture hath observed to us these three special steps of Christs humiliation. 1. He stoop't down to become a man. 2. He condescended to put his neck under the yoke of the Law. 3. He appeared in the likenesse of sinful flesh. 1. He stoop't down to become a man; he left the warme bo∣some of his Father, and took himself lodgings in the womb of a Virgin; he strip't himself of his Robes of glory, to put on the course home-spun, and thread-bare tatters of a fraile humanity; and he that thought it no robbery to be equal with God, submit∣ted to an estate lower than some of his own creatures; this is the first Riddle in the Apostles great mystery of godlinesse: God was manifest in the flesh. And sure,1 Tim. 3.16. that the most magnificent Mo∣narch in the world should become a Toad, that the whole Host of Angels should be degraded into worms; that this goodly frame of
the Creation should be unpinned and annihilated, or crowded in∣to the narrow compasse of one single aome, is infinitely a lesse wonder, than for God to become a man; had Christ been made an Angel, it had been infinitely below himself, and yet then he had remain'd a spirit, and stayed something nearer home; but he cloathed his Divinity with a body; the Word was made flesh; he made himself of no reputation,. and was made in the likeness of men, Ver. 6. He emptied himself of his credit; to become a man was so much beneath him, that upon the matter it undid him in point of reputation. The greatest step of Christs humiliation, was his Incarnation; for that being man he should dye, is nothing so astonishing a wonder, and inconceivable, as that being God he should be made a man. 2. He condescended to put his neck under the yoke of the Law. God (saith the Apostle) sent forth his son made of a woman;Gal. 4.4. and though that be very much, yet there is more added, made under the Law. Though every man that is born of a wo∣man, every mothers childe among us, be necessarily subject to a Law, and it is no condescention, its no whit below the greatest Prince on earth that gives Laws to many thousands; yet this was a very great submission in Christ. Adam while he continued in a state of integrity and perfection, was then under a Law, and did not yield or abate any thing of his right by it; the blessed and glo∣rious Angels continue under an obligation to obedience, and they do not by this lose any of their birth-right for a creature; as a creature, is indispensably subjected to the Law of its Maker, by vertue of its creatureship and dependance; and should any one of them attempt a disobligation, it were an essay toward a prodigious and praeternatural Antinomianisme. But the Son of God, the Eternal and Independent Law-maker did admirably abase himself, to come under the obediential observance, and poysonous maledi∣ction of that Law, upon which there was only the print of his own authoririty; for though the humane nature abstractly considered, is as a creature bound to the observance of a Law, yet being in con∣junction with the second person in the Trinity, and assumed into the personality of the Son of God, it was exempted from obedi∣ence, and indemnified as to curse and penalty. Christ submitted to the Ceremonial Law in his circumcision, put his neck under the yoke of the moral Law, to fulfill the preceptive part by his
Perfect obedience, and satisfie the maledictive part by his com∣pleat sufferings; all which subjection was not a debt that God could have challenged of him, but a pure voluntary subscription; The Law is not made in some sense for a righteous man,1. Tim. 1.9. but it is not made in any sense for the glorious God. 3. And which is a step beneath both these; he appeared as a sinful man, or in the likeness of sinful flesh;Rom. 8.3. subjection to the Law made him very low, but the similitude of sin, which is the violation of the Law was a far greater abasement. Christs appea∣ring in the likenesse of sinful flesh, must not be understood as though his flesh were only a likenesse and appearance,Non in similitu∣dine carnis quasi caro non esset caro, sed in similitudine carnis peccati, quia caro erat, sed peccati caro non erat. Aug. Heb. 9. ult. or he had only an aerial, and phantastical body; as some of old absurdly fan∣cied and affirmed; he had true real flesh, though but the simili∣tude and resemblance of sinful flesh; the word likenesse relates not to flesh, but sin; not flesh in likeness, but sin in likeness; a being under a Law implies nothing of sin; it was the case of Adam, and the Angels, and both without sin, or any thing that look't like sin; but our blessed Lord condescended not only to subjection, but to the print and appearances of transgression. He shall appear (saith the A∣postle) the second time without sin unto salvation. Intimating, that the first time he appeared with sin upon him; when he returns in glory, he shall have no dints of sin upon him; the smell or finge∣ing of it shall not be upon his garments; but his first entrance was with many of those prints and marks that sin (where ever it is) uses to leave behinde it. Sin was neither inherent in him, nor committed by him; but imputed to him. Sin never defiled him, but it defaced him; he had nothing of its impurity, but much of its penalty; he was not tainted with that plague, but he was plea∣sed to take upon him the tokens. In the same Chapter the Pro∣phet tells us, He had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth, and he was numbred with Transgressors.Isa. 53.9, 12. He trode not one step awry in sin, but many of the footsteps of sin appeared upon him; to instance in a few. 1. Poverty: he came in a low and mean condition, and thats the very likenesse of sin, the great bankrupt that brought all to beggery. Though he was rich, yet for our sakes he b came poor.2 Cor. 8.9. When he rode to Jerusalem, it was not in state, in a gilded Coach with six horses; or mounted like a Lord Mayor with em∣bossed trappings; but as one might rather say, like a Beggar that
is sent with a Passe from one Town to another;Matth. 21.5. Sitting upon an Asse,Matth. 8.20. and a Colt, the foole of an Asse. The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Aire have nests, but the Son of man had not where to lay his head. He was at such a very low ebb as to worldly riches,Matth. 17. ult.  valet, 2 s. 6 d. that once he, and one of his Apostles, could not both of them make a purse for half a crown to pay their tax without the working of a Miracle. Isa. 55.3. 2 Thess. 2.3.2. Another likenesse of sin was sorrow: He was a man of sor∣rows, and acquainted with griefs; as Antichrist is called a man of sin, his very make and constitution is sin, so was Christ a man of sorrows, and as it were made up of them, they were in a manner his complexion. We read oft of his weeping, but it is not obser∣ved that ever there was a smile upon his face. Now sin and sor∣row are so near of kin, that the Hebrew language compriseth both in one word; they are as like as mother and daughter, and both cal∣led by the same name. 3. A third likenesse of sin was shame and reproach: Sin was the inlet of shame; when our first Parents had sinned, their eyes were opened,Gen. 3.7. Chap. 2. ult. and they knew that they were naked, and sewed fig-leaves toge her. Why they were naked before, and were not ig∣norant of it, but then it was no shame to them; sin gave them a sight of their nakednesse, so as they never saw it before: This similitude of sin was upon Christ, when he was called Glutton, Wine-bibber, Conjurer, Blasphemer, Divel, and what not, that might cause and increase contempt? We hid (as it were) our faces from him, (saith the Prophet) he was despised, and we esteemed him not;Isa. 55.3. how vile and contemptible is that person, upon whom we turn the back in scorn? to whom we will not vouchsafe so much as a look, or the glance of an eye! I am a reproach of men, (saith the Psalmist in the person of Christ) and desp sed of the people.Psal. 22.6. 4. Another similitude of sin, was the withdrawment of his Father, and clouding the lih of his counteance. His fathers forsaking him, whereof he makes that heavy heart-breaking com∣plaint,Matth 27.46. My God, my God, why hast thou foraken me? The frown of his Father, and brow-beating of his displeasure, was the very likenesse of sin; for from that noysome vapour oly ari∣ses a cloud to over-cast the light of his countena ce. Nothing but that builds up a partition wall betwixt him and us. Your ini∣quities
have separated betwixt you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you. We hid our face from Christ,Isa. 59 2. and in that there was reproach; but alas, this was nothing in compa∣rison; a Prince need not trouble himself that he hath not the smile of his Groom: What if all creatures in heaven and earth had hid their faces from Christ, he could well have born up under it; but the hiding of his Fathers face even broke his heart, as a burden intolerable. 5. And lastly, Christ submitted to death, and that's anoher likenesse of sin. Sin entred into the world, and death by sin;Rom. 5.12. they came together as it were, hand in hand; this was he penalty inflicted upon sin, In the day thou etest, thou shalt suely dye.Gen. 2.17. Now in this respect Christ abased himself to look like a sinner; Humbled himself, and became obedient to death, the death of the Crosse. In the further Amplification of this, I shall endeavour to shew three things. 1. What kinde of death Christ humbled himselfe unto. 2. In what manner Christ underwent that death. 3. Upon what grounds Christ thus humbled himself to death. 1. What kinde of death Christ humbled himself unto; and this I cannot omit, the Apostle having added such a remarkable Emphasis by way of reduplication; Death, even the death of the Cross. It was not only a violent death, and there's much in that, that he dyed not a natural, but a violent death: Nor indeed could he, both because there was no sin in him to be the in-let of a natu∣ral death, nor would that have been satisfactory for the sin of o∣thers. It was not only (I say) a violent death; but such a vio∣lent death, as had in it a more than ordinary violence, a death by crucifying, which hath these three imbittering Circumstances. 1. Pain. 2. Shame. 3. Curse. 1. Pain: The easiest death is painful; a death-bed, though a down-bed, is for the most part a little ease. Oh my gowty feet,
saith Asa! O my cold benum'd body, saith David! O my le∣prous skin, saith Uzziah! O my pained a king head cryes the son of the Shunamite! but in the death of Christ there was the pain of many deaths put together; in the very dawning of the Gospel, the very first time we finde the death of Christ mentioned, it is set out by bruising;Gen. 3.15. It shall bruise the head, and thou shalt bruise his heel,Isa. 53.10.  Matth. 26.39. viz. his humane nature, that which could be bruised: It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he hath put him to grief; bruised him as with a Pestel in a Mortar; hence was it he prayed so earnestly that the Cup might passe; it was so full of worme-wood and gall, and the pain so violent which he was to encounter, that he screwed up his request to the highest pin, if it be possible; wise and resolute men do not use to complain of a little; they will not cry oh at a flea-bite, or the burning of a finger; and some of the Martyrs have born up with such Christian courage, and gallan∣try in death, that being on the Rack they would not be loosed; they were tortured,Heb. 11.35. not accepting deliverance, (saith the Apostle) the incomes and supports of Divine Grace, made an abatement of their pains; oh but what shall we say of the bitternesse of that death, where the Author of all their strength, God and man bewrayes passions? how much dregs was there in that Cup which Christ was so loth to drink of? Three things made Christs death so exceeding painful. Optime com∣plexionatus. Aquin.1. The piercing his hands and feet, those sinnews and sensitive parts. Christs body was all over excellently well tempered, and so his sense admirably acute; but to be pierced and digg'd through hands and feet, parts so full of nerves and sinnews, must needs aggravate and augment the smart; They have pierced my hands and my feet,Psal. 22.16. was the Prophetical complaint of the Psalmist, ful∣filled in Christ. 2. Another thing that addeth much to the pain of Christs death, was the extension and distortion of his body; the Crosse was a rack to him, and he was stretch't as upon the Tenters; for when any persons were to be crucified, the Crosse you must understand, ly all along upon the ground till the party was nailed to it, and stretch't out at his full length, and afterward erected; and to this the Psalmist had respect in that sad complaint of his, I may tell all my bones;Psal. 22 17. he was so rack't, that his bones were almost ready to start out of the skin.
3. The death of Christ was more painful, by reason of its slow∣nesse, and gradual approach. Christ was from the third,Compare Mar. 15.25. with 34. to the ninth houre in dying; from nine in the morning, till three in the afternoon, six compleat houres—When bloody Ty∣rants would make any mans death more than ordinarily pain∣ful, they have devised wayes to cause a lingring death; and when news was once brought to one of them, that such a one was dead suddenly, he cryed out, Evasit, he hath made an escape. When death comes, the slower its pace, the heavier its tread; the longer the Seige, the fiercer the storme; but this is true of Christ, more than others; for when they are long in dying, they usually faint, and their spirits abate, they are brought step by step to deaths doore, and dead before death; but with Christ it was otherwise, he stood all that while in perfect strength; the vigour and acutenesse of his senses was no whit blunted, or made lesse sensible of paine. That is a notable Scripture, Mark 15.37, 39. Jesus cryed with a loud voice, and gave up the Ghost; and when the Centurion, which stood ovr against him, saw that he so cryed out, and gave up the Ghost, he said, Truly this man was the Son of God; a very strange inference, this man dyes, and gives up the Ghost, and therefore he is the Son of God. The Argument one would think, were strong to the contrary; but here lies the strength of his reason, When he saw he so cry∣ed out, and died, he said he was the Son of God. He very well knew, that in other men strength abated leisurely, their speech grew low, and they used to fumble and falter, and rattle in the throat; but as for this man, he gave such a cry at the last gasp as he never heard, and thereupon infers, Truly he was the Son of God. 2. Another bitter ingredient unto the death of Christ was shame; and this was much more than the former. There is no∣thing so sharp and cutting, so intolerable to an ingenuous and noble spirit as shame. The paine of an hundred deaths, is more easily undergone by such, than the reproach of one. Now in this respect, the thieves fared much better than he did; we read of no irrision, no inscription, no taunts, or sarcasms cast upon them; they had only paine to encounter; Christ both pain and scorne; the souldiers, the Jews, the very thieves flouted him. He endured the Crosse,Heb. 12.2. (saith the Apostle) and despised the
shame. The Crosse was it self a ignominious death, the death of a slave;Fecinus est vin∣cire civem Ro∣manum, scelus verbera e, quid dicam in cru∣cem tollere? Cic. Zach 11.13. no Free man, or man of fashio was ever put to it; and to this day, we say of one that is hang'd, He dyes like a dog; yea, but Christ did not only dye such an ignominious and reproachful death as this, but he was sold to it, and a goodly price that he was prized at; the death it self was shameful, the death of a slave, and this was an aggravating circumstance of ignominy, that he was sold to it as a slave; all the while he was dying, he stood naked upon the Crosse. Now nakednesse is our shame; he was scorned and derided on all sides; they mockt and shak't the head at him; all his Offices were derided; his Priestly Office; He saved others, himself he cannot save; his Prophetical Office,Mar. 27.42. when they blinded him, and bid him proph∣sie, who it was that smote him. His Kingly Office, when they put a robe upon him, and in mockery said, Haye King of the Jews. Thieves, and notorious Villains were crucified with him, and he put in the midst, as though he were worse than both of them, and all their villinies, and mis-demeanours had con∣centred in him; they spit in his face, and that's a notable mark of infamy, such an one as God allotted for the reproach of him that refused to build up his Brothers house.Deut. 25.9. And all this was acted without the Gate; they thought him not worthy to suffer within the Walls of their City, lest forsooth, he might have polluted it. This the Apostle takes special notice of; Je∣sus,Heb. 13.12. that he might sanctifie the people with his own Blood, suf∣fered without the Gate; which in the next verse he explaines, and calls his reproach; as under the Law, the Blasphemer was by Gods appointment to be stoned without the Camp; and amongst us at this day,Levit. 24.14. the most base and villainous Malefactors are carted away to Tyburne, and not executed upon Tower hill, that is honourable. 3. The sting of Christs death is yet behind, it was invenom'd with a curse;Deut. 21.23. though pain be bad, and shame worse, yet the curse is worst of all. He that is hanged, is accursed of God. That was (it is true) a Ceremonial Curse, but it was typical, and had special relation to Christ, who was under a real, moral curse; and so it is applyed by the Apostle, Christ hath Redeem∣ed us from the curse of the Law,Gal. 3.13. being made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a Tree.
And here the Apostle Peter puts a remarkable accent, speaking of Christ to the Jewes, Whom ye slew,Acts 5.30. (saith he) and hang d on a Tree; intimating that bare slaying him, would not have been so much as hanging him on a tree; the Jews had many o∣ther wayes of putting people to death, as stoning, strangling, burning, beheading, but only crucifying had a curse annexed to it. Christ was made sin for us, that we might meet with, and intercept that wrath and curse that was due to us, and breaking out upon us. We read in the story of his passion, that when Christ was going to wrestle with that dreadful agony in the gar∣den, he passed over the brook Cedron.John 18.1. And if we consult the History of the Kings, we shall finde that when any godly ones amongst them, as Hezekiah, Asa, Josiah, reformed and pur∣ged the City and Temple of Idolatry, they cast the abominable and cursed things into the brook Kidron.2 Chron. 15.16.29.16.30.14. Psal. 110. ult. Christ was in his suf∣ferings, to drink of the brook in the way, to passe over, and wade through a River full of curses. 2. In what manner Christ underwent this death. It behooves us to consider the manner of our performing duties to Christ, for their acceptation; and it will be worth the while for us to ponder the manner of Christs shedding his blood for us; both for our consolation and imitation. Now as to the manner of his death, three circumstances call for our consideration. He dyed Willingly. Obediently. Humbly and Meekly. 1. Willingly; he was a Volunteer in death; and his offering up himself in sacrifice, was a free-will offering; his Fathers de∣termination made it necessary; and thus, Christ ought to suffer, and the Son of man must be lifted up; but his Fahers preordi∣nation gave not his death the formality of a Sacrifice. In re∣gard of men it was violent, They slew him wth wickd hands; this makes it not the sacrifice neither; they were not the Priests, but the butchers of Chist. In respect of himself it was volunta∣ry; that made the Sacrifice; Then said I, Lo I come; in the volume of the Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy Will,Psal. 40.7, 8.
oh my God, yea, thy Law is within my heart. As if he had said,John 10.17, 18 . Theoph. in loc. Ibid. My very heart is ready for the shedding of my heart-blood. I lay down my life, (saith Christ) no man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of my self; though the Jews took it away, yet not against his Will; it was their murtherous will to have it, and his gracious Will to give it. I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it againe. As if he had said, were it not my pleasure to part with it, with all the power they could make, they were never able to wrest it out of my hands. Mat. 26.53.When one of Christs followers struck off the High Priests servants eare, Christ gave him a check; Think st thou, saith he) that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of Angels. As if he had said, I need not such weapons, I could commission Twelve Legi∣ons of Angels to be of my life-guard: one were sufficient to do the businesse; as what a rout did one Angel once make in Sen∣nacheribs army?2 King. 19.35. but I could put twelve legions into battel ar∣ray for my rescue, were not I as ready to be crucified, as they are to crucifie me. And when the souldiers came to break his legs,John 19 33. Suffixus spiri∣tum cum verba dimisit preven∣to carnificis of∣ficio. Tertul. Luke 12.50. they forbore, because he was already dead. Such was his forwardnesse to die, that he saved them a labour. Nay, there was not a bare willingnesse, but on his part, strong desires to dye. I have a baptisme to be baptized with, and how am I straitned till it be accomplished? his death was full of paine, but his heart was so set upon it, that he was in a man∣ner pained, till he came to dye; and not to have dyed, had been a death to him. Heb 5.7. Mat. 26.39.Object. But it will be objected, Christ feared death, he prayed against it, and therefore his Will had a repugnancy a∣gainst it: Answ. This doth not oppose, but rather testifie and evi∣dence Christs willingnesse to dye; for he may be considered as a private person, of the same natural affections, desires, and abhorrencies with other men; and so the bitter cup was just∣ly feated, and declined; or in a publick relation, as Media∣tor, a merciful and faithful High Priest, and so he most wil∣lingly submitted himself to it; and this willingnesse of Christ, ratione officii, was so much the greater, because ratine
naturae, he could not but have strong reluctancies a∣gainst it. 2. Christ humbled himself to death obediently. It was his will to dye, and yet he dyed not of his own will, but in obedience to his Fathers. We have them both conjoyned, Heb. 10.7. Lo I come to do thy Will, O God. And Joh. 10.18. I lay down my life of my self; this Commandment have I received of my Fa∣ther; he became obedient unto death, (saith the Text) In re∣spect of God, Christs death was justice and mercy; in respect of man, it was murther and cruelty; in respect of himself, it was obedience and humility. To obey, is beer than sacri∣fice. Christs obedience was the best of his sacrifice; when he prayed to his Father, that the cup might passe, it was with this Clause of exception, Not as I wll, but as thou wilt. 3. Christ submitted himself to death humbly, and meekly; he was oppressed, and afflicted, yt opened he not his mouth; not that he spake nothing at all, but he was silent as to mur∣murings and revilings; that was the work of his persecutors; not a word passed from him that might argue passion, or impa∣tience, as from one of the Thieves that were crucified with him; he was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter; he was not enraged, or exasperated, with all the injustice, cruelty, and oppression of his enemies; not one word in heat of blood, to them whose errand was to shed his blood. Friend (saith he) to Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kisse?. Chrys. What meek∣nesse was here? though I confesse there was a tart rebuke in that kinde compellation, and Christ calling him friend, smartly checkt him for his unfriendly carriage. When one of his Disci∣ples cut off Malchus his eare, Put up thy sword, (saith he) Wee'le have none of that club law; he touches his eare, and heales it. When he was reviled, he reviled not again;1 Pet. 2.23. Psal. 64.3. when he suffered, he threatened not; his enemies shot their arrows, even bitter words; but they recoyled not upon them. Nay, he retur∣ned not only no ill words, but gave prayers in exchange for their taunts and revilings; Father forgive them,Luke 23.34. for they know not what they do. It had been meeknesse to have gone through his sufferings without murmuring; but it was an high and hero∣ical act of meeknesse indeed, to poure out prayers for them,
that were such busie instruments in pouring out his blood; he was so far from biting the stone, that he kissed it, and the hand that threw it. 3. Upon what grounds Christ thus humbled himself to death: What cogent necessity was upon him; for we may not conceive that Christ thus humbled himself to death upon trivial and imper∣tinent considerations; as David said once of Abner, Died Christ as a fool dieth?2 Sam. 3.33. No sure, it was upon these six weighty grounds. 1. That Scripture prophesies and Predictions might be accom∣plished; all which represent him as coming in died garments from Bozrah.Gen. 3.15. The first Scripture that ever mentions Christ, shews him a bleeding and crucified Saviour. Now Christ was to make good to a tittle every thing that had been before written of him. In Saint Matthews Gospel this is very remarkable, who above all the rest hath most punctually observed the fulfilling of Prophesies, with whom the burden and under-song of almost every event is, ut impleretur, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the mouth of the Prophets. Christ himself renders this account of his suffe∣rings in that Discourse of his with his Disciples upon the Road; Oh fools,Luk. 24.25, 26. and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken! Ought not Christ to have suffered these things? The Prophets have all spoken this with one mounth, and is it pos∣sible I should make them all liars? 2. That Scripture types might be fulfilled; many whereof were to decipher and prefigure the death of Christ, as Isaac's being offered, the slaying of the Sacrifices, the lifting up of the Serpent; Now had not Christs blood been shed, and he lift up upon the Cross, there had been no correspondency in the Antitype; as Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wildernesse, so must the Son of man be lifted up.Joh. 3.14. Had not Christ been made a Sacrifice, most of the Le∣gal Ceremonies, and precedent prefigurations had either spoken lies, or at least nothing to the purpose. 3. That his Will and Testament might be firme and effectua; in his life he had given many precious Legacies, and they had been all voide, and to no more purpose than a Deed without a Seal at it, unlesse ratified and confirmed; had not Christ given himself to death, all his other gifts that he had bequeathed in his Will, had been giflesse; this is the Apostles Argument, Where
a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the Testator; for a Testament is of force after men are dead,Heb. 9.16, 17. other∣wise it is of no force at all while the Testator liveth. A man that makes a Will, doth not intend that any body should be the better by it, but upon his death: Suppose a man have a Lega∣cy of a thousand pounds given him, he is not one whit the richer so long as his friend liveth, the Will holds not good in Law, nor can he sue for one penny of it. This Cup (saith Christ) is the New Testament in my blood;Luke 22.20. that New Testament which is rati∣fied by my blood: Christs death gives life not only to his people, but to his promises. It is expedient for you that I go away,John 16.17. (saith he) for If I go not away, the Comforter will not come: The sending of the Comforter was one principal clause of his last Testament; but till the death of the Testator, the Will could not be put in suit, it signified nothing, and was not pleadable. The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified; what? had they received nothing of the Spirit? yes;John 7.39. but not according to that plentiful proportion, which he intended and promised in his Will. The Legacy was paid but in part, be∣cause the Testator was yet alive; he was no sooner dead, and got to heaven, but he makes all good to a tittle, as you may read, Acts 2.2, 3, 4. 4. That justice may be satisfied; the sentence upon sin was passed from the mouth of a righteous Judge; now though justice might admit of a change of persons, there was no room for a change of penalties; death was threatned, and death must be inflicted. If Christ will save sinners from death, justice will not let him save himself from death;Heb. 9.22. without shedding of blood there is no remission: Christ undertaking to crosse out, and cover the black lines of sin, must draw over them the red lines of blood: What the chief Priests said concerning Christ, is true in some sense, though false in theirs, He saved others,Matth. 27.42. himself he can∣not save: Justice was to have its penni-worths out of our Surety, and nothing could be abated of blood. God hath set forth Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righ∣teousnesse for the remission of sins, that he might be just.Rom. 3.25, 26. 5. That he that hath the power of death might be destroyed;Hebr. 2.14. through death he destroyed him that hath the power of death, that is the Divel. Satan hath the power of death, not as a
Judge, but as an Executioner; and Christs death hath destroyed him; not taken away his being, or undivel'd him; but shatter'd his Forces, broken, and subdued him. The crucifying of Christ was the Divels plot; he put Judas upon betraying him, the Jews upon accusing him, Pilate upon condemning him, the Souldiers upon executing him; but our Lord out-shot him in his own Bowe, and cut off Goliah's head with Goliah's Sword: It fared with Sa∣tan, as it is storied of a certain Souldier, who being cu iously in∣quisitive after the time of his death, went to an Astrologer, who of a long time would make him no answer, till at the length o∣vercome by his importunity, he told him that he should dye with∣in three dayes; whereat the Souldier being angry, draws his Sword, and kills the Astrologer; for which murder within three dayes compasse he was executed: And thus Satan plotting the death of Christ, to put by his own ruine, promoted, and procured it: Our Saviours death gave him such a deaths wound, as he will never claw off. The Lyon is terrible, (saith Chrysostom) not only awake, but sleeping: And so Christ, not only living, but dying, came off a Con∣queror;Judg. 16.30. as Sampson at his death pulled down the pillars of the house, and made a greater rout among the Philistines, than in all his life; and therefore it is very observable when the death of Christ ap∣proached, and being in view, Satan perceived how great disad∣vantage was like thereby to accrue to him and his Kingdome; how he laid about, and bestirred himself by all means possible to hin∣der it; he put Petr upon disswading him, Master, favour thy self, and let not this be unto thee; and Christ presently smelt him out in that advice, as appears by his rebuke, Get thee be∣hinde me Satan;Matth. 16.23. Matth. 27 19. he buzz'd dreams into the head of Pila es wife, and thereby endeavoured to take him off, and divert him from pronouncing the sentence upon him. 6. To take away the meritorious cause of death; viz. sinne: And verily had all the Divels in hell been routed, and sin, that Divel in the bosome remain'd undisturbed, it had been an inconsi∣derable victory; God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh for sin;Rom. 8.3. tha is, by a sacrifice for sin, (we have such another Ellipsis, Hebr. 10.6.) condemned sin in the flesh. Christ by his blood wrote a ill of Inditement and Condemnation a∣gainst sin, he sued it to an out-lary, and undermied it as to its dominion and damnation;Rom. 6.10. in that he dyed, he dyed unto sin once:
The Saints dye unto sin, namely, by Mortification;Verse 11. Reckon ye your selves also to be dead indeed unto sin; but thus there was never a∣ny alive in Christ, but he dyed unto sin, namely, the utter ruine and undoing of sin: The Messiah shall be cut off, to finish trans∣gression, and make an nd of sins.Dan. 9.24. There is a double finishing of sin, by consummation, and by consumption; the meaning is not as though Christ compleated that which sinners had left imper∣fect, or varnisht over those sins which came out of their hands rude and unpolished; no, he could neither put an hand, nor set a tool to such work as this; but to make an end of sin, to eat into the heart, and tear out the bowels of it; such is Christs hatred of sin, that rather than it shall live, himself will dye. APPLICATION. Three Uses may be made of this Doctrine; for 1. Information. 2. Exhortation. 3. Comfort. 1. For Information in foure particulars. 1. This lets us see the transcendent and inexpressible love of Christ to poor sinners. Let such as can entertain hard thoughts of Christ, look upon him as nailed to the Crosse, and shedding his blood, and then tell me if they do not think him in good earnest in the businesse of saving souls: Oh how was his heart set upon sinners, that would thus shed his heart-blood for sinners! The Rabbins have a saying, that upon every apex or tittle of the Law, there hangs a Mountain of sense and doctrine: In every drop of Christs blood there is an Ocean of love; Who loved me,Gal. 2.20. and gave himsef for m: The death of Christ was such a demonstration of love, as the world never saw. When God made the wordl, he intended the evidence of his power; he ordained hell, digg'd Tophet, and fill'd it with fire and brimstone, and thereby manifested the se∣verity of his jstice; he humbled himself to death, and therein his purpose was to demonstrate the transcendency of his love; this made the love of Christ of such efficacy, and constraining in∣fluence upon the Apostle Paul, Be ause we thus judge, that if one dyed for all, than were all dead.2. Cor. 5.14. When Christ once wept at Lazarus his grave, by-standers made this inference upon it, Be∣hold
how he loved him;John 11.36. but if weeping at the grave for his death ar∣gued such love, what love was it then to dye, and go down into the grave for Lazarus? It were an easie thing to lose our selves in this delightful Maze and Labyrinth of love; the righteous Judge of all the world unrighteously accused and condemned; the Lord of life was dying, the eternal and ver blessed Son of God strugling with his Fathers wrath; he that had said I and my Father are one, crying out in his bitter agony, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? He that hath the keys of hell and death, lay sealed up in anothers grave. Blessed and dear Saviour, whither hath thy love to sinners carried thee? Well might the Apostle in an holy rapture and extasie expresse himself in an elegant contradiction, when he desired the Ephesians might know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge.Ephes. 3.19. 2. Hence learn the horrible and cursed evil of sin; there is sure an abominable filthinesse in that, which nothing but the blood of God could purge and expiate. We may guesse at the depth and breadth of the sore by the plaister that is prepared and applied. Its a desperate disease that requires such a desperate cure; sin is an infinitely mischievous evil, which nothing could remove, but in∣finitely precious blood. You that view sin in its right features and proportions, take a prospect from Mount Calvary, look through the perspective of Christs blood, and seriously ponder the bitter and dreadful agonies of the Son of God, when he sweat, and bled, and groaned, and dyed under the burden of it. You have not yt resisted unto blood,Heb. 12.4. (saith the Apostle) striving against sin; as if he had said, you are not yet come to the hottest of the battel; it may be you have gone through some light skirmishes, a few ill words, or outward losses; but when Christ was challenged by this Goliah, and none durst take up the Gantlet, he resisted unto blood; and verily the evil of sin is not so much seen, in that thou∣sands are damn'd for it, as that Christ dyed for it. If you should see a black vapour arise out of the earth, and ascend by degrees, till it covered the face of the heavens, and obscure the Sun in brightest Noon-day lustre, you would doubtlesse conclude there must needs be a strange and preternatural malignity in that va∣pour. What shall we then think of sin, that brought down the Son of God from heaven, darkned his glory, took away his life, laid him in the dust? After whom is the King of Israel come
out? (saith David to Saul) after whom dost thou pursue, after a dead dog, after a flea? As if he had said,1 Sam. 24.14. methinks the King of Israel should never trouble himself about such a sorry and in∣considerable thing as I am; a dead dog cannot bite; when alive, indeed he is a fierce creature, he may flie in a mans face, and tear out his throat, but death tames him: A dead dog needs no chain, and a flea cannot bite very much, the mark it makes is but a flea∣bite; you that have slight thoughts of sin, do as good as say, that the God of Israel entred into the lists, and armed himself for the Battel against a dead dog; nay, that he lost the Field, and was worsted by a flea; the evil of sin is not so much seen, that it is a knife that cuts our fingers, as that its a knife redded over with the blood of our dear Redeemer. 3. Hence note the exact and impartial justice of God, and his most righteous severity against sin; that rather than that shall passe unpunished, his only begotten, and everlastingly beloved Son shall shed his blood, and become lyable, and obnoxious to a curse. In the blood of Christ as a mirrour, is represented the most condescending mercy, and inflexible severity that ever the world saw. Son (saith God) if thou wilt undertake for sin∣ners, and undergo that penalty that is due to sin, thy blood must go for it, and nothing can be abated; he prays the Cup may passe if possible; but justice was inexorable, he was upon such terms that it was not possible: God hath set forth Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his blood,Rom. 3.25. to declare his righte∣ousnesse that he may be just. One would have thought he would have said to declare his love and mercy, that he may shew himself gracious; nay, but (though there be a truth in that) the Apo∣stle pitches upon another Attribute, To declare his righteousnesse that he may be just. If there were any respect of persons with God, or if exact justice could have warp't, and been drawn away with any accessory and circumstantial considerations, doubtlesse Christ should have gone free, and an indemnity from suffering should have been the Sons priviledge. 4. This is sad and dreadful news to all impenitent and unbe∣lieving sinners; What will be their doom that have no share in this blood of Christ, and not only so, but trample it under foot as an unholy thing? Let them look to it, it will one day rise up against them as a witnesse for their certain damnation; for such
there's a much sorer punishment;Heb. 10.29. woe to those that have not the blood of Christ to plead for them; but ten thousand woes to them that have the blood of Christ pleading against them: And where it cries not for pardon, it cries out for vengeance with a witnesse. They are the enemies of the Crosse of Christ, (saith the Apostle) whose end is destruction:Phil. 3.18, 19. And what better end could it rationally be hoped they should come to, that have an enmity a∣gainst the Crosse of Christ? If that which is light in th e be darkness,Matth. 6.23. how great is that darknesse? If the healing, saving blood of Christ be destruction, how dreadful is that destruction? the death of Christ is to a wicked man one of the saddest stories, and most dreadful tragedies that he can read or hear of; because having no interest in it, he understands what must certainly be acted upon himself; and if God would not hearken to the pray∣ers of his Son, how is it likely he should be moved with the cry of Rebels and Enemies? When God sent the Prophet Jeremiah upon his Errand to the Nations with the Cup of his fury, that they should drink, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more; upon case of their refusal to drink, tell them (saith he) that loe I begin to bring evil on the City which is called by my Name,Jer. 25.29. and sh uld ye be utterly unpunished? ye shall not be unpu∣nished. As if God had said, Carry a Cup, and if they refuse, tell them Jerusalem hath been before them, and I am resolved it shall go round. My own people shall not drink unpledged, and they shall not be unpunished. God hath prepared a Cup for all Christ-rejecting sinners, warmed with fire, and spiced with brimstone, and if they wince, and make a sowre face, let them know Christ hath had it, Gods only begotten and beloved Son hath drunk deep on't, and how, or with what face can they expect to escape? What! will God say to such a one, Behold, he whose judgment was not to drink of the Cup,Jer. 49.12. hath assuredly drunken, and art thou he that shalt altogether go unpunished? thou shalt not go unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink of it. 2. For Exhortation, and that in six particulars. 1. Hath Christ shed his blood for sin? let us then shed the blood of sin; let sin never live one quiet quarter of an houre in our souls, that would not let Christ live in the world. Christ dyed unto sin for Satisfaction; let us dye unto sin by Mortification:
He died unto sinne once, likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin.Rom. 6.10, 11. Every Saint should be , as the Apostles phrase is, Rom. 6.5. planted together in the likenesse of his death; And he further explaines his meaning, Ver. 6. Knowing this, that our old man is cruci∣fied with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that hence∣forth we should not serve sin. And verily, unlesse by the death of sin in you, you can have no comfortable evidence, that the death of Christ was for you. Christ was crucified, and they that are Christs,Gal. 6.24. Gal. 5.2. have crucified the flesh with its affections and lusts. If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing (saith the Apostle) I Paul say unto you; he affixeth his name, and sets to his hand, q. d. I say it, and I will stand to it; and so, if your heart be uncircumcised, by not putting off the body of the sins of the flesh; if you live in any one known, approved sin, Christ and the death of Christ shall profit you nothing. Ah! revenge the blood of your dearest Lord, upon your dearest lusts; and when Satan presents to you a sugred, spi∣ced cup, tempting you to the commission of any sin, say as David of the waters of Bethlehem, Farre be it from me, oh Lord,2 Sam. 23.1. that I should do this; is not this the blood of my Saviour, that not on∣ly hazarded, but laid down his life for sin? 2. Did Christ let out his blood for us? let our lives then run out for Christ in a vigorous activity, and unwearied exercise of grace. It is the Apostles argument, and it's very forcible. We judge that he dyed for all, that they that live, should not hence∣forth live unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for them.2 Cor. 5.15. Christ did not shed two or three drops of his blood only, or breath a veine; and shall two or three duties, a few shreds, and odde parcels of holinesse serve to return back to Christ? What can we think too much for him,Tit. 2.14. that thought not much of his blood for us? the blood of Christ is as well for the purity, as the purchase of his people. 3. Did Christ thus humble himself to death for us? let us then prize him exceedingly, and raise him in our esteem above riches, honour, pleasure, father, mother, husband, wife, friend, yea life it self,Quanto pro me vilior, tanto mi∣hi charior. Ber. or any other thing that we are apt to account preci∣ous; how ought he to be prized and preferred above all things, that prized such in considerable nothings as we are, at so high rates as
his own blood? if you put Christ into one end of the scale, be sure he out-ballances every thing that can be laid in the other. To you that believe he is precious. Other things may be rated according to that particular excellency that he hath put into them;1 Pet. 2.7. but you will be careful to keep the highest Room for the best friend, and say, Come down this, and t' other vanity, this friend must take place; whatever other things may make twelve, Christ shall be thirteen; to a carnal heart, nothing so low prized and undervalued as Christ; but with believers that have an interest in him, and know the worth of him, he is in high∣est esteem.Cant. 5.9. What is thy beloved more than another beloved? (say the daughters of Jerusalem) they have sleight, low thoughts of him, and another, (be it who it will) is to them as good as he; but what answer makes the Spouse? My Beloved is white and ruddy,Ver. 10. the chifest among ten thousand. If there were a general Muster, and all the sons of men stood together, Christ would be above, and beyond them all; and Paul is of the same mind, who desired to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified;1 Cor. 2.2. as if he had said, Let me but be acquainted with Christ and his Crosse, (such a superlative esteem he had of him) that I care not this, if I burn all my Books. Whatever he had heretofore accounted excellent, when his judgement was byas∣sed with wrong apprehensions, he now accounts drosse, dung, dogs meat,Phil. 3.8. for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord; all not worthy to be named the same day with Christ. Nay, Christ himself hath told us, they are not worthy of him, that do not think him most worthy.Mat. 10.37. 4. Christ humbling himself thus low, should teach us highly to prize our souls; by the price that was paid for them, we may conceive at what a rae God values them. If God should have said concerning any soul, I so esteem it, that rather than it shall perish, I'le dissolve, and unpin the whole Fabrick of heaven and earth, that (you'le say) had evidently demonstra∣ted an high valuation of souls; but the course God hath taken, shews a much higher esteem of them. Now let this deare bought ware be precious; ah let none of us adventure a soul, for the satisfying of a base lust; let not any sin steale that away upon easie termes, which put the Lord of glory to such expences. Christ that best knows the worth of souls, for he paid for them,
so values them, that he tells us the gaine of the world were no sufficient or satisfactory compensaion for he losse but of one of them;Mark 8 36. and a man that should make that bargaine (as too many do) might put all his gaines in his eye,Ingeni homi¦nis nulla si ae∣stimatio. and see never the worse after it. What the Civilian saith of a Free-man, is much more true of an immortal soul, Nohing can be valued with it. Tradesmen know, that buying deare, and selling cheap, will undo them; but it will much more undo you, to sell chap that which Christ hath bought so deare. Do not pawn your soules to Satan, that is, do not adventure upon the commission of any sin, with this reserve, I will repent before I dye, and then all is well; that is as if thou shouldst say, Here Satan, I give thee my soule to pawn, in lieu of the pleasure or profit of this or that sin, and make it in my bargaine, that if I repent I will have it again, till then I deliver it into thy custody, and if I never re∣pent, take it, it is thine own for ever. Nay, but ask Satan when he comes thus higgling for thy soul, and bids thee pleasure, pro∣fit, preferment, or any such toyes and trifles, but canst thou subtile Tempter, give any thing aequivalent to the blood of God, the price that hath been already paid for it? our souls were not Redeemed with silve and gold;1 Pet. 1.18. and let us never sell them for that with which Christ could not purchase them. 5. Did Christ humble himself to the shedding of his blood? let us then be willing (if need be) to shed our blood for Christ. We needed Christs death, and possibly Christ may need ours, though not for merit and satisfaction; No, that was our need, for which his death was abundantly sufficient, and needs not ours to make any additions, or heapt overplus measure; but Christ may need our death to seale his truth, and credit his Gospel;Act. 20.24. the Apostle Paul counted not his life deare, that he might finish his course with joy, to testifie the Gospel of the grace of God. And the Holy Ghost gives an honourable character of some Heroi∣cal, noble-spirited Christians, that they loved not their lives unto the death;Rev. 12.11. and the blood of the Lamb animated them to such valour, that they overcame and conquered by the losse of their lives. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, (saith the Apo∣stle) but how soon it may come to that ye know not.Heb. 12.4. It's your duty, and will be your wisdome to prepare for such a black bloody day as that; there are two things in the death of Christ,
that may animate and embolden us into a willingnesse to dye for him. 1. A motive, one good turne requires another. 2. A pattern, Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.1 Pet. 2.21. Verbi verba sunt nobis Docu∣menta; verbi fa∣cta sunt nobis exempla. August. A place very much abused by the Soci∣nians, as though there were no more in the death of Christ, then an example; but one end of Christs death must not exclude another; in the blood of Christ there's both a price and a pat∣tern; he hath set us a Copy, and upon his call, we should be ready to write after him with our blood. 6. By Faith, and an hearty acceptance of Christ, let us put in for a share, and get an interest in the blood of Christ. He hath (it's true) dyed for sinners; but without faith, what is all this to you though ye be sinners? Without blood Christ could not save you; and without faith, the blood of Christ cannot save you.Rom. 3.25. Heb. 9.14. Acts 15.9. God hath set forth Christ to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood; the conscience is purged by his blood, and the heart purfied by faith. This precious blood of Christ, doth no other way purifie, than as applyed and sprinkled by faith. Every man was under the Law to lay his hand on his burnt-offer∣ing of atonement;Lev. 1.4. he must own it for his Sacrifice; thou must stretch out an hand of faith, and put it on the head of thy sin-offering, owning Christ as thy Lord and Saviour; for it is not Christs blood as barely shed upon the Crosse, but as received in∣to the heart, that justifies and saves. The Son of man is lifted up,John 3.15. that whosoever believes on him, should not perish; Univer∣sal causes act not, but by a particular application; as Adams sin pollutes no child, till applyed by the generation of the Pa∣rent. The Sun though it enlightens the whole world, helps no man to see, till its light be received into the eye. Suppose the blood of Christ were as extensive, and universal a cause of sal∣vation, as any men pretend to, and contend for, it could pro∣duce no such effect, till faith hath wrought a particular applicati∣on; a great gift enriches not the beggar, in the rich mans hand, but in his own, having received it. Use. 3. Here's abundant comfort to all them that have by faith, applyed and interested themselves in Christ crucified; here's blood that will interpose between you and harmes; Christs treading the Wine presse, leads you into the Wine Celler; though to him it was very painful, to you it is very comfortable; that
which he felt as blood, believers may taste as wine. Never was there such a Cordial for drooping and disconsolate soules, as that which came from Christs heart, when his side was broacht, and set running upon the Crosse. Comfort in five par∣ticulars. 1. Your enemies are foyled. A Believer hath many enemies; this blood of Christ hath either reconciled, or disarmed them; either made them friends, or left them impotent enemies. To give a short list of a few of them. 1. The justice of God, that's satisfied; out of Christ it hath a dreadful quarrel, and implacable controversie; and poor be∣lievers are many times afraid under their misapprehensions that exact and inexorable justice will either non-suit, or give a ver∣dict against them; but they are more afraid than hurt; this blood hath made justice their friend. Being justified by faith,Rom. 5.1. Rev. 4.3. we have peace with God; and in Christ he now sits with a rain-bow a∣bout his Throne. God once drowned the world in wrath, but smelling a sweet savour of rest from Noahs sacrifice, he pur∣posed and promised never to do so any more; and as a badge and token of his favour, and the firmnesse of that Covenant of Peace, he put his Rain-bow in the clouds. If you can upon good grounds say that Christ is yours, there's a Rain-bow a∣bout Gods Throne, his Bench of Judicature, and condemna∣tion is turned into a mercy-seat; justice will set hand and Seale to your acquittance, and be so farre from pleading against you, that it turnes your Advocate;Rom. 3.25, 26. and Christ ha∣ving shed his blood, because God is just, the believer must be justified. 2. The Law is fulfilled. To be under the Law, is a state full of danger and terrour; and Saints are many times afraid that it will be put in as a black bill of inditement against them, but the blood of Christ hath scracht the curses out of the Rolle; He hath Redeemed them from the Curse of the Law,Gal. 3.13. Rom. 6.14. being made a Curs for them; they are not under the Law, but under grace. Not unde the Law, as to its invenomed curses, inexorable se∣verity, and intolerable penalties. The Law it self to every be∣liever,1 Tim. 1.9. is as it were non-suited by the death of the Law-ma∣ker. It is not made for a righteous man; it was given to Adam when he was righteous, and yet strongly obliges such as are
righteous; but it lies not against a righteous man (so the word signifies) as to his condemnation;. it is not laid as an Axe to the root of the tree. Col. 2.15.3. Satan is subdued. Christs bruised heele hath broken his head; He spoyled principalities and powers, and made a shew of them openly, triumphing over them in his Crosse. The whole Host of Hell, with all their traine of Artillery, was led Cap∣tive by him on the Crosse, and tyed to the Chariot-wheels of this triumphant Conquerour. When the door-post was sprinkled with blood, the destroying Angel passed away; the blood of Christ sprinkled on the conscience, is a choice Antidote, and preservative against this devouring Abaddon; not but that he still may be a Tempter and a troubler, but he shall never be a conquerour, never a tormentor. Christopher Haasse, a Swedish Senator, being at the point of death, the Devil appeared by his bed side, with pen, ink, and paper; Come (quoth he) reckon up thy sins in order, as thou hast committed them, that I may carry them in a Catalogue to Gods Tribunal, whether thou art going; Well Satan (saith he) if it must be so, let the Catalogue be under this head and Title, The seed of the woman shall break the Ser∣pents head, and away flew the Devil in a great rage; ah sirs, had we but the right art of pleading the blood of Christ, it would make this roaring Lion more to tremble, than the Lion doth at the cock-crowing. 4. Sin is abolished; and that is a far worse enemy than the De∣vil. Many a Saint is able, and apt to say, Were it not for sin, I would not much care for Satan; I could defie, and bid him do his worst; it is the Devil within, that makes the Devil without so formidable. Now plead but this blood, and the guilt of sin is done away, Either as 1. Imprinted on the person to condemnation. 2. Or reflected by the conscience in accusation. 1. Sin is done away by this blood as it binds over to wrath and punishment: it's a spiritual aqua fortis, that eates off the souls prison-shakkles.Rom. 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Sin may remain, but it shall not condemn; and whence be∣lievers have their discharges the Apostle there shews,Ver. 3. Suscipiendo poe∣nam & non su∣scipiendo cul∣pam, & culpam delevit & poe∣nam. Aug. God sent his own Son in the likenesse of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh. If the channel of Christs blood runs through thy soul,
thou hast shot the gulfe as to condemnation; this Scripture brings thee in not guilty, and that's the verdict of a thousand Juryes. 2. The blood of Christ abolishes sin as reflected by the consci∣ence, in a way of accusation, as it raises tumults, and turmoyls in the soul, and Armes a man against himself. It's a Malignant and mischievous property of sin, that it doth not only put the soul into hell, but puts hell into the soul. Conscience is to sin, what the burning-glasse is to the sun-beame, twists all toge∣ther, till it scorches, smoaks, burns, and flames; but Christs blood hath that in it, which is abundantly sufficient to silence and stop the mouth of an angry, accusing conscience; it's a sove∣raign balsome, to cure that cancer in the breast; a mollifying oyntment, and cooling fomentation, for those invenomed, sin-rankled ulcers that fester, and bleed inwardly. The blood of sprinkling speaks better things than that of Abel.Heb. 12.24. Abels blood was very clamorous in Cains conscience; he carryed an hue and cry within himself; conscience as a blood-hound, hunted him at every turne; and its continual cry and eccho in his ears, was, Vengeance upon the murderer; but the blood of Jesus hath in it a pleasant and peaceable voice, and hushes all unquiet and tumultuary janglings. Applyed by faith, it saith to the soules rowling billows, that cast up mire and dirt, what Christ once said to the raging Sea, Peace, be still, and there is a great calm. 5. And the last enemy, whose enmity the blood of Christ hath slain, is death. Not that death is so destroyed to believers, that they shall not dye; but unstinged, that it shall not wound in the vital parts, or at once kill bodies and souls. The A∣postles triumphant  is very remarkable, O death,1 Cor. 15.55, 57 where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? thanks be to God, who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. When a Bee hath fastned its sting in a mans flesh, and thereby lost it, it ever after (they say) turnes a drone; death once fastned its sting in Christ, and hath ever since, to them that are in Christ, been like a drone, that can humme and affright, but not sting and hurt them. Death now drives a poor trade amongst them; it may destroy the body, and when it hath play'd that prank, it hath done all its fears; as a fierce Mastiffe, whose teeth are broken out, it can bark, or rend and tear the tatter'd and thred-bare coate,
but it cannot bite to the bone. How feeble an enemy is death, since it travelled, and took a walk to the top of Mount Cal∣vary? 2. A Believers enemies are not only foyled, but through the blood of Christ his person is accepted,Eph. 1.6, 7. he hath made us accepted in the be∣loved; he hath begraced us in Christ (that is the proper impor∣tance of the phrase) in whom we have Redemption through his blood.. If thou art sprinkled with the blood of Christ, God will know his own mark upon thee, thy person is accepted, and ser∣vices cannot be unacceptable. 3. If a believer, here is comfort, in that thou mayst be assured that Christ is willing to do any thing for thee. He is ready in hea∣ven upon all occasions to plead this price, and sollicite thy fur∣ther affaires; shew but Christs blood, and I dare warrant the gol∣den Scepter held out. The Apostles reasoning is unanswerable; He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?Rom. 8.32. Saints need never feare putting Christ to too much trouble, in any thing they have for him to do; for the shedding of his blood (and that he hath already done) hath been more troublesome and charge∣able, than any thing they can set him about for the time to come; thou needest not fear his denying any thing to thee, who hath thus far denyed himself for thee. 4. Here is comfort to a believer, in that his grace shall be pre∣served; such a soul is too costly a purchase for Christ to lose; he paid so dear, that he may be trusted to demand and challenge the making good of his bargain: if true grace could be totally and finally lost, it might be said, Christ payes the price, and the devil gets the prize.Phil. 1.6. He that hath begun a good work in you, will per∣forme it untill the day of Jesus Christ; And it lies Christ in hand so to do; otherwise he will come off a loser. Christ is the good Shepherd,John 10.11, 28 that giveth his life for the Sheep, and gives unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish. Ah how little do they con∣sult Christs honour, or the comfort of souls, that tell us, Belie∣vers may perish in sin, like rotten sheep in a ditch; if so, how then shall Christ save his stake, that hath been thus much out of purse upon them? 5. Here's yet further comfort to a believer, in that by the blood of Christ heaven is opened,Heb. 10 19. and we have boldnesse to enter into
the holyest, by the blood of Jesus. Man had no sooner sinned but God sent an Angel to stand Centinel, and keep him from Paradise with a flaming sword; the blood of Christ hath opened that pas∣sage, at once blunting the sword, and quenching the flame. Christ gave up the Ghost at the ninth hour, at three in the Afternoon, the time of the evening Sacrifice; and at the very instant the Veile of the Temple, that parted the holy place and holy of ho∣lyes, was rent asunder, so that the Priest who was then Ministring in the holy place, had on the sudden a fair and free prospect into the holyest of all; which excellently typifies, that the death of Christ hath removed, and rent away all obstacles and obstructions that might interpose betwixt believers, and the blessednesse of glory. The Rivers lead to the Sea, the stream of Christs blood (if thou beest imbarqued by faith) runs directly into the Ocean of endlesse, boundlesse, bottomlesse happinesse. If thou hast open'd the door of thine heart to let Christ in, the blood of Christ hath open'd and unlock'd the door of heaven, and thou canst not be shut out. A crucified Christ entertained, will one day make glorified believers; his Humiliation is the ready Roade both to his, and his peoples ex∣altation.
CHRISTS EXALTATION. Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every Name: That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth: And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father. THE former Verses-speak of the deep humiliation of Jesus Christ; these words contain the Do∣ctrine of Christs most glorious Exaltation. If you view Christ in the words before going, you will behold the Sun of righteousness ecclipsed; but in this Text you will see him shining forth in his strength and splendour.
The Doctrine of Christs Humiliation leads you to Mount Cal∣vary, but this Doctrine will lead you to Mount Tabor, to Mount Olivet. There you may see Christ standing at the Bar, but here you see him sitting on a Throne of Majesty and glory. The former Doctrine shews you the Son of man in the forme of a servant, but this represents Christ to you the Son of God like himself, in the glorious estate of Triumphant Majesty. You have heard how Christ died for our sins,Rom. 4.25. Rom. 5.10. and how we are Reconciled by his death; and now you shall heare how he rose for our justification, and how we are saved by his life. In his Humiliation there was neither form, nor beauty,Isa. 53.2. Heb. 1.2. nor comliness did appear; but now you will see him in the excellency and brightness of his Fathers glory. In Christs Humiliation you heare how he was reproached in his Person, Name, Doctrine, Ministry, and Mi∣racles; but he is now exalted, and hath a name given him above e∣very name. And whereas in his Humiliation his enemies bowed the knee in scorne to him, yet in his Exaltation they must bow the knee with fear and trembling. Then they cried after Christ, Cru∣cifie him, crucifie him; but God hath exalted him so, as every tongue must confess that Jesus is the Lord, to the glory of God. And thus Contraries are illustrated by their contraries; the sufferings of Christ (like a dark shadow to a curious picture,Contraria jux∣ta se posita ma∣gis elucescunt. or a black vaile to a beautiful face) do make the glory of his Exaltation the more glo∣rious. The height of Christs Exaltation, is best known by consi∣dering the depth of his humiliation; the Cross of Christ (as one saith) being the best Jacobs staff to take the height of this morning Star, or rather Sunne of Righteous∣ness, breaking forth most gloriously from under a dark Cloud.
In these three verses we have these Particulars consi∣derable. 1. The Connexion between the Humiliation and Exaltation of Christ in these words, , Wherefore also God hath exalted him. 2. The Doctrine of Christs Exaltation laid down, God hath highly exalted him. 3. The end of Christs Exaltation, it was for the glory of God the Father. Before we come to the Doctrine of Christs Exaltation, we will a little consider the connexion of these three Verses with the three preceding Verses, viz. 6, 7, 8.— where it is said, that Jesus Christ being in the forme of God, and thought it not Robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the forme of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, e∣ven the death of the Cross; wherefoe God also hath highly exalted him, &c. It is a Question amongst Divines, whether the Humiliation of Christ be the Meritorious cause, or only the Antecedent of his Ex∣altation; and yet they that dispute this, do all agree in this, That Jesus did not by his Humiliation and sufferings merit such things as he was invested withal before he suffered; for that which is meritorious, must alwayes precede the reward; and therefore it cannot be said, that Christ did merit the personal union of his Divine and Humane Nature, nor the happiness of his soul, nor his Habitual Graces, which He had from the first Moment of his Incarna∣tion. Christi humili∣atio est exalta∣tionis meritum; & ejus exalta∣tio est humilia∣tionis praemium Aug. Hac enim par∣ticula  (seu propter quod) meritum Chri∣sti denotat qui∣bus & sibi suam exaltationem & nobis totam salutem promeruit. Zanch. in loc.First, There are some Divines who interpret the particle  as a causal; and so hold that Christ by his Humiliation, did merit his Exaltaion; and of this opinion was Augustine, who calls Christs Humiliation the meritorius cause of his Ex∣altation; and his Exaltation the rward of his Humiliation. The Popish wrters go generally this way. I find also amongst Pro∣testant Writers, the Learned Zanchy of this Opinion, who upon this Text hath this Note. By this Particle  (where∣fore)
The Apostle notes the merits of Christ, whereby he hath merited his own Exaltation, and our Salvation. And that which favours this Explication, is that saying of the Apostle concerning Christ;Heb. 12.2, That for the joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross, and despised the shame, as if having an eye to the Recompence of the Reward, enabled Christ to persevere with more patience, when he became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. Neither doth it derogate from the freeness of Christs suffer∣ings, that he was rewarded for them; for even that glory that Christ hath in heaven, is for our good and comfort. Nor was it out of indigence and necessity, that Christ accepts of glory in a way of Reward of his obedience; but herein he commended his love the more to us, that would so far con∣discend, and so far even in his Exaltation humble himself, to receive glory in the way of obedience, which he might have challenged by vertue of his personal union. Even as a Prince, who though he hath right to a Kingdom by Inheritance and Succession, yet he will accept of it as a Re∣ward of his Obedience, and Conquest over its e∣nemies. 2. But others understand the  in the Text, not as signify∣ing the Humiliation f Christ to be the meritorious cause, but only the Antecedent of his Exaltaton; and so they make this particle to be not causal, but connective only; and so I find some of the Ancient Translations, as the Aethiopick Version doth only ioyn the Humiliation and Exaltation of Christ toge∣ther; Humilavit seipsum & magnificavit eum Deus. — And for this may be rationally urged, 1. That in the whole wok of our Redemption effected by Christ, Jesus Christ had a respect no unto himself, but unto us. It is for us, that he humbled himself to the Death of the Crosse, for us men, and our Sal∣vation. 2. Jesus Christ had right to all the Honour, Glory, and Majesty, which now he is possessed of in Heaven, by ver∣tue of his being the Sonne of God; and the glory which he
hath now in Heaven,John 17.5. he had with God before the world was. 3. The freeness of Gods love in giving Christ, and of Christs in giving himself for us, was such, that the main intention of God, was, that not Christs, but our estate might be bet∣tered;John 1.18. Rom. 9.5. if the Son of God had never left the bosome of the Fa∣ther, he had been for ever God bl ssed in himself. But such was the love of the Father, that he gave his only begotten Son that we might not perish,Joh. 3.16. who believe, but might have everlasting life. 4. It is fit to be considered, that the glory which Christ hath in Heaven, in sitting at the right hand of God, is such, that it cannot be merited by the sufferings of the Humane nature of Christ. And therefore it is said, , he hath frely given him a name above every name. This last interpretation of the Particle , is that to which most of our Protestant Divines do incline. I will not here undertake to determine the Question; I find it the judgement of some of our Learned Divines,Dr. Featly. Mr. Anthony Burgesse. That there need be no Controversie about this thing, for the Parti∣cle  notes order; but whether the order of causality or an∣tecedency, or both, may be consistent with the Analogy of Faith. 1. For if we look upon Jesus Christ as rewarded for his suf∣ferings for us, we may thence be assured, that our sufferings for him (though of another nature) shall be eternally rewarded.Psal. 58.11. 2. Or if you note the order only, that Jesus Christ was first humbled, and then exalted, we may thence learn that before honour is humility,Prov. 18.12. 1 Pet. 5.6. and that if we Humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, in due time he will exalt us. Leaving therefore this Question, I proceed to the Doctrine of Christs Exaltation, as it is laid down in this Text. Doct. It pleased God the Father for his own glory, that the Lord Jesus Christ, after he had been deeply humbled, should be highly exalted.
Thus it pleased God, that he who had humbled himself to the death of the Cross,Heb. 7.26. Phil. 2.7. Acts 3.15. 1 Cor. 2 8. Acts 2.36. Heb. 2.16. 1 Pet. 3.22. should be made higher than the Hea∣vens; and he who had taken on him the form of a Servant, should now appear in Heaven like himself, the Prince of life; and he that made himself of no reputation, should now be in Heaven the Lord of Glory; and the same Jesus who was crucified, God hath made both Lord and Christ; and He who took not on him the nature of Angels, but took on him the seed of Abraham, is exalted above Angels, being gone into Heaven, and is on the Right Hand of God; An∣gels, and Authorities, and Powers, being made subject unto him. There is a word in the Text that is very Emphatical, which is , he hath highly exalted. The Elegancy of the Greek tongue is singular; The Apostle hath a no∣table word, Ephes. 3.8. ,Eph. 3.8 . Minimorum minimus. Beza. Minor minimo. Cor. a Lap.  Emphaticus est hic notandus Pleonasmus. q. d. Super omnem altitudi∣nem exaltavit, super-exal∣tavit. Ambros. Multipli∣cavit sublimitatem ejus. Syr. Sublimitate sublima∣vit eum. Arab. Insigniter extulit. Justinianus. lesse than the least of Saints; and here we have a no less re∣markable word, , he hath highly exalted him; God hath exalted Jesus Christ above all Ex∣altation; the Exaltation of Jesus Christ, was super∣superlative. The Latine Version of the word , Exaltavit eum, he exalted him, is too low to express the sublimity of the Greek word. We have here an elegant and an emphatical Pleo∣nasme, which the Greek tongue borrows of the Hebrew, as is frequently used in the New Testa∣ment, as it is said of the Magi, when they saw the Star, they rejoyced with great joy;Mat. 2.10. . and so when Christ came to Celebrate his last Passeo∣ver, he saith to his Disciples,Luke 22.15. . With desire have I desired to eat this Passeover. So it is sad here, the Lord Jesus Christ was very highly exalted; he was exalted with all Exaltation. Jesus Christ in his Resurre∣ction was exalted; in his Ascension he was highly exalted; in his sitting at the right hand of God, he was very highly exalted above all Exaltation. Christ in his Resurrection, was exalted above the Grave; in his Ascension, above the Earth, and in his Session at Gods right hand, he was exalted above the highest Heavens.
It is very Remarkable how the steps of Christs Ex∣altation did punctually answer to the steps of his Humili∣ation. There were three steps by which Jesus Christ descended in his voluntary Humiliation. Heb. 2.16. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. Gal. 4.4. Heb. 7.22. 1 Cor. 5.7.First, His Incarnation, by which he was made of a woman, and so became man; he was made sinne, and so became out Surety; he was made a Curse, and so became our Sacrifice. This was the largest step of Christs Descension and Humiliation; for it was more for the Son of God to become the Son of man, than for the Son of man to die, and being dead, to be buried, and being buried, to continue in the state of the dead, and under the power of death untill the Third Day. Answerable to this degree of his Humiliation, was his Re∣surrection; for as by his Incarnation he was manifest in the flesh,Rom. 1.3, 4. the son of man, made of the seed of David according to the flesh, so by his Resurrection from the dead, he was decla∣red to be the Son of God, with power according to the Spirit of holiness. The Resurrection of Christ was the first step of his Ex∣altation, He was declared to be the Son of God.Clarificatio Christi ab ejus resurrectione sumpsit exordi∣um. Aug. He was al∣wayes the Son of God, even during the dayes of his flesh; but then he was openly declared to be the Sonne of God, that he could by his own Almighty Power, raise up the Temple of his Body, which the Jewes had De∣stroy'd. The second step of Christs Humiliation, was his poor, painful, and contemptible life, and his painful, shameful, and cursed death of the Cross;Heb. 5.7. He was found in the form of a Servant. He was despised in his Person, Ministry, and Miracles in the dayes of his flesh; that is, whilst he lived here upon earth. He was poor in estate, followed by the poor; he had not where to lay his head,Mat. 11.5. Mat. 8.20. he was reproached, and counted a Sabbath-breaker, a wine-bibb r, an enemy to Caesar, a Blasphemer, he was counted every thing but what he was. Answerable to this great Exinanition of Christ, is his ascension into Heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God. Man did not so despise and disparage, but God hath honoured him, to sit
on the right hand of God; note the great honour that Jesus Christ is invested withal; as he was man,Psal. 8.5. so he was lower than the Angels; But in that he hath said unto him, Sit thou on my right hand, he hath e xalted him above the Angels; for to none of the Angels hath he said at any time,Psal. 110.1. Thou art my Sonne, Sit thou on my right hand. To sit at Gods right hand, is to be next in dignity and honour unto Almighty God; and this is that which the Apostle speaks of, showing how God raised Jesus Christ from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the Heavenly places,Heb. 1.13. Eph. 1.20, 21, 22. far above all principality and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come, and hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head over all things to the Church. Thus all the dishonour and reproach that was cast upon Christ in his life, and the ignominy of his shameful, painful, and cur∣sed death of the Cross is now taken away by Christ his ascending up into heaven, sitting at Gods right hand,Heb. 1.6. and all the Angels of God worshipping him. And thus our Lord Jesus was exalted from a death of shame, to a life of glory, and that not to a temporary, but an eter∣nal life. Christ was raised up, not as Lazarus to die againe, but Christ died but once, but lives for ever at the right hand of God to make Intercession. So speaketh Christ of himself,Rom. 6.10. Heb. 7.25. Rev. 1.18. I am he that liveth, and was dead, and behold I am alive for ever∣more. Thus he that descended in his burial into the lowest parts of the earth, is the same also that ascended up far above the Hea∣vens.Eph. 4.9, 10. . 3. His coming to judge the world, answers his being judged in the world, and by the world.Mat. 25.31, 32 Veniet judica∣turus qui venit judicandus. As Christs Exaltation began at his Resurrection, so it shall be compleated when he shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him; then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory, and before him shall be gather∣ed all Nations. He that came at first to be judged, shall come
the second time to judge the world. We have in the Scriptures several descriptions of Christs glorious coming to judge the world; but when he shall come indeed, he will make known his power and glory to all the world.Joh. 5.22, 27. 1 Cor. 1.8. 2 Cor. 5.10. 2 Tim. 4.1. 1 Cor. 11.26. 2 Thes. 1.8. Acts 10.42. God hath given the judge∣ment of all things and persons into the hands of his Son Jesus Christ; the day of judgement is therefore called the Day of Christ; and the Judgement-seat, is the Tribunal of Christ; the appearing, the coming, the revealing of Jesus Christ the judge of quick and dead. The Apostle gives you the first and last part of Christs Exalta∣tion in one Text; and make the first part of it as an assurance of the last; God (saith he) hath appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousnesse,Acts 17.31. by that man whom he hath ordained, wherof he hath given assuranc unto all mn, in that he hath raised him from the dead.John 5.22, 23. Whence we may be∣lieve, that as certainly as Christ did rise, so certainly shall he come to judge the world. God hath given us assurance of the one by the other. And this committing all judgement to the Lord Jesus Christ, is that he might be glorified; the Father hath com∣mitted all judgement to the Son, that all men should honour the Son, as they honour the Father. Sedebit Judex qui sttit sub judice; damna∣bit vere reos, qui falso factus est reus. Aug.Then shall our Saviour appear in his glory, and judge those wicked ones that judged him. We read how the Jews by the help of Judas and the Souldiers, took him and bound him, and led him to the High Priest, and afterwards to Pilate, and how basely he was betrayed, falsely accused, unjustly condemn'd, and cruelly murthered. But there will be a day, when Judas and the wicked Jews, when Herod,Demonstrabit in judicio potenti∣am, qui osten∣dit in cruce pa∣tientiam. Acts 17.31. Isa. 53.10. and Pontius Pilate, and the Souldiers, and all his enemies shall be drag'd into his presence; and then the Lord Jesus who before shewed his patience, will shew his pow∣er; and he who was so unjustly condemned, shall judge the world in righteosness; and he that was numbred amongst Transgressours, shall at that great day judge and punish all trans∣gressours. And thus as Christ humbled himself in his Incarnation, in his Life, Death, and Burial, so God the Father hath exalted him in his Resurrection, Ascension, Session at the right hand of God, and in constituting him Judge of quick and dead.
Jesus Christ by his Resurrection overcame all his enemies,Heb. 2.14. Col. 2.15. death, and him that had the power of death, the Devil. By his Ascension, and sitting on the right hand of God, he hath Triumphed openly over them; and by his being appointed Judge of all, he will avenge himself of all his enemies, when all must appeare before that High Court of Justice, from which there is no appeal. So that the Lord Jesus Christ by his Resurrection,Quanto humi∣lius sese dejecit, tanto sublimi∣us exaltatus est. Brent. in loc. is exalted above the grave; by his Ascension, above the earth; by his sitting at Gods right hand, he is advanced above the hea∣vens; and by being the Judge of all, he is Exalted above Angels, Principalities, and Powers; and as he was a∣based more than others, he is Exalted above all o∣thers. Thus in part the glorious Exaltation of Christ hath been set forth in the several degrees thereof. For the further Demon∣stration of the Doctrine of Christs Exaltation, let us consider the particulars thereof, as they are contained in this Scripture, and they are these three. 1. God hath given him a name above every name. 2. That every knee, of things in Heaven, and things on the earth, and things under the earth, shall bow to the Name of Jesus. 3. That every tongue must confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord. For the first of these we will enquire, 1. What we are to understand by the Name given unto Jesus Christ? 2. How this Name is a Name above every Name? 3. How we are to understand this, that God hath given  to Christ, a Name above every Name? In Answer to the first. First, Some by this Name do understand the Name Christ Je∣sus, and so take it literally; but neither Jesus nor Christ is a name above every name.
1. Not Jesus, for that was the name of Joshua the Son of Nun; the famous Captain of Israel, called Jesus by the Apostle, Hebrews 4.8. And of this Name was the High Priest Joshuah, the Son of Josedek, Hag∣gai 1.1. 1 Sam. 24 7.  Unctus sive Christus Domi∣ni. Isa. 45.1. Nomen supra omne nomen non intelligen∣dum est de ali∣quo externo cog∣nomine vel Je∣su vel Christi. Brent. Heb. 1.4, 5.2. Neither is Christ a name above every name, for Saul is called the Lords anointed, Christus Domini. And so also the Prophet speaking of Cyrus, calleth him the anointed of the Lord. We cannot therefore understand this of any name, either of Jesus or Christ; for Paul is here speaking not what the name of our Saviour was, but of the Honour, Dignity, Power, and Majesty, to which Christ was advan∣ced. Secondly, Others, as Hierome and Theodoret do think, that in, that Christ was called the S nne of God, he had therein a name above every name; and this Exposition is gathered from that passage of the Apostle, that Jesus Christ was much better than the Angels, as he hath by Inheritance obtain'd a more excellent name than they; for unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Sonne, this day have I begotten thee? But though this be true, that to be the eternal Son of God, is a Name above every Name, yet this cannot be meant here, for it is spoken of that which Christ was exalted to after his Hu∣miliation; but from Eternity he was the Sonne of God, and did not cease to be so by his Incarnation and Humili∣ation. Thirdly, By Name therefore we are to understand that Pow∣er, Dignity,Per nomen po∣testas & digni∣tas significatur. Calvinus. Gen. 6.5.  Viri nominis. 1 Chron. 5.24.  Viri nominum. John 1.14. and Authority which Christ was invested withal, after the dayes of his flesh, and Sufferings were finished. 1, Sometimes in Scripture-phrase, Name is put for glory and Renown. So we read of men of Renown, it is in the He∣brew, Men of Name, and of famous men, Heads of the House of their Fathers. What we read famous men, is in the Hebrew, Men of Names; and thus the glory which Christ is invested withal, is the Glory of the only begotten of the Father.
2. By Name in Scripture-phrase, is meant power, and Au∣thority, and the Soveraignty by which Christ is King of Nati∣ons, and King of Saints; and thus the Scripture speaks; The works (saith Christ) that I do in my Fathers Name,John 10.25. they beare witness of me; in my Fathers Name, i. e. by the Power of God.Acts 3.6. Acts 4.7. Thus Pter speaks to the Criple In the Name of Je∣sus Christ of Nazareth arise and walk, i. e. by the Power of Christ; for so it is expressed; when the Council questioned them for this thing, they are asked, By what power, or by what name have you done this? So then, we are to understand by Name, that Honour, Au∣thority, and Dignity, which Christ now enjoyes in Heaven, of which he spake when he was ascending into Heaven, All power is given me in Heaven and Earth;Mat. 28.18. and the Glory of Christs Name is such, that it shall be celebrated through all the Ages of the World; Heaven and Earth shall Ring with the prai∣ses of his Name, as the Angels praised his Name at his Birth; Behold I bring you good tydings of great joy,Luk. 2.10, 11, 13, 14. which shall be un∣to all people; for unto you is borne this day in the City of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord; and suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the Heavenly Hoste, praising God, and saying, Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will towards men. So they do now praise him and worship him in Heaven,Heb. 1.6. Rev: 5.12. saying, Worthy is the Lambe to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdome, and Strength, and Honour, and Glory, and Blessing. Secondly, How hath Christ obtained a Name above every Name? This Nomen super omne nomen, a Name above every Name, is a demonstration of Christs Super-Exaltation, and it notes four things. First, This is a Name above every Name, that Jesus Christ should be the only Saviour of the World, that his Name should be the Only One Name by which we are saved. Of this the Apostle, The stone which the builders refused,Acts 4.11, 12. is become the Head of the Corner, neither is there any Salvation in
any other, for there is none other Name under heaven given a∣mongst men,John 4.42. . whereby we must be saved. He is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the World; which we may understand not only eminntly, but exclusively; He is the Saviour, there is none besides him. We read that God did raise Saviours to his people; Israel so acknowledged the Levites in their solemn Fast-day;Nehem. 9.27. Thou (O Lord) deliveredst thy people into the hands of their enemies who vexed them, and in the time of their trouble, when they cryed unto thee, thou heardest them from heaven, and according to thy manifold mercies, thou gavest them Saviours who saved them out of the hand of their Enemies. Such a Saviour was Moses to the Israelites from the Egyptians, Joshua from the Canaanites, Gideon from the Midianites, Jeptha from the Ammorites, and Sampson from the Philistims; but all these were but partial, petty, and temporal Saviours. These saved the body from misery, and that but for a time; Christ saves our souls from our sins,Mat. 1.21. and that for ever. All these Saviours stood in need of the Saviour. Joshua himself had eternally perish∣ed, had it not been for Jesus Jesus Christ was the only Saviour, to whose most precious and saving Name, all the Old Testament pointed at. He was the Saviour in whom all the Promises were performed, all the Types accomplished, and all the Prophesies ful∣filled. Acts 10.43. Gen 49.10. Psal. 110.1. Isa. 7.14. Jer. 23.5. Dan 9.29. Hag. 2.9. Mat. 12.21.It was unto this only Name, the Saviour, that all the Pro∣phets bare witness. He, he it was, that was Jacobs Shiloh, Da∣vids Lord, Isaiahs Immanuel, Jeremies Branch, Daniels Messiah, and Haggie's desire of all Nations. It is in his name, and his Name alone that all Nations shall trust, and that for sal∣vation. Secondly, Jesus Christ hath a Name above every Name, in that he is exalted to sit at the Right hand of God, which is a Name or honour which never the Angels nor Arch-Angels had. This I prove from that passage of the Apostle in his Epi∣stle to the Hebrews, where it is said concerning Christ; Who having purged our sinnes, is sate down on the Right hand of the Majesty on high,Heb. 1.3, 4. . being made so much better than the Angels, as he hath by Inheritance obtained a more excellent Name than they; for to which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit
on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy Foo-stoole?Heb. 1.13. Thirdly, He hath a Name above every Name, because it is through this Name, that the Name of God becomes a comfort unto us. The Attributes of God, are the Name of God; Now without an Interest in Christ, we shall have no comfort in any At∣tribute of God. To a Christless sinner, all the Attributes of God are against him; as for instance, 1. God is wise; that's the worse for a wicked man; for he knows all that wickedness thine own heart is privy to, and much more evil by thee,Jer. 17.10. 1 Joh. 3.20. than thine own heart knoweth. 2. God is holy, and therefore he must needs hate those that are Filthy, Being of purer eyes than to behold in∣iquity. 3. God is just; and if the righteousness of Christ do not Skreen thee, the wrath and vengeance of God must needs break out upon thee for thy guilt.Hab. 1.13. 4. God is Almighty; and how shall the Potters Vessel en∣dure the least touch of his hand? how shall the chaffe stand be∣fore the Whirl-wind of his wrath? how shall the stubble dwell with everlasting burnings? and such are all Sinners out of Christ. All the thoughts of God must needs be terrible to all those souls that are out of Christ. But the Name of Christ, is that which makes the Name of God a Sanctuary and strong Tower; the face of God shines upon us in the face o Jesus Christ.Prov. 18.10. As Moses when he was hid in the Rock, could with delight hear the Name of God proclaimed; so how sweet,2 Cor. 5.6.  Exod. 33.21, 22. 1 Cor. 10.4. and lovely, and comfortable, are all the Attributes of God to all those that are in the Rock, the Rock Christ Jesus! 1. God is a wise God, the more is my comfort,Psal. 73.24. Mat. 6.32. may a Be∣liever say, for he knows how to guide me; he knows what I want, and how to supply it.
2. God is a holy God, and thats a comfortable Attribute, for in Christ he is our sanctification.1 Cor. 1.30. 3. God is a mercful and gracious God, so he is in himself; but in Christ Jesus he is most merciful, gracious, and full of compassion to pity and pardon his children, Even as a Father pitieth his Children,Psal. 103.13. so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. 4. He is an Almighty God, mighty in power, and thus his Name,Prov. 18.10. Rom. 8.31. through the Lord Jesus is a strong Tower, the righteous fly unto it, and finde succour; and through Christ a be∣liever can say, If the Lord be for us, it matters not who are a∣gainst us. 5. Lastly, Even the Justice of God through the Lord Jesus Christ becomes an Attribute of comfortable Consideration; for because God is just, therefore he will not condemn those for whom Christ hath satisfied.Rom. 8.1. Mal. 3.17. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; God will not condemn those that are in Christ, but for his sake will spare them, as one sparth his Son that serves him. And thus the Name of Christ is a Name above every Name, because through his Name, it is that the Name and Attributes of God become comfortable unto us. Fourthly, And Lastly, The Name of Christ is a Name above every Name, because his Name should be most precious and pow∣erful in his Church throughout all Generations; thus all the As∣semblies of the Church should be in the Name of Christ;Matth. 18.20. John 14.13. 1 Cor. 5.4. they must meet in his Name; all Prayers are to be made in the Name of Christ; All Church-Censures are to be in his Name;Mat. 28.19. Ministers must Preach and Administer the Sacraments in the Name of the Lord Jesus; and thus he hath a Name above e∣very Name. 3. The third thing propounded, is, How are we to under∣stand the word  God hath given him a Name, &c. I answer, This must be understood of Christ; as Media∣tour, for so considered, and so only he was capable of Ex∣altation. 1. There are some that hold, that Christ as God was ex∣alted; that now in Heaven the glory of the God-head, which
lay hid, and was vailed in the Tabrnacle of his flesh,John 1.14. . is now exerted, and so exalted. But the manifestation of the Deity, is no exaltation of the Deity. When the Sun shines out of a dark night, the ayre is illustrated, but the light of the Sunne is not encreased. The Lord Jesus was exalted in that Nature in which he was humbled, and that is his Humane Nature.. Greg. Nyss. As the Divine Nature could not suffer, neither can it be exalted. God being the highest, cannot be exalted. It was the Humane Nature of Christ that is thus exalted. If we look upon the Divine Nature of Christ,John 10.30. Phil. 2.6. Non nová in∣digeb at exalta∣tione à Patre, qui aequalis e∣rat Patri. Calv. Non ea accepit Christus quae non prius habe∣bat, sed accepit ut homo, quae habebat ut De∣us. Theod. In qua forma crucifixus e, stin ipsa exaltatus est. Aug. so he was one with the Father, and equal to the Father; and thus it must not be thought that Christ could be capable of Ex∣altation. When God gave him a Name; Theodoret excellently un∣folds this great Mystery thus, Christ (saith he) did not receive that which he had not before, but he did receive that as man, which from all eternity he had as God. 2. But we answer that the  of the Text, hath Rela∣tion unto Christ as Mediatour God-man; not as God, so he could not be exalted at all; nor as a meer man, for so he could not be capable of so great Exaltation. The Humane Nature of Christ being a Creature, cannot be capable of Divine Worship, or of sitting at the right hand of God. But the Humane Nature of Christ by the personal inseparable union it hath to his Divine Nature, is thus advanced. Having finished the first particular of Christs Exaltation, that God hath given him a Name above every Name; I now proceed, Secondly, Another particular of Christs Exaltation, is this, That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow; In the handling of which, I will endeavour to resolve these Que∣stions. Quest. 1. What are we to understand here by bowing the knee? Answ. 1. Some take this literally, as the Papists, who in their wor∣ship bow the knee as often as they heare the Name of Jesus menti∣oned. The Learned Zanchy is of an opinion, that some of the Cere∣monies in use amongst the Papists, might have an innocent Ori∣ginal;
as their signing with the Cross, to show that they were not ashamed of the Cross of Christ, with which the Heathens did reproach them; and so the standing up at the Creed, to note their resolution to strive together for the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints. So genuflection to the Name of Jesus, was (say some) in opposition to the Arrians, who denyed the Divinity of Christ; but whether these things were so inno∣cent at the first; seeing they are all of humane institution, and have been abused to superstition, we have justly laid the use of them aside. And this Text cannot be so understood; for if by Name we understand the power of Christ, then by bowing the knee, must be meant our submission and subjection to this power. By bowing, therefore, to the Name of Jesus, is understood that obedience and subjection which is due to the Soveraign power and Auhority of Christ. Thus when Joseph was exalted to that Dignity and Authority in Egypt,Gen. 41.43. Joh. 5.22, 23. Mat. 28.18. Acts 3.15. 1 Cor. 2.8. that there was none greater than he, but Pharaoh himself, They cryed in the streets where Joseph went. Bow the knee. Thus God the Fa∣ther, gave Jurisdiction and Authority to the Son, that they which honour the Father, might also honour the Sonne. All power (saith Christ) is given me, both in Heaven and in Earth. He is the Prince of Life, and the Lord of Glo∣ry, to whom all obedience, service and subjection is most due. Quest. 2. Who are they must bow the knee to Christ, and be in subjection unto him? Answ. All Creatures; for the Enumeration is full; which Chrysostome thus Expounds;. Chrysost. in loc. Things in Heaven, on Earth, and under the Earth; i. e. Angels, Men, and Devils, which Theo∣doret doth more clearly Explain. 1. Things in Heaven, i. e. good Angels, and glorified Saints, spirits of just men made perfect. 2. Things on Earth; all men living, both good and bad. 3. Under the Earth;  infernalia; i. e. Devils and damned spirits.
All these must bow the knee, and must yield subjection unto Jesus Christ. I. All knees in heaven shall bow to Christ voluntarily. 1. The good Angels, they did alwayes honour and obey the Lord Jesus. It was the joy of the Angels of Heaven, to be Subject and Serviceable unto Jesus Christ. 1. Before the Incarnation of Christ, an Angel instructed Da∣niel concerning the Messiah,Dan. 9.24. and how long it should be before his coming. 2. When the fulness of time was come, an Angel comes to the blessed Virgin, and said, Feare not Mary, for thou hast found favour with God,Luke 1.30, 31. and behold thou shalt con∣ceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Sonne, and call his Name Jesus. 3. As soon as ever he was born, an Angel brings the glad-tydings of it; and a whole Hoste of them who sang together,Job 38.7. Luke 2.13. and shouted for joy at the Creation of the world, do with a song Celebrate Christs Nativity, Glory be to God on High, &c. 4. When Jesus Christ was in danger to be kill'd by Herod, an Angel warnes of the danger,Mat. 2.13. and directs his Mother to flee with him into Egypt. 5. When he was tempted by Satan forty dayes together, a little before he entered upon the work of his Ministry,Mat. 4.11. behold An∣gels came and Ministred unto him. 6. When he was in his Agony in the Garden, ready to take the cup of trembling out of his Fathers hand, there appeared an Angel from heaven strengthening him.Luke 22.43. This blessed Creature out of love and duty, seeing his Lord and Master in such distress, came in to succour him. 7. And as the Angels gave the first notice of his Birth, so also of his Resurrection; an Angel told the woman, He is not here,Mat. 28.6. he is risen. 8. The Angels attended Christs Ascension into Heaven, for they told the Disciples,Acts 1.11. That as they saw him ascending into heaven, so he should come again from Heaven in like man∣ner.
9. And with infinite delight did they welcome Christ to hea∣ven, where,Heb. 1.6. upon his first coming, all the Angels did worship him. Mat 25.31. 2 Thes. 1.7. Mat. 24.31.10. And Lastly, When Christ shall come at the last day to judge both quick and dead, he will come with all his holy An∣gels with him, and shall be Revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels; who then most willingly will be employed, to gather together all his Elect, from the foure Windes of Heaven. Col. 1.16.All this service the good Angels performe unto Christ, not only as he is their Creator (for by him were created even the things that are in heaven) But they yield him this Subjection as he is their Head and Governour;Col. 2.10. Eph. 1.21, 22. and so he is called the Head of all Principality and Power; i. e. Of An∣gels. And this voluntary subjection to Jesus Christ, is because they have benefit by Christ, though not in a way of Re∣demption, yet they owe their Confirmation unto Christ. The good Angels, though they were created good and excellent creatures,Hoc ipsum, quod sancti An∣geli, ab illo statu beatitudi∣nis in quo sunt, mutari in deterius nullo modo possunt, non est iis naturaliter insi∣tum, sed postquam creati sunt, gratiae divinae largita∣te collatum. Aug. de fide ad Pet. Diac. cap. 23. Qui erexit hominem lapsum, dedit Angelo stanti ne labe∣retur. Bern. yet as creatures their state is mutable; and they had in them a potentiality and a possibility to sin and fall, as well as those Angels which left their first station. But this possibility is removed by Christ, who by his grace did lift up fallen man, and by his Powen, preserves the Angels that they shall not fall. And therefore it is, that in a way of thankfulness the Angels in Heaven do bow their knee in Subjection and Service unto Christ. 2. As the glorious Angels bow the knee to Christ in heaven, so the spirits of just men made perfect; the souls departed do in Heaven, praise, adore, and worship the Lord Jesus Christ, and do yield voluntary subjection and obedience to him; unto which duty, they are more carried by a principle of thankful∣ness, that Christ hath Redeemed them: this is shadowed out unto us by the Vision of Saint John; who having seen the Lord Jesus taking the Book with seven Seales, and opening it, he heard the Saints in Heaven singing a new Song, and saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seales thereof;
for thou wast slain, and hast Redeemed us unto God out of every kin∣dred, and tongue, and people, and Nation;Rev. 5.9, 10. and hast made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, &c. This is the daily work of glorified Saints in Heaven, to cast down their Crownes before that Throne where Christ sitteth. The Saints departed,Rev. 4.10. are discharged from those weights and clogs of corruption, which did hinder them from this duty while they were in the body,Heb. 12.1. Rom. 7.24. Rev. 4.6. and cumbred and pestred with the body of death. They are never weary, though they never rest day nor night, saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. And thus I have shewed you how things in Heaven do bow the knee, and are subject to the Name and Authority of the Lord Jesus. II. Things on earth, i. e. Good men, and Bad men. 1. Good men;Psa. 110.3. the Children of God who by the grace of Christ, are made a willing people in the day of his Power; for such is the heart-turning power of Gods Grace, that of unwil∣ling,Isal. 48.4. he makes us willing; God by degrees removes out of our necks the Iron sinew, that hinders us from stooping and bowing to Christ. Grace by degrees doth take away that enmity in our mindes,Col. 1.21. Rom. 8.7. and that carnal-mindedness, which neither is, nor can be subject to the Law of God. By nature we are Children of disobedience as well as others;Rom. 7.23. Eph. 2.3. and are willingly subject to no Law but the Law of our Mem∣bers; nor to no will, but the wills of the flesh; but the Grace of God removes that stoutness of heart, contumacy, and Re∣bellion, which is in us naturally against Christ, and so sweetly and powerfully inclines their wills,Psal. 119.6. 1 Joh. 5.3. Veniat, veniat verbum Dei, & si sexcenta nobis essent col∣la, submittemus omnia. that they follow the Lamb wherever he goes, and have Respect unto all the Com∣mandments of Christ, and not one of them is grie∣vous. A Child of God willingly submits his Neck to the Yoke of Christ. 2. Evil men, they also must bow the knee to Jesus Christ; and though their subjection be not voluntary and ingenuous, yet bow they must, and bow they do; and partly through the a∣wakening of a natural conscience, partly by a spirit of bon∣dage,
and fear of wrath, they are as it were compel∣led to render many unwilling services and subjections unto Christ. Non peccare metuit, sed ar∣dere. Aug.Which compulsory subjection ariseth not from a fear of sinne, but from a fear of Hell. All these because they do not willingly bear the yoke of Christ, they shall unwillingly become his foot-stool.Mat. 11.29. Psal. 110.1. And they do not so much honour Christ, as Christ may be said to honour himself upon them. The wicked do give honour to Christ as unwillingly as ever Haman cloathed Mordecai, and proclaimed before him,Hester 6.11. Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King will honour. III. And Lastly, The Devils in Hell are forced to yield subjection unto Jesus Christ; and so , things under the earth, infernalia, things in hell do bow their knee unto him. For if in the dayes of Christs Humiliation, he hath exercised power over the damned spirits, and they have acknowledged him, and his Soveraign power over them, much more are they subject to him now in the dayes of his Exaltation. I shall not need to show you how often the Devils crouched to Christ whilst he was here on earth. The Devils were not on∣ly subject to his Person, but to those that commanded them in his Name; for so the seventy Disciples returning, gave Christ an account;Luke 10.17. Lord (say they) even the Devils are subject unto us through thy Name. In one story we finde that the Devils did three times prostrate themselves at the feet of Christ. Saint Luke relates the Story of the man possessed with a Legion of De∣vils. 1. First one of the Devils in the name of all the rest, thus supplicates Christ,Luke 8.28. What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Sonne of God Most High? I beseech thee Torment me not. 2. When Christ commanded the uncleane spirits to come out of the man,Ver. 31. they besought him that he would not command them to go out into the deep, that is, into Hell. Ver. 32.3. The Devils a third time besought Christ that they might go in∣to the Herd of Swine.
Thus those proud and rebellious spirits were forced to bow, e∣ven in the dayes of Christs flsh.James 2.19. And therefore much more now Chrst is exalted, do the de∣vils tremble; We read that Christ spoiled principalities and pow∣ers,Col. 2.15. and made a shew of them openly, Triumphing over them; In which Scripture we may observe, that Christ hath disarm'd, and triumph't over Satan. The word , alludes to the manner of the Conquerour, who disarm'd the Captives, and afterwards they led their Captives in chaines, when they made their Triumphant entrance; so the words, , do signifie, alluding to the Romane Conquests and Triumphs. Thus the Lord Jesus Christ by his death overcame the Devil,Heb. 2.14. Eph. 4.8. Duo in cruce affixi intelli∣guntùr: Chri∣stus visibiliter, sponte sua, ad tempus; Dia∣bolus invisibi∣ler, invitus, in perpetuum. O∣rig. Missilia Tri∣umphalia. and by his Ascension he led Captivity Captive, and gave gifts; alluding still to the manner of the Romane Triumphs, when the Victor in a Chariot of State, ascended up to the Capitol, the Prisoners following his Chariot; or else drawing it, with their hands bound behind them; and there were pieces of gold and silver thrown amongst the people, and other gifts and largesses bestowed upon the friends of the Conquerour. The Devil ever since the death, Resurrection, and Ascen∣sion of Christ, hath been overcome and spoiled. For by the death of Christ, the Devil was unarmed, and shackled; but presently after he was gag'd and silenc'd, and all his Oracles struck dumb and speechless; and so the Devils divested of their long-enjoyed pow∣er, and they forced to bow, though unwillingly to Jesus Christ. Hence it is said that the Devils tremble,Jam. 2.19. because they know Christ as their Judge, but not as their Saviour. They must bow, because they cannot help it. But it may be objected. Object. If all the Devils in Hell, and all the wicked men here on earth, do bow the knee to Christ, how comes it then to pass, that the Devil and his instruments do continue their Rebellion and mischief against Christ and his Church. 1. To this is answered, that even the Devils of Hell are bound to bow the knee unto Jesus Christ, though like wicked Rebels they have refused to do it. And so much we gather from that Answer of Christ to the Devil, who when he had the impudence
and audaciousness to bid the Son of God fall down and worship him;Mat. 4.9, 10. Christ said, Get thee behind me Satan, for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. The Devils are bound to bow, though they re∣fuse. 2. The Devil Rebels, and wicked men do not bow to, but blaspheme the Name of Christ; and yet Jesus Christ hath and doth exercise Authority over them, 1. In limiting them. 2. In punishing them. 1. In that he doth limit them. The Devil could not take a∣way either Jobs Cattle,Job 1.11, 12. Luke 8.32. Servants, Children, or Health, but as far as Gods permissive Providence was pleased to lengthen the chain; and though God doth lengthen the chain, yet he alwayes keeps the chain in his hand. The Devils could not go into the Herd of Swine, till they had first ask't leave of Jesus Christ. And so persecuters, they are limited too; the Devil and his instruments they are limited. The Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that you may be tried, and you shall have tribulati∣on ten dayes. Thus the Devil and his instruments are boun∣ded. 1. As to the Persons, whom they shall persecute; the Devil shall cast some of you, not all into Prison. 2. As to the kind of trouble, the Devil shall cast you into Pri∣son, not into hell.Rev. 2.10. 3. As to the time, you shall have tribulation ten dayes, and not for ever. 2. God will punish them, and so they shall be Subject to Christ. 1. In this life; for though the patience of God be long-suf∣fering, yet it is not alwayes suffering;2 Pet. 2.8. Luke 18.7. Psal. 110.11. Luke 19.27. and though he do beare long, yet he will avenge his elect. 2. At the last day. The unjust are reserved to be punished at the day of judgement; then will Christ put all his enemies under his feet; and then Christ will say, As for those mine enemies that will not that I should reign over them, bring them forth, and
slay them before my face; the total, final subject on of the De∣vil and Wicked men, of all the enemies of Christ unto him, shall be at the last day; then shall all knees bow before God. Thus the Lord speaks in the Prophet. I have sworne by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness,Isa. 45.23. and shall not re∣turn, that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall sweare. To this Scripture it is that the Apostle alludes in this place; and if you ask when shall this vniversal subjection be unto Christ? the Apostle will answer you in his Epistle to the Romanes. To this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived,Rom. 14.9, 10, 11▪ that he might be Lord both of dead and living; but why dost thou judge thy Brother? or why dost thou set at naught thy Brother? we shall all stand before the judgement Seat of Christ; for it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. And so I am come to the third and last particular of Christs Exaltation; viz. Every tongue shall confesse that Jesus is the Lord. In the handling of which, I shall resolve these Que∣stions. Quest. 1. What are we to understand by every tongue? Answ. 1. Some understand every tongue for every Nation; and then the meaning is,Omnis linguae pro quavis Gente. Dan. 3.4. Rev. 5.9. Psal. 67.7. Psal. 2.8. Psal. 72.9. Rom. 10.18. that the Name of Christ shall be ac∣knowledged and worshipped by every Nation; and so in Scripture Phrase, Tongue, and Language, and Nation, they are  words of the same notion and import. And this is true, that before the end of the world, all the ends of the earth shall worship the Name of Christ. The Heathen shall be his inheri∣tance, and the uttermost ends of the earth his possession; and they that dwell in the Wildernesse, shall bow before him; and the Sunne-light of the Gospel shall shine all the world over. And it is very remarkable, how God did repair the confusion of tongues by the gift of tongues.Gen. 11.7. compared with Acts 2.11. Rom. 10.10. 2. But I rather conceive, that by every tongue is meant every person; as by every knee, every person; for with the heart man believeth unto righteousnesse, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.
Quest. 2. What are we to understand here that Jesus is the Lord? 1 Cor. 2.8.Answ. Jesus Christ is the Lord, the Lord of glory in several re∣spects. 1 Cor. 8 6. Rom. 11.361. He is the Lord, as he is Creatour of heaven and earth; to us there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things. Heb. 1.4. . Heb. 1.2. 2 Cor.. 4.5.2. As he was the Son of God, so he is the Lord, and so he hath obtained by inheritance, this most excellent Name, to be Lord and Christ; thus Christ is Lord of all; jure haereditario, as he was the Heire of all things. Jesus Christ is the Lord; so speaks the Apostle, We preach Christ Jesus the Lord. 1. Christ is a Lord to command us; he hath that Authority, that he hath an absolute Soveraignty over our consciences; men are but Servants of our Faith,Stat pro ratio∣nibus universis, Deus vult. but Christ is the Lord of our Faith and Consciences. It is enough that Christ hath said it, that he hath commanded it. Heb. 7.25.2. Christ is a Lord to save us; and he hath power and abili∣ty, to save to the uttermost, all those that come unto God through him. And thus as he hath the Authority of a Lord to command us, we should willingly obey him; and as he hath the power and ability of a Lord to save us, we should chearfully trust in his Name. To confess that Jesus is the Lord, is so to believe on him, as to say,Mat. 8.26. Acts 9 6. Lord, save us, or else we perish; and so to obey him, as to say, Lord, what wouldst thou have me to do? Now as every knee must bow to the Dominion of Christ, so every tongue must confess that Jesus is the Lord. 1. The Devils and Wicked men shall be forced at the last to acknowledge the power of Christ, whose Authority they have alwayes rebell'd against. And as Pharaoh and the Egy∣ptians cryed out,Exod. 14.15. Lt us flee, for the Lord fighteth against us; So shall the stoutest-hearted sinner one day, flee from the presence of Christ,Rev. 6.16. and call to the Mountains to shelter them from
the wrath of the Lamb. And all the implacable enemies of Christ, they shall be forced, through spite and rage, to gnaw their tongues, and gnash their teeth, and say as that Cursed Apostate Julian, Thou hast overcome me,. O Ga∣lilean. 2. All the Saints and Angels, shall with one consent, own, acknowledge, and praise Jesus Christ, as the Lord, and as their Lord. They shall acknowledge him to be the Lord their Maker, and their Saviour, and so they shall cry Hosanna to him, and they shall ac∣knowledge him to be their Lord and Soveraign, and so they shall cast down their Crowns at his feet, and with everlasting Hal∣lelujahs sing, Worthy is the Lamb that was slaine,Rev. 5.12, 13. to receive Wisdom, Power, and Riches, and Strength, and Honour, and Glory, and Blessing. There is but one thing more to be opened in this Scripture, and that is the end of Christs Exaltation, which was , to the Glory of God the Fa∣ther. 1. Some by , do understand that Jesus Christ is exalted unto the same glory with the Father in Heaven, being now sate down at his right hand; and so they make these words to signifie not the end wny, but the end whereunto Christ was exalted. And thus the Arabick, and the Vulgar Latine.Omnis lingua confileatur quia Dominus Jesus Christus in glo∣riâ est Dei Pa∣tris. Rev. 3.21. And though I believe that there is a truth in this; viz. that Jesus Christ after he had overcome his enemies, sate down in his Fathers Throne; yet I cannot see how the Greek will bear this Interpretation. 2. We shall therefore take these words, Ʋnto the glory of God the Father, as signifying the great end of Christs Humili∣ation and Exaltation, to wit the glory of God. As God had no motive without himself, so he had no end beyond himself,John 3.16. Deut. 7.7. in giving of Christ. God gave Christ for us, because he loved us; and wherefore did he love us, but because he loved us? and the maine end of all, was,Eph. 1.6. that all might be to the praise of the glory of his grace. Thus Christs Exaltation was for the ho∣nouring
of God the Father. Jesus Christ prayed, Father, glo∣rifie thy Name; then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both gloified it, and will glorifie it againe. As if God the Father had thus answered Christ, Sonne, I have glorified my Name in thy Humiliation,John 12.28. and I will glorifie it again in thy Exaltation. God the Father glorifies his Son, that he might glorifie his own Name;Luke 10.16. John 5.22, 23. He that despiseh Christ, despiseth God that sent him; and he that honoureth the Son, honoureth the Father. Having spoken of the Exaltation of Christ, as the A∣postle handles the Doctrine of it in these Verses, I shall conclude all with the improvement and Application thereof. I. Use of Information; If Christ was first humbled, and then exalted;Luke 24.26. Act. 14.22. we may learn from hence, that as Christ first suffered, and entered into his glory, even so must we, through many Tribulations enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. As it was with the Head, so may we expect it will be with the Mem∣bers; the Crown of Thornes, before the Crown of life; the Crosse of shame,Joh. 19.2. Rev. 2.10. before the Throne of Glory; Humiliation be∣fore Exaltation; Christ got not the Crown sine sangine & sudore; he sweat drops of blood for it; and we cannot expect an easier and shorter way to glory. Our way to heaven, is like that of the Israelites to Canaan,Psal. 66.12. which was through fire and water, into a wealthy land. 2 Tim. 2.11, 12.This is a faithful saying, If we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with him; first suffer, and then reign; we pass through Marah unto Elim, through Bacah to Berechah, through bitterness to blessedness. II. Ʋse of Exhortation; Is Jesus Christ thus exalted? then let us, our tongues, our knees, our hearts, and our lives, ac∣knowledge him to be our Lord. Joh. 19. Joh. 19. Rev 4.10. Rev. 15.3.1. What the Jews, and Pilate, and Herod, and the Soul∣diers did in scorne, let us do in sincrity. They put a Crown of Thornes on his head, let us cast down our Crowns at his foot-stool.
They bowed the knee, and cryed, Ave Rex Judae∣orum, Hayle King of the Jewes;Ubi thronus Christi? ubi sce∣ptium, ubi Corona, ubi Pu∣pura, ubi Ministri? Crux fuit thronus, sceptrum cla∣vi, purpura sanguis, Coro∣na spinae, & Ministri Carni∣fices. Aug. Tanto charior es mihi, quan∣to vilior factus es pro me. Bern. let us bow the knees of our souls unto him, and say, Ave Rex Sanctorum, Blessed be thou, O King of Saints; whereas the Cross was his Throne, the nailes his Scepter, his Robe was made Purple with his own blood, his Crown was Thornes, his attendants were the Executioners; Say then, O blessed Saviour! thou art the more p ecious to my soul, because thou wast so much vilified for my sake. 2. Let us take heed that we do not violate our allegiance to him, whom God hath exalted to be Lord and Christ. Sinners!Exod. 5.2. Psal. 12.2. Luke 19.27. do not say, Who is the Lord, that we should obey his voice? Do not say, Who is Lord over us? Do not, O do not say, We will not have Christ to reign over us. 1. Consider, Christ is a Saviour only to thse that sumit unto him. He is the Authour of eternal life to them that obey him.Heb. 5.9. It is a vaine thing to expect the Priviledges and Dignities that come by Christ, and not to submit to the duties and services which are due unto Christ.Tit. 2.11, 12. The Gospel is a Message of Eternal life, only to those to whom it is a rule of a spiritual life; What? will you cry to Christ to save you, and in the meane time serve the Devil and your lusts? But the true believer doth not only cast himself into the armes of Christ to be saved, but also casts himself at Christs feet to serve him; and is as willing to be ruled by him, as to be Redeemed by him. Many love Christ, but it is for their own sakes; who desire to finde, but will not be at the paines to seek him;Multi amant Christum, sed non propter Christum; amant benedictionem; non jurisdictionem multi cupiunt Christum consequi, qui nolunt sequi; desiderant invnire quem nolunt quaerere. Mretricius amor est plus amare an∣nulum quam sponsum. Aug. and so instead of serving the Lord Christ, they do but serve themselves upon him. 2. Consider (O foolish sinner) that every knee must one day bow to Christ; O then! what folly is it to rebell against him, to whom thou must at last be forced to bow! Would the Bre∣thren of Joseph (think you) have so despised, and despitefully
used Joseph, if ever they had thought that there would come a day, that they must supplicate to him for their lives and liberties? The proudest sinner will at the last day,Mat. 7.21. cry, Lord, Lord, &c. Do not then lift up the heel against him, to whom thou must one day bow the knee. 3. Consider, That the sinnes of Christians are far greater, than of the Jews against Christ. They sinned against Christ in the state of his Humiliation, but we sin against Christ who is now exalted on the right hand of God. The Jews put Christ to death for saying,Mat. 26.64. Hereafter you shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven; and shall we, we Christians, put the Lord of glory to open shame, who do believe that he is sate down at the right hand of the Majesty on High?Acts 3.17. The Jews many of them, both Rulers and people, knew not that Jesus was the Christ; they had a hand in his death, but it was through ignorance; for had they known it,Cor. 2.8. they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory; but it must be horrible wickedness for us to rebell against Christ, who do believe his Exaltation. Sub pedibus e∣jus eris, aut a∣doptatus aut victus. Aug.4. And Lastly, Consider, That Christ at last will be too hard for the most hard-hearted sinner. If you will not bow, you will be broken (O obstinate sinner!) if thou wilt not kiss the Son, thou wilt lick the dust under his feet; if thou wilt not bow as a Child, thou wilt be made to bow as a Slave; if thou wilt not bow to his golden Scepter,Mat. 11.29. Psa. 110.1. thou wilt be broken with his Iron Rod; In a word, if thou wilt not bear his Yoke, thou shalt become his Foot-stool. III. Ʋse of Comfort to Belevers; great is the Consolation which doth arise from the doctrine of Christs Exaltation. 1. Is Christ exalted to the right hand of God? then we may comfortably believe, that he hath perfectly satisfied Gods justice for us;John 16.9. we may now rest upon Christs righteousness, that he hath accomplished fully all his undertaking, because he is gone to the Father. Christ by his Death overcame his enemies; by his Re∣surrection he scattered them; by his Ascension he triumph't o∣ver them; by his Death he paid the debt; by his Resurrection
he came out of Prison; and by his Ascension he shews himself openly to God the Creditor, and pleads satisfaction. The Humiliation of Christ confirmed and ratified the New Testament; his Exaltation gives him opportunity to execute his last Will and Testament; for he is now exalted as a Conquerour,Rev. 1.18. and hath the keys of death and hell delivered to him. This comfort the Apostle urgeth upon the Doctrine of Christs▪ Exaltation; for if when we were enemies,Rom. 5.10. we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. Our salvation began in the humiliation, but it is compleated in the Exaltation of Christ.Heb. 7.25. . He did not under∣take what he was not able to finish; for he saves his people to the uttermost. 2. This is our comfort, though Christ be highly exalted, yet he is mindful of us. He is not only a faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people, but he is a merciful high Priest,Heb. 2.17, 18. to remember the suffer∣ings of his people, and to succour those that are temptd. The Lord Jesus though he be safely landed upon the shore of eternal glory, yet he hath an eye to, and a care of his poor Church,Heb. 4.15. Heb. 5.2. . that is tossed with tempest, and afflicted. He is not only , one that can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but he is ; he doth pro magnitudine mi∣seriae condolere, he bears a share with us in our afflictions and temptations. The manner of men is, that great preferments makes them for∣get their former poor acquaintance:Honores mutan mores. but it is otherwise with Chrst. He is exalted above the Heavens, and yet he is not un∣mindful of his Church on earth. The dayes of his Passion are en∣ded, but not of his compassion; as Joseph, though he was the Favourite of Egypt, yet was not ashamed to own his Brethren who were poor Shepherds;Heb. 2 11. Heb. 6.20. . 1 John 2.1. . Joh. 20.17. Exod. 28.9, 10. no more is Jesus Christ ashamed to call us Brethren. Christ is gone into heaven as our Fre-runner, and there he is an Advcate for us with the Fa her. Just when Christ was going into heaven, he sends this comfortable message to his Disciples, I ascend to your God and my God, to your Fa her and my Fa her. Our great High Priest hath all the names, and necessities of his people written upon his Breast-plate; Believers are engraven upon
the palmes of his hands;Isa. 49.16. Cant. 8.6. yea, they are set as a Seal upon his heart. Videmus caput nostrum super aquas. Greg.3. And last Consolation is this, Christ is exalted to heaven, and so shall all believers in due time; the Head hath taken pos∣session of heaven for all his Members. In all the several parts of the Humiliation and Exaltation of Christ, he acted not as a single person, but as the Second Adam; re∣presentatively, as a publick person; so that all those who are in Christ Jesus, have an interest in that Redemption he hath purcha∣sed for Believers. Gal. 2.20. Rom. 6.8.Christ was crucified, and a believer is crucified with Christ; Christ dyed, and a believer is dead with Christ. Col. 3.1.Christ rose from the dead, and believers are risen with Christ. Christ is ascended up to heaven, and believers sit together with Christ in heauenly places.Eph. 2.6. 1 Cor. 6.2.Christ wil come to judge the world; and the Saints, as Asses∣sors to Christ, shall judge the world. Rev. 3.31.Christ is sate down in his Fathers Throne, and believers shall sit with Christ in his Throne. In a word, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is now possest of the glory of heaven,John 14.3. Joh 16.24. will come again to fetch us to heaven, that we may be where he is, that we may not only see his glory, but par∣take of it; for when he shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory.Col. 3.4.
THE SATISFACTION OF CHRIST DISCUSSED. COL. 1.20. And (having made peace through the blood of his Crosse) by him to reconcile all things unto himself, by him; I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. THE Apostle having congratulated the Colossians, their faith, and love, and other graces, and poured forth a prayer for them; in the 14. verse he enters upon a Declaration of the Gospel-mystery, the Person, and Offices, and work of Christ. His person, ver. 15, 16, 17. he is God, &c. his Office, ver. 18. he is the Head of the body,
the Church, &c. His work in the 20. verse. Having in the 19. verse, asserted Christs fitness for that work, it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulness dwell, &c. Besides that infinite fulness which he had as God, by natural and necessary generation, there was another unmeasured fulness depen∣ding upon Gods  and good pleasure, and there∣by imparted unto Christ. Now he comes to shew his work described First, By its nature, To reconcile to himself, to make peace. Secondly, By its instrument, that is, the blood of the Cross by him. Thirdly, The object of it, which are, All things, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven: By which learn∣ed Davenant understands the Angels spoken of as the things in heaven; and so many others, supposing that the Elect An∣gels wer confirmed in their estate by Christ: But with submis∣sion to better judgements, I conceive 1. that there is not sufficient evidence in Scripture, to shew that the holy Angels had their confirmation from Christ; nor doth it seem to be necessary; forasmuch as it is commonly acknowledged, that Adam (who was under the same Covenant with the Angels) if he had continued in the observation of Gods precepts; for so long time as God judged meet, he should have been confirm∣ed by vertue of the Covenant of Works some other way. And therefore it was rather to be thought, that the Angels have their confirmatiom from Christ, as God and Head over all things, than as Mediatour (The actions of Christ as Mediatour, sup∣posing a breach, according to that place, Gal. 3.20. A M∣diatour is not a Mediatour of one; i. e. of two parties which are one politically; i. e. which are agreed in one, but of parties at variance.) 2. Howsoever if the Angels had been confirmed by Christ, yet surely they were not reconciled by Christ; for Reconci∣liation implies a former enmity, as these things in heaven are said to be. And therefore I rather understand it of departed Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, &c. who, as they went to Hea∣ven, not to any Limbus; so this expression is used to insinuate,
that they were saved by the grace of Jesus Christ, even as we, as it is, Acts 15.11. and that the blood of Jesus Christ did expiate not only those sins which were committed after his death, but those also which were long since past; Rom. 3.25. as Sol non∣dum conspictus illuminat orbem, The light and influence of the Sun is dispersed among us, before the body of the Sun doth appear a∣bove our Horizon. So then here you have mans Reconciliation, Justification, and Salvation described, together with the procuring cause of it, set forth 1. More generally, By him. 2. More specially, By the blood of his Cross, by the shedding of his blood for us, by his death and passion complea∣ted on the Cross. The doctrine I intend to handle, is this, That the death of Jesus Christ is the procuring cause of mans justification and salvation. Amongst all those heresies which God hath suffered to spring among us (that they that are approved, may be manifest) none are more dangerous than those which concern the person and office of Christ; of those many streams of errour which run into the dead Sea of Socinianism, these are two; They deny the Godhead, and the satisfaction of Christ, and so indeed subvert the whole Fabrick of the Gospel. This latter I shall here endeavour to discuss, and shall proceed in this Me∣thod. 1. I shall explain it. 2. Assert. 3. Defend. 4. Ap∣ply it. 1. For the Explication of this great Gospel-mystery, (which truly if it fall, we are without hope, and so of all creatures most miserable) I shall lay down these steps. First, God made the world and man in it for his own service and glory: And this end he cannot be disappointed in, but must have it one way or o∣ther. Secondly, Man by sin thwharted Gods end, and cast dirt upon his glory, and so doth every sinner: Every sin is a refle∣ction upon Gods Name, a blot in Gods Government of the
world; so that some make it a pretence for their Atheism, say∣ing, That if there were a God, he would not suffer sin to be in the world. Thirdly, God is inclined by his Nature, and obliged by his interest, to hate sin, and punish the sinner, and so to recover his glory. 1. I say God is inclined by his nature, to hate and punish sin; I do not positively conclude, that he is absolutely obli∣ged; I shall not here meddle with that nice question, Whe∣ther God was so far obliged to punish it by his nature, that he could not pardon sin without satisfaction; but this is manifest: look upon man as a sinner, and so Gods Nature must needs be opposite unto him; The Scripture describes God in such man∣ner, not only in regard of his Will, but also in respect of his Nature, Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and canst not look on iniquity, &c. Exod. 34.6. where the nature of the Divine Majesty is represented; among other parts of the description this is one, He will by no meanes clear the guilty. Psalme 11.5. The wicked—his soul hateth; —and the reason is added from Gods Nature, ver. 7. For the righteous Lord loveth righteousnesse, his countenance doth behold the upright. And it may further appear, that here punish∣ment of sin is not an act of Gods Will, but of his Nature. Be∣cause the Actions of Gods Will are only known by Revelation, not by reason, or the light of Nature; but that God should and would punish sin, this was known by natures light, to such as were unacquainted with Revelation-light. Hence came the Conclusion, Acts 28.4. (This man is a Murderer, whom though he hath escaped the Sea, yet Ʋengeance suffereth him not to live.) Vengeance, , a supposed Goddesse, but indeed nothing else but Divine Ju∣stice. 2. God is obliged by his interest to punish him, as he is the Ruler of the world. By sin there comes a double mis∣chief. 1. God is wronged. 2. The world is wronged by a bad example, and hard∣ned in sin; so that if God might pardon sin as it is a wrong to himself, yet he is in a manner obliged to punish it to right the
wronged world, and to make such sinners patterns of severity, that the world may not make them examples of ungodlinesse; even as King James might pardon the Powder-Traytors, so far forth as his Person was concerned; but if you look on it as a wrong to the whole Nation, to the Protestant Religion, so he was obliged to punish them, to make them warnings to others in the like cases; so that you see mans punishment was necessary for Gods glory, and the Worlds good. Fourthly, The punishment to be inflicted, must be sutable to sins Nature, and Gods Majesty; and therefore an infinite punish∣ment for this is justice to observe an exact proportion between sin and punishment. Fifthly, The only way whereby this punishment might be suf∣fered, and yet man saved, was by the incarnation and passion of God-man. Man being every other way finite, must have suf∣fered infinitely in regard of duration, even to eternity. And none but Christ who was infinite in regard of the subject, and dig∣nity of his person, as he was God, could have so speedily and ef∣fectually delivered us from this punishment, by suffering it him∣self, whereby Gods justice was satisfied, his hatred against the sin∣ner removed, and his mercy at liberty to act in the pardon of the sinner. Sixthly, This passion of Jesus Christ, God was graciously plea∣sed to accept for us, and impute to us, as if we had suffered in our persons, and so he receives us into mercy. And this is the substance of the Doctrine of the Gospel about mans salva∣tion. So much for the first thing, the Explication of the point. 2. I now come to the Assertion or Demonstration of it, that you may receive this Doctrine as a Truth, not built upon the tra∣ditions of men, but revealed in the Word of God. Now to prove this point; viz. That the death of Jesus Christ is the procuring cause of mans Justification and Salvation, I may use two sorts of Arguments. First, Some from the consideration of Christs death. Secondly, Some from the consideration of mans Justification and Salvation.
1. From the consideration of Christs death I shall offer six Arguments. 1. Its Possibility. 2. Necessity. 3. Nature. 4. Cause. 5. Vicegerency. 6. Peculiarity. First, From the possibility: Let me be bold to assert; had it not been for this purpose, it had not been possible for Christ to dye; as it was not possible for Christ to be holden of death, Acts 2.24. the price being paid, and so the Prisoner of course to be released; so it had not been possible, because not just (Id tantum possumus, quod jure possumus) to put him into a prison, if it had not been to pay a debt. And a debt of his own he had none, he was a Lamb without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. Holy, blameless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Hebr. 7.26. He knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. which I the rather mention, be∣cause Scinus hath the impudence to lay down this blasphemous Assertion, That Christ, like the Jewish High Priest, did offer for himself as well as for the people. You have seen he had no debt, no sin of his own, (he professeth of himself that he did alwayes those things which pleased his Father, John 8.29.) and therefore he must needs dye for our debts; it is plain that Adam, had he continued in integrity, should not have dyed; death is not the effect of nature; (then the Saints in glory must dye again; for they have the same nature) but the fruit of sin; death entred into the world by sin; Rom. 5.12. And the Apo∣stle proves the sin of Infants (expressed by that Periphrasis, such as have not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression) from the death of Infants; and in Adam all dyed; i. e. by his sin, 1 Cor. 15.22. Therefore Jesus Christ being purified from the guilt of Adams sin, by his holy birth, and no lesse perfect than Adam should have been, could never have dyed, if not for our sakes. Secondly, From the necessity of Christs death; it was neces∣sary for our Salvation and Justification, without which end it had been in vain. The Socinians mention two other reasons and
ends of Christs death; the one to be an example of obedience; but such we have many others upon far less charge; the other to be a ground of hope for the remission of sin, and the fulfilling of Gods promises; but properly it is not the death, but resur∣rection of Christ, which is the ground of our hope, 1 Cor. 15.14. If Christ be not risen, your faith is vain; so that those ends are improper and insufficient: And to strike it dead, I urge but one place, Gal. 2.21. — If righteousnesse come by the Law, Christ is dead in vain. What can be more plain, if righteousnesse be not by Christ, that the death of Christ be not the procuring cause of our Justification, Christ is dead in vain, to no end, or (as Grotius, and others rather understand) without any meritorious cause; i. e. our sins; however all comes to one. Thirdly, From the nature of Christs death, it is a Sacrifice; this consists of two Branches. 1. Sacrifices did expiate sin. 2. Christs death is a Sacrifice, and a sin-expiating Sa∣crifice. 1. I say Sacrifices did expiate sin, Levit. 1.4. He shall put his hands upon the head of the burnt-offering, and it shall be accep∣ted for him; and many such places. And this they did typically, (which strengthens the cause we have in hand) as representing and fore-signifying Christ, without which it was not possible for the blood of Buls and Goats to take away sins, Hebr. 10.4. And the sins pardoned under the Old Testament, were pardoned thorough Christ, and not through any vertue of their Sacrifices, Christ being a Mediatour for the Redemption of the Trans∣gressions that were under the first Testament, Hebrewes 9.15. 2. And this brings in the second Head, that Christs death is a Sacrifice, and a sin-expiating Sacrifice, if either the names or nature of it may be regarded; for the names and titles proper to Sacrifices, they are attributed to it; (and God doth not give flattering titles, nor false names, but such as discover the na∣ture of things) it is called , an Oblation, or offering up of himself, Ephes. 5.2. , 1 John 2.2. , Rom. 3.25. to omit others; and for the nature, by vertue hereof sin is atoned; he is our High Priest for this end, to make recon∣ciliation
for the sins of the people, Heb. 2.17. , being by an Enallage put for , to pacifie God, reconcile God, turn away his wrath. You meet with all things in Christ, which concurre to the making of a Sacrifice. The Priest, he is our High Priest; the Sacrifice himself, Christ was once offered; the shedding of blood, and destroying of it,  being the essential part of a Sacrifice. Add to these, 1 Cor. 5.7.—Christ our Passeover is Sacrificed for us; where is a double Argument; 1. That Christ is expresly said to be Sacrificed. 2. That he is called a Passeover, which at the best seems to have been both a Sacrifice and a Sacrament: Now then Christs death being a Sacrifice, it appeares that it appeased Gods wrath, procured his favour. Fourthly, From the cause of Christs death I might urge a double cause. 1. The inflicting cause it was Gods displeasure: Nothing more plaine than that he had a very deep sense of, and sharp conflict with Gods wrath, from those dreadful horrours in the Garden (where his soul was exceeding sorrowful unto death; not certainly at the approach of an ordinary death, which ma∣ny Martyrs have undergone with undaunted courage; but at the apprehension of his Fathers anger) and upon the Cross, where he roared out that direful complaint, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Now then, seeing God being natu∣rally gracious, and perfectly righteous, cannot, will not be dis∣pleased with any without cause; and Christ had in himself no cause, There was nothing in him, Joh. 14.30. and (as you read) he alwayes did those things which pleased him: It remains therefore that the cause of this displeasure, and of Chrsts death, was, our sins laid upon him, and our peace to be procured by him: And that brings in the 2. Head, which is the procuring or meritorious cause of Christs death; the guilt of our sins laid on him, brought death upon him, as the just punishment of them. And this is writ∣ten with so much clearness, that he that runs may read it. It is observed of the Ancient Writers of the Church, That those of them which lived before the Pelagian heresie was raised, spoke more darkly, and doubtfully, and carelesly in those things,
not being ob iged to stand much upon their Guard when they had no enemy in view, and having to do with enemies of a contrary make, while they avoided one extream, , as it often happened, they ran too near the other: But in this point, the Apostles who Writ so long before Socinus had a being, have Written with as much perspicuity against that heresie, as if they had lived to see the accomplishment of that Monster, the conception whereof some of them saw in those. Primitive Hereticks. Two things are written with a Sun∣beam. 1. That Christ died for our good as the final cause. Dan. 9.26. —The Messiah shall be cut off, but not for him∣self. 2. That he died for our sins as the deserving cause; Rom. 4.25. Who was delivered (viz. unto death) for our offences; not only upon the occasion of our sins (as the Socinians gloss it) but for the merit of our sins. To suffer for sin, alwayes implies sin to be the meritorious cause of it. 1 Kings 14.16. He shall give up Israel because of the sins of Jeroboam. Deut. 24.16. The Father shall not be put to death for the children; —but every man shall be put to death for his own sin. And many other places there are to the same purpose: And it is sufficient to confirm any judicious man in this Truth, to read the miserable evasions which the Socinians use to shift off the force of this Argument, which as time will not give me leave to mention, so they are neither fit for this, nor worthy of any Assembly: This is plain, that Christ died for our sinnes; and to stop all holes, the holy Ghost useth various prepositi∣ons; if one be more emphatical than another, all shall con∣cur to assert this truth, , Rom. 4.25. , 1 Cor. 15.3. , 1 Pet. 3.18. And that all these should signifie the final cause, or occasion only, and never the meritorious cause, when a man hath put out his eyes, or God hath taken away the Scripture, and o∣ther Greek Authours too, he may believe it, but very hardly before. I shall strengthen this Argument with this consideration, That Christ is said to bear our sinnes; which is so evident, that
Crellius that Master-builder of the Socinian Fabrick, confes∣seth, That for the most part to beare sins, is to endure the pu∣nishments due to sin: And he said no more than he was forced to by the invincible clearness of Scripture-expressions; Lev. 5.1. & 7.18. & 20.17. Notorious Offenders, it is said of them, They shall beare their iniquity. It is said of Christ, not only , which the Socinians say, may signifie to take away iniquity; albeit a Learned man layeth down this asser∣tion, That it never signifies to take away sin, as Socinus would have it; but also , which is to beare upon his shoul∣ders, as a Porter beares a Burden, but never to take away. Isaiah 53.4. He hath borne our griefs, and caryed our sor∣rows. Object. (Which is one of the most plausible Arguments they have in this cause) But Mat. 8.16, 17. where Christ took a∣way diseases which he did not bear, it is said the saying of Esaias was fulfilled therein. Answ. (To omit those many Answers given by others, of which see Brinsleys one only Mediatour, and Calovius his ex∣cellent discourse De satisfactione Christi, in his Socinismus prostigatus) A Scripture is said to be fulfilled, either wholly, or in part: Now then you must know, that although it be a truth, which we conclude against the Papists, That there are no more than one of literal and co-ordinate senses of every place of Scripture, yet there may be divers of several kindes, one subordinate to another, and one typified by another, and one accommodated to another; And when any one of these senses are accomplished, that Scripture is said to be fulfilled, though indeed but one piece and parcel of it be fulfilled. Thus the fulfilling of the same Scripture, is applied to the spiritual preservation of the Apostles, John 17.12. and to the temporal preservation of them, John 18.9. And as it were false and fallacious reasoning for any man to infer, that Christs keeping of his Apostles, cannot be understood spiritually of keeping them in his Name, and keeping them from Apostacy, as it is said John 17.12. because John 18.9. it is said to be fulfilled in
a rescue of them from a temporal destruction; but rather it must be said, it was fulfilled both wayes, and the one was subor∣dinate to the other, and typified in the other; So is it in this case: This place in Isaiah, (that it may appeare to be exactly a parallel case) was fulfilled two wayes; The one expressed, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body upon the Tree. The other in this, Matth. 8.17. In the former is expressed the cause, Christs bearing the burden of our sinnes upon his shoulders. In the latter, the effct, Christs taking off the Burden, or part of that Burden of sin from our shoulders, or from the shoulders of those diseased persons; for it was laid upon his shoulders, that it might be taken off from us. So that Matthew rightly tells us that Isaiah was fulfilled, and that the cause did appeare by the effect; as by the dawning of the day, we see the approach of the Sun. And this may serve for the un∣tying of that hard knot, which I had almost said, is the only thing of moment the Socinians have in this Controversie. But to return, Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressi∣ons, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. If it were lawful for the highest Antisocinian in the world to coyne a Scripture for his purpose, he could not devise a place of a more favourable aspect to his cause than this. And Ver. 6. The Lord hath plac'd on him the iniquity of us all. But indeed the Argu∣ments which might be drawn out of this one Chapter, Isa. 53. might afford matter for a whole Sermon. Fifthly, From the Vicegerency of Christs death; Christ dyed 1. For our good. 2. For ou sins, (of both those you have heard.) 3. In our place; of this I now come to Treat Briefly (for I have been wonderfully prevented) 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ suf∣fered for sins, the just for the unjust. 2 Cor. 5.14. If one died for all, then were we  d; i. e. juridically, we were all as dead, condemned per, because he died in our stead. He is said to die , and . Now the word  al∣wayes
signifies a commutation, saith the then famous, but af∣terwards Apostate Grotius, eye for eye, , Matth. 5.38. that is, one instead of the other, Matth. 2.22. Arche∣laus reigned  in the room of his Father Herod. So 2 Sam. 18.33. Would God I had died for thee O Absalom; i. e. in thy stead, so that thou hadst lived. Thus Christ died for us; so John 11.50. Caiaphas said, It is expedient fo us, that one man should die for the people; i. e. in their stead, to save their lives, as a publick . The Gentiles being used in case of some great and common calamities, threatning destruction to all, to offer up some one man in the name and stead of all, which was a shadow of that great truth of Christs dying for all. And Socinus himself being put to it, cannot deny this; Even in Heathen Authours, it is a common phrase, To do a thing for another; i. e. in his place. Ego pro te molam, I will grinde for you, and you shall be free. Christ is called , a Ransome, or Price, a ; (there is one Argument, that his Blood was the price of our Redemption) and a Ransome in our stead. 1 Tim. 2.6. Who gave himself  a Ran∣some for all. Gal. 3.13. Christ hath Redeemed us from the cuse of the Law, himself being made a curse for us; i. e. he un∣derwent that Curse due to us, that Curse from which we are freed, that Curse which others who receive not Jesus Christ, shall undergo. What a cluster of Arguments might be gathered here? It is prodigious boldness in Socinians to turn this Article of Faith into a streame of Rhetorick, Paulus amavit in voce execrationis argutus esse: But Manum de ta∣bula. Sxthly, And lastly, From the peculiarity of Christs death. It is undeniable that Christ died for us, so as no man in the world ever did, nor can do. Therefore not in the Socinian sense, not barely for the confirmation of our faith, or excitati∣on of our obedience, or strengthning of our hope, or encou∣ragement of us in our sufferings; for in this sense, thousands have died for you. Paul tells the Co  he suffered for them, i. i. for their good; Col. 1.24. and yet lls the Corinthians, he did not suffer for them. 1 Cor. 1.13. Was Paul crucified for
you? i. e. in your stead, or for your sinnes? And this for the first Head of Arguments, where I see I must take up, though I thought to have urged divers other Argu∣ments from the Nature of mans justification and salvation. But I will not be too tedious. What hath been said may be enough to convince any indifferent man; and others will not be convin∣ced, though they are convinced. Thus much for the second particular, the assertion of this truth. The third should have been the vindication of it from the cavils of Socinians; but I am cut off, and it is not wholly necessary; for if once a truth be evident from plain Scriptures, we ought not to be moved with the cavils of wanton wits, or the difficulty of comprehending those great mysteries by our reason; when the Socinians can solve all the Phaenomena of nature, (which are the proper Object of mans Reason) then, and not till then, we will hearken to their rational Objections. And A∣ristotle somewhere lays down this Conclusion, That when once man is well setled in any truth, he ought not to be moved from it by some subtle Objection, which he cannot well answer. All this I speak, not as that there were any insolubilia, any insuperable Objections against this truth that I ever met with; for though there are many things here which are hard to be understood, yet nothing which cannot be answered. As when they tell you he did not suffer eternal death which was due to us. It is true, he did not; but a moment of his suf∣ferings was equal in worth to our eternal sufferings, the dignity of the person being always considerable in the estimation of the acti∣on, or the suffering. So when they say one man cannot dye for another, it is false; you heard David wish he had dyed for Absalom; and Jehu threatens those who should let any of them escape, That his life shall go for his life, 2 Kings 10.24. and Histories tell us of one man dying for another. So when they say it is unrighteous that God should punish the just for the unjust.
Answ. It is not unjust, if any will voluntarily undertake it; volenti non sit injuria. Besides that, God gives Laws to us, Deut. 24.16. but not to himself. The fourth and last Head was by way of Application. Is it so, That the death of Jesus Christ is the procuring cause of our Justification and Salvation? Ʋse 1. Hence see the excellency of Christian Religion, which shews the true way to life, and settles doubting consciences. Hea∣thens were miserably plunged; they saw their sins, their guilt, and had terrors of conscience, an expectation of wrath; this  was written in their hearts, that they which do such things are worthy of death; — They saw the need of atoning God, reconciling God; they saw the insufficiency of all their Rites and Sacrifices. Ah nimium faciles qui tristia Funera caedis Tolli flumineâ posse putatis aquâ! Some of them saw the necessity of a mans death, and that sine humano cruore, without mans blood the work could not be done; but then that seemed an act of cruelty, and the addition of a sin instead of the expiation of it; and here they stuck; they could go no further. Now blessed be God who hath discovered those things to us which were hid from others; who hath removed difficulties, and made our way plain before us; who hath given us a Sacrifice, and accepted it, and imputed it to us, and thereby reconciled us, and given us peace, a solid peace, as the fruit of that Recon∣ciliation. Ʋse 2. See the dreadfulnesse of Gods justice, how fearful it is to fall into the hands of the Living God; Christ himself must suffer, if he be a sinner though but by im∣putation.
Use 3. It shews us, the malignity of sin that could be expiated on∣ly by such blood. Use 4. It shews us the stability and certainty of our Justificati∣on and Salvation. It is procured, purchased, the price paid, recei∣ved, God cannot now recall it. Use 5. Study the death of Christ, and eye it as the great pillar of your faith, in troubles of conscience, and settle your selves upon it.
OF EFFECTUAL CALLING. ROM. 8.28. To them who are called according to his purpose. THe sacred Scriptures are a Paradise, or Garden of delights: This Epistle to the Romans is a most cu∣rious and artificial knot in that Garden; this Chapter is the richest division in that knot, furnish∣ed with sweetest flowres of Consolation, antido∣ting the remnants of corruption that there are in our hearts, and the various afflictions that we meet with in the World. This Verse that I have read unto you, is the fairest flowre in that Division; for what can sooner revive a drooping soul, than to be assured that all things shall work together for good? We (saith the great Apostle) do not think, imagine, conjecture, but know, partly by Divine Revelation, partly by our own experi∣ence,
that all things; not only all Gifts, Graces, Ordinances; but all Creatures, all Providences, all Changes, Events, Occur∣rences, even those things that appear most formidable; (Homo oppugnans,Ferus. Diabolus insidians) the persecutions of men, the temptations of the Divel, shall work not singly and apart it may be, but together for good. For good! Yes, but it is unto those that be good. Hands off wicked and profane wretches; you have no part nor lot in these heavenly consolations. Away base Swine, to your sties, to your muck and mire, these pearls are not for you. Out ye Dogs, to the garbidge that lieth upon the Dunghill, the childrens bread is not for you. We know that all things shall work together for good unto those that love God: why so? because they are called ac∣cording to his purpose; so Paraeus expoundeth the place, and with him I perfectly agree: Isa. 14.27.That which God hath purposed, shall not be frustrated: The Lord of Hosts hath purposed, and whe shall disannul it? his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back? What man will suffer his purposes, those purposes that he taketh up with best ad∣vice, and most mature deliberation, to be disappointed if he have power to accomplish them? the holy purposes of God, as they are ordered and directed by infinite Wisdome, so they have infinite power to bring them to passe; so that if I can say God hath a purpose to save me, I may securely smile at all the attempts of men and devils against me; and if I can say, God hath Effectu∣ally Called me, I may be sure God hath chosen me, and hath a Purpose to save me; for all the links in the golden Chain of salva∣tion are even wrought, not one of them wider or narrower than another; if God have Chosen, he will Call; if God Call, he hath Chosen. Once more, if I can say I love God, I may be sure I am Called; for I cannot love God, except I have some acquaintance with him, some sense and experience of his love towards me. So then all our consolations are ultimately resolved into the Purpose of God; this is the basis and foundation of them all; that Purpose appeareth by our Effectual Calling; and that Calling appeareth to be Effectual by our love to God. Hence the conclusion is certain, That all things shall work together for good to them that love God, to them that are Called according to his Purpose.
But I forget my self; you have heard in former Discourses, under what a sad, soul-killing disease poor man laboureth in his natural condition; you heard likewise of a Soveraign remedy provided in the blood of Christ: I am now engaged to speak to the application of that remedy in our Effectual Calling. This Effectual Calling, according to Saint Augustine, is in∣gressus ad salutem, our entrance into a state of salvation; the first step whereby God his predestination descendeth to us, and we again ascend to the glory predestinated. The Doctrine I present from my Text may be this; There are some persons in the World that are Effectually Called; or which is all one, which are Called according to the Purpose of God. There is a Call of the Gospel that is not Effectual; of this our Saviour speaketh, when he saith, Many are Called, but few are Chosen. How many of the poor Ministers of the Gospel may complain of multitudes in this generation, saying, with the chil∣dren that sate in the Market place, Luke 7.32. We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not lamented! Neither the delightful airs of mercy, nor the doleful dities of judgement have moved you; but the Election will certainly obtain; and the Call that is according to Gods Purpose, reacheth not ears only, but hearts also. The houre is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, John 5.25. This work of grace is presented to our view in a various dresse of words; in the Scriptures it is sometimes a teaching, sometimes a drawing, sometimes a conversion, sometimes a regeneration; and all these in divers respects, which I cannot stand to unfold.Gratia prima. Praeveniens. Operans. In the Schools it is the first grace, preventing grace, operating grace; among Divines of the Reformed way, it is an Internal and Effectual Call; Ʋocatio Alta & Efficax, after the minde of St. Augustine. When it is offered to our consideration under this notion, it pre∣supposeth two things. 1. That natural men stand at a distance from God; we do not use to call those that stand hard by us; this was once the con∣dition of the Ephesians, Ye sometimes were far of; sometimes;Ephes. 2.13. when? surely in the time of their unregeneracy; far off; from whom? from Christ, from the Church, from God, and conse∣quently
from themselves; but how could they be far off from God?Zanchius. not in spaces of place; for God filleth all places with his presence; as to his Essence, and providential works, he is not far from every one of us,Acts 17.27. for in him we live and move; but as to their hearts and affections, all natural men are far from God; God is not in all their thoughts, they do not know him, fear, love and delight in him, they do not breath after communion with him; even when they draw nigh unto him with their lips, their hearts are far from him. If it sometimes happen that we call those that are at hand, then usually they are such as are asleep; sin is a deep sleep of the soul; and as sleep bindeth all the senses of the outward man, so sin all the powers of the inward; a man un∣der the dominion of sin can do nothing for God, neither can he enjoy any thing from God; it may be he dreams of great satis∣factions he receiveth from the worlds dainties; but when he awa∣keth his soul is empty. Or further, if they be not asleep, they are such as mind something else than he would have them. All natural men minde something else than God would have them,Phil. 3.19. they minde earthly things. Herod mindeth the dancing of a lewd Strumpet, more than the preaching of the holy Baptist; the young man mindeth his great possessions; the Epicure his belly; the Farmer his barn; Judas his bag; the Silversmith his Shrines; the Gadarenes their Swine; Pila e the favour and applause of the people. Let the best men speak ingenuously, and they must needs confesse that there were many things (if I may call them things, rather nothings) which they minded more than God or Christ, or Heaven, more than the highest concernments of their im∣mortal souls, the weightiest businesse of Eternal salvation; they were all Gallios in respect of these things, they cared for none of them, till they were rouzed out of their waking dreams by the Ef∣fectual Call of the most gracious God. This is the condition of every natural man. 2. It presupposeth, That it is an easie thing with God to bring us home to himself; though we be never so far distant from him; to awaken us to his service, though in a dead sleep of sin; to raise our minds to higher objects, though they be never so deep∣ly immersed in the things of this present world. Is any thing hard to the Almighty? with a word he made us, with a word he can re∣new us: When darknesse covered the face of the deep, he did but
ay Let there be light, and there was light; with the like facility can he shine in our hearts, giving us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus. He uttereth his voice (saith David) and the earth melteth. Let but God utter his voice, and the Rocks and Mountains of our corruptions will melt away like wax. Come we now closer to the Point. Toward the opening of which, I shall entreat your Attenti∣on to the resolution of sundry Questions. Question 1. What is this Calling? It is the real separation of the soul unto God; and a cloath∣ing it with such gracious abilities, whereby it may be enabled to repent of its sinnes, and to believe in his Son. It is our Translation from the state of Nature which is a state of sinne, wrath, death, and damnation, to a state of Grace, which is a state of Holiness, Life, Peace, and Eternal Salva∣tion. This Translation is wrought 1. By strong convictions of the minde. First, Of the guilt and filth of sin, of the danger and defile∣ment of sin, of the malignity of sin, and the misery that at∣tends it. Once saith the soul (that is under this dispensation of Gods Grace) Once I lookt upon sin as my wisdome; now it is madness and folly: Once I accounted it my meat and drink to fulfill the wills of the flesh; sinne was a sweet morsel,. I drank iniquity like water, now 'tis a cup of trembling to me, and I fear it may prove a cup of Condemnation; Once I hug∣ged, embrac't, and delighted in sin as the Wife of my bo∣some; now I clearly see that the fruit and issue of the impure copulation of my soul with her, is nothing else but the shame of my face, the stain of my reputation, the Rack and hor∣rour of my conscience; and (which is more than all these) the provocation of the Almighty; and therefore I begin to think within my self of an eternal divorce from her; I slept securely in the lap of this Dalilah, she robb'd me of my
strength, she delivered me up to Philistines that dealt unwor∣thily with me, that put me upon base and low employments; what now should I think of? but (if it please the Lord to give new strength) the death and destruction of them all. Secondly, Of the vanity and emptiness of the creature, which we have Idolized, confiding in it as the staff of our hopes, breathing and pursuing after it as the perfection of our hap∣piness. Thirdly, Of the absolute need of Christ, that if he do not save vs, we must perish. Fourthly, Of the absolute fulnesse of Christ, and that in him we may be compleat; if we be guilty, he can justifie us; if we be filthy, he can purge us; if we be weak, he can streng∣then us; if we be poor, he can enrich us; if we be base, he can ennoble us; if we be deformed and ugly, he can make us beautiful and lovely; if we be miserable, he can bless us, and that with all Blessings in Heavenly pla∣ces. Fifthly, Of the clemency, goodness, meekness, sweetness, gra∣ciousness of his disposition, that if any man come to him, he will in no wise reject him:John 6.37. These things the minde is strongly con∣vinc't of, yet if there be not a farther work, a man may carry these Convictions to Hell with him. There∣fore 2. In the second place, this Translation is wrought by a powerful inclination, and conversion of the will to close with Christ upon his own termes, to embrace him as Soveraign as well as Saviour; to take him as men use to do their Wives, for better for worse, for richer for poorer; to stick to him on Mount Calvary, as well as Mount Tabor; to welcome him into thy bosome, by bidding an everlasting farewell to thy sinnes. In a word, to make a voluntary tender, and resignation of thy self unto him, solemnly avouching, that from this time for∣ward, thou wilt count thy self more his, than thou art thine own; and the more thy own, because thou art his. This work is carried on with a most efficacious sweet∣ness, so that the liberry of the will is not infringed, whilst
the obstinacy of the will is mastered and over-ruled. If you ask me, How can these things be? I never studied to satisfie curiosity; but if you can tell me how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child, I also will tell you how the parts of the new man are formed in the heart; but I sup∣pose, silence and humble admiration will be best on both sides; if there be so great a mystery in our natural generation, surely there is a far greater in our spiritual Regeneration; if David could say of the former, I am fearfully and wonderfully made; much more might he say of the latter, I am fearfully and wonder∣fully renewed. Question 2. Who are the Called. First, Among creatures, none but men are of the number of the called; The Angels that kept not thei first estate, but left their own habitation, are never recalled,Jude ver. 6. but reserved in everlasting chaines under darknesse, to the judgement of the great day. Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him?Psal. 8.4. or the son of man that thou so regardest him? Secondly, Among men, none but the Elect are capable of this grace; the call is limited by the purpose; Whom he hath predestinated, them he also called.Rom. 8. Touching these Elect Persons, divers things fall under our Observation; As, 1. In regard of their internal condition; before this call, they are dead in sins and trespasses, blinde in their mindes, stony in their hearts, corrupt in their ways, even as others. 2. In regard of their outward condition; both before and after this call, they are for the most part poor and vile, and contemptible in the eye of the world. God puts not the grea∣ter value upon any man for a gold ring, or goodly aparrel, though the world doth. He hath chosen the poore of this world, rich in faith, and Heires of the Kingdome.Jam. 2.5. 1 Cor. 1.29. Ye see your calling, Brethren, how that not many wise mn after the flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble are called. Some it may be, but not many; God so orders his Call, as
that it may appeare, there is no respect of persons with him. 3. Whatever the outward condition of these men be, there are but very few that are effectually called; few (I say) in comparison of those that are left under the power and domini∣on of their lusts, One of a City, and two of a Tribe. I trem∣ble to speak it, but a truth it is, and must out; Satan hath the Harvest, God the gleanings of man-kinde; which by the way may serve to convince them of their vanity and folly, that make the multitude of actors an Argument to prove the rectitude of actions, as if they could not do amisse, that do as the most: Whereas a very Heathen could say, Argumentum pessimi turba, The beaten Tract is most deceitful; Sheep go the broad way to the Shambles,Seneca lib. de vita beat. when a more uncouth path might lead them to fresh Pastures. Question 3 Who is he that Calleth? Who but God, that calleth things that are not, as if they were? all heart-work is Gods peculiar, the restraining and or∣dering the heart; he with-held Abimelech, not suffering him to touch Sarah Abrahams Wife;Gen. 20.6. and the heart of Pharaoh, while it was least conformable unto the Rule of his Law, was absolutely subject unto the Rule of his providence; and well it is for us, that it belongs to God to restrain and order hearts; o∣therwise sad would be the condition of this Nation, of the whole world; but now if it be Gods peculiar to restraine and order hearts, much more surely, to turn, change, break, melt,Coluerunt Eth∣nici Venerem Verticordiam, Val. Max. lib. 8. cap. 15. Lilius Girald. Synt. 13 Jer. 31.33. and new-mould hearts. It is his Soveraign grace which we adore as the only Ʋerticordia, as the real turn-heart; there∣fore may we observe, that 1. God doth especially challenge this unto himself. You know whose expressions those are, I will give a new heart; and again, I will take away the heart of stone; are they not Gods? who dare make any challenges against the Almighty? hath not he a Scepter strong enough to secure his Crown? those that will be plucking Jewels out of his Royal Diadem, and a∣scribe that to themselves, or any creature; which is his Preroga∣tive,
shall finde him jealous enough of his honour, and that jealousie stirring up indignation enough to consume them. But 2. As God may justly challenge this work to himself, so it is altogether impossible it should be accomplished by any other. For 1. This effectual vocation, is a spiritual resurrection of the soul; while we are in a state of Nature, we are dead; not sick or languishing, not slumbring or sleeping, but quite dead in trespasses and sinnes; when we are call'd into a state of grace, then are our soules raised to walk with God here, as our bo∣dies at the last day shall be raised to walk with the Sonne of God unto all eternity. Now if it be not in the power of any creature to raise the body from the grave of death (upon which account it is used as an Argument of the Divinity of Christ, that he raised himself) much less is it in the power of any creature to raise the soul from the grave of sinne. And therefore do all true Believers experiment the power of God,Eph. 1.19, 20. even that excee∣ding greatness of power; that Might of his Power, as the Greek hath it, whereby he raised up Christ from the dead. 2. This effectual vocation, is a new Creation of the soul, whence we are said to be Created in Christ Jesus, when we are called unto an experimental knowledge of him, and unfeigned Faith in him; upon which account it must needs be Gods work∣manship; for power of creating, is not, cannot be communica∣ted to any creature. Though the Angels excell in strength,Psal. 103.20. and wonderful things have been performed by them, when they have as Ministers executed Gods pleasure in the punishment of the wicked, and protection of the righteous; yet the mighty∣est Angel cannot create the meanest worm that is; the only product of infinite power. And let me tell you, if infinite power be manifested in the Creation of the world, it is more gloriously manifested in the conversion of a sinner. There is a worse Chaos, a worse confusion upon the heart of man, when God undertaketh his new Creation, than there was upon the face of the earth in the Old Creation: In the earth, when it was without forme, and void, there was only indisposition;Gen. 1.2. but
in the heart of man, there is both indisposition and opposi∣tion. Well then, I peremptorily conclude that the work is Gods; Gods by the way of a principal efficiency, and not only by way of motion or perswasion, as some would have it, wherein I fear a piece of cursed brokeage for their own glory. For were it so, they would be but very mean acknowledge∣ments that do belong to God, for the change of a most mise∣rable and unhappy estate. Suppose I should go to some wealthy Citizen, and present him an object of charity, using the most cogent Considerations which my Art and Wit could invent, to inforce a liberal Contribution; thereupon he freely parts with his mony for the relief of that indigent person; tell me now to which of us is he mainly engaged to return thanks? to me the mover, or to him the bestower? I make no question but your Judicious thoughts have made an award of the chief acknowledgement to the Latter. The case would plainly be the same betwixt God and us, if his only were the motion, ours the act of Conversion; his the perswasion, ours the perfor∣mance; and if we go to Heaven, we should have more cause to thank our selves, than to thank God for all the happiness we meet with there. Beloved, I beseech you take heed of such an opinion as this, it hath blasphemy written in the forehead of it; if it be root∣ed in your mindes,Scriptas habet in fronte blas∣phemias. Enno∣dius lib. Epist. 2. it will breed in your hearts a confidence of your own power and abilities, and that is no bet∣ter than a fine-spun Idolatry, and shall finde little better resentment with God, thn if you worshipped stocks and stones. Question 4. Ʋpon what account doth God Call? What moves the Divine Majesty thus to busie himself about a lump of sin and misery? What but meer mercy? what but rich and abundant mercy?
1. It is meer mercy; When by our own merits, we were b∣gotten to death, by his mercy he begat us again unto life:Cum nostris me∣ritis, generati essemus ad mortem, sua mi∣sericordia nos regeneravit ad vitam. Beda. Not by works of righteousnesse which we have done, but according to his mercy he hath saved us, Tit. 3.5. Indeed we cannot do any works of righteousness before our Calling; that righteous∣ness which natural men are subject to glory in, is rather seem∣ing than real; and that which shineth so bright in our own eyes, and perhaps in the eyes of other men, is an abomination in the sight of God;Luke 16.15. God and men do not measure our righte∣ousness by the same standerd; men account them righteous that conform to Customes, Laws, and Constitutions of men, if at least they be likewise conformable to the Letter of the Law of God. But God reckons none righteous besides those that have a singular regard to the Spirit of the Law, (if I may so call it) which layeth an Obligation upon the inward man as well as the outward, which binds the heart as well as the hand; and commands not only that which is good, but that good be done upon a good principle, in a good manner, to a good end: A pitch of obedience that no natural man can possi∣bly arise to; so that in the sight of God there is none righteous,Rom. 3.10. Ephes. 2.3. no not one. We are all by nature, children of wrath as well as others: Children of wrath we are by our own desert; if e∣ver we become Children of Grace, it must be by his mercy. 2. As by meer mercy, so by rich and abundant mercy in God, it is that we are called. There is a greatnesse of love, in the quickning of those that are dead in sins together with Christ. There is mercy in that we have our lives for a prey;Eph. 2.4, 5. mercy in all the comforts and accommodations of life; mercy in the influences of the Sun; mercy in the dropping of the Clouds; mercy in the fruitfulness of seasons; mercy in the fulness of barnes; the yeare is crowned with the goodness of the Lord; but this is a mercy above all mercies, That we are called from dark∣ness unto marvelous light, and from the power of Satan, to the service of, and fellowship with the only living and true God; o∣ther benefits are extended to the worst of men; nay, the very Devils have some tastes of mercy; but this of an Effectual Cal∣ling is (as I said before) communicated to none but those that
God hath chosen; Other blessings and benefits, though they be good in themselves, yet they cannot make us good; they are but as trappings to a Horse, which if he be a Jade, make him not go the better, but the worse; but here God works a marvelous change for the better; once the man ran away from God and himself, but now he instantly returns; once he was a hater, a fighter against God; but now the weapons of his hostility are laid down, and he thinks he can never do enough to express his love; once he was darkness, but now he is light in the Lord; once dead, but behold he lives. Finally, Other blessings and bene∣fits can never make us happy, but as they finde us miserable, so they leave us; we may, and are too apt to bless our selves in them, yet God never intended to bless us in the sole enjoyment of them. But oh how happy is that man, that God hath effectually cal∣led to himself! his bosome shall be his refuge in all storms; his grace, his sufficiency in all temptations; his power his shield in all oppositions; But let the Text speak, All things shall work together for his Spiritual and Eternal good. Before I part with this Point, I shall acquaint you with an Exposition of my Text, utterly inconsistent with the Doctrine I have delivered, and the truth it self, and very unworthy of the Authours of it. This it is, That here we are said to be call'd not according to Gods purpose,Chrys. Theod. Theoph. but according to our own purpose; to hear and obey his call. And perhaps upon this the Papists have grounded their merit of congruity; but this must needs fall, if we consider but this one thing among many, that those that have been farthest off the Kingdome, have been fetcht into it; and those that have not been farre from the Kingdome of God, have never come nearer it. God doth not alwayes take the smooth∣est, but the most knotty pieces of Timber, to make pillars in his house. He goes not alwayes to places of severest and strictest Discipline, to pick out some few there to plant in his House; but he goes to the Custome-House, and calls one thence; to the Brothel-House, and calls another thence: And if yet you insist upon the purpose of man, as an inducement to the call of God, pray tell me what was Sauls purpose, when God met with him in the way to Damascus? Had he any other purpose than
to persecute the Disciples of the Lord? Enough of that. Question 5. By what means are we Called? Sometimes without means; as in persons not capable of the use of them; there is highest Caution amongst the people of God to avoid that sin; (nay, the very appearance) of limiting the holy One of Israel. Sometimes by contrary means, the greatness of a sin being ordered by God to set on the conversion of a sinner, as when a man is wounded with the sting, and healed with the flesh of a Scorpion;Gaffarel. or as when we make triacle of a Viper (a most poy∣sonous creature) to expel poyson. Sometimes by very unlikely means; as when by some great affliction we are brought home to God, which in its own na∣ture, one would think should drive us farther from God; as there is no question but it doth the Reprobates, who are ready to tell all the world what King William Rufus told the Bishop (if the partial Monk do not belye him) God shall never make me good by the evil I suffer from him;Nunquam me Deus bonum ha∣bebit pro malo quod mihi inu∣lerit. Edmerus in Hist. Ser. 2. de Spirt. Sanct. tom. 4. or which is yet more unlikely, when we are brought home by prosperity, God over∣coming our evil with his good, heaping as it were Coals of fire upon our heads, and so melting us into kindly contrition. Gerson in a Sermon of his, tells us of a most wicked Priest, that when he was preferr'd to a Bishoprick, became exemplari∣ly holy; but such a Convert is (rara avis) seldom to be found. Alwayes this work is carried on by weak means; Thus I have heard it credibly reported, that a sentence written in a window, and accidentally read by an inveterate sinner, pierc't his heart, and let out the corruption thence; the sentence was that of Austin, He that hath promised pardon to the penitent, hath not promised repentance to the presumptuous sinner. Thus Austin was converted with a Tolle, lege, Take up the book and read; the Book was the New Testament; the place he opened was
the Epistle to the Romans, where he first cast his eye upon the thirteenth Chapter, the words these, not in gluttony, and drunkennesse, not in chambering, and wantonnesse, &c. This stroke him home. But the most ordinary means of our Effectual Calling, is the Preaching of the Word; which though the world account foolishness,1 Cor. 1.18. An esse sibi cum Christo videtur. Qui adversus sacerdotes Chri∣sti facit? Cy∣prian de unit. Ec. Edit. Goul. Sect. 15. 1 Cor. 4 15. is the power of God unto Salvation. And though by other means men may be called, yet seldom or never any are called that neglect and contemn this; God delights to honour his own Ordinances, and to credit and encourage his Ministers; and because he is pleased to make use of the Word they Preach as seed, therefore it it his Will and pleasure that his people should own and reverence them as their Fathers. In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel; and therefore I am confident, they can have no good evidences of their Christian Calling, that secretly despise, openly re∣vile, secretly undermine, openly oppugne the Ministerial Cal∣ling. Christ will not own them as his Children, that refuse to ho∣nour his Ministers as their Fathers. He that despiseth you, despi∣seth me.Luke 10.16. So much for answer to the fifth Question. Question 6. What is the end of this Call? What but that which is the end of all things, the glory of God? what but that which should be the end that all men should aime at, the salvation of their souls? Here we may see the glory of Gods free grace and mercy, the immutabili∣tie of his purposes, the holiness of his nature, in that he makes us fit for communion with himself, before he admits us to it;Col. 1. the wisdom of his Counsels; and last of all, the ex∣ceeding greatness of his Power; For though the Effectual Calling of a soul be no miracle, yet there is as much power manifested in it as in any miracle that Christ wrought;
yea, as in all the miracles which he wrought if they be put to∣gether: For here the blind eyes, and deaf ears are opened, the withered hands, and lame legs are restored, the bloody is∣sue stanched, the Leper cleansed, Legions of Devils cast out, the dead soul raised to walk before God in the Land of the Living; In a word, the water is turned into wine; the water of contrition, into the Wine of sweetest spiritual Con∣solation. Question 7. When is the time that God calls? As the persons are chosen, so the time is appointed; called therefore the acceptable yeare of the Lord, the accepted time, the day of visitation, the day of Salvation. What hour of the day God will please to call any person in, is to us uncertain; this only is certain, that we must be call'd within the compass of this present life, or else we shall never be call'd. There's no Preaching to souls in the Prison of Hell, no constituting of Churches there; if the Spirit of God be not our Purgatory fire here, in vain shall we look for any other hereafter. Thus briefly of the seventh Question. Question 8. What are the Properties of this Call? 2 Tim. 1.9.First, It is a Holy Calling; holy is the Authour of it, holy are the means of it, holy are the ends of it, holy are the Subjects of it; God is the Authour, the Word is the means, holiness it self the end, none but holy men the Subjects.
I cannot but wonder at the impudence of profane men, that they should call themselves Christians, that they should call God Father, that they should call Christ Saviour; if they be Christi∣ans, where is the savour of those precious oyntments, those spe∣cial graces that run down from the head unto all his members, and give the only just reason why we should be denominated Chri∣stians? I wonder the meer civil person can sleep so securely with his short covering; he boasts of a righteousness, and is a meer stran∣ger to holiness; he separates those things which God hath perfect∣ly and inseparably united. Holinesse and Righteousnesse God hath so knit and coupled together,To serve him in holinesse and righteousnesse, Luke 1. that he reckons no service per∣formed to him where either of these is wanting. It is a part of our Righteousnesse to be holy in our converse with God. It is a part of our Holinesse to be Righteous in our converse with men. Therefore I shall adde the deceitful hypocrite unto the deceived equillist; the one drawing as near to God with his external righteous∣ness, as the other doth with his pretended Holinesse; both stand at a distance from him, he beholds them afar off; and though he hath Called them to be Saints,1 Cor. 1.2. yet they are not Saints by an Effectual Calling. Phil. 3.14. Hebr. 3.1.Secondly, It is an high and heavenly Calling; a learned Cri∣tick supposeth that the Apostle in bestowing this Epitath (high) upon our Calling,Grotius. Dr. Hammond. . alludeth unto the Olympick games; (an al∣lusion which indeed he much delighteth in throughout all his E∣pistles) there the Master, a Ruler of the game, who was also the Keeper and Bestower of the prize, stood upon the higher ground, called to those that were engaged to that noble exercise, to begin the Race; proportionably unto this, Christians having a Race set before them,Hebr. 12.1. which they must run with patience at the call of their great Director, who utters his voice from heaven un∣to their hearts, they first start; so that the Calling is high, because we are Called from on high; but this is not all; for besides that, it is an high way, though it be no common way that we are Cal∣led to run in; all the exercises and employments that a Christian is Called to, they are exceeding high; such as are the service of God, the mortification of lusts, the fighting against principalities and powrs of darkness, the trampling upon all the gilded glister∣ring
vanities of this world; such are the denial of a mans self, the taking up the Crosse daily, the following of Christ, and the shewing forth all his vertues that hath called us; such are warme devotions, spiritual meditations, fervent supplications, holy breathings and aspirings after communion with the ever blessed God, in a conscientious use of his Ordinances; all these are employments too high for those that are skild in nothing else but Satans and the Worlds Drudgery; too high for any but those that are endued with grace and power from on high to per∣form them. Yet farther, this Calling is high, not only in regard of the Director and the Race; but in regard of the prize, as the reward that we shall receive from the righteous Judge. What is the end of our faith, but the salvation of our souls?1 Pet. 1.9. All the prizes were not equal∣ly valuable, See Learned Dr▪ Hammond up∣on Phil. 3. when we come to the Goale, here we finde no Tripodes, Shields or Caps; but Crowns, and no mean Crowns, but glorious ones; no fading Crowns, but everlasting ones: Who would not (with the Apostle) but pressed toward the mark? Lastly, That we may have greater comfort and assurance, that we shall not wax weary, and faint in our course, and conse∣quently not misse of those glorious rewards. There's no Calling that hath so high and heavenly assistances as this hath; God that calls to this Race, engages his power to carry us through it: The Son of God intercedes for us; the Spirit of God is ready to comfort us; the Angels of God have the charge of us to keep us, so that we shall not dash our feet against a stone; the spirits of just men made perfect, though they be not acquainted with our particular wants, yet in general they tender our conditi∣ons, and help us by their prayers; all the people of God are constant sollicitors for us at the Throne of Grace, besides those helps they afford us by their watching over us by their counsels, instructions, admonitions, rebukes, examples; the chearfulnesse, and alacrity of some in the ways of God ha∣ving a great and happy tendency to prevent the wearinesse and discouragements of others. Thus it is an high Calling.
Thirdly, It is a Call without a sound; or if it have any, it is heard by none but them to whom it is directed. A good Di∣vine calls it an in visible Call.Vocatio invisi∣bilis. Alting. Occultis itineribus sapor nobis vitalis infunditur, as Ennodius speaks, by hidden paths and passages the vital savour is infused into us; the seed grows up we know not how;Mark 4.26. the Spirit secretly winds himself into the soul. Christ comes into our hearts, as he did into the house where his Disciples were met,John 20.26. the doors being shut. Thus it is ordinarily, though I will not deny but that sometimes it may be oherwise.Acts 2.1. The Spirit may come with a mighty rushing, and Christ with holy violence break open the doors of our hearts. Saul could well tell the time and other cir umstan∣ces of his conversion;Divina gratia adhuc in utero matris imple∣tus. Cypr. in Epist. ad Ju∣baianum. but it is likely the holy Baptist coud not, in whom the Father saith, there was a Spirit of grace as soon as a Spirit of life. The corruptions of some will out as it were by insensible breathings; but so obstinate and in∣veterate are the spiritual distempers of others, that they must have strong Vomits, violent Purges, and all little e∣nough to clear them; for a man of a good nature, (as they call it) liberal education, much restraining grace, to take and give notice punctualy when his state is changed, is very dif∣ficult; whereas this is no hard matter for a grosse and scan∣dalous piece of debauchery, becoming afterwards an example of piety. We must not expect the same account from Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of our Lord in poi t of Conversion; yet they both rejoyced in Christ as their Sa∣viour. This I have the rather spoken, that I might enter a Caveat aginst those rigd and severe Tryers of mens spiritual estates, whom (as I have heard) nothing will satisfie but the Precise time of Conversion. I acknowledge these men great Artists, and good Work-men, but it is in fra∣mi g New Racks for mens Consciences, since the Old Popish ones are broken. I make no Question b t a weak Christians soul may be as sadly strained to give an Ac∣count of his Graces, as it would have been to give an Account of his Sinnes, had he lived in the dayes of
Auricular Confession. Beware my Frends of the Devils So∣phistry. Fourthly and lastly, It is an Immutable Call; immu∣table as God Himself, as his Electing Love the living Fountain from whence it springs: Not as the World loves, doth God love; they love to Day, and hate to Morrow, wearing their Friends like Flowers, which we may be∣hold in their Bosomes whil'st they are fresh and sweet, but soon they wither, and soon they are laid aside: where∣as the love of God to his people is Everlasting, and he wears them as a Signet upon his right Hand, which he will never part with: Not as the World gives, doth God give; Men give liberally, and repent suddenly; but the Gifts and Callings of God are without Repen∣tance.Rom. 11.29. So much for the properties of this Call; and so much for the opening of the point. Shall I speak a word or two of Application? APPLICATION. Beloved in the LORD, I have answered you many Questions; I beseech you answer me a few. Me, said I? Nay, answer them to God and your own Consci∣ences. First, Are you of the number of the Called? Called by the Gospel I know you are; but that may be your misery. Are you Called according to the purpose? that only can be your Happinesse. Is your Calling Inward and Effectual? We hope it is: why? we have some Convi∣ctions, some Inclinations to good; so had Herod, so
had Agrippa; so may a Reprobate by the common work of the Spirit. I would be loth you should be but almost Christians, lest you be but almost saved. Tell me then, is the whole frame of your hearts altered? Is sinne odi∣ous? Is Christ precious? Doth the prcie of heavenly Commodities rise in your hearts, and the price of earth∣ly Trumpery fall? Do you love God, and his Sonne Je∣sus Christ in sincerity? Then I can assure you, not in the word of a mortal man, which is as good as no∣thing; but in the Word of God that cannot lye, even in the words of my Text, You are Called according to his purpose. Secondly, If you be Effectually Called, Why do you not answer that Call, in receiving Christ in all his Offices, in obeying Christ in all his Commands, in meeting Christ in all his Ordinances? Why do you not give all Diligence to make your Cal∣ling and Election sure? Shall the Children of this World still be wiser in their Generation than the Children of light? They rest not till they have assured (as they sup∣pose) their Earthly Tenements; Why do not we bestir our selves as much to Assure an Heavenly Inheri∣tance? Why are you not more thankful for this Grace? Why are you not more joyful in it? How did the Wise men of the East rejoyce, when they found Christ born in Bethlem? Is it not matter of greater joy to finde Christ born in your hearts? Tell me, is it nothing to have your Names writ∣ten in the Book of Life? To have God for your Father? Christ for your Husband and Brother? The Spirit of Christ for your Comforter? The Angels for your Servitors? All the Creatures at your Beck?
These are the Noble Priviledges of those that are Cal∣led according to the purpose of God: How can they but rejoyce in them, and sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever? Why are you not more careful to walk worthy of this Grace? There is a Decorum,Ephes. 4.1. a seemlinesse that appertains to every Calling. This made Scipio that he would not ac∣cept the offer of an Harlot, because he was General of the Army: And when Antigonus was invited to a place where there was none of the best Company, he was well advi∣sed by one to remember he was a Kings Sonne. When you suffer your selves to be drawn away by your lusts, to be en∣snared by the World, to be captivated by the Divel, you for∣get the Decorum, that should attend your Christian Calling: Remember I beseech you, First, That it is a Holy Calling, and therefore be ye also Holy in all Manner of Conversation. Methinks it should sound as harshly in our ears to hear of a dark Sun, as a wicked Christian. Secondly, It is an High Calling; Do you live High, Scorne Basenesse, Blush to appear in your Old Raggs, To be seen Catering for your Lusts as you use to do; Crown your selves with the Starres; Cloath your selves with the Sunne; Tread the Moon under your Feet; Let the Gospel be your Crown; Let Christ be your Cloath∣ing; Let the World be your Foot-stool; Let Hidden Manna be your constant Dyet; Keep Open House to all Comers; Set your Spiritual Dainties before them; Bid them feed Heartily and Welcome: And for Discourse, Tell them what great things God hath done for your Souls!
Thirdly, It is an Heavenly Call; Let your Conversa∣tions be in Heaven, you have a good Correspondent there: Maintain a constant Trade and Traffick thither; Ex∣pect Returns thence: Lay up your Treasure there, where neither Moth nor Rust doth corrupt, nor can Thieves break through and steal; Be alwayes preparing for your passage thither. Fourthly, It is an Immutable Call: Do not droop and hang your Heads for the Changes and Mutations there are in the World; The Foundation of God standeth sure, (though the Foundation of States be Overturned, O∣verturned, Overturned) the Lord knoweth who are his, and will cause all things to Work together for their good. But what if now there be many amongst you that are not Effectually Called? In the third and last place I addresse my self to them. Men and Brethren, if you have any sense of the ex∣cellency of your Immortal Souls, any Love to them sutable to that excellency; any care and solicitousnesse sutable to that love: Do not resist the Holy Ghost; Make the best Use you can of the Means of Grace: To day if you will hear his Ʋoice, harden not your hearts; If he now Knock at the Door of your hearts, and you will not Open; you know not how soon you may come to Knock at the Door of his house, and he will not Open. Diog. Laertius. Thal.It is Reported that Thales, one of the Grecian Sages being urged by his Mother to marry, told her at first, it was too soon; and afterward, when she urged him a∣gain,
he told her it was too late. Effectual Ʋoation is our Espousal unto Christ; all the time of our life God is urging this Match upon our Souls; his Ministers are still wooing for Christ; if now we say it is too soon, for ought we know the very next Moment our Sunne may set, and then God will say it is too late. They that are not Con∣tracted to Christ on Earth, shall never be Married to him in Heaven.
THE TRUE BELIEVERS Union with CHRIST JESUS. 1 COR. 6.17. But he that is joyned unto the Lord, is one Spirit. YOU have lately seen the Portraicture of our Lord Jesus drawn, as it were at length,Introduction. both as to his Person and Offices, together with the Means and Mannr, how he hath dearly purcha'st Redemption for us. Me∣thod now requires that we lay before you how that Redemption, and the benefits thereof come to be effectually applied unto us. There we had the balme of Gilead, and the plaister spread; what remains, but that it be now applied. There we had a Bethesda, an healing Fountain open'd; but the Pool of life heals not, unlesse the Patient be put in, and the Angel of the Cove∣nant Stir the waters. Salvation for sinners cannot be obtain'd without a puchase; this purchase is not significant without pos∣session;
this possession not to be procured without application; this application made only by union; this union clearly held forth in the Text, viz. He that is joyned unto the Lord, is one Spirit. Coherence.In the close of this Chapter, our Apostle seriously dehorts his Corinthians from that grosse, that soul-polluting sinne of Fornication. His Arguments (which he lets flie as so many Barbed Arrows at the fifth Rib of Uncleanness) are drawn 1. Partly from the end to which the body is appointed. The body is for the Lord, Ver. 13. The body was made for the God of holinesse, therefore not to be prostituted to Lust and uncleannesse.Ver. 19. The Holy Ghosts Temple ought not to be converted into a Stye for Satan. That's the first. 2. Partly from that honour which by the Lord to our bodies is vouchsafed. Know ye not that our bodies are the members of Christ? Ver. 15. Believers bodies are the members of Christ, therefore not to be debauch't so far as to be made the members of an Harlot. This second Argument is back't and amplified by the words of the Text, He that is joyned to the Lord, is one Spirit: q. d. There is a near and dear union betwixt the Lord Jesus and true believers, much what resembling that which is betwixt the head and members: Only here's the difference, that union is carnal, this spiritual. He that is joyn'd to the Lord, is one Spirit: i. e. he is spiritually one, or one with the Lord in Spirit, therefore ought not to be one with a strange woman in the flesh. Having thus beaten up and lvel'd our way to the Text, I shall not stand to shred the words into any unnecessary parts, but shall extract out of them such an Observation as I conceive strikes a full eighth to the minde of the Spirit of God in them. And 'tis plainly this. Observation.True Believers are closely united unto Christ Iesus. The word which we render, Agglutinatus. joyned) imports the nearest, strictest, closest union. This truth I shall endeavour, , cleanly to explain, solidly to confirme, practically to appy.
1. For the Explication of this truth,Explication. It will be of consequence to lay before you 1. Whom we understand by true believers? Sol. 1. Not such as are united unto Christ by a meer external prosession, Sacramental admission, or presumptuous perswasion. Such as these are said to believe in Christ, John 3.23. and yet they are such, so hollow, so false, that Christ dares not trust them, Ver. 24. These are dead Branches, John 15.2. Saplesse stakes in the Churches hedge: Reformad's and Hangby's only in Christs Regiment, whose names are not registred in Aeternitatis Albo: Wooden legs of Christs body, such as have no true, spiri∣tual, vital functions and operations. Such as have a frme of godlinesse, but deny the power thereof, 2 Tim. 3.5. Sardys-like, they have indeed a name that they live, but are dead, Rev. 3.2. With th se our Proposition meddles not. 2. But true believers; i. e. such as are united uto Christ by Internal Implantation, Living, fruit-bearing branches, John 15.5. Such as have not only Christs picture drawn on their fore-heads, but Christs Spirit quickning their hearts, Ephes. 3.17. Nathanaels, Israelites indeed, John 1.47. Jews inwardly, Rom. 2.29. Such as are really and effectually by the Spirit and Word of God call'd out of a state of sin, enmity, misery, into an estate of grace, u∣nion, reconciliation; so that now Christ is in them, and they in Christ, John 17.21, 23. They reposing themselves in Christs bosome by love, and Christ dwelling in their hearts by faith. These are the Believers our Observation in∣tends. 2. What kinde of union it is that is betwixt the Lord Jesus, and true Believers? Sol. 1. Negatively; what kinde of union it is not. 1. Not a grosse, carnal, corporeal union; not a union of bo∣dies. Christ is in heaven, Acts 1.11. & 3.21. we on earth. 2. Not an hypostatical, persona union; such as is that ineffable uni∣on of the Divine and Humane natures in the person of our Imma∣nuel, the Lord Jesus. 'Tis indeed a union of persons, but not a personal union. Believers make not one person with Christ, but1 Cor. 12.13. one body, and that not one body natural, but mystical. True indeed, the Church is call'd Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. but
that is meant of the whole Church, made up of head and mem∣bers, which is Christ mystical. Now 'tis not rational to apply that to any one single Believer, which is proper only to the whole body. Besides, should there be a personal union betwixt the Lord Jesus and true Believers, then would there be as many Christs as Believers. But to us as there is but one Father, so but one Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 8.6. Add, that then very action of Believers would be of infinite value, as is the obedience of Christs Humane na∣ture, by reason of its hypostatical union. 3. Not an essential, substantial union; not such an union as makes Believers in any wise partakers of the substance of Christs Godhead. Those expressions of Nazianzen, , & , of old, and English't by some of us of late; viz. Being Godded with God, and Christed with Christ, are harsh and dangerous, if not blasphemous. To aver that Believers are partakers of the substance of Christs Godhead, is to ascribe that to Believers, which we dare not affirme of Chrissis Manhood it self; concer∣ning which we say that it was inseparably joyned together with the Godhead in one person; but yet. Concil. Chalcedon. without the least con∣version, composition, or confusion. True indeed, Believers are said to be partakers of the Divine2 Pet. 1.4. nature; but how? not of Gods substance, which s wholly incommun cable; but Belie∣vers, by the exceeding great and precious promises, as by so ma∣ny Conduit-pipes, have excellent graces conveyed unto them, whereby they are made like to God in knowledge, righteousnesse, and true holinesse, wherein the Image of God which was stamp't on man at his Creation consists. Ephes. 4.24. Col. 3.10. 4. Not such an union as mounts up Believers to an equality with Christ in any respect. He is the blessed and only Poten∣tate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Tim. 6.15. In all things he hath, and must have the preheminence, Col. 1.18. The best of Saints have but their Ephah, their Homer, their stint andEphes. 4.16. measure of excellencies and Divine Endowments. But now Jesus Christ in his Humane nature united to the Divine, was sanctified and anointed with the Holy SpiritJohn 3.34. Psal. 45.7. Hebr. 1.9. above mea∣sure; we have but our mites, drams, scruples, in him are hid all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge, Col. 2.3. Our Lord Jesus is his Fathers Gazophylacium, the great Magazine and
Store-house of infinite excellencies. It pleased the Father that in him should all fulnesse dwell, Col. 1.19. Yea, in him dwells all the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. Three gradati∣ons, the Godhead, the fulnesse of the Godhead, all the fulnesse of the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily; ; i. e. not on∣ly truly and really, in opposition to the Ark and Temple in which the Godhead was typically; but personally, to distinguish the indwelling of the Manhood of Christ from all accidental, ex∣trinsecal, and integral unions. Thus Negatively. 2. Positively. What kinde of union it is, that is betwixt the Lord Jesus and tru B lievers:Nostra & ip∣sius conjunctio, non miscet per∣sonas, nec unit substantias, sed affectus conso∣ciat & confae∣derat volunta∣tes. Cypr. Cyprian tells us in the ge∣neral, 'tis not such an union as speaks a conjunction of persons, or a connection of natures; but a consent of wills, and confede∣ration of affections; but this is too lax and general; more parti∣cularly; therefore; it is 1. A spiritual union; He that is joyned to the Lord, is one Spirit; i. e. one with Christ, not in a grosse and carnal, but spi∣ritual manner. As man and wife united make one flesh, Gen. 2.24. so Christ and Believers united by the Spirit and Faith, make up one spiritual Christ. Believers are made partakers of one and the same Spirit with Christ; Christs Spirit is really communica∣ted to them, and abides in them. 2. A mystical, deep, profound union: This is a great mys ery saith the Apostle, but I speak of Christ and the Church, Ephes. 5.32. We read of three great mystical, dazling unions; of three distinct persons united in one God, 1 John 5.7. of two distinct natures meeting in one person, in our Immanuel, Luke 1.35. Col. 2.9. of two distinct natures and persons united by one Spi∣rit, that's the union betwixt Christ and true Believers. This is a great mystery, a deep union. Hence it is that it is compared to the mystery of the very Trinity, as being like to the union of persons in the Divine nature. Christ in the Father, Believers in Christ, and Christ in Believers, Joh. 14.20. So Christ prayes, Joh. 17.21. that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. Hence may be gathered a likeness, though not an equality of union. In the union betwixt Christ and Believers, is shadow'd out the uni∣on betwixt Christ and his Father. This is one of the great
Arcana Evangelii; 'tis a mystical union. 3. And yet it is a true, real union; not a fancy only, not an imaginary union, not like the union of the mouth, and meat in a dream, Isa. 29.8. No, but we are as really united unto Christ, as the members of the body are to the head. Hence are we said to beEphes. 5.30. members of his body, of his flesh, and his bones: As the head communicates real influences to the body, so doth Christ to Believers; communicates to us his Sprit, gra∣ces, fulnesse, spiritual light, life, strength, comfort, Joh. 1.16. 4. A close, near, dear, intimate union: Like that of the food with the body which it nourisheth. Hence Believers are said to eat Christs flesh, and to drink his blood, John 6.54. Such an intimate u∣nion, as that one possessive particle is not sufficient to expresse it; not said, my Ʋineyard is before me, but my Vineyard which is mine, is before me, Cant. 8.12. 5. An inseparable, perpetual, indissoluble union. A marriage knot which neither men, sins, sorrows, death, nor Divels are able to dissolve. Who, or what can separate us from the love of God? The Apostle clearly resolves his own question:Rom 8 38 39 I am per∣swaded that neither life nor death, &c. Believers are held in Christs hand; he that would break this union, must first be too hard of fist for Christ, yea, and for his Father too. No man shall pluck them out of my hand; my Father is greater than all, and no man can pluck them out of my Fathers hand, Joh. 10.28, 29. And thus we have dispatch't the second Question. 3. What are the efficient causes of this union? Sol. 1. The efficient causes of this union are either principal, or less principal. 1. Principal; and so this great work of union being opus ad extra, 'tis indivisum, and so ascribed 1. In common to the whole1 Pet. 5.10. John 6.44, 45. Ephes. 2 6, 7. Godhead. Hence we are said to be call'd by God the Father into the fellwship of his dear Son, 1 Cor. 1.9. So likewise this union is ascribed to the Sonne. The dead shall hear the voice of the Sonne of God and live, Joh. 5.25. & Joh. 10.16.
2. But more especially the Spirit of God in a more pecu∣liar sense, is said to be the principal Author of this union: He it is that knits this marriage knot betwixt Christ Jesus and true Believers. Look asActs 4.24. Creation in some respect is appropriated to the Father,1 Pet. 1.18. Redemption to the Son; so the Application of that Redemption to the Holy Ghost. 'Tis by one Spirit that we are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. 'Tis by the Holy Spirit the Comforter, That we are convinced of sin, righteousnesse and judgment, Joh. 16.7, 8, 9. 'Tis by the Holy Ghost that we are renewed, Tit. 3.5. 2. Lesse principal, or the means or instruments of union. These are twofold; outward, inward. 1. Outward: Generally all the Ordinances of God; by the Ordinances it is that we come to haveJob 22.21. acquaintance; that is, union and communion with Jesus Christ. 'Tis by these golden pipes that golden oyle is conveyed to us from that golden Olive, Zech. 4.12. More especially. 1. The Word read, preach't, meditated on, believed, im∣proved. 'Tis by hearing and learning of the Father that we come to Christ, Joh. 6.44, 45. The Holy Scriptures were written for this end, that through them we might have fellowship with the Father and his Sonne, 1 Joh. 1.3. The way to have Christs company, is to keep Christs words, Joh. 14.23. 2. The Sacraments, those spiritual Seals and Labels which God hath fix't to his Covenant of Grace. 1. Bapti me: By one Spirit we are baptiz'd into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. Hence we are said to be buried with Christ by Baptisme into death, Rom. 6.3, 4. Baptisme styled the Laver of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. By Baptisme we put on Christ, Gal. 3.7. 2. The Lords Supper; this is a great means of strengthning and evidencing our union, and advancing our communion with Christ Jesus. We are all made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. Hence that, 1 Cor. 10.16. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of (means, argments, evidences of our communion with) the body of Christ. The
wine which we drink, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? Thus much for the external means of union. 2. Inward, internal, intrinsecal means of union on mans part; i. e. faith: Not a bare historical, miraculous, temporal dead faith; No, but a living, working, justifying, saving faith. Christ comes to dwell in our hearts by faith, Ephes. 3.17. 'Tis by faith alone that we receive Christ, Joh. 1.12. That we come unto him, and feed upon him, Joh. 6.56. 'Tis by faith that a Believer lives in and to Christ, and Christ lives in and for a Believer, Gal. 2.20. Thus much for the Explication of the termes of our Propositi∣on, for the fixing of it on a right Basis. I now proceed to the second part of my discourse; viz. Now That there is such a spiritual, mystical, real, close, in∣separable union betwixt the Lord Jesus and true Believers,2. Confirm. ap∣pears three ways. 1. From those many synonymical terms, and equivalent ex∣pressions whereby the Scriptures hold forth this union. Christ is said to be in Believers, Col. 1.27. Rom. 8.10. To dwell in them, Ephes. 3.17. To walk in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. So are Be∣lievers said to abide in Christ, as he abides in them, 1 Joh. 4.16. & Joh. 15.17. To dwell in Christ, as Christ in them, Joh. 6.56. To put on Christ, to be cloathed with him, Gal. 3.27. Each of these expressions clearly import that near and intimate union that is betwixt the Lord Jesus and true Believers. The King of Saints hath two Mansion houses; one in heaven, the Throne of his glory; another on earth, a Tabernacle of flesh, the heart of a Believer, which is the seat of his delight, Prov. 8.31. his lesser Heaven, Isa. 57.15. — 66.1, 2. 2. From those several similitudes by which the Scriptures sha∣dow out this union. Believers are said to be lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6. Christ the living foundation, the chief corner-stone on which they are built, Ephes. 2.20, 21. Believers are styled li∣ving branches. Christ the true Ʋine, into whom they are en∣graffed, and in whom they bring forth fruit, Joh. 15.1.5. Christ the faithful, loving, discreet Bridegroom; Believers his Loyal, Affectionate, obedient Spouse, Ephes. 5.31, 32. Cant. 2.16. — 5.1. Believers are intitled Christs body, Ephes. 1.23. Bone
of his bone, flesh of his flesh, Ephes. 5.30. Christ, the Believers head, Ephes. 1.22. In a word, the head and mystical body are call'd Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. In all these Resemblances, he that runs may read the union betwixt Christ and Believers, pourtrayed out to the life unto us. 3. From that communion which there is betwixt Christ and true Believers. Omnis communio fundatur in unione: Commu∣nion where ever it is, of necessity argues union; as the effect ne∣cessarily implies the cause. Believers, they communicate with Christ in his fulness, Joh. 1.16. In his2 Cor 5.21. Solus pro nobis suscepit sine meritis malis poenam, ut nos per illum sine b∣nis meritis con∣sequermur gra∣tiam. Aug. merits, which are as fully imputed to Believers for Justification, as if his sufferings had been by them endured, or the debt by them satisfied. In his life and graces, by habitual and real infusion, and in-dwelling of his Spirit to Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.2. In his priviledges and dig∣nities; such I mean as are communicable. Is he a King? a Priest? So are Believers, Rev. 1.6. A Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. Is he a Son? an Heir by Nature? Saints are so by Adoptior, Joint-heirs with Christ, Rom. 8.17. In his Ʋictories; Belie∣vers are more than Conquerours through him, Rom. 8.37. In the midst of their enemies insultations, and their own distresses; yea, even in and by death it self, the victory is still theirs: In his Triumphs and Glory; they share with him in his Throne; all that Believers are is from the Grace of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.10. All that they do, is from the strength of Christ, Phil. 4.13. So that they do not so properly live, as Christ in them, Gal. 2.20. On the other side, Christ communicates in the Be∣lievers graces, affections, duties. He gathers myrrhe and spice out of their Gardens, eats of their honey and honey-comb, Cant. 5.1. Their man-drakes are laid up for their Lord. As they live in the Spirit, so they walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. They tune their souls to his key; theirCant. 2.14. voice is sweet in his Ears; their countenance is lovely in his Eyes; all that Believers are is from Christ, and therefore all that Belivers have is to Christ. What they receive in Mercy, they return in Duty. Thus from this mutual communion, we conclude a close and dear union. And now our Proposition being thus cleared and confirmed, I descend to the third thing promised, and that is
3. Application, which I shall couch under these foure Heads, viz. Information, Examination, Consolation, Exhorta∣tion. 1. Information. Are believers thus closely united unto Christ? Hence see, 1. The crimson, Tyrian tincture, the scarlet dye of their sin, who oppo e, oppress, persecute true believers. Poor souls, little do they think or know what they do; viz. that they wound Christ through believers sides. Believers are united unto Christ; therefore when the seed of the SerpentGen. 3.15. bruises their heel, it must needs have an influence on Christ their head; who though he hath no passion, yet hath he much compassion, and in all their afflictions, is afflicted, Isa. 63.9. In touching them, they touch the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4. so cryes the Head in heaven, while Saul treads on the foot on earth. 2. Hence learn, the heighth, length, depth, and breadth of the love of Christ that passeth knowledge, to believers beyond and above all others in the world. Oh Beloved, that the Lord should leave other plants in the woods and waste ground, let them alone in the Wildernesse, suffer them to grow up to be fit fuel for eter∣nal flames, and make choice of them (who by nature are as wildRom. 11.17. olives, as the worst) and ingraffe them into him∣self, who is the True Oive, and make them partakers of his fulnesse! that he should cull them out, who are by nature dead in trespasses and sinnes, and implant them into himself, raise them up together, and make them sit together in heavenly places with himself! Oh this speaks love beyond expression, beyond i∣magination! This argues grace, riches of grace, exceeding riches of grace, Eph. 2.1, 4, 5, 6, 8. 3. Observe hence not only the love which Christ vouchsafes to, but the high honour which he casts upon believers. Was it an honour for Mordecai to be cloated with Ahashuerus Royal apparel, to ride on the Kings Hrs, having the Royal Crown on his head? Esther 6.11. what an honour then was it, for a poor Esther to be taken into the Kings bed and bosme? Esther 2.17. If it seemed not a light thing in Davids eyes, but rather an high dignity to be son in law to a King, what is it then to be united to a God? the highest pitch and pinnacle of honour;
This; the Ela, the Neplus ultra of true dignity; an honour not vouchsaft by God to those glistering Courtiers of heaven, the Angels. True indeed, they are Christs servants, subjects, not his members. To which of the Ang ls said he at any time, Thou art bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh? Crist took not on him the nature of Angels, but is united to the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. 4. Hence we conclude the stability, fixednesse, perseverance of the Saints in their estate of grace. Here, here, believers, is a firme basis, on which to build the Saits cnstant progresse in the paths of holiness, till they fully arrive at their Port of hap∣pinesse. True believers are united unto Christ; They live in Christ, and Christ in them; their life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. Therefore mauger the malice and power of all un∣ruly corruptions from within, of all subtile temptations, violent assaults, decoying smiles, or threatening frowns from without, they must and shall persevere. Kept as by a Garrison. Kept they are, and shall be by the power of that Christ, to whom they are united through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Whil'st there is sap in Christ their root, it shall ascend into the true Branches. Joh. 11.16. and 4.14. Let the raine descend, and the floods come, and the winds blow, and beat upon these living stones, these spiritual Houses, they shall notMat. 7.25. Isa. 26.4. fall totally, finally, for they are built on that Rock of Ages. True believers are Christs Members, and should he lose the least of them, he would be a maimed, an imperfect Christ, 1 Cor. 12.27. Of those whom thou hast given me, I have not lost one, Joh. 17.12. True Believers are Christs Spouse, married to him, and whatever men have done, or may do, Christ will not give a Bill of utter Divorce, Jer. 3.14. 5. See here a rational, solid ground, for the Protestant Do∣ctrine of the imputation of Christs righteousness, and the merit thereof to true Believers, against the cavils and calumnies of the Pharisaical, self-justifying Papist. Our union unto Christ, is the great foundation on which we build our communion with Christ. Christ is united to believers; one with them, their Head, their Surety, (who in conspectu fori, is but one person with the debtor) and this by his own voluntary undertaking, the debtors consent, and the Judges approbation: therefore 'tis rational, just, equal,
that what our Christ, our Head, Representative, Surety, hath done and suffred for us; and that not only bono nostro, for our good, but loco nostro, in our stead, should by God our Judge be imputed to us. That since our Head and Surety was made sin for us, who knew no sin, we should be made the righteousnesse of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. That since he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows; since he was wounded for our trans∣gressions, and bruised for our iniquities, 'tis but just that our Peace should be obtain'd by his chastisements, and that by his stripes we should be healed, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6, &c. 6. If believers, &c. Hence we gather a cogent, and conclu∣sive Argument for the Saints blessed Resurrection at the last day. Christ the believers Head is risen: risen as their Head: risen as the seond Adam. From hence the Apostle strongly argues for the Saints glorious resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.13, 14, 15, &c. If the head be got above, surely the body shall not away lie under wa∣ter. True indeed, the ungodly and unbelievers shall be raised al∣so, Dan. 12.2. Joh. 5.29. There shall be a2 Cor. 5.10. general re∣surrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust, Acts 24.15. and 17.31. But here's the difference; The bodies of the wicked shall be raised up in dishonour by Christ, as a powerful and offended Judge, John 5.27, 28, 29. To receive their just sentence and condemnation, 2 Thes. 1.6, 8, 9. Matth. 25.33. But the bodies of believers, by the Spirit of Christ, and by ver∣tue of his resurrection, as their Head, shall be raised in power, spiritual, incorruptible, and made like to his glorious body, 1 Cor. 15.20, 22, 23, 42, 43, 44. Because he lives, they shall live also, and have livery and seisin given them of those joyes and glo∣ryes, which neither eye hath seen, nor ear heard, nor can enter into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. and so shall they be ever with the Lord, 1 Thes. 4.17. Thus much by way of Corol∣lary for information of the judgement. I now proceed to the second Ʋse, which more immediately reflects on the heart and life; and that is an Use of, 2. Examination, Whether there be really and indeed such a spiritual, close, intimate union betwixt our souls in particular, and the Lord Jesus. To this purpose give me leave to put the probe into your consciences, by a serious proposal of these five Questions.
Quest. 1. Hath Christ given unto you his holy Spirit? He that is joyn'd to the Lord, is one Spirit, saith the Text. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his,1 Joh. 3.24 Rom. 8.9. Whatever member is really united to the Head, hath a natural spirit; a soul enlivening of it, and acting in it. So saith the Apostle, Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Sirit, 1 Joh. 4.13. Now this Spirit where ever it is, it is, 1. A praying Spirit, a Spirit of supplication; of faithful, sin∣cere, fervent, constant, humble supplication, Zech. 12.10. Ask then thy soul, Canst thou, Dost thou go to God, and cry as a child, with reverence and confidence, Abba-Father, Rom. 8.15. Does this Spirit help thine infirmities? Rom. 8.26. and enable thee to understand both for whom, and what, and how thy prayer is to be made? Does it work and quicken in thy heart (at least at some times, in some measure) such apprehensions, affections and graces, as are requisite for the right and acceptable performance of so heavenly a duty? 2. A mourning Spirit. It puts a believer into a dove-like frame, Ezek. 7.16. mourning for the losse of its Mate: yea, mourning for the offence of a gracious God, as for the losse of an only sonne, Zech. 12.10. Tell me then poor soul, Art thou apt ever and anon to strike on thy breast with the contrite Publican?Jer. 31.19. to smite on thy thigh with broken-hearted Ephra∣im, and in an holy consternation of spirit, to ask thy self, What, ohJer. 8 6. what have I do? Does thy Gods bottle, and thy tears there∣in, for sin as sin, speak for thee? 3. A sanctifying Spirit;1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Pet. 1.2. and that with respect to sins, graces, duties. 1. Sinnes. The Spirit, where ever it is,2 Thes. 2.13. mortifies the deeds of the flesh, Rom. 8.13. Speak then, is thine old man crucified (at least as to dominion) with thy Christ? Rom. 6.6. more especi∣ally, (not to speak of thy more grosse, dangerous, dishonou∣rable sins) Dost thou spit out the sweet morsel under thy tongue? Dost thou with Samuel, hue thy delicate Agag in pieces? with David, keep thee fromPsa. 18.23. thine iniquity, that iniquity to which thy constitution, custome, calling, interest, mostly incline thee? what sayst thou to thy Isaac, Benjamine, Absolom, Dalilah,
Herodias, the Calves at Dan and Bethel? Tell me, Art thou apt sadly to remember thine own evil wayes, and to loath thy self in thine own sight for all thine iniquities, and for all thine abominati∣ons? Ezek. 36.31. 2. Graces. Speak Believer, Art thou renewed in the Spirit of thy mind? hath the Spirit of God re-instampt that glorious I∣mage of God, viz. Knowledge, Righteousnesse, and true Holi∣nesse, which thou lost in Adam? Ephes. 4.24. As thy cloa∣thing is of wrought gold, so especially is all thy glory, thy chiefest glory within? Dost thou find thy graces stirred up, in∣creast, and strengthened with might by the Spirit in the Inner∣man? Eph. 3.16. Hath the North-wind so risen, the South∣wind so come, and blown upon thy Garden, that the spices there∣of flow forth? Cant. 4.16. In a word, Dost thou more and more grow in grace? 2 Pet. 3.18. Beholding the glory of the Lord, art thou changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord? 2 Cor. 3.18. Art thou still perfecting holinesse in the fear of God? 2 Cor. 7.1. 3. Duties. Where ever the Spirit is, it causeth, effectually causeth the man to walk in Gods Satutes, to keep his judgements, and to do them, Ezek. 36.27. It worketh in believers, both to will and to do, Philip. 2.13. To performe natural, mo∣ral, spiritual duties, to spiritual ends, in a spiritual manner: and that, 1. Freely. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. Christs people in the day of his power, are a wil∣ling people; voluntiers in his service, Psal. 110.3. What say'st thou, art thou drag'd to duty, as a Bull to a stake, as a Swine to slaughter? or rather, is it thy meat and drink to do thy Gods Will? John 4.34. Do the wayes of wisdome, seem wayes ofProv. 3.17. pleasantnesse to thee? and all her paths, dost thou look upon them as peace? 2. Regularly. Those that live in the Spirit, walk in the Spi∣rit, Gal. 5.25. i. e. by the Spirits light, according to the Spi∣rits rule, the Word of God, the great standard of Truth. What then, dost thou kindle a fire on thine own hearth, and compasse thy self about with thine own sparkles? dst thou walk in the light of this fire, and in the sparks that thou hast kindled? my mea∣ning is, Dost thou forsake the Law and Testimony, Gods cloud
and pillar, and follow the guidance of that ignis fatuus, thy re∣fined reason, or others corrupt example, or a pretended tra∣dition, or some extatical Revelation contrary to the Word? All these will lead thee into boggs, and this shalt thou have of Gods hands, Thou shalt lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50.11. But if so be the infallible Word be thy Rule, and thou walkest accor∣ding to it, then peace be upon thee, as upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. So much for the first query. Quest. 2. Doth ChristEph. 3.17. dwell in thy heart by faith? viz by such a faith as purifies the heart, as works by love, to God. the Word, Saints, enemies, as overcomes the world, its Midia∣nitish smiles, its Anakimlik frowns? If thou hast such a faith, remember it as an infallible and momentous truth, That faiths Application of Christ to a Believer, i saving, is alwayes joyn'd with a Believers Application of himself to Christ. If the Spouse avers Christ to be hers, My Beloved is mine; she as freely ac∣knowledges that she is Christs, I am his, Cant. 2.16. 'T s with a Believer and Christ in this case, not as with a man cla∣sping about a Tree, but as with two loving friends mutually em∣bracing each other. Ask then thy soul, thy conscience, Canst thou truly say with David, Lord save me, I am thine? Psal. 119.94. Dost thou indeed, not only lean on thy Beloved, but cleave to thy Christ with full purpose of heart? Acts 11.23. Does it content thee to apply Christ to thy soul, only as a plaister to a wound, to have healing from him? or not rather as a seal to the wax, which takes an impression from it? Hath thy faith two hands? as with the one thou pretendest to lay hold on Christ, dost thou with the other, resign up thy self to Christ? Art thou apt with the Romane Spouse to say, Ʋbi tu Caius, ibi ego Caja? Art thou as ready, when he proposes the strictest Precepts, to say, Lord I am thine, as when he proclaimes the sweetest promises, to say, Lo d thou art mine? Art thou as ready to of∣fer up thy self a burnt-offering, an Holocaust Rom. 12.1. to God in obedience, as to tender for thy self, thy Christ, as a sin-offering for satisfaction? Lev. 5.7.2 Cor. 13.5. Oh examine thy heart sincerely, whether thou art thus in the faith; or rather, whether such a faith be in thee. That's the second. Quest. 3. Dost thou crucifie the flesh with its affections and lusts? They that are united unto Christ do so, Gal. 5.24. Rom.
8.13. Dost thou detest, loath, hate sin, all sin, in thought, word, deed; and that not so much for its effects, as its nature? dost thou hate it rather as hell, than for hell? That is our duty,. Rom. 12.9. is it our sincere endeavour? Didst thou ever groan out under the sense of that intolerable burthen? of that Wolf that lies in thy bosome? does it make thee cry out as Paul, O wretched man that I am, Rom. 7.24. Dost thou when thou appearest before the Lord in prayer, or at his Word, or at a Sa∣crament, put thy Uriah, thy dearest darling sinnes in the front of the Battle, that when Christ discharges his keenest arrows, they may be sure to be hit and slaine? When God sends a Tem∣pest, is it thy first, greatest care to throw those Jonahs over∣board? when God seems to beleaguer thee with sharp and threatning providences, is it thy main endeavour to cast the heads of those Sheba's over the Wall? But, Quest. 4. Art thou a new creature? he that is in Christ, is so, 2 Cor. 5.17. Hast thou a new head, heart, lip, life? canst thou now properly say, Ego non sum ego? is the Lyon become a Lamb, the Raven a Dove, the Wolf a Kid, the persecutor a Preacher, or more, an Adorer of Christ Jesus? Dost thou act from new principles, the Spirit of Christ, Ezek. 36.27. faith, Gal. 2.20. constraining2 Cor. 5.14. love, filial fear? Jer. 32.40, Dost thou act for new principles, that thou mayst preserve them in thy self, and propagate them to others? Acts 26.29. Dost thou now level at new ends, the best, the highest ends? is thy main scope and aime now not so much at a clod of earth, a vapor, a puff of honour, a tickling pleasure? No, but rather is it thy chiefest end, plot, design, to advance thy Creators, Redeemers, Comforters glory? and with it, the spiritual, eternal salvation of thy precious and immortal Soule? Is this thy white, thy mark, thy center? Canst thou in sincerity of soul, say with the Psalmist, Whom have I in heaven but thee, &c. Psa. 73.25. Quest. 5. Dost thou bring forth fruit? Every branch in Christ, is a fruit-bearing branch, John 15.5. Art thou fill'd with all the fruits of righteousnesse? first and second Table-fruits? art thou fruitful in every good word and work? Col. 1.10. Dost thou bring forth fruit sutable to the means vouchsaft? or does the seed of an Homer bring forth only an Ephah? dost thou remember,
that where much is given, not a little is required? Luke 12.48. Briefly, dost thou bring forth fruit like the Land of Egypt, by handfulls? Hast thou any bunches of Pomgranates to shew? is thy soul a spiritual Eshcol? and then too, art thou so desirous of bringing forth more, that thou lookest on the Vintage of thy attainments only as gleanings? In a word, dost thou bring forth fruit constantly, every month, in old age? Psa. 92.14. Art thou ever green and flourishing? do not those Apples of Sodome, bitter fruits of Apostacy, in principles, in practices, spring from thee? Are not thy grapes turned into thornes, thy figs in∣to Thistles? Art thou not like Orpah, that tother day kist and complemented, but now forsakes? but rather like Ruth, dost thou resolve and say concerning thy God, thy Christ, Whither thou goest, I will go; where thou dyest, will I dye, and there will I be buryed? Ruth 1.16, 17. If thy heart and conscience can give a comfortable answer to these Quaeries, then Believer open thy mouth, open it wide, that thou mayst suck and be satisfied with the next Use of our Point, which is a Breast of, 3. Consolation. True Believers are closely united unto Christ Jesus; Oh what marrow, what fatness drops from this Truth! what an Hybla is it in the mouths, what musick is it in the ears of true believers! How blessed are the people that are in such a case! Psalme 144.15. Their happinesse will more distinct∣ly appear, if we reflect on it, either with relation to Christ, or believers. 1. With relation to Christ to whom believers are united. On their Union with him, there redounds to them a peculiar Interest in his Person, Properties, Promises, Pro∣vidences, All. 1. In Christs Person; Christ himself is theirs, Jer. 32.38. Isa. 9.6. A Christ that is not like creature c mforts; those , bitter sweets; like the Panther, which has a sweet sente, but an ugly face; No, but he is an Ocean of sweetnesse with∣out the least dram of gall: Christ, that perfect beauty, without the least spot; That fairest of ten thousand, Can. 5.10. That altogether lovely one, Ver. 16. This Christ is theirs; Christ that indeficient, never-failing good is theirs, Heb. 13.5. True indeed, creature comforts and earthly interests like Absoloms
Mule, are apt mostly then to faile us, when we most need them. Yea, but Jesus Christ is such a Sun of righteousnesse, that he knows no setting, no declining, Mal. 4.2. He is a Fountain of life ever running. In a word, Christ that full, filling, sufficient, all-sufficient person,Gen. 17.1. in whomQuae faciunt divisa beatum, in hoc mixta fluunt. concenter all the scattered ex∣cellencies of the whole Creation; in whom is compleatly treasu∣red up whatsoever an angry God can require for his satisfaction, or an empty creature desire for its perfection. This is the person in whom Saints by union have a real interest. 2. In Christs properties. My horses are as thy horses, my Chariots as thy Chariots, said Jehoshaphat to Ahab; all his Councels and Forces devoted to his service. Son, all that I have is thine, Luk. 15.31. Believers! has Christ an Arme of pow∣er, 'tis for your protection? has he an Eye of knowledge, depth of wisdome? 'tis for your direction. A Stock, a Treasury of perfect righteousnesse? 'tis for your justification: A Spirit of holi∣nesse? 'tis for your sanctification. Has he rowling, yearning bow∣els of mercy? 'tis that he may shew you compassion. A Lapp of All-sufficiency for your provision; Arms of Grace, an heaven of glory for your reception, Psal. 73.24. 3. In Christs promises: In all those great, rich, precious, gracious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. wherein all they wan, and infi∣nitely more than they can desire or imagine, is made over to them, 2 Cor. 1.20. Christs promises are the Believers Magna Charta, to the confirmation whereof God has been pleased to adde boh his Oath and Blood, Hebr. 6.17, 18. for Seals. 4. In all Christs Providences, let them seem never so black and gloomy. The hottest Furnace they are thrown into, does but loose their bonds, and the scorching flames become a warme Sun, Dan. 3.25. This is the fruit of Gods sharpest rods,Isa. 27.9. the ta∣king away of their sin. The Lyon affords them meat; the A∣nakim himself proves their bread. All things work together for their good, Rom. 8.28. Every wind, though it blow never so crosse, speeds them to their Port. Not a stone thrown at them, but it is to them a prcious stone. Not a Thorn in their Crown, but i turns into a Diamond. Not a twig in their Rod, but is sweetned and sanctified. The saddest Providences like the Snow falling on them, and descending to the hem of their gar∣ments, there freeze into a gem to deck them.
5. In all: i. e. True Belevers have such an universal interest in all that Christ is, hath, could speak, suffer, or can do, that the Apostle going about to take an Inventory of their large Re∣venue, and as it were despairing to give in an exact accunt of the particulars, is faine to couch them in one sum total: All are yours, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. Wherein are observable, 1. The Believers portion, the fullest imaginable, All are yours: Then the term, for life and death too; in possession and reversion: Things present, and things to come. Lastly, the tenure, the surest, the high st that can be, they hold in apite; for their better assu∣rance, their demesns are entail'd on the Crown; All yours, be∣cause you are Christs, and Christ is Gods. Thus you see what comfort flows from this Doctrine of Union with Relation unto Christ. There's yet another Dug which swels with Consolation, and that is to be drawn 2. With respect to Believers themselves, in a threefold regard; viz. of their persons, graces, duties. 1. Their persons. Believers being united unto Christ, they are, they cannot but be his Fathers Jedidiahs, Beulahs, Hephziba's, dearly accepted in the Beloved, Ephes. 1.6. They are also his own delight, Prov. 8.31. He rejoyceth over them, as a Bride∣groom over his Bride. They are to him as the Seal on his Arme; as aCant. 8.6. Signet on his right hand. He carries their names on his breast continually, Exod. 12.29. And as for the Spirit of God, that like Noahs Dove, finds no where to rest the sole of his foot, but the soul of a sincere Believer, of whom it says, here is my rest, here will I dwell for ever, for I have a delight herein. 2. Their graces. True Believers graces are in themselves very defective and imperfect: The eye of their faith, like that of Leah, a blear-eye. The hand of their confidence, like that of Jeroboam, much withered and blasted. The fire of their love, like that of green wood, apt soon to expire. The anchor of their hope very much crackt; shoulders of patience sorely bruised; feet of obeience, like Mephibosheth, lame; yet because united unto Christ, all accepted, all hold scale and weight in heaven, though not as to merit, yet as to acceptance, 1 Pet. 2.5. There is much alloy in the metal, however I see my Sons stamp, and Picture on the coyne, and therefore saith God, it shall passe for currant in heaven.
3. Their duti s. Oh the defects of Saints duties: How of∣ten do they pray, as if afraid to be heard; hear, as if afraid to learn; learn, as if afraid to do; do, as if afraid to please; and yet being united unto Christ, how acceptable are their persons and performances! Their weak prayers sound like melody. Their broken sighs smell like Incense; Their very stammerings seem Rhetorical, Cant. 2.14. Not a good word falls from their lips, but 'tis recorded, Mal. 3.16. Not a tear drops from their eye, but 'tis taken up, and bottel'd, Psal. 56.8. Mites received as if they were Talents. Cups of Cold water, Ram-skins, Goats-hair, any thing; desires instead of performances; the will for the deed; grief for want of will, for the will it self, 2 Cor. 8.12. and all be∣cause from such as are united unto Christ, in whom the Lord is so well-pleased, Matth. 3.17. that he looks on the very smoke of his Saints performance, mixt with Christs merits as a sweet perfume. Having done with the Consolation arising from this truth, we proceed to the last Use, which is of 4. Exhortation. In it I shall addresse my self, 1. To sinners, then to Saints. 1. To sinners, that are as yetEphes. 2.12. without Christ, God, Hope in this world. Oh be you yet perswaded to give your eyes no sleep, your eye-lids no slumber, till you are really and closely united to Christ Jesus. Methinks poor forlorne creature thou shouldest not need a Spur, if thou dost, consider. 1. The dreadful, dismal danger of thy present estate. A soul not united unto Christ, lies open to all danger imaginable; 'tis in the very Suburbs of destruction: It walks in the valley of the very shadow of wrath, death, damnation. True, it may be thou perceivest it not; but that speaks thy scurity, not thy safety; and thou art scure, because hood-wink't. Thy security is not from want of danger, but discerning. Alas, how dreadful is thy condition, that liest every minute exposed to the cruel cour∣tesie of every Divel, Lust, Temptation, Judgment! The sen∣tence is past against thee; in the next Scene expect the Executio∣ner. He that believeth not, is condemned already, Joh. 3.18, 19. Poor soul, a deluge of wrath is pouring down in full streams up∣on thee, and thou art as yet shut out of the Ark. The Aven∣ger of blood is at thy heels, and thou not yet got into a City of Refuge. A shower of brimstone falling on thee, and thou hast
no Zoar to flie unto. The destroying Angel with his drawn Sword at the threshold, and the lintel posts of thy door not sprinkled with blood. But 2. If the winde do not, lets see whether the Sun cannot prevaile. Poor self-destroying Caitiff, Look yonder on that a∣miable Jesus Christ; (for a marriage between whom and thy pre∣cious soul I am now woing) Do but observe his condescending willingnesse to be united to thee: That great Ahashuerus courts his own captive Hester. The Potter makes suit to his own clay; Wooes thee, though he wants thee not; is infinitely happy with∣out thee, yet is not, cannot be satisfied but with thee. Heark how he commands, intreats, begs thee to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. Swears and pawns his life upon it, that he desires not thy death, Ezek. 33.11. Seals this his oath with his blood; and if after all this thou art fond of thine own damnation, and hadst rather be at an agreement with hell, than with him; see how the brinish tears trickle down his cheeks, Luke 19.41, 42. He weeps for thee, that dost not, wilt not weep for thy self: Nay, after all this obdurate obstinacy, is resolved still to wait, that he may be gracious, Isa. 30.18. Stands yet and knocks, though his head be wet with rain, and hs locks with the dew of the night; fain he would have thee open the door, that he may come in and sup with thee, and thou with him, Rev. 3.20. Thus much for a whet to sinners; my next address is 2. To Saints that are indeed united unto Christ Jesus. Four words of advice I have for you: Oh that they might stick as Goads, as Nails fastened by the Masters of the Assemblies. 1. Be very fearful of that which may in any sort weaken your union with Christ. Beware of committing, of approving thy self in the least compliance with any the least sin. Say not as Lot of Zoar, is it not a little one? Sin approved is that very Dalilah that cuts off the locks, and makes a Believer a prey to e∣very Philistine. Sin is that that separates between us and our God; the great make-bate between heaven and earth, Isa. 59.2. 'Tis true, a Saint shall never be left so to himself or sin, as that sin shall bereave him of his Jewel, his Grac, or God; but may, and doth often steal away the key of his Cabinet, his evidence his assu∣rance. I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn him∣self, and was gone, Cant. 5.6. Sin is that that will soon grieve
away that holy Spirit, by which we are seal'd to the day of Re∣demption, Ephes. 4.30. 2. Wisly improve this your union with Christ.Frustra est po∣tentia, &c. 'Tis not enough to have, unlesse we use Christ: Not enough to have a Well of salvation, but we must draw water, and drink it too, Isa. 12.3. if we intend a benefit by it. 'Twas the looking on the Brazen Serpent that cured those that were stung: Not enough for Saints to have faith, by which to live; but they must live by the faith that they have, Gal. 2.20. i. e. they must by faith draw continual supply of grace, comfort, strength from Christ, as the branch does sap from the root, as the members do influ∣ence from the head, as the pipe does water from the fountain. This your union then must be improved 1. Under the fear and sense of wrath. When God begins to thunder, and to write bitter things against thee: Now, now let faith recollect it self and say, Why, I am united unto Christ, in whose wounds is room enough to hold, and in whose heart readi∣nesse enough to receive all that flie unto him, Matth. 11.28. True indeed, there is a terrible storme of justice gathering over my head, ready to fall upon me; but my Christ to whom I am u∣nited, is myIsa. 32.1, 2. shelter; a flood of vengeance, but I am got into the Ark. Destruction near, but Christ is my Passeover, my little Sanctuary. Able, willing, to save to the uttermost, with all kinds and degrees of salvation, Hebr. 7.25. 2. In solicitations unto sin; when sin comes like a Poti∣phars wife, and offers deadly poyson in a golden Cup. Now, now let faith answer, I would consent, but that I am united unto Christ. How can I do this great wickednesse, and sin against my Christ! Gen. 39.9. I could easily do this and this, if I were not Alexander: But now I cannot gratifie this lust, but I must needs be disloyal to my Christ, my Husband to whom I am married. If I take the cold in my feet, 'twill immediately flye up into my head; every sin is an affront to my Christ. 3. In the use of all Ordinances; let faith use them frequently, reverently; but not in the least rest on them, or be satisfied with them, any farther than they advance our union and communion with Christ. Look on prayer without a Christ, as meer words and sounds. Sacraments without a Christ, as empty Vials with∣out a cordial. Hearing without Christ, as a Cabinet without a
Jewel. Be only so far satisfied with the Ordinances, as thou fin∣dest them to beZech. 4.12. golden pipes, conveying golden oyle into thy soul. 3. Labour more and more for a frame of Spirit sutable to this union. 1. An humble self-abasing frame: Say, Alas Lord, what am I? what my Fathers house? that so great a Christ should so far stoop beneath himself, as to be united to so poor a worme, a clod of earth, a masse of sin, a nothing, a lesse, a worse than nothing, Isa. 40.15, 17. That strength should be united unto weakness, light unto darknesse, life unto death, heaven unto earth, unto hell! That incorruption should marry it self unto corruption: Immortality to mortality: The King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, to such a captive, unpared, unwash't, unshaven captive as I! Ezek. 16.4, 5, 6. 2. A trusting, relying, depending frame o spirit for supply of all temporalsQui misit fi∣lium, immisit Spiritum, pro∣misit vultum, quid tandem denegabit?: He that hath given thee his Sonne, what can he deny? Rom. 8.32. He that hath given thee an Ocean, will not deny thee a Drop. If thou hast the Ker∣nel, thou shalt not want the Shell; if thy Father vouchsafe thee bread, Manna, the Ring, a Kisse, he cannot well deny thee husks. If thou hast his Benjamin, thou shalt be sure not to go without thy Messe, thy five Messes:Matth. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdome of God, and all these things shall be. added; i. e. cast in as paper and packthread to the bargain. 3. A loving affectionate frame. Believer, thou art marri∣ed to Christ Jesus, that Relation calls aloud for union of hand, heart, spirits, all. He is bone of thy bone, flesh of thy flesh, therefore to be dearly loved;. Graecus▪ Aug. count all that thou art, and hast, too little for him. Love him dearly for what he is, for what he hath, for what he hath done, suffered, purchased, promised. Love him more for what he is, than for what he hath; more for his person, than for his rings, bracelets, jewels, joynture. Love him with a cordial, active, conforming, constant, transcendent love, Psal. 116.1, 2. 4. A truly, noble, heavenly frame; such a frame whereby thou mayst truly contemn this poor dunghill world. Believer, being united unto Christ, thou art indeed cloathed with the Sun, and therefore thou shouldst like uhy mother, tread the Moon under thy
feet, Rev. 12.1. We should never fix our hearts on that whereon our God would have us put our feet. Such Eagles as Believers should not stoop at Flies; 'tis not for persons united unto Christ to be fond on these beautiful vanities, fair-faced nothings, cha∣ses in Arras, handsome pictures drawn on Ice; such are all en∣joyments on this side Christ. Believer, thy head, thy husband, thy treasure is above, there let thyAnima illic potius sit ubi a∣mat, quam ubi animat. heart be also. Having Christ for thy portion, let a little, a very little of the world serve thee for thy passage. 5. A pitiful, compassionate frame, to those that are not as yet united unto Christ. That are yet without hope, because without Christ. Oh as the Elect of God put onCol. 3.12. bowels toward such. Poor souls they are sinking, drowning; thou art safe on the shoar, got into the Ark. They are frying, burning in Sodom; Thou safe in Zoar, a brand pluck't out of the fire. Oh pity those that do not, will not, cannot pity themselves. That's the third advice. 4. And lastly, walk worthy of this union; Let your Conversation be sutable to your Condition. This I shall dispatch in these three particulars. 1. Walk zealously; Be wiselyGal. 4.18. zealous in and for the promoting the honour of this Christ to whom you are united. Make it your only plot and businesse to advance his honour; 'tis your own peculiar interest so to do. Be jealous of any thing that doth or may eclipse, or sully his glory. He that toucheth him, his Per∣son, Natures, Offices, Days, Ordinances, Ministers, Servants, let him be thought to touch the apple of thine eye, Zech. 2.8. Let the zeal of his house even eat thee up, Psal. 69.9. 2. Walk fruitfully; so it becomes every branch ingraffed into Christ the true Vine, Phil. 1.11. Thy fruitfulnesse adds much to thy Christs honour; the plenty of the crop sets a glosse on the Husbandmans care; The fully loaden branch reflects an honour on the root: If men see our good works, our fruitfulnesse in eve∣ry good work, they will then glorifie our Father, Matth. 5.16. John 15.16. 3. Walk lovingly, tenderly towards believers, fellow-members; They that are so happy as to be united unto one head, should be ve∣ry careful to be of one heart. Believers formerly were so, of one heart, andActs 4.32. one soul, as if animated with one and the same soul; sutable to
the Philosophers description of true love; ; Arist. Formerly Believers were like Scilurus his bundle of Arrows, so trust up together, no breaking of them. But a∣las, now, 'tis sad to see how those that agree in one common faith, should yet disagree as implacable foes. Oh Beloved, that Brethren, Joseph and Benjamin, Moses and Aaron, Abraham and Lot should fall out, especially when the Canaanie is in the Land. Shall Gebal, Ammon, Amal k, and the Philistines, shall these agree? and shall Ephraim and Judah be at variance? shall the Wolf, Lyon, Bear, Leopad associate? and shall not Lambs and Doves! O let such their sin and shame never be pub∣lish't in Gath, nor spoken in the street of Askelon. Believers, you have heard the fable of the contest between belly and members. The moral of it bids you consult; if not your duty, yet your safety. By your divisions, you do but dig your own graves. Remember Saints, we are all one by spiritual relation; why should we not be1 Cor. 12.13, 27. & 1.9, 10. 1 Joh. 4.12, 16 Gal. 3.28. one in our affection? I shall close all with that of the Apostle, Ephes. 4.3. to 7. wherein he draws this arrow to the very head. Keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: Why? because there is one Body, one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme, one God. Let me adde, you are one with Christ the head, 'tis your duty therefore, and 'twill be your priviledge, honour, safety, to be one with one another.
THE NATURE OF Justification OPENED. Rom. 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, &c. THE words present us, for the Argument of this morning exercise, with the great do∣ctrine of Justification, first to be opened, and then improved. 1. To be opened. And that we may not with Aquinas and the Papists, in ipso lmi∣ne impingere, stumble the very first step we take, and so quite ever after lose our way, by confoundig justification with sanctification. I shall only pre∣mise, that as in sanctification he change is absolute and inhe∣rent, so in justification the change is relative and juridical; the
former is wrought in the sinners person, he becomes a new creature; but this latter is wrought in his state, he becomes absolved at the bar of divine Justice. For Justification is a law-state ( from ) it abolisheth the convincing power of sin, or its guilt. Our businesse therefore is to discover the pro∣cesse at Gods bar, in the justification of a sinner, which will be best done by comparing it with that at mans, which we are familiarly acquainted with. To be justified, therefore implies in general three things. 1. The person is charg'd with guilt. 2. Pleads to the charge. 3. Upon that plea is discharged by the Judge. 1. A justified person must be charg'd with guilt. Now guilt is the Relation which sin hath to punishment; for sin is the breach of the Law, and punishment is the vengeance which the Law threatens for that breach. And as the threatening it self is in the nature of it a guard to the Law, to prevent the breach of it, bidding as it were the transgressour come at his peril, break the Law if he dare, be wise before hand, lest he rue it too late; so the punishment in the very nature of it, is a vindication of the equity of the injur'd Law, the reparation and amends it makes it self for the wrong done it, by damni∣fying the person, injuring her proportionally to the injury: Now that a justified person must be charged with guilt, i. e. with the breach of Law; and by consequence with desert of punishment, appears, because otherwise if a man be pronoun∣ced tighteous, whom no body ever accused or questioned, he is on∣ly praised, not justified. 2. The person to be justified, must plead for himself; either in person, or by his Advocate who sustains his person; for to refuse to plead, is to despaire quite of being justified; and to abandon ones self over unto punishment, silence gives consent; it argues the accused person hath nothing to say for himself, why he should not be condemned. Our Law, you know, shew∣eth no mercy to one that will not plead, he is to be Prest to death. An endited person must plead therefore something in his own behalf, why he should be justified, if he would be. Now ei∣ther the man is guilty of the charge, or not guilty. I must speak to both cases, and shew what pleas are requisite in each,
and which of them is the plea upon which a sinner is justified at the Bar of God. Case 1. If the endited person be not guilty of the charge, justice it self must justifie him upon that plea. Si accusasse suf∣ficiat, quis erit innocens? an innocent person may be accused, he can never be convinc't; for that that is not, can never be demonstrated; the Judge or Jury were themselves guilty, if they found innocence guilty. Now to be justified thus, is to be purely and meerly justified, not at all to be pardoned; for such a one stands upon his termes, bears himself upon his own righteousnesse, begs no mercy. 'Tis no favour to justifie him, 'tis his due; he is not beholding to the Judge a jot, the exact rigour of the Law acquits him. To bring this to the present businesse, I shall demonstrate that we can never be justified at the Bar of God, by pleading not guilty; For, First, the plea is false. Although in a very restrained sense, there is none so wicked but he may plead not guilty, and be ju∣stified as to this or that particular fact charged upon him. Nim∣rod was not guilty of Abels murther. Nay, a Saint may be guilty of some sins which the Devil may plead not guilty too, as grieving the comforting, the sealing Spirit, abusing the Re∣deemers grace, &c. yet nothing short of universal innocence, nothing but a perfect righteousnesse, a total exemption from all manner of guilt will entitle us before Gods Tribunal to this plea;James 2.10. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. 1. Because the punishment due to the breach of the whole Law, viz. the curse of God is due to every breach of every part.Gal. 3.10. Deut. 27.26. Cursed is he that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do them. The wages of sinne ( of every single sinne) is death, Romans 6.23. 2. Because he that offends in one point, affronteth the autho∣rity of all, as is excellently observed in the next verse; For he that said,James 2.11. Do not com it adultery, said also, Do not steale. Every sin hath Atheisme in it, it denies the God that is above; to trample upon the Majesty of God shining in oe Command∣ment, is at once to trample upon that Majesty which ena∣cted all.
3. Because thereby he becomes infected with a contagious disposition to be guilty of all; the same principle which em∣bolden'd him now, will another time (if but excited with e∣qual strengths of temptation) to commit any other sin, or to repeat the same sins again and again, (though excited with still weaker and weaker temptations) for as frequent acts strengthen the habit of sin, so the habit facilitates the acts. From hence it appeares, that the holy Angels, that Adam in innocency, that the man Christ Jesus might indeed plead not guilty before God, and be justified upon that plea; but now impossible for us, Rom. 3.20.23. Psa. 14.1. 1 John 1.8. Secondly, the plea being false, there is no hope upon this is∣sue to be justified, unlesse there were some defect in the Judge, or in the evidence. In the Judge either of prudence, in not understanding; or of integrity or power, in not executing the Law aright: But in our case these are alike, that is, infinitely impossible; for we have to do with the All-wise Legislator him∣self, who is also the Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, and shall not this Judge of all the earth do right?Gen. 18.25. Nor can there be any defect in the evidence; for the books shall be opened at the last day,Rev. 20.12. and the dead shall be judged out of those things which are written in the books, according to their works. Nay, even now there are two day-books a filling, down goes (every houre, every moment) all we do and think, and speak, in the book of Gods remembrance fairly written; not an iota, not a tittle either mist or blurred; of this God hath given us a coun∣terpart to keep in our own bosomes, the Register of consci∣ence (though a very imperfect copy, full of blots, mistakes, o∣missions, yet) enough alone to convince us instead of a thou∣sand witnesses; for every sinner will be his own accuser and con∣demner, rising up as an Advocate in the behalf of the great Judge, against himself at the day of judgement. —Prima est haec ultio, quod se Judice, nemo nocens absolvitur— Case 2. And this was the first plea, not guilty; but the case is not ours, and therefore this plea will never justifie us. I come therefore to the other (which in our case) is guilty; and here
are two wayes of pleading. First, meer mercy, for mercies sake; but indeed this is not to plead at all, but to beg. And as in the last case, when an innocent person upon his pleading not guilty is discharg'd, that is pure justification, but no pardon: so here quite contrary; when a guilty person is discharg'd out of mercy, this is pure pardon, but no justification; for there shines not one beame of Justice in such a discharge, meer mer∣cy is all in all. Whence it follows, that the Socinians, who to avoid the necessity of acknowledging Christs satisfaction to Di∣vine Justice, affirm that Justification is nothing but meer Re∣mission of sins, do abuse the Wod, and contradict themselves; for who seeth not that to be pardon'd gratis, out of pure mer∣cy (without the least reparation made either for the injury and indignity done to the Law, or satisfaction to the honour, justice and authority of the Law-giver, by the sin affronted) is not to b justified at all, , but only to be gratified, ; i. e. discharged upon the sole account of mercy, with∣out any consideration had of justice. This is the first way of pleading when guilty, meer mercy for mercies sake; but to be justified upon this plea, is an evident contradiction. Therefore secondly, the only plea for a guilty person to be justified upon, is to plead mercy for the sake of some satisfaction made to the justice and honour of the Law. And by how much the fuller this satisfaction is, by so much the fuller is the justification of such a person as is upon this plea discharged. Now a full satisfaction may be made two wayes. 1. By suffering the whole penalty due. 2. When a valuable consideration is accepted by the offended party or Judge, wherein the honour of the Law is as much sa∣ved, as if it had never been broken; or as if being broken, the full penalty had been inflicted on the brea∣ker. And here I have these two things to prove. 1. That man could never make such satisfaction to the justice of God, nor any creature for him. 2. That the Lord Christ hath made such full satisfaction, that it stands now with the ho∣nour of the holy God, to justifie sinners upon the termes of the Gospel.
First, That neither man, nor any creature could satisfie of∣fended justice. 1. Not by suffering the penalty; for that being infinite, re∣quires an infinite continuance under it (there beig no other way for an finite creature to suffer infinitely) and so the whole penalty will ever be suffering, but can never be suffered; for in etetnity, stop where you will, and there is yet as much to come, as is already past; nay, infinitely more, for that which is past, is but a finite time of suffering; though millions of a∣ges are past, but an eternity of suffering is yet to come; and after as many more millions of ages, still, still an infinite e∣ternity is future, that never can be so exhausted, but an eternity will still be left. Secondly, not by any act of service, which amounts to a valu∣able consideration worthy to be accepted of the Judge as satis∣factory to his affronted justice, for two Reasons. 1. Because God is more dishonoured by one sin, than ho∣noured by an eternity of obedience; for God is not at all ob∣liged to Cherubims and Seraphims for obeying him; all the Creation naturally oweth its utmost possibility of service, as an eternal debt to its great Creatour. Now the least act of diso∣bedience or sin, being injury and Treason, thereby a new ob∣ligation is contracted, viz. to suffer condigne punishment, the former obligation unto duty remaining eternally in as full force as ever; which if we could discharge, yet were we but unpro∣fitable servants, Luke 17.10. Can a man be profitable to God? Job 22.2. If thou be righteous, what givest thou to him? or what receiveth he of thine hand? Job 35.7. An eternity of service in the highest perfection, is every creatures debt as a creature; and besides this, an eternity of suffering too, is every delin∣quent creatures debt, as delinquent. But one debt cannot pay another; since therefore all that the whole Creation can do for ever, would but just satisfie the first natural obligation unto pure justic, viz. the debt of obedience; it s qute impossible that ever any creature should supererogate, or spare any thing from hence, towards satisfying the secondary superadded ob igation un∣to offend d iustice, viz. the debt of punishment, either in its own behalf or anothers.
Secondly, The other reason why neither man, nor any crea∣ture for him, can ever satisfie the offended Creator by the high∣est services, because they all have it from him when they do obey him; of his own do they give him; for in him we live, and move, and have our being; What hast thou, O man, nay, O Angel, O Arch-angel, that thou hast not received? all our, nay, all their springs are in him; without him we can do no∣thing. The more we do for God, the more he doth for us; and consequently, still the more we owe him. So that acts of obedience are so farre from satisfying our Obligations to God, as that they contract new ones, for even for them are we ob∣liged. Having cleared the first, we come to the second point, That Christ hath so fully satisfied his Fathers offended justice, as it stands now with the honour of the holy God to justifie every sinner, that can upon Gospel termes, plead his interest in this satisfaction. Here we must enquire into these three things. 1. The matter of this satisfaction. 2. The forme, or that which makes it infinitely satisfa∣ctory and meritorious. 3. What are those Gospel terms. First, For the matter of Christs satisfaction, I humbly con∣ceive that the whole state of his humiliation, from his conce∣ption to his resurrection (for at his resurrection began the se∣cond state of Christ as Mediatior; viz. his exaltation, to be continued to the general Resurrection, and then he shall resign up the Kingdome to the Father, and God shall be thencefor∣ward all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24, 28.) that this state (I say) of our Redeemers humiliation, is entirely lookt upon by God as the valuable consideration, wherein his justice with honour ac∣quiesceth, and rests satisfied. It hath two parts. First, his ta∣king the forme of a servant at his incarnation. Secondly, his management of, and deportment in that state. First, his Incarnation, and this presents God with a double satisfaction, whereby he may with honour entertain thoughts of love to man-kind. 1. In that humane nature is in Christ unstained with either o∣riginal or actual sin; for by his divine conception by the holy
Ghost, he received of his Virgin-mother, a pure, undeflowred, Virgin humane nature; the second Adam revives the inocen∣cy of the first; those eyes could without disparagement behold his manhood, which are purer than to behold iniquity; and e∣ven in their sight, though no other flesh living could, yet this flesh must be justified. 2. In that humane nature is in him dignified with union to the divine, and is become the seat and mansion of the Godhead; so that how loathsome soever sin hath rendred it in us, yet in him it is highly exalted; even as highly, as the Divine Nature in him was abased; for the Humane Nature ascends just in the same proportion, as the Divine descended, that is, to the ut∣most possibility; for God could stoop no lower than to become a man, nor man rise higher than to be personally one with God. Thus you see Christs entering into his state of Humiliation, hath rendred the nature of man very considerable againe in the sight of God; so that he can now with honour, exercise good will towards it. Secondly, His management of this state, consists in his active and passive righteousnesse. By his active Righteousnesse, I mean his obedience to the whole Law; to the Ceremonial, in being circumcised, ba∣ptized, keeping the three yearly feasts, &c. To the moral, in not committing one sin, or neglecting one commanded duty, even to subjection to his Parents, and paying Tribute to Caesar. By his passive Righteousnesse, I mean all that he suffered in his life-time, as the meannesse of his birth and education; his persecution by Herod in his infancy, after by the Scribes and Pharisees, his hunger and temptation in the Wildernesse, his poverty and straits, he had not where to lay his head; in a word, he was all his life long in all things tempted as we are (yet without sin) Heb. 4.15. but especially what he suffered at his death. First, in his body, he was scourg'd, spit upon, crown'd with Thornes, and latength crucified; which was, 1. A cruel death; the Latine cruciari, to be tormented, is derived à cruce, from being crucified. 2. A reproachful one, Gal. 3.13. Heb. 13.13.
it was the Roman death for slaves and Malefactors. But secondly, most of all he suffered in his soule, witnesse those expressions, , Mat. 26.37. Mark 14.33. adde his bemoaning himself to his Disciples in the following words, and his passionate prayer thrice repeat∣ed, Abba Father, if it be pssible let this cup passe; Adde further yet his sweating drops of blood, in that bitter agony which so spent him in the Garden, that an Angel was sent to comfort him; but above all, his desertion upon the Crosse wit∣nesseth that he suffered unutterably in his soule, when he cry∣ed, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? The Soci∣nians are here puzzled to give any tolerable account, how the infinitely good God could find in his heart to exercise his only be∣gotten Son, that never sinned, with all these horrours in his soule; for certainly it stood not with his goodnesse, had not Christ as the second Adam been a publick person, a Repre∣sentative, on whom the Lord laid the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.6. But if we consider (which they deny) that Christ was then satisfying his Fathers Justice, we need not wonder at those horrours and consternations of the manhood; for he knew the vastnesse of his undertaking, the numberlesse numbers, and aggravations of sins, the dreadful weight of his Fathers wrath, the sharpnesse of that sword, Zech. 13.7. which he was going now to feele (not that God was angry with Christ upon the Crosse, quoad affectum; no, he never more dearly loved him; but quoad effectum) adde Christs infinite abhorrence of the sins he bore, and that infinite zeal wherewith he was inflam'd to vindicate the honour of Divine justice. Now his infinite love to his Church struggling with all these, produc't those agonies, and overcame them all, when he said, It is finished, Joh. 19.30. we meet him next triumphing in his Resurrection. But here to resolve that great question, whether Christs pas∣sive Righteousnesse alone, or active and passive joyntly, are the matter of Christs satisfaction, which believers plead at Gods Bar for their Justification, and which being accepted by God as a plea good in Law, is said to be imputed (viz. in a Law-sense) for Righteousnesse. Let these Reasons be weighed by such as do disjoyne them.
First, each of them hath its proper interest in, and its respe∣ctive contribution towards the satisfying the injur'd honour of Gods Law. For the honour of Gods Law, is the equity of both its parts, its command, and its threatening; Christs active Righteousnesse honours the equity of the first, which man had dishonoured by his disobedience; but the great God-man hath repaired the honour of Gods Commandments, by yielding a most perfect obedience to every one of them, and therein pro∣claimed the Law to be holy, just and good. Then Christs passive Righteousnesse in like manner honours the equity of the threa∣tening; for as by obeying, he acknowledged Gods authority to make a Law, and his unexceptionable righteousnesse in every single Branch of the Law made; so by suffering, he proclaimeth that man is bound to keep it; or if he do not, to beare the pe∣nalty. He himself dyes to justifie that the sinner is worthy of death, and offers himself upon the Crosse as a Sacrifice to the Divine Justice; and hereby he hath proclaimed sin to be exceeding sinful, and God to be so jealous a God, as rather than sin should go unpunish'd, and his justice want its glory, the righteous, eternal Son of God must be made an example, what guilty man had deserved. Thus God by two equal mira∣cles (of everlasting astonishment to be adored) hath satisfied both his contending Attributes, and rendred each of them Tri∣umphant, in making his righteous Son an example of his sin-avenging justice, that guilty sinners (repenting and belie∣ving) might be made examples of his sin-pardoning-goodnesse. In the second place, as each hath its respective interest in sa∣tisfying the injur'd Law, so neither of them can be anywhere severed from the other; and those which God hath so indisso∣lubly joyned, let none part asunder; for Christs active Righte∣ousnesse was everywhere passive, because all of it done in the forme of a servant; for in our nature he obeyed the Law, but in his very incarnation he was passive, for therein he suffered an ecclipse of the glory of his Godhead. And his passive Righ∣teousnesse was everywhere active; because what he suffered was not by constraint, or against his Will; no, it was his own vo∣luntary act and deed all along; let me instance in the grea∣test of his sufferings; his very dying was the product both
of the freenesse of his love, and the Majesty of his power, John 10.17, 18. Rev. 1.5. In the third place, both Christs active and passive Righte∣ousnesse, what he did, and what he suffered, partake in com∣mon of the forme of atisfaction; therefore they are both inte∣gral parts, or joynt ingredients thereof; for forma dat esse: but this brings me to the second enquiry. What is the forme of Christs satisfaction, or that which ren∣ders it satisfactory? I answer, the infinite merit of what he did and suffered; which infinite merit stands, 1. In the dignity of his person; the fulnesse of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, Col. 2.9. John 1.14. Now for the work of a servant to be done by the Lord of all, renders his active; and for him to suffer as a Malefactor between Malefactors, who was God blessed for evermore, renders also his passive righteousnesse infinitely me∣ritorious; no wonder the blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin, for it is the blood of God, Acts 20.28. 1 Joh. 1.7. And this is the Reason why the Righteousnesse of one, redounds un∣to all for the justification of life, Rom. 5.18, 19. because his active and passive Righteousnesse is infinitely of more value, than all, that all the creatures in heaven and earth could have done or suffered to eternity; the very man Christ Jesus, is above all the Angels, Heb. 1.6. for he is the man that is Gods fellow, Zechary 13.7. And this infinite worthinesse of the Redee∣mers person, you have excellently described, as irradiating and infinitely exalting all he did and suffered, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. Heb. 7.24, 25, 28. 2. The active and passive Righteousnesse of Christ are of infi∣nite merit, because not at all due, but both meer supererogati∣ons of an infinitely glorious person. And first for his active Rihteousnesse, i stood in his obedi∣ence to the Ceremonial and Moral Laws. 1. His obedience to the Ceremonial Law was a meer supere∣rogation, for the substance to comply with the shadows, the Antitype to do homage to its ow types; besides, he submitted to those very Ordinances, whose end and institution supposeth guilt, and whse Nature argues them designed only for the use of sinners; what foreskin of impurity had he to be cut off in cir∣cumcsion? what filth to be washt awy in baptism? did the ho∣ly
childe Jesus defile his mothers womb, as common mortals do that are conceiv'd in sin, and brought forth in iniquity? And yet he was circumcised and baptized, and his mother offered for her purification, Luke 1.21, 22. ch. 3.21. No imaginable obligation lay on him to these submissions, being to him meer ciphers wholly insignificant. 2. His obedience to the Moral Law; Although it must be granted that as man it was his duty, Gal. 4.4. yet was it not his duty to become man. True, a creatures homage was due from him, when a creature; a servants work, when in the form of a servant; but the whole was free and arbitrary, because his entring into that state was so; for what but his own infinite love could e∣ver move the eternal Word to pitch his Tent in our Nature? what obligation lay on the Heir of all things to take the form of a ser∣vant? who bound the eternal Son of God to become in the fulnesse of time the Son of man? And as his active righteousnesse, so secondly, his passive too was a meer supererogation; for his Almighty Fathers Holy, All-seeing Eye could never espy the least iniquity in him to punish; what had the Divine Justice to do with him? for he was a sinlesse person, he suffered not for himself, Dan. 9.26. No, for us; 2 Cor. 5.21. And therefore since no obligation lay on him to do what he did, or to suffer what he suffered, he may impute the merit both of the one, and the other, to whom∣soever, and upon what termes soever he and his Father please. But before I come to consider the termes upon which Christs satisfaction is applied, I must answer some questions, and clear the scruples in the way. 1. What is become of the Law of that first Covenant made with Adam in Paradise? Gen. 2.17. repeated again to the Jews, Deut: 27.26. The sum of which you have fully expressed, Ezek. 18.4. The soul that sinneth, it shall dye. I answer: It is not executed nor abrogated, but released, or dispensed with. First, it is not fully executed; for there is no condemnation to them that re in Christ Jesus, &c. Rom. 8.1. Secondly, It s not abrogated; for it is in part executed upon Believers; they are liable to the first, or natural death, which is
the wages of sin, although the second death hath no power over them; besides all manner of chastisements and afflictions, Psal. 89.30, 31, 32. And also that Law is totally executed upon finally impenitent unbelievers, over whom not the first only, but the second death also hath power, 2 Thess. 1.8. For he that belie∣veth not is condemned already, John 3.18. That is, the Go∣spel finds him, and every one in a state of condemnation; but those who believe, it proclaims deliverance to; those who through unbelief reject it, (judging themselves unworthy of everlasting life, see Acts 13.46.) it leaves such as it found them; viz. un∣der the condemnation of the Old Covenant, since they refuse the pardoning mercy of the New. Thirdly, I answer therefore positively, that the first Covenant is re∣leased, and dispensed with, by super-inducing a New Covenant of Grace over it, that whosoever closeth with, and comes into the terms of the New, should be exempted from the rigour and ex∣tremity; i. e. from the eternal condemnation of the Old, Joh. 3.16. It is not said, He that believes shall not be sick, shall not be afflicted, shall not dye; No, but he shall not perish. Thus you see the Covenant of Works as to its execution upon such as are in the Covenant of Grace, is in the chief part restrained; but yet in some part inflicted: They never shall complain under the eternal and destructive; yet they do complain under the temporal and corrective punishment of their sinnes, Lam. 3.39. Yet more particularly for the clearer understanding of this, we must consider that the first Covenant lays a double obligation on sinful man. First, In reference to what is past; and here it requires satisfaction and reparation from us for our sin in break∣ing it. And secondly, In reference to the future; after such satisfacti∣on and amends made, it requires perfect conformity still as at first, absolute obedience to all Gods commands being the eternal debt of the reasonable creature to that God that made it in his own Image; if therefore we could (which hath already been proved to be impossible) ever have satisfied Gods injur'd Law for our past breach, the Law would still have come upon us for future, exact conformity to pay the residue of that eternal debt; and its lan∣guage
would be, Sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee; as a Felon, though butn't in the hand, is yet bound to live honest∣ly for the future at his peril. Now the New Covenant of Grace relieves us as to both these cases, and dispences with the rigor of the Law. As to the first, It comforts us with the good news, that the Son of God hath satisfied his Fathers Justice; and if we believe but in him, God will accept of us, as if we had satisfied in our own persons. The case the Law leaves us in, is well expressed, Isa. 33.14. & Hebr. 10.31. But the relief the Gospel brings us in St. Pauls language, Rom. 8.33, 34. You have both toge∣ther excellently, Ezek. 33.10, 11. As to the second Obligation, the New Covenant dispenseth with the rigor of that too; for woe to a justified and pardoned per∣son, if he must lose all again, upon the least defailance; there∣fore the Gospel proclaims pardon of sin upon repentance, and acceptance of sincere endeavours to obey him. Gods language now is, Sinners be but in good earnest, do but love me heartily, and my ways; let me but see a childe-like ingenuity in you, and I will put down your upright, though imperfect performances, in the book of my remembrance, Mal. 3.16. and blot out your transgressions when repented of, out of the book of my remem∣brance. Mandata Dei tanquam facta reputantur,Aug. Retr. l. 1. quando quic∣quid non fit ignoscitur. Thus doth the candor of the Gospel dis∣pence with the rigor of the Law; God deals not with us as an Aegyptian task-master, but as a Father with his children whom he loves: Christs yoke is easie, his burden light. If any doubt how it stands with Gods veracity and immuta∣bility, having once declared that the soul that sinneth shall dye, to contradict it by declaring that, He that believeth shall never dye, but have eternal life.John 11.26. I answer: We must look upon threatnings as a part of the Law, declaring the duenesse of the punishment, what the offender hath deserved to suffer; not as predictions of the event, any more than Thou shalt, and Thou shalt not in the command, are predictions: but only are expressive of the duenesse of obedience. Nor will it hence follow, that we have the least cause once to suspect that God may (if he please) revoke his promises, as well as his threat∣nings; and then what would become of us? for there is a wide
difference in their essential natures and properties. In a promise, the obligation lies upon the party promising; he hath past away his own liberty, and the thing is now no longer his, but the o∣thers, who may if he please, release and quit-claim to his pretensi∣ons; he may dispense with, and surrender his own right; but if he claime his right to, and interest in the benefit, by vertue of the promise, it cannot be detained without notorious wrong and injury, which God forbid we should charge him with; for he were not God, if he were not infinitely true and faithful. How should he lse judge the world? But now the Obligation unto punishment lies contrarily upon the sinner threatned; he hath past away his own indemnity, and given God the right of punishing him: I say the right, not the necessity; if God will claime this right, he may; but if he please, he may dispence with it. It is no injury if he punisheth; yet no Obligation lies upon him but his own honour: And that indeed obligeth him not, never to dis∣pence with his Law; but never to dispense with it upon a light cause, or upon termes misbecoming his Glorious Attri∣butes. And the dispensation we now speak of is an honourable one; for 1. There are weighty inducements moving God hereunto. If he had not dispenc't with the rigor of it, First, He had lost the opportunity of the highest possible way of glorifying his own goodnesse, which now so infinitely endears him to the world, and lays such Obligations on us to admire and adore him. Secondly, As all Israel lamented over Benjamin, Judg. 21.6. that a Tribe was lost; so the Creation would have mist a Tribe; which is the reason some Divines have given why Christ took not on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham; be∣cause only some of the Angelical Tribe lost their birth-right; on∣ly some kept not their first estate; but man being in ho∣nour continued not, but became like the Beast that pe∣risheth. Thirdly, All Religion had been extinguish't, and frozen by despair unavoidably; if there had been no hope, the fear of God, his worship and service had for ever utterly perish't from off the earth. But now his Name is excellent in all the earth; even that Name Proclaimed to Moses, Exod. 34.6.
The Lord is known in Judah, and his Name is great in Israel, Psal. 79.1. 2. As the causes inducing are weighty, so the terms on which he dispenseth with his Law are as honourable; which was our third Query propounded in the opening the point. For since Christ Redeemed us, not by way of Solution (strictly) as a Surety, paying the Debtors proper debt to the Creditor; but by way of Satisfaction, as a Mediator and Intercessor, offering a valuable consideration to the offended Judge of the world, in lieu of the Laws executing the penalty threatned upon the sin er: It necessa∣rily follows that no right at all in the benefits of this satisfaction can accrue to the Delinquent, but upon such terms precisely as the offended party, and the Mediator that satisfieth him, shall agree unto; and upon mutual treaty and compromise, joyntly ratifie; so that justification by way of satisfaction provides no only for the sinners indemnity, but in such a manner, as also to consult the interests and honour both of the party saisfying, and satisfied; and this latter is the rule and measure of exhibiting the for∣mer, and of making over the satisfaction for discharge of the offender. What are the terms therefore upon which both God and Christ have agreed to justifie sinners? I answer: first, faith, which is a hearty receiving Christ as he is tendred by the Gospel, and here the soul quits all pretensions of being justified by any righteousnesse of its own, and rolls it self upon the Lord its righteousnesse; and therefore hath faith the honour to be the justifying grace, because it so highly honou∣reth Christ; it is the nuptial knot whereby the soul joyns it self to its Lord-Redeemer in an everlasting Marriage-Covenant; it denies its self, and forsakes all its other Lovers, and clasps about its Lord and Husband, as its all in all. Look what a wife doth in a Marriage-Covenant to her husband, that doth a soul in belie∣ving unto Christ, it saith unto him,  thou art my husband, Hos. 2.16. And he saith unto his Spouse,  you are my people. But then this justifying faith hath two daughters that inseparably attend her. 1. Repentance: Here sinful man retracts and undoes his faults, cryes peccavi, weeps, wrings his hands, smites upon his breast,
and cryes What have I done? Laments after the Lord, and abhors himself in dust and ashes: He calls himself fool, mad man, beast, traytor to his God, and to his soul: In a word, executes the Law upon himself; and since God excuseth him from the punishment, he accuseth himself of the guilt, and condemns himself to the shame of his sin; and hereby the sinner honours the equity of the threatning, by his tears acknowledging that his blood was due. 2. Newnesse of life; here the sinner acknowledgeth perfect o∣bedience to be still his duty; this honours the equity of Gods Commandments. And the Redeemer by making this one of the conditions of the Gospel-Covenant, hath given his Father his Law back again; he doth not repeal it; no, its still the rule of life, and every Commandment still obligeth a Believer. Christ hath only released us from the condemning power of it, not the com∣manding power of it. We must still presse after perfection; but though we fall short of it, we shall not dye for it: Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; but hath left us under the government and command of the Law. The whole matter is excellently expressed, 1 John 2.1. My little children, these things I write unto you that you sin not; and if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous. 3. Having thus discoursed to the three general points first pro∣pounded, and shewed that the person justified is charg'd with guilt: And secondly, that he pleads to the charge, (where I have largely opened the nature of that plea) I come now to the third general point, to shew how upon his plea he is discharged or justified. A sinner is then actually justified, when he is constituted or made righteous in Law. Righteousnesse is a conformity to the Law; he that fulfills the Law, is righteous in the eye of that Law; he is , within the protection of it; as he that transgresseth the Law, is , guilty in the eye of the Law, and without the protection of it. Now the Law of the New Covenant runs thus, He that believeth shall not perish; so that a Believer keeps and fulfills this Law; and therefore faith is imputed to him for righteousnesse, Rom. 4.22, 23, 24. because faith is the keep∣ing of the New Covenant, which therefore is called the Law of
faith, Rom. 3.27. in opposition to the Old Covenant, called there by the Apostle, the Law of Works. As therefore innocen∣cy, or perfect obedience, would have justified Adam, had he stood by vertue of the Law of Works, or Old Covenant, whose tenor is Obey and live, for then he had fulfilled that Law; and as his Disobedience actually condemned him by vertue of the same Law, — Disobey, and dye for it, Gen. 2.17. So now belie∣ving in Christ justifyeth by vertue of the Law of faith; for it is the keeping and fulfilling of the Gospel-Covenant, whose tenor is, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved: And again, unbelief actually condemneth by vertue of the same Law, — He that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 3.18. That is, because the unbeliever is , with∣out the protection of the Gospel, or Law of faith, he cometh not up to its righteousnesse; he is condemned already, as a sinner by the Law of Works; and yet once more with a witnesse con∣demned as an unbeliever, as a monster that hath twice been ac∣cessory to his own murder; first, in wounding himself, and se∣condly, in refusing to be healed: The Law of works includes us all under sin, we are all dead, our case was desperate; but God who is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith he hath lo∣ved us,Ephes. 2.4. John 3.16. (his immense ) when we were dead in sins and trespasses, hath sent his only begotten Son, that whosoever be∣lieveth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. And this is that Law according to which he will judge the world; accor∣ding to my Gospel, saith Paul, Rom. 2.27. Every Believer therefore, though he wants the righteousnesse of the Law of Works, (viz. innocency) yet he shall not be condemned, because he hath the righteousnesse of the Gospel, (viz. faith) which is the New Law in force, according to which God now dealeth with us, and shall judge the world at the last day. And here it will be richly worth our very heedful Observation, that although a Believer hath not the righteousnesse of the Law of Works, iherent in himself; (for if he had, he were not a sinner, but should be justified by that Law) yet by faith he lays hold upon Christs satisfaction, which in the very eye of the Law of Works is an unexceptionably perfect, an infinitely glorious righteousnesse:
So that faith justifieth us even at the Bar of the Law of Works, Ratione objecti, as it lays hold on Christs satisfaction, which is our Legal righteousnesse; it justifieth us at the Bar of the Gospel, or Law of faith; formaliter, & ratione sui, as it is Covenant-keeping, or a fulfilling of the Gospel Law: For he that keeps a Law is righteous, where that Law is Judge, the Law-Maker by his very making of the Law, makes him righteous, and the Judge that pronounceth according to the Law, (for a Judge is ) will infalibly pronounce him so. But that with all requisite distinctnesse we may apprehend this great affair, let us take a view of some of the most considerable and important causes which concur to the producing this excellent effect, the discharge and justification of a sinner, and state their several interests and concernments in their respective influences upon, and contributions towards it. 1. How free grace justifi∣eth.And first, The free grace of God is the first wheel that sets all the rest in motion. Its contribution is that of a proegumenal cause, or internal motive, disposing God to send his Son, John 3.16. That sinners (believing) might be justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Rom. 3.24. For Christ dyed not to render God good, (he was so eter∣nally) but that with the honour of his justice he might exert and display his goodnesse, which contriv'd and made it self this way to break forth into the world. 2. How Christs satisfaction.Secondly, Christs satisfaction is doubly concern'd in our Justi∣fication. 1. In respect of God, as a procatartick cause of infinite merit, and impetrative power; for the sake of which God is re∣conciling himself unto the world in Christ, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. 2. In respect of the Law of Works, Christs satisfaction justifi∣eth us formally, as our proper Legal righteousnesse; I call it our righteousness, because it becomes imputed to us upon our believing; faith being our Gospel title, by pleading which, we lay claim to all the benefits accruing from the merit of Christs performance, to al effects, uses and purposes, as if it had been personally our own; I call it our Legal righteousnesse, because thereby the Law of God owns it self fully apaid, and acquiesceth in it, as in full reparations and amends made unto it for the injury and dishonour
received by the sin of man. We must plead this against all the challenges and accusations of the Law: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is Christ that dyed, &c. Rom. 8.33. And thus our Legal righteousnesse required in the first Cove∣nant, that of Works, is wholly without us in our Redeemer, yet imputed upon our account. Thirdly, The Gospel justifieth quâ Lex lata,3. How the Gospel. as it is the Law of faith; for the very tenor of the Gospel-Covenant is, Believe, and thou shalt be saved. Fourthly, Faith justifieth vi Legis latae,4. How faith. as it is our Evangeli∣cal righteousnesse, or our keeping the Gospel-Law; for that Law suspends justification upon believing. Faith pretends to no merit or vertue of its own, but professedly avows its dependance upon the merit of Christs satisfaction, as our Legal righteousnesse, on which it layeth hold, nor can it shew any other title to be it self our Evangelical righteousnesse, but only Gods sanction, who chose this act of believing to the honour of being the justifying act, because it so highly honoureth Christ; So that as a most ju∣dicious pen expresseth it, the act of believing is as the silver; but Gods Authority in the Gospel-sanction, is the Kings Coyne, or Image stamp't upon it, which gives it all its value as to justificati∣on. Without this stamp it could never have been currant; and if God had set this stamp on any other grace as love, that then would have been currant, and have justified us as faith doth now. Fifthly, God justifieth in a proper sense two ways: first,5. How God. As a Legislator; secondly, as a Judge. 1. As a Legislator, enacting by his Soveraign Authority that sweet and gracious Law of the New Covenant, by vertue of whose tenor, every sinner that believes is justified from the guilt of sin; from which he could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.38, 9. This Law of justification by faith, is Gods own act and deed, the great Instrumentum pacis, between God and man; he hath proclaimed his Letters Patents; the King of hea∣ven and earth hath in the Gospel (our Magna Charta) given his Warrant under his own broad Seal, that he that believeth, shall not be condemned. 2. As a Judge, the God of heaven may in three respects be said to justifie a Believer.
First, Forthwith upon his believing, God owneth him secretly within himself, as a person justified; God esteems and approves of him as in that state, unto which he hath by believing a title good in Law, an indefeasible right; a justified estate emergeth actually, as soon as faith, the Law-title thereunto emergeth as a necessary resultance by vertue of the tenor of the Gospel-Law, which only justified vertually, potentially, and conditionally before every Believer in general; but now actually, absolutely, and in parti∣cular it justifieth him as a Believer, when he is so. Secondly, At the moment of dissolution God justifieth as the Judge of all the earth, passing a private sentence and award unto e∣verlasting life upon every believing soul. Thirdly, But eminently at the last day, when the Ancient of days shall take the Throne, and in open Court, before the whole Creation, by publick sentence for ever acquit and discharge Be∣lievers at that great and last Assizes. 6. How Works.Sixthly, Shall I need to adde that Works are said to justifie us? Jam. 2.4. because they justifie our faith, or demonstrate before God and man, and to our own consciences that our faith is not a dead and barren, but a true and living one by its fruitfulness in well-doing. 7. How the Spi∣rit.Seventhly, But I must not forget, lastly, that the Spirit of God is said to justifie us: 1 Cor. 6.11. and that two ways; first, directly, by working faith in the heart, which is one of the fruits of the Spi∣rit, Gal. 5.22. Now Causa causae est etiam causa causati; the Spirit justifieth as it is the Author of the justifying grace. Secondly, reflexively: The Divine Spirit clears up justification to a Believers conscience, by discovering the truth of faith, by working assu∣rance, and by sealing a Believer to the day of Redemption. The Spirit it self beareth witnesse with our spirits that we are the children of God; and if children, then heirs, &c. Rom. 8.16, 17. Thus I have at length done with my first Task, the opening of the Point, which finds it self summed up in this definition. Justifi∣cation is a judicial act of God, as Law-giver and Judge of the world, gracioussly discharging a Believer for the sake of Christs satisfaction, from the condemnation of the Law of Works, by the te∣nor of the Gospel-Law, or New Covenant which requireth of, accept∣e h from, imputeth unto sinners faith in Christ Jesus as their righte∣ousnesse; see Rom. 3.25, 6, 7, 8. Rom. 4.5. Phil. 3.9.
To improve it now, (which was my other task) by way of re∣futation, I infer against the Antimonians, first,Ʋse. Refut. That justifica∣tion is not from eternity. 1. Because a person must be charged with guilt before he is justi∣fied or discharged; but nothing can be before eternity; if dis∣charg'd from eternity, when was he charged? what from eter∣nity too? then he will be at once eternally charged with, and dis∣charged from guilt, which if any excuse from a contradiction, they are much wiser than I am. 2. My Text convinceth them, actual faith is not from eternity, therefore not justification before God; for if faith justifie us not before God, but only at the bar of conscience; then there will be no justification at Gods bar at all once mention'd in Scripture; for works do it at mans bar; what is it I wonder that justifieth from e∣ternity? Not Gods decree to justifie; for then his decree to glorifie, would make glorification from eternity too; — but Decreta Dei nihil ponunt actu in subjecto. Gods decrees are immanent acts, and passe nothing actually upon the creature. 3. A justified person was actually under condemnation whil'st he was an unbeliever, Rom. 3.18. He that believeth not, is con∣demned already; but he could not be at all condemned, if justi∣fied from eternity. 4. Saint Paul expressely affirms that the believing Corinthi∣ans were not once, but now were justified, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, &c. Secondly, I infer against them, that they are dangerously mi∣staken, in thinking that a Believer is righteous in the sight of God, with the self-same active and passive righteousnesse wherewith Christ was righteous, as though Believers suffered in Christ, and obeyed in Christ, and were as righteous in Gods esteem as Christ himself, having his personal righteousnesse made personally theirs by imputaion. This is their fundamental mistake, and from hence (tanquam ex equo Trojano) issue out a throng of such false and corrupt deductions and consequences as these. That God sees no sin in his children; that affliction and death are not proper punishments of sin to Believers; that all future sins are already actually forgiven, as well as past and present; that a Believer must not pray for the pardon of sinne, but only for
the manifestation of it; that God loved Noah when drunk; Lot when so, and besides incestuous; David, when acting A∣dultery and Murther; Peter, when he was cursing and swearing, and denying Christ, with as high a love of complacency and de∣light, as when coversant in the most spiritual exercises of grace; that all which God requires as a sinners duty in the Gospel, is to believe that Christ dyed absolutely for him in particular; that this is alone true Gospel faith; and the doubting or questioning this, the unbelief which the Gospel so much condemneth; that to argue our justification from our sanctification, and gather assu∣rance of Gods love from our love and fear of him, is a Legal principle; that obedience to Gods Commandments is not pro∣perly a Believers debt, but that all the obligation which lies upon him to holinesse, is only the voluntary expression of his love and gratitude to God, not as what is due, but what is comely: And lastly, (for I should be tyred to name all) that Christ hath kept the Gospel-Covenant for us, as well as satisfied the Law; So that not only our Legal righteousnesse is without us in Christ our Surety, but our Evangelical righteousnesse it self also. Now to pluck up all these desperate consequences by the root, there needs no more than a right understanding of the true and proper notion, and manner of Christs redeeming us; it is not by way of Solution, but of Satisfaction. Clearly thus, our case to God is not properly that of debtors, but that of criminal Subjects. Gods aspect to usward, not properly that of a Creditor, but that of a Rector and Judge: The person Christ sustained, and the part he acted, not in a strict sense that of a Surety, paying the very debt in kind, and so discharging a bond; but that of a Me∣diator expiating our guilt, and making reparations to Divine Ju∣stice another way than by the execution of the Law. And indeed the very nature of a Law is such, as it is quite impossible that the obligation either of its threatning or command, should in a pro∣per sense be fulfilled, by any other than the very person threatned and commanded; alius here makes aliud. If another suffer the penalty, the threatning is not fulfilled: Nor if another per∣forms the duty, the command; for the obligation as to punish∣ment lies on the person threatned, (noxa caput sequitur) and that to duty on the person commanded, it cannot be fulfilled in
kind by another, but it ceases to be the same thing, and be∣comes another thng from that in the Obligation; yet it may be such another thing (and Christs Righteousnesse (both active and passive) really is such) as the Rector or Judge may accept of with honour, and be satisfied with, as if the very same thing had been suffered and done just in the same manner, as the Law threatned and commanded it. That Christ hath paid not the idem, but tantundem, i. e. not fulfilled the Law (as for us) in kind, but satisfied it for us, is most evident. For, 1. The Law obliged the sinners person to suffer; Christ was no sinner. 2. All men to suffer, forasmuch as all had sinned; Christ was but one man. 3. The punishment due by Law was eternal; Christ suffered but for a season, and is entered into his glory; thus Christ paid not the same thing that was in the Obligation, but something e∣quivalent thereunto. This being obtain'd, that the Lord Christ hath Redeemed us, not by way of solution, or discharging a Bond, by payment in kind, but by way of satisfaction, or making amends to the injur'd justice of the Law: It follows from the reason & nature of the thing: 1. That God pardons freely; we are not only beholding to Christ for satisfying, but to God too infinitely for accepting of any satisfaction at all; he might have refused it; he had done sinners no wrong if he had executed the rigour of the Law, without hearkening to termes of Reconciliation. Quite contra∣ry, a Creditor doth not pardon the debtor, when the surety hath discharged the Bond by full payment in kinde; the Debtor is beholding indeed to his friend the Surety, but not at all to the Creditor, who cannot refuse to cancel the Bond; nay, it were wrong and injustice in him if he did. 2. That none hath or can have actual interest in, or benefit by this Redemption, but upon such termes as God and Christ have mutually compromised in, and agreed to, viz. the condi∣tions of the Gospel-Covenant above mentioned. See the answer to the third quere. 1. The Reason hereof is partly from God, the injur'd Law-giver of the world; who seeing it was at his liberty to accept of
satisfaction or no, hath of necessity the right to make his own termes, when, and how far forth, and in what manner and method he will condescend to admit the sinner to the actual be∣nefit of Christs satisfaction. 2. And partly too from Christ; for as he is the , or Mediator between God and man, a friend to both parties; nay, a person consisting of both natures; the offended, and offen∣ding; he is engaged necessarily by vertue both of Office and person, to espouse with equal tendernesse of regard he inte∣rests of both parties; for he is really concerned in them both; they are his concernments as well as theirs. True indeed, a Surety that dischargeth a Bond by full payment in kinde, he su∣staines and beares only the person of the Debtor, minds only his indemnity; doth what he doth upon his account, and for his sake. But our great Mediator must consult not only our impunity, but his Fathers, yea, and his own honour; and there∣fore , get you hence all you that either yet never did, or that do not now repent, believe, and conscientiously endeavour to obey; here's not the least jot of benefit for you in the case you are in, from this Redemption: for how infinite soever the merit of Christs satisfaction is, it conferreth nothing actu∣ally upon any person that hath not actually a Gospel-claime and title to plead it before God. The immediate effect actu∣ally resulting from Christs performance, is the procuring the Gospel-Covenant to be ratified by his Father, as a Law, where∣by sinners upon the termes propounded, become reconcilable unto God; actually it is of force to all that have, but to none that want the conditions of it. Now the keeping this Gospel-Covenant, God expects from us in person (though by the as∣sistance of his Spirit, which he hath promised to give to them that humbly and earnestly ask it of him, Luke 11.1.) To af∣firme that Christ hath kept the Gospel for us too, is to utter the most self-contradicting blasphemy and absurdity imagina∣ble; as if he could repent, or believe in himself, free, ex∣cept, or cancel our Obligation to obey the Moral Law, by his own obeying it; as if Christ had so done all, that nothing re∣maines to be done on our part. Such strange extreames do some men run into, that to avoid Justification by works (by an ) are as extravagant on the other hand, think∣ing
the grace of God cannot be free, except the sinner become either a senselesse statue, meerly passive, or (which is yet worse) have a Writ of ease to be quite idle, or (wich is worst of all) a Licence to sin by Prerogative. Let the Apostles  chastise this insolence. Rom. 6.15. Shall we sin because we are not under the Law, but under grace? God forbid. If Christ had obeyed the Law for us in the sense of paying a debt, or discharging a Bond, the Apostles answer could not stand, Rom. 3.31. Do we then make void the Law through faith? yea, we e∣stablish the Law. When a believer breaks the Law, he sins (for sinne is the transgression of the Law) nay, he cannot break it wilfully, but he breaks the very Gospel-Covenant (one condition whereof is sincere obedience) and the guilt of that sin lieth upon him unpardoned, untill by hearty repentance, and fresh applications by faith to the blood of sprinkling (which are the only Titles good in Law, the only Gospel-claimes to pardon) he hath sued out a new pardon (for actual Remission is only of past sins, Rom. 3.25.) according to the tenor of the New Covenant, which is a perpetual Law of pardoning, re∣penting and believing sinners, whomsoever, whensoever, but as such. Neither was Christs suffering like the Cancelling of a Bond, a total discharge of us, from suffering the penalty threatened in the Law; we dye still, and afflictions are punishments still. True, indeed upon Christs satisfaction made, God and he are agreed, that a believing sinner should not be punished with the everlasting destructive penalty threatened (for whosoever be∣lieves shall not perish) but they are not, that he shall not be,John 3.16. for he is, punished with the temporal corrective punishments of the threatening, as sicknesse, and natural death; yet even these (through infinite goodnesse so ordering and dispo∣sing it) prove much more a benefit, than a penalty to a believer. Ʋse 2. What cause have we then with the lowest and profoundest Humility, to adore the Majesty of the living God? First, To adore his holinesse. Reverence those eyes of his, that are purer than that they can endure to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13. Let this God be thy dread and awe. Dare not
to make a mock of sin; tremble at the horrid guilt and sinful∣nesse of the least sin; look upon it as an affront and treason against an Eternal Majesty, as worthy the Curse of the Law, and the wrath of an Almighty God, as that which could not be expiated at a lesser rate than the blood of God, Acts 20.28. Secondly, to adore his wisdome in finding out such a per∣son to satisfie his justice as our Redeemer; Consider here, that God could not suffer, could not dye; Nay, could not (properly) satisfie himself; (for it had not been a satis∣faction to his justice at all, but meer mercy; and so no justifica∣tion of a sinner, but meer pardon, if the person satisfying had been only God.) Again, Consider that a meer creature could never satisfie, as I before demonstrated, a meer creature had perish't in the attempt, would have been overwhelmed, and crush't to pieces with that insupportable load, the guilt of sin, and the wrath of God. The person therefore that must satisfie, must neither be finite, nor infinite; neither the creature, nor the Creator; neither God, nor man; yet must be both. Here now, the understandings of men and An∣gels must have been tyred to all eternity,Rom. 11.33. see also Eph. 1.7, 8. fully hereun∣to. and lost for ever in a bottomlesse gulf of horror and amazement to finde out such a per∣son. O the depth of the riches of the wisdome and knowledge of God! Thirdly, To adore the infinite riches of his grace, Rom. 3.24. in justification; and here consider, 1. God might have let man alone, seized the forfeiture; as the Tree fell, it might have lain for ever; what obliged God to accept of satisfaction? 2. The Redeemer hath trodden the wine-presse alone; what ever was done in this satisfaction, he did it; Of the peo∣ple there was none with him. The sinner hath not the least hand in it, could not pay one, Christ paid every, to the utmost farthing. Thirdly, It was the Judge himself who contrived this way to justifie us, and it was at his cost, he gave his Son; herein God commended his love to us, as Abraham once did his faith to God, in that he spared not his son, his only begot∣ten son whom he loved. So that if we rightly weigh it, it will appear, that by how much the satisfaction is the fuller,
by so much the pardon is the freer; by how much his justice is the more, by so much too is his mercy the more glorified, and still, still infinitely the more are we obliged. Use 3. Consol. Here's unspeakable comfort for every hum∣ble, though doubting soul, every contrite spirit that hungers and thirsts after righteousnesse. First, Consider how full satisfaction Christ hath made; he is able to save to the utmost all that come to God through him; he is the beloved Son in whom the Father is well-pleased; all power is committed into his hands; God hath exalted him to be a Prince, and a Saviour to give Repentance, and Remission of sins. Secondly, Consider he inviteth thee as a sinner to come in unto this Gospel-righteousnesse, in the general tenor of his Procla∣mation, Whosoever believes, &c. If any man sin,1 John 2.1, 2. we have an Ad∣vocate with the Father, &c. An Whosoever, excludes none that excludes not himself. Thirdly, Consider, Christ assures thee, (that art the person I now speak to) he who is the Truth assures thee thou shalt be wel∣come: Matth. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labour, and are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest, &c. This is your very case: Heark, the Master callth you, will you not be of good courage, and Go, when he saith Come! he that never yet cast out any that came unto him, that never will, he saith so him∣self; Thou mayst believe him, he never broke his word yet, he will not begin with thee, he cannot deny himself. Fourthly, Consider those standing Monuments of Gods free ju∣stifying grace that are on record in the Scripture. What hath been done, may be done again: Nay, will be done again (in the case we speak of) by the God that changeth not; God hath pardoned as great sinners; see Ephraims case, Jer. 31.18. see the Corin∣thians example, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. see Pauls, 1 Tim. 1.13. Who∣ever goes and doth likewise, shall receive likewise; for Christ is yesterday and to day, and the same for ever. Fifthly, Consider it is the very designe of God in gi∣ving his Son, and of Christ in giving himself to dye for us, to justifie such as thou art, Isa. 16.1. Luke 4.19, 20. Jer. 3.12. 1 John 5.9. Ʋse 4. Exhort. First, To the Unconverted.
Use 4. Exhort. Let me then beseech sinners not to love death; Why should iniquity be your ruine? There is balme in Gilead, there is a Physitian there; Why are ye unwilling to be healed? Turn ye, Turn ye, why will ye dye? Would it be a hard matter to perswade a condemned person to be willing not to be executed, were he not distracted? if having a pardon offered upon the easie terms of confessing his fault, and serious promising amendment, he should bid the Prince keep his Pardon to himself; for his part, he was in love with his chains, he would not be relea∣sed, he would dye. Thou art the man whoever thou art that neglectest Gospel-grace; what fury and raging madnesse is it that thou art guilty of? Thy soul with all its eternal interests lies at stake, and as if it were neither here nor there, what became of thee for ever, thou despisest the riches of Gods forbearance, after thy hardnesse and impenitent heart,Rom. 2.4, 5. treasuring up wrath a∣gainst the day of wrath. Is it well done of thee sinner? is this thy kindnesse to thy own soul? is this thy thanks to thy Redee∣mer? How inexcusable art thou? thy self being Judge, thou canst not answer it to thy conscience, to thy God, with the least colour or shadow of a reason. God sends his Gospel proclaiming,Acts 3.19. — Repent ye, and be converted, that your sinnes may be blotted out: His Ministers proclaiming, — We then are Embassadors of Christ,2 Cor. 5. as though God did be∣seech you by us; we pray you in Christs stead be ye reconciled unto God. Why dost thou hate thy soul, and say I will not? why wilt thou not? Is it because it doth not concern thee? or because eternal life and death are trifles, small, little things, not worth thy considering? or doth any body hinder thee? No, no; our Saviour gives the true account, Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life. Let me entreat this small request of thee for Gods sake, for thine own, take the next opportunity, and spend half an houre alone; let thy spirit accomplish a diligent search, pursue this inquiry to some is∣sue; am I justified or no? if not, what will become of me, if it should happen (sometimes such things fall out) that I should dye now presently? I cannot promise my self that I shall see to morrow morning. Thus go on, and bring it to something before thou leavest; give not over till thou art not only clearly convinced of; but heartily affected with thy
guilt; not only to see, but feel thy self to be the man who art undone without an interest in this justification. Be in good ear∣nest; thou canst not mock thy God; and is there any wisdome in mocking and cheating thy own soul? What thou dost, do it heartily as unto the Lord, as for thy life, as one that would not rue thy self-deceiving folly, when it cannot be recalled; and if thou art hearty and serious in these re∣flexions; 1. Thou wilt deeply humble thy self before the Majesty of the Judge of all the earth, with that self-abhorrence and confusion, that be∣comes one who feels himself (even himself being Judge) most righ∣teously condemned. 2. Thou wilt sollicite and assail the Throne of Grace with all redoubled favours, and holy passionate importunities of prayer and supplication, giving God no rest till he hath given thee his Spirit, according to his own promise, Luke 11.13. Ezek. 36.26, 27. To help thee to performe the conditions of the Gospel-Covenant, plead his own promise with him. Wrestle with him for a broken and clean heart; for faith, for repentance unto life; for these are not of thy self, they are the gift of God, let him not go till he hath blessed thee with these blessings in Christ Jesus. This will confound every sinner at the day of Judgment, that when he might have had grace; yea, the Spirit of grace for asking; he either asked not, or if he did, it was so coldly, as if he were con∣tented enough to go without. Now if thou art in good earnest, God is I assure thee in full as good earnest as thou; he is ready to meet thee; Try but once whether it be in vain to seek him; all that ever tryed, found it good to draw near to God, and found him easie to be entreated; he useth not to send the hungry empty away. He that commands us to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, he it is that worketh in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13. Secondly, To them that are the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Let me beseech them, 1. To walk worthy of God who hath called them to his King∣dome and Glory, to adorn their holy profession; take the Exhor∣tation in Pauls words, Col. 2.6. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. Receive not this grace of God in vain; the interest of your comfort obligeth you hereunto;
hereby you will know that you know him, that you are in Christ Jesus,Rom. 8.1. that there is no cond mnation to you, if you walk not af∣ter the flesh, but after the Spirit; and herein will your Father be glorified,John 15.6. if ye bring forth much fruit. 2. To live up to the comfort of their state; 1 John 3.1. Ye are already the sons of God, it doth not yet appear what you shall be. Who shall lay any thing to your charge? it is God that ju∣stifieth, who is he that condemneth? it is Christ that dyed, &c. Rom. 8.33. Go eat thy bread with joy, and put on thy white rayment, God now hath accepted thy works, Eccles. 9.7, 8. I conclude this particular (and the whole discourse) with, the happy effects and fruits of Justification, which every Believer hath as good a right and title to, as the Gospel it self, the Word of the God of truth can give him, as I finde those sweet effects and con∣sequences set down in my Text, and the words next following it. — 1. Being justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. By whom also we have accesse by faith in∣to this grace wherein we stand, and rejoyce in the hope of the glory of God, 3. And not only so, but we glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation worketh patience, 4. And patience experience, and expe∣rience hope, 5. And hope maketh not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given un∣to us. Wherefore, the righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and all the up∣right in heart shall glory, Psal. 64.10.
THE BELIEVERS DIGNITY and DƲTY, LAID OPEN, In the High-Birth wherewith he is PRIƲILEDGED, And the honourable Employment to which He is called. John 1.12, 13. But as many as received him, to them he gave pow∣er to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name: Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. IN this Chapter, Christ the principal Subject of the Gospel, is admirably and Seraphically described. 1. By his Divintiy, as co-eternal and co-essen∣tial with the Father, verse 1. & 2. 2. By his discovery or manifestation. 1. In the work of Creation, ver. 3. & 10. 2. In the work of com∣mon
providence, ver. 4.5, 9. 3. In the work of gracious pro∣vidence, he being in the world, and coming to his Church, as our Immanuel, God incarnate, ver. 11. & 14. 3. By his entertainment; which was 1. Passive; his enter∣tainment was poor; the world knew him not, ver. 10. He was as a Prince disguised in a strange Country; the Church sleighted and rejected him, as Rebels do their natural Prince, ver 11. And such entertainment Christ meets with at this day, in his Truths, Ordinances, Graces, Ministers, and his poor mem∣bers, &c. Object. Was not Christ entertained by them? what else means their harbouring him at Capèrnaum, their flocking after him, admiring of him, seeking to make him a King? &c. Answ. True, they entertain'd him for a while civilly and formally upon self-interest, but not spiritually by saving Faith, Love and Obedience, John 6.26. Matthew 11.21, 23. Quest. 1. Did Christ find no entertainment at all? Answ. This rejecting of Christ was not universal; some did receive him cordially, verse 12. and were more graciously en∣tertained by him, ib. and this was his active entertainment, he dignifying all who received him with the priviledge of Adopti∣on, ver. 12. Quest. 2. How came it to passe that some received Christ, when the generality rejected him? Answ. Not from their own free will, or good nature, but from the especial grace of God regenerating them, whereby they were made able and willing to close with Christ, whom others (as likely, or more likely than they) being devoyd of grace rejected. And thus I have brought you to the Text, as it stands in its re∣lative consideration. In the words absolutely considered, you have a singular commendation or Encomium of Faith. 1. From its nature, a receiving of Christ. 2. From its root, Regeneration, or being brne of God. 3. From its consequent or suit. Adoption, he gave them power to be the Sons of God.
Passing sundry useful points, I shall pitch only upon that which comprehends the marrow and substance of both Verses. Doctr. Every true Believer is a childe of God by Regenera∣tion and Adoption. They were born of God, and so were Sons by Regeneration; they had a great priviledge given them, and so were made Sons by Adoption. In handling this excellent Doctrine, my work shall be Expli∣cation, Confirmation, Application. The Explication shall be first general; secondly, particular. That respects the doctrine of Filiation or Sonship in general; this the doctrine of Regeneration and Adoption in particular, they being distinct kinds of Filiation. For the first in general,General Expli∣cation. A fourfold Sonship. a Person may be a Son foure wayes. 1. By Creation; and thus, 1. The Angels, Job 38.7. 2. Adam, Luke 3.38. 3. Christ according to his Humane Na∣ture was the Son of God, Luke 1.35. Not that Christs Hu∣mane Nature was a Son or a Person, lest we make two Sons or two Persons in one Christ. And thus believers are Gods Children, by virtue of their new and spiritual Cre∣ation. 2. By Generation; and this is, 1. Eternal or temporary; eternal, as in Christ, John 1. ver. 1, 14, 18. compare Isa. 53.8. Temporary, as in other men. 2. Natural or spiritual; natural, as in the Son of God, and the sons of men, though with infinite disproportion; spiritual, as in Regeneration, James 1.18. 3. By contract of Marriage;Or as some think, the legal Son of Jacob, the natural Son of Heli. and thus Joseph was the Legal son of Heli, Luke 3.23. but the natural son of Jacob, Mat. 1.16. And thus we are Children of God by marriage with Christ his Natural Sonne; as Leah and Rachel, were both daughters of Isaac by marriage with Jacob, See 2 Cor. 11.2. 4. By Adoption; which is, 1. External and federal, Exod. 4.22. Rom. 9.4. by virtue of external profession and Church-member-ship, Gen. 6.1. compare Job 1.6. By Sons of God in this last place, may be understood either Professors, or the Angels. This Sonship may be lost, as is evident by the Jews
who are now cut off, Rom. 9.7, 8. & 11. ver. 15, 19, 20, 23, 31. yet so high is this priviledge, that in comparison of such Adopted Children, Persons without the Pale are called Dogs, Matthew 15.26. 2. Adoption is internal and real, which leads me to the particular Explication. Only, before I proceed, let me subjoyne a word of general Application, in two Heads. General Ap∣plication.1. What comfort doth this speak to every Believer, who bears so many indearing relations to God in point of filiation and otherwayes! Relations, we say, are minimae entitatis, but maximae efficaciae: and if one endearing relation draw so much love, what wi l all do? especially considering God and Christ will be sure to fill every relation with love and grace; the Church (and by proportion every true believer) is Christs childe and mother, his brother and sister, his Spouse, body and member, Cant. 5.1. Matth. 12.50. & 1 Cor. 12.27. Yea, his Childe not one way, but every way, by Creation, Regenerati∣on, Marriage, Adoption external and internal; how much love may such expect from Christ in every kinde? No wonder Gods people are such gainers by their losses and sufferings for Christ, who is an hundred fold better to them in this life, than all the relative comforts they part with for his sake, Mat∣thew 19.29. 2. How doth this by proportion, oblige us in point of reci∣procal duty, who stand in all relations of subjection to God and Christ, as owing to him all the duty of a Creature, Ser∣vant, Chide, Subject, Friend, Wife, &c. and parti∣cularly, the duty of foure filial relations, as chidren by Crea∣tion, Marriage, Regeneraton and Adoption, both external and internal! Particular Ex∣plication.I shall now proceed to the particular Explication: and open, 1. The doctrine of Adoption, according to the order of the Text. 2. The doctrine of Regeneration; and remember we are now speaking of internal and real Adoption. Quest. 1. What is this Adoption? Answ. It's considerable; 1. For its name or notion. 2. For the thing it self.
For the first,Its name. The word (Adoption) is used but five times in the New Testament, Rom. 8.15, 23. & 9, 4. Gal. 4.5. & Ephes. 1.5. In the Original, its , as , and signifies the putting or placing one for a Son. It's applyed to other things besides man; thus we are said to Adopt a name, when we take a new name; to Adopt a Plant when we give it a name, as Lysimachus did to the herb Lysimachia, and Arte∣misia to the herb Artemisia; and thus one branch is said to adopt another by inoculation, according to the Poet, Venerit insitio, fac ramum ramus adoptet; which Metaphor, as it is very elegant, so it serves to illustrate the Nature of Adoption, Compare Rom. 11.24. For the thing;Its nature. Adoption is the acceptance of a stranger in∣to the Relation and Priviledges of a Son. It was much in use among the Romans; and was ratified by the Law of the chief Magistrate, and the approbation of their Pontifices or chief Priests; wherein great respect was had to the ho inesse and dig∣nity of persons (whence a Patrician might not adopt a Plebei∣an, &c.) lest the dignity of the Adopter should be stain'd by the meanness of the Adopted: There was also great care used to prevent all fraud on the part of the Adopter or the Adopted. Thus our Adoption is ratified by the Law and gracious sentence of God the Father, and by the Approbation of God the Son our High Priest; without any fraud on Gods part, or any re∣flection on the dignity of God, and the holiesse of Christ; though in this gracious act those two most glorious persons stoop infinitely below themselves. Thus Moses was the ado∣pted son of Pharaohs daughter, Exod. 2.10. and Esther was the adopted childe of her cousin Mordecai, E her 2.7. both which illustrate Gods singular grace to us, who are before A∣doption Captives, slaves, and lost creatures. By effectual voca∣tion we are translated into a twofold state. 1. Absolute, namely a state of sanctification and glorifi∣cation. 2. Relative, namely a state of Justification and Adoption; in which last upon our believing, we are by Gods gracious Sen∣tence, accepted into the number, and have a right to all the Priviledges of the Sons of God. Adoption then is our Rela∣tive state, which puts no real worth in the Adopted, though
it presuppose an absolute state of holinesse, and a double act. 1. Of free grace, on the Adopters part. 2. Of faith, on the part of the adopted. From all hath been said about the Nature of Adoption, note these following Corollaries. Corollary.1. Hence it follows, that Adoption presupposes effectual vo∣cation, Regeneration, Faith, Justification, and Reconciliati∣on, which are (as it were) its secondary foundations; compare Rom. 8.30. & 5. ver. 1. & 2. 2. Hence it follows, that Believers expect heaven by a dou∣ble Title.Besides a Title of Marriage-Joynture. 1. Of Redemption. 2. Of Adoption. See both toge∣ther, Rom. 8.23. 3. This shews how Christ is applyed in Justification, name∣ly as a fountaine and garment: how in Adoption, namely as an elder Brother, and Prince of Salvation, Hebrews 2. ver. 10, 11, 12. 4. Hence its evident, our Sonship far excels Adams filia∣tion. He indeed was Gods Son by similitude and dependance, but not by special union and communion with Christ the Natural Son of God, as we now are, Gal. 4. ver. 4, 5. 5. Hence we have the true reason, why Gods Name is called upon us (Jerem. 14.9. & 1 John 3.1. compare Gen. 48.5, 6, 16.) as well as called upon by us, 1 Pet. 1.17. 6. This shews why we are in an especial manner of Gods Houshold, Eph. 2.19. not as Bastards, Sojourners, Borders, Hirelings, Slaves, Exod. 12.45. Judg. 11.1, 2. Heb. 12.8. but as his honourable Servants, his Spouse, and his A∣dopted Children. Compare 2 Sam. 9.7, 11, 13, & Est∣her 2.7. Quest. 2. Wherein doth Divine Adoption differ from, and excell Humane adoption? This Head is a powerful motive. Answ. 1. In its properties. 2. In its Priviledges: both which concurre in the substance, but are distinguished here for Doctrines sake. The Properties of Adoption are foure.The properties of Adoption. 1. It's a precious Relation, cost as much as our Redemption, an infinite price; compare 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. & Gal. 4.4, 5. al∣lude to Acts 22.28. with a great summe Christ obtain'd us this Freedome.
2. It's an high and honourable Relation. Every Believer is an High-borne Person; and as his Birth, so his Adoption is high, even as high as heaven, John 1.12, 13. It's honourable to be the Son of a King, much more to be the Son of God; to be Gods Servant, 2 Sam. 7.5, 8. (Witnesse Theodosius the Em∣perour) much more to be Gods Son, 1 John 3.1. The ho∣nour of Sonship ever rises or falls with the honour of Father∣hood. This second property flows from the first. That which is pre∣cious must needs be Honourable, Isa. 43.4. Whence the same word signifies both preciousnesse and honour, compare Psal. 45.9. 3. It's a free Relation. It's free, 1. In an active sense, making its subject free, Gal. 4.7. A slave adopted, is by that act made a Free man. 2. In a passive sense; and first as to the Adopter, who is not moved by any thing in the Creature, to bestow this high favour, Ephes. 1. ver. 4, 5. God adopts not out of necessity, but liberty; who can compel or necessitate him? not out of indigency (he had a Natural Son, and many created Sons, who were very like him, and liking to him) but out of redundancy of goodnesse. 2. In a passive sense its free also as to the adopted, without, yea, against their deser∣vings. We may all with shame take up the words of Mephi∣bsheth, 2 Sam. 9.8. & 19.28. This property flows from the two former; that must needs be freely given, which is so preci∣ous and honourable. None is worthy to be the Son of God, but only the Natural Son of God. He that cannot deserve a bit of bread, much lesse can deserve this Divine Relation; we de∣serve an hellish, not an heavenly Sonship, each of us being by Nature children of Belial. 4. It's a permanent Relation. Once a child and for ever so. John 8.35. A Servanr, a created Son, a Natural Son may sometimes be turned out of doors, witnesse the Angels, and Gen. 21.10, 12. But an adopted Son is never cast off, Psalme 89.26, 30, 33, 34. and that upon the following ac∣counts. 1. From the freenesse of Adoption; God chose them not for their well-deservings, nor will he reject them for their ll-de∣servings; if unworthinesse foreseen, did not hinder the pur∣pose
of Adoption, then unworthinesse present shall not hinder the compleating of Adoption; and thus the fourth Property flows from the third. 2. Divine immutability is engaged in the Covenant of grace, of which Adoption is one great Branch. Compare Rom. 9.4. & 11.29. & Heb. 6.17, 18. 3. If any thing unchild them, it must be their Apostacy: But, 1. They can fall no further than their Father per∣mits. 2. Fall they never so foully, he can mend and recover them as he pleaseth. 3. He will never permit them to fall finally and totally, Jer. 32.40. And what Parent would cast off a son, had he this pow∣er over him? We never cast off a childe unlesse incorrigi∣ble;Deut. 21.18, 19 20. but to our heavenly Father, no childe is incor∣rigible. The Priviledge of Adoption. Likenesse to God.2. Divine Adoption differs from, and excels humane, in its Priviledges, as well as in its Properties. The General Priviledge is, Likenesse to God. All Gods a∣dopted Children bear their Fathers Image, as Gideons Brethren d d his,And 1. In ho∣linesse. Judg. 8.18. They are like God, 1. In holinesse. 2. In dignity. In holinesse; as Christ beares their Natural, so they bear his Spiritual Image. Compare Heb. 2.7. & Rom. 8.29. Their principles and actions prove them the children of their heavenly Father, Matth. 5.45. This one truth un∣childs most Professours, who look not at holinesse as a Privi∣ledge: with Machiavels Prince, they like the shew of vir∣tue, but fly virtue it self as a burthen: Such bewray themselves to be Bastards; but let genuine children remember, that holi∣nesse is not only a duty, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. but also a preroga∣tive, Exod. 19.5, 6. & 1 Pet. 2.9. Many hope to be like God hereafter, who affect not to be like him here; but genu∣ine Sons affect the one, as well as they hope for the other, 1 Joh. 3.2, 3. The hope of the former, will at farthest dye with themselves, Job 8.13, 14, 15, & 11, 20. 2. In dignity.Next, Gods adopted children are like him in Dignity. This Dignity appeares, Which appears1. In their Titles.
2. In their Offices. 3. In their Dominion. In their Titles, they are called his treasure,1. In their ti∣tles. Exod. 19.5. his jewels, Mal. 3.17. his first-fruits, and holinesse to the Lord, Jerem. 2.3. Heires, Gal. 3.19. first-born Heires, Heb. 12.23. compare Deutr. 21.16. yea, joynt-heires with Christ, Rom. 8.17. each of them having right to, and possession of that In∣heritance which hath no Corruption, Succession, Di∣vision. 1. No corruption, 1 Pet. 1.4. It's not corrupted by out∣ward principles, as fire, violence, &c. Nor by inward prin∣ciples, as sin and other taints which defile; or prutribility, as the best things here below, are from their own or their sub∣jects innate principles, Isa. 29.14. & 1 Pt. 1.18. compare James 5.2. 2. It hath no Succession; the Father and Children alwayes living upon the same Inheritance; whence, as Christs Priest∣hood, so their inheritance is unchangeable, Hebrews 7.24. 3. It hath no Division; for every Heire enjoyes the whole, God being infinite and indivisible: as every eye enjoyes the whole Sun, &c. Hence there will be no occasion of jealousie or quarrelling among the Brethren; for, let others have ne∣ver so much, I shall not have one jot the lesse. To his Isa∣acs, his Heires, his Conquerours, God gives his all; not half (with Ahashuerus and Herod) but his whole Kingdome. Compare Gen. 25.5. & 2 Chron. 21.3. & Rev. 21.7. It's other∣wise with Heires and Wives here below, because their inte∣rests are divisible, Luke 12.13. Gen. 30.15. & 1 Sam. 1.6, 7. Their Dignity appeares, 2. In their high Offices.2. In their Of∣fices. Like Christ their Head, they are Gods anointed ones, 1 John 2.20, 27. and that to a threefold Office, Prophetical, Priestly, Kingly, Psalme 105.15. Revel. 1.6. Where the Prophetical Office is not mentioned, probably upon this account, because included in the Priestly Office. The first-born in every Family were typical Kings, Priests and Prophets, Exodus 24.5. which therefore were the Birth-right of Reuben, who by his sin for∣feited the Government to Judah, the Priest-hood to Levi, and
the double portion or inheritance to Joseph, 1 Chron. 5.1, 2. see Numb. 3.45. But Gods adopted ones shall never forfeit their Unction. 3. In their Do∣minion.Their Dignity appeares, 3. In their Dominion; and this by five particulars. 1. By their Ministers or attendance, an heavenly Guard, Heb. 1.14. 2. By the extent of their property, they are Lords of all, 1 Cor. 3.21, — 23. Compare Psalme 8. Their Title is as good, as large, they holding all in Capite, which is the worst Title a∣mong the Sons of men, but the best among the Sonnes of God. 3. By their Right, and pure use of all, Tit. 1.15. Job 5.24. 4. By the benefit and advantage redounds to them out of all, Rom. 8.28. There's no creature but owes homage, and payes Tribute to these Lords. A Saint gets more good by other mens estates, than the Possessours themselves. The first-fruits, and fat of all, come to those who are the first fruits of God and of the Lamb. 5. By their immunities. Kings children have great immuni∣ties, Matth. 17.25, 26. but Gods children have all immuni∣ties, being priviledged from the hurt of every thing, Luke 10.19. Rom. 8.35, 38, 39. Second branch of the doctrine.This for the Explication of the first Branch of the Doctrine: The second Branch is, That every true Believer is a child of God by Regeneration. Explication.I shall first explain this Head; then prove and apply both to∣gether. Quest. What is Regeneration? Here I shall endeavour to open, First, The Name. Secondly, The Thing. The Name.The Name is . It's used but twice in the New Testament, Matthew 19.28. & Tit. 3.5. haply in several senses; the one glorious, the other gracious. Yet both may ve∣ry well be understood in a gracious sense; and so in the former place Judas is excluded, as having no hopes of a glorious Sessi∣on, because he wanted a gracious Regeneration.
Its Synonima's in Scripture are very Emphatical. Thus its called a quickening, Ephes. 2.1. a formation, Gal. 4.19. a Birth, John 3.3, 8. a Baptizing, Matth. 3.11. a renewing of the minde, Rom. 12.2. a new heart and spirit, Ezek. 36.26. that being renewed by saving knowledge, this by saving grace; a new creature, which is the product of Omnipotency,Gal. 6.15. 2 Cor. 5.17. The new man, it renewing the whole, Ephes. 4.24. and the Divine Nature, in respect of its transcendent excellency, 2 Pet. 1.4. For the thing it self; Regeneration is taken, 1. Absolutely,The thing. and so it's really the same with effectual vocation, both which are either active or passive; that in Relation to the party Re∣generating and calling, this in reference to the party Regene∣rated and called. 2. It's taken Relatively; and so it's the foun∣dation of our first Filiation or Sonship, whereby we are begotten Sons: Generation is the foundation, as of humane, so also of Divine Filiation; and as by faith we are adopted Sons, so by Regeneration we are begotten Sons. Quest. What is Regeneration? Answ. It's the production of a new and spiritual being, by the Introduction of a new and spiritual forme.Its nature. As therefore Isaac before generation, was a non entitie in nature; so every child of the promise before Regeneration, is a non entity in grace, 1 Cor. 13.2. Gal. 6.3. and as in Generation there is a formation, or the introduction of a new forme, which gives being, distinction and operation; so is it likewise in Regenera∣tion, Gal. 4.19. This forme is nothing else but truth of grace in∣fused. 3. As in nature the corruption of one thing is the Gene∣ration of another; so in grace, the corruption of the old man, is the Generation of the New, Rom. 6.4, 6, 11. And lastly, as in natural Generation no forme is introduced but by various preparations and previous dispositions; so in Regeneration, much Legal and Evangelical preparation ushers in the New Birth; which preparation consists especially in Conviction, Illumi∣nation, &c. The Nature of Regeneration will appeare more distinctly, by comparing it more particularly with natural Generation;The termes of conveniency. and 1. In the termes of conveniency or similitude. 2. In the terms of difference or dissimilitude. They agree, 1. In the cau∣ses.
2. In the manner of production. 3. In the matter pro∣duced. For the first; in both there is, 1. A principal cause; and thus God is the Regenerate mans Father, witnesse the Text, Isa. 6.9. & Heb. 2.11, 13. the Church is his Mother, Gal. 4.26, 27. 2. There are subordinate and instrumental causes; such are Christs Ministers, who are therefore sometimes called Fa∣thers, 1 Cor. 4.15. and sometimes Mothers, Gal. 4.19. Com∣pare 1 Thes. 2.7. 3. The constitutive cause; a seed, which is partly material, namely the Word, 1 Pet. 1.23. partly spiri∣tual, the influence and efficacy of the Holy Ghost, John 3.5. without which the material seed or letter is ineffectual, 2 Cor. 3.6. 2. They agree, 2. In the manner of production. In both there is, 1. A conception; Christ spiritual (as well as personal) is e∣ver conceived by the power and overshadowing of the Holy Ghost. This holds true in other Generations, Matth. 13.23. unlesse the seed of the Word be received and retained, there can be no new man, no good and honest heart. 2. There is a formation. Gods Art is wonderful in the for∣mation of our outward man, Psalme 139.14, 15, 16. but far more stupendious in the formation of our inward man, Gal. 4.19. which is no mean part of the mystery of godlinesse, 1 Tim. 3.16. 3. Quickening, 1 Cor. 15.36. Eph. 2.2. Gal. 2.20. which is per∣ceived by spiritual motion. 4. Longing. Sometimes the Parents long, sometimes the childe; here both Parents and childe; How doth God, Christ and his Ministers long for the natural mans conversion? Ezek. 18.23. Luke 13.34. Phil. 1.8. Never did a teeming woman long more for fruit, or deliverance, than these do for a new-born babe in Christ. I, but this is not all, the Babe himself longs also, 1 Pet. 2.2. Compare 2 Cor. 7.11. 5. Travaile with paine. Oh the pangs of our spiritual Mo∣thers, Gal. 4.19. do not increase them by sticking in the birth! Hosea 13.13. Compare 2 Kings 19.3. Oh the feare and dan∣ger of miscarriage, both before and after this spiritual chil∣ding! Gal. 4.20, 11. & 1 Thes. 3.5. and in this miscarrying
age, how frequent is the curse of Ephraim? Hosea 9.13, 14. But is the Babe exempted from paine, sorrow and danger? In no wise. Every new-born babe comes crying into the world: The New, as well as the Old Creation, travails with paine, Rom. 8.22, 23. The foundation of the second Temple, is e∣ver laid in weeping, Ezra 3.12, 13. and God still layes the beames of his Chambers in the waters, &c. Psalme 104.3. Each of these may be a taste and touch of our new-birth; and prove the greatest part of Professors to be in an unregenerate estate. 3. They agree in the Subject produced, the new creature with new actions and new Priviledges. As in Generation, so in Regeneration, there is, 1. A new nature with new principles, 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15. In Generation there is still the same first matter, but under seve∣ral and successive formes; and when ever a new forme is intro∣duced, the Subject is called new: so in Regeneration, Old things passe away, behold all things b come new, ib. 2. There are new actions or operations, 2 Cor. 4.16. & Ephes. 4.22, 24. There's a new eye, a Circumcised eare, a spiritual taste, appetite, language, motion, &c. 3. And lastly. There are new priviledges. According to the degrees of Generation the degrees of Priviledge vary; a plant hath higher Priviledges than an Element, a beast than a plant, and a man than a beast: But how transcendent are the preroga∣tives of the new man? Heb. 12.22.—24. See more of this Head in the Explication of Adoption. Next follow the termes of difference or dissimilitude,The termes of difference. which may be applyed to each of the Heads of Agreement, the se∣cond Birth far excelling the first Birth, even in those Termes wherein both agree. But I passe that for brevities sake, and shall content my self to note the difference of both Births in four Properties. And, 1. Regeneration is rare: As few men are generated in com∣parison of all other creatures, so few persons are new borne, in comparison of those who are borne: No more are Regene∣rated, than shall be saved, and those are but few in comparison, Mat. 7.14. compare Luke 13.23.
2. Its far more secret than the natural birth; compare Eccl. 11.5. Joh. 3.8. & Colos. 3.3.John 3.4, 9. Whatever Solomon might understand of Generation, both he and every man else is very purblinde in dis∣cerning the nature of Regeneration; nor could the wisest or the holiest (excepting Christ) ever fathom either the mystery of ini∣quity, or this mystery of godlinesse. 3. Regeneration is constant and progressive; once born, and ever born; once born, and always bearing. Its like the Gene∣ration of the Son of God, who was begotten from eternity, and is still a begetting, Psal. 2.7. Hebr. 13.8. In natural Genera∣tion, sooner or later, death marrs the birth; but its other∣wise in Regeneration, he that is born again shall never dye; the soul and body may part; but Christ, grace and the soul shall never part. 4. Regeneration is spiritual; the very soul it self is carnal, if compared to the Spirit of Grace communicated in Regenerati∣on, Zech. 12.10. John 3.6. The grace of Regeneration, though but a quality, far exceeds the most refined substance, humane or angelical, as is evident in the Apostate Angels, who by their losse of holinesse became Fiends and Divels; yea, worse than nothing. This for the Explication of the termes in general, and in parti∣cular.Proof of the Doctrine. I proceed to the proof and demonstration of the doctrine; In the management whereof I shall need to go no further than my Text. 1. Adoption and Regenera∣tion are di∣stinct Sonships.And First, It will appear from the Text, that the Sonship by Adoption and Regeneration are distinct filiations, though never separated as to the subject; for whoever is a Childe by Adoption, is also a Childe by Regeneration, and contra. That they are di∣stinct filiations is evident; 1. Because they are noted as distinct; ver. 12. & 13. 2. Their foundations are distinct; the one is of gift, and by actual faith; the other is of birth. There's a wide difference be∣tween , applied to Adoption, and , which expresses Regeneration; compare Matth. 2.1. Joh. 1.2.14. & Gal. 4.4. where both words are joyned together. An adopted person is made a Son; but he is not born a Son as to the Adopter. Its evident then these two relations are distinct.
Secondly, It appears also from the Text,2. Believers are Gods children by both. . that every Believer is a childe of God by both these filiations; Namely, by Adoption and Regeneration. The former is evident, because Believers are dignified with a sonship which follows as a priviledge upon their faith, and that by deed of gift, which can be no other than the Sonship of Adoption; for the Sonship of Regeneration pre∣cedes actual believing. The second is as evident; for they who are born of God must needs be Sons by Regeneration, as he that is born of man, is a Son by Generation: But Believers are ex∣pressely said to be born of God, as is evident by comparing both the Verses of the Text, and therefore are Gods Sons by Regene∣ration as well as by Adoption. If you ask further, Whence it is that Believers are Sons of God by this double filiation; the Text holds forth a foure-fold ground, partly explicite, and partly im∣plicite. The first ground is free-grace; Adoption is a gift therefore not deserved; Regeneration cannot be deserved; 1. Because all merit is impossible to the creature;. 2. Because before Regeneration the creature was in a state of Corruption; and what can a corrupted creature deserve but wrath and curse? The second ground is Christs merit, whence probably the bestow∣ing of the priviledge of Adoption is singularly attributed to Christ, because he purchased our Adoption as well as our Regeneration, Ephes. 1.5. Tit. 3.5, 6. The third ground is Divine glory, which is the end of all Gods Works, much more of such gracious Dispensations as are Regeneration and Adoption, Ephes. 1.5, 6. Isaiah 43.21. The fourth ground is encouragement unto faith by the favours and priviledges vouchsafed unto Believers, 1 Tim. 1.16. And these are more implied than expressed in the Text, yet flow naturally enough out of it. 1. Of Information: About the sad condition of all unbelie∣vers, by rule of contraries. Are all Believers Gods children, &c? Then no unbeliever is a childe of God either by Regeneration or Adoption: Not by Regeneration, as having no life of grace, which initially infused is the new birth. And hence every unbe∣liever is,
First, A dead man, as dead in Law, Joh. 3.18. dead in sin, Ephes. 2.1. dead under wrath and curse, Joh. 3.36. Gal. 3.10. compared with Gen. 2.17. dead in expectation and fear, Hebr. 10.27. Whoever hath not a part in the second Birth, shall be sure to have a part in the second Death. Secondly, Unbelievers being not children of God, can expect nothing from God as a Father. Now the state of unregeneracy excludes them from both filiations; for unlesse God be a Father by Regeneration, he will be no Father by Adoption. Nor can unregenerate persons be children by Adoption because they have no faith. Hence they are Orphans, and so helplesse; for God will be no Father to such fatherlesse Children. But are they alto∣gether fatherlesse? No verily; therefore Thirdly, They have woful parents; namely, sin and disobedi∣ence, Ephes. 2.2. wrath and curse, Ephes. 2.3. & 2 Pet. 2, 14. and lastly, Satan, Joh. 8.44. who is also their God, 2 Cor. 4.4. as God is the Believers Father. Oh miserable wretches as desti∣tute of an heavenly Father; and more miserable as the woful children of most hellish and cursed Parents, who have nothing to make over to them but sin and cutse, and that they will do with a vengeance. 2. Of Humiliation: And that not only for profane Esau's, who despise their birthright; nor only for barely nominal and foederal children, Deut. 32.5, 19. compared with 1 Cor. 7.14. but even for such as groundedly call God Father, yet carry not themselves as children to such a Father. They are children of the greatest, wisest, and most Ancient King, (allude to Isa. 19.11.) yet walk not up to their principles as Regenerate Sons, nor up to their priviledges as Adopted Sons, as is evident by the following particulars. 1. They think not of, rejoyce not, glory not in, nor walk up to the dignity of Divine filiation; but are mean-spirited, and sink almost at every difficulty, Isa. 49.14, 15. the natural Son of God did not so. 2. They are palpably worldly, as if they had no Father to care for them, no hope nor portion but in this life, Jerem. 45.5. Matth. 6.28, 30. That worldlinesse which reigns in Natural men, tyrannizeth too often in Regenerate men.
3. They behave not themselves as Brethren of Christ, and as Children of one Father; compare Hebr. 2.11. with Ephes. 4. ver. 3. to ver. 6. & Malach. 2.10. How do Brethren fall out by the way? how great is their difference, when the matter of dif∣ference is so little? what quarrelling about the hedge, when both agree about the inheritance: We all professe to believe the holy Catholick Church, yet minde not the Unity of the Church; but rather the promoting of a party and faction in the Church, to the shame of Religion, the scandal of the weak, (who by reason of our differences are puzled which way to choose) and the opening of the mouth of the enemy. May we not justly feare (as one notes well) that the neglect of true Religion, and true Catholick unity is making way for Atheisme, or for Popish Catholick unity?Exhort. and 1. Unto stran∣gers. 3. Of Exhortation: And first, unto strangers; secondly, unto children. For the first, Art thou an Alien? Oh never rest till thou get into a state of Sonship; and to this end, 1. Be convinced of thy Orphanhood, and hellish Filiation. 2. Make good thy effectual vocation, justification, and reconciliation; this is done outwardly by consciencious attendance on the Ordinances; inwardly by the spiritual Baptisme and faith, Gal. 3. ver. 25. to ver. 29.2. Unto chil∣dren. Secondly, If thou be a childe of God, then 1. Evidence thy Sonship; this is done by evidencing thy voca∣tion, 2 Pet. 1.10. and is necessary. First, In order to Gods glo∣ry. Secondly, In order to thy duty and comfort. Thirdly, In order to others conversion and edification; neither of which will proceed to purpose, without some comfortable evidence of thy filiation. 2. Carry thy self as a child of God. This will blow up the fire of grace, light the candle of comfort, and beam forth in thy conver∣sation to the conviction, conversion and edification of others. To this end; First, Honour thy Father,Directions. Mal. 1.6. acknow∣ledge and testifie his dignity and excellency. This do, 1. Negatively; take heed of dishonouring God passively, by o∣mission: What childe can see or hear his father wronged? or con∣verse needlesly with dishonourers of his father? 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
2. Affirmatively; dishonour not God actively by commissi∣on, as David, Peter, and others did. How many, not only Bastards, but genuine Children are either ashamed of, or shame to their heavenly Father? especially in evil com∣pany. econdly, Obey thy Father, 1 Pet. 1.14. this flowes from the former, and is part of the honour Children owe to their Parents, (Ephes. 6.1, 2. Colos. 3.20.) and much more we to our heavenly Father, Hebr. 12.9. whose commands are all of them so holy, equitable, profitable; compare 2 Kings 5.13. Thirdly, Imitate thy Father, Ephes. 5.1, 2. This flows from both the former; and by it we do both honour and obey God. Children are apt to follow their Parents in Naturals, in Civils, in Morals; and if we be Gods children, wee must walk not only with him, but also like him, 1 Joh. 4.17. & 2.6. Especially imitate God in endeavouring to bring many to glory, Hebr. 2.10. Our imitation of God is a great part of our following the Lord, Ephes. 5.1, 2. Fourthly, Submit to his chastisements, Hebr. 12.7. As afflictions, piously born, are evidences of our Sonship, so the ho∣ly, humble, and fruitful bearing of them, is our duty as Children. Fifthly, Depend universally upon Divine provision and pro∣tection; casting all thy fears, cares and burdens upon thy Father, Matth. 6.25. & 1 Pet. 5.7. Psal. 55.22. Faith is both the mo∣ther and nurse of Adoption. Be not worse than thy own Child, who can live without carking upon thy fatherly love and pro∣vidence. Sixthly, Abound in filial affections; as love, delight, and fear to offend thy Father. Thy sin is exceedingly aggravated by the dgnity of the party offended, and offending, (as well as by Gods singular love to thee) Lev. 4.3, 13, 22, 27. & 21.9. God may well say to thee, Et tu fili! Seventhly, Wait and long for the perfecting of thy Adoption, Rom. 8.23. Here below, children cannot without impiety de∣sire and long for the full inheritance.
Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos. But its otherwise with heavenly heires, who could have no in∣heritance unlesse their Father lived, who inherit the whole toge∣ther with their Father; yea, their Father is their main inheritance, all other Comforts being but accessory. 4. Of Consolation, to Gods children; for the effectual application of which comfort, two things are very consi∣derable. First, The grounds of Consolation. Secondly, The tryals and discoveries of our filiation whereby we may be assured of our rght to, and interest in these comforts. The general ground of Consolation, is our filial priviledges;Filial privi∣ledges are. which are more particularly. 1. Fatherly affections, which for tendernesse and vehemency, are called mothers bowels, Isa. 49.15. As a Father God pities his children, Psal. 103.13. and spares them, Mal. 3.17. Parents bowels yearn most towards their weakest Children; and such a Fa∣ther is Christ, Matth. 12.20. We pity a Childe that is poysoned, not so a Serpent to whom poyson is natural. If thou favour not thy self in sin, God will favour and pity thee because of thy very infirmities, Hebr. 4.15. 2. Fatherly provision; God will never fall under the foule as∣persion of being worse than an Infidel, which he blames so much in unnatural Christians, 1 Tim. 5.8. This priviledge Relates to the necessities of Gods Children. Its well observed by a Mo∣dern Writer, To have no necessity at all, is Gods sole priviledge; To have necessities immediately supplied, is the happinesse of glo∣rified Saints; To have necessities mediately supplyed, is the comfor of Saints on earth; To have necessities without any sup∣ply, is the misery of the damned. Now Divine provision under∣takes for all these supplies, mediately here, immediately hereafter. Fatherly provisions are fourefold, answerable to the proportionable wants of Children. First, for maintenance; and God provides no lesse than all good things for his Children, Psal. 34.9, 10. & 1 Tim. 4.8. especially the best things. Compare Matth. 7.11. & Luk. 11.13.
Secondly, A calling. Gods care extends to the particular calling of every one of his Children, much more to their general calling, 1 Cor. 7.20. Rom. 1.7. Thirdly, Marriage; their civil marriages are made in heaven, Prov. 19.14. much more their spiritual match with Christ, Joh. 17.6, 9. Fourthly, an inheritance: Though their portion be not here below, yet God gives them portion in things here below, which sweetens and sanctifies all their enjoyments, Gen. 33.5. But the best portion here is nothing to their heavenly inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. 3. Fatherly protection, Deut. 32.6, 10, 11, 12. which is e∣ver seasonable for time, sutable for kinde, proportionable for degree, universal against every danger, and constant as long as danger threatneth: immediate by God himself, Isa. 27.3. Or mediate by Creatures, Ordinances, Providences, Comforts, Crosses, Graces, Temptations, &c. 2 Cor. 12.7. 4. Fatherly education, with all requisites thereunto; for which this Father alone can undertake; as First, Dociblenesse; God alone can make his children apt to learn: Secondly, Teaching, by precepts, direction, examples, illumi∣nation, manuduction, exercise and inclination, making them wil∣ling to learn, Job 36.22. Thirdly, Correction, and that 1. By chastisements, bodily or spiritual. 2. By crossing their will and worldly designs. 3. By teaching them to crosse their own wills, Psal. 94.12. This correction is a great branch of the Covenant, Psal. 89.30. — 34. All these priviledges God affords them gratis. Children pay nothing for provision, protection, education, &c. Matth. 17.26. 5. Fatherly Communion. A Father is very familiar: First, With his little Children. Secondly, With his grown Children. To assure us here∣of, God is pleased to take upon him a threefold Rela∣tion.
1. Of a Friend. 2. Of an Husband. 3. Of a Father; compare John 14.21, 23. & Revel. 3.20. This for the grounds of Consolation, which every one is ready to catch at; but only children have a right unto: This makes way for the last head, and a grand case of con∣science; Namely, How shall I make it out that I am a genuine Son, and not a Bastard or Stranger? In managing this discovery I shall mix together the tryals of both filiations, by Re∣generation and Adoption. And first, Sons are like their Father;1. Tryals of our sonship. they are usually the Natural and Moral Pictures of their Parents. This in its measure holds true of Gods Children, who resemble their Father. 1. In light, Ephes. 5.8. 2. In love, 1 John 4.7. 3. In life, Ephes. 4.18. & 5.1. Secondly, Children honour their Parents,2. Obedience is both a nega∣tive and affir∣mative tryal, John 8.47. Mal. 1.6. and that 1. By Reverence, 1 Pet. 1.17. 2. By Obedience, 1 Pet. 1.14. 3. By pliablenesse, Rom. 8.14. Slaves are driven, but Chil∣dren are led. 4. By coming oft into, and delighting in his presence; Compare Job 1.6. & Pal. 139.18. Thirdly, We may know our Sonship by our spirit; every Childe of God hath 1. A Spirit of faith and dependance, 2 Cor. 4.13. 2. A Spirit of prayer, Rom. 8.15. The first cry af∣ter the New Birth, is Abba, Father, Acts 9.11. God hath no Childe but can ask his heavenly Father blessing. 3. A Spirit of Evidence, Rom. 8.16. Ephes. 1.13, 14. & 4.30. The Spirit alwayes witnesseth, though his witnesse be not alwayes heard. 4. A Spirit of liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. of liberty from the bon∣dage of sin, Satan, the world and fear, Joh. 8.32. Hebr. 2.15. of liberty to Christ and duty, Psal. 119.32. 5. A Spirit of waiting, Rom. 8.23.
Sixthly and lastly, A Spirit of love; not only to God and his children, 1 John 5.2. but also to our very enemies, Mat. 5.44, 45. Hence Gods Children, (like their Father) are peace-ma∣kers, Mat. 5.9. To conclude; Art thou like God? dost thou honour God as a Father? hast thou the Spirit of God? then mayst thou comfor∣tably claime and enjoy all the forementioned priviledges, and infinitely more than heart can conceive, or tongue expresse. Art thou covetous? here is a treasure for thee; Art thou ambitious? here is the highest honour. Art thou voluptuous? here is an Oce∣an of pleasure. Art thou in danger? here is an Ark and Haven of security; all these in the hand of filiation, and that above any created desire or comprehension, with infinite security to all eternity.
OF Saving Faith. ACTS 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved. THe words are the satisfactory Answer of Paul and Silas to their Keepers serious demand, to whose strictest care and custody they were committed by the Magistrates of Philippi upon the complaint of the covetous Masters of a gainful Servant-maid possessed with a spirit of Divination, upon whom the Apostle wrought an undesired and displeasing cure, after eminent Testimo∣ny born by her to them and their Doctrine; God answereth their couragious singing in Prison by an earthquake shaking the founda∣tions of the house, and the stout heart of the Jaylor; the doors were opened to, and fetters fell off from the prisoners, and therewith the door of the keepers soul was opened, and his fetters of igno∣rance and corruptions in which he was holden captive by Satan were broken. At first (poor man!) he was afflicted with fear of his Prisoners escaping, so as to make attempt against his own natural life; not knowing that God intended good by all, and to make his Prisoners his Releasers and Deliverers; But by and by
his amazement and trouble strikes the right way, and he is not only willing to keep a natural life, but is desirous of, and inqui∣sitive after an eternal life; Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe, &c. My allotted work at this time is from this clear and full Text to speak of Saving Faith; in the entry whereof let me once for all premise; First, I purposely wave Controversies, as wanting both time and fitness to be an Umpire, and give a final decision. Secondly, I shall endeavor to confine my discourse to my Subject, without trespassing upon others ground, by repeating what belongs to preceding, or preventing what belongs to following Subjects. Thirdly, I am not solicitous about, nor is it possible to please all in method and terms belonging to it (those :) Method and words I always account are servants to matter. Fourthly, In this great part of the Body of Christian Religi∣on, I can only shew the Sceleton, without reading an Explanatory Lecture; or give the bones and sinews without cloathing them with a due proportion of flesh, for that would take up too much room. To engage attention, consider, This is that greatJoh. 6.29. Work of God, a main part of the1 Tim. 3.16. Mystery of Godliness, aHeb. 6.1. Principle and foundation; at this when excelling,Mat. 8.10. Christ wondered; by thisRom. 4.20. Glory is every way given to God; to thisMark 9 23. Heb. 11.33. all things are pos∣sible (it sharing with God in his otherwiseMat. 19.26. incommunicable Om∣nipotency) and accordingly theMat. 9.22. Effects of the Divine Power are attributed unto Faith;2 Pet. 1.1. Pretious andJam. 2.5. enriching Faith, though in it self, and to its Subject the most indigent and empty∣ing Grace; Poor, yet making rich; having nothing, yet entitling to all things. This is that which all the promises, types, and pre∣figurations of the Messiah did lead the Patriarchs unto, and by which they obtained a good report:Heb. 11.2. This is the end of the Law (subordinate unto Christ, Rom. 10.4.) and the sum of the Go∣spel, commonly named and pretended to, but little known, and rightly understood,Luk. 18.8. less enjoyed and exercised in the World.
I shall reduce all to these Six Heads, The Nature, Subject, Causes, Effects, Properties, and Opposites of Faith. To open the Nature of it,1. Nature. I shall remove the ambiguity of phrase, and state what I shall prosecute by giving the Distincti∣ons and Description of it. Fides quae creditur;Distinctions Faith which we believe is the Doctrine of the Gospel, or any word of God; yea, the essential Word of God,Gal. 3.23. the promised Seed, the Object of Faith, is by that word under∣stood by learned persons. 1. Fides qua creditur, Faith by which we believe; and this (to begin at the remotest and meanest) is ei∣ther First, Without knowledge, the ignorant implicite Faith and profession of many owning Christ as the founder of their Order and way; but this is not right, which only distinguisheth Christi∣ans from others. Secondly, With some knowledge without assent (which scarce de∣serves the name of Faith) and this is a Profession of the Faith, either customary, following education and example; or compul∣sive, through fear; or gainful, for outward advantages, as theirs that followed Christ for the loaves, and Simon Magus's. Thirdly, With knowledge and assent, of which some Faith re∣specteth the Truth of God (for Doctrine sake I may thus distin∣guish) which is called Historical;Jam. 2.19. thus the Devils believe and tremble; wicked men believe and sometimes tremble, and some∣times rejoyce as if they had enough; the only difference is the want of applicability to the Devils; in neither is affection to the Revealer or things revealed: This is not right though it be∣lieve never so rightly concerning Christs Person, Natures, Offi∣ces, &c. Some Faith respecteth the Truth and power of God, and hath for its ground ordinarily some special Word,Mat. 10 8. and this is called Faith of Miracles; and this is either active, Matth. 17.20. (which is pecu∣liarly the Faith of Miracles, and that to which the special Word refers) or passive, Act. 14.9. and 3.16. and which the woman
with the bloody issue had. The Promises that were the ground of this Faith, were peculiarly suitable to those times, and now not improveable, or not ordinarily; and the Faith it self though grounded on a special word, yet is but a common gift (in it self) as opposed to saving; as appeareth in Judas, and those that at last would cry Lord,Mat. 7.22. Lord; and in the nine Lepers: Though some∣times indeed it had the actings of the best, even Saving Faith twisted with it, Mat. 8.10.15.28. Some Faith respecteth the Truth, Power, and Goodness of God, and this grounded upon General Promises, and words of encou∣ragement of an unlimited truth and concernment to time and persons:Mat. 6. from vers. 25. Now this respecteth either the General love of God to his Creatures, and Man as a peculiar one, affording support, pre∣servation, provision necessary; or the peculiar love of God to man through the undertakings of Christ, making man to look for better things than the effects of common providence, even God himself for his portion, and full happiness in him. Now that bold affiane is not true Faith, whereby men carry it at that rate of con∣fidence as if Christ died to save all from hell, that are not willing to go thither; for in some it is without savor and af∣fections suitable (which I may call altogether fained Faith) as in the generality of Formalists now, who presume all is well, God loveth them, and Christ died for them. In others it is joyned with a savory gust and relish of the Word and Pro∣mise; which in regard of its continuance, and thereby usefulness to its end Salvation (though I make not that the only difference) is called either temporary, springing from sleighty and perishing causes, as that of theLuk. 8.13. stony ground, and theMat. 25.8. Virgins: Or else lasting, durable, altogether true and1 Tim: 1.5. unfeigned, justifying and saving Faith. This indeed is butEphes: 4.5. one, as well as the Object; and therefore those Peter wrote to, had2 Pet: 1.1. obtained like precious Faith; yet differeth in degrees andRom: 12.3. measure; in some it isMark 9.24. small andIsa: 42.3. weak, as a bruised reed; through dimness and scantiness of know∣ledge; (as a building laid upon a weak or narrow foundation can∣not be strong) weakness of assent; strength of temptations; natural timorousness,Rom: 4.19, 20. Act: 6. suspiciousness and lowness of spirit: In others it is strong, and they are full of Faith, as Steven, having clear and large knowledge, &c. Both weaker and stronger may be consider∣ed either as Habitual in the root and principle, or Actual as ex∣ercised toward Christ and the promises.
For the Definition or Description of Faith, I shall not heap up words in mentioning many, but take up with that full and excel∣lent one of the late Judicious Assemby, in their larger Cate∣chism (that Christians may with more readiness and safety enter∣tain it.)Description. Faith is a Saving Grace, wrought in the heart of a sinner by the Spirit and Word of God, whereby he being convinced of his sin and misery, and of the disability in himself and all other creatures to recover him out of that lost condition, not only assenteth to the truth of the promise of the Gospel, but receiveth and resteth upon Christ and his righteousness therein held forth for pardon of sin, and for the a cepting and accounting of his person righteous in the sight of God for salvation. It hath here for its Genus (or general and common nature) a Grace, it being compared with Love, Hope, &c. they herein agree. The word Grace distinguisheth it from other Habits even good and vertuous that are acquired; this is a Grace or gracious dis∣position or habit infused. A Saving Grace to distinguish it from, and set it above common Grace, and make it one of those better things that accompany salvation.Heb: 6.9. The Subject is twofold, Subjectum Recipiens, & Occupans;2. Subject. Subjectum recipi ns. The first the Subject receiving it, or in which it is, most ordinarily called the Subject, and this is The heart of man, a sinner elected and called. 1. It is Man that believeth, not Angels; for of their Faith we have no ground to speak. It is Man; not God, and the Spirit in us, but man through them. Yea, Man singularly, not of a∣nother, but of him that hopeth for life; the Just shall live by HIS Faith, not by anothers. 2. It is the Heart of man; with the heart man believeth;Rom: 10.10. the Heart includeth Will and Affections; it is not the Ʋnderstanding onely, nor so much, though that necessarily makes way; Coming to Christ is a spontaneous motion of Will and Affections renewed, and this is beleiving: there is assent to things revealed as true; and acceptance of things offered as good, receiving,Joh: 1.12. embracing with suitable affections to the Revealer and things revealed. 3. The heart of a man a sinner; for man upright is not capable of this Faith, which is in God through a Mediator: Believing
the word of another concerning restoral and reparation speaketh loss and decay; acceptance of alms, poverty. Indeed Adam might and must thus far exercise Faith in beleiving and trusting God (it belongeth to the first commandment) that he continuing upright, there would be a continuation of Gods love and his happiness; but Faith apprehending the promise of God of acceptation through the righteousness of another, necessarily speaketh man a sinner,Rom. 4.5. as Justification which is by Faith is of the ungodly. Rom. 11.7.4. The heart of man a sinner elected; the election obtained it, the rest were hardned,Tit. 1.1. and therefore is it called the Faith of Gods elect. Remarkable is that expression, As many as were ordained unto life beleived;Act. 13.48. and our Lord saith, all that the Father giveth him come unto him;Joh 6.37. and the Jews not believing was because they were not his sheep, and therefore heard not his voyce. 5. The heart of man a sinner elected and called, is the Subject of Faith.Rom. 10.17. Faith is by hearing; it is the souls answer to, and compliance with Gods call; God vailing his omnipotency under, and putting it forth with words of command. Uncalled and un∣believers are the same; and therefore calling is one of the links of the golden chain of Salvation,Rom. 8.28, 30. and goeth before Justification by Faith; in which Call, the Terminus â quo is Satan, sin, mi∣sery, death, we are called from; and the Terminus àd quem we are called to, Christ, God, Holiness, and Life. Subjectum Occupans. Materiale.The Subject about which Faith is employed, or Object; that which and in which we believe, is not God immediately though pri∣marily, Heb. 6.1. but Christ immediately, and the Promises which are in him yea and amen,2 Cor. 1.20. and God through Christ, 1 Pet. 1.21. he that believeth not in the Son, believeth not in the Father; and he that hath not the Son hath not the Father;Act. 20.21. Repentance is pe∣culiarly referred to God, and Faith to the Lord Jesus Christ. Faith also and the Promises,Heb. 10.23. or God through Christ promising, are Correlates; and of all Promises those that concern righte∣ousness and life through the blood of a Mediator, are the peculiar object.Act. 10.43. 1 Joh. 5.10, 11. Believing the witness of remission, and the recrod of giving eternal li e is mentioned: it is called beleeving the Gospel, , glad tidings in the Gospel, promises of remission and salvation.Mark 1.16. It is true that Faith doth believe and apply every word of God: Some things reductively and secondarily are the object of Faith in a sequacious Spirit, credulous to whatever is con∣tained
in Scripture, as that Abimelech had a wife, &c.Gen: 20. Some things are more directly the Word of God expressed and asserted in the Hi∣story of the Bible, yet being believed have not an immediate connexion with Justification and Salvation thereby: But the grand testimony of and through Christ, Faith as saving princi∣pally respecteth, and as assenting in the mind looks upon the Promise, as accepting in the Will and Affections respecteth Christ. The ground on which we believe,Formale. called the Formal Object of Faith, shall be referred to the Externally moving Cause to be∣lieve; of which afterwards. Of all Four Causes I shall speak in order,3. Causes. Efficient. Principal. and first of the Effi∣cient, which is either Principal or less Principal. The Prin∣cipal Cause may be considered, as that from which the beginning, acting, continuance, growth, and perfection of Faith do proceed; and this is the Blessed Trinity, or God the Father through the Son by the Spirit. 1. The beginning, root, and habit of Faith is from God; if of everyPhil: 1.6. good work, andJam: 1.17. gift, then this; and therefore it is called theEphes: 2.8: gift of God; and to you it isPhil: 1.29. given to be∣lieve;Heb: 12.2. Jesus also is called the Author; this is wrought by the Spirit, it is called one of theGal: 5.22: 2 Cor: 4.13. fruits thereof, and he called the (g) Spirit of Faith, for indeed the word and letter is dead, the Spirit quickneth; and this powerfully and certainly, yet sweetly, making willing to beleive in the day of his power;Psal: 110.3. 2 Cor: 6.7. & 10.4. for it is not the Word of truth only, but the power of God that made the A∣postles warfare so victorious in subduing souls to the obedience of the Faith; It is so great a thing to bring blind, proud, self-de∣stroying man to own Gods way of Salvation by the righteousness of another, to accept all from another, and him a crucified Saviour, that it is a great part of the great mystery of godliness,1 Tim: 3.16. that Christ should be believed on in the world; so that it needs an exceeding greatness of Divine Power,Ephes; 1.19. the working of a mighty power in them that beleive, even such as raised Christ from the dead. , est facultas ipsa: , ipsius sese exerentis virtus; , ipsi∣sius effectus sive . Bez: in loc. though other sence is put upon that place, yet by many judicious Expositors is this sence fol∣lowed, which we find in the Gr. Schol.
, &c. None can come to the Son except the Father draw them,Joh. 6.44. in which the Au∣thor and powerful manner of operation in causing Faith are con∣tained. And all this in effectual calling and regeneration, (before which is no part and degree, no act and demonstration of spiri∣tual life,Ephes. 2.1. Joh. 1.12, 13. Act. 14.27. for we are dead:) which is not of him that willeth, not of flesh and blood, and the will of man, but of God, and this is spoken of the Believer, to whom God opens the door of Faith. 2. The actings, and operations of Faith are from God; as in him we live,Joh. 15.5. so we move, and without him can do nothing; he worketh to will and to do ( Velle bonum, aeque ac voluntatem bonam) he worketh habit and principle, and by supervening Grace exciteth to, and assisteth in acting it. 3. The continuance and perseverance of Faith are from above: Christ causeth our Faith not to fail,Luk. 22.32. 1 Pet. 1.5. and we are kept by Gods mighty power through Faith unto Salvation, and Faith is by the same preserved: The1 Thess. 5.23, 24. faithful God, that effectually calls, will safely keep, inJude 8. Jesus Christ1 Cor. 1.8. and confirm to the end; for this is theJoh. 17.11, 12, 24. desire of the Son unto the Father, andJoh. 6.39. Mar. 9.24. Luk. 17.5. will of the Father concerning the Son. 4. The growth and increase of Faith are from God, who giveth all increase; and therefore it was well prayed for unto the Lord to help unbelief, and to increase Faith. 5. The perfection of Faith is from God and Christ; Jesus is as the author,Heb. 12.2. so the finisher of our Faith; and this either by bringing it to its , and highest degree it can reach, or is ne∣cessary for the Saints it should reach to in the world, fulfilling all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of Faith with power,Phil. 1.6. and because he hath begun, perfecting it, . Or by perfecting it in vision,1 Pet. 1.9. for it's God that gives the end of our Faith, Salvation. Less Princi∣pal.The Less Principal Efficient Causes are either Impulsive or In∣strumental. Impulsive.The Impulsive or Moving Cause, is either External or In∣ternal. The Inwardly moving Cause, Proegumena, is 1. On Gods part, his free grace and love, self-moving goodness; in which sence it is called theEphes. 2.8. gift of God, and theRom. 11.7. election obtain it, even
those that are ordained to life believe.Act. 13.48. Not improvement of Rea∣son, not use of means appointed for the attainment of Faith, that merit this gift, but God worketh all of his own good pleasure,Phil. 2.13. , which appears in that not many noble, and wise, but poor receive the Gospel. 2. On the sinners part, who doth believe, and being quickned, moveth; acted, acteth, and that freely, the moving Cause is sence of misery, and undonness without Christ, and interest in the pro∣mise through Faith, there being no other name,Act. 4.12. Joh. 3.18. and he that be∣lieveth not being condemned: So that here is the necessary condi∣tion, and causa sine qua non, of Faith, sense of misery and ina∣bility in self, and all creatures to recover a man out of his lost e∣state, whence ariseth renouncing and throwing away all our own righteousnesses, those filthy rags,Isa. 64.6. Phil. 3.9. not having or not depending upon our own righteousness, or any thing short of Christ. The outwardly Moving Cause, Procatarctica. 1. On Gods part to give Faith, is Christ and his merit; for every good gift is through Christ: Omne donum gratiae Dei in Christo est. Ambr. in Ephes. 1. As from the father of lights, so through the the Sun of righteousness; none come to the Father, nothing cometh from the Father but by him, whom by this means the Father will make to be honored as himself.Joh. 5.23. As salvation was purchased by Christ upon terms of believing, so Faith also whereby we lay hold upon Christ for Salvation: and therefore that Spirit which is cal∣led the Spirit of Faith is by Christ promised, upon his purchase making and ascending to be sent to convince the world of that great sin of unbelief.Joh. 16.9. 2. The externally moving Cause to believe on the sinners part (which may be called the Formal Object) is two∣fold. 1. As to God and his Word, Gods Veracity, and infallible truth,Heb. 4.13. & 6.18. Titus 1.2. 1 Thess. 2.13. Joh. 3.33. Heb. 10.23. he can neither be deceived, nor deceive; God which cannot lye hath promised, is joyned to Hope, and therefore Faith. He that believeth receiveth the Word of God as the word of God, and seteth to his seal that God is true, accounting him faithful that hath promised; the ground of Faith being Gods faithfulness, and the object the Promise. God's having spoken, , was enough to Abraham,Rom. 4.17, 18. in a difficult case. Here is the Resolutio fidei into its stable founda∣dation, Gods unquestionable Truth, who is Prima veritas,
& ,1 Joh: 5.10: so that the believer hath the witness in himself, and his evidence is better, and assent stronger, as to his , than any ones, as to things apprehended by sence, , or by reason, : Therefore sometimes divine testimony is added to rational discovery (as in this point, that there is another life, &c.) because of the certainty and distinctness of knowledge by revelation, above all other ways. 2. As to Christ offered in and by the Promise (for more full explanations sake, I sever the consideration of God promising, and Christ offered, which otherwise I would always unite) the moving Cause of Faith in the sinner,Heb: 7.25. is his power, as an All-sufficient Saviour, able to save to the uttermost, being anointed with authority and abilities, commission and qualifications for that work: and his love to sinners, having laid down his life for them,Joh: 6.37. he will in no wise cast them out that come to him by Faith. These are the solid props of a true Christians Faith, which make the former (believing God and the Word) not to be a wavering opinion, and the latter (believing in Christ) not an adventurous hazard.Instrumental Cause. The Instrumental Cause of Faith, is either the begetting or preserving Cause. 1. The Instrument by which the Spirit of God produceth Faith is the Word of God, in whatever way coming to us, to beJoh: 5.38. Luke 2.19:51. consi∣dered and meditated on by us: The Word1 Joh: 3.15. read by us or to us, the Word expounded and enforced by the Publick Ordinance, preaching Ex Officio; the private Ordinance, conference ex fra∣ternâ charitate. By believing the soul answereth to Gods call, which supposeth a Word,Ro. 10.8, 14, 17 therefore it is called the Word and Do∣ctrine of Faith; and Faith cometh by hearing, men cannot be∣lieve in him of whom they have not heard: Christ must be preach∣ed,1 Tim: 3.16, Rom: 1.16. before believed on; for by the Gospel preached, God puts forth his power in making men believe to salvation, the efficacy whereof (it being accompanied with that spiritual and powerful demon∣stration,1 Cor: 1.18, 21 &c. mentioned 1 Cor. 2.4.) the Apostle to the Corinthians explaineth and extolleth, God having in due time manifested his Word through preaching.Tit. 1.3. Act: 24.14. Now this Instrument is All the word of God, not excluding the Law from being the means as well as the object of Faith;Gal: 3.21, 22. for the Law is a useful Schoolmaster to prepare us for Christ, driving us out of our selves, and following us with
the lashes of the Curse, that we may run to the Grace of the Go∣spel, and make mention of Christs righteousness only.Psal: 71.16. So that knowledge must alway go before Faith; we must know whom, what, and wherefore we believe,2. Tim: 1.12. Ephes: 1.18, 19 and give a reason of our faith and hope: the eyes of the mind enlightning, goes before the working of Gods power in our believing: so Pauls sending was to turn from darkness to light, before Faith in Christ is mentioned:Act: 26.18. Joh: 6.40. every one that seeth the Son and believeth on him, &c. a seeing in Scripture light makes way: In so much that the knowledge of the Word and Christ, as the means to get Faith,Joh: 17.3. Isa: 53.11. is highly advanced and called life eternal; yea, put for believing to which it leads, by his knowledge, Objectivè. Or the knowledge of him, shall my servant justifie many. Secondly, The Instrumental Causes of Faiths maintenance and en∣crease are, 1. The Word of God, Causa procreans & conservans: Ab iis∣dem nutrimur ex quibus constamus, It is seed to beget,1 Pet: 2.2. and milk for growth in babes; yea, strong meat for strong ones in Christ. 2. Sacraments, as Seals of the righteousness of Faith, Tesserae, and pledges of Gods love superadded to his promise. They signifie and help to clear the understanding, and so consequently promote Faith: they seal and confirm (seals are for this end to confirm the Faith of him to whom the Deed is delivered:) and ('tis usually said by learned Divines) they actually exhibit for our growth by feeding. 3. Prayer, as in that man, Lord help mine unbelief;Mark 9.24. 2 Thes: 1.10, 11 and the Disciples, Lord encrease our faith; and St. Paul for the Thessalo∣nians. Quoties de Fidei constantia (& incremento) agitur, ad preces confugiendum est. Calv. in Jud. 20. v. I might add another Ternary of means for the encrease of faith, inferior to the former. 1. The Cross, Afflictions, Temptations;1 Pet: 1.7. Therefore the trial of Faith is called pr cious, because it burnisheth and encreaseth pre∣cious Faith; the trial of Faith worketh patience,Jam: 1.3. patience expe∣rience, and that is a good ground for more Hope and Faith;Rom: 5.4. they are conjoyned, 2 Thess. 1.3, 4. 2. By frequent actings and exercise, Faith is encreased: though Graces beginning is different, yet their improvement is in great measure after the way of other habits.
3. By seeing and considering the Example of others, the cloud of Witnesses,Heb. 12.1, 2. Heb. 13.7. whose Faith the Apostolical command is that we follow: Thus many were of weak made strong, beholding the faith of the Martyrs, and the eminent effects of it. Material Cause.For the Material Cause of Faith; Genus habet rationem ma∣teriae; that which is its general and common nature, wherein it agrees with others is the matter of it; Now as Saving Grace in the Description was the Genus wherein it agrees with other Graces; so comparing true Saving Faith with other Faiths, that may to∣lerably pretend to the name, Assent is the common nature and matter of it, even the nearest and immediate Genus; Faith hi∣storical, of miracles, temporary, all have Assent, but not all As∣sent belongeth to true Faith. There must not only be knowledge , but also , acknowledgement, as necessary and essenti∣al to Faith,Col. 2.2. 2 Tim. 3.14. and that arising from the full assurance of understanding, : There must be a Faith Doctrinal and Assertive, as the foundation of Faith applicative and fiducial: if I assent not to the promise of another as true, I cannot rely upon the person for the good mentioned. There is a double acknowledge∣ment (I mean not verbal profession,) 1. That the things reveal∣ed in Scripture, and by us known are of God: 2. That they are true (which naturally floweth from the former) and shall all be fulfilled:Rom. 4.21. Abraham was perswaded before he trusted. Now to this end that this full assent and acknowledgement of the mind, which is a necessary ingredient of true Faith, may be had, The Divine Authority of the Scriptures, confirmed by miracles and other characters, is to be studied, that we may build our Assent, and thereby our Faith upon a stable foundation. Formal Cause.The Formal Cause, which doth straiten the general nature of Faith, and distinguish true Saving Faith from all other Faiths (forma vel aliquid formae analogum ponitur differentiae loco) in which may be Notitia & Assensus, is Fiducial receiving of Christ offered by God in the Promises of the Gospel. In which are two things formally constitutive of Saving Faith. 1. Acceptation of Christ and the Promises; Faith is that hand which doth touch the top of the golden Scepter, or that closeth with and entertaineth what God offereth, receiving Christ; hence a weak Faith is true Faith and saving,Joh. 1.12. as well as strong, be∣cause it indeed receiveth the gift, though with a trembling hand:
This is the coming unto Christ,Joh. 6.35. and appropriating what before lay in common; the applying what before was only applicable, making the soul to say with Thomas, believing,Joh. 20.28. My Lord and my God. Zanch. in Coloss. 2.6. Sicut accepistis, & quomodo acci∣pitur? Fide. So the good things purchased by Christ, and fol∣lowing upon our receiving of Christ, are said to be received as the atonement, abundance of grace, the gift of righteousness,Ro. 5.11.17. , & , fidei videl. manu oblata , and ex∣presly remission of sin, is said to be received by Faith.Act. 26.18. 2. Innitency, recumbency of soul upon a Christ received, entrusting him entirely with,2 Tim. 1.12. Isa. 50.10. Cant. 8.5. and committing to him the care of Soul and salvation, staying the soul upon him, leaning upon the beloved, rouling the soul upon him, resting with whole weight upon him, as faithful, able, loving: and this is truly fiducia; this is truly Credere in Christum, To believe in or upon Christ; more than Credere Christum, & Christo, to believe a Christ (that he is) and to believe Christ (or his word.) It is a phrase in Prophane wri∣ters unusual, as the thing it self, salvation by Faith was unknown. To this belong those expressions of the eyes being toward God,2 Chron. 20.12 Psal. 123.2. Isa. 45.22. Joh. 3.14, 15. and looking to him: even as the Serpent was lifted up, to be looked up∣on with expectation of healing vertue; so Christ to be looked unto by the Soul, with a longing expectation and confident de∣pendance. The End of Faith is the glory of God in mans salvation,Final Cause. the one as supream and ultimate, the other as subordinate: that God might save his Creature to whom he wished well in a way of demonstration and exaltation of his glorious justice and mercy, therefore was Saving Faith and Salvation by Faith ordained. Justice, that he might be just,Rom. 3.26. that is demonstrated and declared to be just (as Psal, 51.6.) both in not pardoning without satisfaction, and there∣fore punishing sin upon the Surety; and then in pardoning the sinner through faith, uniting to, and interesting in the Surety, therefore saith the Apostle, God is faithful and just to forgive. Mecy, in that he accepteth the satisfaction of another, and im∣puteth his righteousness to the sinner, by Faith receiving it: and that he found out and provided alone this way of salvation by Faith: It was of Faith, that it might be of Grace,Rom. 4.16. Ephes. 2.8. for by Grace are we saved through faith: and thereby works, as meriting, and so mans confi∣dence in, and boasting of himself are excluded,Rom. 27. and Gods glory en∣tirely
secured and advanced by mens submiting to the righteous∣ness of God by Faith;Rom: 10.3. Hab: 2.4. Faith and Pride being utterly inconsistent. Indeed trusting God upon his bare word, not having merit nor hu∣mane probability,Rom: 4.20. Heb: 10.39. 1 Pet: 1.9. giveth great glory to God. That Mans Salva∣tion is an end of Faith, all the New Testament witnesseth, even that we believe to the saving of our souls, and receive the end of our Faith, in the salvation of our Souls. 4. Effects.The Effects (more proper or less proper) and Consequents of true Faith. Col: 3.4.1. Union with Christ, who is our life, and so we live by Faith: What can more necessarily and immediately follow upon the of∣fer on Gods part in the Gospel of Christ to be ours, and our recei∣ving him by Faith, than union to his person, though no personal u∣nion.2 Cor: 13.5. Ephes: 3.17. Hence having Christ in us, and our being in the Faith, are made the same, because Christ dwelleth in our hearts by Faith. Whatever the Spirit on Christs part doth before by way of uniting us to Christ, apprehending us for Christ Jesus (as some under∣stand, Phil. 3.12.) Faith is the hand on our part that receives, and the band that fastneth Christ to us: This I take to be the fruit of the first consummate Vital act of the quickned soul; and then is the mariage knot tied. 2. Hence follow Remission of sins, and justification of the person through Christ and his righteousness apprehended and appropriated. This Peter testifies to be the witness of the Prophets,Act: 10.43. even that through his name, whosoever believeth in him, shall receive remission of sins: The pardoned alone live, for the guilty are dead in Law, which the people sensibly bewailed in saying, if our iniquities be upon us,Ezek: 33.10. and we pine away in them, how shall we then live? Joyn this with our living by Faith, and you see Faiths necessity and effi∣cacy towards pardon. It was St. Pauls ardent desire, that he having won Christ (got him, been united to him) might be found in him, having the righteousness which is of God through faith in Christ. Nothing more frequent than the assertions and demon∣strations of Justification by Faith; in S. Pauls Epistles, especially to the Romans and Galatians: The manner of Faiths efficacy where∣in, is by a judicious person of our own well expressed, for the cutting off those two eager controversies about the Instrumentality and conditionality of Faith. It is (saith he) the general opinion
of the Orthodox, wherein all agree, That Faith is a means ap∣pointed by God, in the use whereof the chi dr n of men are made par∣takers of Justification. 3. Adoption; That our receiving into the number, and having a right to the Priviledges of the Sons of God (the Spirit of A∣doption, boldness at the Throne of Grace, present supply, future inheritance) is the fruit and product of Faith, appears from Scripture and consequence. To as many as received him,Joh. 1.12. or be∣lieved on his name, gave he power to become the Sons of God. For indeed we being by Faith united to Christ, and the faultiness of our persons taken away through Christ, what more immediate∣ly follows from this loveliness in him, and oneness with him, than communication of Sonship, which cannot be in that way that Christ is a Son,Ephes. 1.5.6. and therefore is by the Adoption of children by Jesus Christ: Adoption therefore is the effect of Faith, through uni∣on to, and Justification through Christ, intermediately caused thereby; Causa causae est causa causati. 4. Audience and answer of prayer: Our Lord hath given univer∣sal proof to this,Mat. 21.22. in assuring that all things whatsoever shall be asked in prayer, believing, shall be received: By St. James,Jam. 1.6, 7. asking in Faith, without wavering, is required, and he that wavereth is bid not to think he shall receive any thing. Yea,Jam. 5.15. the efficacy of the prayer of Faith is by him asserted; and throughout Scripture by remarkable expressions and instances abundantly confirmed and proved. Fidelem si putaveris, facies, is true as to God,Sen. as well as man. And that of the Roman Historian,Liv. Vult sibi quis∣que credi, & habita fides ipsam plerumque obligat fidem. But it doth not produce this eminent effect, as to Prayer only, rendring it acceptable; but also, 5. Acceptance to the person in all services, together with the di∣stinction of, and denomination of Good given to habits and actions flowes from Faith.Heb. 11.6. vers. 4. vers. 5. Without Faith it is universally and utterly impossible to please God. By Faith our Sacrifices become excellent, and we with them, we and they please God; and therefore it is not without good reason usually accounted that Wedding garment which renders our presence welcome to the Lord in any Ordinance or service.Mat. 22.11. Faith taketh away the savor of the flesh (which what∣soever is born of the flesh hath) and gives a divine tincture and relish: it is like a vein of gold running through all duties, which makes
them precious, though still they be somewhat earthly. That it is Cha∣racteristically denominative of other Graces, and distinctive of them fom moral vertues, those splendida vitia, may appear, if it be consi∣dered, That even that eminent Grace of Love is nothing without Faith,1 Cor. 13.2. Gal. 5.6. (as no Faith without it could be any thing) and doth no∣thing without it, Faith worketh by Love; not Love, but Faith by it; Faith being first and chief in being and working: Humility was eminent in the woman and Centurion,Mat. 15.27, 28 Mat. 8.8, 10. yet not Humility, but Faith was taken notice of; this being the main tree, that a sprig from its root, receiving its excellency from it, and by faith accompanying and overtopping it, becoming true humility, and not a degenerate meanness, and abject lowness of Spirit. Sorrow for sin would not deserve the name of Repentance, nor Confessi∣on be ingenuous, but for the hand of Faith laid on the head of the Scape-goat: Faith believing Gods promise, concerning the Mo∣deration, Sanctification, removal of Affliction, worketh in a way of Patience,Jam. 1.3. and this Faith accompanying ennobles Christi∣an Patience, and makes it not to be Obstinacy, or Insensibi∣lity: So it makes a Christians contempt of the World, not to be a Vain-glorious pretence, or a sullen morose reservedness: Thus might we run through many more. 6. Conquest over Adversaries, and hinderances in the way to heaven.Isa. 9.6. Heb. 2.10. Ephes: 6.16. Faith in the mighty God, the Captain of our salvation, who hath led captivity captive, disarmed the powers of darkness, and triumphed over them (and we in him our head) makes cou∣ragious, and that victorious, for if we resist, the General of the adverse party will flee;Jam. 4.7. 1. Pet. 5.9. only we must resist him stedfast in the Faith, holding up that shield, that will repel and quench all his darts: For the life of sence, in the lusts of the flesh and of the eye,2 Cor. 5.7. and the pride of life; the life of Faith is diametrically oppo∣site thereto, (by Faith not sight, &c.) & doth necessarily weaken it, as we find in those Worthies, Heb. 11. that by Faith denied them∣selves in so many things pleasing to flesh and blood, and did and suffered so many things contrary thereto. For the World, as that same eleventh of the Hebrews giveth remarkable instance; so St. John beareth testimony in most significant phrase to the power of Faith herein,1 Joh. 5.4. calling it the Victory whereby we overcome the world, because certain victory attends, and shall crown all that fight the good fight of faith against the World; as the God and
Prince of this world; so the pleasures of the world, the honors, the profits, the friendship of the World, with their contrary trou∣bles, and the snares and temptations of both. 7. Confession and profession of the Faith. This is an inseparable adjunct and consequent of true Faith, though I call it not a pro∣perty, because this may be where true faith is not, but where Faith is this will be also; all is not gold that glisters, but that is not gold that doth not glister. Can a man carry fire in his bosom and not discover it? Can a man have the Spirit of Faith,2 Cor. 5.13. and believe, yet not speak? The Apostolical command is, not only that we stand fast in the Faith,1 Cor. 16.13. Heb. 10.23. Rom. 10.10. but also that we hold fast the pro∣fession of our Faith; for as with the heart man believeth to justi∣fication, so with the mouth confession is made to salvation. Let our unchristianly and irrational deriders of Professors and Profession, consider this. 8. It giveth the soul a sight of things invisible,Heb. 11.27. Joh. 1.18. Exod. 33.20. 2 Cor. 4.18. and an enjoy∣ment of things to come: By Faith Moses saw him that is invisible, Jehovah, whom otherwise no man hath seen, nor can see and live. Yea, by the same St. Paul and others of the faithful looked at those eternal good things which are not seen,& 5.7. for they walked by Faith and not by sight. By this the Saints can look within the vail: By Faith the soul takes a prospect of the promised Canaan, this being the Pisgah of its highest elevation:Joh. 8.56. By this Abraham saw Christs day and rejoyced: It gives a present subsistence to certain futures, and is the evidence of things hoped for,Heb. 11.1. and not seen; for which cause the believers conversation will be in heaven, where he seeth his treasure is, and where therefore his heart is. 9. Joy and Peace in some degree is an immediate effect of true Faith, (and no true Joy is without Faith) though higher degrees flow through Assurance.Rom. 15.13. There is joy and peace in believing; and a joy of Faith, especially when conjoyned with growth, Phil. 1.25. It is expressed by leaning and staying upon the Lord; which speaks support, fixation, quietation of mind: For which cause a childe of God under desertions pre∣fers his life of Dependance, before the Worldlings life of en∣joyment, and findes some satisfaction in present unsatisfied∣ness, hath some glimmerings of light in the dark night of unassu∣redness. God hath promised to keep him in peace, in peace
(translated perfect peace) whose mind is staid on him,2 Isa. 26 3. Ch ron. 20.20 be∣cause he trusteth in him: Believing in the Lord brings e∣stablishment, not only as to the condition and state of the person, but also as to the disposition and frame of the mind. We finde it in other cases, believing the promise, and re∣lying on the power and love of another, affords a great calm, and some secret joy to a mind otherwise disturbed and per∣plexed. Thus Faith in its own nature, and direct tenden∣cy: But still understand Faith as acting, Faith as exercised produceth this effect; the Christian, so far forth as he lives by Faith, and in the Improvement of Faith, enjoys this quiet sedate minde, even when he wants the full-blown joy of a life of Spiritual sence. And not only from the nature of Faith doth this arise, but also as Faiths hand casts out the Anchor of Hope which keeps the soul steddy; and also as it represents and foretastes the recompence and joy to come. This leads to the next Effect of Faith. 10. Assurance and further joy thereby. I make not this Constitutive of Faith, nor inseparable from Faith, lest I condemn and sadden causelesly the Generation of the just, but whereever it is it proceeds from Faith. Ʋnbelief is shut out from the Promise, and can have no true Hope, much less Assu∣rance:Heb. 10.22. Therefore it is called The full assurance of Faith; and that , boldness and access with confidence and assurance is by faith in Christ.Ephes. 3.12. And thus be∣lieving doth through assurance (the soul by a reflex act preceiving its own Faith, and thence interest in the O ject of Faith) brings the joy unspeakable and full of glory. This, though not abso∣lutely necessary,1 Pet. 1.8. all believers should labor after, that the com∣fort of it may confort (according to the notation of the word) and strengthen them,Nehem. 8.10. 2 Pet. 1.10. 2 Joh. 5.13. for the joy of the Lord is our strength. The Apostle Pter bids, give diligence to make our calling and election sure, even to our selves rather than in it self. And St. John wrote to those that believed, that they might know they had eternal life. 11. And lastly, Salvation is the effect and inseparable con∣sequent of true Faith, according to the Text. Now this be∣ing that great and last effect which the others made way for, the object of our desires, the reward of our endeavours, the only
and perfect happiness of man: I shall speak more distinctly to the connexion between Faith and Salvation under these three heads, That, How, Why. First, That Faith and Salvation are conjoyned; and this is pe∣culiarly one of those things which are called ,Heb. 6.9. having, accompanying, laying hold of salvation. It is the Te∣stimony of Truth it self,John 3.16. that this is Gods great end in sending his Son into the world, that whosoever believeth might have e∣ternal life: The Purchaser of salvation,John 6.40. declares this to be the Will of him that sent him, that every one that seeth the Son, and believes on him, might have eternal life; Accordingly he that hath all power committed to him, giveth commission and command to his Disciples to preach, that whosoever be∣lieveth shall be saved:Mark 16.16. And ascertaines their salvation by his prayer for all that should believe through his Disciples word, John 17.20. Saint Paul testifies,Rom. 10.9, 10. Rom. 5.17. he that believeth in his heart shall be saved; declares that they that have the gift of righteousness (which he defends to be by Faith) shall reign in life,Rom. 8.30. and accordingly conjoynes justified (viz. by Faith) and glorified; and asserteth this to be according to Gods design in Election, and terms in Vocation;2 Thes. 2.13, 14. 1 Tim. 1.14, 15, 16. sets forth himself as an en∣couraging example of the exceeding abundant grace of our Lord through Faith, to all though great sinners like himself, that should believe on Christ to life everlasting. . Cyril. This Saint John accounts so clear and unquestionable, that he writes to them that believe,1 John 5.13. that they may know that they have eternal life: So unlimited∣ly true is that of Habakkuk, The Just shall live by his Faith.Hab. 2.4. Deus oleum misericordiae (& gloriae) ponit in vase fiduciae. Bern. Secondly, How Salvation is the effect of Faith. Here consider these three things. 1. The natural aptitude and fitnesse of this grace of Faith, to be made use of in the way of saving man that had broken the first Covenant, and could not be saved thereby; yea, so fit is faith as to be necessary upon supposition of Gods saving sin∣ners by a New Covenant in the hands of a Mediatour, and Surety, and his Righteousnesse: There must be an appropria∣tion
of that to the sinner, and making all his own; and this must be by voluntary acceptance; self-confidence and boasting must be prevented; now faith alone could do this, as before hath been shown. 2. The institution of God making this fitnesse of Faith useful and effectual to this end Salvation; for be it never so fit, yea, necessary, so that Salvation could not be brought about without it; and suppose (per hypothesin impossibilem) which yet could not be, that man had believed upon the Redeemer, and God had not said, Believe, and thou shalt be saved, Faith had not reached Salvation;Phil. 3.9. therefore it is called the righteousness of God, which is by Faith in the Son of God, even of his find∣ing out and appointing. Even as Sacramental signes, are and must be fit to represent what they are appointed for; (as Aug. Epist. 23. ad Bonif. Oportet similitudinem habeant earum re∣rum, quarum sunt Sacramenta, quam si non haberent, non es∣sent Sacramenta) yet they work not naturally, but by Divine in∣stitution, as a means of Faiths maintaining and increase; so Faith to Salvation. 3. The Dignity and Merit of the object of Faith is to be considered; for though it be said, 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving ( mercedem, as Beza rendreth it) the end, the reward of your Faith; yet is it not of merit; for the way of Salvation by Faith, is altogether of Grace, as Saint Paul industriously and abundantly proveth. Faith therefore may be considered either qualitativè, or relativè; in it self, or with respect to its ob∣ject: Now not as an habit in us, or act exerted by us, (though acting, not dead faith saveth) not as a work of the Law requi∣red in the first Commandment doth faith save, but through the righteousness of Christ which it apprehends and appropriates: in it self it is the most indigent and soul-emptying grace that is, and cannot by its own merit do this; for it is due, being by God commanded, (Luke 17.10.) imperfect in it self; for who attaines the highest degrees of faith? and if perfect in its kind, yet but an imperfect Righteousnesse, being the fulfilling but of one Gospel-command. Thirdly, Why there is this undivided connexion between Faith and Salvation The Prime reason, and that which it must be ultimately resolved into, is the good pleasure of God, accor∣ding
to which he worketh all things. There is nothing in faith bearing proportion to this effect and attainment, so that we may admiringly say, Even so Father, because it pleaseth thee. Secondary and Subordinate reasons: First, On Gods part, upon supposition of his institu∣tion. 1. His Justice, having received a valuable price for Salvati∣on; and this price being made the sinners own in the way of Gods own appointment; so that believing sinners may hum∣bly plead with God as a righteous Judge for their Crown,2 Tim. 4.8. Rom. 3.26. Gods justice being not only secured, but obliged (in a sense) by Faith. 2. His faithfulness, having in his Word promised Salvation to Faith, as hath been shown. Secondly, On Faiths part; the reason why God hath con∣joyned certain Salvation with it, is, because it giveth most glory to God of any thing;Rom. 4.20. 1 Sam. 2.30. therefore God entailes glory on it peculiarly; it honoureth God, and God will honour them that have it. He that believeth, sets to his seal that God is true,John 3.33. and every way justifieth and advanceth him. Properties and notes of Trial, convertible with true Faith,5. Pro∣perties. and reciprocal (where Faith is, there is this and that; where this and that are, there is Faith; where Faith is not, there these are not, &c.) and farther differencing it from other Faith,2 Cor. 13.5. which is a needful work; for there is true and false, feigned and unfeigned, alive and dead; Of these some indeed belong to the former Head of Effects; and some of them seem not altogether unsuitable to be referred to this Head. The First shall be a more general Note. True and saving faith receiveth a whole Christ upon judgement and choice on Gods terms. Lord to rule as well as Jesus to save, the object of Faith in the Text; no separating what God hath joyned, and to have a divided Christ, not a whole Christ; salvation, but not self-denial, &c. True Faith is a considerate thing, (that which hath least depth,Mat. 13 5. springs up most suddenly) the soul sits down, and weigheth, and casteth up all accompts, and compa∣reth all things together, misery by sin, undonnesse in self, termes of salvation, self-denial a fundamental one, taking
up the Crosse, following Christ, universally sincere obedience, and what the world, lust, or Satan can say to the contrary, and saith CONTENT to Gods terms, and here the bargain is made; the soul trusts God contentedly for his part, even pri∣viledge, and resolvedly sets about its own part, even duty. Hence true faith proceeding deliberately upon Gods termes, is willing to be tryed by the Word declaring those terms: which farther tryal according to the Word follows. Secondly, True and saving Faith is ushr'd in by godly sor∣row, and humility in a good degree, though they are farther compleated afterward upon the sense of Gods pardoning and ac∣cepting love;Ezek. 16.63. Mark 1.15. Acts 20.21. Then shalt thou be ashamed, &c. Repent and believe; Repentance towards God, and Faith in our Lord Je∣sus Christ, this is Gospel order: The inconsistency between Faith and Pride,Hab. 2.4. is evident in that opposition of the souls lift∣ing up, and living by Faith; and the hinderance of the Jews believing, John 5.44. The Centurions and womans Faith were attended with eminent humility. Did not humility and godly sorrow accompany and bring in faith, the Law could not be our School-master to bring us to Christ. This shutteth out that easie, merry, proud faith, that springs up without the dunging of humility, or watering of sorrow according to God. Thirdly, True and saving Faith is abiding and perseverant, and this upon supposition of temptations and assaults; for o∣therwise a mock-faith may have a continuance, and men dye in a pleasing dream of ungrounded presumptuous confidence. Now it must be such, or cannot be saving; for as it is said, He that believeth shall be saved:Mark. 16.16. Mat. 24.13. so he that endureth to the end shall be saved. They that have true Faith, have the seed of God abiding in them, the prayer of Christ for them, are kept by the power of God; for he that hath begun a good work will finish it, his gifts being without repentance. Believing and sealing for security are conjoyned:Eph. 1.13. The true believer is the wise man that built on the Rock,Mat. 7.24, 25. his house therefore stood; the good ground that hath deth of earth,Mat. 13. Heb. 10.38, 39. that what springs may not wither. The just shall live by his faith, continue therein, and so believe to the saving his soul, being rooted and established therein through Christ.Col. 2.7. See more of
this before under the efficient cause, principal and instrumental. Fourthly, True and saving Faith is growing, though this growth be not alway discernable, or alike: That prayer for en∣crease of Faith, flowed from the very nature of Faith;Luk. 17.5. it is the good fight, which must be carryed on to a compleat con∣quest; running a race,1 Tim. 6.12. 2 Tim. 4.7. Prov. 4.18. speaking progresse to the finishing our course; for the way of the just is as light that shineth more and more to a perfect day. Whatever hath life hath growth, till it reach a state of consistency.1 John 5.13. Saint John wrote to those that did believe, that they might believe, Ʋt credatis, cre∣dere pergatis (which belongs to the last Head) & fide cresca∣tis. Beza in loc. i. e. grow in faith, according to the general Apostolical precept of growing in all grace. The same Author accounts this the most plain and natural interpretation of that of Paul, from Faith to Faith, Fide,Rom. 1.17. quae quotidiè incremen∣tum accipiat; confirming it by that of Clement of Alexandria, The Apostle speaks not of a double Faith, but of one, and that receiving growth and perfecting. The Apostles  furtherance of faith,Col. 2.7. Phil. 1.25. and , establishing and abounding in the Faith; speak encrease and growth in root and branches; more fixed ha∣bit, more frequent acts. They therefore that have believed ever since they were born, and alway alike, never believed at all truly. Fifthly, True and saving Faith is Purging;Act 1 Rom 8.1, 4 purifying their hearts by Faith: Believing and walking not after the flesh are joyned: where there is Faith (and much more assurance of Faith) there will be heart and body cleansed and washed;Heb. 10.22, 23 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Pet. 1.4. 1 John 3.3. pol∣lutions of flesh and spirit taken away by faith, receiving the promise of the undefiled inheritance; the believer will purifie himself, as he is pure in whom he trusteth and hopeth. Li∣ving flesh will purge out the Sanies and corruption in it; a li∣ving Fountain, the mud that's stirred up; so living faith: And indeeed hereby it is permanent, for purity preserveth; pure Faith cannot be kept but in a good, even a cleane conscience.1 Tim. 1.19. Sixthly, True and saving faith hath other graces accompany∣ing it, in a good measure, with a proportionable encrease, strength and activity; I know some are more eminent for this, others for that grace; as Moses for meekness, Job patience, Abraham Faith, &c. yet in good measure must other graces accompany; for this is an indispensable duty, to add to Faith
temperance,2 Pet. 1.5. patience, brotherly kindnesse. Faith with many other graces, are called in the singular number () the fruit of the Spirit, because connex and inseparable, Gal. 5.22. Besides that the growth, and strength, and activity of other graces have de∣pendance upon it; both as it pleads with Christ in prayer for all, and pleads with the soul to act, stir up, and abound in all. Abra∣hams faith had self-denial accompanying it; there will be pati∣ence, for he that believeth will not make hast. See more tending to this under the fifth effect of faith. Let not men speak of their faith then, when other graces are no way suitable. Seventhly, True and saving Faith is working and fruitful; though love and good works are not the form of it, (as the Papists plead) yet it alway hath love accompanying.Gal. 5.6. James 2.17. Eph. 1.15. and worketh by love, and without works is dead. Per opera consummatur fides, non ut for∣matum per suam formam, sed ut forma per suas operationes, actus pri∣mus per actum secundum. Alting. Faith alone justifieth, but Faith which justifieth is not alone. Bona opera non praecedunt justifican∣dum, sed sequuntur justificatum. They that are in Christ Jesus by Faith, are described by walking in Christ, and according to the Spi∣rit: Quomodo accipitur? fide: quomodo ambulatur in eo? ad praescri∣ptum voluntatis ejus vitam instituendo, & ex ejus Spiritu vivendo. Zanch. in Col. 2.6. Faith is obediential,Rom. 16.26. and cannot but be so; for he that believeth really, his labour shall not be in vain in the Lord, cannot in reason and holy ingenuity,1 Cor. 15.58. but think it meet he be fruit∣ful and abounding alway in the work of the Lord;Alii cogitant, pii credunt. Aug. for others they do but think, not know the greatness and certainty of the reward. Yea indeed that assurance I before spake of, proceeds from Faith through obedience; By this we know that we know him (know put for believe, Zanch. in loc. as Isa. 53.11.) if we keep his Commandments: I shall therefore, according to St. Pauls command to Titus, affirm constantly this as a faithful saying,Tit. 3.8. That they which have believed, must be careful to maintain good works. Eighthly, True and saving Faith trusting God for the greater, will trust him for lesser mercies. To them that through Christ do be∣lieve in God,1 Pet. 1.21. this will seem forcible arguing, and a necessary infe∣rence, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up (I be∣lieve) for me,Rom 8.32. how will he not with him give me also all things freely? God hath made all sorts of promises to true Faith; and accordingly many of the Servants of God have expressed confidence in God when things have gone worst with them; they would not be afraid
what man can do unto them, nor of evil tidings;Psal. 11.7. their hearts were fixed trusting in the Lord: The just's living by Faith is true in this sence also:Gal. 2.20. and that of Pauls living the life in the flesh by the Faith of the Son of God, hath much in it. Though I know natural timo∣rousness, and living too much the life of sense may occasion some worldly fears in a Believer; as boldness of temper, carelesness, false confidence may much bear up an unbeliever: Yet in great mea∣sure their pretences to faith are questionable (I might say their faith is but pretence) who say they can trust God with their Souls, but will not trust him with bodies and estates. Ninthly,1 Pet. 2.7. Vers. 8. Isa. 53.2. Cant. 5.9. True and Saving Faith makes Christ very precious to them that believe. , but to the unperswadable, he is a stone of stumbling, without form or comeliness; they ask the believer What is thy beloved more than another? And no wonder; for none but the believer hath a cleared eye to behold things that ae spiritu∣ally discerned:Tolle meum & tolle De∣um. Psal. 34.8. Psal. 104.34. None but he hath that special interest which in∣hanceth the price and valuation: None but he hath that experience, by which it is tasted and seen that the Lord is good: But sight, pro∣priety, and experience will make him inestimably precious, and the meditation of him sweet; Faith that seeth his necessity, seeth al∣so his excellency, and takes him not upon constraint but choyce. Those things that are pposite to true Faith, are of two sorts.6. Opposites. First, Such as speak the soul void of it, and are simply incon∣sistent with it. Secondly, Such as actively war against it, and repel it. These I shall call Contrarily Opposite, those Privatively Opposite; though the terms may seem not fully suitable to all the particulars. Some things are Privatively Opposite to true and Saving Faith,Privatively. as relating to the Ʋnderstanding; others as to the Will; others as to the Life. First, As to the Ʋnderstanding and Assent. 1. Ignorance, bilndness, darkness (of the inconsistency of which with Faith, see before of the Word, the Instrumental Caue) This either is invincible Ignorance,Act. 17.30. where means of cure are want∣ing: Or Vincible, which carelesness, sloath, or affectation causeth; for there are some persons willingly and wilfully ignorant,2 Pet. 3.5. Joh. 3.19. and love darkness. 2. Unperswadableness to assent to the truth of the Word and Promise: , Impersuasibilitas:Rom, 11.30, 31 When men are not satisfied in the grounds of believing, and so assent not: wherein yet
somtimes there is a battery shaking the Assent, and by parley bring∣ing near a surrender;Act. 26.28. an almost perswasion, which yet is ineffectual. 3. Error in Fundamentals; especially those that concern Faith, Christ, the Promises, Justification and salvation. Corrupt minds are reprobate concerning the Faith, 2 Tim. 3.8. Therefore doubtful Disputations,Rom. 14.1. where on one side is error, are dangerous to the weak. Secondly, As to the Will, Affections and Consent. Heb. 2.3.1. Unbelief, not accepting the good things promised through ignorance or careless neglect of great salvation. 2. Disbelief, when men through dissatisfaction with the rea∣sons to believe, or through pride, stubbornnss, uncompliance of spirit,Joh: 5:39, 40, 44. WILL not come to Christ for life, will not submit to the righteousness of God. Thirdly, As relating to Life, practice and profession. 1. Heresie is Privatively Opposite: Such as joyn obstinacy and promulgation to their errors,2 Tim: 2.16. whose words eat like a gan∣grene,Tit: 3.10. are to be rejected, as men void of, and enemies to the Faith. 2. Apostasie from the truth and profession of the Gospel called denial, viz. after knowing and owning. These never were of the Faith,1 Joh: 2.19. else would they not have gone from it. This is a dange∣rous thing, drawing back to perdition; in such God hath no plea∣sure:Heb: 10.38. 2 Pet: 2.21. It had been better for them never to have known, &c. This commonly ends in bitterest enmity to the Faith and true professors of it. 3. All sins laying waste the Conscience are inconsistent with faith: because Faith and a good conscience are inseparable companions.2 Tim: 3.9. Contrarily.By way of Contrariety, there may be considered these things (possibly some also under the former head, in part,) as Opposite to true Faith. First, Flesh and blood; these cannot enter into the kingdom of G d, and oppose faith that would bring thither. I name this first, because it is the greatest enemy, and gives advantage to all others, and then indeed are we tempted (to unbelief, or any thing else) when we re drawn aside of our own hearts. By Flesh and blood is meant Sense,2 Cor: 5.7. living by sence is the great hinderer and supplanter of Faith: Also Carnal reason judging every thing by its own unsuitable apprehensions, and so misrepresenting the things of God: to it the Gospel is foolishness, though it is the wisdom and power of God to them that believe: This taketh no∣tice of the meanness of the faithful in the world, and stumbleth
at it, &c. Abraham left both these Servants below when he went up into the Mount to the Lord, to exercise that eminent Faith of his:Rom: 4.18.19, &c. Yea indeed Sense and Reaon appeared eminent∣ly contrary to him in his entertaining the romise at first; else had not the great strength of his Faith been manifested, nor God glorifi d so much. Secondly, Satans assaults: He not only at first keeps out Faith, by blinding mens minds,2 Cor: 4.4. but afterwards doth with Faith as the King of S ria charged his Captains to do with the King of Israel: He knows what an enemy to hs kingdom Faith is;1 King. 22.31. by it we resist him, and consequenty put him to flight and quench his darts: He knows if our Faith fail, all fails,Luke 22.31. Luke 8.12. and therefore he desires to winnow the soul, and get the god seed out of our hearts, lest we should believe and be saved. Thirdly, The World is a great adversary:1 John 5.4. Why else is Faith called the Victory over the world, but that there is hostility between the world and it? Fourthly, I might add m ns own delays. 1. Causing hard∣ness in their hearts from themselves: To day, to day believe,Heb: 2.15. Joh: 12.38, 39, 40. unless you would harden your hearts. 2. Provoking God to seal men up under their injudicious unperswadable minds, for their long op∣position to the light and word of Faith.Gen: 6.3. Act: 7.51. The Spirit of Faith will not alway strive, when men still resist him. I shall improve all that hath been spoken by some few Uses, and conclude. The first sort of Uses shall be Corollaries for Information. 1. Of the certain and u peakable misery of he unbeliever,Information. from the sure happiness of the believer. Contrariorum contraria est conse∣quentia. Remember what hath been spoken before of the excel∣lent Effects and Consequents o Faith, Union with Christ, Justifi∣cation, Adoption, &c. and that great and everlasting fruit Salvati∣on: upon all which we may coclude with the Apostle,Gal: 3.9. blessed are they wich be of Fith (or believe) with faithful Abraham:Luk 45. yea therefore blessed is he tha blievth, because there shall be a performane of ll tho e things which have been spoken of the Lord: Now turn the Table, invert the sense, read all backward, under∣stand all contrary of the unbliever: No union with, but separation and distance frm Christ: No pardon of sin, reconciliation and justification, but guilt in fu l force, the curse of the Law,John 3.36. (and so he is left to stand or fall by himself) and the wrath of God
are upon him: No Adoption of Sons, but rejection as spu∣rious, and a Sonship to the Devil, the god of this world, &c. No Salvation,Mark. 16.16. Joh. 3.18. but inevitable condemnation; He that believeth not shall be condemned, yea is condemned already, because he believeth not in the name of the only begotten Son of God: i. e. his present state is a state of certain damnableness, as sure as if he were condemned already: Not that there can be no believing afterward, and reco∣very thereby;1 Cor. 6.11. for who then should be saved? for such were some (yea all) of them that are justified by faith in the name of the Lord Je∣sus, as the Apostle speaks of other sinners. He that believeth not maketh God a liar;1 Joh. 5.10. Joh. 3.36. but he shall find him exactly true to his cost, in such words as these, He that believeth not the Son shall not see life: The unbelieving (as well as more carnal sinners) shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone,Rev. 21.8. which is the second death.Heb. 3.12. Joh. 5.40. Act. 13.46. Matth. 13.58. Men by unbelief depart from the living God; will not come for life; and judge themselves unworthy of eternal life; and bring a kind of impotency upon the Omnipotent as to the do∣ing them any good: No wonder then if Jesus wondered at their unbelief that held his hands from helping them.Mark 6.5, 6. Oh! how much better were it for them among us that believe not, that they had never had offers of Salvation, never heard the Gospel of the Grace of God! 2. It is no small matter to be saved, since Faith is such a thing as before described, and without it there is no Salvation: Should Christ now come, should he finde Faith on the earth? Alas, the small number of those that shall be saved, there being so few Believers, though so many Professors of Faith among Christi∣ans! This is sadly manifest in the gross Ignorance of the most, and suitable apprehensions in the Doctrine of Faith of very few: In the Errors, Heresies, Apostasies of many, even denying the Lord that bought them: In the altogether contradictory life of most to that Faith they pretend to have, which (as well as Re∣pentance) should have fruits meet for it brought forth, and accor∣dingly it is known. No wonder if they that take true Saving Faith to be no more than Assent, ad a professed owning the Doctrine of the Gospel, a Confidence (at all adventures) of Gods love, &c. or some such thing, think the way to heaven broad, and wonder at any speaking of the paucity of those that shall be saved. 3. Hence take notice of the Reasonableness of the Christian Religion. 1. That God requireth no more but Believe: Other
things indeed are required, but they naturally flow from faith, are insepa∣rably linked with faith, and faith cannot be without them; faith is the great work of God, and command of the Gospel. 2. That this is so suitable: Without faith no salvation can be apprehended as attainable by the new Covenant; by it comes union to, and interest in the person of the Me∣diator; by it is the appropriation and application made of what he hath done and suffered in sinners behalf; by it is acceptance given to Gods gracious offers in the Gospel. What more meet, and just, and necessary? are not Gods ways in requiring faith equal? 4. Behold the danger of ignorance, or mistake in this great fundamen∣tal point, upon which salvation or damnation have such immediate and necessary dependance; in other matters not so great danger: How justly censurable then is the folly of those that cannot patiently hear the doctrine of faith, but think of time laid out upon it, as Judas of the ointments expence, What needs this waste? But truly, if you are igno∣rant of Gods righteousnesse (which is by faith in the Son of God) you will take other ways in which ye cannot find salvation, ye will ye will go about to establish your own righteousnesse, Rom. 10.3. 5. The usefulnesse and needfulnes of a Gospel-Ministry is hence manifest. Faith cometh by hearing;Rom. 10.14, 15. How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? &c. How beautiful upon the Mountains are their feet, that bring the glad-tidings of salvation, and as workers together with God, build up pre∣cious souls in their holy Faith. The second sort of Uses shall be made up of conjoyned Exhortation and Admonition; Admonitory exhortations.Exhort. First, Labour after this Faith,Heb. 3.12 and take heed lest there be in you an evil heart of unbelief; Evil it is to God, it dishonoureth him, and dis∣appointeth him; Evil to us, deprives us of our offered happinesse, and bringeth upon us swift destruction; certain and aggravated condemna∣tion; take heed of this grosse self-murder of unbelief; make use of the means before prescribed for the begetting and increase of Faith, & beware & oppose those things that are Opposite unto faith: This Exhortation is to al. Secondly, To those that pretend they have faith. Try whther your faith be right or no: and to ths end make use of, and apply those notes and pro∣perties of faith before handled: Yet spend not so much time in trying whether you have it, as in exercising it, (in this many weak Christians are very faulty;) and this will be the way to make all sure for you, and in due time clear to you. Thirdly, To those that upon trial find they have this excellent grace of faith.
1. Rejoyce and comfort your selves against all your sins, fears, the worlds troubles, Satans temptations; for as to all thou art more than Conquerour.Rom. 5.2. If thou believest, rejoyce in hope of the glory of God; for he that believeth shall be saved. 2. Bless God and boast not; there's no cause of boasting, faith is the gift of God; there's cause of thansgiving, it's the hand to receive all other gifts. If ye hope for salvation by faith, be humble and glory not, for boa∣sting is excluded by the Law of Faith,Rom. 3.27 the constitution of faith for the salvation of sinners thereby. If ye stand by Faith, be not high-minded; if ye abound in Faith,Col. 2.7. abound therein with thanksgiving, for ye ow the more. Rom. 1.173. Live by faith. Paul from Habakkuk asserts the just shall live by faith, and propounds his own example of living by the faith of the Son of God. Be much in the actings and exercise of Faith, and make your lives full of the fruit and efficacy of faith; yea, peculiarly exercise faith in dependance upon God for the support and perseverance of your faith. Draw down to practice what you know of faith, and ye shall know more satisfactorily the Doctrine of faith, than the wisest in the world according to the let∣ter. Live by the Faith of the Son of God (it is not notion, but action; not word, but life) and then wait till faith shall be turned into vision, and be∣ing perfected be abolished, having done its work, and then at least ye shall be fully satisfied concerning it. 2 Tim. 2.1.4. Labour to be strong in the grace of Faith that is in Christ Jesus; not only for your own sakes, to avoid those anxieties which weakness of faith causeth; but for Gods sake, that by strong faith ye may with Abraham the father of the faithful,Rom. 4.20. give much glory to God, who hath annexed glo∣ry to believing. 5. Pity them that do not believe, and labour to propagate your faith. Whose soul, that by faith are themselves secured, would not bleed in con∣sideration of the dangerous, yea, certainly miserable estate (as before de∣scribed) of unbelieving friends, relations, acquaintance? Warn them, exhort them while it is called to day, pray for them; yea, strengthen the weak in faith, and offend them not by going to the utmost bounds of your Christian liberty. 6. Esteem them precious that have this precious faith, and have not the Faith of Christ with respect of persons:Jam. 2.1. Verse 5. Let the poor of the world that are rich in faith, and heires of the Kingdome, be honourable in your esteem, as they are in Gods.
REPENTANCE NOT TO BE Repented, Plainly Asserted, and Practically Explained. Acts 5.31. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgivenesse of sins. REpentance being the Subject of this day, in the course of this moneths exercise to be discussed: I must wave the Coherence and Connexion of the Text; only desire you to note, that the Apostles assert the pre∣rogative of Christ, as their Apology for their disobedience to humane commands; when they forbidden, did proceed to preach, and a reason thereof is demanded; the answer is made in short, Whether we obey God or man, judge ye: Jesus Christ is exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour, to subdue his enemies by Re∣pentance, and support his Subjects by Remission of sin.
The Text presents us with two parts considerable. 1. A Donor, Jesus Christ exalted to be a Prince and a Sa∣viour. 2. The Donation, and that is double. Repentance. Remission of sin. Answerable to the parts of the Text, the Doctrines which might be inferred to our instruction, would be two. Doct. 1. Repentance and Remission of sinnes, are the especial acts and advantages of Jesus Christ his exaltation. Doct. 2. It is the sole prerogative of the Lord Jesus, to give Re∣pentance and Remission of sins. But I must not insist on a formal discussion of either of these doctrines; my work and intention being to unfold, and pra∣ctically explaine the nature of that most necessary (at all times, though now more especially) grace of true Gospel-Repen∣tance; And therefore praetermitting the doctrines, let me propound to your serious consideration, these four things, viz. the, 1. Nature Of Gospel-Repentance. 2. Necessity Of Gospel-Repentance. 3. Notes or Characters Of Gospel-Repentance. 4. Next way or means Of Gospel-Repentance. First then of the nature of Repentance; and in opening it I shall not trouble you with the curious and critical considerations of the word, or the various descriptions of the thing set down by many sound and piousAmbrose de poenit. Aretii problem. tom. 1. l. 3. Dani. Dike. Stock, with ma∣ny others. Repen. de fin. Authours: but briefly propound unto you this general description, as that which comprizeth in it the nature and particular parts of true Repentance, viz. Repentance is a grace suprnatural, whereby the believing sinner sensibly affected with, and afflicted for his sin as committed a∣gainst God; freely confessing, and fervently begging pardon, tur∣neth from all sin to God. Instead of a logical division, and discussion of this descripti∣on, I shall distribute it into these Theological conclusions, as most proper for your capacities, and profitable for your instru∣ction.
1. Repentance is a grace supernatural. 2. The believing sinner is the subject of true Gospel-Repen∣tance, whereby the believing sinner, &c. 3. Sense of, and sorrow for sin as committed against God, are the precursive acts of true Repentance: sensibly affected with, and afflicted for his, &c. 4. A turning from all sin to God, is the formality of true Repentance. 5. Confession of guilt and supplication for pardon, are constant concomiants of Gospel-Repentance. These several Conclusions I shall briefly and distinctly explain, whereby I hope you will well understand the nature of Repen∣tance; and first of the first, (viz.) Repentance is a grace supernatural. It is a grace in its na∣ture, supernatural in its Authour, Original, quality and opera∣tion; Repentance is a grace in its nature; not only as it is freely given us of God, without the least merit of ours, but al∣so as it is a gift animating and enabling unto action; That which I intend you especially to note, when we say Repentance is a grace, is this, (viz.) that it is an habit, power, principle, spring, root, and disposition; not a bare, single, and transient action, as the Papists, and some ignorant souls do imagine: Repentance is different and distinct from all penitential acts; sighing, self-castigation, and abstinence from all sinful actions, are fruits and expressions of repentance, but not the grace it self; for that diffuseth it self into the heart, and disposeth, ha∣bituateth, and enableth to all acts of sorrow for, and cessation from sin: The repentance which is given of God, is not an a∣ction, but power, principle, and frame of spirit: The power and principle is divine, but act and exercise of repentance is hu∣mane; God plants the root whereby man brings forth fruit worthy repentance, Matth. 3.8. Repentance is no other but a spirit of grace, animating men to mourn, Zech. 12.10. Re∣pentance is not the work of an houre, or a day, but a constant frame, course and bent of the soul, on all renewed guilt flow∣ing afresh, and bringing forth renewed acts. When the migh∣ty hand of God doth smite the flinty heart of man, it loseth its stone and hardinesse, becomes pliable to divine pleasure, is inclined to relent, and prone to distill its heavenly dew: and
therefore it is called a grace; as in its nature Repentance is a grace, so in its Original and operation it is supernatural; a grace freely given from above, not acquired by any means or merit of our own, but springing into the soule by the meer good Will of God, and immediate power of the holy Ghost; however Repentance must be acted, it cannot be acquired by man; it lieth out of the reach of humane arme, and must be the effect of an Almighty hand, even the influence of God himself; there is not in man the least merit of condignity or congruity, that can engage divine justice to bestow it: No; it is a good and perfect gift,James 1.17. and cometh down from above, and is given by the Father of lights. In vain do men seek Repentance in any natural meanes; for birth, breeding, educa∣tion, instruction, art, knowledge, moral swasion, friendly ad∣vice,1 Cor. 3.6, 7. and Gospel Ministry it self cannot work it, without the immediate operation of an omnipotent Spirit; that will, and that indeed only can work above, and contrary to the course of Nature; God only can take away the stony heart, and give an heart of flesh.Ezek. 36.26. It is the sole and singular prerogative of Christ Jesus exalted, to give Repentanc; all means and Mi∣nistry are but a Moses Rod, a meer passive instrument; only the might of Gods hand can make mans Rocky heart relent; Mi∣nisters must indeed preach in season and out of season, yet it is but a peradventure that God will give repentance, 2 Tim. 2.25. In vain do men dally with, and delay repentance, when God calleth, determining to themselves time wherein to repent, as if it were within the reach of their own arme, or at the command of corrupt nature, whil'st (God knoweth) they may see their set time (though that it self is doubtful) and yet find no place for repentance, though they seek it with teares; Repentance is not the result of purest nature, nor yet the ef∣fect of the Law, but a pure Gospel grace; preached by the Gospel,Dykes Treat. of Rep. p 3, 4. promised in the Covenant, sealed in Baptisme, pro∣duced by the Spirit, properly flowing from the blood of Christ, ad so is every way supernatural; so that every returning sin∣ner must pray to God,Je. 31.18, 19. Turn thou me, and I shall be urned; and the praise of Repentance obtained, must be returned to God alone,1 Pet. 1.3. as him from whom it hath been derived; for 'tis a grace supernatural; But secondly,
The believing sinner is the subject of Gospel-repentance. Who∣soever repenteth, chargeth himself with guilt, and must needs be a sinner. Adam in innocency had no repentance, be∣cause no sin; and the Lord Jesus saith, he came not to call the righteous, but the sinner to repentance, Matth. 9.12. Re∣turns do follow upon deviations, remorse upon disobedience, and repentance is the work of a transgressor. But the Subject of Gospel-Repentance, must be a believng sinner; a sinner not only of sense, but also of hope; not on∣ly of conviction, but also of confidence, seeing a pardon procu∣red for sin committed. Faith must be the formal qualification of a Gospel-penitent, as the very foundation and fountain of true repentance; unbelief is the very ground of impenitency, and lock of obduracy. Gods common complaint of impenitent Israel, is, they believed not, Psal. 78. Then faith must needs unlock and release the soule unto its returne to God; for con∣trariorum eadem est ratio, the reason is the same to contra∣ries. Saint Ambrose calls faith incendium poenitentiae, the spur of repentance; and the Scripture doth suggest to be the pumpe of repentance. Psal. 130.4. There is mercy with thee, that thou shouldest be feared. Hence it is that the objects of faith become arguments, and the promises of grace, perswasions to repen∣tance, Jer. 3.13. The approach of the Kingdome of God, is the only argument urged by John the Baptist, and our Saviour,Mat. 3.2, 4, 17. to enforce Repentance; mercy apprehended, animateth the miserable sinner to returne to God. Israel mourned, but made no returne untill Shecaniah cryed, There is yet hope in Israel concerning this thing, Ezra 10.2. The Assyrians put halters on their necks, knowing that the Kings of Israel are merci∣ful. The Law shutting the door of hope, may stir up grief, and horrour, but it staveth off Repentance; sin seeming un∣pardonable, sets the soule at a distance from God, and sinks it in despaire, whil'st the pardon proclaimed provoketh Rebells submission. Nemo possit poenitentiam agere nisi qui speraverit indulgen iam; no hope, no help to repentance, saith Saint Am∣brose. Repentance is argued from,Gerhard. medi∣tat. secund. Ex∣ercitium poeni∣tentiae ex domi∣nica passione. and effected by the death of Christ; Mount Calvary is the proper Bochim; the sufferings of a Saviour the sad comments upon sin; the sighs and groanes of a Redeemer, most rending to rgardlesse hearts; and the
sweat and blood of the Lord most soaking and suppling to an A∣damantine soul; but faith only apprehendeth and applyeth a crucified Christ: Repentance the souls Pump is drie, and distills no water, untill faith poure in the blood of Christ, and water of Gospel-promises; so that Faith must precede Repentance, as the cause to the effect, the mother before the daughter; for it must qualifie the true Penitent: It is a mystery beyond the reach of na∣ture, that a Son should coexist in time with the Father; but neither reason nor faith can allow a priority of the daughter before the mother. I well know many Divines assert the precedency of Repen∣tance unto faith; but to my judgment it is more than probable, yea, positively clear, that in order of time, Faith and Repen∣tance are infused together into the soul; in order of sense, and mans feeling, Repentance is indeed before faith; but in Divine method, and the order of nature, Faith is before Repentance, as the Fountaine is before the Stream. But it is objected that the order of Scripture doth set Repen∣tance before faith; so in preaching, Mark 1.15. Mat. 3.2. Luke 3.3. Acts 2.38. & 3.19. And Repentance is required as the qualification which must entitle to the promises, remission of sinne is onely offered to the penitent; so that Repentance is the reason of faith, and ground on which we believe sin is pardoned. In Answer to this Objection; I shall propound unto your Observation three Rules which make a full and ready resolution to it. 1. Order of Scripture doth not alwayes conclude order of na∣ture; in 2 Pet. 1.10. Calling is mentioned before Election, yet who will deny Election to be first in nature? for whom God predestinated, them he also called, Rom. 8.30. Again, in 1 Tim. 1.5.Acts 15.9. The pure heart, and good conscience is mentioned before faith; yet none can deny them to be the effects of faith, which purifieth the heart; for to the unbelieving, nothing is pure, but their very minde and conscience is defiled, Tit. 1.15. 2. Humane sense is in many things the Dictator of Scri∣pture order: The Holy Ghost speaketh of things as they are, ob∣vious
to our sense and capacity, rather than as they are in them∣selves, and their own order: Hence it is that the promises of peace, pardon, and the like priviledges are propounded unto Re∣pentance, as a qualification obvious to our sense, and evidencing our faith: Faith and Election must be known à posteriori, by their effects, Repentance and Ʋocation, and therefore are mentioned after them: For though we Believe before we Repent, we Repent before we know that we do Be∣lieve. 3. Misapprehnsion of the nature of Grace, doth easily lead into a mistake of the order of Grace. Such as deem common illumination and conviction to be Repentance, and Assurance of pardon, joy and peace to be the formality of faith, may very well place Repentance before Faith; but such as understand the accep∣tance of Christ in order to pardon, to be true and saving faith; and a ceasing from sin, and serious application of our selves to piety, to be the formality of Repentance, will plainly see that faith uniting us to Christ, and deriving to us the efficacy of his death and sufferings, that we may be holy, doth Precede, and must needs be the cause of true Repen∣tance. Let me then dismisse this Rule with this Note or Observation.Note. Faith in its existence and essential acts, but without its reflexion, fruits and effects, is the foundation and fountain of true Repen∣tance. Such therefore on the one hand, as apprehend and assent unto the History of the Gospel, and are sometimes affected with, and af∣flicted for their sin, but do not accept of Jesus Christ as tendred to be Lord and Saviour, do fix their Engine too low to force the waters of Repentance into the soul; yet this Divels faith may produce a Judas Repentance; for an Hypocritical Repentance is the result of an Historical faith. And on the other hand, he that seeks assu∣rance of his sin pardoned as an argument of Repentance, ma∣keth the effect both cause and effect, and concludeth himself in∣to a condition not needing Repentance, whilst he pretendeth to enforce it; but the true frame of a Gospel Penitent, is by sa∣ving faith to see salvation (through the satisfaction of Christ our Saviour) extended to sinners, himself not excluded; and so clo∣sing with, accepting of, and appropriating to himself the gene∣ral tenders of grace, and terms of the Covenant, to prostrate
himself at the feet of mercy, and pursue his pardon, untill by acts of sincere Repentance, he assure himself his aimed at happi∣nesse is attained, and shall with certainty be possessed; and so he experienceth in himself, and evidenceth unto all others, that the believing sinner is the subject of Gospel Repentance; and now I passe to the third Conclusion considerable in the nature of Repentance. Sense of, and sorrow for sin as committed against God, are the pro∣cursive acts of true Repentance. True Repentance (as most Divines determine) doth consist in two parts; (viz.) Humiliation and Conversion; the casting down the heart for sin,2 Cor. 12.21. . Revel. 9.20. . and the casting off sin: A Repenting for uncleannesse and sin, with grief, shame and anguish; and Repen∣ting from iniquity, Acts 8.22. and from dead works, Hebr. 6.1. This distinction, or rather distribution of Repentance, is not on∣ly dictated by the denominations of Repentance, which in the Hebrew is called Nacham,. An irking of the soul; and Teshub∣ba, A t rning from iniquity; so in the Greek, Metamelia, After-grief; and Metanoia, After-wit; and in the Latine, Paenitentia, and Resipiscentia; the one expressing the sense and sorrow of the soul; the other, the retrogradations and returns of it from sin; but the Scripture also doth clearly suggest, nay, speak out these distinct parts of Repentance, Humiliation and Conver∣sion; requirng sometimes the one, sometimes the other, when Repentance is the duty to be discharged; calling sometimes for fasting, weeping, and walking in sackcloth and ashes; nay, the rending of the heart, and not the garmens, Joel 2.11, 12. and sometimes, and that very commonly, for turning to the Lord; nay, the whole work of Repentance is in Scripture expressed by Humiliation; in the promise of pardon to the penitent, their Repentance is described to be an humbling of the uncircumcised heart, and acceptance of the punishment of their sin, Lev. 26.41. So when Rehoboam and Manasseh Repented, they are on∣ly said to humble themselves, 2 Chron. 12.6. & 33.2. And under the Gospel we read of Repentance for sin, as well as from sin; and 'tis denominated godly sorrow, which worketh Repen∣tance: 2 Cor. 7.10. Working not only as a cause but comple∣ment, perfecting, finishing, and compleating Repentance, and therefore the Apostle James requires them that draw nigh to
God, and clean their h art, and purifie their hands, that they be afflicted, mourn and weep, and humble themselves under the hand of God, James 2.8, 9, 10. And the Covenant of Grace promising Repentance, doth expresse it self by these two acts; you shall see the evil of yo r wayes, and loa h yur selves be∣cause of your iniquities and abminations: And I wll put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my ways, Ezek. 36.27, 31. So that according to the expressions of Scripture, as well as the experiences of the Saints, Humiiation of the sul is an essential act, and eminent part of Repentance; and this is that which I in the description do denominate sense of, and sorrow for sin, as com∣mitted against God, thereby intending to note unto you, that the soul must be humbled that will be lifted up by the Lord; and his humiliation doth, and must consist of these two parts, Conviction and Contrition, sight of, and sorrow for sin. The first part of humiliation is, A Spirit of Conviction,First part of humiliation. or sight of sin in every penitent soul, which is no other than the operation of the Holy Ghost opening the blinde eye to see the deviations of the soul, and the destruction inevitably attending the persistance in it; this act of Repentance and Humiliation, is no other but the Prodigals return to himself in sense of his own starving conditi∣on, whil'st his fathers servants have bread enough;Luke 15.17.Rom. 7.9. the arrival of the Law unto the reviving of sin in Pauls sense and feeling; the communing with our hearts, that we may tremble,Psal. 4.5. and not sin; a searching and trying our ways, that we may return unto the Lord; a smiting on the thigh, with a What have we done?Lam. 3.39. the smiting of Davids heart,2 Sam 24.10. with an I have sinned against the Lord; the judging of our selves, that we may not be judged of the Lord; the Spirit of bondage, which goeth before the Spirit of Adoption: In a word, it is the souls serious erection of a Court in its own breast, and setting conscience in the Throne, and making a judicial processe to descry and determine its eternal condition; in order to which 1. It spreads before it self the Law of God, as that whch must be the Rule of life, and reason of death and condemnation; the will of God dictating duty, and disswading iniquity; awarding recompence according to obedience or disobedience: In a word,
determining of men, Thus do and live, or thus do and dye; thus I will be worshipped, and you shall be rewarded; in this if you transgresse, you shall be thus punished; the soul seeth clearly that the Law is in nature and necessity, a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, whil'st by serious consideration of its genuine sense, and due extent the soul standeth convinced this is du y enjoyned; this is sin inhibited; herein if I offend, not only in deed and word, but thought or imagination, I am a Transgressor bound under guilt, and the expectation of judgment; thus the coming of the Law into Pauls minde, becomes the revival of sin; and Josiah his reading in the Law of Moses, led him to the trem∣blings of heart, and renting his garment before the Lord, 2 Chron. 34.18, 19. For as indeed wihout the Law there is no transgressi∣on, so without the knowledge of the Law there can be no con∣viction; ignorance of Divine pleasure is the great obstruction of Repentance; and therefore the Prince of this world doth daily endeavour to blow out the light of the Word, or to blinde the eyes of the sons of men, that they may not see, and be converted; but God sends his Prophets rising up early, and sending them to read the Law in the ears of men, that Israel may see his sinne, and Judah her transgression: The first act of Repentance, is the falling of the scales from off the sinners eyes; the first language of a turning soul, is Lord, what wouldest thou have me to do? So that the soul humbling, self-examinant, seeing the Law to be holy, just and good, that which must be the rule and reason of its condition, it being to arraign and condemn it self, becomes stu∣dious of the Law in its full sense, and due extent, in commands, prohibitions, promises and threats, and sets before its eye every particular precept, and pondereth the righteousnesse of that God who hath declared a curse against every one that continueth not in the Law to do it; and so by the justification of, and insight to the Law of God, exciteth the soul to self-reflexion, and is constrained to cry out What have I done? whereup∣on it 2. Surveigheth the past course of his own life; summoneth together all faculties, powers and members of both soul and bo∣dy, to make rehearsal of his past conversation, in word, thought and deed, and to give an exact account of their conformity or
disagreement with the Law of God established, and rule by which it must be judged; and now he communeth with his hear, con∣sidereth his ways, examineth him l, makes an exact comparison of his life with Gods Law, layeth the lie close to h s carriage: and so convinceth himself of his deviations and rregularities, in∣somuch that sin reviveth, and he dyeth; guilt appeareth, and grief and shame aboundeth; his own heart condemns him as diso∣bedient, and a Transgressor of the Law, that he is constrained to cy out, What I shuld do, I have not done; and I have left undone what I ought to have done.Rom. 7.19. I have sinned against the Lord; if God be severe to mark what is amisse, I cannot abide in his presence; for I have not only offended in part of his holy Law, and broken the least of his Commandments, but I have violated the whole Law, and am a Transgressor against every Command; nay, he cometh on this consideration to be convinced of his anomy and ataxy, the pravity of his nature, that enmity to the Law, which is implanted in his very being, and that irregularity where∣by evil is ever present; but to do good he hath no minde; so that he must needs cry out, I have sinned, and must return, or else I perish; now reproof finds ready acceptance from him; the Mi∣nisters of God shall meet with no murmuring, if they cry unto him Thou art the man; for he is apt and ready to draw up a Bill of Inditement, and read a large accusation against his own soul, his iniquities now finds him out, and followeth him every where, that it becomes alive, and appears against him with vigour, not admitting the least of Apology, but leading him to Condemnation, and laying him open to the Curse due unto them that break the Law, and therefore he now 3. Sentenceth himself as accursed of God, and bound over to Divine fury; the conscience of his guilt concludes him under the condemnation of the Law, that he seeth cause to wonder at his very being, concludeth himself unworthy the least of mercy, and God to be just in the greatest of judgments which lie upon him; and so proceedeth to judge himself, and seal up his own soul under the curse, standing under the continual expectation of Gods fiery indignation to be revealed from heaven; determining it self a debtor to the Law, and as such, liable to justice, and in it self unable to make the least satisfaction; so that now the soul
doth not only assent unto the Law as true in all its threats, but app yeth them unto himself, confessing unto him belongs shame and confusion, hell and horrour, wo and eternal misery, that he knoweth not how to escape, but if God proceed against him, he is most miserable and undone forever; and so is con∣strained with anguish of soul to cry out, What shall I do to be saved? This is then the first part of humiliation, when the soul in this due order, and judicial method of conviction, is brought to a sight of sin, to see God offended, the Law violated, the soul damned and destinated to everlastng woe, if not Redee∣med by the mercy of a God, who hath established Jesus Christ his Son to be a Lord and Saviour, to g ve Remissin and Re∣pentance, and so it proceeds to the sorrow for his sin as committed against God. Second part of humiliation.The second part then of penitential humiliation, is contriti∣on, or sorrow for sin as committed against God: Herein the soul is not only acquainted with, but afflicted for its guilt, see∣eth not only that it is a sinner, but sorroweth under, and is ashamed of so sad and sinful an estate; the stony heart is bro∣ken, the Adamantine soul dissolved; he rends not his garment, but his heart, and goeth out and weepeth bitterly: He seeth with shame his many abominations, and rendeth with soul-di∣stressing sorrow and anguish, the Curse of the Law that is due unto him; and considereth with almost soul-distracting de∣spaire, the doleful estate into which his sin hath resolved him; for he seeth God with whom he is not able to plead, to be high∣ly offended, and therefore must with Job confesse that he is n t able to answer when God reproveth;Job 40.4, 5. he is vile, and must lay his hand on his mouth; though in his pride he hath once spoke, yet now he hath no answer; yea, twice, but he dare proceed no further. Well, seeing that all contending with God, is but a da kening counsel by words wi hout knowledge, and so he be∣comes submisse and silent under the saddest of affliction inflicted by God;Psal 51.4. Lam 3.39. Crying out, Against thee, thee only have I sinned. And why should a living man complaine for the punishment of his sin? the soul is in it self, confounded on the sense that God claps his hands against him for his sin, therefore his heat cannot endure, or his hands be strong, Ezek. 22.13, 14. Com∣punction
of spirt is the only condition of the convinced Peni∣tent; he seeth he is liable to the curse of the Law, and his on∣ly outcry is, What shall we do to be saved? He being con∣vinced that he hath crucified the Lord of life, is pricked at the heart; and in all approaches unto God he is ashamed and ama∣zed, becuse a man o polluted lips; nay,Isa. 6.6. sadly seeing that sin overspreads him,Isa. 64 6. his very righteousnesse is as a menstruous cloth; he like the poor Publican, stands afar off, and dares not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven; and his only note and eccho is, Lord, be merciful to me a sinner;Luke 18.13. he humbleth himself under the hand of God, as having deserved the most heavy of plagues; his haughty spirit is now laid low within him, he is wholly resolved into sorrow, even godly sorrow; it is his grief that guilt is on his spirit; but his greater grief, that his sin is gone out against God, a gracious and an holy God, a just and an holy Law; his sorrow is a sorrow of candor and inge∣nu ty; not so much that he is liable to the lash, and obnoxi∣ous to the curse, as that a Father is offended, the image of his God defaced; his grand complaint is, I have sinned against God; his soul-affliction, and heart-trembling is, God is offen∣ded; the frownes of God sink deeper, and seize more sadly on his spirit, than the sharpest of his sufferings; his earnest cry is for the joy of Gods salvation; he is not only afflicted with the terrours of the Law,Psal. 51 12. which he confesseth belongeth to him, but is melted with merciful Ministrations of the Gospel of which he is so unworthy; he cannot look unto Christ but with a spirit of mourning, moved by the strength of the remedy, to see the heighth of his malady, and by the dolor of a Saviour,Zech. 12.10. made sensible of the depth of his miserie; by the mercy and love manifested to so great a sinner, he is led to mourn over a gracious Saviour, like Mary Magdalene, he loveth much, and manifesteth it by lamenting much,Luke 7.47. because much is for∣given. Thus then the believing sinner comes home by weeping-crosse, findes conviction, and contrition, antecedaneous acts unto his conversion, a sense of, and sorrow for his sin, pre∣cursive parts of his Repentance; and God holds this method in g ving Repentance for sundry wife and gracious ends which he hath propounded to be effected. As,
1. To suit them for, and engage them to set an esteem on Christ Jesus, and the Remission of sin in him. The whole need not the Physician, but the sick, and Christ came not to call the righteous to repentance, but the sinner, Mat. 9.12. The hunted beast fl es to his Den, and the pursued Malefactor to the hornes of the Altar, the chased man-killer to his City of Refuge, so the humbled sinner unto Jesus Christ; like Paul slaine with the sense of sin, and constrained to cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin?Rom 7.24, 25. it soon seeth and saluteth Christ for his Saviour, with an, I thank God through Jesus Christ, I have gained the vi∣ctory. The weary and heavy laden are the men invited to Christ for ease and refreshment;Mat. 11.28. for indeed such ony seek him, and can be satisfied in him, and duly savour him; the full stomach of a proud Pharisee, loaths the honey-comb of Christ his righ∣teousnesse; whil'st to the hungry appetite of the humbled sin∣ner, the bitterest passions of a Saviour are exceeding sweet; the deeper the sense of misery, the sweeter is the sense of mer∣cy. How acceptable is the fountain of living waters to the chased panting heart,Deus oleum non infundit nisi in vas contritum. Bern. and the blood of Christ to the thirsty soul and conscience scorched with the sense of Gods wrath! the broken and the contrite heart is the only Sacrifice accepta∣ble to God; the wounded Samaritan is the fit object of his compassion; a Mary Magdalene cannot but love much, when looking on her sins, she seeth much is for∣given. 2. To set them at enmity with sin, and in due submission to his sacred Will. Sin is natural to the sons of men, and only smart for it will make us sick, and willing to be rid of it: un∣till God bring Israel into affliction, they regard him not, but then they seek him daily, Hosea 5.14. An unbroken sinner is as unfit for Gods instruction, as an unbroken Colt for the sad∣dle, or unfallowed ground for seed. Manasseh his Bonds break in him the power of his sin; Chron. 33.12 and the shakings of the prison to the heart-ake of the Jaylor, makes him pliable to divine pleasure,Act. 16.30. What shall I do to be saved? Sense of sin is a princi∣ple of submission under affliction; Why should a living man complaine for the punishment of his sin? Sins revival unto remorse of conscience, constrains Pauls outcry, O wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from this body of corruption! the humbled heart gives an heedy eare to divine instruction; They are not stiff-necked, but give their hand to the Lord to be led by him, 2 Chron. 30.8. and therefore God will teach the hum∣bl his way, Psal. 25.9. A bruised heart is like soft waxe pre∣pared for divine impression; so that to the end Christ may be of esteem as a Lord and Saviour, the penitent soul must on due conviction cry out, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the High God? shall I come before him wit burnt-offerings, with Calves of a year old? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or ten thousand rivers of oyle? shall I give my fist-born for my transgression, or the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? Micah 6.6, 7. And to the end we may be set against sin, it must sting the conscience, and so work us into a willingnesse to do or suffer the Will of God, making us with earnestnesse and resolution, cry when prick∣ed at the heart, What shall we do to be saved? so that a sight of, and sorrow for sin as committed against God, are parts of, and essential to true repentance; only before I passe from this Conclusion, let it be noted, that they are precursive acts: Re∣pentance cannot be constituted without them; but they are pre∣cursive, such as alwayes go before; sometimes, yea, too often (at least in shew and appearance) without true Repentance. Judas is convinced of, and cast down for sin unto utter de∣spaire, crying out, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood. And Ahab may humble himself in all external expressions, and many internal operations of the soul, and yet never be turned unto the Lord. We may not indeed deny that humiliation, especially in the external acts and expressions goeth many times without conversion and compleated repentance, and so we must needs conclude, Conviction is not true grace, or an estate of saving holinesse; but that sad complaints of guilt may passe from Reprobates and damned soules; yet we must remember, Repen∣tance or conversion never goeth without humiliation, sight of, and sorrow for sinne. In the order of nature men must be convin∣ced of, and confounded for the evil from which they are con∣verted; we cannot hate and avoid the evil we do not know, and know to afflict us; and the order of Scripture doth alwayes call to a communing with our hearts, that we may stand in
awe, and not sin; Psal. 4.5. a searching and trying our wayes, before we turn unto the Lord; the Law must do its work, as a Schoolmaster, to every soule that is brought to Christ; and the Gospe ever sends the prick into the h art of such as repent un∣to remission of sin, Acts 2.37, 38. and the spirit of bondage, before the spirit of Adoption, of power, love, and a sound minde, Rom. 8.15. Preaching Repentance is the opening the blind eye, and the bringing the Prodigal into his right minde, that in the sense of his sad estate, he may go unto his father and seek mercy. The work of the Word, is to make them sinners of sense, that shall come to Christ for cure, to cast down all proud imaginations, and every high thought which exalteth it self, and so to bring into obedince to Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. to affect men with guilt and danger, that they may with ferven∣cy cry, What shall we do to be saved? to convince that the issues of death, will be the end of the way in which they now walk, that they may flee with desire, and returne without delay. In a word, to affect the heart with the high transgressions of Gods holy Law, the disobedience of a gracious Father, and offence done to infinitenesse, that the soule may down on its knees, prostrate it self at the foot-stoole of mercy, fly to Je∣sus Christ as its Redeemer, Surety, and alone satisfaction, and so sue out its pardon by a serious return to God; and these are as it were, the pangs of the New Birth, natural, and necessary, though sometimes abortive and miscarrying; the first part of sin∣cere repentance, though not alwayes successeful to perfect and compleat it; for although we must not call the convinced con∣science a Gospel-Convert, yet the Convert is alwayes convinced; sense of, and sorrow for sin, is no infallible sign of saving grace; yet saving grace and sincere repentance, is never wrought without a sight of, and sorrow for sin as committed against God; for this is the precursive act of true repentance; and whenever God will seale up under impenitency, he stops the passage and possibility of humility, making the eare heavy, and the eye dim, and the heart hard, lest they should see with their eyes, hear with their eares, and be of humbled hearts, and so be converted, Mat. 13.15. And so much for the third Conclusion; but again, in the nature of repentance we must Note,
Turning from all sin to God, is the formality of true repen∣tance. Sincere conversion is the summa totale, and ratio for∣malis of a Gospel-penitent; Remorse for sin without a returne from sin, will afford you no comfort; sin is an aversion from God; and repentance a conversion to God; the common call of sinners unto repentance, is to turn, and return to G d, Isa. 44.22, 55, 7. Jer. 4.1, 18, 11. and many other places; whenever repentance is promised or predicated, and spoken of in Scri∣pture, it is ordinary by this terme, of turning, and returning to the Lord, Isa. 19.22. Isa. 59.20. and that not only in the Old, but also in the New Testament, 1 Pet. 2.25. We were like sheep that were going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of our soules. Every sinner is towards God, like Hagar resisting the Will, and then running from the presence of her Mistresse, untill by the Angel of the Co∣venant, called to repentance, and caused to return by weep∣ing-crosse, and submit under his hand. Like Travellers we are out of the way, and running upon our ruine, and had need to call one on another, Come, and let us return to our God, Hos. 6.1. Like the Prodigal we are out of our wits, untill by a spirit of repentance we recover our sound mind, and return to our Father, from whom we have madly run away, so that the very formality of repentance, is returning. All Judas conviction and confession, nay, contrition and condemnation will not constitute a Gospel-penitent for want of conversion. Repentance when it is true and saving, makes the sinner sadly smite on his thigh, and say, What have I done? and speedily to face about and say, I will do so no more; the Gospel-pe∣nitent is a positive Changeling, no more the same he was, Old things are done away, all things are become new; he is really and throughly changed; not in his substance, as the Fa∣milists fondly fancy; nor in quantity, measure, and degree, as common Christians too commonly dreame, but in quality, nature, frame, and disposition; the soul and body in regard of their essence, powers, faculties, proper and natural actions, remaine the same after that they were before repentance; sor∣row, fear, joy, love, desire, natural passions and affections, are indeed altered, not annihilated, restrained, nay, regulated, not ruined; but the whole man is in respect of property, bent
and disposition no more the same, but a very Changeling, that it may be said of them as of Onesimus in time past, unprofitable, but now profitable, Philem. 11. Or as of the Corinthians, they were Thieves, Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners, What not; but they are washed, they are cleansed, they are sanctified; the ve∣ry best of men before the grace of God their Saviour appear, by the working of Repentance, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, are as the Apostles themselves were, Foolish, Disobedient, De∣ceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, rebellious to Gods holy will, running from his gracious presence, and continually going astray; but when by the grace of Repentance they see, and are sadned for their aberrations, and sinful course, they speedily return from all sin to God; so that turning is their general act and businesse, and it consists of two parts answerable to the terms about which it is conversant, and they are, Recession from sin. Reversion to God. Or as the Prophet (in the Name of the Lord) phraseth it, a ceasing to do evil, and learning to do well, Isa. 1.16. Or the wicked mans forsaking his evil way, and the unrightous man his thoughts, and returning to the Lord, Isa. 55.7. Or as the Apostle James, a cleansing your hands you sin∣ners, and purging your hearts you double-minded; and drawing nigh unto the Lord, James 4.8. The work of Regeneration doth consist in putting off the Old, and putting on the New man. It is not being conformed to the World, or fashioned acording to the lust of ignorance; but being transformed by the renewing of our minde, to be holy as God is holy, Rom. 12.2. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. First part of conversion.So that the first part of Conversion is a Recession from all sin; which the Psalmist calleth, a departing from iniquity, Psal. 34.14, 37.27. as the original word will bear it, a substracting from sin, that the number and increase of it may be small, and at the length amount to just nothing;. and as the Prophet Isaiah, a cea∣sing from evil; as the Septuagint rendreth it, a resting, and be∣ing quiet from the practice of iniquity, so in Isa. 1.16. and at af∣ter a forsaking of his evil ways, utterly deserting and relinqui∣shing sin, Isa. 55.7. this is that which the Apostle calleth a casting off, flinging from us with detestation, and anger the works
of darkness, Rom. 13.12. so as never more to have fllowship with the unfruitful works of darknesse, but rather reprove them, Ephes. 5.8. Nay, it is an Apostasie from sin to break League with, and violate all those bonds in which we stand bound to profanesse; and with rage and resolution rebel against the Soveraignty of sin which it hath exercised over us; if we will call on the Name of the Lord, and become his Subjects, we must recede, rebel a∣gainst sin, bid open defiance, and proclaime open war against it, notwithstanding all those engagements that lie upon us;. let him depart saith our Translation, in the Original, Apostatize from unrighteousnesse, 2 Tim. 2.19. Sin hath an interest in, and en∣gagement upon men, by nature they are obliged to follow it, and the whole man is too much devoted to pursue and obey the di∣ctates of lust; but Repentance dischargeth all, and turneth the whole man into an estrangednesse to, nay, enmity against sin; so that both soul and body in faculties and members do withdraw from sin, the thoughts are now no more engaged to contrive and devise iniquity, nor the heart to embrace it, or hands to act it; the mem∣bers of the body are no longer yielded to be the instruments of unrighteousnesse; but the contrary is now effected by Repentance. In a word, the penitent soul recedes and turns from all sin. First, By the apprehension of his minde, seeing sin and its sinfulnesse, he discerns the contrariety of it to the Image of God, by the Law, which is by the Spirit of Repentance engraven on his heart; he now knows sin, which he never knew before; he discovereth a∣bundance of evil, in what he deemed exceeding good; he now seeth he sinned to the damnation of his soul, in what he thought to have been good service to God; he is now freed from error, and readily disowns, and damneth as desperately wicked what he sometimes allowed and argued for as eminently good; with Jobs proud friends, when penitent, seeth he hath need of Gods par∣don, and Jobs prayer for the very things he spake for God; and like pharisaical Paul, seeth horrid unrighteousnesse in all his self-righteousnesse of which he had vaunted; so that sin shall no more impose on his judgment, but he will try all its dictates, and discover the falsehood that is therein. Secondly, By the alte∣ration of his will and affections; that he shall not more disallow, than detest the sinfulnesse of sin; he no sooner seeth his iniquity, but he loatheth himself because of his abominations; sin was ne∣ver
so much the object of his affections, as now it is the object of his passions; what he before loved, desired, delighted in, he now by Repentance hateth, feareth, envieth with David, he hateth every false way, and the very workers of iniquity; if he be surprised by the difficulty of his estate, or distemper of his minde, with an act of sin, he loatheth himself because of it, and with Paul professeth, I do the things that I would not do; the very existency of sin in him, is his intolerable burden, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of corruption, is his out∣cry? death is desired, because he would sin no more; he would rather be redeemed from his vain conversation, than from wrath to come; penitent Anelme had rather bein hell without, than in heaven with his iniquity, and therefore he yet recedes. Thirdly, Into an abstinence from, nay, actual resistance of sin; he puts away the evil of his doings, forsakes his way, abstains from the ap∣pearances of evil; he is now ashamed of what he hath sometimes acted with eagernesse; he now preacheth the Gospel he some∣time destroyed; and blesseth the name he blasphemed; he is not only restrained himself, but he labours to reclaime others from ini∣quity; nay, not only is his hand with-held from sin, but his heart is set against it; his study is to mortifie his earthly members, and his resolution that sin shall not raigne in his moral body, that he should obey it in the lust thereof; he is careful to avoid all oc∣casions and inducements unto evil, he feareth to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lust thereof; his hearty prayer is, that he may not fall into temptation, but be delivered from evil; he re∣sisteth all sinful assaults, striveth against sin unto very blood; his righteous soul is grieved for the sins of others; all his complaint under sorrows is against sin; his care is to be rid of sin, his fear of falling into sin. So that the Gospel-penitent maketh a perfect recession from sin, all sin, sin in its kinde, not in its species or degree; not on∣ly this and that sin, but sin which is contrary to Gods Law and Image, be it sin small or great, natural, and near allied unto him, it is his care to keep himself from his own iniquity; the sin of his complexion, calling, constitution, or condition; he will not indulge his right eye, or right hand in opposition to Gods ho∣linesse: No pleasure, profit or honour shall willingly hie him to the least iniquity; the penitent eye judgeth sin by its complexion,
not its composition; by its colour, not by its weight; he deter∣mines of it, not by comparison with it self, but its non-conformi∣ty to Gods Law; so that if you say of any thing there is sin in it, you have said enough to set the Gospel penitent against it; for he is turned from all evil; yet take along with you this cautionary Note, that you run not into sinful despaire and despon∣dency, in observing your penitent Recession from sinne. (viz.) Sins existency, and sometimes prevalency,Caution. is consistent with a penitent recession, and turning from it. Sin may remain, though it doth not raigne in a gracious soul. Who is there that lives, and sins nt: If we say sin is not in us, we are lyars, and the truth is not in us. The righteous themselves often fall; Noah, the Preacher of Repentance to the old World, becomes the sad pattern of impiety to the new World. Penitent Paul hath cause to complain, when I would do good, evil is present with me: Sin abides in our souls, whil'st our souls abide in our bodies; so long as we live we must expect to bear the burden of corruption; sin exists in the best of Saints by way of suggestion, natural incli∣nation, and violent instigation, and enforcement of evil; and so taking advantage of the difficulty of our estate, and distemper of our minds, it drives us sometimes into most horrid actions, e∣ven Davids Adultery, or Peters denial of Christ; which of the Saints have not had a sad experience hereof; nor must it seem to us strange; for Repentance doth not cut down sin at a blow; no, it is a constant militation, and course of mortification; an habit and principle of perpetual use, not action of an houre, o little time, as we have Noted before; it is a recession from si all our days, though sin run after us; if once we be perfectly freed from sins assaults, we shake hands with Repentance, for we need it no more; so that let it not be the trouble of any that sin is in them, but let it be their comfort that it is shunned by them; that you fall into sin, faile not in your spirits, let this be your support, that you flie from, fall out with, and fight against sin; the true penitent doth evidence the truth and strength of his Repen∣tance, by not admiting sins dictates without resiance; not acting sins precepts without reluctance; when he deviseth evil, his minnde is to serve the Law of God; and he approveth of that as good; he doth what he would not; the Law in his mem∣bers
rebels against the Law of his minde, and leadeth him cap∣tive; and therefore he abides not under sins guilt or power with∣out remorse; if he be drawn to deny his Master, he goeth out, and weepeth bitterly; he is in his own eye a wretched man, whil'st oppressed with a body of corruption; nay, he retireth not into sinful society without repining; his soul soon thinks he hath dwelt too long in Meshech, and in the Tents of Kedar; the wicked are to him an abomination; whil'st then any soul maintaineth this conflict, and so visibly disalloweth what he sometime doth; he may safely say it is no more I, but sin that dwelleth in me; for his servants you are to whom you yield your selves servants, Rom. 6.16. and comfortably conclude that as a Gospel-peni∣tent he turneth from all sin; and that is the first part of the formality of Repentance, the second naturally followeth, and that is, Second part of conversion.Reversion to God, a reception of God, God and God only, becomes the adequate object of Gospel Repentance; man by sin hath his back on God; by Repentance he faceth about; all sin doth agree in this, that it is an aversion from God, and the cure of it by Repentance must be conversion to God; when God calls for true Repentance, it is with an if thou wilt return O Israel, return unto me;Jer. 4.1. and when Repentance is promised, it is promi∣sed that the children of Israel shall return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodnesse, Hosea 3.5. And when they provoke one ano∣ther to Repentance, it is with a come let us return unto the Lord; and when provoked by others, it is to return to the Lord their God, Hosea 14.1. and when God calleth, and chargeth their Repentance with hypocrisie, it is with this complaint, They cryed, but nat unto me; and they returned, but not unto the most High, Hosea 7.14, 16. The Gospel penitent turneth not from sin to sin, as do the profane; nor from sinful rudenesse to common civility, or only moral honesty, as do the civil honest man; but unto piety, acts of Religion, unto God: God is the sole object of his affection and adoration; the true penitent is prostrate at the feet of God, as him only that pardoneth iniquity, transgres∣sion and sin: And pliable to the pleasure of God, as him only that hath prerogative over him; the whole man, soul and body is bent for God, and pursueth communion with, and conformity
to God; not only doth Repentance turn us from what is grie∣vous and contrary to God; but unto that which is agreeable, and acceptable God, the minde returneth from the devising of evil, to the review of the minde, and will of God;Psal. 1. v. 1, 2. from sitting in the seat of the scorneful, unto meditating on the Law of God night and day, his earnest out-cry is, Lord,Acts 9.6. what wouldest thou have me to do? for he is transformed in the spirit of his minde to prove what is the good and acceptable will of the Lord! Rom. 12.3. and full well knoweth it is life eternal to know God,1 Pet. 2.2. and Jesus Christ, and therefore having once tasted that the Lord is gracious, he as a new-born babe desireth the sincere milk of the Word; Gods Word is his great delight, and beautiful in his eyes are their feet that bring glad tydings from Zion.Rom. 10.15. The will and affections return from all evil, unto a resolution, and ready ac∣ceptance of the good, and acceptable will of God; not only doth the Gospel penitent pray, Wherein I have done amiss do thou shew it me, I will do so no more; but also speak Lord, for thy servant heareth; for it is wholly resolved into the will of God approving what is good, prizing every act of worship, and pur∣posing an exact observance of it, sincerely praying, Let thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven; and accounting it his meat and drink to do the will of God; his desires and affections run out to God, and God alone, there is nothing in all the earth to be compared with God, nor any in heaven acceptable to the soul besides God, Psal. 73.25. The Lord becomes his very dread and delight; he rejoyceth in the Lord, and continually feareth before him; such are his affections now towards God, that he can leave all to follow him, father, mother, sisters, brethren, wife, chil∣dren, lands, houses; nay, life it self becomes nothing in respect of God. A Gospel penitent stands convinced, that if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 Joh. 2.15. And if any man love any thing better than Christ, he is not worthy of him, Matth. 10.37. and so he accounteth all things drosse and dung in comparison of Christ, Phil. 3.7. The Lord is his chiefest among ten thousand, his all in all; and so his out∣ward man is ready in the utmost of endeavours to do the will of God; he is wholly resigned to Divine pleasure, to do or suffer a∣ny thing: God shall not enjoyne what his attempts and utmost industry shall not be to performe, or inflict what he shall not in
patience and silent submission endure; Repentance is no other than the obedience of faith;1 Pet. 1.2. the penitent Romans do obey from the heart the forme of sound words unto them delivered; or as the Greek bears it,. into which they are delivered; as in a mold which leaves its shape and impression on that which passed through it, Rom. 6.17. For the stony heart removed, the Law of God is imprinted in the soul, the Spirit of Repentance maketh us walk in Gods way,Ezek. 3.26. and to do his Statutes. The command of God carrieth the truly penitent contrary to the commands of men; nay, corrupt dictates of their own soul. J seph dare not sin against God for all Potiphars possession; nor Daniel slack his devoti∣on for fear of a Lyons Den; nay, it is irksome to a penitent Pe∣ter, to be once and again provoked to obedience, as half angry, he cannot but cry out,John 21.17. Why Lord, thou knowest I love thee; he is ready to execute Divine prescription against the utmost of oppo∣sition; he never desireth other Apology than whether we obey God or man judge ye; for Christ is exalted to be Lord and King, to give Repentance, &c. Not only doth he believe, but is also ready to suffer for the sake of Christ; he is contented to be at Gods carving, as unworthy any thing; under sharpest sorrows he is dumb,Psal. 39.9. and openeth not his mouth because God did it; in sad∣dest disasters he complains not, because he hath sinned against the Lord;2 Sam. 16.10. let Shimey curse him, he is quiet; nay, grieved at the instigations of revenge, for that God hath bid Shimey curse; in all his actions and enjoyments, he is awed by, and argueth not a∣gainst God. However he may with Hezekiah, slip and fall in his life time, yet the support of his soul at death is, Lord, Re∣member I have walked before thee with an upright and perfect heart, and have done that which was right in thine eyes, Isa. 38.3. And with Paul, he may finde a Law in his members rebelling against the Law of his minde, yet can thank God, that with his minde he serves the Law of God, Rom. 7.25. So that true Gospel Repentance doth not only convince and cast down, but change and convert a sinner, sense of, and sorrow for sin as committed against God, are necessary and essential parts, but not the whole, or formality of Repentance; no, that is a turning from sin, all sin unto God, only unt a God; it indul∣geth not the least iniquity, nor taketh up short of the Lord; it
stayeth not with Jehu at the extirpation of Baal; but with Hezekiah and Josiah, Rest reth the Passeover, the worship of the Lord; and that is the fourth thing considerable in the nature of Re∣pentance. The fifth and last conclusion is, Confession of sin, and prayer for its pardon, are constant concomitants of true Repentance. The true penitent is not only the sinner of sense, but of hope, and therefore a suppiant at the Throne of Grace, prostrate at the foot-stool of mercy, confessing sin, and suing for pardon, free∣ly accusing, and fully condemning it self before God; every penitent soul comes to God, like Benhadad to the King of Israel, wih an Halter about his Neck, praying, Forgive us our trespasses. David is no sooner brought to Repentance by Na∣than, but he is brought on his knees before the Lord, with an I hav sinned before the Lord, 2 Sam. 12.13. Returning Israel must take with them words, and say, Receive us graciously, take a∣way all iniquity; Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our gods, Hos. 14.3. When the Prodigal comes to himself, he goeh to his father, and cryeth, I have sinned against heaven, and a∣gainst thee; I am no more worthy to be counted thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants, Luk. 15.21. Confession of, and prayer for sins pardon, are such inseparable concomitants of Re∣pentance, that the whole work of Repentance is expressed by them, as if they were the formality thereof; thus when Repentance is the result of Gods chastisements, God observes, if they shall confesse their iniquity, and the iniquity of their Fathers, their trespasse where∣by they have trespassed against me, and that they have walked contra∣ry unto me, then will I be merciful, Levit. 26.40. When Achan is called to Repentance, he is required to give glory to God, and con∣fesse his iniquity, Josh. 7.18. and so Israel is required only to ac∣knowledge her iniquity, that she hath transgressed against the Lord her God, and hath scattered her wayes to the strangers, &c. Nay, the very promise of pardon to the penitent, is entailed on an humble suppliant confession of sin; if we confesse our iniquity, he is merciful and gracious, ready to forgive us our sins, 1 Joh. 1.8. So that there is no coming to God but with confession of sin, and prayer for its par∣don, and indeed there is great reason that these should accompany true Repentanee, because confession and supplication are;
First, The vent of grief; they give ease and quiet to the penitent perplexed soul; conviction concealed, is like a burning bile, in which the ill humours in a mans body do rancour and swell, burn and pain the whole body, as willing to be gone, and only giveth ease by being lanced, open'd, and let out by confession and supplication; guilt concealed, is like the winde confined in the bowels of the earth, making roaring ruptures and dreadful earthquakes; unconfest sin is the spring of horror, and principle of all amazement; David found it so on his sad experience, Psal. 32.3. When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long, but I acknowledge mine iniquity; untill then he could find no comfort. Secondly, The vomit of sin, so Origen did usually call con∣fession; for it is the loathsome rejection of sin, an easing of the soul by evacuation of what burdened it; casting up with grief and pain what we cast off with detestation; confession is the emptying the soul of sin by expression of all passion against it self; accusa∣tion and condemnation turn the heart and whole man against sin; shame makes us shun evil; the penitents in the Primitive times did confesse their iniquities to God in the sight of the Church, and if they again relapsed into the same sin, and aposta∣tized to their old course, were said to return with the Dog to his vomit, and the Sow to her wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.22. Thirdly, The vindication of Gods justice in all the afflicti∣ons by him inflicted. David acknowledgeth, and cryeth out, Against thee, thee onely have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou mayst be justified when thou speakest, and clear when thou judgest, Psal. 51.3. and therefore confession is said to be a giving glory to God. Josh. 7.19. Jerem. 13.16.Lam. 3.39. It quells all quarrelling passions against God, Why should a living man complain? a man for the punishment of his sinne. The language of a confessing penitent is, Thou hast punished us lesse then our Iniqui ies do de∣serve, Ezra 9.13. And to us belong Confusion of face, but to the Lord belongeth Righteousnesse, Da∣niel 9.
Fourthly, The voice in which God is well-pleased; God loves to see his people with ropes about their necks. Only acknowledge thine ini∣quty is Gods demand; this soon meeteth with acceptance. I have sinned, is no sooner spoken by David,2 Sam. 12.13. but the Lord also hath taken away thine iniquity is replied by the Prophet; nay,Psal. 32.5. David can witnesse, I but said I will confess, and thou forgavest mine iniquity. God will nor stay his correcting hand, untill the stubborn heart acknowledge his iniquity; but then he will do it;Levit. 26. the compassions of God give an affectionate check to the sharpest corrections of his children, if but moved by their confession and complaint; Ephraim cannot sooner relent under Gods hand, than he repent of his anger. I heard Ephraim bemoaning him∣self, saying, I was as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, I was ashamed, I was confounded; turn me, and I shall be tur∣ned, moves Gods very bowels to pity, Is not Ephraim my dear son? Is he not a pleasant childe? I will surely have mercy upon him, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. We see then that there is much reason why the Gospel-penitent must be a confessing suppliant; but before I passe this Conclusi∣on, let me briefly propound unto you the Rules which must guide our Confession, evidencing and accompanying our Repentance; and they are these. 1. Confession must spring from Conviction, and spread it self unto Condemnation. Soul-sense of guilt unto sighing, must make the tongue speak of it unto shame; compunction of spirit must be expressed by supplication: Then shall you remember your own evil wayes, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves; our common Translation reads it, But shall judge your selves not worthy to live, as other and better Translations read, for your iniquities, and your abominations, is the pro∣mise of the Covenant of Grace, Ezek. 36.13. Confession of sin wh ch springs not from sensible conviction, and spreads not to self-condemnation, is an historical narration, & verbal recitation of sin; like the cursory reading of an ordinary Inditement, no penitenti∣al confession of sin; the penitent prodigal begins with I have sinned, and ends with I am not worthy; it is an easie matter for Saul to say I have sined, I have transgressed the Commandment of the Lord, but still he staves off the sense of it, and not only disputeth against reproof, but at length diverts his conviction by an Apology,
I feared the people, and obeyed their voice, 1 Sam. 15.24. Conscience is placed in us, the Law spread before us, and self-scrutiny imposed on us, as precursive to our repenting confes∣sions; we are required to judge our selves, which imports to be convinced, we deserve to die, and so to put halters on our own necks. 2. God alwayes, and men ordinarily must be the object of our confessions and supplications. Whatever sin is committed, God is the object of it; his holy Law is violated by it; though some sins are committed against God immediately, and ex∣tend not unto men, as all breach of the first Table of the Law, and miscarryings of acts of Religion; yet all sins against men, are also against God, who is no lesse concerned in the second than the first Table of the Law. If David sin against Bathshe∣ba her chastity, or Ʋriah his life, yet he must confesse unto God, Against the have I sinned, and wrought this wickednesse in thy sight; however the trespasse is against man, the trans∣gression is against God; the sin which is committed against God, is to be only confessed unto God, not unto man; but the sin which is committed against man, must be confessed un∣to God, and likewise unto men; to God alwayes who can par∣don the eternal punishment; to men ordinarily, as when the Church is scandalized, or the particular person is offended and damnified;James 5.16. and in this last case, restitution must be added to our confession,Luke 19. Zacheus like; where we have wronged any, we must make acknowledgement and reparation; and in all offen∣ces to men, when we come before God, we must consider, whether our brother hath ought against us,Mat. 5.24. and go and be re∣conciled; the God that binds men to forgive till seventy times seven times, binds the offendor so, often to return and say, I have offended.Luke 17.4. The auricular confession of the Papists, is vani∣ty, superstition, and evil; but particular acknowledgements of sin to God, and sometimes to men, is duty indispensable; in vain doth Saul say to Samuel, I have sinned, whilst he never seeks to God for the pardon. 3. Confession of sin and prayer for pardon must be free, and not extorted. The natural, not forced language of the peni∣tent; the confession of constraint, falleth equally under suspicion with the unrequired accusations of malice, both which are fre∣quently
false; true repentance doth convince of the sinfulnesse of sin, and constraine the soule to confesse it with candor, in∣genuity and freedome, as weary of it, as the stomach of nau∣seous matter, that it naturally without any co-action casts up. Confession springs from the Saints, as Elihu his plea for God against Job, I am full of matter, the Spirit of the Lord con∣straineth me, saith he to Job, Job 32.18, 19, 20. The con∣fession of the wicked is constrained, and no longer doth he cry to God, than he is under the cudgel of his judgements, or on the Rack of his own conscience; so Pharaoh his plagues, and Judas his anxiety may extort an I have sinned; howe∣ver the children of God must be sometimes pinched and whip∣ped into their complaints, yet their cry is natural, and con∣fessions free and voluntary, a ready eccho to the least reproof,Psal. 141.5. and desiring that the righteous may smite, and God shew them their iniquity. 4. Confession and supplication must not be more free than full; not straitned any more than extorted; sin must be confest, not only in general, and in the lump, with a Lord have mercy upon us miserable sinners; but in its particular species and parts; as Israel, We have forsaken the Lord, and served Baal; in Judg. 10.10. and we have to all our sins added this evil, to ask us a King, to go about to change our Government, 1 Sam. 12.19. not only open, known, hainous, and flagitious offences, but even secret and particular lusts. David bewails, and con∣fesseth not only his murther executed on Uriah, but his self-revenge intended against Nabal, and the very cutting off the lap of Sauls garment; not only sin simply in it self, but with all its aggravations of time, place, manner, occasion; sinne must be taken up by the roots, and spread before God in all its branches, In iniquity was I conceived, in sin brought forth; as well as against thee have I sinned. In vaine doth Caine con∣fesse his cruelty to Ael, and conceale his irreligion to God; or Judas complaine of betraying innocent blod, whilst he makes no mention of his covetousnesse. 5. Shame and sorrow must seize on the confessing suppliant for sinnes pardon. Contrition of heart, and confusion of face, must be the result of confession; dayes of atonement,Lev. 23.27, 28. were dayes of soul-affliction, because of confession of sin; Davids complaints
makes him water his couch, and mingle his bred with teares; lying in the dust, and renting of Garments, were required from such as came to confesse iniquity; the spirit of repentance is a spirit of mourning. 6. Confession must be made with confidence and supplication in hope of pardon; the true penitent is prostrate before God as a Father, not as a Judge; men may confesse and be hanged, but the children of God cry with Shecaniah, We have transgres∣sed, but yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing, Ezra 10.2. they pray in faith, Father forgive us our trespasses; not in feare; mercy my Lord mercy. Judas's confession was there∣fore false, because fearful, and flying to his own destruction, not the innocent blood by him betrayed, that he might have been saved; we have shewed you the subject of repentance must be the believing sinner; hopes of mercy puts halters on our necks; confidence of pardon seats us in Gods Chair to con∣demne our selves; the confessions of despair, are the outcries of the damned in hell. Thus then Beloved, I have laid before you the true nature of true repentance. I well know it is a common Theme, and much Treated of, but little practiced; nay, indeed little con∣sidered and understood: How many pretenders are there among us, that may yet ponder the nature of Gospel-repentance? which if it be well understood, will neither appeare to be so lightly come by, nor sleightly performed, as it is deemed; we must know that every common repentance will not serve our turn unto the Remission of sin; but that repentance which Christ gives, is in respect of nature, 1. A grace supernatural, without the reach of mans arme or acquirement. 2. Whereby the believing sinner apprehensive of his own guilt and Gods grace, in and through Jesus Christ; 3. Sensibly affected with, and afflicted for his sin as commit∣ted against God, under conviction and contrition for all his sin as sin; 4. Doth return from sin, all sin, unto God, and God only as his all in all. 5. Freely confessing, and frequently begging pardon for his ini∣quity.
Consider my Brethren this description of Repentance you have had unfolded, and the nature of the grace discovered; for it will be very useful to you as a touchstone of doctrine and practice; for the confutation of all false notions about Repen∣tance; as that, 1. Repentance is the result of nature, and at mans command; we may repent when we will, as the Armi∣nians teach; but you must remember its supernatural. 2. That pennance is a transient act of confession and self-castigation, as the Papists teach; you must know it is a grace or habit. 3. That repentance is before faith, and not the result of the Gospel, and effect of the blood of Christ, as some Divines suggest. 4. That cnviction, contrition, and confession, are not necessary to repen∣tance, as the Antinomians teach; or sufficient repentance, as the Legalist and Pharisee teach; that a turning from sin to sin, or at least not to God and holinesse, as the Quakers, and our sinful age suggest, is the formality of repentance: but you may find and make it specially useful to conviction, and discove∣ry of false repentance, with which men are apt to take up and content themselves; and if this which you have heard be the nature of true Repentance, then these are false Repentances, with which take heed you be not de∣ceived. 1. Popish pennance,1. False repen∣tance. which is indeed scrued very high by the Church of Rome, unto a detracting from the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and making mans own sufferings, Partners and Peers to Christ his satisfaction; wherein it is not only Hereti∣cal, but blasphemous; but indeed in it self is very low and weak, not able to afford us the least of comfort, because a false and fained repentance, consisting in auricular confession to the Priest, never instituted by God; and self-castigation in a most cruel and violent manner, or Pilgrimages interdicted by the very light of nature, and never enjoyned by the Lord, and is different from true Repentance, in that it is meerly ex∣ternal on the body, not at all seizing on the soul; chastise∣ments of the outward, without any serious conviction or con∣trition of the inward man; tearing the flesh without renting the heart; nay, and that in a way of superstition, and will-worship like the self-cuttings, and torments of the Priests of Baal,1 King. 18.27, 28. and like to finde the same acceptance; and a transient action, with∣out
any inward principle, habit, and disposition; and too often under the prpose of continuing in sinne; nay, many times ma∣king way to sin, as the Popish Conspirators in the Gun-powder Treason confessed, and did pennance for the wickednesse they intended; so that it is every way inconsistent to the nature of true repentance; for it hath man, not God for its object; na∣ture, nay, lust for its principle; action, not frame and disposi∣tion, for its forme; is external in its property and in∣tention of sinne for its end; and so must needes be sinful, and soul-damning Repentance in its quality. 2. False repen∣tance.Pagans Repentance, which is effected in men as men, with∣out any the least respect unto Religion; all men have a natural conscience, and some remainders of the Law of God discovering a Deity, and directing duties of preservation to themselves and humane Society; by this they are checked on all miscarria∣ges, and grosse exorbitancies; and not only grieved and offen∣ded at the present, but also curbed and restrained for the fu∣ture. Thus Alexander when sober, repents the slaughter of his friend Clitus, in a drunken humour, and consults the Phi∣losophers as so many Ministers for the pacification of his consci∣ence; and so Polemo though in his drunken fit, he came to the Schoole of Xencrates, and heard him read of sobriety, yet went home, and repenting his drunkennesse became sober ever after; yet this is no other than a false repentance effected by the only power of nature, whose best things are but splendida peccata, shining sins, and is meerly a restraint of action, no renewing of disposition; it wants both principle and power to make it saving; this light within them without supernatural grace, doth but lead them a smoother way to hell; for at the best, vertue contrary to their natural vice, not God and his Will is the object of their conversion. 3. False repen∣tance.The prophane mans repentance, Pharaoh-like, repenting of good, and returning to evil; having let Israel go, pursueth them to bring them againe to bondage; and like the children of Israel,Jer. 34.12, 13, 14, &c. who let every man his servant go free, and then fetch them back againe. Like the repentance of Ananias and Saphira, who run as farre as others in selling their estates for the common good of the Church,Acts 5.5. but soon repent to the re∣taining some part, and lying to the holy Ghost. How many a∣mongst
us do now repent their sighing and sad thoughts that their sin hath cost them, and the serious discharges of holy du∣ties, fasting, praying, reading, hearing, and the like, which they have done; bewailing themselves that ever they looked towards heaven, or left the way of hell; this is a most sad and sinful repentance, in every respect opposite to the nature of repentance, being an inversion of the very termes; instead of turning from sin to God, a turning from God to sin; these mens latter end must needs be worse than their beginning, be∣cause having begun in the spirit, they end in the flesh; and it is hapned unto them according to Proverb, The dog is retur∣ned to his vomit, and the sow to her wallowing in the mire. The formalist and legal repenance; these men are eminent,4. False repen∣tance. and exact in the external and precursive acts of repentance; they humble themselves before God, and confesse iniquity, and seek for pardon of sin; rent their garments, and ie in sack-cloth; Ahab-like they are alarum'd by the Prophet Eli∣jah for their sin,1 Kings. 21.27. and therefore humble themselves before the Lord; they are full of conviction and seeming contrition, but never reach unto conversion; they lament sin, but lie in sin; like Herod, heare John gladly, but retain their Herodias; and like Foelix, tremble to heare of righteousnesse, temperance,Act. 24.25, 26, 27. and judgement to come; but yet look for a bribe, and dismisse Paul till some other time, that so they may quiet conscience, and grant a truce to the Devil; those like the young man in the Go∣spel, are not far from the Kingdom of God, but yet fall short; they never come at repentance. The Slaves repentance, which is extorted and extenuated,5. False repen∣tance. neither free nor full; like the repentance of Saul or Phara∣oh; so long as they are constrained, they confesse their guilt; when they can no longer hide their villany they own it, though with an endeavour to extenuate it; thus Saul by the dint of Ar∣gument, is at length driven to confesse to Samuel, I have sin∣ned; yet he that staved off the Prophets reproof as long as he could, at last stifleth his conscience, by pleading the feare of the people whom he pretended to fear and obey; and seeks no more than to avoid the present blow; Honur me, saith he to Samu l, in the sight of the people. So Pharaoh when under
the cudgel, will confesse he hath sinned, and will let Israel go; but Gods hand is no sooner staid, but his obduracy returns; it were well for many penitents, if they could go from a sick bed, a prison, an anxious conscience to heaven; for so long as they are in this condition, they are in a good mood, but no longer; these men like flint stones flie in sunder by the hammer, but still retain their hardnesse; there is in them no principle that may make them candid in confession, or free in the forsaking of sin. 6. False repen∣tance.A sullen and self-destructive repentance; these men in an an∣gry humour, and by the anxiety of conscience are constrained to repent of their miscarriage, like Shimei his repentance for cursing David, occasioned only by the change of Davids condition,2 Sam. 19.20. 1 King. 2.39, 40. and crosse of his own expectation, which yet at length leads him to sin against his soul, and break his bounds unto his own ruine; and like Judas in a dogged humour, de∣ploring his sin unto self-destruction; many men turn out of sin, because it turns Wife and children out of doors, deprives them of expected preferment, disposeth them into distresse and an∣guish of soul or body, or both; these men have no na∣tural enmity to sinne; but are like a Bowle turned out of its Biasse by some more than ordinary rub to their desires. Give me leave to adde one more, and that is the Quakers Repentance,7. False Repen∣tance. not fit to be mentioned, nor worthy the least re∣futation, it is so notoriously prophane and ridiculous, were it not too much successeful in these sad times, in which God hath given us up to a spirit of delusion, so as that the most palpable of errours finde entertainment; this is the Repentance where∣by men following the pretended light within them, are sud∣denly converted from extreame loosenesse, to extreame strict∣nesse of behaviour; it is to be wondred at, to see what a sudden leap the lewdest men make by this rude spirit, from the most horrid lewdnesse, to the most strange, solitary, and self-affe∣cted way of behaviour; these men we must not deny to be chan∣ged, unlesse we will deny our senses; nor own to be Gospel-penitents, unlesse we deny our Religion, and very reason; for themselves professe it to be from no other principle than the light within thm, which they say also is common to all men;
and so is at the best but natural, though in them plainly visible to be diaboli al, whilst it carrieth not so far as the light of nature, but is contrary to the dictates thereof in natural and civil society, darkening, nay, declaiming against those very notes of distinction, which God and nature hath in all Nati∣ons made between man and man; being violent, sudden, and precipitate by some absession or enthusiastique impulse as from the Devil, not by any moral swasion or intellectual convicti∣on, which is proper to a reasonable soule, and therefore acts wilfully with rage and rabid expressions, not able, and so refu∣sing to render a reason of their actions or perswasions; but with obduracy persisting in their own self-affected profession, with∣out the least possibility of conviction, or capacity of discourse, reducing them into a direct Bedlam temper, fit for nothing but Bedlam Discipline, so that in the very forme thereof, men of reason and the least measure of Religion, must needs conclude their conversion Devilish, not Divine; yet in the effect of it, their repentance must needs appear not to be true Gospel, and saving repentance, as being dissonant to the nature in the very formality thereof; for however it turns them from sin, yet not with due contrition and confession, or on due conviction, not from sin as sin; they retain pride, railing, disrespect to men, are void of natural affection, despise dominion, speak evil of dignities, whilst they damne drunkennesse, swearing, and o∣ther the like abominations; but it never turnes them unto God, nay, it keeps them at an equal, nay, a greater distance from God, than from the Devil, from heaven than hell, whilst they deny civility, and the common reverence children owe to Pa∣rents, Servants to Masters, and all Inferiours to Superiours, decline God, disown and declaime against holinesse, praying, hearing Sabbath and Sacraments are to them as the vices they do detest; Gospel-Ministers and Ministrations, are to them an abomination; whilst they refuse to sweare, they refuse to pray; drunkennesse and devotion are equal in their account; if with Jehu they drive furiously against Baal and Ahab, yet they mind not to walk with God, but follow the way of Jeroboam, both for Rebellion towards men, and confusion in the Church, so that they appeare farre from Gospel-penitents.
I have done with the first general part considerable, viz. the nature of repentance, and shall now proceed to the second, and that is, The NECESSITY of Repentance. Repentance in the very nature of it, which hath been ex∣plained, doth appeare useful and necessary. It is not a thing base and vile, to be despised, neglected, and contemned, but admirably excellent, and to be prized and pursued by every soul that is studious of true excellency; for however proud men pro∣phanely deem and damne it as a puling property, and pusillani∣mous temper of spirit, below a man, on every ordinary acti∣on to sit drooping and pensive, and not dare to do as nature dictates, and good company requires; yet the children of wis∣dome well pondering what hath already been spoken of it, can∣not but see it sparkle with such splendid notes, as engage them to esteem it, and employ themselves in it night and day; making it their work and businesse, saying as Tertullian, Nulli rei natus nisi poenitentiae, I am born for nothing but to repentance. For from what hath already been spoken, it is apparantly excellent: in its First, Nature; being a remorse for guilt, and return from sin; which who even among the Heathen did not esteem; remorse for guilt is the rejoycing of heaven; returns are the delights of God; in Luke 15.7, 10. rhe teares of sinners is the wine of Angels, saith Bernard. Secondly, Authour and Original, a grace super∣natural grows not in natures Garden, cannot be acquired by the most accurate industry or endowments of nature; it is from heaven by the immediate operation of the holy Spirit; Christ himself is exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance; Shall divine works, celestial influences lose their esteem? Thirdly, Ground and principle; t flowes from faith, and is the result of hope; it is not the lamentation of despaire, but complaint of candor and confidence affording comfort; streami g with pleasure from the soule; the priviledge of the Gospel, and Covenant of grace; it flowes from the fountaine of Divine favour.
4. Concomitants; Confession and Supplication; accesse to God with assurance of acceptance. Confession is the souls phy∣sick, saith Nazianzen; and Supplication is the Childs por∣tion. And indeed what is there in the Nature of Repentance, which rendreth it not desirable by every gracious heart, or good nature? so that to men that seek excellent endowments, and are for high and honourable atchievements, I must say, Repent, Repen: This is Alexanders honour, this is the only ornament of nature; the way to highest preferment, is to be humbled under the hand of God. But not only is it in it self excellent, and to be esteemed by such as can, and do obtain it, but also necessary; not of indif∣ferency, but of absolute and indispensable necessity; men may not choose whether or no they will repent, but must do it with all care and diligence, with all speed and alacrity; and a∣mongst the many Demonstrations which might be urged, I shall enforce the necessity of Repentance from these two grounds. 1. The Anticipation, and removal of Gods wrath and judgments. 2. The Answer unto the call of the Gospel. First, Then Repentance is necessary to anticipate, and remove the wrath and judgments of God. Repentance is the only fence to be made against feared judgments; there is no way to appease Divine fury, but by Repentance; judgments threatned may be thus diverted and prevented, and evil inflicted may be thus remo∣ved; the Lord threatens before he striketh, that the fear of ap∣proaching evil might force men to Repentance; thus God sent Jonah to cry to Nineveh, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed; and so the Lord sent his Prophets, Rising up early, and sending them to Judah, and to Samaria. The threatnings of God are but Summons unto Repentance, that his hand might be stayed; and therefore every threat doth either expresse or imply a promise of escape on the condition of Repentance, and an assu∣rance is given by the Lord that Repentance shall appease his an∣ger, and anticipate the denounced judgments. Behold, at what time I shall speak against a Nation or Kingdome, if that Na∣tion against whom I have pronounced, shall turn from their evil,
I will repent of the evil I thought to do unto it, Jerem. 18.8. Accordingly Gods hand is stayed by the but-seeming Repentance of men; Ahabs formal Repentance procureth a reprieve of the judgment, though not a remission of sin; because Ahab humbleth himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days, saith th Lord to the Prophet, 1 Kings 21.29. And so Nine∣veh repenting at the preaching of Jonah were spared, Jonah 3.10. God saw that they repented, and turned from their evil way, and God repented of the evil that he said he would do un∣to them, and he did it not. Impenitency is the enforcement of Di∣vine plagues; for all denunciations run with an unlesse ye repent, ye shall likewise perish. Repentance is the main errand of Gods judgments, and if it will be effected by reproof and threatning, God will never handle the rod, or inflict evil; the judgments of God thunder not over Jerusalem, untill they mocked the mes∣sengers of God, despised his Word, and misused his Prophets; and then the wrath of the Lord was kindled, and arose against his people untill there was no remedy, 2 Chron. 36.16. God is so solicitous of Repentance, that like the Lord of the Vineyard, he sends his servants one after another to the rebellious husband∣men, and at length his Son, whom he expects they should reve∣rence, to call them to Repentance, before he come with force and armes to subdue them, Mat. 21.36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Gods judgments are never inflicted, untill mens impenitency be upbraided; he always begins his corrections with an how often would I have gathered you,Mat. 23.37. and ye would not; and aggravates the affliction with a thy destruction is of thy self; and enforceth his utter rejection with an Oh that thou hadct known,Luke 19.42. at least in this thy day, the things which concern thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes; he drowns not the old world with∣out the warnings of an hundred and twenty years; he damned not the souls which are now in Prison, untill by Noah the Prea∣cher of Righteousnesse, he had called them to Repentance, and sealed them up under disobedience. We are now the Subjects of sin, and that stirs up Gods wrath; if we will escape that, we must return from this; Sin kindleth, and Repentance quencheth Gods fury. Man is not bound to pardon and pretermit an offence, but on Repentance of the offender; neither Nature nor Scripture doth require it; how much lesse is the Lord thereunto obliged;
therefore agree with thine adversary quicky, whil'st th u art in the way with him, lest he bring thee before the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee over to the Jaylor, and thou be cast into Prison. How many plagues are there impending over our Nation, Families, Persons? how high are the provocations of our sins? have we any heart to escape evil, and fear of the judgments im∣pending, deserved, and ready to fall on our heads? Let us humble our selves under Gods hand; let the Nation repent, every Family repent, and every particular soul repent; for Repen∣tance is our onely remedy of absolute necessity to di∣vert the denounced judgments, and anticipate impending plagues. Repentance is not only a means to prevent judgments threat∣ned, but to remove them when inflicted. Impenitency kindles Gods fury, but obduracy maketh it flame. Impenitency pulls the judgments of God on us, but obduracy sealeth us under them to our ruine; it is the very heighth of obduracy not to repent un∣der the Rod; they that fear not, yet cannot but relent when they feel the smart of Gods anger; the proudest Pharaoh that can out-face a threat with a What is the Lord that I should let Israel go, is yet apt to cry under his plagues poured out, I have sinned against the Lord. Gods wrath is never so severe, or his hand so smarting, but it will be stayed by sincere Repentance; but never without it; Repentance is the errand of his Rod, as well as of his reproof; where this prevaileth not, that must walk; I will go and return unto my place;Hosea 5.15. for in their affliction they will seek me early. The least remorse of a repenting Ephraim moves God to pity and Repentance, and stayeth his correcting hand; but stubbornnesse in sin must meet with bitternesse and severity in God; when God takes stubborn hearts to task, he addes to the number and nature of his chastisements, untill their sturdy stomacks are taken down. He walks contrary unto them that walk contrary unto him,Lev. 4.26. and comes on them with seven times more plagues, untill the uncircumcised heart be humbled, and they confesse their iniquities; this God will effect, or he will break in pieces; none must strive against him, and prosper; they that are hardened under his hands, he handleth to their utter ruine; Repentance is the natural genuine result of the Rod; of heart-rending plagues; it is a note of the highest impiety to per∣sist
in sin under punishment; of all the Kings of Israel, Ahaz is marked with this brand of incorrigiblenesse: This is that King Ahaz, who in his distresse did trespass yet more against the Lord, 2 Chron. 28.22. Where there is any ingenuity, there will be a repenting under the Rod by them that resisted the Word. It is the ordinary note of most obstinate Israel, when he slew them, then they sought him, Psal. 78.34. Though they were not good any longer than whil'st they were beaten; yet they were indeed exceeding bad, when they resisted correction; the worst tale that ever was told against Gods children, is that by the Pro∣phet Jeremy, Thou hast stricken them, and they have not grieved; Thou hast consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction, and have made their faces harder than a Rock, they have refused to return, Jerem. 5.3. Well may the Prophet conclude, They are poor and foolish, and know not the Lord, o the judgment of their God, ver. 4. For even iron and steel is soft whil'st in the fire; and impenitency under the Rod exposeth unto inevitable ruine; they are reprobate from Gods favour who repent not in the time of his fury; the saddest symptom of displeasure, is to hear God determine, You shall be smitten no more,Isa. 1.5. for ye will revolt still more and more. God sealeth up to everlasting vengeance by a spirit of impenitency, My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me; so I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own cuonsels, Psal. 81.11, 12. The proud Pharaoh that is not melted by, and repents not under Gods many judgments, is raised for this very purpose, that God might shew his power, and make known his minde unto the ends of the earth by their cer∣tain and severe destruction.Rom. 9. Whil'st then the sons of men are by nature the children of wrath, subjects of sin, and liable to sor∣rows, obnoxious to Gods chastising hand, and land-destroying judgments, provoking Divine displeasure, and Repentance the only means to divert or remove the same, must they not call one upon another? Come let us return unto the Lord; though he have wounded, he will heal us, Hos. 6.1, 2, 3. And for us in this Land and Nation, Are we not the subjects of sin, and most hor∣rid, God-provoking sins which God cannot but punish! pride and perfidiousnesse, profanesse and perjury, blasphemy, and base contempt of his Ordinances, and what not! iniquity unto the very
despising the Word of the Lord, and mocking his Messengers, that his wrath could no longer forbear, but hath made us the subjects of shame and sorrow. The furious footsteps of an angry God are to be found among us; God hath smitten us with pestlence, after the manner of Egypt, our young men have been slain with the edge of the Sword, and yet his wrath is not turned away. Our Foudations are removed, Laws violated, and Liberties invaded; his Name and Truth blasphemed, his Church laid waste, and his People sadly subjected to a spirit of delusion: And what Confu∣sions, Commotions, sad because sinful Revolutions compasse us about, making us a shame among the Nations, and a burden to our selves: And yet his wrath is not turned away, but his an∣ger is stretched out still, because we have not returned unto the Lord. How many, and heavy judgments hang over our heads? threatning the extirpation of the Church, eradication of the Go∣spel, and desolation of our Nations: And what is our remedy to remove what we feel, or prevent what we fear? is it not Re∣pentance? is not this ENGLANDS Unum Necessarium, One thing necessary? Should not all the Ministers of God cry, Repent ENGLAND, Repent, Repent? Must not all conclude in this respect, Repentance is a grace of absolute ne∣cessity; but Secondly, Repentance is necessary to answer the call of the Gospel. We are called Christians, and do professe subjection to the Gospel of Jesus Christ; our care must be in all things to walk as becometh the Gospel. Hippocrates took an oath of his followers,Phil. 1.27. to keep their profession unstained, and their lives unblameable: Sure I am, that in our Baptisme we are dedicated, and engaged to yield obedience to the Gospel, and shew forth its holinesse and power by due acts of Repentance, renouncing the flesh, the world, and the Divel; for indeed Repentance is the great duty imposed by the Gospel; and all such as will conform unto the commands of the Gospel must repent. Acts 17.30. Now God commandeth all men everywhere to repent. The light of Na∣ture, and of the Law, did direct men unto Repentance; but the light of the Gospel, is a loud call unto all men to repent; times of past ignorance, were times of Divine Indulgence; but these Gospel-days are seasons of imperious injunction; God now cm∣mandeth all men; not pity or patience must now be expected with∣out
serious pennance; there are many things considerable in the Gospel, whereby it calls to Repentance, which doth evidence the indispensable necessity thereof, and binds all men to answer; viz. 1. The positive duty directed in, and required by the Gospel, is Repentance. This is the main matter prescribed in it, and prea∣ched by it; John the Baptist, the harbinger of the Messiah, and first publisher of the Gospel, came preaching Repentance; and therefore his whole Doctrine and Administration, is called the Baptisme of Repentance, Mark 1.4. And the Lord Jesus, the great Prophet and Apostle of the Gospel, made his first appearance in the world, at the imprisonment of John, preaching Repentance, for that th Kingdome of God was at hand; and the great disrespect he chargeth on the Jews, was, that they repented not, either at the preachng of John, or himself, though both differently administred; to anticipate their caption; so that the great work of both appea∣reth to have been to bring men to Repentance. The first Sermon that ever Peter preached after Christ his Ascension, was to perswade Repentance; this was, and is the matter of all Preaching, and the main end of all Ministry; for the sole errand of the Gospel, is to open the blinde eyes,Acts 26.18. to turn men from darknesse to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; and hence Repentance from dead works is reckoned as one of the first, and foundation principles of the Go∣spel, Hebr. 6.1. And certainly principles are positively necessary, undeniable, and indispensable truths; Contra principia negantem non est disputandum; he is to be declined as mad that denieth princi∣ples; so that Repentance is the first, chief, and main lesson taught by the Gospel, and its call thereunto then must needs be great. 2. The prime priviledge of the Gospel is Repentance. This is the royal gift of our Redeemer Jesus Christ; he is exalted and made a Prince, and a Saviour to give Repentance; the prime grace con∣veyed unto us by the Covenant of grace contained in the Gospel, is Re entance; he taking away the stny heart, and giving us hearts of flesh, making us to see the evil of our ways and doings: The great Errand for which the Gospel is set into the world, is Repentance; they that receive the Gospel and not Repentance by it, shall be upbraided as were Bethsaida,Matth. 11. Chorazin, and Capernaum, as unwor∣thy so high a favour; nay, they shall have their torments aggravated by the enjoyment, but non-improvement of so high a favour.
It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon, Sodom and Gomor∣rah; they never enjoyed a Gospel to call to Repentance; this is the end of all the promises of God; to make us partakers of the Divine nature, escaping the corruptions that ar in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 7.4. The proposals of glory and happinesse, are the principles of purity and holinesse; we have these great and preci∣ous promises, that we may cleanse our selves from all filthinesse of flesh and spirit, and perfect holinesse in the fear of God.2 Cor. 7.1. The whole work of the Gospel is to carry on, and compleat Repentance, this is the profit to be reaped by every Ordinance; the Word prea∣ched, perswades Repentance; th Sacraments received, stir up and seal Repentance; the communion of the Saints carrieth on the work of Repentance, Exhorting one another daily, lest any be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, Hebr. 3.13. The Gospel is the great Charter of our priviledges purchased by Jesus Christ, and they all run into this, Repentance; this is the benefit by Christs death, Resurrection and Ascension; this is the fruit of the Spirit of Adoption,Zech. 12.10. it is a Spirit of prayer and mourning over him whom we have pierced; in brief, Repentance is the contract of the Covenant of Grace; the Law cannot give it, and the light of nature cannot give it; only the Gospel can effect it; the Covenant of Grace confers on us, an accesse to, and communion with God; as our God, not as we are innocent; for we are guilty of the breach of the first Covenant; but as we are penitent, sorrowful for, and turned from the evil of our ways; so that in this respect we must needs conclude Repentance is a grace of great necessity; we reap no benefit, enjoy no priviledge of the Gospel but by Repentance; the mystery of Redemption, Christs Incarnation, Death, Resur∣rection, Ascension and Exaltation, and all the Ministrations of the Gospel, are in vain to the impenitent. 3. Most pregnant Arguments perswading to Repentance, are propo∣sed in and by the Gospel; this is light so powerfully convincing, that all others which past before it, is but darknesse in comparison of it; whether it be the light of nature, making known sin as it is specifi∣cal and particular, contrary to certain standing dictates; not in its contrariety to the image and holinesse of God; and that without any clear and certain way of escape, and Repentance; or the light of the Law, which layeth men under full, plain, and clear conviction, even unto self-condemnation, but coucheth the pardon and possiibility of
Redemption, under such dark figures and expressions, that with much difficulty it may direct and provoke Repentance; but in the Gospel, the Sun of r ghteousnesse shines brightly unto conviction, and self-condemnation, nay, unto speedy and chearful conversion. There is no Argument in Nature, or in the Law to enforce Repentance, but it is urged in the Gospel; I, and much more: doth Nature stir up Re∣pentance by sins inconveniency to mans state, or the Law by sins in∣congruity to the holy, just, and good command of God; the Go∣spel doth the same; nay, and further addeth its inconsistency with that estate int which we are resolved by the Redemption of Jesus Christ; and so it presenteth us with two most pregnant, Powerfully Convinc ng, and Perswasive Arguments unto Repentance; such which no Professed Religion in the World (it self excepted) doth propound, and they are these: 1. The death of Jesus Christ. 2. The day of Judgment. The first Argument propounded in the Gospel to perswade Repentance, is, The death of the Lord Jesus Christ; This is an Argument potent in operation to every true believer; faith doth no sooner touch the hem of its garment, but it cureth; like the bones of Elisha, quickens the dead man that is but let down into this Grave; and pregnant in perswasion to every rational soul that is but candid, and ingenuous. It is storied of Antonius the Senator of Rome, that he intending to provoke the people to r∣venge the death of Caesar slain at the Senate by Brutus and Cassius, brought out his bloody Robe, and cryed out, Here is the bloody Robe of your Quondam Emperour. Thus the Gospel pre∣sents to our faith a crucified Christ, and slain Saviour, slain for, and by our sins, that we may look on him whom we have pir∣ced, and mourn over him; that we may see him whom our lusts have slain, and be revenged on them by Repentance. The con∣templations of a crucified Christ, cannot but constrain Repen∣tance. Mount Calvary is a place of heart-melting to every in∣genuous soul that makes it his walk; for that it presents unto his observation a man; nay, more than a man, a God under the most grievous sufferings, not for his own, but the sins of others, exposed unto that sad estate, not by any constraint or necessity, but his own choice, pity and compassion, in whom we reads
these three heart-moving, Repentance-provoking considerations: (viz.) 1. The great severity of offended justice, and fury provoked by his iniquity. Here he seeth the vilenesse of his sin, and fiercenesse of Gods anger, who would not, nay, in justice could not spare man without satisfaction; he had said it, and now seeth it executed: In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt dye the death. Here is furious justice which falls fearfully on a Surety, a Mediator; and fierce fury that favours not a Son, an only begot∣t n Son. Surely sin is hainous, greatly provoking to God, that his displeasure thus rageth. It is sure a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who makes the Son of his love thus roare out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Oh Impiety, horrid Impiety, that cannot be expiated by any thing, but the very heart-blood of God! O fury! fearful fury! that forsakes a Son, (only) become a Surety for sinners; what pensive thoughts must needs arise in the serious observer of this sad spectacle, especially when he proceeds to the next consideration, which is this: 2. Great love and pity of a Saviour; who willingly en∣dureth these sad sufferings out of choice, not constraint, for the sins of others, not of himself. Oh unconceivable love, ineffable pity, that we sinned, and he thus suffered! he left glory, to be exposed to shame; he undertakes an Atonement and Reconciliation between God and man, and endure h infinite fury to effect it; no guile was ever found in his mouth, whose soul undergoeth this grief; the debt was ours, and he payeth the utmost Mite for us. All we went astray, and on him was laid the punishment of us all;Isa. 53.3, 4. he is wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our sins; and that whil'st we were sinners, that slighted and rejected him. Greater love can no man shew than to dye for his friend; but behold here is matchlesse love! whil'st we were yet enemies, Christ gave himself for us. These Torments we must have en∣dured to Eternity, if they had not been inflicted on him. 3. We here see the gracious acceptance we have with God; the great liberty of accesse to God, which is to us afforded; the wrath of God thus poured forth on his Son, is pacified to∣wards
sinners; and the Covenant of Works being thus ac∣complished, is abolished; and man that was at distance from God, draweth nigh unto him; for this crucified Christ was thus lifted up, that he might draw all men unto himself; and is exalted, to give remissin of sin, and Repentance; and to con∣secrate us unto himself, a peculiar people. These Lessons, and every of them are written in such legible Characters in the death of Jesus Christ, that he that runs may read them; and each of them are pathetical perswasions to Repentance; whil'st they are read by any seriously observant soul, they re∣flect these serious and pensive thoughts! How vile is mine ini∣quity that hath provoked so great severity, and exp sed my Sure∣ty to so much misery? how great peril was my soul in, which is rdeem d by so great a price? how dangerous those wounds, which are only cured by the death of the Chyrurgion? how dis∣sonant to holinesse, and daring to justice is that sin, which but imputed, exposed the only begotten Son of God to be deserted by his Father? how fierce that fury, which could not be appeased without suffering? it must needs be fearful to fall into the hands of an angry God; for how will he fume at the servant, that thus frets at his Son? how will he tear the Principal, that thus tormenteth the Surety? how shall God punish us for our own sins, who is so wrathfully displeased with his Son for other mens sins? Oh what shall be the sufferings of the Reprobate, if these be the sufferings of his dearly beloved? needs must fraile man sink un∣der the burden of Divine fury, when the God of Angels needed the support of an Angel: If my Repentance will avenge the quarrel of my suffering Saviour, shall I not do it? if Repen∣tance will rescue me from wrath to come, shall I not performe it? had I not better weep a few days here, then in hell for ever? and the rather for that I weep not without cause, nor mourn without hope. The sin was mine, the sorrow my Saviours; the transgression mine, the satisfaction my Sureties. Oh the depth of his pity, that endured this for mine iniquity! What he endu∣red for a time, I must have endured for ever, if in him the Father had not been well-pleased! Shall that be my delight, which cost my Surety so dear? Shall I call on the Lords Name, or be called by the Name of Christ, and not depart from ini∣quity? was Jesus Christ thus broken for me, and shall not my
heart be broken for and from sin? hath he R deemed me from this wrath to come, and shall he not Redeem me from my vain conversation? shall I expect Remission, and not accept repen∣tance through his blood? Oh what reason have I to return to God, and glorifie him with my soul and body which are his! for he bought them at a price, and a deare price, his own blood; he hath consecrated a way of access unto the Father, through the vaile of his own flesh; but shall I dare to approach, not having my heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, and my body washed with pure water? he is reconciled, but shall I againe rebell? I am healed, shall I againe sin? a pardon is to me extended, shall I not receive it with a pensive and prostrate soul? Thus then we find that there is much of strength in this Argument, even above a thousand Arguments to enforce Re∣pentance; if but right reason keep the Throne, what reply can be made, or reason rendred, why the call of the Gospel should not be obeyed, whilst it pleadeth with so much clear∣nesse for our repentance from the consideration of the death of Christ? But the second Argument urged by the Gospel to induce us to repent, is, the day of judgement.2. Argument to enforce repen∣tance. The former Argument doth assault our affections, this our passions, that the soul may be surrounded with suggestions unto repentance; and if either the one or the other, are under the command of right reason, the design of the Gospel may not miscarry; the dread of the day of judgement, drives the Ministers of God to Preach and perswade repentance. Knowing the terrours of he Lord, we perswade men, saith the Apostle; for that we must all appear before the judgement seat of Christ, that every one may receive according to the things done in the body, according to that he hath done in the body, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. This is sure a profitable proper Argument to perswade repentance; which provokes unto the Preaching of it; and therefore the same Apostle doth in Acts 7.30, 31. urge it; but now he commandeth all men everywhere to repent, for that he ha h ap∣pointed a day wherein to judge the world in righteousnesse, &c. And this Argument is so pregnant and profitable to per∣swade repentance, that it is urged by John the Baptist, The
Kingdome of God is at hand, therefore repent; nay, the axe is laid to the root of the tree, and every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit, must be hewen down, and thrown into the fire; therefore bring forth fruits meet for repentance, Matthew 3. and very often by the Lord Jesus himself: This is so proper an Argument to enforce repentance, that it is noted to be set at a distance to the thoughts of the impenitent; they live as having made a Covenant with death, and an agreement with hell, Isa. 28.15. put farre away this evil day; it is noted that the Doctrine which increaseth ungodlinesse, denieth the resur∣rection, 2 Tim. 2.16, 17, 18. And such as walk after their own lusts, are scoffers at the day of judgement, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. And it is to be observed, that those in Athens who repented not at Pauls Preaching, mocked when he made mention of the resurrection, and last judgement. But certainly there is much in the day of judgement to move the hardest heart, and most stubborn sinner to repentance: the same Spirit which is to con∣vince the world of sin and of righteousnesse, convinceth also of judgement; for the day of judgement answereth all the sinners pleas, whereby he defendeth and encourageth himself in sin; for it assureth of certaine detection and conviction of sin. It is a day which alloweth not the least encouragement from secre∣sie; for therein every mans deeds must be made manifest, whe∣ther they be good or evil; nay, the very secrets of all hearts shall be laid open; and sinful thoughts themselves must then be judged; the day of judgement determineth a period to all im∣piety, and denieth the duration of its props and Pillars, pro∣fits and pleasures in the world; determining all the advanta∣ges of sin, to be at the best but pleasures of sin for a season; calling on rich men to howle and weep, though they live in pleasure on earth, in James 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. The day of judgement assureth of the punishment of the wicked; howe∣ver they scape scot-free in this life, and by their present power, Gods patience, and humane strength, they evade and escape many evils which befall the godly, yet they are but reserved to this day of vengeance; and this is the day in which the wicked must appeare Cursed, and manifesteth that it shall not go well with the wicked; this day of judgement, is the day of recompence to the righteous, wherein it shall be made mani∣fest,
it is not in vaine to serve God, or walk mournfully before him; the iniquities of the penitent shall not be found when sought for, but appear blotted out of Gods remembrance; for that if there be in the soul any sence of sin, and fear of judgment, this is one eminently forcible argument to perswade repentance: shall men continue in sin which shall erelong be laid open to their shame? or pursue the pleasures which shall shortly end in perplexities? and not rather judge themselves, that they may not be judged by the Lord? Thus then the Gospel doth by plain and powerful arguments call unto repentance, and witnesse its necessity: But yet a∣gain, The most powerful helps conducing to Repentance, are afforded by the Gospel: and thereby it calls most loudly to Repentance, leaving us altogether without excuse, and sealing us under inevi∣table condemnation in case we do not repent: the Gospel affords the fulnesse of knowledge for the enforcement of Repentance; ignorance and unbelief, those bars and locks of impenitency are broken open; the Gospel opens the blinde eyes, and turnes us from darkness to light; makes all men from the least to the greatest, to know the God that is offended, to be a God of jealousie, that will not endure iniquity; he is a consuming fire to the hypocrite in Zion: The Law that is violated, is just, holy and good; the guilt contracted, is so contrary and provo∣king to justice, that in it there is no possibility of approach to God; that therefore Christ is exalted a Prince and a Savi∣our, to give Repentance before Remission of sin: Repentance is a free gift conferred by the Covenant of grace, signified and sealed in Baptism; Christ Jesus the Donor; we need but ask and have; the death of Jesus the efficient cause of Repentance, it is wrought by union with the same; so that the Gospel makes us to see the necessity, nature, next way, method, and order of repentance; we cannot now plead we knew not what it was to repent, where or how to gain repentance, or that there was so great a need of it. The Gospel helps us to the Spirit that worketh Repentance. The Ministry of the Gospel is the Ministry of the Spirit; this awakeneth the most sleepy conscience, and shaketh the most rocky heart; this makes Herod heare John gladly, and the
Jews to rejoyce in his light; this makes Foelix himself to tremble, and Simon Magus to fall down like lighening; none can continue impenitent under the Gospel, but by quenching the Spirit, grieving the Spirit; nay, with rage resisting the Spirit, and counting themselves unworthy of salvation. The great work of the Gospel, is to send forth the Spirit to convince the world of sin,Act. 13.46, 7, 51. righteousnesse, and judgement; and the Spi∣rit by the Gospel works conviction, unto very opposition with rage, and violence, and malicious attempts, to extin∣guish its light, and destroy the Ministers that publish it, if it do not convince unto conversion and repentance; hence the sin unpardonable (constituted say some) but I am sure com∣pleated by impenitency, is called blasphemy against the Spirit; for and by reason of its spite and rage against the Gospel. We see then that the Gospel teacheth repentance as its maine do∣ctrine, offereth repentance as its prime priviledge, urgeth re∣pentance as its chief duty, and enforceth repentance as its on∣ly end; and so loudly calleth unto repentance, that we are bound to the obedience of the Gospel as the last of Divine in∣structions, and after which we must expect no direction to our happinesse; but this must stand as the high aggravation of im∣penitency, as a sin against the humiliation and exaltation of Jesus Christ, the death, sufferings, resurrection of the Son of God, the Covenant and Spirit of grace: Repentance is absoultely and indispensably necessary. So that in order to the antiipation of divine fury, and an∣swer of the call of the Gospel, we see the necessity of repen∣tance: And this is the second general Head propounded, which give me leave to dismisse with a brief, but plaine rebuke and blame unto the sinful demeanour and carriage of men in the world, demonstrating an insensibility of this indispensable ne∣cessity of Repentance; and it consists in two things, (viz.) the Contempt Of Repentance. Neglect Of Repentance. 1. Note of in∣sensibility of repentance.The sinful carriage of men evidencing their insensibility of its necessity, is the contempt of Repentance, whereby men scoffe at repentance, despising all calls thereunto; scorning
it as a base and contemptible melancholy humour, below the spirit of men; they live like men in Covenant with hell, and at an agreement with the grave, who need no repentance, and therefore make their hearts hard, and necks stiffe, be∣come obdurate and rebellions to all calls to repentance; ap∣prove themselves a scornful people; nay, scoffers at the Doctrine of the Gospel, and day of judgement, which calls them to Repentance. In the haughtinesse of their spirits, they 1. Disesteem the mercies and common providences of God, which should lead them to repentance. They say not in their hearts, Let us feare the Lord our God that giveth rain, both the former and latter in its season, and that reserveth to us the appointed weeks of the Harvest, Jer. 5.24. but despise the pati∣ence and long-sufferance of God, which should lead them to repentance. 2. Decline, nay, despise the Word of God; when preaching repentance, they will not hearken to the sound of the Trumpet, Jer. 6.17. have line upon line, yet will not heare, Isa. 28.13. Nay, pull away the shoulder, and stop their eare, lest they should hear, Zech. 7.11. 3. Disregard the judgements of God denounced, or inflicted upon others for their warning; all that God doth to treache∣rous Israel, never affects or frightens treacherous Judah to make her return, Jer. 3.10. The falling of the Tower of Si∣loa, and Pilates mingling the blood of men with Sacrifices, may occasion censorious thoughts,Luk. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. these were worse sinners than others; but never any serious reflections, that unlesse we repent, we must all likewise perish. Obdurate children never relent at their Brethrens correction; nay, when threatened themselves, they blesse themselves in their heart, and say, We shall see no evil, though we go on to adde drunkennesse to thirst, Deut. 29.19. By their stubbornnesse they tire and stay Gods correcting hand, with a Why should you be smitten any more? you revolt still more and more, Isa. 1.5. 4. Are desperate and daring in their impiety; sinning with an high hand, and brazen face, with utmost resolution; Come say they, we will fetch wine, and fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and more abundant,
Isa. 56.12. are not ashamed when they commit abomination, nor can they blush, Jer. 6.15. they sin as Sodome, not so much as seeking to hide their iniquity, Isa. 3.9. out-facing vengeance, out-daring heaven, out-vying hell, Isa. 28.15. deriding judgements denounced, because deferred, wth O Watchman, What of the night? Isa. 21.11. Where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3. nay, blasphemously saying, God is such an one as our selves, Psal. 50.21. and because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed, their heart is fully set in them to work wickednesse, Eccles. 8.11. so that they do every way demonstrate a contempt of repentance, and are so farre from owning a necessity of it, that they deem it vaine and vile, and so witnesse themselves to be desperately wicked, wedded to their lusts, and sold to work wickednesse; who wi l not heare of parting from impiety, though on hope of pardon, or feare of hell; and so justly called a stubborne people, deeply disingenuous, despising all dictates of self-preser∣vation, and escape of everlasting woe, the deepest discoveries of divine wisdome, which prescribeth repentance as mans re∣medy, the displayings of divine affection, soliciting repen∣tance to prevent their ruine, and so are foolish, dolefully self-destructive, denying the way of their safety, and defying a God of power and jealousie, to arise in his wrath against them, and so aggravating their sorrow with an I would have healed thee, but thou wouldst not be healed; thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel. 2. Note of in∣sensibility of repentance.But the second sinful carriage of men evidencing their in∣sensibility of the necessity thereof, is the neglect of Repentance; these men own it as a duty to be done, and remedy to be used, and dare not admit any contemptible thoughts of it; yet they are slack unto, and sleighty in the performance of it; And of these there be three sorts. 1. Sort of neg∣lectors of re∣pentance.1. Self-justitiaries; men that are right in their own eyes, see Repentance a needful grace, but not needful unto them; they are honest among men, pay all their own, live civilly among their Neighbours, nay, holy towards God; they Pharisee like fast twice aweek, pay tithes, give almes, heare Sermons, read Scripture, pray, and the like; these pity their prophane Neigh∣bours, and apply every reproof to them; but as for them∣selves,
Bellarmine-like they have no sin to confesse; they must straine conscience for some venial sins, that they may passe the forme of absolution; these are the whole who need no Phy∣sician, and the righteous whom Christ calls not to repentance; Untill convinced that this, and more than this, is consistent with Reprobation, and is not enough to keep a soul from hell; certainly these are, 1. Ignorant of natures pollution, Ezek. 16.2. Rom. 11.24. 2. Ʋnobservant of the Law its exaction, which concludeth all under guilt, Rom. 3.17. 3. Ʋnaffected with the prescribed way of salvation, Repentance and Remission. 4. In∣sensible of Divine scrutiny and judgement which they must passe, Prov. 16.2.21. 2. Matth. 9.13. 5. Unacquainted with, and unaccustomed to, or indirect in the work of self-ex∣amination, altogether strangers at home, or seeing their fa∣ces in the false glasse of comparison with their vilest Neigh∣bours; for otherwise they could not but see Repen∣tance absolutely necessary for themselves more than o∣thers; for Publicans and Harlots will enter into heaven before them. 2. Superficial penitents; these see Repentance a duty,2 Sort of neg∣lectors of re∣pentance. but deem it needs not much ado; there is no such necessity of it, as that a man should be taken up with it as his serious busi∣nesse; therefore they regard not the quality of the act, but passe themselves as penitentials, with some formal carelesse performances, some short sighs or sobs for sin, trembling with Foelix at Pauls Preaching, or quivering with Belshazzar, on sight of Gods hand-writing; and casting off some grosse pro∣phane acts with Alexander or Polemon, but never strike at the root of sin, and mortifie lust, or make a serious returne to God, but shew themselves voide of the grace, and ignorant of the nature of true repentance, and fall under fallacious hopes of heaven, which like the hope of an Hypocrite, will faile them in the evil day, when they shall be too late convin∣ced that such is the necessity of Repentance, that the matter there cannot be separated from the manner of perfor∣mance, 3. Such as set Repentance at a distance,3. Sort of neg∣lectors of repen∣tance. and post it off from time to time; these men are, and indeed by dayly subjection to the Gospel, cannot but be convinced Repentance is indeed
a duty, and exceeding necessary unto the remission of sins; and sitting under the Word, these men meet with many strong heart-shaking convictions, which they bid welcome, and un∣to the truth and goodnesse of what is required they assent, and their affections work within them, they cannot but sigh on sense of their sad condition, and confesse it hath been bad with them, but it shall now be better; they conceive and declare good pur∣poses, but alas they prove abortive; like Ephraims righteous∣nesse, an early dew soon gone; like the Son in the Gospel, when called into Christ his Vineyard, they answer, I go Sir, ut go not; like lingring Austin, pray, but feare God will too soon say Amen to their prayer; they protract time, persist in sin, and many times quench the motions of the Spirit within them; suggesting to themselves, though repentance be necessary, it re∣quires no haste; these men do sinfully 1. Determine their own time, not considering the uncertain∣ty thereof, that they are Tenants at the will of another, in the hand of the God of time, who may not give them another time; sense of repentance should make us say, Multis annis cra∣stinum non habeo, I have no to morrow. 2. Deem grace to be within the reach of mans arme; they think they can repent when they list; not considering it is Gods gift, so that they may enjoy their time, but not repent; were it at mens Command, what disingenuity is it to de∣ferre Repentance! but in this case it is Grand presum∣ption. 3. Do what in them lieth, to quench the Spirit, stifling convictions, disobeying perswasions, deadning affection; the Spirit will not move for ever, Gen. 6.3. 4. Disesteem grace and holinesse, accounting it the shame of strength, and burden of youth, thinking repentance the work of old age and weaknesse, and the quality of fools. 5. Deaden the hopes of their friends, who know not how to deert∣mine their eternal estate, are indeed cheered in their pensive po∣sture in sicknesse, and at death, if it be not too late to be true, on which account they are constrained to check their hopes, and dare make no conclusion, but say as Austin in the like case, Non dico damnabitur; non dico salvabitur; sed tu dum sanus es poeni∣tentiam age, Repent in health.
6. Make difficult repentance; undertaking that in infirm age, which requireth the utmost of strength; nay, rendering sin by its custome natural and obdurate. Can the Ethiopian change his colour?Jer. 13.23. then they that are accustomed to sin may repent; sicknesse employeth the whole man, and shutteth out all list or leasure to repent. 7. They are in danger dolefully to outdate the day of grace. God doth manifest graces beauty, and magnifie the necessity of Repentance, by limiting its time; to day if ye will hear his voice, well and good; if not, he will sweare in his wrath you shall not enter into his rest; if the day of grace be once expi∣red, Repentance may be sought with tears, but not obtained; and then the pleasures of sin will be shortning; conscience will grow clamorous, and torment with an expectation of fie∣ry indignaton to be revealed from heaven, lamenting too late, Oh that I had known in that my day,Luke 19.42. the things which Concerne my Peace, which are now hid from mine eyes! Such as in time will not, when it is too late shall see that repentance is the One Thing Necessary of mans life, is even of absolute Necessity. I have laid before you the two first general things considera∣ble, (viz.) the Nature and Necessity of Repentance, where∣in I have been longer than intention, but shall be more brief in the two remaining; I passe then to the third thing propoun∣ded, viz. The Notes and Characters of true Repentance. And concerning this, I might return back to the descripti∣on of Repentance, and make that an examination of the truth of your Repentance; but I will leave that to your own private meditations, and only examine your Repntance by the Chara∣cters propounded by the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians; For behold this self-same thing, that you have sorrowed after a god∣ly sort, what carefulnesse it hath wrought in you; yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what indignaion, yea, what feare, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeale, yea, what re∣venge! 2 Cor. 7.11. in which we have two remarkable Notes and Characters of true Rpentance.
First, The general nature of it, godly sorrow. Secondly, The Concomitants thereof, care fear, &c. 1. Mark of Re∣pentance.The first Note or Mark of Repentance, is godly sorrow: I have before Noted sorrow to be essential to Repentance; God never calls to Repentance, but he calls to weeping; or promiseth Repentance,Mr. Cala∣mies Sermon before the house of Com∣mons, Octob. 22. 1644. but he promiseth a spirit of mourning; excellently well saith an eminent Minister of this CITY, God hath tyed sin and sorrow together with Adamantine chains. A woman may as soon look to be delivered of a Childe in a dream, as a man to repent without sorrow. Sorrow is indeed the daughter of sin; but God hath made the daughter a means to destroy the mother; you must not look to dance with the Divel all day, and sup with Christ at night; to lie in Dalilah's Lap all your lives, and go to Abrahams bosome when you dye. To the merry Greeks, and Boon Companions of the world, Repentance seems madnesse, because it calls for mourning; for wheresoever there is true Re∣pentance, there must, there will be sorrow for sinne. This sorrow must be godly sorrow after a godly sort; it is , sorrow according to God. Godly in its Author, Occasion, Object, End and Effects; it must be godly sorrow in its Author, springing from God, and God alone; the working of natural passions by a supernatural power and principle; a spirit of mourning, even the Spirit of God melting and making the hard heart to mourn; a rock relenting on the stroak of Gods rod; the stony heart is taken away, and an heart of flesh given by the Lord; this sorrow is Gods gift from Golgotha; the death of the Son, of the Son of God, depresseth in us all joy and comfort. Nature is no Author, though an Actor in this grief. It is godly in its Occasion; Divine offence, rather than Humane losse; sinne, not smart, is the ground, reason, occasion of it; it is most in their hearts, who in respect of the world have least cause to mourn; it is not for losse of wife, children, goods or credit, but breach of Divine Law; its complaint is not I am undone, but God is offended, the Law violated, Christ is dishonoured; it is more for deformity, than deserved misery; for extinguished ho∣linesse, than miseries to be endured; a mourning for sin as sin, as it is offensivum Dei, aversivum à Deo, an act of disobedience, an act of unkindnesse. It is dolor to God, Against thee, thee only have I sinned. The souls unlikenesse to God, unlocks its
passion; the utmost of perplexities cannot abate its joys, if God appear well-pleased; nor the highest of enjoyments silence its sorrow, whil'st God stands offended. It is godly in its object; it is s rrow towards God, Acts 20.21. A lamenting after the Lord, 1 Sam. 7.2. A looking unto Christ, and mourning ove him whom we have pierced, Zech. 12.10. As a man runs with bleared eyes to the party offended, Oh Sir, I have offended, wronged you, will you forgive me? So penitent David runs to God, and with remorse crieth, Against thee, thee only have I sinned: And the Prodigal crieth to his father, I have sinned against thee. In days of affliction and atonement, Israel assembled, and mourned before the Lord; penitent Ephraim crieth, Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised. This sorrow speaks not in the ears of men, but God; it is not open and seen to the world, but secret, serious towards God. It is godly in its end and ef∣fects; it is expressed to God, that God may be enjoyed; this sor∣row speaks unto God the vindication of his justice; That thou mayst be justified when thou judgest, and righteous when thou speakest. It is not a mourning of murmuration, but of justification: Why should a man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin! it is a sorrow that sets a lustre on the least mercy; it is of the Lords mercy we are not consumed; We are lesse than the least of his mer∣cies, is its language; this sorrow is of submission, I have sinned, let the Lord do what seems him good; it lies prostrate at the feet of God for mercy, and resigned into the will of God: Wherein I have done amiss shew it me, I will do so no more; and so devotes it self unto God, to suffer or do his will; its out-cry is, Lord, what wouldest thou have me to do? it is eve∣ry way godly sorrow: This is the first Mark of Repen∣tance. The second Note or Character followeth upon it,2. Mark of Re∣pentance. and is the Concomitants; some call them adjuncts, properties, effects; but I shall only say inseparable Concomitants of this godly sorrow; and these are seven in number. First, Care; by some rendred study; in the Original ,1. Concomi∣tant of godly sorrow. which as Cicero rendreth, is a very earnest application of a man unto something with great delight: And as Interpreters render, it signifieth serious intention of minde, and speedy, sedulous ex∣ecution of hand; so that it stands opposite to security and sloth∣fulness,
and intends to Note the diligence and dexterity of the soul, in a shunning and avoiding sin, and setting against all occa∣sions and temptations thereunto, and studying the will of God, making it his meditation night and day; and having in all things respect unto it, as the rule of his life and conversation; so that the very anxiety of his spirit is to shake off and avoid his sin, to subdue and weaken his lusts,Qui paenitet, sollicitus est ne peccet. Ambr. in Text. to stand against temptations unto evil; for whoever repenteth, saith Ambrose, is careful not to sin a∣gain. He is made whole, he would sin no more, but with all care, caution, circumspection and vigilancy strive against cor∣ruption, and study to know and to do the will of God; with the Church at Ephesus, To remember from whence we are fallen, and do our first works;Revel. 2.5.3.1. or the Church of Sardis, to awake and watch, not to be slothful in businesse, and secure against sin, untill surprised therewithall. 2. Concomi∣tant of godly sorrow.Secondly, Clearing of our selves; , an Apology, or answer by way of defence unto the calumnies of an Accuser; which is not done by denial of guilt, and excuse of sin, but by confession;Paenitentia non habet excusati∣onem, nisi con∣fessionem. Amb. in Text. for saith Saint Ambrose, Repentance hath no excuse but confession. This is an humble deprecation of Divine judge∣ment, and silencing of the Accuser of the Brethren by self-con∣demnation; the true penitent doth judge himself with shame and sorrow, that he may not be judged by the Lord; he is ready to aggravate all, not extenuate any his sins; only findes an acquit∣tance from them in the blood of Christ, and concludes not against the charge of the Accuser, and clamour of his own conscience: I was an Extortione, a Drunkard, an Adulterer, a Blasphe∣mer; but I am washed, I am sanctified, I am justified; Repen∣tance rendreth guilt as if it had never been, and so becomes the souls Apology. 3. Concomi∣tant of godly sorrow.Thirdly, Indignation; , wrath unto grief; the ri∣sing of the very stomack with rage, and a being angry unto very sicknesse again; it is only used in this one Text of Scripture, as it hath sin for its object; but in reference to other things it expres∣seth the very heighth of anger, fretting unto fuming; thus the rage of the Ruler of the Synagogue on a conceived breach of the Sabbath, is expressed, Luke 13.14. Religious wrath is the hottest, it will make a meek Moses break the very Tables of the Lord: Thus the discontent of envy is expressed in Mark 10.41.
The Disciples stomack rose against Jams and John; so that it here imports the turning of the unquiet passions of the soul whol∣ly against sin; a fretting and fuming at our selves for sin; an ha∣ting and being ashamed of our selves for sin; this wrath breaks out in a penitent David, into disgraceful speeches against him∣self, so foolish was I and ignorant, when distrust prevailed on him, Psal. 73.22. And I have done very foolishly, when he sinned in numbring the people, 2 Sam. 24.10. Nay, breaks in∣to disgraceful demeanour towards sin, as impenitent Israel to the defiling the graven images of silver, and the ornaments of their golden Idols, and casting them out with contempt, as a menstruous garment, and an angry rejection of them, with a Get you hence, Isa. 30.22. So that sin is the object of hatred, scorn, rage, reproach, and contumelie, and ground of grief and shame to the peni ent; the soul cannot think of sin without stomachiza∣tion, heart-rising, and redning of face; he is indeed angry, and sins not the whole of whole anger, runs out against sinne. Fourthly, Fear, a rare companion of wrath,4. Concomi∣tant of godly sorrow. but alwayes of care; the truly penitent are of a trembling and timerous spirit; and no marvel; for the burnt childe dreads the fire; they have paid dear for past guilt, and may well beware to fall again; the whole work of Repentance is expressed to be a fear of the Lord and his goodnesse, Hos. 3.5. The fear of the Lord is the only fence against temptations unto sin; here note that this fear is a fear of sense, affecting us with the evil sin procureth, and dread∣ful judgments of God by it deserved, trembling at the Word of threatning; a fear of reverence, awefully apprehending the ho∣linesse and Majesty of God, and that vast disproportion and dis∣parity between God and us, sorrowfully crying, How shall dust and ashes, polluted man, come nigh to an holy and glorious Ma∣jesty! and a fear of diligence and vigilancie, watching and warring against sin, that it may not surprise us by the difficulty of our state and distempers of our soul; and thus the penitent wor∣keth out his own salvation with fear and trembling; but it is not a fear of diffidence and despondencie, of distrust and despaire, which deadning all hope of prevalency, dulleth all diligence, discoura∣geth vigilancy, and industry, and at length driveth to self-destru∣ction; the fear of Repentance springs from sense of mercy, and
is spurred with the confidence of successe, being assured it is God that worketh in the soul to will and to do,Phil. 2.13.1.6 and will perfect what he hath begun. 5. Concomi∣tant of godly sorrow.Fifthly, Vehement desire, , a desire of fervency, that can admit of no delay, saith Dr. Slater: Of dilgence and activity, say the Greek Criticks, which puts on with industry and violence; the soure sauce of godly sorrow doth ever sharpen the appetite of holy desire; the huted Hart thirsteth for the water, the sin-wearied soul for Christ; it is a desire to be wholly rid of sin, and therefore breaks out into complaints against the remain∣ders of sin in the soul, as Paul, Oh wretched man tht I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?Rom. 7.24. the death of nature, and day of judgement is desired, and delightful, because the destruction and discharge of sin; it is also a desire of all sin-subduing and grace-strengthning administrations; they that by Repentance have once tasted that the Lord is good, do as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, 2 Pet. 2.2. This desire is vehement against all difficulties and discourage∣ments, running out with all fervent dilgence for obtainment; and bitter complaints for want, finding no satiety without its very object. 6. Concomi∣tant of godly sorrow.Sixthly, Zeal, an affection compounded of love and anger, and is the edge of our desire, enforcing all means, and encoun∣tering all difficulties and opposition to our end; this is that whereby the penitent persists in his godly sorrow under all checks and diversions; and persevereth in his course of mortification a∣gainst all opposition of the world, or his corrupt self, fighting a∣gainst what hinders, and flinging off all incumbrances, and fol∣lowing heaven with force and violence, that if it were possible, it would draw all men with it, but however it beareth down all be∣fore it, and never sheweth the strength that is in these godly streams, till stopped by some temptation; but then it roareth and swelleth, and overfloweth its banks, that all men may see the pe∣nitent is full of the Holy Ghost; and this is alwayes a Note of Re∣pentance; Be zealous and repent, is Christ his own Call; sorrow must not be for sin, as if we minded not to part with it; but must manifest our fulnesse of resolution to be rid of it, whatever it costs us.
Seventhly, Revenge; the due result of zeal; by zeal we are car∣ried with that vigor, that the world concludes us mad for God,7. Concomi∣tant of godly sorrow. and for Religion, especially when our indignation boiles into revenge upon our selves for our sins by self-castigations,Acts 26.24. not of our body, with whips and scourges, as do the Papists, but by the abatement of lust, which stirreth in us, buffetting the flesh, and bringing it into subjection, giving it the blew eye, a blot in the face, as the Greek word signifieth,. withdrawing those lawful com∣forts which make it to wax wanton; as Hilarion, when he felt his lusts wax big and strong, and wanton, provoking to filthinesse, Ego faciam Aselle ut non calcitres, I will by abstinence keep this Asse for kicking; and our Henry the second, being incli∣ned to incontinency, prayed to God that he might rather have a constant weak body, than so srong lusts; this is that which car∣rieth the penitent to wreak his quarrel on the occasion and instru∣ments of their impiety;Exod. 38.8. as the daughters of Israel in dedicating their looking glasses, by which they had offended unto the service of the Temple; and as did the Ephesians, burn their books before all men, Act. 19.19. as holy Cranmer thrust his right hand which sub∣scribed his recantation, first into the fire, revengefully crying out This unworthy right hand as long as he could speak; and this re∣venge leads them to satisfaction for offences done, either by pub∣lick confession unto open shame, or ready restitution, as Za∣cheus, threefold to the injury done; as penitent Bradford, that parted with his whole estate to satisfie the wrong done by one dash of his pen when a servant; so that revenge worketh all the dis∣grace, dishonour, disadvantage, and destruction that is possible a∣gainst sin; thus then you have here the Notes and Characters of Re∣pentance, laid down by the Apostle, the best looking glasse that can be, by which to dresse your penitent souls. Let it be to every of us a Use of Examination, and clearly convince us that if we be strangers to sorrow, or our sorrow be to the world, not towards God, godly sorrow, we have not repented; never let us think of celebrating a celestial Passeover without these soure herbs. Again, if under our sorrow we continue carelesse of required duty; cla∣morous by continued guilt on the conscience; fearless of com∣mon danger, and deseved misery by the increase of sin, foolishly pitiful towards our lusts to be rebuked with rage; faint in our desires to be rid of sin; luke-warme in our work of mortification,
or indulgent to our lusts, not str king home, whilst we smite at sinne, we are not the Subjects of true Go∣spel-Repentance; for these must alwayes accompany it. Having laid before you the Characters of true Repentance, I shall proceed very briefly to propound the fourth and last Gene∣ral head to be considered, (viz.) The Next way and meanes to gain Repentance. And herein I shall not insist on the method and order of procuring repentance, which is hinted to you before; or the lets and hinderances of repentance which are to be removed, this would tire your patience (on which I have already too much trespassed) but I shall only give you some special directi∣ons, which you must observe, and carefully practice, if ever you will obtain Repentance; As, 1. Help to re∣pentance.First, Sit with care, constancy, and conscience under the Word of truth, and Gospel of Grace. Repentance you have already heard, is the great work of the Word, and loud call of the Gospel. This was the voice of John the Baptist, nay, of Jesus Christ himself, and his Apostles; the Ministers of the Word, are the Embassadours of Reconciliation, and so Prea∣chers of repentance; hearing is prescribed of God the way to happinesse. Isa. 55.2. Heare, and your soul shall live; The Preaching of the Word, is the power of God to salvation; so long as God continueth the Word to a people, they are in a possibility of repentance; but where the vision failes, the peo∣ple perish, Prov. 29.19. If ever God bring the Jews to Re∣pentance, it will be by the Preaching of the Gospel, the lift∣ing up of the root of Jesse as an ensign, Isa. 11.11. God sealeth up under impenitency by the withdrawing of his Word; the removing of the Candlestick of the Gospel, is the saddest doom can be denounced:Rev. 2.5. Refusing to heare, is the great reason of impenitency;Psal. 81.11. my people would not hearken, is Gods complaint; and We will not heare, the language of the obsti∣nate, Jer. 6.17. Rejection of the Word, pulling away the shoulder, and stopping the eare, the property of an hard heart;Zach. 7.12. never did Foelix faile so much; as when trembling at Pauls Preaching, he sends him away, and would heare no
more of that matter; nor did the Jews fall under final Aposta∣cy, untill they put the Gospel away from them; the very Heathen concludes Repentance to be the result of audience and attention. Invidus, Iracundus, iners, vinosus, amator;Horace in E∣pist. 2. Nemo adeo ferus est qui non mitescere possit, Si modò culturae patientem accommodat aurem. There is no prophanesse but it is curable by patient audience; As ever you will repent, hear the Word, attend unto instructi∣on, abide the heart-shaking convictions of the word; if you sleight the Ministry of the Word, the sound of the Trumpet, the call of the Gospel, you are sealed up under impenitency; the very cry of the Gospel-call to Repentance, is, Let him that hath eares hear. Secondly, Study the nature of God;2. Help to re∣pentance. God must be the object of Repentance; we must sorrow towards God, return to God; it is a great inducement therefore to know God; ignorance of God is the mother of impenitency; the times of impeniten∣cy are denominated times of ignorance, Acts 17.30. This is observed to be the very cause of obduracy; the Gentiles walk in the vanity of their minds, having their understanding dar∣kened, being alienated from the life of God by the ignorance which is in them, because of the blindnesse of their heart, E∣phes. 4.17, 18. Ignorance of God was the very principle of Israels persistence and progresse in sin; They proceed from evil to evil, but know not me, saith the Lord, Jer. 9.3, 6. The devil labours to keep all light out of mans soul, that so he may sleep in sin, and be locked up in impenitency; he hinders the Gospel from being Preached; if possible, he would blow out the light, and hinder men from hearing, but chiefly from un∣derstanding; if our Gospel be hid, it is hid unto them that pe∣rish; the eyes of whose minde the god of this world hath blin∣ded, lest the light of the gl rious Gospel of Christ (who is the Image of God) should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4. And when God brings to repentance, he breaks these barres of ignorance, he pulls off these scales of blindnesse, and begins with the un∣derstanding; true grace begins alwayes at the renewing of the
mind; the transforming of the mind to know the good and ac∣ceptable Will of God, is the formality of the Gospel-grace, true repentance, Rom. 12.2. And the knowledge of God being the princple of it, is put for repentance: They shall know God, Hos. 2.20. and God will be known by the Egyptians, Isa. 19.21. are the promises of repentance; There can be no convicti∣on of a contrariety to God, where there is not a right conce∣ption of God; and affection must follow apprehension; ignoti nulla cupido; how can we fear God or his goodness, if we do not know him? what reason of return to God, when men know not his holinesse offended, justice provoked, power irresistible, mercy in pardoning iniquity? It is a seeming faire Apology for Pharaohs obduracy, Who is the Lord, that I should let Israel go? The work of the Gospel is to open the blinde eyes, in tur∣ning from Satan unto God; the enquiry of Saul is first, Lord, who art thou?Act. 9. then, What wouldest thou have me to do? Did men know who it is they sin against, they never durst be so bold. Study therefore the nature of God, acquaint your selves with his Attributes, his Holinesse, Power, Justice, Mercy, and the like: Your soules will never be drawn from sin, or dri∣ven into a course of true repentance, untill God become your dread. 3. Help to re∣pentance.Thirdly, Sit close to the work of self-scrutiny; be serious in self-examination; no man sits so fast in impiety as the stran∣ger at home; none so soon run upon their ruine as the regard∣lesse of their accounts. This is a remedy of Gods immediate prescription, Commune with your hearts is on your beds, Psal. 4.4. Search and try your wayes, and turn unto the Lord, Lam. 3.40. Judge your selves, Mat. 7.1. When we approach his Table, where we are eminently to act repentance, the whole work of preparation is resolved into self-examination, 1 Cor. 11.28. Nay, this is a receipt transmitted to us with a probatum est thus by David, Psal. 119.59. I examined my wayes, and turned my feet into thy Testimonies. And when the Prodigals wits returned to consider his wickednesse, he would home to be a servant, where he had been and might have been a son; Gods rod is but a calling us to reckon with our own souls; he never reasons with any by correction, that read their own e∣state in his instructions. You have heard before that conviction
must go before conversion; mans conscience is a Register which will bring to remembrance; and Judge that will clearly deter∣mine of mans wayes; the worst of men by a short conference with their own soul, would soon see a necessity of repentance; censure others lesse, and your selves more; enquire not into other mens condition so much as your own Con∣versation; let no day return without accounts, be serious in self-examination. Fourthly, Sit loose to the world;4. Help to re∣pentance. the world is the great pull-back to heaven, and hinderance of repentance; you may ob∣serve, the reason the Rebellion and impenitency of Ezekiels hearers, was, their hearts went after their covetousnesse, E∣zek. 33.31. otherwise they took delight to hear. That sad sen∣tence, A Camel may sooner go through the eye of a Needle, than a rich man enter into the Kingdome of heaven, was oc∣casioned by a rich mans refusal of Christ his call to repentance, Matth. 19.20. Riches choak the work, and lift up the heart too high; great men in the world think they live above all re∣proof; for Tyrus-like, they set their hearts as the heart of God, Ezek. 28.6. and think to live without controle; he that loves the world, finds (when called to repentance) he is loth to leave pleasures; it is hard to renounce riches; it cuts deep to despise Wife, Children, Father, Mother, Friends, and deare Relations; he cannot but be dismayed at reproach and sufferings; sin is the common property of the world; the things of this world, is the recompence of impiety; they that sin highest, ordinarily succeed most; yet this is the great stum∣bling stone of the godly; the world makes David almost re∣pent his repentance, Psal. 73. They that will follow God, must be strangers to the world; true Penitentiaries must be pilgrims in the earth. Fifthly, See the shortnesse of life,5. Help to re∣pentance. and limitaton of the day of grace. Hopes of long life, and thoughts of repentance at plea∣sure, help many a soul to hell; our life we must consider is but a bubble, a blast, a shadow, gone before it well appeare, in which there is no certainty; our time is in Gods hand; he hath numbred our dayes, but to which of us hath he declared the number? hath he given any man a legible Lease of his life? have the youngest, strongest, most healthful among us, an as∣surance
of to morrow? and doth not eternity depend on the well-husbanding of this uncertain time? is there any remem∣brance of God in the grave, or repentance among the dead? doth not death determine the eternal estate of men? Dives eyes cannot distil one tear in hell; though he call to Abraham for mitigation of torments, never so much as begs the pardon of sin; no, that is too late; see we not men pensive and sad at the thoughts of death? Chrysostome hath told us, the cause of the fear of death, is, because we live not in the austerity befit∣ting Christianity, but lead dlicate and voluptuous lives. Could we make every day our dying day, it would quicken us to repen∣tance. Hilarion never had a to morrow; and when he comes to die, he hath the comfort of it; Oh my soul, get thee out of this house of clay, what dost thou fear? Septuaginta pr pe annis servivisti Christo & mortem tim s! Hast thou served Christ almost seventy yeares, and dost thou now feare death? If we will live for ever, we must die dayly; if we will not defer re∣pentance, we must not determine to our selves any other time than the present. Again, if we know our time in nature, who knoweth the date of the day of grace? It is a limited day, but the bounds there∣of are not pub ished, that to day, whilst it is called to day, we may hearken to his voice,Heb. 4.4, 7. lest he sweare in his wrath we shall not enter into his rest. A season of salvation is allotted to the sons of men; the old world had its day, Jerusalem had her day, every of us have our day; but our day of nature may out-date our day of grace, (yet of this we have no assurance) but if so it do, it were better the day of our being had never been; for the opportunity lost, we are lost for ever; whilst we enjoy the Word, and motions of the Spirit, we have hope; but if ever these cease, we are undone; Let us startle our souls with these sad thoughts; This may be the last day or hour of my life, but if not, the last day and houre of grace; would we hear every Sermon as the last, it would rouze our souls to re∣pentance. Sixthly, Seriously expct approaching judgement; it is an Ar∣gument to repentance,6. Help to re∣pentance. and very perswasive thereunto, as you have before heard; the thoughts of the last judgement, will cool the courage of the prophanest sinner, when he seeth the
day approach in which his secrt sins must be laid open, a severe sentence cannot be respited or suspended for the least moment, but must be executed with speed, certainty and severity; the Judge is just, and will then be inexorable. All the shelers of his power, might, policies, riches, honours, by which he staved off reprof, will now b scattered; a d fame vain and boot∣lesse; the Judge is no respector of person; a day stored with; indigna∣tion, which will not be mitigated, but be poured out in full vi∣als; can the heart but tremble, that is the subject of these thoughts? They that sin with boldnesse, set the day of judgement at a di∣stance from their soul; but if we will provoke repentance, think with Jerom you alwayes hear the Trumpet of the last day soun∣ding in your ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judgement. Ex∣cellent was the stratagem to stir up repentance, whch is storied of a Christian King of Hungary, who being on a time sad and pensive, his brother a jolly Courtier, would needs know the cause of his sadnesse; O Brother (said the King) I have been a great sinner against God, and know not how to die, or to appear before God in judgement; his Brother making a jest of it said, These are but melancholy thoughts; the King replyed no∣thing at present; But the custome of the Country was, that if the Executioner came and sounded a Trumpet before any mans door, he was presently led to execution; the King in the dead time of the night sends the Executioner to sound the Trumpet be∣fore his brothers door, who hearing it, and seeing the Messenger of death, sprang into the Kings presence, beseeching to know in what he had ffended; Alas Brother (said the King) you have never offended me; And is the sight of my Executioner so dreadful; and shall not I who have greatly offended, fear to be brought before the judgement seat of Christ! a singular cure for jovial contempt of repentance; the sense of judgement is a strong summons to repentance. Seventhly, Seriously apprehend the possibility, nay, probabi∣lity, nay, the positive certainty of pardon. I have before told you,7. Help to re∣pentance. Repentance is the result of faith; despair deters duty; hope in Israel, is the great help to repentance; the Law leads to con∣viction, but the Gospel to conversion; despair is the devils lock to impenitency; look up therefore, see there is mercy with the Lord, that he may be feared, and plenteous Redemption, that he
may be sought unto; apprehend then the price of mans sin paid, the justice of God satisfied, the pardon sealed in and by the blood of Christ, and proclaimed in the Gospel; so that it is thine with certainty, if received with a prostrate soul, and sued out by serious repentance; nothing needs to deter; God is reconci∣led, therefore return unto him. 8. Help to re∣pentance.Eighthly, Soak the heart in the blood of Jesus; take every day a turn of meditation in Mount Calvary; cast thy eyes on a cru∣cified Christ; read the nature of thy sin, the provoked wrath of God, and passionate loves of a Saviour; it is suppling to the Adamantine heart, and swasive to the most obdurate soul: I have before noted its force and efficacy to repentance; be perswaded daily to contemplate the Crosse of Christ. 9. Help to re∣pentance.Ninthly, Speed will much facilitate repentance; sin may be removed, before it be settled by custome; but then it is diffi∣cult; youth is pliable to precepts, strong under burdens, dexte∣rous and active in businesse; when old age is infirm, and impo∣tent; the piety of youth is the horrour of the devil, the honour of Religion, the case and joy of the soul; let not sin become custo∣mary, if you will ever cast it off; for it will become a second na∣ture; linger not in what you will be rid of; for the longer you linger, you will be more loth to part, like Austins modo sine modo, and paululum quod ibat in longum; your anon will never come; and our little longer in sin, will last for ever by the good will of nature; singularly good is the counsel of Basil, If the thing be honest, keep it to the end; if filthy and hurtfull, why dost thou continue in it? doth any that desires to ease the stomach of cho∣ler, increase it by a continued bad and intemperate dyet? if ever you will repent, repent betimes; late repentance is rarely true, but ever difficult. 10. Help to re∣pentance.Tenthly, Sue for it at the hands of God. Repentance is Gods gift, and therefore must be begged; it is Christs purchase, the Covenants promise, and may be begged with confidence; Je∣sus Christ is exalted to give Repentance, therefore go to him in Faith; all meanes is ineffectual without Gods Blessing. Let therefore Prayer enforce all meanes to this end; whilst you sit under the Word, study the na∣ture of God, examine your selves, sit loose to the
world, see life its brevity, and the limitation of the day of Grace, seriously expect the day of judgement, sen∣sibly apprehend a pardon, soake the heart in the blood of Christ, and speed Repentance, second all with ear∣nest Supplication; say with Ephraim, O Lord turn thou me, and so shall I be turned; so shall your stony heart be taken from you, and you shall possesse this necessary grace of Repentance in the truth of it, which God of his mer∣cy grant us.
OF Holiness. HEB. 13.14. Follow peace with all men, and holinesse, without which no man shall see the Lord. HEre are two duties enjoyned together in one and the same precept, though not enjoyned wth the same penalty, (peace and holinesse) the latter hath a sad threat added, if we misse it, without which no man shall see the Lord. It is some∣what like that charge, Exod 28.34, 35. that the Vest of Aaron should be on the skirt with a Pomegranate, and a Bell, both of gold; yet the use of the Bell was far above that of the Pomegranate, that the sound thereof may be heard when he goeth in before the Lord that he dye not. So are peace and holiness two golden graces or blessings; peace is like the Pomegranate, whose smell is fragrant, odoriferous, and so full of seeds, as no fruit more; such is peace, of all outward blessings the chief, and full of the seed of all blessings, it is therefore call'd the bond of peace,Ephes. 4.4. as if other blessings were the bundle, but peace the bond that did comprehend them all:
Yet holinesse is that which beareth the Bell, and maketh the mu∣sick in the ears of God; and if the sound thereof be not heard before the Lord, we shall surely dye. Therefore it is observed that the Relative [which] is not plural, as referring to peace and holinesse both; nor is it feminine, as referring to peace at all; but , (not , nor ) as referring only to , holinesse. Here are two great points contained in this Text. Doct. 1. P ace is a high duty, rich blessing, and singular benefit that a Christian is bound to follow, pursue, presse after, and labour for, and that with all men. The duty is pressed strictly in the word , rendred here with the softest follow; and in other places it is rendered to fol∣low after, 1 Cor. 14.1. Phil. 3.12. to pursu, 1 Pet. 3.11. to presse unto, Phil. 3.14. And we have a full proof for all; Rom. 12.18. If it be possible, as much as in you lieth live peaceably with all men. We must see there be no default on our part (that all the world is not in peace) but that we follow, pursue, presse hard after peace, (as far as possibly we may, and to the utmost that lies in us) and that with all men; so saith the Text also. But I must leave this small Pomegranate peace, that I may ring out the Saints Bell of holinesse, the sound and force where∣of I heartily pray may reach all your hearts, (not ears) or ra∣ther that the sound thereof in all your hearts may be heard in the Lords ears, (not ours) that ye dye not; yea, that Religion dye not; otherwise I may fear that Englands passing Bell is tolling at the departure of our glory, and we may call the next generation Iohabod. But the other, and present point is this; viz. That true and real holiness is the grace; the duty, the state, the trade which every Christian is bound to follow, pursue, press after with might and main, as he ever thinks to look God in the face. 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holinesse in the fear of God; perfecting holinesse] what is that, but to follow it, fol∣low after, pursue, presse hard to it? so 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye holy as God is holy; there is as much or more, pursue, follow it
still, that you take up with no scant measure, no low degree of it. I call it, 1. A grace, and so it is; yet more; it is not one single grace alone, but the conjunction of all graces. To say it is a star, is too little, it is a constellation; or the way of holinesse is as the lactea via, altogether starry, so holinesse is all grace. 2. I call it a duty, and so it is; but much more, it is the sum and Epitome of all duty. All duties of the first Table are referred to holiness, as all of the second Table to righteou ness, Luke 1.75. Yea, duties of the second Table are call'd holinesse, 1 Thes. 4.3. & 7. 3. I call it a state; it is not an act or habit, but a state; nor a state of a Christian, but the state of Christianity, the state of consistency and continuance or growth; there are some states we passe through, (as the man through Infancy, childe∣hood, youth, but abides in the state of Manhood) we passe through the New birth to be born no more; of morti∣fication,Rom. 6.9, 11. Rom. 8.15. to dye no more; of bondage, to fear no more; but in this state once, we must persist, persevere, live, dye in it. 4. I call it our trade, and so it is our noblest profession, and course of life, 1 Pet. 1.15. Be holy in all manner of conversation, 2 Pet. 3.11. What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conver∣sation! This is the trade and businesse we should ply in the whole course of our lives. Now it may be asked what this holinesse is? And I would answer, and (if the time would bear it) open, the definition, which is this: True holinesse is that inward, through and real change, wrought in the whole man, of a formerly vile sinner, by the Spirit of God,What holiness is. whereby his heart is purged from the love, and his life from the dominion and practice of fomer sins, and whereby he is in heart and life carried out after every god. 1. I call it a change, and so it is; it is not from nature, custome, education; it is not an habit, form, but a change. Christiani fiunt non nascuntur, creantur non generantur; and a mighty and manifest change it makes, it is therefore call'd a new birth, new creation, a
new creature, resurrection, &c. Is there not a change when a childe is born? when a dead person raised? a blinde man receiveth sight? Yea, whatsoever is call'd holy, is eo nomine, changed from its common use; when a person, or a garment, or a place, or a vessel, or a day were called holy, all such were changed, as to their use, serving now for sacred and Religious Services; such is Soul-holinesse, a Soul-change. There are three great changes wrought in a Christian at times. First, One in Justification;1. Ne impute∣tur. when a guilty sinner hath sin taken away, that it is not imputed. The second in Sanctification; when a sinner living and wal∣lowing in sin, hath sin taken away,2. Ne regnet. (the power of it) that it doth not raign. The third is in Glorification;3. Ne restet, aut omnino sit. when the sanctified person hath sin taken away, (all remainders of it) that it hath no being left. Now though the first and last of these are both perfect changes, and Sanctification is not perfect here; yet upon some account, some have called that change wrought in Sanctification the greatest change of the three; for com∣pare it with Justification, Justification is a change of the state, not of the person; a change without, not within the man. In Sanctification, there is a real change, and that within the man. In Glorification also is a perfect change, (it being the highest state of the three) but the change is not so great as in Sanctificati∣on; glory and grace differ but gradually, there being no oppositi∣on between them, as between grace and sin. The change is not so different between the Morning light and the Noon-day brightnesse, as between the Morning light and the Midnight darknesse. 2. I call it an inward change] to distinguish it from civil honsty. 3. A through change] to distinguish it from restraining, or con∣forming grace, which produceth some particular and partial change, but not a total and universal.
4. A real change] to distinguish it from hypocrisie, which makes shew of a great and goodly change, but is only outward and seem∣ing, not inward and real; which three are often taken (but as often mistaken) for holinesse. 5. Wrought] it is neither natural nor acquired, or taken up by the power of our own free will, or force of others perswasion, strength of reason, convictions, resolutions from within or without. Hence we are said to be Gods workmanship, Eph. 2.10. To be wrought to the same thing, 2 Cor. 5.5. 6. In the whole man] 1 Thes. 5.23. The God of peace sancti∣fie you wholly; and I pray God your whole soul and body, and spirit be kpt blamelesse, &c. So that if you ask where is the seat of this holinesse? is it in the head? or heart? or conscience? or outward man? I answer, in no one, but all of them; it is as leaven that leaveneth the whole lump; it is as the soul, tota in toto, & tota in qualibet arte. The understanding in a new sanctified person is enlightned to discern spiritual things, which before he understood not; his memory sanctified to retain what is good, and shut out what is hurtful; conscience awakened to check for sin, and exc te to duty; will subdued to embrace good, resist evil; affections orderly placed, to love, fear, desire, delight it, and to hate, and what is sutable to holinesse; and the whole outward man for speech, actions, behaviour, yea, habit and dresse is composed as becometh holinesse. 7. Of a formerly vile sinner] grace makes a mighty change when it works effectually; none so bad, so far gone, but it can br ng home;Ezek. 16.6. Esay 55.13. it findes one in his blood, and leaves him clean; it findes a thorn, and leaves a mirtl; it meets with a Publican and Harlot, and leaves a Sant; it meets with a bloody Persecu∣tor, and hellish Blaspheme, and turns him into a Preacher, or Martyr, as Paul; it findes men as bad as bad can be, and leaves them in as good a state as the best, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. 8. By the Spirit of God] we may not ascribe it to the vertue of Ordinances, or worth of Instruments; 1 Cor. 9.11. But ye are wash∣ed, but ye are justified, but ye are sanctifid; — by the Spirit of our God. Art, nture, education can do nothing here; it is not by might or power, but by the Spirit of God, Zach. 4.6.
9. Whereby the heart is purged, &c.] here the parts of holi∣nesse, which are two, mortification and vivification;Esay 1.16, 17 Cease to do evil, learn to do well. The first is privative. The second positive. Grace works right, when there is first a leaving of old sin: it is not putting a new piece on an old garment; or clapping a new Creed to an old life; or new duties to wonted courses;Deut. 22.9, 10, 11. this were to sowe with divers seeds, or wear a garment of woollen and lin∣nen which God hates; but there must be as to the privative part 1. A heart purged from the love of every sin] there may be sin left in the heart, no sin loved and liked; the evil that I do, I hae; sin and grace may stand together,Rom. 7.15. not love of sin and grace. 2. A life from the practice and dominion of sin] sin remains still, but raigns no more; he was a servant of sin,Rom. 6.17, 18. and had mem∣bers enough to be instruments of sin; a mouth to speak it, a tongue to speak for it, a wit to invent for it, reason to argue for it, hands and feet to work and walk fot it, purse to spend upon it; there is none of these now. Secondly, and the other part is yet much better; he is in heart and life carried out after every good] it is not a bare breaking off of sin that makes a Christian; (it is one half of a Christian) but there must be a turning from sinne, and bringing forth fruites meet for Repentance. You have both these parts, 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthinesse of flesh and spirit, and perfect holinesse, &c. To come to the Reasons of the point, which are foure. Reas. 1. This is Gods great designe; therefore should be ours. It is the greatest design God hath upon his people in all he doth to and for them. All the immediate acts of God, and all his mediate tend to this. 1. All Gods immediate acts: Pitch where you will; car∣ry it to the first of Gods acts towards man in Election; God hath chosen us before the foundation of the world,Ephes. 1.4. 2 Thes. 2.13. that we should be holy. So that I may not say, If I am Elected, I shall be saved, though I live in sinne;
but if Elected, I must be Sanctified, and dye to sinne. 2. Take all the acts of the three persons apart. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. 1 Thes. 4.7.First, The Father if he adopt, if he regenerate, if he call, it is that we should be holy. Secondly, It is the end designed by all that Christ did; his Incarnation,Hebr. 2.11. Hebr. 13, 12 Eph. 4.26, 27. Life, Death, Doctrine, Example, Humiliation, Exaltation, Prayers, Promises, Threats, Miracles, Mer∣cies; yea, of his Intercession in heaven that we might be sanctified. Thirdly, It is the end of all that the Holy Ghost doth. All the works of the Holy Ghost may be referred to three heads. 1. His gifts. 2. Graces. 3. Comforts; and all these tend to holinesse. 1. All the gifts of the Holy Ghost; if a gift of prayer, of con∣viction, terror, &c. it is to sanctifie thee; if of knowledge, utte∣rance, &c. it is to make others holy. 2. A l his graces; What is Knowledge, Faith, Repen∣tance, Love, Hope, Zeal, Patience given for; but to make thee holy? yea, they are the several parts of thy holinesse it self, which is made up of nothing but the graces of the holy Spirit. 3. All the comforts of the Spirit are given to strengthen our hands in holinesse; What is the peace of God, love of God, pardon of sin, assurance of salvation, joy in the Holy Ghost, Spirit of Adoption given for, but to make us more watchful, humble, lively in holinesse? The Privy Seals of Justification must be attested in Letters Patents, under the broad Seal of Sanctification, or it may be well suspected. Jeremy had two Evidences of his purchase,Jerem. 32.10. one sealed, the other o∣pen; so must we. 2. The mediate acts of God, whatsoever they be in Providences or Ordinances. First, All ways of Gods Providence to his people, tend to their sanctifying. 1. If God afflict, he saith to sicknesse, Go and pull me down that proud sinner, that he may be sanctified; Go saith the Lord to the winds and storms of the Sea, blow and beat the Ship to a∣waken me that sleepy Jonah;Jonah 1.17. & 2.10. swallow him up saith he to the Whale, (the Lord spake to the fish it is said) that he may learn
to pray there, and preach after. Go Temptation, winnow me that man well, that he may not be full of self-confidence, that he being converted, may strengthen his brethren; Go death, saith he, smite such a womans husband, that she may be destitute of worldly comforts, then will she trust in me,1 Tim. 5.5. and fall to prayer and supplication. Go ye Caldeans and Sabeans, and work your will on my servant Job; yea, Go Satan, and do thy worst, make ye him poor, I'le make him honest and pious, and more than a Conqueror, and bring him forth as gold; I will leave a poore people, saith the Lord, and they shall trust in me. In a word, the Lord saith,Zeph. 3.12. the end of all cha∣stisement, is, That we should be made partakers of his ho∣linesse.Hebr. 12.10. 2. If God deliver, it is that we should serve him in holinesse and righteousnesse. Go saith the Lord to Moses,Luke 1.74, 75. deliver me that people, that they may be to me a Kingdome of Priests, and an holy Nation. Let Naaman be healed,Exod. 19.5, 6. that he may be∣come a Convert to that God that hath healed him. San∣ctifie me that first-borne sonne,2 Kings 5. Exod 13.2. whom I have given thee again. Secondly, In all Ordinances; whose sole and proper end is Sanctification. The Word is to sanctifie, John 17.17. The commands, 1 Thes. 4.3. The promises to sanctifie, 2 Cor. 7.1. The Sabbath is a signe between God and us, that he is the Lord that doth sanctifie us, Exod. 31.13. The Sacraments; Baptisme is to sanctifie, Ephes. 5.26. The Lords Supper; so Discipline, Censures, Absolution, &c. Church-communion, private Conference. All Ordinances agree in this; some of them are for Conversion, some for Confirmation, all for Sancti∣fication. Reas. 2. This is that which constitutes a Christian, and from which he is denominated. All the Christians, and Church-members of old were called Saints; the Saints at Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, &c. That is, the Christians of those places and Churches, (not Saints departed, and Canon zed, but such Saints as we are or should be) visible Saints, followers of holinesse: And therefore as one is called a Scholar because he followes learn∣ing; another a Merchant, because he follows Merchandize; so is the Christian to follow holiness; To imagine a Christian
without holinesse, is to call one rich that hath neither goods nor lands; a Scholar without learning; to imagine a Sun without light, and fire without heat, which is a pure contra∣diction. It is holinesse which constitutes the Christian, as it is the soul which constitutes the man, who without it is a dead carcasse, hand, foot, heart, move not; neither can the eye see, eare hear, or tongue speak without the enlivening soul; so is the Professor a carcasse or shadow without holinesse; all his works dead works; his prayers dead, praises dead; yea, his faith, hope, repen∣tance without holinesse (mortua, & mortifera) all dead and deadly. Reas. 3. Without this no man shall see the Lord. This is the Menacing reason of the Text, where there are two things to be explained. First, One implyed. Secondly, The other expressed. 1. That implied is, That in seeing the Lord is the compleat bea∣titude of the soul; Blessed are the pure in heart, they shall see God, Mat. 5.8. i. e. see the Lord Jesus; for the Godhead is in∣vsible; No man hath seen God at any time, nor can we see him, 1 Tim. 6.16. But the holy person shall see Christ, and the glory of the Divine Essence, as much as finite can comprehend of infinite; yea, see God and live; see Christ, and be like him, 1 John 3.1, 2. Jesus Christ seen in heaven, is the glass of the Trinity; in him we shall see the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily: And he is a transforming glasse to those that see him, who shall be changed into the same image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. And the sight of Christ will be to us a transfiguration sight; when I look into another glasse, I see the image and representa∣tive of my self, and as it were, another self; but when I shall look into this glasse, I shall see another image and representation, (as a Parelius by the reflexion of the Sun) and as I may say, another Christ. Hence we commonly call the vision of God the beatifical vision; as one saith elegantly, Fides justifi∣cat, Charitas aedificat, Spes laetificat, Visio beatificat; Faith justifies, Charity edifies, Hope pacifies, but it is Ʋision which glorifies: And I may adde, Sanctitas qualificat, ho∣linesse qualifies, that Vision may glorifie. And this leads
me to the second thing which is expressed. 2. Without this no man shall see the Lord. Mark the word, no man; Be he rich or poor, Prince or Peasant; yea, be he a Prophet, Apostle, Minister, Martyr; yea, we may carry this  higher, no Angell shall see the Lord; what parts soever the man hath, whatsoever duties he performeth; let him be this or that, or any other the best profession, way, Church; let him do, let him suffer, let him be, let him give, let him hold what he will, f he be not holy, he comes not into Gods beatifical pre∣sence, he enters not into the holy hill of God. But were he as the Signet o the right hand, he must off, were he an anointed Cherub, he must out; down came the Angels, when they had laid down the r holinesse, and Adam was driven out of Gods presence, when he had driven out holinesse. Reas. 4. The fourth and last Reason, is that thundering one of Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13. When the last Trum∣pet shall sound, and sound louder and louder; when the day of the Lord shall come as a Thief in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and all the works therein shall be burnt up; Seeing then all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy Conversation and godliness, looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the Ele∣ments shall melt with fervent heat! Neverthelesse we according to his promise look for new Heavens, and a new Earth wherein dwelleth righ∣teousnesse. Here is nothing but terror in the Text, Lamentation and mourning, and woe. A Thief in the night, a great noise, fire, melting, burning, dissolving, yet is holinesse and righteousnesse secure. The new Creature looks for a new Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein there will be room for holinesse, if there be none here as for Lot in Sdome. This holinesse is like the blood of the Passeover on the door posts, when the destroyer was abroad, and a dreadful cry all Egypt over, then were the Israelites ready with their loyns girt, and staves in their hands, expecting the good houre of their last Redemption. We have seen (it may be some of us) sad days already; but there are too sadder to be expected; they are called the day of the Lord, and not days; because as death leaves us, judgment finds us;
Death being the morning, and Judgement the evening, and eter∣nity the night of the same day) They are both dayes of dis∣solution; the one is of the body; a sad dissolution, when the soul shall pass away with a sad noise of many a doleful groan, and this elementary body shall melt with fervent heat of burn∣ing diseases, &c. The other is of the Universe, when the whole world shall be in a conflagration, and hell shall come up to heaven, as once hell came out of heaven to consume Sodome; when the body of the Universe shall groan with the groanings of a deadly wounded dying man, as was said of Egypt, Ezekiel 30.24. Cum mare, cum Tellus, Correptaque Regia Caeli, Ar∣deat, & mundi moles operosa laboret; When the starres of heaven shall fall, and the powers of heaven be shaken, the Sun turn∣ed into darkness, Moon into blood, and all the kindreds of the earth mourn, and the hypocrites cry out, Who among us shall a∣bide with devouring fire, and dwell with eternal burnings? Isa. 33.14. Then shall the godly soul lift up his head, at death and destruction he shall laugh; he shall walk loose in the midst of the flames, as did the three Children without so much as the smell or least dread of the fire; and they may touch these live coals, as the Angel did, Isaiah 6.6. without any dis∣may. Oh holiness, holiness! what a munition of Rocks wilt thou give thy followers in that day of the Lord! oh let me press you to get a holiness that is Scripture-proof, and you your selves, and your state, and comforts will be death-proof, hell-proof, judge∣ment-proof; you need not fear any fear of man, any day of the Lord, any furnace-fire, elementary fire, conflagration-fire, hell-fire; when the Kings, and the Captains, and the Mighty shall cry out to the Rocks to fall on them, and the worshippers of the Beast, and the rich Merchants of Rome shall cry out for the smoak of the burning, then shall the Sons of Sion sing out their redoubled Hallelujahs at the coming of the Bride∣groom, and the day of the Lord, their day of Marriage and Co∣ronation. Use 1. Lament the loss of holiness. We may complain; Holi∣nesse is lost and faln in the streets. Some complain of losse of Trade; in these sad times Trade is dead, there is no Trade; we may say this Trade is lost or dead, there is little holinesse
stirring. Many complain of the losse of peace, pace is gone, but we have caue to say, Holiness was gone first. In midst of many Professions, many contentions, many op nions, chang∣ings, turns, returns, little holiness to be seen. In midst of great parts, high expressions, much light, powerful Ordinances, many years attempted Reformation, a little holiness goes a great way. Our shadows are long, our contentions sharp, our holi∣ness low, our Corn runs out into straw and stalk, not ear and kernel. Our nourishment turns to Rickets, the head swelled, and extended, the child feeble and infirm; we have left our company, and our work, and are scattered all the Land over, to pick up strawes, and gather stubble. Some observe, that our buildings now adayes, are not so solid and substantial as of old; our spiritual buildings are not I am sure; And as some say, our English cloth is not of so good a name and esteem, as here∣tofore abroad, not so pure and well wrought; our name and Crown for holiness is lost, it not being so pure and well wrought. Use 2. It informs how little some have to evidence their Christianity, and their Title to heaven, that can speak of no Holinesse, make no proof of any real change or work of the Spitit, of dying to sin, living to God; what are all these hopes but lying hopes. Without holinesse no man shall see the Lord. Ʋisible Saintship may justly gain admittance into Church-fel∣lowship; But it is real holiness that makes meet to partake of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Seeming holiness in profes∣sion, sets thee in the outward Court, but into the inner Tem∣ple, and the Holy of Holies, only true holiness qualifies to an admission. It is noted, though the outward Court was laid with stone, yet the Inner Temple,1 King. 6 30. and the Holy of Holies had the very floore of gold. True Holinesse makes a Member of the Church Militant and Tryum∣phant. 3. Use, Reproof, or terrour to such as hate, deride, or scoff at holinesse. Many if reproved, will say, I cry you mer∣cy, you must be so holy, I am none of your Saints, nor of the holy Brethren, &c. Oh unclean swine, or unclean spirit shall I
say; knowest thou not whose language is that in thy mouth, What have I to do with thee thou holy one of God? Thy speech bewrayeth thee (as one saith) to be a Hellilean, no Galilean, no Disciple; dost thou call thy self a Christian, and deny the Saint? then blot out Saint in Pauls Epistles, and teach him to call Christians by some other name, of Drunkards, Swearers, and Scoffers at holinesse. Blot out Saints out of thy Creed. Dost thou say thou art none of the holy Brethren? then tear thy name out of Gods Book, and the Church Register; The Apo∣stle calls all the Christians to whom he writes, Holy Brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling.Heb. 3.1. Dost thou glory that thou art none of the holy ones? then glory in this threat of the Text, that thou shalt never see God; glory in this, that thou hast no part nor lot in this matter, no part in Election, Redemption, in the gifts, graces, comforts of the Spirit, in the promises and priviledges of the Gospel; go and glory that God is not thy Father, Christ thy Saviour, that thou shalt never be troubled with the Communion of the Saints in Heaven, and the spirits of just men made perfect. Use 4. A worse Reproof and Use of terrour follows to such, who instead of following holiness, and perfecting holiness in the fear of God, are faln from it, declined, and turned aside after vain opinions, and employ speculations. Caepisti melius quam desinis, ultima primis oedunt, dissimi∣lis hic puer, ille Senex. Ovid.A young Saint and an old Apostate leads to a sad end. Look to it you young Professors, that had the Dew of Grace, and seeming holiness in youth, and are now dryed up by the roots. Look to it you old Professors, that you hold out, watch, and keep your Garments white, and seek to bring forth more fruit in your age. The Tree that bears evil fruit, is cut down. That which leaves only cursed, but that which is twice dead worst of all; this is the desperate case; and of all sins, this is only the unpardon∣able sin.Heb. 6.4, 5, and 10. All the unrighteousnesse of the greatest sinner, repen∣ting and leaving his sin, is forgotten and forgiven; but the righ∣teousnesse of the greatest Saints, repenting and leaving his righteousness, is forgotten, but never forgiven, Ezekiel 18.24. Use 5. The last Use is an Exhortation, and the whole Text is an Exhortation to follow holiness; to pursue, press after it, and pro∣ceed
in it with growth and perseverance. He that is holy, let him be holy still. For motives and Arguments,Rev. 22. let that of the Text never be forgotten, without holinesse no man shll see the Lord. When God comes to judge the world, it will not be asked of what Church, or Congregation thou wast, how great a Professor, but how holy thou hast been. The way of holi∣ness, is the Kings high way to Heaven. Read that notable place, Isa. 35.8. And a way there shall be, a high way, and it shall be called the way of holinesse; the unclean shall not passe e∣ver it; the way-faring men, though fools, shall not erre therein. There is much ado now about the way; many say, Which is the way? some say this, some that; would you not mi∣stake, enquire for the old way, the way of holiness, and fol∣low it, and thou shalt not perish. Some would go a new way, some a shorter, some an easier way. The simplest Saint (in the worlds sense) a fool shall not erre therein. The least dram of holiness is above a Talent of parts, a drop of grace above a Sea of knowledge. In knowledge we are said to be as Angels of God; in holiness like God himself;2 Sam. 14.20. 1 Pet. 1.15. so much as God is above an Angel, so much is holiness above knowledge. Look if thou canst make out the first change, then thou needest not fear any other change; if thou art partaker of the first Resurrecti∣on, thou art secure against the Second Death; thou hast crossed the Line; another Stile, and thou art at home. I shall only name two properties of holinesse, three Companions, and four Opposites to holinesse, and so con∣clude. 1. It must be Conversation-holinesse, 1 Pet. 1.15. & 2 Pet. 3.11. The Greek word ; and the Latine, Conversatio, come of a Verb that signifies to Turn; q. d. which way soever you shall turn your self, you shall find them holy at every turn; holy in the Church, and follow them home; observe them alone, or in company, merry, angry, in Shops, Closets, Counsels, Commerse, they are holy still; he is not Pub∣licanus, but Privatanus as one saith; and true Ho∣linesse is like that Famous Queen Elizabeth, Semper ea∣dem.
2. Which is yet more, it must be God-like-holinesse, 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye holy as G d is holy. God is infinitely and essen∣tially holy, so we cannot be; but God is imitable in his ho∣liness. As he is, 1. Universaly holy; holy in all his wayes, works, com∣mands, precepts, threats, promises, his love, an∣ger, hatred, all his Attributes, all his Actions holy. 2. He is Communicatively holy; communicating holinesse to all his, Angels and men. 3. App obativ ly holy; this he likes, commends, promotes in all, discountenancing all unholinesse, in persons, actions, things. 4. Remuneratively holy, rewarding and exalting holinesse, punishing want of it, so be you Universally holy in all your acti∣ons, speeches, writings, Letters, Counsels, Designes, in all Companies; let your anger, love, zeal, pity, &c. be all for holinesse, seek to communicate and spread holinesse in your fa∣miles, charge, Societies; let this be that which attracts the hearts, draws your eyes to any person, &c. And to your power suppresse, curb all unholinesse, and promote, exalt, commend holinesse. 2. There are three Companions of holinesse. 1. In the Text, Peace and holinesse; he is most for holinesse, who is most for peace in a right way; seek the peace of the Land,Isa. 8.12, 13. make no Conspiracies; say no confederacy, bt sanctifie God in your hearts; seek the peace of the Church, by preser∣ving the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; take heed of Schismes, Rents, Divisions, Separations; Pray that the Church may have rest;Act. 9.31. that walking in the feare of the Lord, and com∣forts of the holy Ghost, Believers may be multiplied and e∣dified. 2. Holinesse and righteousnesse are oft matched toge∣ther;Luk. 1 75. 1 Thes. 3.10. Prov. 11.1. Righteousnesse in Pactions, Words, Promises, Oaths, Bonds, Righteousnesse in dealings, Weights, Measures, a just Ballance, Ephah. Righteousnesse may possibly be without holinesse, but holinesse without righteous∣nesse never.
3. Holinesse and unblameablenesse; 1 Thes. 3.10. Ye are Witnesses, and God also how holily, justly, and un∣blameably we have had our Conversation in the world.1 Thes. 3.13. The Christian must be tryed by God and the world. Un∣blameableness in speech, behaviour, dealings; yea, in habit, gestures, that w may be without all offence, towards God, and towards man. The Kings Daughters Garment must be of divers colours, holily, justly, un∣blameably. 3. The foure Opposites, and enemies to holiness, which we must avoid, are, 1. Filthinesse of the flesh; sensual and bruitish lusts, 2 Cor. 7.1. Fornication, uncleanness, drunkenness, which de∣file the body, do utterly destroy holiness, and cannot con∣sist with it; therefore oft opposed. 1 Thess. 4.3. This is the Will of Gd, even your sanctification, that ye abstain from fornication, &c. God hath not called us to ancleannesse, but holi∣nesse, ver. 7. 2. Filthinesse of spirit; 2 Cor. 7.1. which is as destru∣ctive to holiness, as bruitish lusts. Idolatry, false Re∣ligions, wantonness in Opinion, errour, corrupt Do∣ctrine are as dangerous as Fornication; By these we go a who∣ring from God and Truth. The minde is to be kept chast and pure, as well as the body; errour is not so harmless a thing as many dream. 3. Over-reaching men by craft, fraud, power, po∣licy; and making use of such meanes, Arguments, de∣vices, stratagems, as corrupt reason, and carnal Coun∣sel (not Gods providence, or approbation) doth furnish us withal, and put us upon. 1 Thess. 4.6, 7. That no man go beyond, or over-reach his Brother in any matter; for God hath not call'd us to uncleannesse, but holinesse; and God is an avenger of all such. The word is , that no man over-top, over-reach, go beyond his Brother; not in holness (would we did seek herein to go beyond each other) but in craft and policy to undermine, or over-reach them; as Simeon and Levi over-reached the over credulous Shechemites, pretending conscience, and harbouring bloody intentions in
their hearts. God is an Avenger of such. There is a direful threat added of Divine Vengeance; this word , is but once more used in the New Testament, Rom. 13.4 then applyed to the Ma∣gistrate; he is a revenger of wrath to him that doth evil; he must see execution done; So in this case, God is the revenger him∣self, and he will be this mans Executioner. 4. The fourth opposite to holiness, is an ill kind of holiness; a supercilious, censorious, disdainful, and distance-keeping ho∣liness; which like the Pharisee, Luke 18. exalts it self, and Canonizeth himself, and his own party, and unsainteth all o∣thers. Isa. 65.5. Which say, Stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am holier than thou; these are a smoak in my nose, and a fire that burneth all the day, saith the Lord. This is the worst spot in the beauty of holiness; a spice of that pride that was in Lucifer, and his fellow-aspiring Angels that made the first Schisme and separation in the purest Church, even in heaven it self, among the Angels that were wholly perfect. Take heed of this, as of the very pest of the Church, and the bane of all Religion, which is best preserved in unity and humility. I shall shut up all with a wish, and that an hearty Prayer allu∣ding to what I said at first; Oh that all our garments (our Profes∣sion) might be adorned with these Bells and Pomgranates, peace and holinesse. That as we call on God, who is called holy, holy, holy, Rev. 4.6. and on Christ who is called King of Saints, Rev. 15.6. and as we profess the Gospel, which is a Rule of holiness, and are members of the Church, which is called a Kingdom of Saints, an holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9. and as we look to be partakers of that Kingdom wherein dwells righteousness and holiness, that accor∣ding to that promise, Thy people shall be all righteous, Isa. 60.21. that holiness to the Lord may be engraven upon all our hearts, as with the engraving of a Signet (the Spirit of God) and holiness to the Lord upon all our fore-heads, as to our conversati∣on; that as we have had a year, which we call Annum Restitutae Li∣bertatis, we might have a year Restitutae Sanctitatis; this we might safely call Annum Salutis, or Annum Domini, the year of our Lord. That our Officers might be all peace, our Governors holiness, Isa. 60.17. that our Ministers might be cloathed with righteousness, and our Church-Members with holiness; that all of different perswa∣sions
might (not contend, but) labour for peace and holiness. Here∣in let us agree, and all is agreed; that the bells of our Horses, and Bridles of our Horsemen (Commanders and common Souldiers) might be holiness to the Lord, Zach. 14.20, 21. that there might not be a Canaanite, or hypocrite in the house of the Lord; then might our Land, Church, Parliament, Army, City, Minstry, be called Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there, Ezek. 48.35. yea, then would this holiness settle us in peace here, and bring us to see the Lord, where peace and holiness shall never be separated. Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.
OF THE Resurrection. ACTS 26.8. Why should it be thought a thing unreasonable with you, that God should raise the dead? THese words are part of St. Pauls Apologie for himself, before King Agrippa, against the un∣just accusations of his implacable enemies; where∣in, 1. He demonstrates the innocency of his life. 2. The truth of his Doctrine; and sheweth, That there was nothing either in his life or doctrine, for which he could justly be accused. The Doctrine he taught did consist of divers par∣ticulars enumerated in this Chapter; one of which (and that not
the least) was, That there should a day come, in which there would be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. Now that this Doctrine was not liable to any just exception, he proves three manner of ways: 1. Because it was no other Doctrine, but such which God himself had taught: It had a Divine stamp upon it; as it is Verse 6. And now I stand, and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers. 2. Because it was that which all the godly Israelites, instantly serving God day and night, did hope for, and wait and expect in due time to be fulfilled; as it is Verse 7. Unto which promise our twelve tribes hope to come; for which hope sake, King Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews; and therefore it is called, The hope of Israel, Acts 28.20. for the hope of Israel, I am bound with this chain. 3. Because it was a Doctrine which God was able to bring to pass. This is set down in the words of the Text, Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? The emphasis lieth in the words with you: Why should you, O King Agrippa, who art a Jew, and believest in the God of Israel, and that he made the world out of nothing, think it incredible for this God to raise the dead? indeed it may seem incredible and impossible to the Heathen Philosophers, who are guided onely by Natures Light; but as for you, who believe all things which are written in the Law and Prophets, why should you think it either impossible or incredible that God should raise the dead? This interrogation is an Emphatical Negation, and it is put down by way of Question, Ʋt oratio sit penetrantior, that so the Argument might take the deeper im∣pression; and the meaning is, that it is not , or : It is not a doctrine exceeding the bounds of faith, or contrary to right reason, that God should raise the dead. The Observation which ariseth naturally out of the words is:
Doctrine. That the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust, is neither incredible nor impossible, neither against right reason, nor true faith. Though it be above reason, yet it is not against reason, nor against the Jewish or the Christian Faith: For the explication of this Do∣ctrine, I will briefly speak to six particulars: 1. What is meant by the Resurrection of the dead. 2. Who are the dead that shall be raised. 3. The absolute necessity of believing this Doctrine, and believing it firmly and undoubtedly. 4. The possibility and credibility of it. 5. The certainty and infallibility of it. 6. The manner how the dead shall rise What is meant by the Resurrection of the dead?The first Par∣ticular. For answer to this, you must first know, what there is of man that dyes when any man dyeth. Man consisteth of soul and body; and when he dyeth, his soul doth not dye; it is the body onely that dyeth. Death is not an utter extinction and annihilation of the man (as some wickedly teach) but onely a separation of the Soul from the Body,It is called a departure, Luk. 2.25. 2 Tim. 4.6. And an un∣cloathing, 2 Cor. 5.4. and a Departure of the Soul out of the body either to Heaven or Hell. When Stephen was stoned, his soul was not stoned; for while he was stoning, he prayed, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. When Christ was crucified,
his soul was not crucified; for while he was crucifying, he said, Faher, into thy hands I commend my Spirit. The Wiseman saith expresly, That when a man dyeth, His body returns to the earth from whence it came;Eccles. 12.7. but, his spirit returns to God who gave it: And our Lord Christ commands us, Not to fear them that kill the body,1 Luk. 2.4. and after that have no more that they can do: The soul cannot be killed; a man by sin may make his soul miserable and cursed, but he cannot make it miserable and corruptible. And therefore by the Resurrection of the dead is not meant (as he who writes that dangerous Book of the Souls Mortality would have it) the Resurrection both of body and soul, but of the body onely: For the body onely dyes, and therefore it is the body onely which riseth again. Thence it is, that in the Creed, (commonly called the Apostles Creed) it is put down in ex∣press terms,John 5.28, 29. I believe the Resurrection of the Body: Not of the Soul, for that never dyeth, but of the Body. The second particular.The second particular propounded, is, to shew who are the dead that shall be raised at the last day: The Answer to this is easie, All that are in the grave, whether godly, or ungodly; whe∣ther just or unjust,Acts 24.15. shall be raised. This Christ saith expresly, The hour is coming,Revel. 2.13. Isa. 26.19. in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voyce, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resur∣rection of damnation. All shall come forth, without exception of any;Acts 24.15. and the Apostle likewise tells us, That there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and un ust. The Earth and the Sea are Gods Stewards, with whom he hath betrusted the bodies of men and women: And when God shall call them to give an account of their Stewardship, they will faithfully dis∣charge their trust,Revel. 20.13. and not keep back one dead body: The sea shall give up her dead, and so shall the earth also. They are but the bodies withdrawing room, or sleeping-place; and the time will come,Isa. 26.19. when all that are asleep in the dust of the earth shall a∣wake: They shall all awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting contempt. This is the second particular, All the the dead, great and small, rich and poor, from Adam to
the coming of Christ, both good and bad, shall be raised at the last day. The third thing proposed, is,The third par∣ticular. To demonstrate the absolute neces∣sity that lies upon all Christians, firmly and undoubtedly to believe the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead. This appears in an especial manner from the spiritual mischiefs, and soul-ruinating consequences which necessarily flow from the denial of it. For, 1. The Doctrine of the Resurrection is an Article of our faith. The Author to the Hebrews puts it amongst the principles of the Doctrines of Christ; and therefore he that denieth it,Heb. 6.2. erres fun∣damentally, and is an Heretick, one whm we must not receive in∣to our houses, or bid him God speed. 2. It is not onely an Article of our faith,Sine hoc Arti∣culo tota fides & tota religio vana est. Streso in Act. but one of the chief Articles, without which all the other Articles of Christian Re∣lion are vain and unprofitable. This the Apostle speaks in express tearms, 1 Corinth. 15.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. If there be no resurrection of the dead, then is not Christ risen; and if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain, &c. If the dead rise not, let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. This therefore is not only an Article of our faith, but the foundation of all other; for, if there be no Resurrection, there is no life everlasting. Saint Austin saith, That the Resurrection of the dead is propria fides Christianorum: The proper faith of a Christian, without the be∣lief of which, no man can be justly accounted a Christian. A man may hold many errours, and yet deserve to be esteemed a Christian; but he that denieth the Doctrine of the Resurrection, doth unchristianize himself: For a Christian is one whose hope and happiness is in the other world: (For if we had hope onely in this world, we were of all peopl most miserable;) and therefore, he that renounceth his belief of the other world, renounceth Christianity.
Adde, That it is not onely the foundation of our faith, but of all our comfort and consolation; Resurrectio mortuorum est fiducia Christi∣anorum: The chiefest comfort the Saints of God have under all the distresses of this life, is, That there will a day come, in which they shall be raised out of their graves, to the Resurrection of Life; and shall have their vile bodies made like to the glorious body of Christ.Job 19.23, 26, 27. This comforted Job upon the dunghil; and therefore it much concerns all those who tender either their con∣solation or salvation, to be firmly and undoubtedly perswaded of this great truth, That there shall be a Resurrection of the dead: This leads me to the fourth particular. The fourth Particular.In the fourth place, I am to shew you the credibility or possi∣bility of this Doctrine. I confess, it is very hard and difficult to believe, that the bodies of men (when eaten up by worms, or devoured by wilde beasts, birds, or men-eating men; or when burnt and consumed to ashes, and these ashes scattered in the ayre, or thrown into the river) should ever rise again. It is easie to believe the Immortality of the soul; (for many Heathens have written in defence of it) but as for the Resurrection of the body, it is very difficult to believe it firmly and undoubtedly; there∣fore there are,Acts 17.18, 32. and have been multitudes of persons in all ages who have denied it. The Epicures and Scoiks laughed Paul to scorn, when he preached to them of the Resurrection of the body: The Sadduces in Christs time denied it.1 Cor. 15.12. Many in the Church of Corinth were infected with the same leprosie; Hymenaeus and Philetus begangreen'd many Christians, and overthrew their faith, by preaching to them that the Resurrection was past already.2 Tim. 2.17, 18. Da∣naeus tells us of nineteen Hereticks, who opposed this truth. The Familists also renounce it: And the Socinians say, That the same body shall not rise; but an aerial and spiritual body, which shall have no eyes nor ears, nor head, nor feet, &c. It must be ac∣knowledged, that this Doctrine is very hard and difficult; but yet it is not , or : It is not a thing impossible or incredible. Sure I am, that Job in the Old Testament did believe
it; for, he knew that his Redeemer lived, &c.Job 19.25, 26 27. And though after his skin, worms destroyed his body, yet in his flesh he should see God; and then he addes, Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me. Job did not onely believe, that his body, when de∣voured with worms, and his skin spent, and reins consumed, should rise; but, that the same body, not onely the same specifical, but the same numerical body should rise; therefore he puts in those emphatical expressions, I shall see God, I shall see for my self; I, and not another; and, mine eyes shall behold him: Though his eyes shall be glorified eyes, yet they shall be the same eyes for sub∣stance. As the Patience of Job was very great, and very exem∣plary; so surely his Faith was as great, and as imitable: O Job, great was thy Faith! This one Text is sufficient to prove, that the Doctrine of the Resurrection is not a thing incredible: And give me leave to speak to you in the words of S. Paul to King Agrippa, Why should it be thought incredible that God should raise the dead? especially, if you consider who this God is, That he is Omnipotent and Almighty, infinite in power, and able to do all things: He that believes the first Article of the Creed, will quickly believe the eleventh Article: He that believeth that God is Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, will easily believe that he is able to raise the dead. For if God (saith Tertullian) can make a body, being nothing, out of the dust of the earth, he can certainly repair it out of the dust when it is something. It is as easie to God to restore a body to a soul at the Resurrection, as to breathe a soul into a body at the first Creation. Objection. But how is it possible, that when a man hath lain rotting in the grave a thousand years, he should rise again? Answer. This is above reason, but not against reason: For there are many resemblances of this even in nature; which though they be not
sufficient proofs, yet they are great inducements to cause us to be∣lieve this truth. Both Philosophers and Divines write of the Phoenix, that first she is consumed to ashes by the heat of the Sun, and that afterwards of her ashes ariseth a young one, which is the same Phoenix risen from the dead. The Apostle tells us, That the corn must first be cast into the ground, and there dye and rot, before it will spring up; which sheweth, that a Resurrection from the dead is possible, even in nature. Adde to this, That Swallows, Flies, and Worms, which lie dead in the Winter-season; in the Spring, by vertue of the Suns heat, revive again. And what is every night but the grave (as it were) of the days light? and the morning, but the Resurrection of the day? What is Winter but the death of the fruits of the earth; and the Spring, but the Resurrection of them? What is death, but the blowing out of the candle of our lives? and what is the Resurrecti∣on any more, but the lighting of this candle again? What is death, but a pulling down of the house of the body? and what is the Resurrection, but the rebuilding of the same house? And why then should any man think it a thing incredible for God to raise the dead? We see by experience, that our curious glasses are made by the art of man, even out of ashes: And cannot the Omni∣potent God raise mens dead bodies, when turned to ashes? There is no contradiction in this; and therefore an infinite power is able to effect it. And to shew that God can effect it, he raised up many from the dead, both in the Old and New Testament, as helps to our faith, to enable us to believe, That that God who raised those few, will in due time raise all the dead, both just and unjust. Objection. But you will reply, How is it possible that the same body should rise, when as the dust of men are so mingled toge∣ther, as that it seems impossible to separate the dust of one man from another?
Answer, With man this is impossible, but with God all things are possible: It is easie to God to give to every man his own dust; if it be possi∣ble for a Gardner that hath thirty several seeds in his hand, to be able to distinguish between seed and seed; and for a Chymist, to extract the four Elements out of an hearb, and sepaate them one from the other; and for a Watch-maker, to take his Watch in pieces, and mingle the pieces together, and yet afterwards put them together as before: Much more is it possible for the Omni∣potent God to distinguish one dust from another, as well as one man from another, and one stone from another. Objection, One man is eaten by another, and turned into the sub∣stance of another; how can both these arise with their distinct bodies? Answer. Every man shall arise with his own flesh; but yet not so, as that he shall arise with every thing that was once a part of him: But he shall arise with so much of his flesh as shall make a perfect man, and the same man. A man hath a piece of his flesh cut off by a sword, and new flesh growing in its room; now he shall not rise with both these, but with so much as shall make him a perfect man, and one and the same man for substance. One man eates another mans flesh, and it becomes one with his; yet he shall not rise with that flesh, but with so much as shall make him a compleat man, and the same not onely for kinde, but for num∣ber; For with God nothing is impossible. So much for the fourth particular.
The fifth par∣ticular.The fifth thing propounded; is, to shew the certainty and infalli∣bility of this Doctrine: For this is not onely a Truth that God can make good, but a Truth which God cannot but make good. As there must be a day of Judgement, 2 Cor. 5.10. So there must be a Resurrection of the body; not onely there may be, but there must be, and of the same body; not onely the same specifical, but the same numerical body: Otherwise it were not a Resurrecti∣on, but a Surrection; not a Resuscitation, but a Suscitation. And (as Estius saith) not a Regeneration (as it is called, Mat. 19.28.) but a Generation. A Resurrection is of the same body that dyes, or else it is a new Animation, and a new Creation, and not a Resurrection. Now that there must be a Resurrection; appears, 1. From the promise of God: God hath promised that all that are in the graves shall hear his voyce,Joh. 5.28, 29. and come forth, &c. and, all that are in the dust shll awake. And that this corruptible, shall put on incorruption; and this mortal, shall put on immor∣tality;Isa. 26.19. and, We must all appear before the judgement seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done,2 Cor. 15.53. whether it be good or bad: And therefore the ancient Christians, when they rehearsed that Article of the Creed, I believe the Resurr ction of the body, would point to some part of their body; and say, Even of this body. God can do it, because he is Almighty; and he must do it, because he hath promised it. This is Pauls Argument to King Agrippa, Vers. 6. And now I stand, and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our Fathers, &c. And this is Christs Argu∣ment by which he proveth the Resurrection against the Sad∣duces, Matht. 22.32. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.
Objection, This Argument of Christ proves onely the Immortality of the Soul, but not the Resurrection of the Body. Answer. It proves also the Resurr ction of the body, because God is the God of Abraham, Isaa, and Jacob; not onely the God of one part of Abraham, but of whole Abraham; not onely the God of his soul, but of his body: And therefore whole Abraham must live for ever; for Gods Covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, is an everlasting Covenant. 2. From the justice of God: God cannot but raise the dead, because he is a just God, and must reward every man according to his works. Now in this life men are not rewarded; the Righteous in this life are oftentimes persecuted, and the wicked are in prosperity: And therefore there must come a rewarding time; and if so, then first there must be a Resurrection: For dead men cannot be rewarded. Objection. Is it not enough that our Souls be rewarded? Answer. No: For our bodies are partakers in good and evil actions with the soul; and therefore it is just that they should be Par∣takers also in rewards and punishments. Shall God require services of the body, and shall he not reward those services? Do not the Saints of God beat down their bodies, and bring them into subjection? Do they not fast often, and mortifie their earthly
members, and suffer Martyrdome with their bodies? And there∣fore God cannot but raise their bodies to the Resurrection of Life, and raise the same bodies; for it cannot stand with Gods justice, that one body should serve him, and another be rewarded; or that one body should sin, and another body be punished. A just Judge will not suffer one man to fight, and get the victory; and another to be crowned. The same body that sinneth, must dye; and the same body that conquers, must be crowned. What justice can there be, for God to cast a body that never sin∣ed into Hell, and that never was in Adam? 3. From the end of Christs coming in the flesh; which was, to destroy all the Enemies of our Salvation. Now the last Enemy which must be destroyed is death, 1 Cor. 15.26. and death can∣not be uttetly and totally destroyed, unless there be a Resurrecti∣on of the dead. 4. From the Resurrection of Christ: This is Saint Pauls great Argument; 1 Cor. 15.12, &c. If Christ be risen, how ay some that there shall be no resurrection of the dead? For Christ rose as a Publique Person, and as the Head of his Church: And if the Head be risen, all the members must also rise; and therefore he is called the First-fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20. and, the First-born of every creature: And if the First-fruits be lifted up out of the grave, the whole lump will certianly follow. Hence also it is, that Christ is called the Second Adam, 1 Cor 15.21.22. and Paul argueth strogly, That as by man came death, so by man also came the resurrection of the dead; and, as in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive. But now in the first Adam all dye, not onely spiritually, but cororally; and there∣fore in the second Adam, all must be corporally made to live: And live again in the same bodies; for Christ rose with the same body that he dyed with. And therefore he rose with his scars and wounds, and he convinced his Disciples that the body he rose with was a tu body, and not a Spirit; For a Spirit hath not flesh and bones (saith Christ) as ye see me have, Luke 24.39.
Objection. Doth not the Apostle say in that very Chapter,1 Cor. 15 44. That the bodies of men shall be spiritual bodies at the Resurrection; And therefore they cannot be the same bodies?1 Cor. 15.50. Doth not the same Apostle also say, That flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God? Hence the Socinians, and di∣vers others, gather, That the bodies of men shall not have flesh, and blood, and eyes, and heads, and feet, at the Re∣surrection, but shall be airy and spiritual bodies. Answer. There is a vast difference between mutation and perdition: The same bodies shall be raised for substance, but marvellously altered in regard of qualifications and endowments, as you shall hear in the next particular. Non aliud corpus, sed aliter. We read, Exod. 4.6, 7. That M ses put his hand into his bosom, and when he took it out it was leprous as snow; and again he put his hand in his bosom, and pluckt it out, and it was turned again as his other flesh: Here was the same hand when belepred, and when whole. A Beggar when he puts off his rags, and puts on the apparel of a King, is the same man, though outwardly altered or changed; So shall it be at the Resurrection; the bodies shall be the same for sbstance, though altered wonderfully as to their Qualifications and Endowments. And as for that saying of the Apostle, That flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; the meaning is not, That the substance of flesh an blood shall never enter into Heaven; (for Christ in his Humane Nature is now in Heaven) but that flesh as it is corrupted and sinful, cloathed with infirmities, and subject to mortality and death; flesh and blood as it is in this
transitory estate, liable to corruption, should not enter into Heaven; and therefore it followeth in the Text, Neither shall corruption inherit incorruption.1 Cor. 15.50. 5. I might argue lastly from the Immortality of the S ul: For the soul was made by God to dwell in the body; and though it can subsist of it self without the body, yet it still retains appe∣titum unionis, a desire of re-union with the body; and therefore is in an imperfect estate, and not compleatly happy, till it be re-united to the body: And therefore that the souls of the godly may be compleatly happy; and of the wicked compleatly misera∣ble, there must of necessity be a Resurrection of the body, that so soul and body may be re-united, and partake togther, either of compleat happiness, or compleat unhappiness. Adde to this, what is said by Durand (that great Schoolman) That when a man dyeth, not onely the soul of that man continueth alive, but some substantial part of that mans body, and God also, the great Creator, and first cause of all things. And why should any man think it incredible for God to re-collect the parts of the matter of any mans body which are perished, and to re-unite the same body to the same soul again? Post mortem homi∣nis (inquit Durandus) sperest quae potest utrum{que} unire anima; superest etiam materia, & praeterea, causa, scilicet Deus; ergo pote∣rit fieri reunitio earundem partium, scilicet animae & materiae ad idem totum constituendum. Upon which Argument Estius hath this Comment, Si partes substantiales hominis. anima & materia non poreant (qud rei veritas habet, & Durandi argu∣mentum assumit) sed in rerum naturâ permaneant, hinc facile probatur resurrectionem esse possibilem. Sic enim ad resurrectionem non aliud requiritur quam u tota materia quae fuerat hujus hominis, re olligatur & compingatur in eandum figuram mmbrorum quam aliquando habuit, ei{que} anima pristina ut forma restituatur. Quod totum Deo possibile esse non est difficile creditu iis qui Dei omnipoten∣tiam attendunt. So much for the fifth particular. The sixth par∣ticular.The last thing propounded, is, to shew, After what manner the dead shall rise, and what difference there will be between the Re∣surrection of the just and unjust.
Answ. It is certain (as hath been proved) that both just and unjust shall rise, and rise with the same bodies for substance; but yet there will be a vast difference between the Resurrection of the one, and of the other; which will consist in three parti∣culars: 1. The bodies of the just shall rise out of their graves, as out of their beds, with great joy and rojoycing; and therefore it is said, Isa. 26.19. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust. As soon as ever they awake, they shall sing and rejoyce: The godly shall come out of their graves, as Jonah out of the Whales belly; as Daniel, out of the Lyons Den; as the chief Butler out of Prison, to be restored to all his former dignities; and as Joseph, who was taken out of Prison to be made Lord of Egypt: So shall the bo∣dies of the Saints be taken out of the grave, to be crowned with everlasting glory. And who can sufficiently express the great joy and rejoycing that will be, when the body and soul shall be re-united together; when the Soul shall come down from heaven, to be married again to its former body? Look what sweet embracements there were between Jacob and Joseph when they first saw one ano∣ther, after that Jacob had thought he had been dead, and look'd upon him as one raised from the dead; such, and a thousand times more will be at the souls re-possession of the body: Look what joy between Jonathan and David, when David came out of the cave to him; and what embracements between the Father of the Prodi∣gal and the Prodigal, when his Father ran to meet him, and im∣braced him, and kissed him; and said, My Son was dead, but now he is raised again; such, and much more, will there be, when body and soul meet together. O how will the soul bless God for the body, which was an instrument to it in the service of God! and how will the body bless God for the soul, which was so careful to get an interest in Christ, and to get to be justified and sanctified! and how will both body and soul admire the free grace of God in Jesus Christ, who hath pickt them out to be heirs of so much mercy! Surely, we shall never understand the greatness of this joy, till we do taste of it.
But now on the contrary, The bodies of the wicked shall come out of their graves, as out of their Prisons, and as so many ma∣lefactors, to appear before an angry Judge. They shall come out of their graves (as the chief Baker did out of Prison) to be executed in Hell for ever: They shall arise with great fear and trembling; and shall call to the hills and mountains to cover and hide th m from the pres nce of the Lamb. And Oh the horror and astonishment that shall be, when the soul of a wicked man shall come out of Hell, and be again united to its body! How will the body curse the soul, and the soul the body! How will they be fool one another! certainly, this greeting will be very terrible: The Lord grant we may never come to have experience of it. 2. The bodies of the Saints shall be raised by vertue of their union with Christ: For the Body of a Saint, even while it is in the grave,1 Cor. 15.24. is united to Christ, and is asleep in Jsus, and shall be raised by vertue of this union. The Head will raise all its members; and cannot be perfect (as he is Christ mystical) without every one of them:1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive; that is, All that are in Christ by faith, shall be raised by the power of Christ, as a Head, and as a merciful Saviour and Redeemer: By the same power by which Christ raised himself, he will raise all his members. But now the ungodly, they shall rise out of their graves; but it shall be a Resurrection unto Condemnation, and it shall be by vertue of Christs power as a terrible Judge, and as an angry God, to their everlasting shame and confusion. 3. The bodies of the wicked at the Resurrection, shall be as so many ugly and loathsome carcasses to look upon; and their faces shall gather darkness and blackness, Isa. 66.24. They shall arise to evrlasting shame, as well as to everlasting torment, Dan. 12.2. But the bodies of the godly shall be made very glorious and beautiful: They shall shine as the Sun in the firmament, Mat. 13.43. and, their vile bodies shall be made like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.21. Now surely the body of Christ is wonder∣ful glorious: We had a specimen of this in his Transfiguration, where his face did shine as the Sun;Mat. 17.2. and yet this was but a glimse
of that glory he now hath, and which our vile bodies shall one day have. Question, How can this be? Answer. This is according to the working of his mighty power,Phil. 3.21. by which he is able to subdue all things unto himself. God can do it, for he is Almighty, and with him all things are possible: Indeed, the substance of our bodies shall not be altered, but the qualities shall be much altered. They shall have glorious en∣dowments and qualifications: As Wool, when died into a pur∣ple or scarlet die, is not changed in the substance of it, but one∣ly is made more glorious: So when the bodies of the Saints shall rise, the substance of them shall not be changed, but they shall be made more glorious, and more excellent. Question. If you ask me, what those Endowments are which God be∣stoweth upon the body at the Resurrection? Answer. It is impossible to set out all the glory which God will bestow upon the bodies of his Saints at that day. For eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entred into the heart of man to conceive, what God hath prepared even for the bodies of those who love him, and wait for his appearing.Aug. de Civita∣te Dei, lib. 22. cap. 21. Quae sit & quam magna spiritualis corporis gloria, quoniam nondum venit in experimen∣tum, vereor ne temerarium sit omne quod de illa profertur eloquium. The Schoolmen reduce them to four heads, Impas∣sibility,
sibility,Impassibilitas, Subtilitas, Agilitas, Clari∣tas. Subtilty, Agility, Clarity. The Apostle also com∣prizeth them under four particulars, It is sown in weakness, it is raied in power; It is sown in corruption, and raised in incorruption; It is sown in dishonour, and raised in glory; It is sown a natural bo∣dy, and raised a spiritual body. Objection. If it be a spiritual body, how is it the same body? Answer. It is called a spiritual body, not in regard of the substance of it, but of the qualities of it; and that in two respects, 1. Because it shall have no need of meat or drink, but shall be as the Angels of Heaven, Mat. 20.30. not that we shall have Angelicam essentiam, but Angelicas proprietates; not the essence, but the properties of Angels: We shall neither eat nor drink, but shall be as the Angels. We shall have (as Tertullian saith) cor∣pora reformata & Angelificata: Even as a Goldsmith (saith Chry∣sostome) puts his silver and gold into a pot, and then melts it, and forms of it a gold or silver b wl, or cup, fit to be set before Kings; so the Lord melts the bodies of his Saints by death, and out of the dead ashes and cinders of the bodies of his servants, he frameth, and will make goodly vessels of honour to stand before him, and to praise him for ever in heaven. 2. It is said to be a Spiritual body, because it shall be absolutely subject to the soul. In the state of glory the soul shall not depend upon the body, but the body upon the soul. In this life the soul is,See this more fully handled in the Sermon preached at Dr. Bollons Fu∣neral. as it were, carnal, because serviceable to the flesh; but at the Resurrection, the body shall be, as it were, spiritual, because per∣fectly serviceable to the Spirit. But the time will not give me leave to insist largely upon this point. So much in answer to the six particulars propounded for the explication of this Doctrine: Now for the Application.
Use 1. LEt us believe this great truth, and believe it firmly and undoubt∣edly, That there shall be a Resurrection of the body, and that the same numerical body shall rise again; the same for substance, though not the same for qualities. The great God can do this, for he is Almighty, and to an Almighty power nothing is impossible: God can do it, because he is Omnipctent; and he cannot but do it, because he hath promised to do it. He cannot be true of his word, if the body do not rise again, nor can he be a just God (as I have shewed;) for it is just with God, that as the body hath been par∣takers with the soul in good or evil actions, so it should be par∣takers with the soul in everlasting rewards, and everlasting punish∣ments: And it is just with God, that the same body that serves him should be rewarded; and the same body that sins against him should be punished: And the truth is, if the same body doth not rise, it cannot be called a Resurrection, but rather a new creation (as I have shewed:) Let us, I say, firmly believe this truth; for it is a fundamental truth, and the foundation of many other fundamental truths: For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ risen; and then is our faith vain, and our preaching in vain. Remember Job in the Old Testament believed this. Use 2. IF there be a Resurrection of the dead,Resurrectio mortuorum est consolatio & fi∣ducia Christia∣norum. here is great consolati∣on to all the real members of Jesus Christ: For the Resurrecti∣on of the dead is the comfort, and the hope, and confidence of all good Christians. This was Jobs comfort upon the dunghil, Job 19.26, 27. and Davids comfort, Psal. 16.7. and Christs comfort, Mat. 20.19.—But the third day he shall rise again. It was Christs comfort, and it is the comfort of every good Christian.
1. Here is comfort against the fear of death: As God said to Jacob, Gen. 46.3, 4. Fear not to go down to Egypt, for I will go with thee, and I will bring thee out again. So give me leave to say to you, Fear not to go down to the house of Rottenness, to the Den of Death, for God will raise you up gain. Your Friends and Acquaintance leave you at the grave, but God will not leave you. The grave is but a dormitory, a resting-place, a storehouse, to keep you safe till the Resurrection: Christ hath perfumed the grave.1 Sam. 26. As David, when he found Saul asleep, took away his spear and cruse of water; but when he awoke he restored them again. So will death do with us: Though it take away out strength, and our beauty; yet when we awake at the Resurrection, they shall be restored again unto us. God will keep our dead ashes, and preserve them safe; as a Druggist keeps every whit of the drug he hath beaten to powder. A Saint while he is in the grave, is united to Christ, he sleeps in Jesus, and Jesus will raise him up unto life everlasting. John 11.24.2. Comfort against the death of our friends: Though they be dead, yet they shall rise gain; as Martha told Christ, I know that he shall rise again at the Resurrection.1 Thess. 14. The Saints who dye in the faith of Christ, are dead in Christ, and such he will raise and bring with him to judgement. If a man be to take a long journey, his wife and children will not weep and mourn, because they hope that ere long he will return again. A man that dyes in Christ, and sleeps in Christ, doth but take a journey from Earth to Heaven, but he will come again short∣ly; and therefore, let us not mourn as men without hope for our godly relations, for we shall meet again; and in all probability, shall know one another when we meets though not after a carnal manner; for we shall rise with the same bodies. And if Laza∣rus was known when raised, and the Widows Son known by his Mother; if Adam in Innocency, knew Eve when he awoke, and Peter knew Moses and Elias in the Transfiguration (which was but a dark representation of Heaven) it is very probable that we also, when we awake at the great Resurrection, shall know one ano∣ther,
which will be no little addition to our Happi∣ness. 3. Comfort to those who have maimed and deformed bodies: At the great Resurrection all these deformities shall be taken a∣way; therefore it is called, A Day of Restitution,Acts 3.21. wherein God will set all things in joynt. If there were a Physician who could cure all bodily deformities, what flocking would there be to him for help; such a Physician is Death. As Job had all things restored double, when raised from the dunghil; so shall a childe of God have all bodily deformities removed, and his body shall be raised in glory, and shine as the Sun in the firmament. And why then should we be so afraid of death? it is initium vivae spei, the be∣ginning of a living hope. The Heathen mans Motto is, Dum spiro spero, while there is life there is hope; but a Christians Motto is, Dum expiro spero, when I dye, then my hope begins to live. 4. Comfort to those who forgoe any members of their bodies for Christ: If thou losest thy leg, or arm, or ear, God will restore it again at the Resurrection. The same leg, &c. as Christ healed the ear of Matchus; he did not give him a new ear, but the same again. Famous is the story that Josephus tells of one of the seven children in the Maccabees, who when he was to have his tongue cut out, and his hand cut off, said to his Mother, These I have received from the Heavens, and for the love of my God I despise them, and trust that I shall receive them again. 5. Comfort to the people of God, when in the lowest condition: When upon the dunghil, and past help of man, then let them re∣member, That the God whom we serve can raise the dead; and therefore can deliver them out of all their troubles, though ne∣ver so great and incurable. This was Jobs comfort, when in the saddest condition, Job 19.25, 26, 27. It is proper to God to deli∣ver from the lowest grave, Psal. 86.13. And for this very end and purpose, God oftentimes brings his children into a very
deplorable and desperate condition, that they might learn to trust in that God who raiseth the dead, 2 Cor. 1.12. 6. Lastly, Here is singular consolation in reference to the sad times in which we live. It is with us now as it was with the Disciples when Christ was crucified; their hopes dyed, when Christ dyed; their faith in Christ, was dead and buried with Christ; therefore they say, Luke 24.21. We trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel; and besides all this, to day is the third day since these things were done: As if they should have said, Christ hath now been so long in the grave, that we have no hope of salvation by him; it is now the third day, and we hear no tidings of him. Even so the people of God are rea∣dy to say of these times, We had thought that this had been the time wherein Christ would have made the Churches of England very glorious, and have taken away all our tynne and drosse out of his Church, and perfectly have purged his floor, and made a most happy Reformation: But we see that Christ is still in the grave, and there are mountains upon mountains rowled over him, to keep him still in it. We are in as bad a con∣dition as ever, and our hopes as desperate; and it is now not onely the third day, but the thirteenth, nay the sixteenth year, and yet we are not delivered. But now hearken to a Word of Consolation: As Christ rose in spight of the Jews; they rowled a stone upon the mouth of the grave, and sealed it, and set a watch to keep it, and yet he rose in spight of them all: So shall Religion, and the Gospel, and Church of Christ rise, notwithstanding all the opposition made against it. Though never so many Mountains e in the way, God will in time rowl away all these Mountains;Mat. 16. Isa. 54. Zach. 12.3. for Christ haih said, That the gates of Hll shall not prevail against his Church; and, that no weapon formed against Jacob shall prosper; and, that he will make Jerusalem a burthensome stone for all people; all that burthen themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it. As the children of Is∣rael, the more they were oppressed, the more they multiplied; so the more the Church of Christ is trodden under foot, the more it will prosper. As Moses his bush burned, and was not consumed,
because God was in it; so the Church of Christ may be burning, and full of troubles and afflictions (which shall purge it,Rev. 11.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and refine it) but it shall not be consumd; for Christ is risen, and his Church shall rise: The God whom we serve is a God who can raise the dead. It is related of the two Witnesses, that when they shall have flnished their estimony, they should be slain, and lie three days and an half unburied; and that the people that dwell upon the earth should reoce over them, and make merry: But yet notwith∣standing, the Spirit of God should after three days and an half enter into them, and they should stand upon their feet, and a∣scend up to Heaven in the sight of their Enemies. By these two Witnesses are meant, all the eminent Opposers of Antichrist, whe∣ther Magistrates or Ministers; who, though they prophesie in sackcloath 1260 years, and towards the end of them (which is yet to come) be in a more then ordinary manner massacred and killed, yet they shall after a little while rise again (in their suc∣cessors) stand pon their feet, and ascend up to a more heavenly and glorious condition: There will be a happy and blessed Re∣surrection of the Church. Famous is the Parable of the Dry Bones, Ezek. 37. God saith to the Prophet, Son of man, can these bones live? The Prophet answered, O Lord God thou knowest. Then God tells him, That he would cause breath to enter into the dry bones, and make them to live, &c. Though the Church of Christ be in as sad a condition as the Israelites in Babylon, and be as dry bones in a grave; and though the Pro∣phets know not how they can be raised,2 Pet. 2.9▪ yet God knoweth how to deliver his people: He can and will in due time raise them up to a more pure and happy estate, even in this life. Let us comfort one another with these things.
Use 3. OF Terrour to all the wicked and ungodly that cannot say with Job, I know my Redeemer liveth; but, I know my Re∣venger liveth. There will a time come, when they that now stop their ears, and will not hear the voyce of Christ speaking by his Word and Ministers, shall hear a voyce whether they will or no, and shall come out of their graves to the Resurrection of condemna∣tion, just as Pharaohs Baker out of Prison, or as Malefactors out of Newgate, to be executed at Tiburn. Happy were it for such that there were no Resurrection, that their souls did dye as the souls of Brute Beasts: But let such know, That there shall be a Resur∣rection of the unjust, as well as of the just; and that there will a day come, in which they must, whether they will or no, behold the Lord Jesus with those very eyes which have been the casements to let in iniquity into the soul: They shall see that Christ whose Sabbaths and Ordinances they have despised, and whose Laws they have trampled under their feet: That drunken and adulterous body, that swearing tongue, those hands of thine which have been workers of iniquity, and those feet which have been swift to shed blood, shall rise at the last day to be tormented in everlasting flames: That flesh of thine for which thou hast made such provision to fulfil the lusts of it, shall arise into everlasting con emt and punishment. O consider what howling and lamentation will be when thy soul and body shall meet again, and shall curse one another, and call to the Mountains to fall upon them, and rocks to hide them, from the wrath of the Lamb, but all in vain: When thy godly Minister shall say to thee, as Reuben to his Brethren, Gen. 42.22. Did I not tell you before of these things? but you would not hearken unto me; and as Paul to the men in the ship, Acts 27.21. If you had hearkened unto me, you might have scaped this loss. O quam miserum est Deum videre, & perire, & ante Pretii tui perire conspectum! Suppose a
man were to go to bed at night with an assurance that the next morning he should be hanged, drawn and quartered, he would have but little comfort in that nights rest. And did a wicked man con∣sider that whensoever he falls asleep, and is laid in the grave, he shall awake to everlasting condemnation, this would make his joynts to loose, and his knees to smite one against the other, as Bel∣shazzars did at the sight of the Hand-writing. The Lord give you grace to perpend and weigh these things, and lay them to heart, before it be too late. Vse 4. IF there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, let us labour so to live, that when we dye we may have a happy Resurrection, that we may arise to the Resurrection of Life; that there may be a ne∣cessary connexion between the eleventh nd twelfth Articles of our Creed; and that immediately after the Rvsurrection of the body, we may be received into life everlasting. Here I shall briefly answer unto two Questions: 1. How shall we know whether we shall have a blessed and happy Resurrection? 2. What must we do that we way have a happy Re∣surrection? Question 1. How shall we know whether we shall have a blessed and happy Resurrection?
Answer. 1. If thou be a just man, thou shalt have a happy Resurrection. The Apostle tells, Acts 24.15. That there shall be a Resurrection both of the just and the unjust: The unjust shall come out of their graves to the Resurrection of damnation, but the just to the Re∣surrection of life. If thou be a just man, just in thy dealings, just in thy words and oathes, just both to God and man, and labourest to give God his due in the duties of the First Table, and man his due in the duties of the Second Table; if thou joynest justice with holiness, and holiness with justice, thou shalt certainly have a joyful Resurrection. Job was a just man, and one that feared God, and therefore he believed that with those very eyes of his he should see God to his everlasting comfort. 2. If thou refusest earthly Resurrections upon base terms, thou shalt have a happy Resurrection. The Apostle tells us, Heb. 11.35. of many blessed Martyrs, who would not accept deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection. They might have risen to great preferments, if they would have complied upon base terms; but they would not accept of an earthly Resurrection, that they might obtain a better Resurrection. When S. Basil was offer∣ed great preferments if he would have subscribed to the Arian Heresie, he refused them with scorn and contempt, &c. he would not accept deliverance upon such unworthy tearms. When Hor∣misdas a Persian Noblman was devested of all his Honours for his Religion, and afterwards restored again, and offered greater advancements if he would renounce it: He answered, Si p opter ista me Christum denegaturum existimas, ea denuo, accipe; If you think I will deny my Christ for these things, take them back a∣gain. But if you accept of earthly Resurrections upon base and sinful Conditions, you shall have a sad and woful Resur∣rection.
3. If thou glorifiest God with thy body here, thy body shall be glorified at the Resurrction: If thou beatest down thy body, and bringest it under subjection;1 Cor. 9.27. Rom. 12.1. & 6.13. if thou offerest up thy body a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God; if thou makest thy body an instrument of righteousness; if thy body be erviceable to the soul in the worship of God, then shall it be made a most glori us body: But if it be the Devils instrument unto sin, if thou makest it a slave to thy lust here, it shall rise at the last day unto everlast∣ing misery. 4. If thou hast a gracious soul here, thou shalt have a glorious body hereafter; for the body followeth the soul, it is but as the souls shadow. If when thou dyest thy soul goeth to Hell, thy body will come thither at last; and if thy soul go to Heaven, thy body will come thither also: And therefore examine what kinde of soul thou dyest withal; if thy soul be beautified with grace, if sanctified and regenerated; if thou mindest thy soul more then thy body, and labourest for Soul-riches, and Soul-honours, and Soul-food, then thy body shall be happy at the Resurrection: But if thy soul be polluted and deformed, if starved by the neglect of Gospel-Ordi∣nances, if poysoned with sin, if infected by evil company, if thou dicest and cardest it away, if thou losest thy soul for want of look∣ing too, thy body will arise to the Resurrection of Condemna∣tion. 5. Lastly and especially, If thou hast got a real interest in Christ and his righteousness, then thou shalt have a most blessed Resurrection; for Christ Jesus is the Resurrection and the life, John 11.25. and whosoever believeth in him, shall rise to life ever∣lasting: If thou gettest into Christ while thou livest, thou shalt dye in Christ, and sleep in Christ, and be raised by Christ unto eter∣nal happiness: But if thou hast not got into him by a Christ-appro∣priating faith, thou canst not dye in him, nor sleep in him, nor rise by him as Head, unto life everlasting, but as a revengeful Judge unto everlasting damnation.
Question 2. VVhat must we do that we may have a happy Resurrecti∣on? Answer. 1. You must labour to be just persons, that you may partake of the resurrection of the just. 2. You must refuse earthly resurrection upon base terms, as the three Children and Daniel did. 3. You must glorifie God with your bodies, you must make them helpers to your souls, not hinderers; you must make them Tem∣ples of the Holy Ghost. The body which hath fasted, and prayed, and joyned sincerely with the soul in holy services, shall one day behold the face of God with comfort. Christ will say, Are not these the eyes which have been liftd up unto God in my service? Are not these the ears which have hearkned to my word? Remember this when your bodies are wearied and tired in the worship of God, The more thou servest God with thy body, the more glory it shall have at that day. 4. Labour to get gracious souls here, and you shall have glorified bodies hereafter. 5. Labour to be united to Christ by a lively faith, and he will be your resurrection and your life: It is the great promise of Christ, that he will raise up the body at the last day, John 6.39.40, 54, 58. that is, raise it up to life everlasting. 6. Labour to have part in the first resurrection, Revel. 20.6.
Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection. I know this Text is differently interpreted; but sure I am (according to the judgement of all learned men) there is a double resurrection; the one spiritual, the other corporal; the one of the soul, the other of the body: Those Texts, Ephes. 2.1. Col. 2.13. John 5.25. do (without all doubt) speak of the spiritual resurrection. By na∣ture we have dead souls, dead in sins and trespasses, void of spiri∣tual life, as perfectly under the power of sin, as a dead man is under the power of death, and as unable to do any thing that is spiritually good, as a dead man is to do any work. Now a soul dead in sin, shall be damned for sin; but if thy soul be quickned and made alive, if the Lord hath infused principles of grace into thee, and given thee a new heart, and a new spirit; if regenerated and born again, then thy bodily resurrection shall be happy: It is very observable, That the Resurrection is called Regeneration, Mat. 19.28.—In the regeneration, that is (as many interpret it) in the resurrection: If spiritually regenerated, thy resurrection shall be most happy and glorious. O pray unto God, and labour for regeneration, and a new creation, and that thou mayest have a share in the first resur∣rection. 7. Heaken to the voyce of Christ, and of his Spirit; and of his Ministers, and of his Rod, and then his voye at the resurrecti∣on (when he shall call thee out of the grave) shall be a happy voyce. If thou stoppest thine ears, and wilt not hearken to the voyce of the Rod, nor to the voyce of his Word, and the Mini∣sters of it; thou shalt hear the voyce of the Archangel calling thee out of the grave whether thou wilt or no, and the voyce of Christ saying, Go ye cursed ito Hell-fire, &c. 8. Count all things dung and dross, that thou mayest gain Christ, and be found in him at that day, not having thine own righteousness, but the righteousness which is of God by faith in Christ; and be wil∣ling to do any thing, if by any means you may attain to the resur∣rection of the dead, Phil. 3.8, 9, 11. that is, either to a happy re∣surrection, or rather to such a degree of grace which the Saints shall have at the Resurrection.
9. Remember and carry daily in your mind, that saying of S. Jerom Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you are doing, think with y ur selves, That you hear the Trumpet sounding, and the voyce of the Archangel, saying, Arise ye dead and come to judgement. Ʋse 5. A Divine Project how to make your bodies beautiful and glori∣ous, and beautiful in an ominent degree, in a supersuperlative measure, beautiful, as the Sun in the Firmament, as the beautiful Body of Christ, which so dazzled Pauls eyes, that it put them out: To make your bodies Majestical, Immortal, and Impassible; and that is, by labouring to glorifie God with them, and to get an in∣terest in Christ, and to get gracious and beautiful souls. O that this word were mingled with faith! Methinks if any Motive could prevail with you that are Gentlewomen and rich Ladies this should: Behold a way how to make your bodies eternally beautiful. What trouble and pains do many women that are crooked endure, by wear∣ing iron-bodies to make themselves stait: What labour and cost are many women at to beautifie their rotten carcasses! Hearken to me thou proud dust and ashes, thou guilded mud, that labourest to beautifie thy body by vain, foolish and sinful deckings and trim∣mings, and thinkest thy self deckt in the want of decking: That pamperest thy body in all voluptuousness, and makest thy self by thy strange fashions so unlike thy self, as that if our civil forefathers were alive again, they would wonder what strange monster thou wert: Hearken unto me, I say, and consider thy madness and fol∣ly, by labouring so much to adorn thy body with the neglect of thy soul, thou undoest both body and soul. The onely way to make thy body beautiful, is (as I hove said) to gain Christ, to have a part in the first resurrection, and to get a gracious soul, and then thou shalt be sure hereafter to have a glorious body. Excellent is that saying of Bernard, Christ hath a treble coming, Once he came in the flesh for the good of our souls and bodies: now he comes in the Spirit (by the preaching of his Ministers) for the good of our souls: At the last day he shall come for the good of our bodies, to beautifie and glorifie them. Noli O homo praeripere tempora; Do not O fond
man mistake the time! This present life is not the time for thy bo∣dy; it is appointed for the beautifying of thy soul, and adorning it with grace and holiness. The Resurrection is the time where∣in Christ will come from Heaven to make thy body glorious. How quite contrary to this do most people live? Let it be our wisdom (with the children of Issachar) to have understanding of the times.1 Chro. 12.31. Let us labour to get our souls beautified by Christs second coming, with Justification and Sanctification, and Christ at his third coming will make our bodies glorious above expression.
The Day of Judgement asserted. ACTS 17.31. Because he hath appointed a Day in which he will judge the world, &c. SAint Paul perceiving the Idolatry at Athens, his spirit was stirred in him, ver. 16. , his spirit was sowred and imbittered in him; Paul was a bitter man against sin. That anger is without sinne, which is against sinne: Or the word may signifie, he was in a Paroxysme, or burning fit of zeal; and zeal is such a passion, as cannot be either dissembled, or pent up; with this fire he dischargeth against their Idolatry, ver. 22.23. Ye men of Athen, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious; for as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an Altar with this Insc iption, ; To the unknown God. Nor doth the Apostle only declaime againg the false god, but declare to them the true God; and he doth it ab effectu; That God which made the world, and all things therein, is Lord of heaven and earth, ver. 24. To Create is the best demonstration of a Deity: And this God being everywhere by way of repletionJer. 23.24., cannot be locally confined; He dwelleth not in Temls made with hands, ver. 24. And though in former times, when the vaile of Ignorance was drawn over the face of the world, God seemed lesse severe. ver. 30.
The times of this ignorance God winked at.  He did as it were overlook them, not taking the extremity of the Law; yet now he commandeth all men everywhere to repent, ver. 30. And if it be asked why now repent? why may we not take our full sleep? The Reason is, because now is the broad day∣light of the Gospel, which, as it discovers sin more clearly, so judgment upon sinners: He hath appointed a day in which he will judge the world. Which words are Gods Alarum to the world, to awaken it out of security: This is a sweet, yet dreadful point. When Saint Paul discoursed of judgement to come, Faelix trembled, Acts 24.25. He that is not affected with this Truth, hath an heart of stone. For the illustration of this, there are six things I shall discusse. 1. That there shall be a day of judgement. 2. Why there must be a day of judgement. 3. When the day of judgement shall be. 4. Who shall be the Judge. 5. The order and the method of the Trial. 6. The effect or consequent of it. I begin with the first; That there shall be a day of judgement. There is a twofold day of judgement. 1. Dies particularis, a particular judgement; at the day of death, immediately upon the souls dissolution from the body it hath a judgment passed upon itHebr. 9.27.: Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, the spirit shall return to God that gave it. As soon as the breath expires, the soul re∣ceives its particular sentence, and knows how it shall be with it to all eternity. 2. There is Dies universalis, a general day of judgement; which is the great Assises, when the world shall be gathered toge∣ther; and of this the Text is to be understood, He hath appoin∣ted a day in which he will judge the world. I might impannel a whole Jury of Scriptures giving in their verdict to this; but in the mouth of two or three witnesses the truth will be confirmed. Eccles. 12.14. God shall bring every work into judgment with every secret thing,Eccles. 12.14. whether it be good or evil. Mat. 12.36.
Every idle word men shall speak, they shall give account there∣of in the day of judgementMat. 12 36. . Psal. 96 13.. Now is the day of Arr ars, then will be the day of Account. Psalme 96.13. For he cometh, for he cometh to judge the Earth. The In∣gemination denotes the certainty and infallibility of his coming. Secondly, Why there must be a day of judgement. 1. That God may execute justice on the wicked. Things seem to be carried here in the world with an unequal balance; The Candle of God shines upon the wickedJob 29.3.. They that tempt God are deliveredMal. 3.15.. Diogenes seeing Harpalus a Thief goon pros∣perously, said, sure God had cast off the government of the world, and minded not how things went here below;2 Pet. 3.4. 2 Pet. 3.4. There shall be in the last days Scoffers, saying, Where is the pro∣mise of his coming? Therefore God will have a day of Assizes to vindicate his justice; he will let sinners know that long-forbea∣rance is no forgiveness. 2. That God may exercise mercy to the godly: Here, piety was the white which was shot at; they who prayed and wept, had the hardest measure; those Christians whose zeal did flame most, met with the fiery tryal.Rom. 8.36. Rom. 8.36. For thy sake we are killed all the day long. The Saints (as Cyprian saith) are put in the wine-presse, and oft the blood of these grapes is pressed out; God will therefore have a day of judgement, that he may reward all the tears and sufferings of his people; They shall have their Crown and Throne, and White Robes; though they may be Losers for him, they shall lose nothing by himRev. 7.9.. Thirdly, When the day of judgement shall be? 'Tis certain there shall be a judgment, uncertain when; the An∣gels know not the day, nor Christ neither as he was man. Matth. 24.36. And the reason why the time is not known, is, 1. That we may not be curious: There are somethings which God would have us ignorant of. Acts 1.7. It is not for you to know the times or seasons which the Father hath put in his own power. We must not pry into Gods Ark, or intermeddle with his Arcana imperii; it is a kinde of Sacriledge (as Salvian speaks) for any man to break into the Holy of holies, and enter into Gods secrets.
2. God hath concealed the time of judgement that we may not be careless. We are alwayes to keep Centinel, having our Loyns girr, and our Lamps burning, not knowing how soon that day may overtake us. God would have us live every day (saith Austin) as if the last day were approachingIdeo latet ul∣timus dies, ut observentur om∣nes dies. Austin.. — Omnem crede diem tibi diluxisse supremum. — This is the genuine Use our Saviour makes of it; Mark 13.32. Of that day and houre knows no man, no not the Angels in heaven; Take ye heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is. But though we cannot tell precisely when this day of the Lord shall be, yet in probability the time cannot be far off. Hebr. 10.3.7. He that shall come,Hebr. 10.37. will come, and will not tarry. Chry∣sostome hath a simile; when saith he, we see an old man going on Crutches, his Joynts weak, his radical moisture dried up, though we do not know the just time when he will dye, yet it is sure he can∣not live long, because natures stock is spent: So the world is decrepit, and goes as it were upon Crutches, therefore it cannot be long before the worlds Funerals, and the birth-day of judge∣ment. The Age which Saint John wrote in, was the last time, 1 John 2.18. in the Greek it is ,1 John 2.18. the last houre; then sure the time we now live in, may be called the last minute; Psal. 96.13. For he cometh to judge the Earth. Not,  he shall come, but he cometh; to shew how near the time is. It is almost day-break, and the Court is ready to sit. Jam. 5.9. The Judge standeth at the door. Verily, if SecurityMat. 24.37., Apostasie1. Tim. 4.1., Decay of LoveMat. 24.11. Inun∣dation of Sin2 Tim. 3.1., Revelation of Antichrist1 Joh. 3.18. Non secus ac slavescente a∣rista colonus colligit pro fo∣ribus adesse messem., be made in Scri∣pture the Symptomes and Prognosticks of the last day, we having these gray haires among us, the day of judgement cannot be far off. Fourthly, Who shall be the Judge? I answer, the Lord Jesus Christ. Thus it is in the. Text, He will judge the world by that man whom he hath ordained. That man, who is God-man. We must take heed of judging others; this is Christs work. John 5.22. The Father hath committed all
judgement to the SonJudicium erit totius indivi∣duae Trinitatis, quoad consen∣sum & authori∣tatem; Christi vero quoad vi∣sibilem actum, promulgatio∣nem, & execu∣tionem. 1. Sagacitas.. He who once had a Reed put into his hand, his Father will now put a Scepter into his hand; he who had a Purple Robe put upon him in derision, shall come in hs Judges Robes; he who hung upon the Crosse, shall sit upon the Bench. There are two things in Christ which do eminently qua∣lifie him for a Judge. 1. Prudence, and Intelligence to understand all Causes that are brought before himHebr. 4.13.. He is described with seven eyes, Zech. 3.9. to note his Omnisciency; he is like Ezekiels wheels, full of eyesEzek. 10.12. 2. Potestas.; Christ is , an heart-searcher; he doth not only judge the fact, but the heart, which no Angel can do *. 2. Strength, whereby he is able to be revenged upon his ene∣mies. Christ is armed with Soveraignty; therefore the seven eyes are said to be upon one stone, Zech. 3.9. To denote the infinite strength of Christ; and he is described with seven horns, Rev. 5.6. As Christ hath an Eye to see, so he hath an Horn to push; As he hath his Balance, so he hath his Sword; As he hath his Fan and his Sieve, so he hath his Lake of fire, Revel. 20.10. Fifthly, The Order and Method of the Trial. Where observe: 1. The Summons. 2. The Judges coming to the Bench. 3. The Processe and Trial it self. 1. The Summons to the Court, and that is by the sounding of a Trumpet. 1 Thes. 4.16. The Lord shall descend from hea∣ven with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God. Saint Hierom saith, that whatever he was doing, he thought he heard the noise of this Trumpet sounding in his ears, Surgite mortui — Arise ye dead, and come to judgementHierom in Mat.: Note 1. The shrilness of the Trumpet, it shall sound so loud, that the dead shall hear it. 2. The efficacy of the Trumpet; it shall not only startle the dead, but raise them out of their graves, Matth. 24.31.Vere vox magna, vox tu∣bae terribilis, quae petras scindit, inferos aperit, vincula mortuorum dirumpit; haec autem omnia citiuss peragenda quam sagitta in aere transit, in momento, in ictuoculi: They who will not hear the Trumpet of the Ministery sounding, but lie dead in sinne, shall
be sure to hear the Trumpet of the Archangel sounding. 2. The manner of the Judges coming to the Bench. Christs coming to Judgement will be Glorious, yet dradful. Frst, It will be glorious to the godly. The Apostle calls it , the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour, Titus 2.13. 1. Christs Person shall be glori∣ous. His first coming in the flesh was obscure; his glory was vail'd over. Isa. 53.2, 3. All who saw the Man, did not see the Messiah; but his second coming will be in vigore, & fulgore, very illustrious and resplendent. He shall come in the glory of his Father, Mark 8.38. that is, he shall wear the same embroydered Robes of Majesty as his Father. 2. Christs Attendants shall be glorious. He shall come with all his holy Angels,Mat. 25.31. Mat. 25.31. These Sublime Seraphick Spirits, who for their lustre are compared to lightningMat. 28.3.; are Christi Satellitium, part of Christs Train and Retinue. He who was led to the Cross with a Band of Souldiers, shall be attended to the Bench with a guard of Angels. Secondly, Christs coming to judgement will be dreadful to the wicked. At the coming of this Judge, there will be ignis con∣flagrationis, a fire burning round about him. 2 Thes. 1.7. He shall be revealed with his Angels from heaven, in flaming fireSi talis sit horror venien∣tis, qualis, erit judicantis. Aug., &c. When God did give his Law upon the Mount, there were thunders and lightnings, and Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoak, because the Lord descended upon it in fineExod. 19.16, 18., Exod. 19.16, 18. If God was so terrible at the giving of the Law, O how terrible will he be when he shall come to require his Law! 3. The Processe, or the Tryal it self. Where ob∣serve, The 1. Universality Of the Tryal. The 2. Formality Of the Tryal. The 3. Circumstances Of the Tryal. First, The Universality of the Tryal; it will be a very great Assizes, never was the like seen. 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ2 Cor. 5.10.. Kings and Nobles, Councels and
Armies; those who were above all Tryal here, have no Charter of exemption granted them; they must appear before Christs Tri∣bunal, and be tryed for their lives; neither power nor policy can be a suber-fuge. They who refused to come to the Throne of Grace,Hebr. 4.16. shall be forced to come to the Bar of Justice. And the dead as well as the living must make their appearance. Rev. 20.12. I saw the dead both small and great stand be ore God, &c. We do not use to cite men to our Courts when they are dead, but at that day the dead are called to the Bar; and not only Men, but Angels. Jude 6. The Angels which kept not their first e∣state, he hath reserved in chains to the judgement of the great day. Secondly, The Formality of the Tryal, which consists in the opening of the BooksRev. 12.20.. Dan. 7.10. The judgement was set, and the books were opned. There are two books will ba o∣pened. 1. The book of Gods Omnisciency. God not only observes, but registers all our actions. Job 14.16. Thou numbrest my steps. The word there  to numberUnde  liber., signifies to put a thing into the book; as if Job had said, Lord, thou keepest thy day-book, and enterest down all my actions into the book; we read of Gods book of remembrance,Mal. 3.16. Mal. 3.16. This book will be produced at the last day. 2. The book of Conscience. Let there be never so much writ∣ten in a book, yet if it be clasped, it is not seen. Men have their sins written in their conscience, but the book is clasped; (the searing of the conscience is the clasping of the book) but when this book of conscience shall be unclasped at the great day, then all their Hypocrisie, Treason, Atheisme shall appear to the view of Men and AngelsLuke 12.3.; the sinnes of men shall be written upon their forehead, as with a Pen of IronCunctis ag∣minibus pate∣bunt universa scelera tua. Bern.. Thirdly, The Circumstances of the Tryal; where consider foure things. 1. The Impartiality. 2. The Exactnesse. 3. The Perspicuity. 4. The Supremacy.
First, The Impartiality of the Tryal; Jesus Christ will do e∣very man justice; he will (as the Text saith) judge the world in righteousnesse. It will be dies , justice holds the scales. The Thebanes did picture their Judges blind, and with∣out handsReusner.; blinde, that they might not respect persons; with∣out hands, that they might take no bribes. Christs Scepter is a Scepter of righteusnsseHebr. 1.8., Hebr. 1.8. He is no , or respecter of persons; 'tis not nearnesse of blood prevailes: Many of Christs Kindred shall be condemned. 'Tis not glori∣ousnesse of profession; many shall go to hell with Christ in their mouths. Mat. 7.22.Mat. 7.22. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out Divels, &c? Yet though they cast out Divels, they are cast out to the Divel. 'Tis not the varnish of a picture that a judicous eye is taken with; but the curiousnesse of the work. 'Tis not the most shining profession Christ is taken with, unlesse he see the curious workmanship of grace in the heart, drawn by the Pensil of the Holy Ghost. Things are not carried there by parties, but aequa lance, in a most just balance; Christ hath true weights for false hearts; there are no fees taken in that Court; the Judge will not be brib'd with an hypocritical tear, or a Judas kisseVeniet dies illa, in qua plus valebunt pura corda quam astuta verba, conscientia bona quam marsupia plena; judex enim non falletur verbis, nec flectetur donis. Bern.. Secondly, The Exactnesse of the Tryal; it will be very criti∣cal; ten, will Christ throughly purge his floor, Mat. 3.12. Not a grace, or a sin, but his Fan will discover. Christ will at the day of judgement make an heart-anatomy; as the Chyrurgion makes a dissection in the body, and doth criticize upon the several parts; or as the Goldsmith, doth , bring his gold to the balance and touch-stone, and , pierce his gold thorow, to see if it be right, and genuine, and whether there be not a baser mettal w thin: Thus the Lord Jesus, (whose Eyes are as a flame of fre, Revel. 1.14.) will pierce thorow the hearts of men, and see if there be the right mettal within, having the Image and Superscription of God upon it. Paint falls off before he fire; the hypocrites paint will fall off at the fiery Try∣al, nothing then will stand us in stead but sincerity.
Thirdly, the perspicuity of the Trial; sinners shall be so clearly convicted, that they shall hold up their hand at the Barre, and cry guilty; those words of David may be fitly applyed here, Psalm. 51.4. that thou mayst be cleare when thou judgest. The sinner himself shall clear God of injustice. The Greek word for vengeance , signifies justice. Gods taking ven∣geance, is doing justice; sin makes God angry, but it cannot make him unrighteous; the wicked shall drink a Sea of wrath, but not sip one drop of injustice; Christ will say, Sinner, what Apology canst thou make for thy self? are not thy sins written in the book of conscience? hadst thou not that book in thy own keeping? who could interline it? now the sinner being  self-condemned, shall clear his Judge; Lord, though I am damned, yet I have no wrong done me; thou art cleare when thou judgest. Fourthly, The Supremacy of the Court; this is the highest Court of Judicature, from whence is no appeal. Men can re∣move their causes from one place to another; from the common Law to the Court of Chancery: but from Christs Court there is no appeal; he who is once doomed here, his condition is irre∣versible. 6. The sixth and last particular, is the effect, or consequence of the Tryal. Which consists in three things. First, Segregation. Christ will separate the godly and the wicked.Mat. 25.32. Matth. 25.32. He shall separate them one from ano∣ther, as a Shepherd divideth his Sheep from the Goats; Then will be the great day of separation; it is a great grief to the godly in this life, that they live among the wicked. Wo is me that I sojourn in Meseck, Psal. 120.5. Wicked men blas∣pheme God, Psal. 74.18. and persecute the Saints, 2 Tim. 3.12. They are compar'd to dogsPsal. 22.16., to BullsPsal. 68.30., to LionsPsal. 57.4.; they roare upon the godly, and tear them as their Prey. Cain kills, Ish∣mael mocks, Shimei rails; The godly and the wicked are now promiscuously mingled togetherMat. 13.30.; and this is as offensive as the tying a dead man to a living; but, Christ will ere long make a separation; as the Fan doth separate the wheat from the chaff: as a Furnace separates the gold from the drosse: or as a searcer strains out the spirits from the dregs; Christ wll put the sheep by themselves, who have the ear-mark of Electi∣on
upon them; and the Coats by themselves; after which sepa∣ration there follows Secondly, The Sentence; which is two-fold. 1. The sentence of absolution pronounced upon the godly. Matthew 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. After the pronouncing of which blessed sentence, the godly shall go from the Barre, and sit upon the Bench with Christ. 1 Cor. 6.3. Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world? The Saints shall be Christs Asses∣sors; they shall sit with him in Judicature, as the Justices of Peace with the Judge; they shall Vote with Christ, and applaud him in all his judicial proceedings. Here the world doth judge the Saints, but there the Saints shall judge the world. 2. The sentence of condemnation pronounced upon the wicked, Matth. 25.41. ite maledicti— Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. I may allude to that, James 3.10. Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing; out of the same mouth of Christ, proceeds blessing to the godly, and cursing to the wicked; the same wind which brings one ship to the Haven, blows another ship upon the Rock. Depart from me; the wicked once said to God, Depart; Job. 21.14. They say unto God, Depart from us; and now God will say to them, Depa t from me; this will be an heart-rending word. Chryso∣stome saith this word. Depart, is worse than the fire. Depart from me in whose presence is fulnesse of joyPsal. 16.11.3.. Thirdly, After this sentence, follows the Execution; Mat. 13.30. Binde the tares in bundles to burn them. Christ will say, Bundle up these sinner; here a bundle of hypocrites, there a bundle of Apostates, there a bundle of prophane; bundle them up and throw them in the fire. And now no cryes or entrea∣ties will prevail with the Judge; the sinner and the fire must keep one another company; he who would not weep for his sins, must burne for them; and it is everlasting fire. The three chil∣dren were thrown into the fire, but they did not stay in long; The King came near to the mouth of the burning fiery surnace, and said, Come forth, Dan. 3.26. but the fire of the damned is everlasting; this word ever breaks the heart; length of time cannot terminate it; a Sea of-tears cannot quench it. The
wrath of God is the fire, and the breath of God is the Bellows to blow, it up to all eternity. O how dreadfully tormenting will this fire be! to endure it will be intolerable, to avoid it will be impossible. Use 1. Let me perswade all Christians to believe this Truth, that there shall be a day of judgement. Eccles. 11.9. Rejoyce O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart chear thee in the dayes of thy youth, and walk in the wayes of thy heart; but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into judge∣ment. This is a great Article of our faith, that Christ shall come to judge the quick and the dead; yet, how many live as if this Article were blotted out of their Creed? we have too many Epicures and Atheists, who drown themselves in sensual delights, and live as if they did not believe either God, or day of judgement; the Luianists and Platonises deny the immor∣tality of the soul; the Photinians hold there is no Hell. I have read of the Duke of Silecia, he was so infatuated, that he did not believe either God or DevilUsque adco in∣snus, ut neque inseros neque superos esse di∣cat.; I wish there be not too many of this Dukes opinion. Durst men swear, be unchast, live in malice, if they did believe a day of judgement? Oh, mingle this Text with faith, the Lord hath appointed a day in which he will judge the world; There must be such a day; not only Scri∣pture, but reason confirms it. There is no Kingdom or Nati∣on in the world, but have their Sessions, and Courts of Judi∣cature; and God who sets up all other Courts, shall not he be allowed his? that there shall be a day of judgement, is en∣graffed by nature in the consciences of men. Peter Martyr tells us that some of the Heathen Poets have written, that there are certain Judges appointed (Minos, Radamanthus, and others) to examine and punish offenders after this life. Ʋse 2. See here the sad and deplorable estate of wicked men; this Text is as the hand-writing on the wall, which may make their knees to smite one against another, Dan. 5.6. The wicked shall come to judgement; but they shall not stand in judgement, Psa. 1.5. in the Hebrew it is  they shall not rise up. When God shall be deck'd with glory and Maje∣sty,
his face as the appearance of lightening, his eyes as Lamps of fire, and a sword of justice in his hand, and shall call the sinner by name, and say, Stand forth, answer to the charge that is brought against thee; what canst thou say for thy pride, oaths, drunkennesse, &c. these sins thou hast been told of by my Ministers, whom I sent rising up early, and going to bed lateJer. 7.25., but thou didst persist in thy wickedness with a neck of ironIsa. 48.4., a brow of brassEzek. 36.26. an heart of stone; all the tools I wrought with, were broken and worn out upon thy rocky spi∣rit; what canst thou say for thy self that the sentence should not passe? O how amazed and confounded will the sinner be! he will be found speechless, he will not be able to look his Judge in the face.Job 31.14. Job 31.14. What then shall I do when God rseth up? and when he visiteth, what shall I answer him? O wretch, thou that canst now out-face thy Minister, and thy godly Parents when they tell thee of sin, thou shalt not be a∣ble to out-face thy Judge; when God riseth up, the sinners countenance will be falnGen. 4 6.; — and when he visiteth, what shall I an∣swer him? Not many years since, the Bishops did use to visit in their Diocesse, and call several persons before them as cri∣minal; all the world is Gods Diocesse, and shortly he is co∣ming his visitation, and will call men to account. Now, when God shall visit, how shall the impure soul be able to answer him? 1 Pet. 4.18. Where shall the ungodly and the sin∣ner appeare? Thou that dyest in thy sin, art sure to be cast at the Barre; John 3.18. He that believeth not, is condemned al∣ready; that is, he is as sure to be condemned as if he were condemned already; and if once the sentence of damnation be passed, miserable man, what wilt thou do? whither wilt thou goA dextris e∣runt peccata accusantia, à sinistris infinita daemonia, subtus horrendum cha∣os inferni, desu∣por judex ira∣tus, soris mun∣dus ardens, in∣tus conscientia∣urens heu mi¦ser peccator quo fugies? Ansel.? wilt thou seek help from God? he is a consuming fire; wilt thou seek help from the world? it will be all on fire about thee; from the Saints? those thou didst deride upon earth; from the good Angels? they defie thee as Gods enemy; from the bad Angels? they are thine Executioners; from thy consci∣ence? there is the worme that gnaws; from mercy? the Lease is run out. O the horror and hellish despaire which will seize upon sinners at that day! oh the sad convulsions! their heads shall hang down, their cheeks blush, their lips quiver, their hands shake, their conscience roar, their heart tremble. What
stupifying Physick hath the Devil given to men, that they are insensible of the danger they are in! the cares of the world have so filled their head, and the profits of it hath so bewitched their heart, that they minde neither death nor judgement. Ʋse 3. Exhortation. 1. Branch. Possesse your selves with the thoughts of the day of judgement; think of the solemnity and impartiality of this Court. Feathers swim upon the water,Exhortat. 1. Branch. gold sinks into it; light, feathery spirits floate in vanity, but se∣rious Christians sink deep in the thoughts of judgement; many people are like quick-silver, they cannot be made to fix. If the Ship be not well ballasted, it will soon overturn; the rea∣son why so many are overturned with the vanities of the world, is because they are not well ballasted with the thoughts of the day of judgement. Were a man to be tryed for his life, he would bethink himself of all the Arguments he could, to plead in his own defence; we are all shortly to be tryed for our souls; while others are thinking how they may grow rich, let us bethink our selves how we may abide the day of Christs coming. The serious thoughts of judgement, would be, 1. A Curben-bit to sinne; am I stealing the forbidden fruit, and the Assizes so neare? 2. A spur to holinesseNihil est quod magis proficiat ad vitam hone∣stam &c. Amb.. 1 Pet. 3.10. But the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night; seeing then all these things shall be dissolved, what man∣ner of Persons ought ye to be in all Holy Conversa∣tion? 2. Branch.2. Branch. Let us solemnly prepare our selves for this last and great Trial! that is, by setting up a judgement-seat in our own souls; let us begin a private Sessions, before the Assizes; it is wisdome to bring our souls first to tryal. Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our wayes; let us judge our selves according to the Rule of the Word, and let conscience bring in the Ver∣dict. The Word of God gives several Characters of a man that shall be absolved at the day of judgement, and is sure to go to Heaven. 1. Character is humility. Job 22.29. The Lord will save the humble person. Now, let conscience bring in the Verdict;
Christian, art thou humble? not only humbled, but humble; dost thou esteem others better than thy self? Phil. 2.3. dost thou cover thy duties with the vail of Humility? as Moses put a vail on his face when it shined; if conscience brings in this Ver∣dict, thou art sure to be acquitted at the last day. 2. Character, love to the Saints. 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the Brethren. Love makes us like God, 1 John 4.19. it isAug. radix omnium virtutum, the root of all the graces. Doth conscience witness this for you? are you perfum'd with this sweet spice of love? do you delight in those who have the Image of God? do you re∣verence their graces? do you bear with their infirmities? do you love to see Christs picture in a Saint, though hung in never so poor a frame? this is a good sign, that thou shalt pass for currant at the day of judgement. 3. Character, a penitential frame of heart. Acts 11.18. Re∣pentance unto life. Repentance unravels sin, and makes it not to be; Jerem. 50.20. In those dayes the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for; and there shall be none. A great ball of Snow is mel∣ted and washed away with the rain: great sinnes are washed a∣way by holy tears. Now can conscience bring in the evidence for thee? dost thou tune the penitential string? thou that hast sinn'd with Peter, dost thou weep with PeterQui secutus es Petrum er∣rantem, sequere poenitentem. Ambros.? and do thy tears drop from the eye of faith? this is a blessed sign thou art judge∣ment-proof; and that when thy iniquities shall be sought for at the last day, they shall not be found. 4. Character, Equity in our dealings; Psa. 24.3, 4. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? mundus volis, he that hath clean hands. Injustice doth sully and defile the hand; what saith con∣science? is thy hand clean? it is a vain thng to hold the Bible in one hand, and false weights in the other. Beloved, if consci∣ence upon a Scripture-trial, give in the verdict for us, it is a blessed sign that we shall lift up our heads with boldnesse at the last day. Conscience is Gods eccho in the soul; the voice of con∣science is the voice of God; and if conscience upon an impar∣tial trial doth acquit us, God will acquit us. 1 John 3.21. If our heart condemn us not,1 John 3.21. then have we confidence towards God. If we are absolved in the lower Court of conscience, we are sure to be absolved at the last day in the High Court of Justice. It were
a sweet thing for a Christian thus to bring himself to a Trial. Se∣neca tells us of a Romane, who every day ca led himself to ac∣count; quod malum sanasti? what infirmity is healed? where∣in art thou grown better? then he would lie down at night with these words, O quam gratus sonnus! O how sweet and refreshing is my sleep to me! Use 4. Here is a fountaine of Consolation opened to a believer; and that in three Cases.Consolation. In case of 1. Discouraging fear. 2. Weaknesse of grace. 3. Censures of the world. First, Here is comfort in case of discouraging fear. Oh saith a believer, I fear my grace is not armour of proof; I fear the cause will go against me at the last day; Indeed, so it would if thou wert out of Christ; but as in our Law-Courts, the Client hath his Atturney or Advocate to plead for him, so every believer by virtue of the interest, hath Christ to plead his Cause for him. 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Fa∣ther, Jesus Christ the righteous;1 John 2.1. What though Satan be the ac∣cuser, if Christ be the Advocate? Christ never lost any Cause he pleaded; nay, his very pleading alters the nature of the cause; Christ will show the debt-book crossed with his own blood; and it is no matter what is charged, if all be discharged; here's a Believers Comfort, his Judge will be his Advo∣cate. Secondly, Here is comfort in regard of weaknesse of grace; a Christian seeing his grace so desective, is ready to be discou∣raged; but, at the day of judgement, if Christ finde but a dram of sincerity, it shall be accepted; if thine be true gold, though it may be light, Christ will put his merits into the Scales, and make it passe currant; he that hath no sinne of allowance, shall have graines of allowance; I may allude to that, Amos 9.9. Ne lapillus in terram, yet shall not the least grain fall to the earth. He that hath but a grain of grace, not the least grain shall fall to Hell.
Thirdly, it is comfort in case of Censures and slanders; the Saints go here through strange reports, , 2 Cor. 6.8. John Baptists Head in a Charger, is a common dish now adayes; 'tis ordinary to bring in a Saint Beheaded of his good name; but at the day of judgement, Christ will unload his people of all their injuries, he will vindicate them from all their calumnies. Christ will be the Saints Compurgator; he at that day will present his Church sine macula & ruga,Eph. 5.27. not ha∣ving spot or wrinkle.
OF HELL. MATTH. 25.41. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye Cursed into ever∣lasting fire, prepared for the Divel and his Angels. IF any in the broad way upon the hearing of this terrible Text, shall say to me, as the De∣vils in the Gergesens said to our Saviour, Art thou come hither to torment us before the time?Mat. 8.29. I say no, but to warn you to flee from the wrath to come; and reduce you from the broad, into the narrow way;— 3.17. — 7.13, 14. for all the while you are in a state of nature, going on in sin against God, you do but wrong your own souls; and by hating wisdome love death,Prov. 8. ult. Rom. 6. ult. yea, eternal death, though you like not to hear of it. Let not prejudice take away your judgement; and then a BoanergesMark 3.17. with Joh. 12.29., a son of thunder to day, may fit you to give better enter∣tainment
to a BarnabasActs 4.36. with Rev. 4.5., a sonne of Consolation to morrow. For my part, I hope I am not studious, neither do I expect to please men,Gal. 1.10. 1 Cor. 4.3. in treating on this severe point; their censure is a small thing to me, if I may approve my self the servant of Christ our Judge, which I shall endeavour in not erring from the scope of this his last sentence in my Text, wherein we have Text divi∣ded. .1. The persons sentenced or judged; viz. the wicked described by their station [on the left hand.] condition [cursed.] 2. The person sentencing; viz. Christ who is Lord Chief Justice of all the world, [me.] 3. The punishment, or sentence it self pronounced by this Judge who cannot but do right; namely, [Depart from me into everlasting fire prepared for the Divel and his Angels] from God who hath no beginning, into Hell which hath no end; noting the pain of 1 Tim. 1.7.Ter. à quo. ad quem. Loss, [Depart from me.] Sense, [into everlasting fire, &c.] Where we have Hell Torments set forth by their quality, extremity & eternity. & quantity, extremity & eternity. (1.) Extremity aggravated by their inflammation, [fire.] the preparation of them [prepared]. the association in them, [the Divel and his Angels.] (2.) Eternity, which makes all Hell ndeed, [evalasting fire.] Take the summe in this Proposition. The wicked shall depart from Christ into the greatest Tor∣ments. Or if you will have it shorter, take it in Davids words.Psal. 9.17.
The wicked shall be turned into Hell. I shall endeavour to prepare this for Application, by Explication, and Confirmation. I. Explication of the Subject. Predicate.I. Explicat. 1. The Subject, [the wicked.] i. e. All ungodly men and women who dye in their sins, unclean, unsanctified;Rev. 21.27. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. 2 Thes. 1.9. Colos. 3.6. who know not God, nor obey the Gospel; the Goats on Christs left hand, at the great day in my Text denominated [the cursed, execratio hor∣renda & abominanda. Camerarius & Ger. Harm. Evang.] with a dreadful execration, detested of God with abomination, and destinated to all misery without remedy. 2. The Predicate, [the greatest punishment] or Hell, of which I shall say somewhat to. First, The name, Hell, answering to the Hebrew  She∣ol, and the Greek ;quid nominis. quid rei. which though the former primarily signifies the grave; and the latter the valley of the son f Himmon, yet they do (also) signifie extreame and eternal tor∣ment; especially the latter in the new Testament, where Christ speaks. Mat. 5.29, 30. with — v. 22. . of the whole body being cast into Hell, (the fiery Hell) which Mark explains to be inextinguishableMark 9.43. . with Mat. 18.9. Hence our Saviour else∣where bids fear him who is able to destroy soul and bo∣dy, , in Hell,Mat. 10.28.23.15.33. Luke 12.5. Men could not cast the soul into the proper Gehinnom, but God can cast that into Hell after the body is killed; which seve∣ral of the Ancient Jewish Doctors Targ. Jonath. B. Uz. Hierus. Paraph. in Gen. 3. ult. Praeparavit Gehennam improbis, infuturo seculo.  &c. apprehending, they did by Gehinnom Metaphorically describe the infernal fire; as the Learned Targ. Jonath. B. Uz. Hierus. Paraph. in Gen. 3. ult. Praeparavit Gehennam improbis, infuturo seculo.  &c. have proved, notwith∣standing what is said to the contrary, in that abomina∣ble Treatise of Hell, (justly sentenc'd to be burnt about two years ago) (wherein the Jesuited Pen-manP. Cheitomaeus, Beza, Scapula, Minshaw, Usher, Fulk, Buxtorf. Lex. Talm. . & , ider sonant apud Ignatium. Epist. ad Ephes. 4. S. R. Lond. printed 1657., whither out of ignorance or malice, or both, hath most shamefully wronged our best Authors. But could he and any others (which they cannot) evade the Tropical signification of Gehenna; yet all the strength
of their Arguments to shake and remove Hell Pillars, will be but just enough (as it fared with Sampson in a far more lawful undertaking,Judg. 1.16, 28. when he shook the Pillars of the house in which the Philistines were) to pull down the rotten Fabrick of their hellish Tenet upon their own Pates; sit'h there are abundantly more of Scripture expressions noting an extreame and eternal mi∣sery after this life is ended; viz. Destruction by way of eminen∣cy:Mat. 7.13. utter darknesse, where weeping and wailing, and gnash∣ing of teeth;— 22.13. and the worme dyeth not;Mark 9.43.48. dam∣nation,Mat. 23.33. everlasting punishment,— 25.46. eternal fire, chains, black∣nesse, and mists of darkness,Jude ep. 6, 7, 13. the Prison where the spirits of the disobedient be;2 Pet. 2.4, 17. with 1 Pet. 3.19. wrath to come,1 Thes. 1.10. — 5.9. the furnace of fire,Mat. 13 42. the second death, bottomless pit, place of torment, lake of fire and brimstone.Rev. 2.11. & 9.2. & 14.10. & 20.10. & 19.20. & 21.8. Secondly, The nature of Hell may be thus described; 'tis no lesse than the eternal and second death in its latitude, as opposite to eternal life; i.e. The most miserable state of the wicked, where∣in they are everlastingly separated from the sight of God, and all comfortable good,The descripti∣on of Hell. lock't up in chains of darknesse under the fresh, lively and afflicting sense of the wrath of God, justly kindled, and on∣tinually flaming against them for their sins, and according to the measure of them, so that they are filled with never ceasing hor∣rors of conscience, and scorched in soul and body, with such grie∣vous flames as will for evr torment, but never consume them to an annihilation. The description explained.More particularly this Description suggests two things agree∣able to them, already noted in the Text further to be explained; viz. the Punishment it self. Properties of it. 1. Punshment it self. Paena damni. nsus. . Acts 1.25. Abiiendi in illud  quo infernus. Gerh.(1.) The punishment it self, to which the wicked are adjudged, and that is the pain of Losse, absence of infinite mercy. the Sense, presence of unspeakable misery. 1. The pain of loss, the privation of all good; Depart from me says Christ, get ye gone from my presence into your proper place; away with you, here is no comfort for you; Depart from all the
good you were once (while on earth) invited to have in me, and with me in heaven; yea, and from that you chose and preferred before me; you must now lose all real, and all you and others reputed good things, whither [1.] Natural, (your sins will go along with you) but all your pleasures, profits, honours, with the vain hopes of greater content in your sinful courses will leave you. The covetous Cor∣morant shall not have his bags, nor the ambitious his honour, nor the voluptuous his pleasure:Acts 1.18. Judas left his silver which he pri∣zed more than out Saviour; Haman his honour; the deceased Gentleman in the Gospel his delicious fare, with which he had pamper'd himself in his life time, and glad he would have been upon his importunate begging to have had one drop of water from the end of Lazarus his sorest finger, to cool the tip of his tongue, when he was tormented in flames; but alas! he must remain de∣prived with this sharp answer,Luk. 16.24, 25 with Jam. 5.5. Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things. Though wicked men be Rebels and Traytors to God, yet here he gives them meat and drink to keep them alive for a time; he deals not with them as the cruel Duke D' Alva did with his prisoners, whom he starved after he had given them Quarter, saying, Though I promised your lives, I promised not to finde you meat: He gave Aegypt to Nebu∣chadnezzar, and vast Dominions to Alexander; but in Hell wicked men shall be deprived of all. There they shall have no houses, nor lands, nor moneys, nor good chear, nor mirth, nor credit, nor friends, nor servants; no stately Italian Palaces, no rare Coaches of Naples drawn by the Horses of Barbary; no artificial wares of Quinsaio and Alexandria; no Indian gold; no Bisnager Diamonds; no Scythian Em raulds; no Topazes of Aethiopia; no Molucca spices; no Canary Sacks nor Su∣gars; no Candie oiles; no Spanish sweet meats; no French wines; no Ʋ lvets nor Tisse, nor Scarlet, nor purple cloaths, but purple flames. [2.] Spritual good things they had here, and might have had in common with the Saints; in Hell no offers of Christ,Vide part 3. of Baxters Saints rest. nor pardon by him; no Pr achers nor promiss, nor pssibility of heaven, as there was here in the wckeds apprehensions, whic will be exceedingly enlightened to see what they are deprived of; yet then can see no Wells of salvation, only the pit of dmntion.
[3.] Eternal good things; the wicked lose God himself, and heaven with him; oh unspeakable losse to the understanding soul! infinite loss! to want an infinite good, to be separated from the chief good! to depart from God, this is a most sad de∣parture,In his medita∣tions on the foure last things. Psal. 139.8. Hebr. 12.14. the worst of all (as Reverend and Learned Bolton well observes from the Ancients) 'tis true, wicked men cannot depart from Gods essence; for he is essentially in Hell; but they depart from his comfortable presence, not to see God, nor to have one comfortable glance at the great Creator, merciful Redeemer, and gracious Sanctifier. And with this losse of losses, they are de∣prived of heaven, and those admirable perfections, and ravishing beauties, with which the Spouse of Christ is for ever, endowed, and are shut out with the foolish Virgins from those inconceivable pleasures,Mat. 25.10. with c. 8, 11, 12 Psal. 16.11. and joyes which are at Gods right hand for evermore. 2. The pain of sense; Depart from me saith Christ, whither may the damed say? why from my face into the fire of Hell; not a purifying, but a tormenting fire; in the last verse called everlasting fire;Mat. 13.30. . Chrys. Hom.. 31. in Rom. 16. in my Text [the fire] as more notable than a∣ny other; but what, and where this fire is, I have only this to say negatively; neither the fire, nor place of Hell are meerly fantastical or imaginary; i.e. such only as have their being in the operation of the minde; but positively, that both are real, such as have a certain physical being; however Scripture gives me not a warrant distinctly and demonstratively to particularize of what kind, and where. Some style this more grosse part of Hell puni∣shment positive, vexation and torment, considering it concretely; yet abstractively considered, even the pain of sense may be pri∣vative; as these torments deprive a man of that due perfection which would otherwise be in him; ex. gr. though the sensible vexation of a man in a Cauldron of scalding liquor be in the ma∣terality of it positive;Salamandra est animal vivens in igne, tamen non comburitur. Isid. yet the formal nature of that punishment precisely considered, lies in this, that the scalding takes away from the man some perfection belonging to him, else the scalding li∣quor would be no more an evil to him, than fire is to the Salaman∣der;Exercitatione de malo. for 'tis impossible (saith the Learned Barlow) that should be evil to a man, which does not in some respect make him worse; as that which does not deprive him of any per∣fection cannot do, and by consequent could not be evil; this
I only premise, that I may not be understood by any to have a mind to cavil. There are three things requisite to constitute the nature of this pain of sense.Requisite to the pain of sense three things. [1.] The real presence of all evil; that which some terme the position of all horrour, anguish and vexation; some resemblance we may have of it, by supposing what the person sustains, who is cast into a furnace of scalding lead or brimstone, still remembring that all the tortures which ever seized upon all the senses of any body in this world, are but shadowy resemblances of this more sensible part of Hell torments. [2.] The strong impression of vindictive justice,Omnis poena, si ista st, pec∣cati poena est. Aug. in reference unto sin, else the most vehement tormentings could not properly be punishments; when one undergoes the cutting off a rotten leg, nè pars sincera trahatur, that pain is not properly called a pu∣nishment, because 'tis not inflicted for any fult, 'tis for cure, not in vengeance; but in Hell torment, which is the execution of the just wrath of God, the Lord Chief Justice comes in flaming fire, inflicting vengeance,2 Thes. 1.8. , infli∣gens ultionem. Bez. which relates to the fault, by reason 'tis fit that the punishment be apportion'd to the fault in the execution of justice, as maybe more plain in this case. Suppose Titius for Treason should justly deserve death, yet so, that none living know his crime; then imagine Caesar in a rage take away Titius his life, his crime of Treason all this while neither con∣sidered, nor discovered, why! the death of Titius (though in it self it be a natural evil, yet) in order to Caesar is no proper punishment, sit'h it is not the execution of justice in reference to the crime; however it may be so in respect of God,Latet culpa ubi non latet poena. Aug. who kew not only that Titius so dyed, but that he deserved so to dye; this may illustrate that in the punishment of the damned, there is an impression of Divine justice; and therefore because of Gods just judgement, this punishment is called the damnation of HellMat. 23.12. Quia Deus ex uicio hanc poenam impiis infligit. Gerh. thereby noting the keen impression of Gods wrath, wherein not only the Almighty Punisher doth respect sinne; but the finite creature who is punished, knows that he is cast into the furnace of fire for his sinne against the in∣finite God; whereupon there is further requisite to this pu∣nishment:
[3.] That the party punished have an acute feeling himself spoiled of all his perfections; a lively sense of all that he is depri∣ved of, by reason of his sin, otherwise it would not properly be punishment, as I hinted before; the damned hath always quick and terrble apprehension of an angry God impressing his wrath, and persisting to deprive him of all that glorious good was offered to him; instead of which (that being refused) he is more and more assured of lying in a consuming fire, that is, and will be continually burning up all those perfections he had; not purging, but plaguing him worse and worse; yet not so, that the flames devoure his essence, or that the torments utterly, i. e. absolutely destroy his substance; but that they are continually feeding upon all that it should otherwise have been, his simple being neverthe∣lesse remaining; thus of the punishment it self both of losse and pain. The two pro∣perties of Hell punishiment. 1. Extremity.(2.) The Properties of Hell punishment inseparable from it, are its Extremity. & Eternity. 1. Extremity; it infinitely exceeds all other punishment; no pain so extream as that of the damned, who sustain the absence of all good, and the presence of all evil; all the cruelties in the world cannot possibly make up any horror comparable to the hor∣rors of Hell. I noted in the Analysis of my Text, that the Extremity of Hell-torments is aggravated by . Beza. Annot.their inflammation, [the fire.] the preparation of them [the prepared.] the association in them, [the Divel and his Angels.] There is a great force and Emphasis in these praepositive Articles, in the Original thus repeated, demonstrating and defining this punishment to exceed all others in its Extremity. [1.] The grievous inflammation, setting forth the extremity of these torments; fire is the most furious of all Elements; but
this is the fire, hotter than Elementary or culinary fire, impor∣ting the torments to be of a more violent nature than any o∣ther.Geogr. l. 16. Col. 764. Cit. Full. Strabo relates that there is a Lake near Gadara in Gali∣lie, infected with suh malignant and pestiferous qualities, that it scaldeth off the skin of whatsoever is cast into it; yet this is not comparable to the fiery Lake of brimstone, where the ex∣treame anguish of the damned is. (1.) Most exquisite;Damnati ex∣quisitissimos do∣lores sentient, quibus majores non dari nec cgitari possunt. Gerh. loc. com. Long. four last things. all the exquisite torments that ever were heard of, cannot expresse it to the full; Nebuchadnezzars fiery furnace could but cause horrours like flea-bitings, in com∣parison of those the damned in hell do suffer in every sense; the little Monasyllable Hell, though 'tis easily over-look't by many at present, yet 'tis the most unexpressibly grievous Rack in the world. They say Gehenne (which we translate Hell in the New Testament) does in French signifie a Rack, which (as the Strappado) is thought to be the most exquisitely tormen∣ting; those terrible allusions to Tophet,2 King. 23.18. with Isa 30.32, 33. to the shreeks and yellings of Children sacrificed there, are but shadowy representations of their paine who dye the second death. (2.) Intolerable; soul and body shall be ever supported by God in being, but neither be able to avoid, nor yet endure hell-pain; if Cain the foreman coming within the sight of hell here, cry out, My punishment is greater than I can bear;Gen. 4.13. Prov. 18.14. Psal. 88.15. —90.11. Hos. 13.8. Rev. 19.20. Heb. 11.36. (for a wounded spirit who can bear?) if the apprehensions of hell e∣ven distract the Psalmist; if an angry God but meeting the soul of a sinner, rent the caul of his heart, how will he be able to bear burning in the Lake with fire and brimstone? hanging, sting, racking, roasting, suffering under harrowes and sawes of Iron, fleaing of the skin, scratching off the flesh with Thorns, &c. unheard of mercilesse miseries, are nothing to the un∣sufferable tortures of Hell. I grant there are degres of tor∣ment in hell, yet the least is int lerable, whether, 1. We look up on the Omnipotent hand of God executing the vengeance of eternal fire; ah, it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God,Heb. 10.30, 31. the Judge to whom vengeance be∣longs, who takes the wicked immediatly into his own hands, as if none else were strong enough to inflict the fiercenesse of his wrath. Or,
Rom. 9.19.2. Look down on the impotent punished creature, no way able to make any resistance, or lift up his head under the burden of divine indignation, but must crouch under it; for alas! what can a leaf driven too and fro do against the blast of Gods dis∣pleasure! how should the weak back of a poor feeble man, bear the pile of fire and much wood,Isa. 30.33. — 33.14. Job 20.26. which the breath of the Lord doth kindle? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burn∣ing? they that suffer least in hell will find the torments into∣lerable. So that when our Saviour saith,Mat. 10.15. 'I will be more to∣lerable for Sodome and Gomorrah in the day of judgement, than for that City which despiseth the offers of Gospel-grace, he means not that any damned Sodomites should find hell-paines tolerable at all; for Jude writing by the same spirit that Mat∣thew did, sayes, They suffer the vengeance of eternal fire;Jude ver. 10. and eternal fire with a vengeance can be no tolerable paine. Christ will come in flaming fire taking vengeance on those that know not God,2 Thes. 1.8. as well as on those that bey not the Gospel; yet the disobedient and despisers of the Gospel (especially as to the pain of losse) shall be more fearfully plagued than So∣domites. If Turks and Tartars be damn'd, than debauched Christians (as their sins have been double dy'd, so) shall be double damn'd, deeper in hell, by reason here they were nearer to heaven; In∣gen∣tia. beneficia flagitia suplicia if there be hainous sins against wonderful mercies, they must needs bring tremendous punshments; oh, consider it England, City and Country, Courtiers and Common-wealths men. A∣gain, the anguish is John 3.36. Rev. 20.10. Jam. 2.13. Ezek. 7.4. Job 7.9. Isa. 5.14. Luke 16.26. Vestigia nulla retrosum; cra¦dum{que} retro sle∣ctere hand un∣quam sinunt umorae tenaces. Senec. Herc. Furens. Rev. 1.18.(3.) Easeless and remediless; the wrath of God abides; in hell no cooling fits, but continued burnings, the worm per∣petually gnawing, the same torment remaining both day and night; there no Remission of sin, dismission of pain, inter∣mission of sense, or permission of comfort; but judgement with∣out mercy, mischief without measure, crying without compas∣sion, pain without pity, sorrow without succour, bitter lamen∣tation without any consolation, descending without hopes of ascending; the Prisoners being lockt up in this dungeon with∣out possibility of release, no passage out of this darksome fiery Pit of no ease, where the Prisoners would not live, yet cannot die, nor get out; Christ the Supreame Keeper, who hath the Key in his own hand, affirmes with an asseveration (if thou be
cast in) Veriy thou shalt not come out, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthingMat. 5.25. with Luk. 12.58. Mark 12.42. nay, cue or mite, which will ne∣ver be. (4.) Universall, and various, both in respect of the sub∣ject tormented, and the objects tormenting; even as the tooth∣ach, stone, gout, feaver, plague, &c. concurring to torment one man in every part; every power and faculty,Isa. 66.24. Rom. 2.9. Mat. 22.13. — 13.42. — 25.30. sense and member, both of soul and body, will be filled with anguish and vexation, within and without; the never-dying worme of con∣science, and unspeakable tribulation that follows upon it, ma∣nifested in weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, to con∣found the eye, and perplex the mind; as all have joyned in sin, so they shall in suffering; the soul indeed was ring-leader in sin, and so will be chief in suffering,Psal. 120.4. Job 6.4. and — 20.25. when the sharp arrowes of the Almighty are within, and the poison thereof drinks up the spirit. Thus of the inflammation greatened by the four Ingre∣dients. [2.] The preparation further aggravates the extremity of the torments; the Text acquaints us that 'tis [the prepared] fire by way of transcendency, as if the wisdome of God had devised on purpose the most tormenting temper for this formidable fire,Deut. 32.22. Isa. 30.33. which the Lord kindled in his anger of old; In Gods secret purpose 'twas prepared from eternity, and actually made ready for the faln Angels when they fell from God. The Talmudists conceive, that by reason to the things created in the second day, there is not added (as in the rest) that it was good;Gen. 1.6, 7, 8. Buxtorf. Talm. Lexic. therefore the fire of hell was then created; but to leave such a conjecture, we are certain 'tis the prepared fire, and that for the Devil and his Angels;Calvin, Beza, Baxter, &c. not as if it were not prepared also for wicked men, but chiefly to shew 'twas first assigned to the Devils, to note the extremity and inevitablenesse of the tor∣ment of the wicked, who have the Devil and his Angels for their companions. Hence, [3.] The Association, in hell, the Devil and his Angels contribute to the extremity of the damneds punishment:Mat. 12.24. — 10.25. — 9.34. Rev. 12.13. John 12.31. — 14.30. The Devil so called, because he first calumniated God to Eve, as elsewhere Satan, because the capital enemy of God and man. It should seem there is one notorious Beelzebub in the King∣dome of darknesse, over the rest of evil spirits, who may be
called his Angels, probably by reason he being one above the rest,Facti perduel∣les ad exem∣plum sui prin∣cipis, atque a∣deo semen illi∣us audiunt. Dr. Arrows. Tactica sacra. l. 1. c. 2. Sect. 4. Mat. 18.34. 1 Pet. 5.8. (as Head of the Faction) drew multitudes of others into the party, who with him sinned, and fell; but because the di∣stinction in the oder of Angels is not so evident, we may take it of the evil Angels collctively, rather than distributive∣ly, miserable comforters, indeed tormenting companions. Oh! think how sad 'tis to be chained with the Devil in his fiery fetters, shut up in the darkest den with the roaring Lion, with ravenous Wolves, to live in a Nest among stinging freckled Ad∣ders, having your loynes encircled with the girdles of Ser∣pents, to lie in a Pit amongst millions of ugly tods, to be e∣verywhere bitten with venemous Asps, to have Cockatrites kil∣ling you with their eyes, Dragons spitting fire in your faces, Ʋipers eating out your bowels; and then tell me, if the com∣panions in hell, (who are infinitely worse than these) can be desirable, that we should any of us be so mad (as too many are) to choose them, rather than the Society of Saints. Wier speaks of a Charmer at Satlsburg,Moore Athe∣ism. l. 3. c. 2. that when in the sight of the peo∣ple he had charm'd a company of Serpents into a Ditch, and kill'd them, at last there came one huge one, far bigger than the rest, which leap'd upon him, winded about his waste like a girdle, and roll'd him into the Ditch, and so kill'd the Char∣mer himself in the Conclusion. Alas! how may men and women can sport themselves with the Devils temptations here, till at last the grand Old Serpent come out with his strength,Rev. 12.9. Peccato Diabo∣lorum nullum paratum reme∣dium. and roll them into the pit of hell, where they shall live in mi∣sery, and lie sprawling wth no other companions but the Devil and his cursed fiends, who will be continually tormen∣ting one another, and stinging them with horrors to all eternity! Hence, 2. Eternity.The second Proprety of this punishment is its Eternity, in the Text , the everlasting fire; and verse 46. everlasting punishment, which is there directly opposed to eternal life, that blessed state of the righteous which will never have an end; and therefore according to the Rules and Maximes of reasonOppositorum est eadem sci∣entia. & Oppositorum sunt opposita consequentia. Can. Logic., doth necessarily import a punishment of the same duration that the reward is; now that's acknowledg'd by the Socinians them∣selves, to be eternal, absolutely so, as never to end; and there∣fore the punishment cannot, but be so too. The damned are
in everlasting chaines of darkness, suffering no less than the vengeance of eternal fire, in the blackness of darkness for ever,Jude ver. 7, 6, 13. Rev. 14.7. and their smoke goes up for ever and ever. A parte post, it is an interminable duration; as beyond measure in extremiy,Psal. 90.2.11. so beyond time in eternity; None but he who was from everlasting to everlasting, can fully describe this most permanent durati∣on. They that by the help of the best spiritual and rational pro∣spective, can see furthest into it, will be forc'd to cry out, O the Ocean that cannot be look't over, the depth that cannot be fathom'd! there is never an exit to this saddest Tragedy, this eternal judgment; God sets an end to all other darkness,Heb. 6.2. Job 28.3. Mat. 3.17. but none to the darknesse of hell; when the wrath of God is come upon the ungodly, 'twill still be wrath to come; this fiery durance is not measureable by our petite particles of time; a∣las! 'tis for ever, wo! wo! wo! O Eternity! Eternity!Mat. 23. , q. d. . Drexelius, Ger∣hard, Birke∣bock, &c. E∣ternity! this word ever, ever, everlasting, will even break the hearts of the damned. Mark what I say, suppose with me, (af∣ter others) the whole world were a Mountaine of Sand, and a little Wren com but once every thousandth year to fetch one grain of Sand, what inc mprehensible millions of millions (not to be numbred by a finite being) would be spent before this sup∣posed wonderful Mountaine could be fetcht away? (when it would be millions beyond reckoning, before the sands in an hour-glass could be carried away after this rate; but six thousand years, and so but six Sands would be gone since the Creation of the world) Well! but supposing yet this wonderful astonishing thing should be effected; if a damned person should stay in tor∣ment so long, and then have an end of his wo, it were some comfort; but when that immortal bird should (according to the presupposed portion) have carried away this Mountain ten thousand times over, Alas! alas! and wo! his anguish and tor∣ment will be as great as ever it was, and he no nearer coming out, than he was the very first moment he entred into Hell. Beloved, think seriously on this sad supposition, I know not whether your hearts tremble, but I am sure mine does when I dwell on these things in my thoughts: Oh! who are so flout-hearted among us,Isa. 33.14. that they can dwell with everlasting burn∣ings? that they can strugle with this wrath to come, which will never be overcome, never come to an end? believe it
friends! the worm dieth not, the fire is not quenched; they are not mine, bur the most sure (yet sad) words with which the most Evangelical Prophet Isaiah shuts up his long and sweet Prophecy;Isa. 66.24. John 7.46. and you know our Lord Jesus, who spake as never man spake, did frequently utter his mind in the same stile. Thus for Explication. II. Cnfir∣mation.II. For Confirmation, That the wicked shall depart from Christ, into an extremity and eternity of torment, as hath been descrbed, take these Particulars, which laid together are cogent. First, The fore-mentioned Explication grounded upon evident Texts of Scripture (not wrested from their genuine meaning) doth imply the quod sit, i. e. the existency of the Subject, viz. that there is an Hell, as the basis or Hypothesis upon which not only the quid, but quale is founded in Scripture; i. e. the essence and essential properties,Non entis nec est essentia nec modus essentiae Maxim. viz. that there is a real punish∣ment appointed to some, consisting in the pain of loss and sense, both extreme and eternal; for of that which is not, there can neither be essence, nor manner of being described; but from what hath been said, you see there are both predicates in Scri∣pture answering to the Questions, what pain? and what man∣ner of pain? and therefore it must necessarily follow, that there is some subject on which they are affirmed, and to which they do appertain;Certum est vi∣vere omne quod dolet, dolorem∣que omnem nisi in re vivente esse non posse. l. 21. de Civ. Dei. c. 3. to this purpose Augustine sayes truly, That whatsoever is grieved doth live or exist; and that there cannot possibly be any grief, but there must be some real subject to sustain it; if then the Scripture speaks of an Eternal pain, it doth certainly suppose some must en∣dure it. Secondly, The beams of natural light in some of the Hea∣thens, have made such impressions on the heart or natural con∣science, that several of them have confused notions of an Hell, as well as of a judgement to come. Profound Bradwardine and others, have produced many proofs concerning their apprehen∣sions of this TruthBradw. de causa Dei. l. 1. c. 1. Corol. 39. Raynaud. Theol. Nat. Disp. 8. Q. 4 Windel. Phys. Part 1. Sect. 2. Justin. Hist. Adrianus.; what made the Heathen Emperour when he lay a dying, cry out? O animula vagula blandula, &c. O my little wretched wandering soul, whither art thou now hast∣ning, &c. Oh, what will become of me? live I cannot, dye
I dare not! but some discoveries of the wrath to come. Surely, it was not meerly the dissolution of nature, but the sad conse∣quent that so startled and terrified Belshazzar, when he saw the hand-writing on the Wall;Dan. 5.5, 6. Heb. 2.15. guilty man when conscience is awaked, fears an after-reckoning, when he shall be paid the wages of his crying sins, proportiona∣ble to his demerits.Tert adversus Gentes. p. 78. & de Resurrect. c. 3. Chrysost. Hom. 8. in 1 Thes. sub fin. , &c. , Plat in Phaed. p. 52. Edit. Franc. 1602. . Ita ille in Gorgia sub fin. Trismeg. c. 10. Ascelp. Hence Tertullian in this mat∣ter appealing to the consciences of the Gentiles, and after him Chrysostome affirmeth, that Poets and Philosophers, and all sorts of men speaking of a future retribution, have said that many are pu∣nisht in Hell. Plato is very plain, that whoever are not expiated but prophane, shall go into Hell to be tormented for their wickednesses, with the grea∣test, most bitter, and terrible punishments for ever in that Prison in Hell. And Trismegistus affirms concerning the souls going out of the body defi∣led, that 'tis tost too and fro with e ernal punish∣ments; and anotherLucian. de luctu. , &c. . Tartrus horriseros eructans fontibus oestus. Lucr. Tartareae sedes & formeda∣bile regnum mortis inexpletae. Stat, Viscera praebebat Titius La∣nianda. Ovid. Perfidus Ixion; Horat. Saxum ingens volvunt ali, radisque rotarum Districti pendent: sedet aeternumque se∣debit Infelix Theseus, Ph∣gys{que} miserrimus omn s Ad∣monet, & magna testatur voce per umbras: Discite justitiam moniti & non enee divos. Virgil. Nec mort is poenas mors altera siniat hujus, Hora{que} erit tantis ultima nulla malis. O∣vid., that it was the comm n opini∣on among them, that the wicked were held in chains by Pluto (so they call the Prince of Devils) in chaines which cannot be loosed. 'Twould take up much time, and not be so fit for your Christian ears to mention what conceits the Poets have of Tarta∣rus (i. e. in plain English Hell) and the judge∣ment there, wherein for want of Scripture Reve∣lation, they are much out in their fictions con∣cerning the manner of this punishment; yet these imaginations of theirs, give some evidence to the thing it self written in their consciences, about which the Word of God doth informe us more fully and clearly. Every ones guilty conscience (not seared and stifled) calls for our assent to this same Doctrine; the secret checks in our own bo∣some, do sometime affright and appale us, even
anticipating torments, and giving the sinner an earnest of that summe of misery (which is the wages of sin) the pay∣ment whereof shall never have an end;Rom. 6. ult. so that every conscious wretch may find and feel such a worm crawling in his own breast, which unless it be kill'd by the Physician, who only cures sin-stung souls with his own blood, will never dye. The very Turks speak of the house of perdition,Alcoran Ma∣hom. c. 14. p. 160. &c. 20. p. 198. and affirm that they who have turned Gods grace into impiety, shall abide eternally in the fire of hell, and there be eternally tormented. Thirdly, It cannot but be equitable, that the wicked who de∣spised everlasting happiness, should suffer eternal miseries: They would not be heirs of an Everlasting Kingdowe;Joh. 5.40. with Isa. 9.6, 7. and Dan. 7.14, 27. and Rev. 14.6. Mat. 2.12, 46 & — 18.8. Joh. 5.39, 40. with Jude E∣pist. ver. 21. Factus est malo dignus aeterno, qui hoc in se peremit bonum, quo esse posset aeternum. August. Dan. 12.2. and therefore no marvel they are everlastingly shut out. They sleight and re∣fuse Gods eternal mercy, and the honour which the Heirs of glory do accept of upon the terms of the Gospel; and therefore they must arise to shame and everlasting contempt, and undergo eternal misery, according to the terms of the Law. For Fourthly, The violation of those everlasting obligations which lie upon them unto God, do demerit an answerable punishment. Sit'h the wicked have trampled upon the blood of the Covenant,Heb. 10.28, 29. and abused the many favours God tendred to them to make them meet for glory (by which they have fitted themselves for destruction) 'tis but reasonable they should be punisht with the mist and blackness of darkness for ever,Rom. 9.22, 23. 2 Pet. 2.17. Jude ver. 13. Rom. 1.18, 25. Isa. 60.19. Rev. 14.6. Rom. 16.26. who by their prophaness and errours, did seek to cloud the beams of Gods infinite good∣ness, Everlasting light, and eternal truth. To draw to a period, Fifthly, If wicked impenitents after this life, shall not be pu∣nisht by God with everlasting torments, then something must hin∣der Either on Gods part, or, Theirs. If on Gods part, then 'tis either,
1. Because he will not: Now what his will is, you have heard revealed, and may know further if you consult the Scripture: My Text acquaints you plainly with Christs mind, and that's the mind of God. Or 2. Because he cannot, which to affirme, were to deny his Om∣nipotency, to say he is not God. Or 3. Because he dare not; what were this, but to suppose the Soveraign Judge upon the Bench to be (as it were) a cowardly Underling to the trembling Prisoner at the Bar! when his very breath can kindle the fiery River of brimstone into which he sentenceth every impenitent Malefactor.Isa. 30.33. Or 4. Because like unjust Judges, he may be corrupted with bribes;Gen. 18.25. but shall not the Judge of all the World do right? If the hindrance be on the wickeds part, then I conceive it must be either 1. Because their living and sinning but a short time here on earth, does not deserve eternal punishment in Hell; for the evil of punishment should be but commensurate to the evil of sin: Now there is no proportion betwixt finite and infinite. I confesse this pretence is ready to shake the faith of many in this point; but if the ground of it be rightly understood, it may con∣firme the point; for (1.) If the wicked had lived always, they would alwayes have separated themselves from God by sinning against him, and never have repented of their sin, nor been weary of sinning; nei∣ther then will God be weary of plaguing, or repent of punishing: The Schoolmen from Augustine argue, Pecant in aeterno suo, ergò puniuntur in aeerno Dei;Aquin. Supl. Scot. in Sent. Thom. 1.2 dae. Q. 99. l. ult. Q 87. Arts. 5. which will never have an end, but remain while God is God. This may be illustrated by a similitude; as men addicted to pleasure, do in the night time eager∣ly and earnestly pursue their game at Chesse, Tables, or the like, by an inch of candle, which unexpectedly goes out, would questionlesse have play'd willingly all night had the light lasted: So wicked men they desire to spend all their inch of time in the pursuit of their sins, if that would continue, they would con∣tinue in sin, and not leave sinning, wherefore they shall not leave
suffering; had they lived for ever here, they would have sinned for ever;Rev. 9.6. but in Hell, where they would not live, they must be kept alive, because of their will of sin upon Earth: Oh! wicked wretch, is it not a righteous thing with God (what thinkest thou?Ad magnam justitiam judi∣cantis pertinet, ut nun∣quam careant supplicio qui in hac vita nunquam vo∣luerunt carere peccato. Gregor.) that thy punishment for thy sin should never cease in Hell; who shouldst thou live for ever here, thou wouldst be an Eternal standing provocation to his Majesty? I deny not, but the wicked will sin Eternally in Hell, yet I lay not the stresse on that, (which some do) as the reason of their Eternal punishment, but because they ven ceased, nor would have ceased to transgresse Gods Law,Gen. 2.17. Rom. 6. ult. & — 5.12. Gal. 3.9. whiles upon earth; and Eternal punishment was denounced against the first transgression, which e∣very one that lives and dyes in sin, is not only guilty of, but will not repent of; he would not be reconciled to God here,Isa. 30.15. Matth. 23.37. John 5.40. Ezek. 33.11. and God will not be reconciled to him hereafter, but will say to him always, as Tyberius once said to one that requested death, rather than long imprisonment;Suet. in vita. Tyber. nondum tecum redii in gratiam; I am not yet reconciled to thee, that I should shew thee such a favour. Prov. 8.36. Deut. 30.19. John 6.40, 54. & 3.36. Ezra 8.22. Hos. 13.9.(2.) The sinner hath but his choice and option; if he be pla∣gued with Eternal death, 'tis no other than that which he prefer'd before Eternal life. The Lord sets life and death before us, (as by Moses the typical, so by Christ the true Messiah) if we will choose Christ, and accept of him, we may have Eternal life; if not, we must be sure of Eternal death; he that refuseth the Eternal weight of glory in one end of the scale, chooseth Eternal punishment in the other end; as our first Parents did choose the curse by their voluntary refusing of the blessing; which bad choice of theirs, laid obnoxious unto Eternal pain both themselves and their posterity, who cannot complain of God for inflicting the death they are by corrupt nature liable to; sith besides their choice in their first parents, and in their own persons, they who live under the Gospel have as great a mercy tendred by the second Adam, as Eternal death is a grievous punishment; yea, the Atheist (who (as 'twas said of Antiochus Epiphanes) takes more pains to go to Hell,Buntings Itine∣rarie. than some others to go to Heaven)
must confesse that he deserves his wages of Eternal death as his Pay, sith he hath toyled and drudged all his life long in the Devils Service, only to fit himself for misery. (3.) The Schoolmen have observed from the Philosopher,Aquia. Supl. Q. 99. Art. 1. that the punishment ought to be levied according to the dignity of him against whom the offence is committed. He is more severely punish't, who gives his Soveraign a box on the ear, than he that does so to his equal: Now wicked men (and that without Re∣pentance) sin against the Eternal God by the violation of his Honourable Law, which he resolves to magnisie:Isa. 42.21. And as they ought not in their own case (so they are unqualified) to be com∣petent Judges of their Own offences; (sit'h they cannot see the thousandth part of that evil there is in the least sin) and therefore unfit to apportion the punishment which ought to be levied by the Judge of all the World, (who knows what is meet,Gen. 18.25. and will do nothing but what is right) proportionable to the offence committed against the supreme Majesty;Peccatum in Deum crimen laesae Majestatis: — Adsit Regula pecca∣tis quae paenas irroget aequas. Horatius. for where there is satisfaction required, there must be proportion, which would not at all be here in this case, without some kind of infiniteness; and because that cannot be found in any meer creature in value, it must necessarily be in duration; for if after millions of years it could ever be said the damned had fully satisfied Gods justice, it might be said they shall be set free, as the prisoner from the Goal, having paid the debt;Luk. 12:58, 59 (a thing impossible) but because the sufferings of the damned (which are all the satisfaction they can give infinite justice) in regard of the subject, being finite,Ex parte sub∣jecti. and consequently not of nifinite value, they must be so in duration; at least à parte post, as to the future, for the defect of satis∣faction in the temporal finite punishment of any meer creature. Excep. If it be excepted,Excep. neither by the Eternal punishment of men is Gods justice satisfied; for then this punishment would not be Eternal,Contradictio in Adjecto. (which is a contradiction in the very thing it self) if ever it could be said of Gods justice now 'tis satis∣fied. Repl. I Reply; [1.] Let it be very well considered,Repl. whether Gods iustice, being infinite, and consequently an essential At∣tribute in God, doth not require from man (upon his delinquency)
that satisfaction which is of infinite value,Infiniti valo∣ris. he the party offen∣ded being essentially of infinite dignity. Now such a satisfaction, i. e. of infinite value, could only be made by Christ, who (being the Surety of the Covenant, and suffered in our stead) is God-man in one person,. Acts 20.28. and gave plenary satisfaction unto God. John 1.14. 1 Tim. 3.16. Rom. 3.25.[2.] Though Eternal punishment may not be cal∣led a satisfaction made or given to the party offended, yet 'tis that which the party offending must ever be in making or giving,Parti laesae. (by the order of the Supreme Judge who is to hear the cause and apportion the pu∣nishment to the fault) because he the delinquent wanting that in∣finitenesse in dignity of person, which doth bear a proportion to the dignity of the party offended, must make this up by an infi∣nite duration of punishment, which may perhaps in some sort be termed satisfaction performed to the Law, it being the payment of the whole in the obligation;Satisfactio legi praestita. Peysolutio totius quod est in obligatione. for up∣on defailance of paying the debt of duty and obe∣dience, what more is required of the debt of penalty and suffering to be paid,Debitum officii. Debitumsupp li cii. than death in its full lati∣tude, temporal, spiritual, and Eternal? so that in this respect 'tis no error to call it satisfaction; but if we speak of a compleat satisfaction made to the party offended,Parti offensae. it must be granted that none but the only Son of God did, or could give it; thus for the first great impediment pretended in regard of the Subject. Or 2. It is because there is a possibility of freedom from the Pri∣son of Hell; and then this must be either by Covenant and Com∣pact, which whoever affirms, proferat tabulas; for 'tis fan y, not faith which believeth any such thing without the written Word. Or by commutation; and what place for such a fancy? Is any so absurd as to think there are any in Hell who belong to God, and in Heaven who belong to the Divel? that there should be matter for such a Chimaera, such a strange fiction? Or by force, and what were this but to over-power Omnipotency? Or by fraud, and what were this but to out-wit Divine Wisdome, and to put a trick upon him whose understanding is infinite? Or by a price paid, and what is it that offending man can lay down as a sufficient compensation or satisfaction to an offended God, who is infinite,
for the injury done unto him, which God should accept of,1 Sam. 2.25. Godw. Rom. Antiq. l. 1. Sect. 2. . Ephes. 5.6. is hard to fancy; and woful experience (if nothing else will) may con∣vince vain man, that 'tis impossible to procure. Or by manu∣mission; now this doth belong only to obedient servants, not to chldren of disobedience. Or, 3. The impediment is because there is an impossibility in re∣gard of the subject (as is pretended) of undergoing torments of an eternal duration by a finite creature;Ex parte subjecti and therefore all the Hell, Socinians, &c. grant,Socinus, Racov. Cat. Crel∣lius, Bidle, Richardson, &c. 2 Thess. 1.8, 9. is Annihilation, by reason 'tis said, The wicked shall be destroyed. But to remove this, remem∣ber (1.) The same infinite power of God which preserves An∣gels and men vessels of mercy, to the glorifying of his grace,Rom. 9.22, 23. can preserve Devils and wicked men vessels of wrath, to the glorifying of his justice; and God will do so, by reason his mercy annot contradict his justice and truth; Christ who at the last day will judge others for unmercifulness, best knows what it is to be merciful; and it concernes us to credit the verity of his sentence in my Text, though upon harkening to the shallow reasonings of flesh and blood we may be apt to apprehend severity in it: but as Gregory sayes truly, He that cannot find out a reason of Gods doings, may easily finde in himself a reason why he cannot finde it out. (2.) The destruction mention'd, is rather in a continual fieri, than in facto esse, in a perpetual doing, never finally done; the living of the wcked in hell, is a dying life, and their dy∣ing is a living death; one arme of Gods power is al∣wayes bearing up what the other is alwayes beating down. (3.) They shall be destroyed in a moral, not in a natural sense; a man that is dead in Law, may live a natural life, but is deprived of that whch before was due to him; the wicked have their b ings in hell, but are deprived of all that which makes to their well-beings; sequestred from the fruition of God, and all comfort with him, who is the Fountain of life; instead of which they cannot be freed from all that tends to their ill-beings. Christ sayes expresly, they must depart into e∣verlasting fire, and everlasting punishment; therefore
certainly not to be annihilated, but to abide and remain in tor∣ment. For [1.] He that shall be everlastingly punished, must needs re∣main in being everlastingly; his punishment can∣not continue when he is not;Non entis nulla sunt praedi∣cata. Ejus quod falsum est nulla potest esse scientia. . Ut Philopon. in Arist. he that hath an end, cannot be punished without end after he ceaseth t, be; so that if the wicked should be annihilated, or absolutely destroyed, and deprived of being, then nothing should be tormented with the never-dying worm; (if the worm dye not, it must live in some subject) and nothing should dwell in unquenchable fire, as the Scripture affirms there shall. A∣gain, [2.] Men as well as Devils, may have their essence and being eternally preserved, and yet not inherit eternal life, but remain in a moral condition of eternal death; for eternal life promis'd and purchas'd in Scripture, does not only note our physical or natural being in life, but chiefly our moral well-be∣ing in bliss and happiness; and therefore eternal death does not deny wicked men being naturally alive, but their being morally alive; they live indeed, but miserably, in a conditi∣on absent from all comfortable good, present with all evil; there shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for e∣ver;Mat. 8.12. therefore there shal some be who shall so weep, &c. and they are the wicked that shall still remain in these remain∣ing torments beyond expression, which are called the Second death; not that this death is a consumption of their persons, an absolute wasting of their substances, as to the continuance of their beings (for though they seek to have their beings destroy∣ed, yet they shall not finde their desire accomplish∣ed) yet as 'tis said of Roger Bishop of Salisbury,Revel. 9.6. Vivere noluerit, mori nescie∣rit. Nulla major aut pejor mors quam ubi non moritur. mors. Aug. in King Stephens time (he would not have lived (that life in Prison) yet could not dye; they would be annihilated and cannot) but this which is the worst death, is a deprivation of all the comfortable good of life natural, spiritual, and eternal, with an infliction of the greatest evil, the wicked are then suported and capacitated to lie groaning under for e∣ver.
Thus for the Confirmation of the Point, wherein we have had likewise (imply'd) a confutation of the most consi∣derable Adversaries to this infallible Doctrine of Hell, there re∣mains III. A short Application to be enlarged in your meditati∣ons; learn hence,III. Appli∣cation. 1. To feare sin, and its sad consequent, Hell; the clear evi∣dence of an eternity and extremity of hell-tortures, should stir up in us an holy affection of fearing God, and being affraid (by reason we are guilty) of eternal vengeance; the truth is, we should be so afraid of sin and hell, as to be afraid of no∣thing else, if we would copy out in our practice, the Lesson Christ commands;Mat 10.28. viz. Fear not them which can kill the bo∣dy, but are not able to kill the soul, but rather feare him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him; Christ repeats his precept,Luke 12.5. that it may not be forgotten; an urgent necessity lies upon us to pass the time of our sojourning here in feare;1 Pet. 1.17. Phil. 2.12. we must work out our own salva∣tion in feare and trembling; we may, we ought to feare the pain of losing the sight of Jehovahs blessed face and favour; for this is a filial affection consistent with the greatest love; he that truly loves God,Res est soliciti plena timoris Amor. Jeanes Schol. & Practic. Di∣vin. will solicitously fear nothing so much as to dis∣please and lose him. Yea, and (though we may not with an ir∣rationl, or selvish, uneffectual, slavish fear, (which dishonour-God) feare the pain of sense; yet) because hell-torments are such extream and eternal violations of the Primitive integrity of our nature, we may and ought also wth a rational fear to be afraid of the pain of sense, but not immoderately and immea∣sureably more than we are afraid of sin, which is a worse evil in its own nature, than hell it self; for all the evil that is in hell, doth arise from sin as the mother of it. Oh! if we should but hear the bitter complaints of those suffering in Hell for their sin, I need not then (I might hope) perswade the stout∣est to be afraid of sin and hell; for our eares would even tingle, our hearts tremble, our blood curdle, and our spirits as it were congeal to yee, at the noise of their most horrible lamentations. Learn,
2. To flee speedily from sin by real Repentance; having this warning to fl e from the wrath to come, which will inevitably seize upon impenitent sinners; Oh! let's all learn of our Saviour and Judge, from this consideration, to bring forth fruits meet for Repentance;Mat. 3.7, 8, 12. his reason is in effect the same with this Doctrine; viz. Every fruitless Tree is cast into the fire unquenchable fire; yet of our selves we can bring forth no acceptable fruit, till we be ingraffed into Christ the true Vine:John 15.4, 5. Oh! let's then labour to see, and be truly sorrowful for all our sins! and pray, Lord, Turn thou us,Jer. 31.18. and we shall be turned from all our sins, and accept of a whole Christ for our only Lord and Saviour; oh! sith we cannot wash our hands in innocency, lets be washing them daily in the tears of true penitency; let's go to the Fountain open'd to wash in for sin,Zch. 13.1. Isa. 30. ult. Rev. 20.10.14, 15.21.8. and for uncleanness, that we may not be cast into the River and Lake of fire and brimstone; Oh! let's now bathe our souls in the blood of Christ, that everlasting burnings may not hereafter seize upon us. Hence Learn, 3. Not to blame Gospel-Ministers for preaching of terrors: hereby they would stave us off from running head-long into Hell, and bring us to repentance, that we may not be cast into that prison, where there is no place for repentance:2 Cor. 5.11. Knowing the terrors of the Lord we perswade men: in love to their precious souls we are bound (being assured we must give an account) to awake our hearers,Hebr. 13.17. lest they forget God and be turned into hell: we dare not betray your pretious souls to gratifie you at present,Psal. 9.17. and indulge you in your sins; as the Apostle says, — We must not for meat de∣stroy the work of God;Rom. 14.15.20. for preferment, favour or respect from you at present; we dare not suffer your immortal souls to perish without warning; oh friends, be not angry with us the Embas∣sadours of Jesus Christ, when we see any of you hastning down the broad way which leads to Hell, (as sure as we are here now) if we then cry fire! fire! to bring you back. You have no more reason to think us your enemies for this warning of you, and telling you the truth in love,Gal. 4.16. than any of your children have to think the most dear and tender Parents amongst you, were their enemies when seeing them (through carelessnesse) ready to fall into fire or water, they should cry out, oh! take heed
Children, or you are irrecoverably lost. Learn, 4. Not to grudge sinners their portion in this World: Davids advice should be our practice, enforced from this very Do∣ctrine; viz. Not to fret our selves at evil doers, nor to be en∣vious against the workers of iniquity;Psal. 37.1, 2. & — 9.17. Prov. 24.20. for they shall soon be cut down as the grasse; they shall be turned into Hell; their foolish prosperity will destroy them, their candle shall be put out, and that in a snuff which will never cease stinking; why then should we be offended at their prosperity here, who are re∣served to an extremity and eternity of torment hereafter!Mal. 3.15. it is a grosse mistake to call the proud happy, or to think the godly most miserable,1 Cor. 15.13.19 because they are here sometimes a lit∣tle under a cloud. The Psalmist was tempted to it; but the knowledge of this Doctrine in the Sanctuary,Ps. 73.3.18, 19 did soon recti∣fie his judgement, and made him conclude that God had set them in slippery places to be cast down into destruction,Job 20.6, 7. and utterly consumed with terrors, and perish for ever; we had more need to pity than repine at our wicked Neighbours,Mat. 19.24. with Luke 16.25. having their good things here: when we consider how hard a matter 'tis to have good things here with Dives, and with Lazarus too hereafter in Abrahams bosome. Learn, 5. Lastly, To admire, and be greatly affected with the su∣perlative love of Christ in undergoing that punishment in our stead, (if we will receive him for our Lord and Saviour) which will be extream and eternal torment to all that do refuse him. And if he be Judge,Mat. 10.14.15, 39, 40. they who receive not his Embas∣sadors in his Name, are of that number: Oh! who would not then kiss the Son, that believe the wrath of God will in∣flict these eternal torments. Oh! Christians! (such I wish we may a l be in deed and truth) let's bless and kisse this blessed Son of God, that bare for us this insupportable wrath,Psal. 2.12. 1 Thes. 1.10. Colos. 2.15. Hosea 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55. Mat. 23.14. Hebr. 2.3. Gal. 3.13. Hebr. 2.9. even Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come, and trium∣phed over principalities, and over tho Grave and Hell; the greatnesse of the damnation we are exposed to by nature, doth greaten the salvation purchased by grace! Oh! blessed Jesus! thou wast cursed here, and tasted'st the death that was accur∣sed;
even this in thy sentence;Isa. 53.5, 7, 8. Rom. 8.1. Mark 3.29. with Heb. 6.2. & 5.9. Acts 2.24. Psal. 116 3. John 8.51. thou wast bruised, afflicted, and broken of God for us; but thou was taken from Prison, and from judgement, and everlasting condemnation; for it was not possile that Thou shouldst be holden of any pains; so that though every Believer shall see a Temporal, yet shall he never see Eternal Death, but inherit Eternal Life.
OF HEAVEN. MATTH. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the King∣dome prepared for you from the foundation of the world. THE Description of Heaven is a work fitter for an Aaron the High Priest of the Most High, when upon Mount Hor he is strip∣ping himself of the vile body of sin; or for a Moses when on the top of Nebo, after a Pisgah prospectDeut. 34.5. (as the Jews comment) he died at theCant. 1.2. kiss of God, refunding thatGen. 2.7. breath of life, and expiring his soul into the bosome of God; Nay, more fit to be described by a pen taken from the Wing of a Cherubim, than the stammering tongue of any mortal man. For whoever attempts to speak of an heavenly state while himself is on earth, his discourses of that, must needs be like the dark dreams and imaginations of a
child concerning the affaires of this world, while it self is yet swadled and cradled in the womb. Yet discourses of Heaven were never more seasonable upon earth. When. Dio. Laer. Anaxagoras was accused as not studying Politicks for his Countryes good, he replied, I have a very great care of my Country, pointing up to heaven; if ever Christians had cause to make all honest haste to heaven, 'tis in a sinful and a perverse generation; when the waters cover the earth, whether should a Dove-like soul fly, but to the Ark of God? when Gods judgements and his Aven∣gers of blood threaten us on every hand, what City of refuge can we run to but the Sanctuary of God? when we know not how soon the members of Christs body in conformity to their Head, may be called to sweat drops of blood; 'tis wisdom for us with our bitter hearbs to keep the Passover, and to think on thatLuke 22.12. large upper Roome, wherein we may be Feasted at the Supper of the Lamb. Therefore with holy David, when the floods of ungodly men made him afraid,Psal. 18.4. let us take the wings of a Dove, fly away, and be at rest, in that desart of men, but Paradise of God, while we meditate on these words, Come ye Blessed, &c. A little before the Text, you have such a division of this world, as you shall never see (as many divisions as there are) till you come to judgement; a Herd of hairy, rough, lustful Goats on the left hand, which (like Pythagoras his second number) are accursed for departing from unity, and have a sharp sentence with the unprofitable servant,. Mat. 24.51. Cut him in sun∣der, and appoint him his potion with the hypocrites. But the sheep on the right hand, are all folded up in the arms of Christ, Come ye blessed, &c. In which words, you have 1. A Possession. 2. The admission into that possession. In the Possession, 1. The nature and qualification of it, it is a King∣dome. 2. The Preparation of it, From the foundation of the World. In the Admission,
1. The Title, and that is, Inheritance. 2. The Heirs, The blessed of my Father. 3. The formal Introduction, Come ye blessed of my Father, in∣herit, &c. First, The Possession, and in that its nature and quality, it is a Kingdome;Psal. 47.7. God is King of all the earth;Psal. 97.1. the Lord reigns, let the earth rejoyce, and the multitudes of Isles be glad thereof; for no places so subject to tempests, inundations and changes in the ayr and state, as they. Every creature payes him allegi∣ance in the Kngdom of his power. But the Scepter of his grace is stretched out over Zion,Rev. 14.3. he is King of Saints, who are not only Subjects to his power, but his holy Will, beingPsal. 110.3. made willing in the day of his power. But yet the seeds of Re∣bellion are in their hearts; but when they enter the Kingdom of his glory, they shall not only become perfect Subjects, but Kings and Conquerours over his and their enemies; Come en∣ter into this Kingdom prepared for you. Now in every King∣dom erected, there is something to be deposed, which they are to be devested of, something to be imposed, which they are to be invested in. First, Therefore to make way for this Kingdom, the black Re∣giment of errours, ignorance, and misapprehension, shall be disbanded; though all the Subjects of Christs Kingdom here, are freed from2 Pet. 2.1. damnable heresies, and recovered from the ab∣solute dominion of the Prince of darkness, yet they are sub∣ject to such errours and mistakes, as may make them trouble∣some not only to the Church of God, but to the wor d. Te tullian Montanizeth, Cyprian rebapti∣ze h, andCujus ingenium Ecclesiae Sacramentum. Origen brings others from those errors himself fell into, as he did Saint Ambroe from the Ʋalentinian Heresie, to the. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. lib. 6. c. 13. Orthodox fath. Bu these and all other shadows on the minds of Saints shall vanish, when the morning shall ap∣pear as the darkness of the night is routed by the rising Sun. All those groundless scruples that now gravel tender hearts; andMat. 13.41. whatever offends, shall be gathered ut of this Kingdome. All laborious studies, Controversies, and Polemical Disputati∣ons, shal then have a final determination. All sub∣tile
distinctions, Jesuitical aequivocations and evasions (the usual masks, and genuine Vermilion of that Scarlet whore, whereby to render the fowlest actions specious to the eye of the world) shall be then swept away as a Refuge of lyes; Death will be the. molting time to deplume men of all those phantastick opinions, and Mercurian fancies, which they now wing their heads withal; all those.Act. 9.18. Scales of ignorance wherein theyJob 41.15. and 31. pride themselves as the Leviathan, and fling the world into aestuations, shall then drop off their eyes; theirJer. 13.23. Leopards spots, and Aethiopian skins contracted by too hot a Sun, and too open a converse with the prosperities of this world, shall be taken off. And though now upon our eye-lids sits the very shadow of death,Job 16.16. yet there the meanest understanding shall confute the ignorant determinations of a whole Sanerdrim of Rabbi's, and look down upon all the grandure of Humane Policies, and reasons of State, with as scornful an eye, as we now look up with to the meanest Cobweb in our Win∣dows. 2. All that turbulent Rout of affections shall be cashiered; as all those clouds of ignorance shall be blown over, so all that thunder and lightning of passion which they involve and travel with, shall pass away. All those furious waves which now ebb and flow in mens hearts, according to the various and lunatick impressions of worldly interests and imaginations, which make men storm like the winds, rage like the Seas, and foame forth their own shame, shall be reduced to a calm; these murmuring Gadarens, and their swinish lusts shall be buried in a dead sea.Aeolus sis affectuum tuorum Neirim. de arte volun. We shall hold all theseProv 30.4. Isa. 40.12. winds in our fists, and these waves in the hollow of our hands. All those peevish, fiery Policicks, Ecclesiasticks, and blinders of natural conscience, wherewith men sting one another in these dayes of sin, shall be eternally extinguished; those muti∣nous commotions of spirits, which now dethrone jugement, and conscience in mens breasts (and therefore enforce judge∣ment-seats without them to be set up) shall be as calmly sub∣dued, as the Sun puts out the fire; thunders, lightnings, pe∣stilences, earth-quakes, shake not the world so much, as mens passions. The pride and envy of a Caesar and a Pompey, were
able to inroll three hundred thousand Heads in the dust. The impetuous motions of these lustful affe∣ctions, breed those miserable necessities men talk of; but as Augustine sayesTum finuntur istae ne∣cessitates quum vincuntur il∣lae cupiditates. Aug. in E∣pisto. 70., those necessities will be ended, when these lusts are conquered; then men will beRom. 8.37. . more than conquerours; and shall be able to conquer themselves, their passions, which Victors themselves obtain not to do here. Men are now like bruits, staked down to particular interests, humours and lusts; but then, and not till then,Liberum arbitrium crit li∣beratum. Aug. free-will it self shall take up its freedom, and all thoseEphes. 2.3. . Wills of the flesh, shall have a totaI and final circumcision, when this eighth day, and great Sabbath of the Saints is come. 3. The whole body of bodily infirmities shall be shaked off. So long as the soul weareth the body, it carries an Almanack about it, by vertue of those pas∣sions which. Jamb. in vi. Pyth. button soul and body together, and convey its distempers to the mind; and the soul on the other hand, as primarily affected with sin, as a rusty sword infects the scabbard; but when the body call'd the sheath of the soul by the ProphetChap. 7.15.  vagi. Dani∣el, shall drop off, the soul like theGen. 3.24. flaming sword or Cherubim rather, shall enter into the Pa∣radise of God. How long is the soul, thatProv. 20.27. Candle of the Lord, in the dark Lan hon of the body, ere it shine at all? and when it begins to flame forth, the Lanthorn burnes; one feaverish distemper or other comes, and that is raked up as a spark in its ashes. That greatSen de brev. vi. Pubican of time, Sleep, what an Excise upon custom hath it out of our lives? and ourVenter vitae Charybdis. bel∣lies are the graves of a great part of our days; But meats for the blly, and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it and them; that is, as to their pre∣set use1 Cor. 6.13. quoad u∣sum. Ut in carina prora puppis∣que, &c. Tertul. de Resur∣rect.. As in a Ship, all the Masts, Sails, Poop and Sterne abide when in the Haven, as hey were in the Voyage, so all the Tackling of the boy may remain in heaven; Elijah dropped his Mantle, none of his cloaths; so the looser humours, dull phlegm,
and melancholy, which clog us with indispositions, and make us. Anton. . Psal. Sept. 4.2. Psal. 30.5. heavy-hearted, and dull-spirited in holy duties, shall be all drawn off, and then we shall serve God without any lassitude, fainting or tediousness; Heaviness may en∣dure for this night, but joy cometh in that morning, when with the Sun,Psal. 19.5. we shall rejoyce as a Gyant, to runne our race. 4. All that Legion of fowle spirits, with their armoury of tentations, shall be confined for ever in theirJude 6. chaines of dark∣ness; the Prince of this world shall be deposed when this King∣dom taketh place; theRev. 20.3. great old Serpent cast into the botome∣lesse pit. No Serpent shall hiss in that Paradise. And though all this world, theJob 7.1. . 70 scene of his tentations, should remain af∣ter its purifying by fire, and all creatures as mans servants be cloathed with a better Livery, when their Master is advanced; yet they could no more fasten a tentation on a Saint in glory, then you can now shoot an arrow into the heart of the Sun. Though Satan and the world are now alwayes nibling at a Chri∣stians heels, that as many ejculations as the soul hath to God, it finds as many injections from the Devil, yet the God of peace will then finally bruise Satan under their feet.Rom. 16.20. The ground that now Lords it over men, and is the Lordship, not the man, and plows up his heart with creful solicitudes, and casts its furrows, and wrinckles in his face, shall never give Thornes and Thistles to his eyes more; but he shall be able to serve God1 Cor. 7.35. . without a∣ny Vellications, Convulsions, Cramps, of Distractions, from the sowre Fermentations of the Flesh and the World. Secondly, As these enemies shall be deposed and disappear; so there is something to be super-induced, in order to the confum∣mation of this happiness. 1. Therefore all the Subjects of this State, shallRev. 19.8. be cloa∣thed with long white R bes, whi h is the righteousness of the Saints; they shall bePsal. 110.3. in the beauties of holiness, from the very womb and first opening of that morning; every infant-grace shall then have its adolescence into a perfect man,Ephes. 4.13. and to the mea∣sure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. Here is imperfecti∣on, intermission, and remission in our devotions of the high∣est elevation. David himself when his heart was most strung
with Divine affections, and in the best tune; yet he had his Cadences. His Hallelujahs, and highest straines of praise, came off with prostra∣vit. Buxt. Selah, a Prostration of voice, and an affecti∣onate pause; but in that Quire of souls once enteredSanctum san∣ctorum. the ho∣ly of holies, shall sing, Blessing, and glory, and honour, and power, to him that sits on the Throne, and the Lamb for ever and ever, with anRev. 5.13. Amen Hallelujah, with the most disten∣ded faculties and intentions of soul to all eternity, in thatRev. 19.4. house of praises, and at the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. Here every Christian hath Hebraeis domus nuptialis dicitur candore san∣guinis. his Garments made white in the blood of the Lamb, being justified from his iniquities by Faith in Jesus; but when they shall be translated to that Mountain of Bliss,Rev. 7.14. their faces shall appear as the Sun, and their Gar∣ments of light as the top of Lebanon,Mat. 17.2. Mark 9.2. Candore nivis. shall shine as white as Snow. Here like poor common Souldiers, some get one piece of Armour, others another, one is skilled at one weapon, o∣thers at another; Job gets a Helmet of Patience, David a Girdle of Truth on his Loynes, and Peter a Shield of Faith, af∣ter they had been trained up to the use of them in many com∣bates; but there every one shall have put upon him, the wholeRom. 13.12. Armour of Light, not to fight but triumph in; for1 Cor. 15.28. God will be to them all in all: and thePsal. 48.11. Sun himself being their Shield,Rev. 21.22. Sanctuary, and holy temple of his holy ones; yea, theRev. 12.1. cloathing of his Saints; all sublunary glories, like your half-mooned honours, shall be under their feet, but an asterism and Crown of everlasting Righteousness shall be upon their heads. 2. As they shall have this Royal Apparel when they enter into this Kingdome as their Robes, so they shall have theirRev. 7.9. palms in their hands; the1 Kings 6.33. doores of the holy of holies were made of Olive Trees, Palms, Cherubims, and open flowers can∣ved on them, which signified that absolute Peace, compleat Victory, Angelical felicity, and an1 Pet. 1.4. incorruptible Crown of glory, that never fadeth away, to be their inheritance that en∣ter into that place. There is no worm in the fruit of this Para∣dise,Pax est traa∣quillitas ordi∣nis. Aug. de civ. Dei 19. l. 14. Ordinata re∣quies appeti∣tionum, &c. but tranquil order in the soul,Isa. 32.17. 1 Cor. 6.17. the fruit of rightoous∣ness here being * peace, and the effect of it joy and assurance for ever; Surely there where we shall * be joyned to the Lord, and become one Spirit, his mind and will perfectly taking place in
us;Isa. 48.18. our peace will be as a River, when our righteousness shall be as the waves of the Sea. No reflections upon sins or sor∣rows pass'd with bitterness of spirit, as now we have in our greatest Triumphs and festivities, as the Jews in their Feasts of Tabernacles,Lev. 23.40. had their willow boughs among their Palmes, while they remembred the dangers they passed in the Wilderness on their Festival Revolutions, but every review (if actual felici∣ty can possibly give way to it) will only widen and dilate the soul for a more ample fruition of the present state, evenSi quaeris de visione Dei qua∣lis est actio aut quies potius ut rerum di cam, vescio. Deciv. 22.29. that peace of God which passeth all understanding. So that as Au∣gustine sayes, if you ask what this enjoyment is of God, what kind of action, or rather rest? to speak truth, I know not; and no wonder when that which is enjoyed herePhil. 4.7. ., containes more than any understanding can compre∣hend. 3. To make up the Kingdom there must be a Crown, and so there is; but this Crown is the King himself; here the King of glory enters in at our everlasting gates, but there we shall en∣ter in to the King of glory;Gen. 15.1. I am thy exceeding great Reward. But there are three wreaths in this Crown. 1. God as considered the object of Vision, the Chrystal O∣cean of all Truth; and there we shall be able to read every truth in the Original, and see it in him as our faces in a glass; not only those truths that are so mainly conducing to our hap∣piness, but those more speculative toEtiam curio∣sitas satietur. Anselm. the satisfaction of cu∣riosity it self. Luther discoursing at Supper the night before he died, said, That as Adam after his sleep knew his Wife to be bone of his bone, and call'd all the Creatures by their names; so afterPsal. 17.15. we shall awake, we shall not only be satisfied with Gods image, but shall know one another; yea, all things to be known; Philosophy will then be not a dead contemplation, but a meditation of life; and every idiot now, shall then have the collection, and pure extract of all the notions in the world, while the book of life lies open and legible before his face, the idea's, and Representations of all beings in God the Father, the mirrors of all grace and truth in Jesus Christ, the beauty of all delights and sweetnesses imaginable in the holy Spirit, and all these in all, and all in one, with infinite variety in u∣nity
transcendent to all imaginable reflections of glory. But who of us, &c. Aris. dark creatures can bear this inaccessible light? and therefore he1 King. 8.10, 11. appeared in the Temple in Divine darkness, all the purest light in the world being but a shadow of God. If an idolatrous Temple of Diana's was so bright, that the door-keepers cryed always to them that entred in, Take heed to your eyes, 'tis difficult to imagine how, even an immortalExod. 33.20. eye should see him and live. ThereforeRev. 2.28. to him that overcomes, he will give the morning starre, aLumen con∣fort ans uti Scholastici lo∣quuntur. light to strengthen the eye to behold this glory, as all the Starres can look upon the Sun; we shall then not only have all the Riddles of providence un∣folded, seeing how one Politician was used to crack anothers Crown, and one Serpent broke the head of another; but the glorious Majesty of God shall be reflected to us in the all-glo∣rious body of Jesus Christ as the rain-bow about the Throne;Rev. 4.3. nay, some think the very Angels shall assume aery bodies to feed the eyes of the Saints with all, and to be in a nearer capacity of conversing with them. Yea, Saint Augustine sayes,De civit. Dei. lib. 22. c. 29. we shall see God in his Saints and their glorious actings, as well, and as mani∣festly as we now see mens bodies in the vital actions of the bodies. 2. The next wreath in this Crown, is the perception of Di∣vine goodness to the satisfaction of our love as all other desires; this is the great Sabbath of loves, and the soul like a Phaenix shall lie down in a bed of Spices, and live like a Salamander in thoseCant. 8.6. Coals of Juniper, desiring exstatically to be in its best self, and archetypon God himself.Isa. 33.14. But who of us can dwell with devouring flames? who of us can lie down with everlasting burnings? even the love wherewith God loveth himself, and loveth his Saints; but then we shall find his love strengthening of us to love him with his own love; and these dull earthly hearts of ours by beholding of that Sun, shall be converted into fixed Stars, reflecting back his own glory; we shall then feel the sweetness of Gods Electing love from all eternity; the love of our blessed Jesus, which wasCant. 8.6. stronger than death; yea, we shall then enjoy the Spirit of love, who is1 John 4.8. love it self, and whosePsal. 63.3. Sicut ferrum immissum in ig∣nem totum fit lignis, sic Pau∣lus accensus charitate totus fit charitas. loving-kindness is better than life. And as one sayes of Paul, that as Iron put into the fire becomes all fire, so Paul enflamed with charity and love, becomes altogether love. If
The Philosophers say the reason of the Irons cleaving to the Loadstone so constantly, is because the pores of both bodies are alike, and so there are effluxes and emanations that slide through them, and unite them together; now this will be the magnetism of heaven, that our wills shall perfectly fall in with the Divine Will, and nothing seem good to us, but what is good in Gods esteem, so that we shall then need no threat∣nings to drive us, nor promises to lead us; but Divine good∣ness will so perfectly attract us, that we shall be naturalized to God and goodness, and be no more able to turn off from that in∣effable sweetness, than the Loadstone is to convert it self to the West. 3. The last wreath is the result of both the former; from vision and fruition of infinite truth and goodness, reflected in the Center of the soul, springs up delight to all eternity; Heaven is nothing butGaudium de veritate. Aug. Alicubi. the joy of truth. After a tedious Rack∣ing of our braines on a knotty probleme, if we discover any sa∣tisfaction, with what an exultancy do we break out into the Mathematicians phrase,. Archimed. I have found, I have found, what I a long time studied for. What joy will it be then, to see e∣very truth in God as our faces in a glass, without all studying? for the joyes of heaven are therefore oftner compared to drink, than meat in Scripture, because there is no labour in chewing upon them, nor any diminution of them, but they slide in smoothly, and fully replenish the soul with delight; the plea∣sures of sense are short, no longer than the Oesophagus, a. Aristip. in Dio. Laer. glib swallow, a grateful hogough; but there the quire of Divine powers shall be fixed in an everlasting fruition of eternal felici∣ties. Now the Saints may have some fits of that joy, but then they shall have their fill. Now they have many aSuavis hora brevis mora. Bern. sweet houre, but a short one, but then joy shall be a standing dish, and we shall bePsa. 36.8. satisfied with the fatness of Gods house. Now their memories are slippery, but then there shall be an actual sensa∣tion of Divine joyes continually, when we shall see God face to face;Concupiscibile replebitur fonte justitiae, rasci∣bile perpetuâ tranquillitate. Bern. the concupiscible part shall be filled with a Foun∣tain of righteousness, the irascible with perpetual tranquillity. We shall come within the verge of Gods own happiness; whenMat. 25.21. we shall enter into our Masters joy, when we shall joy more in his happiness, than in our own; there shall be joy upon joy,
joy above all joy, joy without which there is no joy.Gaudium super gaudium, gaudium vincens omne gau∣dium, gaudium exta quod non est gaudium. Aug. de civ. 22. We shall be perfectly at leasure for God, and see him, we shall see him and love him, we shall love him and praise him in the end without all end; for as the seventh dayVacabimus & videbimus, videbimus & amabimus, a∣mabimus & laudabimus, in fine sine sine. Aug. deciv. 22. 30. had no evening mentioned, and the NewGen. 2.2. Jerusalem hath no night; itsRevelat. 21.25. length, breadth, &c. all alike cubed for per∣petuity. And if ever we be happy, we must be assu∣red of the eternity of that state; for else, fear of the loss doth lessen our joy, or else we think it is perpe∣tual, and yet it is not, and so we are miserable in our ignorance and mistake;Verse 6. and as the joy of that state is not lessened by future fears, so neither by passed or present sorrows,Revelations 21.4. all tears being then to be wiped from their eyes; and the view of their nearest Relations in the bottomless Pit, shall no more be an allay to their joy, than if they saw so many fish caught in a Net; but they shall rejoyce as well in the Justice of God glori∣fied in the ruine of his incorrigible enemies, as in the glory of his mercy in their own Salvation; all those feeble affections that are now so strongly contracted to poor particulari∣ties, shall be divorced when once we come to be E∣spoused to those dilated joyes in the Immense De∣ity. But yet there are two accessary Coronets we may add to this Crown of happiness as compleaters of it. 1. When the bodies of the Saints shall be re-united to their souls, there shall be an accession of joy; as the Schooles say, The body must have its dowry, ere it be Espoused to Christ. If the vile body of an ambitious and imperiousReference Qu. Curtio. Alexander, had such a crasis and temperament, that it gave a perfume to the ayr when he was dead, doubtless those that have conquer'd the world, and are to triumph for ever in the world to come, their very bodies shall give (as the flowers of that Paradise) a very fragrant smell, being members of the body of Christ, whose ve∣ry crucified body was anEph. 5.2. offering of a sweet smelling savour unto God. Anselme tells us, the bodies of Saints shall be so endued with strength, that they will be able to remove the whole earth with one touch of their foot, when on the contra∣ry
the wicked shall be so weakened by sin and wrath, that they shall not be able to a move a very worm from feeding upon their eyes; and theEzek. 32.27. Prophet sayes, that Meshech and Tubal are gone down to hell with their Weapons of War, and they have laid their Swords under their heads, but their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they have been the terrour of the mighty in the Land of the living. But the bodies of the Saints shall be1 Cor. 15.44. Spiritui sub∣dita. spiritual bodies; that is, every way subject to the motions and desires of the soul, full of agility; as Maca∣rius sayes, God made not man wings as birds, though his Nest be above the Stars, because after the Resurrection, he should have in Tertullians PhraseCarnem An∣gelificatam; de resur. Angelified flesh; and as the Apo∣stle sayes1 Thes. 4, 17. and 1 Cor. 15.52. ., In a moment we shall be all snatched, and chang∣ed in the twinckling of an eye to meet the Lord; there shall be such agility of body, and nimble collection of the parts, that the body shall be no more liable to a stroke or a wound, than the ayr, or the heavens, or the Sun it self. And as the soul now drinks in dark informations, obscure apprehensions, and cloudy notions by the corporeal senses, those painted Win∣dows of these Houses of clay; yet when the soul is become a Vessel replenished with immortal and unspotted light, it will transmit such rays into the very body, that it shall shine as theDan. 12.3. Mat. 13.43. stars, nay, as the glorious body of the Sun in the Firmament for ever. 2. The second accessory to this Crown, is the blissful socie∣ty of all the Saints and Angels about the Throne. In this life it is the happiness of true believers; that whether Paul, Apollo, or Cephas, all their eloquence, learning, gifts, and graces, they are all theirs for their benefit and spiritual advantage. But then, whether Prophets, or Apostles (whose imaginary rel∣liques some go many a weary Pilgrimage to see) all the Mar∣tyrs with their glorious scarres of honour; nay, Angels, Che∣rubims, Seraphims, and all that blessed Quire of Spirits, who have done them, while they were in dangers here, many an invisible courtesie which they could never thank them for, they beingHeb. 1.14. ministring spirits sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heires of salvation; all these are theirs. If a Diagoras when he saw his three Sonnes crowned in one day at the Olym∣pick games as Victors, died away while he was embracing them
for joy; and good old Simeon when he saw Christ but in a bo∣dy subject to the infirmities of our natures, and had him in his armes, cried out,Luk. 2.29. Now Lord lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, for my eyes have seen thy Salvation. What unspea∣kable joy will it be to see your Christian Friends and Relations; to whom you have been instrumental in their New Birth and Regeneration, all Crowned in one day with an everlasting Dia∣dem of Bliss which never shall decay. There shall be no hy∣pocrite then for you to lose your love upon, which is now the great cooler of your charity, and keeps your affections in a greater reserve; but there none but true Eagles, and heaven-born souls will be able to look upon that Sun in glory; you shall then rejoyce, that there are so many pure spirits able to praise and love that God whom you could never yet, nor will then be able to love and praise enough, or as you desire. When the glorious Angels begin their Hallelujahs, the Saints shall also joyn in one common Quire,Psal. 149, 5. they shall be joyful in glory, and sing aloud upon their everlasting beds of rest. Oh how the Arches of heaven will eccho, when the high prai∣ses of God shall be in the mouths of such a Congregation! for as when one eye moves, the other roles; and when one string in concord with another is struck, the other sounds; such a blend and sympathy of praises shall there be in that heavenly Chorus, with thesePsal. 150.6. high sounding Cymbals in most flourishing expressions, and anthems upon the divine glory. If the Sun, Moon, and Stars did as Ignatius sayes, make all, in Epist. ad Eph. Luke 15.7. a Quire as 'twere a∣bout the Star that appeared at Christs Incarnation, * and there be joy in heaven at the conversion of a sinner; no wonder thenJob 38.7. the morning starres shall sing together, and the Sons of God shou for joy, when there shall beHeb. 12.23. a general Assembly, and Church of the first-borne, and the spirits of all the just shall be made perfect. And though there may be one Starre differ from another in glory, yet there will be noVidebit civi∣tas illa quod inferior non in∣videbit. Aug. de civ. 22. 29. envying one anothers happiness, but every one bear his part whatever it be in the lower or higher praises of the God of glory, with a most harmo∣nious variety in perfect symphony; for there we shall love one another as our selves, love God and our blessed Saviour, better than our selves, and he will love us better than we can love our
selves, or one another.Oh quot & quanta gaudia obtiniebit qui de tot & tantis beatitu∣dinibus sanctorum jubilabit. Ans. alicu. ni fallor de beatitu. Oh how many, and how great joyes shall he possess, who shall keep an eternal Jubilee in the enjoyment of so many and so great beatitudes and felicities of others as truly as of his own! I have done with the possession and its qualification, it is a Kingdom. I now come to its preparation, prepared for you from the foun∣dation of the, &c. But how is this Kingdom of so long preparation, when Christ tells his Disciples, I go to prepare a place for you, when he de∣parted hence?John 14.1. 1. Therefore this Kingdom was prepared even when the foun∣dations of the world were laidJob 38.7., for there the morning starres did sing together. God Created the Heavens, and then the earth, and the spiritual world of Angels above, before the foun∣dation of the earth below: though as some judge, Moses men∣tion'd it not, being to teach a dull people by sensible objects, con∣cealed the notion of spirits, lest they should Idolatrously wor∣ship and attribute the Creation of the world to them. And so the Empyrean Heaven, and seat of glory, some venture to say, God then made; and determinately too in the Aequinoctial East of Judea, call'd therefore the Navel of the whole earth; to confirm it, they tell us Adam was made with his face to∣wards the East, and so they worshipped Eastward three thousand and odd years. And thence Christ call'd theLuke 1.79. . East, or day-spring from on high, andZac. 3.8.  Lev. 16.14. the blood was to be sprinkled on the mercy-seat Eastward seven times. But we may answer the curiosity of this enquiry about the Ubi and determinate place, as he of old was answered, that asked what God was doing before he created the world? he was making Hell for such unbe∣lieving Querists, and Heaven for the reward of an humble Be∣liever. 2. It was prepared from the foundation of the world, in re∣gard of divine predestination, for that which is last in obtain∣ing, is first in the intention of rational agents; so God from eternity designing his own glory in the salvation of the Elect,
and their blisseful fruition of himself, may be said to have set the Crown upon them, while they were in the womb of his Decree; and to have prepared them a Kingdome before they were born. And though God made all the world for man, yet it was to be kept under his feet; he reserved himself to be the Crown of his hopes, and Portion of his heart. He chose us in Christ before the Foundation of the World, thereforeEphes. 1.4. all was ready. But 3. In regard of Divine Dspensation, the carrying on the whole oeconomy hath been from the Foundation of the World, and so being, the Kingdome is not yet given up all unto the Fa∣ther; it may be still said to be preparing; for though God being our heaven, it was always ready, yet by our fall we lost our title to this Paradise; Christ intervenes to divert the flaming Sword of vengeance, enters a Covenant with his Father, sends the glad ty∣dings of it into the WorldGal. 3.8. before he cameLevit. 16.6. Hebr 9.7., typifies in theGal. 4.4. fulnsse of time, makesRom. 5.11. 1 John 2.2. atonement, proclaims reconciliation and pardon to penitent sinners, sends his Word and Spirit to wait to be gracious, to sollicit the World, till all that are the truly called guests are invited and brought in; then he shuts up the door of mer∣cy, opens the grave, summons all to judgmet by the last Trumpet, makes the separation, and then pronounceth this Benediction; so that though the Kingdome was from the Foundations of the World prepared, yet in regard every Kingdome includes Subjects as well as Soveraign, Christ when he was going, that so he might send his Spirit to comfort his Disciples, and to gather in more Subjects, may be said to prepare a place for them, though most significantly he went to prepare them for that Kingdome. But Parabolical and Metonymical Expressions must not have too rigid an Interpretation exacted from them; but our Saviour ha∣ving bid his Disciples to go before and prepare a place for him to eat the Passeover with them in, he tells them that he is going to prepare the Supper of the Lamb, and a place for them, to whichLuk. 13.28.29. they shall come from the East, and from the West; from the North, and fom the South; and sit down with Abraham, I∣saac and Jacob in the Kingdme of God; and this to raise the appetites of their faith and hopes, when a Supper of so many thousand years preparation is the entertainment they are invi∣ted to.
And so I come to the second Part of the Text, and that is the admission into this prepared Possession, Come ye blessed of my Father, &c. When a Kingdome is proposed, every man is ready to be catch∣ing at a Crown; but therefore our Saviour tells us it must be had by inheritance; that is the title by which we must be admitted;. in∣herit, as the Jews had Canaan divided and apportioned to the several Tribes byNumb. 26.55 lot; so some too curiously and boldly adven∣ture to assign to every Saint a Mansion bigger than the whole earth, which is true indeed in this sense, in regard immensity and God himself is thePsal. 16.5. lot of their inheritance; but it is an inheritance in regard 1. There is a claim made to it only by the new-born and first-born of God, and so by right of birth exceptJohn 3.3. a man be brn again, cannot see the Kingdome of God; the spirit of a slave cannot manage the Scepter of a Prince; nay, they that look to sit on Thrones of glory with ChristMat. 19.28., must follow him in the regenera∣tion of the body1 Cor. 15.36., that must dye ere it be quickned1 Cor. 15.50.; for flesh and blood in corruption, moral orExod. 33.20. natural, cannot inherit the Kingdome of God, which made theMoriar ne moriar, ut te vi∣deam. Aug. confessii. Father cry out, Oh then Lord let me dye, lest I dye, that so I may see thee. Now if an unregenerate body cannot enter, much lesse an unregene∣rate soul. An infamous personTurpis perso∣na. Myns. in instit. in the Civil Law may be excepted against as not fit to be an heir; and shall the Laws of men be purer than the Laws of God? If the pure in heartMat. 5.8. only can see God here in reflections, and1 Cor. 13.12. through a glasse darkly, then surely they must be without2 Pet. 3.14. spot or wrinkle, who must see him face to face: Heaven is entailed upon holy souls; 'tis their birth-right; for no other butRev. 22.14. they that keep the Commandments of God have right to eat of the Tree of life, or enter in through the Gates into that Jerusalem, and vision of peace. 2. They inherit by right of Adoption; for Christ is heir, and we heirs of his righteousnesse, and so co-heirs of his glory; andRom. 8.17. hirs of God; if sons, then heirs; now we are the sons of God by Adoption; Regeneration makes us not perfectly holy, and so not perfectly sons, and so not heirs, and therefore weGal. 4.5. 1 Joh. 3.1, 2. receive the Adoption of sons, and being called to be we are sons, and if sons, then heirs; for if a son be passed by in his Fathers Will, and not named, and a reason of the passing of him by, the Testament is
invalid in Civil Law, when anoher is made her; and God, his nature and love transcends all the compassions of men, and is a greater obligation than any Laws among them; so that if thou canst make it out that thou hast the spirit of Adoption, thou art as sure to inherit this Kingdome, as thou mayst be sure thou art not by name excepted from the inheritance in the Gospel of Christ, which is his Will and Testament. 3. 'Tis inherited by right of Donation and Gift;Luke 12.32. Fear not lttle flck, it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdome; and though the wages of sin be death, and men are but justly re∣warded therein for their demerit, yetRom. 6.23. eternal life is the gift of God; and it is not such a gift as is a salary or stipend for our work,. pay for our service; forLuke 17.10. when we have done all that we can, we are but unprofitable servants, and deserve nothing, unlesse it be to beLuke 12.47. beaten with many stripes: It is not an honorary gift, as he that had lost an Arme in Battel, his Commander General gave him an Arme of gold, as an honourable reward of his ser∣vice; but alas,Matth. 5.47. . What singular thing can we do to emerit a∣ny thing at Gods hands? when the more we do, we are the further from merit, in regard we are the more indebted to our Master, who gave us the opportunity and grace to performe it: Nor is it an Eleemosynary gift of charity, such as we extend to poor fel∣low creatures; for that is but a piece of justice, and self-love, if we have that in abundance, which others want to relieve them. Every act of charity is but a piece of equity, a paying of our debts; for we are toRom. 13.8. owe every man love; but God ows us nothing, nor is he bound to pity our poverty, which we have by our own default contracted on our selves; but this gift of God is a meer. gratuitous act of bounty and grace; but when it is pro∣mised and given, then it is but an act of justice to grant possession, and so the title is inheritance, but by way of free Dona∣tion. 4. By right of Redemption they may be said to inherit; for under the Law the next of Kin was to redeem a sold or morgaged possession; accordingly Christ took our nature upon him,Ruth. 4.5. that he might be of our consanguinty; he becameGal. 3 13. a curse for us,2 Cor. 5.22. was made sin, that he might ransome penitent believers from the curse; andHebr. 7.25. having satisfied to the utmost, and1 Cor. 6.20. bought us with a responsible price, he hath right to give his sheepJohn 10.28. eternal life;
and therefore it is caledEphes. 1.14. the purchased possession. In Law, he that buys a slave, may dispose of him as he please by his will; ac∣cordingly Christ hath made hs will to dispose of all those he hath bought:John 17.24. Father, I will that where I am, these may be also: And so they are heirs by Will and Testa∣ment of him that took upon him the right of Redem∣ption. Now I come to the second thing in the second ge∣neral, and that is the heirs of this inheritance, described in these words, Ye blessedPatris est benedicere. of my Father; 'tis the Fathers work to blesse his Son; and when Isaac blessed Jacob, he made him his heir; so Gods blessing makes us a title to this inheri∣tance. 1. Then ye that are blessed of my Father from the foundation of the World in his Electing love, and they whom he hath so bles∣sed, they shall be blessed; the. word signifies well-spoken to; now Gods Eternal thoughts areVerba mentis. his words; and they that were in his thoughts from Eternity, their names were written in the book of l fe: God had Eternal purposes of grace to them,John 17.6. thine they were, and thou gavest thm me; they were blessed in the thoughts of his heart before all generations; this is an Elective Kingdome, yet we are saved not according to the merit of2 Tim. 1.9. our works done o fore-seen, but accord ng to his own purpose and grace, which was given in Christ Jesus befor the World began. And in vain id Christ Covenant with his Father, or make a Testament for us, unlesse the hers purchased were fore-knownHaeres caput Testamenti., heirs being the ground-work of a Testament. 2. Well spoken to in the Word of God by the powerful voca∣tion of his SpiritRom. 1.7.; they are called to be holy, and heEphes. 1.3. bles∣seth them with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places by Christ Jesus. There are none come, but they that areRev. 19.9. invited to the Supper of the Lamb; they that God hathGen. 9.27. Cant. 1.4. perswaded to dwell in the Tents of Shem; whomHosea 11.4. he hath drawn with the cords of his love, and made them aPsal. 110.3. people of a free-will offering in the day of his power; whom theLuke 1.78. day-spring from on high hath visited, and the womb of the morning of the day of grace hath brought them forth; those that GodHos. 2.14. hath allured and brought into the Wildernesse, that he might speak to their hearts. None
shall be followers of the Lamb but those that areRev. 17.14. called faithful and chosen. 3. Well-spoken of in the Word and Promises of the Gospel; those that areMat. 5.3, &c. meek, poor in sprit, pure in heart, merciful, persecuted for righteousness sake, and merciful; for all these shall obtain mercy; as it follows in the Verses after the Text, Come ye blessed, &c. ForMat. 25.35. I was an hungry, and ye gave me to eat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; a stranger, and you took me in; naked, and you cloathed me; sick, and you visited me; in pri∣son, and you came to me: And he said, Ʋerily inasmuch as you have done it to one o these my brethren, these littte ones, you have done it unto me; forRom. 2.13. not the hearers, but the doers of the Word are blessed; theHebr. 6.17. & 17. heirs of these promises are the only heirs of glory. 4. Blessed in the final pardon, absolution and justification which shall be pronounced at the last day. Ye shall inherit, whom the righteous Judge of all the world shall acquit and discharge from your sins, to whom God shall sayMatth. 9.2., son be of good chear, thy sins are forgiven thee; nay, Euge, well doneMat. 25.1. good and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many. Oh how good a word will this be to a soul, as soon as it is got up out of the Wildernesse of this World! yetPsal. 128.4. thus shalt thou be bles∣sed that fearest God. He will give thee then to be sureRev. 3.12. a new name, and a white stone, and write upon thee, as a Pillar, or a Trophy erected after victory, his own Name; and when God shall thus blesse thee, and speak to thee, thou wilt need never a word more to make thee happy, but the generations that come up after thee, shall when they rise up to heaven, call thee blessed. And so I come to the third particular, the formal introducti∣on of these blessed heirs into their inheritance, Come ye blessed, &c. 1. This is the speech of one that gives us an everlasting avoca∣tion from the troubles and vanities of this present world. vox avoantis. Christ will speak to them in this manner, only in more emphatical signi∣ficancies, Come poor souls, where have you been all this while? poor sheep, where have you been wandring upon the barren Moun∣tains
of the earth, climbing the cliffs of preferment and worldly honours, as if you had been of the number of the Goats, and had no title to the blessings on my right hand? In what a pickle have you been in, in a nasty World whichJohn 5.19. lies altogether in filthi∣nesse, in a muddy body of sin, pepsed with a number of tentati∣ons; you have lain a long timePsal 68.13. among the pots, griming your selves, and defiling your garments amongst the Aegyptians on my left hand. I but now you shall have the wings of a Dove, which are all covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold. I will never morePsal. 74.19. give the soul of my Turtle Dove into the hands of her enemies; you shall never more be cooped up in a Cage with such a company of unclean Birds; no,Cant. 5.2. Come my Love and Dove, and flie away. Vox admitten∣tis.2. 'Tis the speech of one that admits us into this inheritance; Christ is pleased to condescend so low as to stile himselfJohn 10.7. the door; nay, the Keeper of the door; he opened a door of hope by his death, a door of faith by his preaching the Gospel, a door of life by his resurrection, and heaven-gates also by this admission; and when he hath admitted his heirs of glory, and taken them out of this deluge of sin and sorrow into that Ark of salvation, he willGen. 7.16. shut them in as God did Noah; and though they have an2 Pet. 1.11. abundant entrance ministred to them into the everlasting King∣dom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; yet when entred, the door is shut, and no egress or back-door of Apostacy can be found in that state. Adam was created out of Paradise to shew that his admission, even in his innocency, was of grace; much more is it of grace upon a recovery from his fall. Christ while in the Kingdome of his patience, doth call his to many a penitent groan, to mournful prayers, and many tribulations, which make a very bed of dust to be a soft couch of repose; and he calls them thither,Isa. 26.20. Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers, shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self for a little moment, till the indignation be over-past. Come child, go to bed in the grave; oh but then hisCant. 2.14. v ice will be sweet, when he shall call to them to come up toIsa. 25.6. this Mountain, to a feast of fat things, a feast of wine on the Lees, of fat things full of marow, of wines on the Lees well refined. Laetissimè ex∣cipientis.3. 'Tis the speech of one that bids us welcome to the feast too; Come my friends; I, it is Come and welcome now; Come poor
heart, thou hast been coming a long time, I went my self to call thee; I2 Chron. 36.15. sent my Messengers, rising up early, and sending them continually to invite thee to come in. I sent my holy Spirit also like a Dove from heaven, and it did light upon thee, and gave thee an Olive branch of peace in the Wildernesse of thy fears; when it allured thee, and call'd thee from all thy wandrings, then I sent my black rod for thee by that grim Serjeant death, to strip thee of thy soul body of sin, not to be touched, but by the Angel of death; then I sent my Angels to bring thy soul to the Courts of thy God, and now by the sounding of the last Trum∣pet I have call'd for thy sleepy body to arise out of thePsal. 22.15. dust of death: And now after all these Messengers thou art come, I will not upbraid thee for thy delays, but come, come blessed soul with as many welcomes as there are Saints and Angels in glory; I haveJohn 14.2. prepared a place for thee,Cant. 5.1. thou at come into my Garden; Eat oh friends, Drink, yea drink abundantly, oh beloved! And so I have done with the explication of the several bran∣ches of the Text; now let us see what fruit they bear that may beCant. 2.3. sweet to oru taste. First,1. Infer. Then if there be a Kingdome prepared before the foun∣dation of the World for the blessed Saints and holy ones; then what manner of persons are2 Pet. 3.11. we in all unholy Conversation and godlessnesse in this generation? Men are as dead to Religion, as if heaven was but a dream; and as hot upon sin, as if hell had no fire, or was all vanished into smoak; as atheistical and wretched, as if neither heaven, hell nor earth, neither did feel a God, or any memorandum's of his Providence. Therefore a little to fortifie this notion, which artificial wickednesse hath endeavoured to ex∣pel, and expunge out of natural consciences, I shall endeavour to confirme your faith by Scripture and reason. The Socinians deny the revelation of eternal life, and a state to come, to have been propounded under the Old Testament; and the reward being only earth, their Law and obedience to be but carnal and low, which is to level the Jews to the order of brutes, that so the Gen∣tiles under the Gospel might be advanced to the state of men, and so by vertue of rhe new prize of immortal life proposed, they should have a new command, as their care to run; which is all as true as that all the Tribes of Israel were converted into Isacar's,
Gen. 49.4. strong asses couching down between two burdens; butLuke 7.35. wis∣dome is justified of her children; and the Chaldee paraphrase renders those words,Gen. 4.7. Remittetur tibi in saeculo futu∣ro. if thou dost well, shalt thou not be ac∣cepted? by this glosse, Amend thy works in this world, and thou shalt be forgiven in the world to come; and the argum says, the very dispute betwixt Cain and Abel, was concerning a world to come; and those carnal Hereticks thatJude ver. 10.11, 19. are sensual, not having the spirit; in what they know naturally as brute beasts, corrupt themselves, they are gone into the way of Cain: But when God tells AbrahamGen 15.1. I am thy exceeding great reward; and Jacob cries out,Gen. 49.18. I have waited for thy salvation O Lord, even when about to dye; God stiling himsef their God, is not by our Saviours authorityMat. 22.32. the God of the dead, but of the li∣ving; therefore God held out eternal life in the promises, yea and in the very command too,Levit. 18.3. & Gen. 3.12. do this and live; the reward of that obeeience there enjoyned, was no lesse than this everlasting life, as appeareth by our Saviours interpretation when the Lawyer came to him,Luke 10.25.28. saying, Master, What shall I do to inherit eter∣nal life? and he said, What is written in the Law? how readest thou? and he answered, thou shalt love the Lord, &c. and Jesus said, Thou hast answered right, this do and thou shalt live; that is, thou shalt have that thou desiredst; viz. inherit eternal life; and the very reproach of the Sadduces, and the distinction of their Sect from Pharisees and others, argueth sufficiently the world to come was a very common notion among all the Jews; and indeed the whole land of Canaan was but a comprehensive type and shadow of heaven, and all their Religion but aHebr. 10.1. shadow of good things to come in the Kingdome of heaven, as well as in the Kingdome of the MessiahJohn 8.56. whose day they then saw, and were glad; and if the Gospel contain the promise of eternal life, then they had it in Abrahams days;Gal. 3.8. for the Gospel was preached before to him; yea, and before to Adam,Gen 3.15. that the seed of the woman should break the S rpents head; and the skins of the Sacrifices wherewith he was cloathed might suggest the put∣ting on of that promised seed and his obedience, who wasIsa. 53.5. to be bruised for the iniquities of his people: But now to awaken Atheistical souls that deny not only the revelation of this Kingdome of God under the old Testament, but its reality and existence under old and new; consider these foure things
very briefly, as the limits of this Exercise command. 1. The whole Creation is a Book which always lyeth open, wherein we may read that there is a God who made the goodly Structure and Fabrick of Heaven and Earth; Who else could be able toJob 26.7. hang the vast body of the Earth upon nothing! or toVer. 10. girdle the Sea, and all its mountainous Waves with a Rope of Sand,Psal. 104.2. to spread the heavens as a Curtain, and hang up those vast Vessels of light in the Skies; there must be a being existent from, and of himself; and so being improduced, is infinitely per∣fect, and comprehendeth all those perfections dispersed through the whole Creation, and infinitely more; yet what he makes, is like himself; every creature bears his footsteps; butPsal. 8 3. Gen. 1.27. the hea∣vens are the works of his fingers, and man bears the very image of God. We see in the several stories and degrees of the Creation, love and communicativenesse to their off-spring, groweth more and more; the higher you go it grows, more in brutes than plants, in men than in brutes; in God therefore love and good∣nesse, which are most communicative, are most transcendent: Now God himself is the heaven we plead for; he is the Region of souls and spirits; and for the resurrection of the body, his infinite power can surely1 Cor. 15.38. give to every seed its own body; though one part of our flesh was sublimated into the fire, another precipitated into ashes, and cast into the midst of the Sea, de∣voured by a fish, taken and eaten again by men; and another part dissipated into the Aire, and sucked into some other body;Borel. Med. Pari. ita refert. yet if a Chymick can out of the ashes of a flower reproduce the flower in its former beauty; nay, out of the dung of beasts re∣produce the very herbs they have eaten, notwithstanding what is passed into nourishment, by the architectonical parts and spirits yet abiding in those Reliques; much more can God recover our bodies from all possible dispersions, and conversions into other bodies, when all the World shall be his Furnace, and every thing resolved into its first seminal parts by the reverberation of the flames, and give to every bodyFlorem Resur∣rectionis. Tert. de Resur. the flowre of resurrection, and a reflorescence into glory.
2. As there is a God, and so that Kingdome, so there are heirs, and they are immortal souls, and therefore fitted to be, uti Pla∣tonici. in Divine conjunction; for that which is contiguous to an Eternal,Omne contiguum aeterno spi∣rituali, est aeternum spirituale. Spiritual Be∣ing, is Eternal and Spiritual; but man is here on∣ly himself, when in communion with God and spiritual things: And God when he infused the reasonable soul, he breathed into man theGen. 2.7. . breath of lives. And Tertullian who had too grosse a conception of the nature of the soul, yet calls itVaginam afflatus Divini, liberalitatis suae haeredem, Religionis suae sacerdotem, Christi sui sororem. the sheath and scabbard of Divine breath, heir of his bounty, &c. in the exercise of those acts of apprehension, judgement and argumentation; it is impossible such steddy and orderly consequential actions should be performed by a fortuitous concurse of atomes; or its re∣flexive acts much lesse by the purest flame, no body being able to penetrate it self, nor to dive into it self without a disorder of its parts. But Religion rather then Rea∣son being the greatReligio penè sola quae ho∣minem discernat à mutis. Lactan. de divi. praemio l. 7. difference of a man from brutes, 'tis a sign he is made for communion with a better being; and therefore as Augustine sayes, Thou hast made our heart O Lord for thee, and it will neverQuum tibi inhaesero ex toto, me viva erit vita mea, plena te tota nunc autem quia plenus tui non sum o∣neri mihi sum. lib. de confes. rest till it come to thee; and when I shall wholly inhere and cleave to thee, then my life will be lively; but now being not full of the enjoyments of thee, I am a burden to my self: The World was made for brutes to live in, but for man to. Lact. ibid. contemplate the Wisdome and Power of God; he made many brutes, but one man, that he might be chieflly for theDei socius. Aug. de Civ. l. 12.20. ut cohaereat autori. lib. 22.1. society of God, and keep coherence to his Maker. And alas the World is but a dry Morsel to an immortal soul, whose vast Chaos of desires cannot be satisfied by it, though every drop of comfort in it was swel∣led into an Ocean. There is upon the soul such a drought without God, asCant. 8.7. all the waters in the world cannot quench
it; such an endlesse thirst after truth, and goodnesse in the ge∣neral notion, as it can never be satisfied, till it find out thePsal. 36.9. foun∣tain of this water of life. 3. This Eternal state is the common sense of the World; and the voice of natural conscience hath in all Ages pro∣claimed it. Every Nation hath some Diety or other, and so a Religion; Heathens sacrifice, though it may be it be to the Divel, who cruelly sucks their very blood. Turks and Sara∣cens must have the black drop cut out of their breast, and their circumcision; every Religion puts some restraints upon mens lusts and lives. Now though I believe, though there were no reward, or a future state, Religion would be as good for our bodies, as prunings are to Trees,Prov. 3.8. health to our navels, mar∣row to our bones; yet its severities would in no degree down with men, were it not for the urgings and prickings on of natural conscience. But Christians above1 Cor. 15.19. all men were most misera∣ble, if in this life only they had hope, whose principles enjoin the highest degree of self-denial, patience and bearing of the Crosse. But every good man, let the mad World prate as it will, and vomit all its gall and bitternesse in reproaches and perse∣cutions, yet if he suffer for righteousnesse sake in innocent pa∣tience, his own conscience gives him an acquittance, and a secret absolution, so as he canRom. 5.3. glory even in tribulation; yea, every devout soul more or lesse tasteth of those first fruits of heavenly delight, in being conscious2 Cor. 1.12. of his duty discharged in simplicity and godly sincerity, whatever calamities may attend him in this life; which if they were not pledges of a fuller crop in that future harvest of joys, the best men were most unhappy by that great frustration and disappointment of their expectations. And so wicked men, though the World may applaud their actions as highly vertuous by a sordid spirit of flattery; yetMens habet attonitos & surdo verbere coedit. Per. their own consciences affr ght them, and smite them with many a deadly and deaf blow, which no body else doth hear or observe Cain may build his Cities and his Walls as high as the Clouds, yet there is that within as he said to the Emperour, that will ruine all;Gen. 4.5. his countenance
falls, and the guilt of his Brothers blood maketh his soul to blush, and pulleth down his high looks. The highest-formed sinners that have sinned themselves into despaire, have nothing left themHeb. 10.27. but a certain fearful looking for of judgement, and fiery indignation, which shll devoure such Adversaries. Others that have sinn'd themselves into the highest presumpti∣ons, never come to any senseless ease, till they attaine toIsa. 28.15. make a Covenant with Hell, and can be content toHeb. 11.25. suf∣fer torments to eternity with the enemies of God, rather than to part with the pleasures of sinne which ae bu for a season; and seem to have that wrote on the tables of their hearts, which that Wretch subscribed under the Image of God and the Devil,Domine, si tu non vis, iste me rogitat. Lord, if thou wilt not, here is one that begs of me to be his, and his I will be. Now if there be a Law, a Judge, punishments, and rewards in some degree here, then every man is a Prophet, in this case of this Future state. 4. The promiscuous dispensations and providences of God in this world,Eccles. 9.2. Psal. 17.14. Lam. 3.16. all things coming alike to all; nay, the wick∣ed it may be have their belly full of a large portion in this life, when the godly have their teeth broken with gravel stones, and covered with ashes; these argue, 1. There is a day to come when the scales shall be turned; Abel is slaine for his piety, when Cain lives and builds Cities; Herod reigns, Herodias danceth, when John Baptists head is serv'd in in a Charger. And though God sometimes by extem∣pore and sudden justice hangs up some wicked wretches in chaines, yet many times the most wretched oppressors are too strong and high for justice in this world; and they that live like Lyons, die like Lambs; they have liberty in their lives, andPsal. 73.4. no bands in their deaths. Dionysius a bloody Ty∣rant, dies quietly in his bed, when David liesPsal. 32.3. roaring all night, and a good Josiah falls in Battle; which made the Prophet cry outHab. 1.8., Wherefore doth the wicked devour one
more righteous than himself? the just must therefore live by his Faith in the world to come, or else all Piety will die; therefore there shall be a judgement hereafter; forHeb. 6.10. Psal. 58.11. God is not unrighteou to forget their labour of love, and patience; doubtless there is a reward for the righteous; verily there is a God that judg∣eth in the earth. 2. Is the life to come such a Kingdome? then here is field-room for all our ambition, avarice, and contention, to shew it self; be ambitious for something; if we must be ambitious, let us all King it here. What scuffling and scrambling is there for Crowns and Scepters in the world, out of that impetuous lust of dominering; whereas a prophane Esau sold his Birth-right, which had a Kingdome and a Blessing too in it,Gen. 25.34. for a mess of pottage! Lysimachus when inflamed with thirst, pro∣fered his Kingdome for a draught of cold water; and how much gold, or how many Kingdomes would Dives give, if he had them,Luke 16.24. for a drop of cold water, or to be delivered from that one Kingdome of the Devil? and shall Christians con∣tend about these things? Alas, Christian Religion was ne∣ver made for a secular Engine; we may as soon turn Axiomes of Truth into Swords and Speares; the Rules of holy living, in∣to Canons and Musquets; and prayers and teares into powder and shot, as to make Religion a troubler of the order and peace of the world; that is of a Dove-likeMat. 10.16. innocent temper, full ofJam. 3.17. meeknesse, humility, gentlenesse, easinesse, to be entrea∣ted, without partiality, without hypocrisie, can suffer any evil, but do none; can live and secure it self better by suffering, than the crafty world by acting; to use sinful means to avoid suffer∣ing, or preserve worldly greatness, is like him that when one hoped to see him at his Diocess ere long, Replyed, He feared he should be in heaven before that time should come. It is not Christian Religion, but that Anti-Christian spirit, which diffuseth it self all over Christendome in its Doctrines and Agitations, its Philtres and Poysons, that inflames it more with contentions and Warres, than any part of the world besides. For Religion truly Christian,Mat. 12.25. takes only the King∣dome
of Heaven by violence. Let one Romane Emperour busie himself in catching flies, another gather Cockle-shells with his Army on the Sands, after great preparations for an Expedi∣tion; silly emblemes of the most valiant attempts of many highly-famed Mortals; but let Christians March with all Zeale only for the holy Land of Promise. All those tittles of Honour (for we pronounce them too long) which the world playes with, as children with Farthing Candles, blow∣ing them in with one breath, puffing them out with another; if they had never so good aMembrana dignitatis. Sen. Pattent, yet what will they come to,Isa. 34.4. Rev. 6.14. when the Heavens shall role up as a Scrole? much more shall these shrivel up as a piece of Parchment before the Flames, when all the Armes and Ensignes of Honour, shall be blazoned alike in a Field ardent at the judgement day. Beauty, that blossome of flesh and blood, which now carries so many Captives at her Wheeles, tyranni∣zing over fond mortals affections, when we come to those beauties of Glory, will be no more comely than a dry skull, in comparison of the Ravishing Lustre that will be in the most deformed body of the Poorest Lazarillo, whose Brightness will transcend the loveliest face more, than the rarest Jewel doth a vile piece of Jett. And though perhaps difference of Sexes may remaine for all Scotus his Glosse, That in Christ Jesus there is neither male nor female; yetDelectent in∣tuitum, non in∣flectent ad vi∣tium. they will only delight the eye, not incline to any vicious thought, all lust being fired out, and no spark of concupiscence left in the Saints, but Grace triumphing in those objects that con∣quered it here, whenMat. 11.12. they shall be as the Angels of God, only pure flames of Divine Love and joy. When all the pure gold in the World shall be melted out of the veins of the Earth, and mens Coffers into one common streame, and all Pearles, and precious Stones should lie as the gravel on the side of that River, yet they would scarcely be thought fit then to make a Metaphor of for the very Pavement of the new Jerusalem, one sight whereof will dimm and deface all the glory of the World.
3. Must the Title be Inheritance? then look to your evidences, Regeneration, and Adoption; as ever you look for this Kingdome, prove your Fathers Will, and your selves Sonnes; it is no matter how your names are wrote on earth, in dust or Marble, in reproach or re∣nown, if they be written in Heaven. Some say this world is but a shadow of that above (and it was so before sin had blotted and defaced all) therefore look for the line∣aments of that Kingdome above, to be pourtrayed on you; all are for an Heaven; but as Eusebius says, there were manyEbionitarum, Encratitarum, Nazaraeorum, &c. spurious Gospels, so Basilis asserted one hundred sixty five Heavens, as many Heavens as dayes in a yeare. The Turks delighting in flowers, and their Tulipomania, dreame of such a Paradise. A silly Coun∣trey Woman coming upon the Exchange, was so ama∣zed at the view, that she fell down, and said, She had oft heard of Heaven, but never was in it before; The volup∣tuous Epicure will have his a Poetical Heaven of Nectar and Ambrosia; the ambitious an Heaven of honours and Gallantry. But holy Abraham passed all these, byHeb. 11.10. looking for a City that had foundations. The Kingdomes of the world want legs and foundations to stand upon; and while men dream of such Paradises, they do but build Castles in the ayre, without any basis but imagination. But look you for the new Heavens,Isa. 65.17. wherein dwells Righ∣etousness; get a Copy of grace in your hearts out of Scripture-Records, the Court-Roles of Heaven, and then you have1 Tim. 6.19. laid hold upon eternal life. 'Tis easie to be a Saint of the earth, a State-Saint, a designing Saint; nay, a Church-Saint; but it must be a hea∣venly Saint, one truly holy, that isCol. 1.12. meet to be par∣taker of the Inheritance of the Saints in light. Ex∣amine therefore what Authority and entertainment have the most searching truths, and cutting Providences of God with you? what spiritual wickednesse that ne∣ver hurt your body, Purie, or Fame, have you forsaken for Christ? This sincere beauty of holinesse, s able to make you Ornaments even to heaven it self.
4. Is this Kingdome prepared for those that are Blessed of the Father? Oh then labour to obtain your Fathers blessing, thoughHeb. 12.17. you seek it with teares. Now the Father sayes, Blessed are the pure, the poor in heart, the merciful, they that pray for them which persecute them; be careful not onlyMat. 25.4. to have oyle in your Lamps, grace in your hearts, but get yourVer. 7. Lamps trimmed, be upon your Watch,Ver. 13. for you know not what houre your Master comes. Look how you improve your Talents, what good you do in the world; Remember it runnes thus in the last account, I was an hungry, you fed me; naked, you cloathed me; in Prison, you visited me; andMat. 16.27. every man shall be rewarded according to his Works; and the more you have of Heaven and Divine love here, the more you shall have hereafter; for one piece of it will lie in comfortable reflections upon what good we have done in the world; though every one hath hisMat. 20.9. peny, that comes in at the Eleventh houre; viz. all that is essential unto happinesse, yet1 Cor. 15.41. one Starre differs from another in glory. Art thou therefore in Authori∣ty? use it for God? Art rich? alas,Prov. 23.5. riches make themselves wings and fly away; Up then, and be do∣ing good, and make thy self wings of thy Wealth for Heaven, by all charitable expressions; there is no way to lay your treasure up in Heaven, but by laying it out here; no way to lend God any thing, but by giving to the poor; How will hopes of Preferment nourish Conformity? Tully tells us, A Prince is to be fed with glo∣ry, and drawn to worthy acts by the allurement of Honour and Renown. Did but Christians feed more upon the Heritage of Jacob,Isa. 58.14. and their Immortal hopes, they would act more for their immortal ho∣nour; such Meditations do as the Philosopher sayes
of speculations,. Arist. E. immortalize men, and make them spiritual ones indeed, or as Ambrose phraseth it, carry them upwards, as Birds of Paradise,Volucris in Spiritu factus. Exod. 19.4. all upon Eagles Wings to soare on high. Fifthly, Will Christ say, Come ye blessed, &c. then here is an Io triumphe over all the World; Let it look as grim as it will upon thee, yet Christ will smile; though it gnash its teeth upon thee, yet Christ will open his lips, andCant. 1.2. kiss thee with the kisses of his mouth;Lapides loqui∣tur. though the world speak words as hard as stones about Stephens ears, yet Christ will speak comfortably. If the World say Go, Get you hence; yet Christ will say Come; if that say Go, ye Cursed; Christ will say Come ye Blessed. Though men say Go ye Cursed Generation who are hated of all men; yet Christ will say Come ye blessed of my Father. They say Turn out; Christ will say Turn in; they cry, Away from houses and lands, and wives, and children, and all for Christs sake; yet be not discouraged poor heart, for Christ will recompence thee a hundred fold, and thou shalt have a King∣dome for thy Cottage. And when they have done all, this, they rejoyce that their Plot hath taken effect, for they de∣signed your ruine long ago; I but Christs thoughts of love run higher yet, Come blessed soul, inherit the Kingdome pre∣pared for thee from the foundation of the World. The World may thrust thee out with both hands, Christ will receive thee with both arms. When Cyrus gave one of his friends a kisse, another a wedge of gold, he that had the gold, envied him that had the kisse, as a greater expression of his favour; what if thou hast not the onions of Egypt, if thou have the Quails and Manna in the Wildernesse,Psal. 17.14. if thou beest a man of G ds hand, if thou beest one of his heart, there is small ground to complain. Upon all, if an Epicurus was the best of the Philosophers without an Elysium; If a Platonick lecture of the immortality of the soul made another cast his life a∣way that he might enter upon that state; If an Aristotle up∣on Euripus banks being not able to resolve himself of the cause of its motion, dissolved himself, by casting himself in∣to
the streame, saying, If I cannot take thee, take thou me; when we have such a glory as eye hath not seen, nor ear heard; nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive what God hath1 Cor. 2.9. prepared for those that love him; how shamefuly are we run a ground, if we cannot have a kinde ofPhil. 1.23. . Rev. 22.20. lust to be dissolved; and when Christ holds this price in his hand, and cryes, Come ye blessed, we do not answer, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly!
THE Conclusion. 2 TIM. 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou hast heard of me in faith, and love, which is in Christ Jesus AT the beginning of this Moneths Exercise I entred upon this Text, and then resolv'd the matter contained therein into these four Doctrinal Ob∣servations. 1. Evangelical words are sound words. Or, All Gospel-truth is of an healing nature. 2. It is of great use and advantage both for Ministers and private Christians to have the main Fundamental truths of the Gospel collected and methodized into cer∣tain Models and Platforms. 3. Such Forms and Models are very carefully and faith∣fully to be kept. 4. Faith and Love are as it were the two hands, where∣by we may hold fast Gospel-truth. I fingled out the second of these Doctrines to be the subject of that first introductive Sermon which fell to my lot in the course of this morning Exercise.
I shall now for the CONCLƲSION of this Service, make choice of the third Doctrine. Scil. Such Forms and Collections of the special Heads of Gospel-Do∣ctrine are to be kept and observed with all care and diligence. The other two Doctrines, namely the first and last, may be usefull some where or other in the managing of the present Truth; which is, That Forms and Models of Gospel-Truths are carefully to be kept, &c. The Greek word  hath both significations in it, scil. to Have and to hold; to get such Models, and to keep them when we have them: Our English word implyeth the first, and expresseth the second; Hold fast, i. e. first have them, and then, let them not go when you have them: And the word in the next verse expounds this to the same sense, both in the Greek and in the English, , Custodi, keep; keep as in safe Custody, as under Lock and Key. That good thing which was commtited to thee; what was that? Some extend it to his whole Evangelical MINISTERY, which was com∣mitted to Timothy with the gifts and graces conferr'd therewith by Divine Ordination: Others restrain it to the form of sound Do∣ctrine in my Text, which Timothy had received either by word of mouth: or in scriptis from Saint Paul, whichsoever, or both, as he must have it, so he must preserve it safe and sound; Hold fast, keep, &c. Thus in the Old Testament the Kings and Princes of Israel must get a Copy of the Law of God; and when they have it, they must keep it, and keep close to it, Deut. 17.18, 19, 20. for First, He must write him a Copy of the Law in a book. And then it must be WITH HIM, and he shall READ therein all the dayes of his life. The good King Hezekiah caused his Secretaries to make a Tran∣script of Solomons Proverbs, a bundle or Model of Divine Apho∣rismes, both for knowledge and practice: These are also the Proverbs of Solomn which the men of Hezekiah King of Judah copied out.Prov. 25.1. These were to be laid up safe as a sacred depositum; and carefully preserved for the publique use and service of the Church.
The Jews Phylacteries mentioned by our Saviour, Matth. 23.5. were in their first institution of the same nature, that is to say,The Hebrews call them To∣taphoth; the Greek , from . Conservatoria quibus memoria legis conserva∣batur. cer∣tain Memorials appointed of God, by the help whereof they might have the Law of God alwayes in their mindes and memories, which the pride of the Scribes and Pharisees (not contented with the com∣mand of God) had enlarged into broad scrolls of parchment, upon which were written certain abridgments of the Law, which they wore (over and above Gods institution) about their arms, and necks, and heads; which practice of theirs although a superstitious ad∣dition to the Divine appointment, yet it held forth Gods design, which was the having and preserving Models of divine principles, both for knowledge and practice. It is the express command of God in the close of all the Prophets in the Old Testament, Remember the Law of Moses which I commanded him in Horeb for all Israel,Mal. 2.2. with the Statutes and Judgments. Though Gospel times were drawing nigh, yet the Law of Moses must not be forgotten, but must be kept exact and entire, as an eternal rule of righteousness. In the New Testament the frequent repetition of those words of command, HOLD, 2 Thes. 2.15. Heb. 3.14. HOLD FAST, 1 Thes. 5.21. 2 Tim. 1.13. Heb. 3.16. Heb. 4.23. Rev. 2.25. and 3.11. KEEP, 1 Cor. 11.2. and 15.2. 1 Tim. 6.20. 2 Tim. 1.14. Rev. 1.3. and 22.9. CONTINUE, Joh. 8.31. Acts 14.22. Gal. 2.9. Col. 1.23. 1 Tim. 4.16. 2 Tim. 3.14. ABIDE, Joh. 15.7. 1 Joh. 2.14, 24. 2 Ioh. 9. These I say, and other of like nature, all of them relating to Gospel-doctrine, either in general, or in some of the special forms and Models thereof give sufficient testimony to the Point in hand. For further proof whereof, I shall need to add no other Grounds or Reasons then what we made use of to the Confirmation of the first Doctrine. Those very Considerations which commended to us the having of such Collections and Models of Gospel-truths, do commend also the keeping and holding of them fast as a sacred treasure. The end of having is keeping, and the end of keeping is using; we cannot
use unlesse we keep; and we cannot keep unless we have: The Reasons therefore why we should get such Models of Evangelical Truths, will sufficiently evidence the necessity of holding them fast. All then that I shall do in the prosecution of the Doctrine shall be to shew you HOW, or in what RESPECTS such Collections or Forms of Doctrine are to be HELD FAST. Now the Rules and Directions for the keeping of them are to be suited to the several Orders and Sorts of Persons concerned in this great Trust and Depositum. And they are of three Ranks and Conditions; Scil. Rulers and Magistrates. Ministers. Christians of a more private rank & relation. suitable to each Station and Capacity must the Rule be; Magistrates concerned in this charge.First Rulers and Magistrates, they are to hold fast such forms of sound words. 1. Rulers and Magistrates, they are to keep these Models and Platforms of Fundamental Truth; and that for thee Rea∣sons. 1. For a test of the publick Ministry.1. That there may be a certain test for the publick Ministery, that so they may know whom they ought to encourage with their countenance and maintenance, as it was Hezekiahs praise that he spake comfortably to all the Levites that taught the good knowledge of the Lord, 2 Chron. 30.22. Certainly Magistrates are to take notice what kind of Doctrine is preached in their Dominions; for they are bidden to be wise, and to be instructed, Psal. 2.10. which im∣porteth more than a bare negative act that they should take heed only they do not oppose Christs Doctrine; but something positive, that they should protect and countenance it. The Magistrate has a great trust as to sacred things, for which he is responsible to God; and many wayes may he offend in the not discharging of it, as by opposing the truth, by tolerating Errors, and which is a higher de∣gree, by countenancing those that broach them; to tolerate false Do∣ctrines is a sin, but to share out his respects equally to the He∣terodox and Orthodox, is a greater; much more when the Hetero∣dox
are only countenanced, and those that preach the good word of the Lord in the Land are burdened with reproaches and all manner of contempt. Certainly the least that can be expected from him, is that the true Religion by his civil sanction should be preserved from reproach; and the professors of it from being af∣fronted in the exercise thereof. 2. Because without preserving of unity and uniformity in Reli∣gion, civil peace cannot be long maintained;2. Because civil peace is bound up in Ecclesi∣astical. no differences being carri∣ed on with so much heat and earnestness of contention as differ∣ences in matters of Religion; for, that which should be a Judge of strifes, then becomes a party; and what should restrain our pas∣sions feeds them: Therefore when one scorneth what another adoreth,Summus utriu∣quc Inde furor vulo quod no∣mina vicinorum Oit uter{que} lo∣tus. Juvenal. Noununquam tumultus Eccle∣siarum antegres∣si, Reipublicae autem confusio∣nes consecutae sunt. Socrat. Scholast. Hist. Eccles lib. 4. in Proaemio. 3. For the keeping of youth untaint∣ed. there must needs be great contentions and exasperations of mind▪ and when every man is left to hold what he lists in matters of Religion, all manner of mischief and confusions must inevitably follow; and every one stickling for the precedency of his party, there can be no solid union of heart under so vast and boundless a liberty. Tumults in the Church do necessarily beget confusions in the Common-wealth; for the Church and State, like Hippocrates twinnes, they weep, and laugh, and live, and die together. 3. That youth may be kept untainted, and seasoned with good Principles in Churches and Schools; the durable happinesse of the Comm n-wealth lying much in the education of youth which is the seed-plot of future felicity; and we use to say that Errors in the first concoction are hardly mended in the second; when youth are poysoned with Error in their first education, they seldom work it out again in their age and riper years. But because the pow∣er of Magistrates in Sacred things is much questioned, and we are usually slandered as a Rigid sort of men that would plant Faith by the Sword, and are more for compulsion of conscience than Information; I shall a little give you a taste of what we hold to be the Magistrates duty in and about Sacred things. We say therefore that Religion may be considered as to be planted; o as already planted in a Nation.What is to be done when Religion is to be planted. When it is to be planted, and hath gotten, no interest or footing among a people, the Preachers and Professors of it must run all hazards, and bold∣ly own the Name of Christ, whatever it cst them; the only wea∣pons which they have to defend their way, are, Prayers and tears; and whatever Proselites they gain to the faith of Christ, they must
use no resistance, but only overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony, not loving their lives to the death, Revel. 12.11. And thus did the Christian Religion get up in the face of the opposite World, not by anyNè videretur Authoritate traxisse aliquos, & veritatis ratio non pom∣pa gratia prae∣valeret. Ambr. publick interest and the power of the long sword, but meerly by its own evidence and the efficacy of Gods grace accompanying the publication thereof; And though it were a Doctrine contrary to nature, and did teach men to row against the stream of flesh and blood, yet it prevailed with∣out any Magistracy to back it. The Primitive Christians, how numerous soever they were, never made head against the Powers then in being, but meekly and quietly suffered all manner of but∣cheries and tortures for the conscience of their duty to God. And what we say concerning Religion in the general, holdeth true also concerning Reformation or the restitution of the Collapsed state of Religion; when men oppose themselves against the stream of corruptions which by a long succession and descent run down against them, and are armed by Law and Power, they are in patience to pos∣sess their souls, and to suffer all manner of extremity for giving their testimony to the truths of God: And in this case we only press the Magistrate to be wise or cautious that he do not oppose Christ Jesus,Psal. 2.10. by whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree Ju∣stice. What the Ma∣gistrates duty is when Reli∣gion is plantedBut when Religion is already planted, and received among a people, and hath gotten the advantage of Law and publick Edicts in its favour, not only for its security and protection, but also for its countenance and propagation, then it becomes the peoples birth-right as the Law of Moses is called the inreritance of the Congregation of Jacob, Deut 33.4. and ought to be defended and maintained by the Magistrate as well as other Laws and Priviledges which are made for the conservation, welfare, and safety of that Na∣tion. Yea much more; because if the Magistrate be the Minister of God for good, Rom. 13.4. then he is to take care of the chief good, which is Religion, as concerning not only the bodies but souls of the people committed to his charge; and therein to take ex∣ample from the holy Magistrates of the people of the Jews who were zealous for God in this kind. The Govern∣ment of Christ is to be owned publickly.For first it is the will of Christ who was appointed to be King of Nations as well as King of Saints, Rev. 15.3. not only to e∣rect himself a Government in the hearts of his people; but also to
be publickly owned by Nations, as to the Religion which he hath established. There is a National acknowledgement of Christ, as well as a Personal and Ecclesiastical. Christ is personally owned when we receive him into our hearts: He is Ecclesiastically owned by his worship in the Churches of the Saints: And Nationally owned, when the Laws and Constitutions of the civil Government are framed so as to advance the interest of his Scepter, and the Christian Religi∣on is made a National Profession; this is spoken of in many places of Scripture, Gen. 18.8. Isa. 55.5. Isa. 60.12. Matth. 28.20. 2. When Religion is thus received and imbodied into the Laws of a Nation,A contempt to Christ when his interest is slighted. it is the greatest scorn and affront that can be put up∣on Christ, that such an advantage should be lost and carelesly looked after, when other Priviledges and birth-rights of the people a e so zealously and with such heat and sharpness of contest vindicated and asserted. In Scripture God often debates the case with Nations upon this account, Jer. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. He calls upon the Sun to look pale upon such a wickedness, and the Creatures to stand amazed that any people should be so foolish as to cast off their God, So Isa. 43.22. God complaineth of Israel they were grown weary of him, and Mich. 6.2, 3. Hos. 8.12. The summe of all those Scriptures is this; If Magistrates who are to open the gates for the King of glory to come in, Psal. 24. and to welcome Christ into their Dominions, should be so far from opening the gates to him that they should turn him out when once entered, and should look upon the great things of his Law as a strange thing, Hose 8.12. that wherein they were not concerned, or which they knew not what to make of, what a vile scorn is this put upon the Ma∣jesty of God? It will be more tolerable for a Nation who had never known Christ, than after a publick and National owning of him, they should be cold, indifferent, and negligent in his interest; if the business had been to introduce a Religion, the crime of refusal were not so great,The Magi∣strate is to see that Religion when once e¦stablished, be not violated. as when the business is to conserve and defend a Re∣ligion already received, that it may be transmitted to po∣sterity. Briefly then, that which we say, is this, that a Religion recei∣ved by a Nation, and established by Laws, should not be violated,
and the Magistrate is to see that it be preserved against all open oppo¦sition and secret underminings, and in no case contemned and-scorned. The consciences of men are liable only to the judgment of God; but their words and practices come under the Magistrates cognizance. Inquisition into mens thoughts we condemn; but taking notice of their hard speeches and contemptuous revilings, and publick opposition against the truth, is that which we commend in the Christian Magistrate; the Law of Theodosius concerning He∣reticks doth fully expresse our sense:Sibi tantum∣modo nocitura sentiant, aliis obfutura non pan dant. If men will perish by hold∣ing pernicious Doctrines, let them perish alone; but let not others perish with them by their holding them out. The Canon in this case, is,Tit. 1.11. Their mouths must be stopped; we con∣tend not punishment so much (unless in point ofThe Blasphe∣mer must die, Levit. 24.16. blasphemy) as prevention. If Seducers be not severely chastised, yet (like wilde beasts) they must be. Rom. 15.1. muzled, (that's the Metaphor) that they may do no harm; their mouths must be stopped, lest by teaching things which they ought not, they subvert whole houses. Once more; we are not such Rigid Imposers as the world doth make us to be, as that in lesser things wherein good men may erre or differ, we should presently call in the power of the Magistrate to avenge our quarrel; we know there is a due latitude of allowable differences wherein the strong should bear with the weak; and are so farre from making use of civil censures in such cases,Ministers Gods witnes∣ses and Tru∣stees to keep the truths of God. that we think the Church should not use any extream course, but rather all manner of patience and indulgence. And thus much for the Magistrates duty. The Minister's follows. Secondly; Ministers are to hold fast this form of sound words;By Catechy∣sing. for they are Gods Witnesses to the present age, and Trustees for the future. 1 Tim. 1.11. The glorious Gospel of the blessed God which is committed to my trust; and 1 Tim. 6.20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, &c. Now they are to keep it, First by Catechizing and instilling these Principles into the hearts of young ones:2. Preaching. Foundation stones must be laid with great exatness and care; for they support the whole building. It seems by Heb. 6 2. that there was an Apstolical Catechism wherein some Principles were laid as a foundation fr all other Christian Doctrine. Secondly by assiduous preaching, that they may explain and apply these Principles, and still keep up the remembrance of them in the Church: God that hath appointed Apostles and Prophets to
write Scriptures, hath also appointed Pastors and Teacher to ex∣plain and apply Scriptures; Therefore are Evangelic l Ministers called Prophets, because they are to interpret the Oracles of God: Nabi signifying an Interpreter as well as a Foreteller of truths to come, Ephes. 4.11. 'Tis a part of our trust to keek these things still a foot. 2 Tim. 2.2. The things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same cmmit thu to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others, by solid explications, without innovating either as to the matter or expression; for uncouth words make way for strange Doctrines. Thirdly to vindicate them from the glosses and oppositions of Seducers; for the good Shepherd must not only fodder the sheep, but hunt out the Wolf.. This is part of our tru;st for we are set (saith the Apostle) for the defence of the Gospel, Phil. 1.17. And we are to convince gainsayers, to hold fast the Word of Truth, Tit. 1.2. , the word signifieth to hold fast a thing which others would wrest from us,Ministers must not be of too easie a spirit. and implies that Ministers should be good at holding and drawing, and be able to main∣tain the truth, when others would force it out of their hands. Two things will hinder us in the discharge of our duty herein. First a faulty easiness; the wisdome that is from above is gentle andJames 4.17. easie to be intreated, but 'tis in that which is good; in other things we must be obstinate and resolute, and not betray the truths of God by our condescentions and compliances. It is said of Chryso∣stome that he was , by his own simplicity and candour often drawn into inconveniences; when this good∣nesse of nature is apt to abuse us, Ministers should awaken them∣selves by a zeal for Gods glory; shall we be yeilding when his Truths are despised, his Name blasphemed? No, let us resist them to the face, and give not place, no not for an hour, Gal. 2.5, 11. as also by a compssion over souls; shall we suffer them to be se∣duced, and by droves led into error, and be sinfully silent? God forbid. Secondly, by a fearful cowardize; the Prophet complaines,Act. 20.24. none are valiant for the truth upon the earth, Jer. 9.3. We must stand to these Principles, though it cost us bonds and imprisonments, yea life it self; a good Shepherd will lay down his life for the sheep, Joh 0. Christ did for their Redemption, and we must, for their confirmation in the Faith, and not be light and vain, off and on as our carnal interests be more or less befriended. Thus for the Ministers duty.
The peoples followeth. Thirly, The people are to hold fast these Truths. Christians of all Ranks and Sizes,People must hold fast. they are to hold them fast in their judgements, memory, practice, and in contending for the truth. First, In their judgements; every Christian should have a Plat∣form of sound Doctrine;In their judge∣ment. not only some scraps and fragments of knowledge but a distinct and clear deleination of Gospel-truth, that they may know things not only at random, but in their or∣der and dependence,Christians li∣able to two mistakes. how they suit one with another: Two faults are Christians usually guilty of: Either they content themselves with warm affections without knowledge; and then are like a blind horse full of mettle,To rest in affection without judge∣ment. but ever and anon stumbling; their wild affe∣ctions misguide them, not being directed and governed by an answerable light. Or secondly, they content themselves with loose Notions, without seeing the truths of God in their frame, and so are never stable and roted in the Faith;In loose No∣tions without method. therefore this should Christians first look after,Col. 2.2. the riches of the full assurance of understanding in the Mysteries of godliness. Secondly, Christians must keep such Models of truth in their memory; the memory is like the Ark wherein the holy things of God are to be kept. The Spirit of Christ Jesus is given not only to teach us all things, but to BRING ALL things to our REMEMBRANCE,2. In their memories. Joh. 14.26. and Scripture is written upon this occasion, not to lay in new truths, but to keep the old in remembrance, 2 Pet. 3.1. This second Epistle I write unto you by way of Remembrance. His first Epistle was like the Sermon, the second as the Repetition; the first to inform the judge∣ment, the second to help their memories; so must Ministers pegge in one Sermon with another, never leave repeating the same truths, till they are fastened upon their Auditors. Phil. 3.1. To write the same things to you, to me it is not grievous, but to you it is safe. Mens understandings are dull to conceive, hard to believe, and their memories apt to forget; therefore we should presse, if not; , alwayes the same things; which Hippius liked not; yet  much about the same matters, as Socrates advised. The memory is a leaking vessel, therefore as the Apostle exhorts, it concerns us , more abundantly to attend, to give the more diligent heed; lest we let them
slip, and thereby we lose the2 John 8. To live truth. Ministers and our own labour; Thirdly, Hold fast the Models of Divine Truth in your pra∣tice a; practical mem ry is the best memory; to live the truths which we know, is the best way to hold them fast. There are Heretical manners as well as Heretical Doctrines.Infidelis dis∣putat contra fi∣dem, improbus Christianus vi∣vit contra fidem Aug. Prophane Christians live against the Faith, whilest Heterodox Christians dispute against the Faith: There be not a few that live Antimonianisme, and Libertinisme, and Athe∣isme, and Popery, whil'st others Preach it: Apostates are practical Arminians; a prophane man, a practical Atheist. Whil'st others therefore live Error, do you live the truth; whil'st others deny the Gospel, do you live the Gospel: As you have received the truth as it is in Jesus, so walk in it, to all well-pleasing; without this a man forsakes the truth while he doth professe it. They profess to know God,Tit. 1.16. but in thei works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work disobedient. Yea to live the Truths we hear, is the way not to hold them only, but to hold them forth to others; as the Apostle speaks,To hold forth truth to others. holding forth the Word of Life, . It is a Metaphor taken either from Fire-lights upon the Sea-coasts burning all night,Phil. 12.6. the use whereof is to give notice to Seamen of some neighbouring Rocks and Quicksands that may endanger their Vessel; or else from Torch-bearers in the night-time, who hold out their lights, that passengers may see their way in the dark; according to which Metaphor our Saviour calls true reall Christians the Lights of the world, a City set on a hill,Matth. 5.14. to enlighten the dark world with their beams of holiness. It is a blessed thing when the Conversations of Christians are practical Models of Gospel-truths, walking Bibles, holding forth the graces or excellencies of him who hath called them out of dark∣nesse into his marvellous light.. 1 Pet. 2.9. Fourthly,To contend for the truth. Christians are to hold fast Models of truth by con∣tending for the Truth, against all the opposition of the repro∣bate world, in contending and publickly owning the truth, what∣ever it cost them; God ordereth the love which the people show to the truth, not seldom to be a restraint to carnal Magistrates when they would introduce mischiefs into the Church by force and power, Matth. 14.5. He feared the multitude. Matth. 21.46. They feared
the multitude, because they took him for a Prophet. Acts 4.21: They let them go because of the people: Thus doth God make use of the people, though contemptible for their quality, yet con∣siderabe for their number, as a bank of sand to keep back the waves of furious and opposite greatness: Yea when the flood of Perse∣cutions is already broken in upon the Church, their zealous own∣ing of the Truth keeps it alive, and is a means to propagate it to after ages. We owe our present truths not only to the disputa∣tions of the Doctors, but the death of the Martyrs who were willing to resist unto blood, striving against sinne, Heb. 12.4: By whose flames, after ages see the truths of the Gospel more clearly. ƲSE. The first Use may serve for Lamentation. We live in a frozen and dull age, wherein men have learned to hold fast every thing but the Truth; Rich men will hold fast their E∣states, though Christ, his Church and Cause have never so much need of them. Ignorant People will hold fast their Ignorance; ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth: Superstitious people will hold fast their Superstitious Cu∣stomes and Idolatries: Vain people will hold fast their Fashions and Modes: Seduced wrerches will hold fast their Errors; Non per∣suadebis etiamsi persuaseris; yea they are bold and impudent in justifying and propagating their false Doctrines; they bend their tongue like their bow for lies, but they are not valiant for the Truth upon the Earth;Jer. 9.3. while multitudes are outragious against the Truth, few, very few are couragious for it. We may take up that complaint, Isa, 1.21, 22. How is the faithful City become an Harlot? how is our gold become drosse? and our Wine mixt with water? who would have thought England could have so quckly forgotten Jesus Christ, and changed the truth of God into a lye? have the Nations been guilty of such a thing! Jer. 2.9. The World once wondered to see itself turnd Arrian; England may wonder and be astonished to see itself turned Arminian, An∣tinomian, Socinian, Anabaptist, Quaker, Papist, Atheist, any thing but a Christian! This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation; Oh that mine head were waters, and mine eys rivers of tears, &c.
And now my Brethren, to make some brief Application of what what hath been said, in order to this morning Exercise. As you have heard, so you have seen,Application to the morning exercise. this Moneth now elapsed hath brought to your view an  or Model of sound words; you have had as it were, the Summe and Substance of the Go∣spel preached over in your hearing: I know it falls far short both in respect of Matter and Method, of a perfect body of Di∣vinity, an exact and full delineation of all the chief Heads and Principles of Religion: But considering the smallness of the Circle of this monethly course in which this Model was drawn, I dare take the boldness to say, there hath as much of the Marrow and Spirits of Divinity been drawn forth in these few Morning Le∣ctures, as can be rationally expected from men of such various Studies, and assidnous labours in the Ministerial work. Former ages have rarely heard so much Divinity preacht over in many years, as hath been read in your ears in twenty six dayes: These few Sermons have digested more of the Doctrine of faith, than some large volumes, not of a mean consideration, now extant in the Church of God, Truely, every single Sermon hath been a little  with∣in itself. Each Subject in this morning Exercise hath been hand∣led in so ample a manner, and with so much judgement, acute∣ness, and perspicuity, that it may well passe for a little Treatise of Divinity; wherein many profound Mysteries have been discust, and stated, not with more judgment in the Doctrine, than with life and vigor in the Ʋse and Application. The Preachers have sought to find out acceptable words,Eccles. 12. and that which was spoken was upright, even words of truth. Insomuch that a man that had never heard of a Gospel before, this moneths conduct had been sufficient, not only to have left him without ex∣cuse, but with the wise mens STAR to have led him to Christ. The more I dread to think what a tremendous account you have to make, who after twenty, twirty, fourty years Revelation of the Gospel, have the addition of this moneth of Sabbaths also, to reckon for in that day when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, &c. if while in this Mirror,2 Thes. 1.8. beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, you are not changed into the same
image from glory to glory by the Spirit of the Lord. I shall not undertake (asMorning Exercise, May 1654. formerly) to extract the Summe and Substance of what you have heard; I have some hope to be saved that labour upon a better account. I shall recount to you the Heads only, and Points of Christian Doctrine which have been handled in this Monethly Exercise, that now in the close of all, you may behold as in a Map or Table, the Method and Connexion which they hold amongst them∣selves. , Or a Summary repetition of the Heads of Di∣vinity preacht upon in this Course. The first Divine (after the preparatory Sermon) that preach∣ed to you, began with that which is the first and chief object of Knowledge and Faith; that α and ω in Divinity, THERE IS A GOD, Heb. 11.6. He that cometh to God, must believe that GOD is, &c. Hereupon, because if there be a God, then he is to be wor∣shipped; and if to be worshipped, then there must be a Rule of that worship; and if a Rule, it must be of Gods own appoint∣ment; therefore The Second dayes work was, against all other Books and Writings in the world, to Evince this Truth, the SCRIPTƲRES CONTAINED IN THE BOOKS OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT, are THE WORD OF GOD; 2 Tim. 3.16. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God. By these Scriptures that great Mysterious Doctrine of the Trinity, which the light of nature can no more discover than de∣ny, was asserted and opened as far as so profound a Mystery can well admit; and so The third mornings work was to shew, THAT IN THE GODHEAD THERE IS A TRINITY OF PERSONS IN ƲNTY OF ESSENCE; GOD THE FATHER, GOD THE SON, AND GOD THE HOLY GHOST, God blessed for ever; 1 Joh. 5.7. There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the FAHER, the WORD, and the HOLY GHOST, and these three are ONE, The Creation of Man in a perfect, but mutable Estate, by the
joynt Power and Wisdom of these three glorious Persons, was the Fourth Subject opened from that Text, Eccles, 7.29. God made man upright, but they have sought out ma∣ny inventions. Man thus Created, God entred into a Covenant with him, and so the COVENANT OF WORKS which God made with Adam and all his posterity; succeeded in order to be the Subject matter of the Fifth morning Lecture: the Text was, Gen. 12.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die. This Covenant no sooner made (almost) then broken; the work of him that preacht the Sixth Sermon was, THE FALL OF ADAM, and therein more specially of PECCATƲM ORIGINALE ORIGINANS, or ORIGINAL SIN IN THE FIRST SPRING and fountain of it; the Scripture Rom. 5.12. By one man, sin entred into the world, &c. The Fruit and sad effect whereof being the losse of Gods image, and the total depravation and corruption of mans nature; The seventh thing that fell naturally to be handled, was, Pec∣catum originale originatum, or, Original corruption in the STREAM and DERIVATION OF IT TO POSTERITY; from Psal. 1.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in Sin did my Mo∣ther conceive me. This is the Source of all that evil that hath invaded all Man∣kind; that therefore which naturally succeeded in the Eighth course of this morning Exercise, was, MANS LI∣ABLENESS TO THE CURSE; or the MISERY OF MANS ESTATE BY NATƲRE; Deut. 27.1. Cursed is every one that continueth not in all the things of the Law to do them; or Ephes. 2.3. By nature the children of wrath; Ninthly, Mans impotency to help himself out of this miserable estate, was the next sad Prospect presented to your view, by that Reverend Brother that preached the ninth course, and he
took his rise from Rom. 5.6. When we were without strength, Christ died for the un∣godly. That the doctrine of mans impotency, when it had laid him in the dust, might not leave him there; the Tenth Preacher discoursed to you of the COVENANT OF REDEMPTION, consisting of the transaction between God and Christ from all Eternity; from that Text, Isa. 53.10. He shall see the travel of his soule and be satis∣fied. In the eleventh place, THE COVENANT OF GRACE RE∣VEALED IN THE GOSPEL, came next to be unfolded, as being (if I may so say) the Counterpart of the Covenant of Re∣demption, which the Preacher to whom the Eleventh course fell, opened to you out of Heb. 8.6. Jesus Christ, hath obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also he is the Mediatour of A BETTER COVENANT. This done, it was very seasonable to let you hear of the Media∣tour of the Covenant; which was performed by the Twelfth Minister who preached to you JESUS CHRIST in his PERSON, NATƲRES, and OFFICES, from that Scripture, 1 Tim. 2.5. There is one God, and one Mediatour between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Next to his Natures and Offices, it was proper to treat of the two states of Jesus Christ; and therefore the Thirrteeth Preacher opened to you Christs state of Humi∣liation, out of Phil. 2.7, 8. He made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the Crosse. The fourteenth, CHRISTS STATE OF EXAL∣TATION, out of the ninth verse, Wherefore God hath highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every Name, &c. Time not allowing a more copious and distinct enquiry into this great Mystery, God manifested in the flesh; that which came in the
Fifthteenth place under consideration, as most proper, was, THE SATISFACTION WHICH CHRIST MADE TO DI∣VINE JƲSTICE; and that was done on that Text, Col. 1.20. And (having made peace through the blood of his Crosse) by him to reconcile all things unto himself; I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. And because the Redemption made by Christ upon the Crosse, sig∣nifieth nothing in effect without the Application of it to the con∣science: The Minister to whom the Sixteenth turn fell, Treated of EFFECTUAL CALL∣ING, from Rom. 8.30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called. In, and by which Call, the soul being really, but yet Spiritually joyned and united to Jesus Christ; that which fell next under consideration in the Seventeenth Course of this Exercise, was that exceding preci∣cious Mystery; The SAINTS UNION WITH JE∣SƲS CHRIST. His Scripture was, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joyned to the Lord, is one Spirit. And inasmuch as Ʋnion is the Foundation of Communion, Interest in Christ the Fountain and Spring-head of Fellowship with Christ; the Subjects which followed naturally to be handled, were Ju∣stification, and Filiation. JƲSTIFICATION in the eighteenth Course, out of Rom. 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God. And the Nineteenth, FILIATIN, or Divine Son-ship to God; which branching it self into these two great priviledges of the Covenant ADOPTION. REGENERATION; the one whereby out State is changed; by the other, our Natures, they were twisted together into one Sermon, on that por∣tion of Scripture,
John 1.12. To as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the SONNES of God, even to them that be∣lieve on his Name. In which Filiation, it being evident by the Scripture quoted, that Faith hath such a special ingrediency, therefore it was season∣able in the next place to speak of SAVING FAITH; which was the Subject preacht on in the Twentieth morning of this Moneths Exercise; the Text being Acts 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house. And although Repentance be usually before faith, in the order of sense and feeling; yet faith being before Repentance, in the order of Nature and operation, it being the primum mobile in the orbe of grace, (as unbelief in the orbe of sins, Heb. 3.12.) hence it was proper, next after Faith, to speak to you of REPENTANCE,  which was handled by him that preached the one and twenty Lecture; his place of Scripture being Acts 5.31. Him hath God exalted to be a Prince, and a Saviour, for to give repentance, and remission of sins. Matth. 3.8.And because true repentance is alwayes accompanied with fruits meet for Repentance; therefore as the great and comprehensive fruit thereof, the twenty second Exercise was spent in setting forth the Na∣ture, necessity, and Excellency of HOLINESSE from these words of the Apostle, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which none shall see the Lord. This giveth the Believer a capacity, though not a merit of a joy∣full resurrection, and the next Preacher took therefore the RESUR∣RECTION  for his Subject, upon the Twenty third morning, and for his Text, those words of St. Paul. Acts 26.8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? And as upon the Resurrection follows the day of Judgement; in the same Method, the discourse of the LAST JƲDGE∣MENT succeeded, and was the work of the Twenty fourth day the Preachers Text was Acts 17.31. Gd hath appninted a day in the wich he will judge the world in Righteousness, by that man whom he hath ordained.
The sentence of that day was the next thing in order to be consi∣dered: and although the sentence of the Elect be first in the processe, yet because it is last in the execution, as appeareth in comparing the 34. verse of the 25. of Matth. with the 46. therefore the TOR∣MEMTS of HELL was the sad and startling Subject which the twenty fifth Preacher insisted on, from Math. 25.41.—Everlasting Fire prepared for the Divell and his Angels, &c. And when the Righteous have had the honour as Assessors with Christ, to behold with their eyes that sentence executed upon the Re∣probate, and their persons dragged away into everlasting burnings by the Ministry of the infernal Angels: Then the joyful sentence shall be accomplished upon the Elect of God, and they shall ride in triumph with Jesus Christ the King of Saints, into the gates of the New Jerusalem; and so the Twenty sixth, and most blessed Subject with wich the last Minister did most sweetly close this morning Exercise, was the JOYES of HEAVEN; and his Text was Matth. 25.34. Receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. And thus honourable and beloved, I have prese ted you with the Epitomy or Compendium of sound words, which hath Methodi∣cally been delivered in the course of this moneth in divers of the chief Heads and Points of Gospel-Dctrine. There is no man that is acquainted with the Body of Divinity, but may easily observe this Method or Sstme to have been in some Points (possibly) redundant, but in more defective: He that will object the former, may consider that evey man sees not by the same light; insomuch as if twenty Divines should have the drawing up of twenty several Models of Divinity, not two of them would meet exactly in the same heads or order; in this case therefore, veniam ptimus{que} damusque vicissim. And he that will object the latter, must also remember, that if we had taken in more Points, there must have been more dayes, which the course of this Exercise doth not allow. Sufficient to the dayes hath been the labour thereof; and when we cannot do all we would, it his honourable to do what we can: To the glory of God be it spoken; since this Exercise was first set up, such a moneth hath not been known in this City.
A word of Exhortation. What now remaineth, men and brethren, but that the Ministers of the. Cyril. Hieros. praef. Cat. Nostrum est dicere, ve∣strum vero age∣re, Dei autem perficere. Gospel having done their work in holding out unto you a Form or Model of sound words; you stir up your selves in the strength of Jesus Christ to do yours? and what is that, but that which is commended here to Timothy, That you hold fast the form of sound words, which you have received of them? They have held it forth, it concerns you to hold it fast. First see therefore that you hold it fast in your understandings. My brethren, in this Moneths Exercise you have had many of the chief Heads and Points of the Christian Faith unvailed to you,. I∣dem ut supra. Non existimes institutiones istas homiliis esse similes, &c. Sed haec quae per ordinem tradimus docu∣menta, &c. not only as so many single truths, and several precious Jewels to lie by you, but (that to which possibly most of you have been stran∣gers hitherto, as far as the design could well suffer) Methodized as it were into a Chaine of Pearls to weare about necks; truths fitly joyned together and compacted into a body, by that which every joynt supplyeth. Now your duty is, to wear this Chain or Bracelet carefully that it may not be broken. Your labour must be to imprint this Me∣thod of truth in your mindes and judgements, by vertue whereof you may be able to know them in their Series and Connexion; and when you hear any of these Points handled in Sermons, you may be able to know one truth from another, where they are to be fix∣ed in the Orb of Divinity, and so to refer them to their own proper place and station; which will prove to be a greater advantage to your proficiency in the knowledge of Christ then you can easily believe. It is observable, Rom. 8.28. when the Holy Ghost having hinted effectual calling as the ground of that blessed truth, that all things work for good to those that love God; yet he mentions it again in the very next verse; and why? but to shew us what place it obtains in the golden chain of salvation; how it takes its room between Predestination and Justification; Whom he did pre∣destinate, them also he CALLED, and whom he CAL∣LED, them he justified; of so great moment it is not onely to know Gospel-truths, but how to posture them in their proper rank and file, where every truth is to stand: This advantage in a great measure you have had by this Moneths Exer∣cise; see that you improve it to the clearing of your understand∣ings in the Method of Gospel Doctrines.
Secondly, Hold them fast in yor Memory. Truely the Order of this Moneths Exercise, if you be not want∣ing to your selves, will not contribute lesse strength to your memo∣ries than light to your understandings. The truths themselves have been a Treasure given you by your heavenly Father; and the Me∣thod will serve you for a sack or purse to keep them in: and truely it would be a labour neither unprofitable nor uncomely to take so much paines your selves, and to teach your Families to do so too, scil. to Conne this Model without book; and the Lord teach you to get them by heart. You may once a week, or so, revolve them thus in your minds. I. There is a God. II. The Scriptures are the Word of God. III. In the God-head there be three Persons or Sub∣sistencies, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, God bles∣sed for ever. IV. God Created man in a perfect, but in a mutable estate. V. The Covenant of works God made with man in his innocency. VI. Original sin in the first spring of it, in Adams first transgression. VII. Original corruption derived from thence into mans nature. VIII. Mans liablenesse to the curse, or the misery of mans state by nature. IX. Mans impotency to help himself out of this estate. X. The Covenant of Redemption, or the transaction between God and Christ from all Eternity, about mans sal∣vation. XI. The Covenant of Grace revealed in the Gospel. XII. Christ the only Mediatour between God and man, con∣sidered in his Person, Natures, and Offices. XIII. Christs state of Humiliation. XIV. Christs state of Exaltation. XV. Christs satisfaction to Divine Justice. XVI. Effectual calling. XVII. Ʋnion with hrist. XVIII. Justification by Christs Righteousnesse.
XIX. Son-ship to God, consisting in Adopition. Regeneration. XX. Saving Faith. XXI. Repentance. XXII. Holinesse. XXIII. The Resurrection. XXIV. The last Judgement. XXV. Hell. XXVI. Heaven. Christians, this, and other such like Catalogues or Formes of the Articles of Christian Faith imprinted upon your memories, will be of great benefit and service to you. Do ye serve your memories, and your memories will serve you;. Cyril. Hieros. praef. Catechis. labour to get them so im∣printed upon your memories, that they may never be blot∣ted out. Thirdly, Hold fast; yea hold forth these precious Truths delivered to you in your lives and conversations. Christians, let it be your care (and behold it shall be yourDeut. 4.6. wis∣dom in the eyes of all the beholders) to live this morning Exercise, the glory whereof hath filled this Assemblie for a moneth together. To engage and quicken you herein, let me mind you of one rare ad∣vantage this Model carrieth with it, above most of the acute and learned Treatises of Schoolmen, or solid Tractates of Catechetical Divines, who have taken great paines in opening and stating the Principles of Christian Religion. The Reverend Divines who have travelled in this service of your Faith, have in their several Sermons with singular skill and piety, brought down Principles unto practice, and improved all their Do∣ctrines to Ʋse and Application; wherein they have shewed them∣selves Workmen that need not be ashamed; wise Builders that know how to handle the Trowel as well as the Sword; and that made it their design to build up their hearers in holinesse as well as in know∣ledge: The School and the Pulpit met together; the Doctor and the Pastor have kissed each other.Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. They have not discust the Doctrines of Faith in a jejune frigid speculative way only; but what they clear∣ed to the judgment, they wrought it home upon the heart and affe∣ctions, with such warmth and sweetnesse, as that the hearers seem'd for the present to be carried into the mountain of transfiguration,
where they cryed out with Peter, It is good for us to be here: So that although their Sermons were very large, yet the greatest part of their Auditories thought they had done too soon; and went away praising God that had given such gifts unto men. Oh let it be your care, dearly Beloved, that as this Model hath been delivered unto you, so you may be delivered into it:Rom. 6.17. . The Form of doctrine into which ye were delivered. Efficacius vitae quam lnguae te∣stimonium. Ber. Confession. Bernard. What a sore judgement will abide such as suffer all these morning influences to passe away as water over a swans back; that come the same from these morning visions, they came to them. How shall we escapt, if we neglect so great salvation? Hold it forth I say Christians, in your lives; the Conversation is a better testimony to the truth then the confession. I have met with a general vote in the Auditory, that attended this morning Ordinance, that these Sermons might be Printed; that so what hath once past upon your ears, might be exposed to your eye; whereby you might stay and fix upon it with the more deliberation. Whether I may prevail with the Brethren, or no for their second tra∣vel in this Service, I know not. There is one way left you, wherein you may gratifie your own de∣sires, and Print these Sermons without their leave, though I am con∣fident, not without their consent, and that is, PRINT THEM IN YOƲR LIVES AND CONVERSATIONS. Live this morning Exercise in the sight of the world, that men may take notice you have been with Jesus: You have been called up with Moses into the Mount to talk with God. Now you come down, oh that your faces might shine; that you would commend this morning Exercise by an holy life, that you may be manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ ministred by ƲS.2 Cor. 3.3. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in heaven.Matth. 5.16. To that end Take along with you these two great helps in the Text FAITH. LOVE. Hold fast the form of sound words in FAITH and LOVE. I know some Expositors interpret these as the two great COM∣PREHENSIVE HEADS of sound words or Gospel-Doctrine, in this ; Faith and Love: Faith towards God, and
Love towards men: Faith the summe of the first Table, and Love of the second; or Faith in Christ, and Love to Christ; or Faith as comprehending the Credenda, things to be believed; Love as com∣prehending the Facienda, things to be done. But I am sure it is not against the Analoge of Faith, or the Context to improve these two as Mediums to serve this command of holding fast sound Doctrine. And so in the entrance it was propounded, as the fourth Doctrine, scil. Faith and Love are as it were the two hands where∣by we hold-fast the Form of sound words. 1. Faith.First then (Christians) look to your Faith; that is an hold-fast grace, which will secure your standing in Christ. As unbelief is the root of Apostacy, and falling back from the Doctrine of the Gospel, Heb. 3.12. So Faith is the spring of Perseverance. 1 Pet. 1.5. Kept by the power of God through faith to salvation. Faith keeps the Believer, and God keeps his faith; Now faith keeps the be∣liever close to his Principles upon a two-fold accompt. Faith realizeth Gospel-truth.1. Because faith is the grace which doth REALIZE all the Truths of the Gospel unto the soul. Evangelical Truths to a man that hath not faith, are but so many prettie Notions, which are plea∣sing to the fancy, but have no influence upon the Conscience; they may serve a man for discourse, but he cannot live upon them: suffering Truths (in particular) are pleasing in the Speculation, in times of prosperity; but when the hour of temptation cometh, they afford the soul no strength to carry it through sufferings, and to make a man go forth unto Christ without the Camp, bearing his reproach. Heb. 13.13.But of Faith, saith the Aposte, it is , and ; the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; faith makes all Divine Objects (although very Spiritual and subtile in their own nature) faith makes them (I say) so many realities, so many solid and substantial verities; it gives them a being, not in themselves, but unto the believer: and of invisible it makes them visible; as it is said of Moses, he saw him that was invisible; How? by faith, verse 23.24: that which was invisible to the eye of nature, was visible to the eye of faith. Faith brings the object and the faculty together.Heb. 11.27. Hence now men yet in their un∣regeneracy, though haply illuminated to a high degree of Gospel-Notion, in time of tribulation will fall away, and walk no more with Jesus, because through the want of Faith. Divine Truth had no rooting in their hearts; all their knowledge is but a powerlesse
notion floating in the brain, and can give no reality or subsistence to Gospel-verities: Knowledge gives lustre, but Faith gives being; knowledg doth irradiate, but Faith doth realize; knowledge holds ou light, but faith adds life and power. It is Faith my Brethren, whereby you stand;2 Tim. 1.12. Faith is that where∣by a man can live upon the truth, and die for the truth; I know whom I have believed; and I am perswaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day. Look to your Faith Christians. For again,Faith fetcheth strength from Christ. Secondly, Faith will help you to fetch strength from Jesus Christ, to do, to suffer, to live, to die for Jesus Christ, and the truths which he hath purchased, and ratified by his own blood, Phil. 4, 13. I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me. Faith invests the soul into a kind of Omnipotency; I can do all things: Other mens impossibilities are faiths triumph: Faith is an omnipotent grace, because it sets a work an Omnipotent God. In the Lord I have righteousness and strength, is the boast of faith, Isa. 45.24. Righteousnesse for Justification, and strength for San∣ctification; and for carrying on all the duties of the holy life: this is insinuated in my Text, Hold fast, &c. in FAITH which is in CHRIST JESƲS: So that if it were demanded How shall we hold fast? the answ. is by Faith: how doth faith hold fast? in Christ Jesus; scil. as it is acted by, and as it acts upon Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ is a Fountain of strength,Psal. 71.16. and that strength is drawn out by faith; hence Davids Resolve, I will go in the strength of the Lord God, I will make mention of thy Righteousnesse, even of thine onely.2. Love. The second grace which you must look to is LOVE. Love is another hold-fast grace, I held him, and would not let him go, said the Spouse of her Beloved, Cant. 4.3. I tell you sirs, Love will hold fast the truth, when Learning will let it go; the reason is, be∣cause Learning lieth but in the head, but Love resteth in the heart, and causeth the heart to rest in the thing or person beloved. I cannot dispute for Christ, said the poor Martyr, but I can dye for Christ. Love will say to the truth, as she said to her Mother in Law, Whether thou goest I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge; thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God; where thou di∣est, I will die, and there will I be buried; the Lord do so to me,Ruth. 1.16, 17. and more also, if ought but death part me and thee.
Gen. 34.3.Love is the glue that makes the heart cleave to the Object; as it is said of Shechem, His soule clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob. Minuit Felix octa.Love is the twist of soules Crederes unam animam in duobus esse divisam, it is but one soul that informs Lovers. Christians, if you would hold fast the truth, LOVE IT. Love hates putting away:2 Thes. 2.11, 12 when ever your love begins to decay, you are in danger of Apostacy. For this cause God shall send them strong delusions to believe lies; for what cause? why, because they re∣ceived not the love of the truth. Christians, look to your standing; there is much of this judicial blast abroad; the generality of Professors have contented them∣selves wth, and rejoyced in the Light of the Truth, and in the No∣tion of the Truth, and in the expressions of the Truth, but they have lost their love to the truth. Parts without grace hath been the precipice of this evil and adulterous generation: the foolish Virgins of this age have got Oyle only in their Lamps, but none in their Vessels, and so perish. 2 Pet. 3.17.You therefore Beloved seeing ye know these things before, beware lest you also being led away with the error of the wicked fall from your own steadfastness. Let it be your care to receive the truth in the power of the truth, in the impressions of the truth upon your hearts, in the love of the truth: Love the truth, even when the truth seems not to love you; when it makes against your Carnal interests; when it calls for your right eye, and your right hand: The right eye of your sin∣full pleasure; the right hand of your dishonest gain: when the truth comes to take away all your false Principles, and to take away all your false evidences; not to leave you worth a Duty, or a Church-priviledge, not to leave you so much as a Creed, or a Pater-noster, or a good meaning: but casts you out of all, which self, and flesh hath counted your gain in point of salvation,Ezech. 16.5. (Phil. 3.7.) to the loathing and abhorring of your persons, &c. Yet even then I say, Receive the truth in the love of it: God intends you more good in it then you are aware of: and therefore say with young Samuel,Ure sea, corri∣pe, ut aeernum parcas, Bern. Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth; and with Bernard, do Lord, wound me, scorch me, slay me, spare me not now, that thou mayest spare me for ever.
Thirdly, There is yet another means,Ver. 14. . and that is in the verse next to my Text, relating to the same duty, though under a various expression. That good thing which was committed to thee. KEEP. The good or excellent trust and depositum; was either the Mini∣sterial Office, with the gifts and graces which Timothy received by Ordination for the edifying of the Church; or else The form of sound words here committed to him in my Text: whichsoever, this duty is incucated upon Timothy again and again, that he must keep it, ; preserve it as under Lock and Key; and saith Beza, He keeps his depositum that improveth it so, that the depositor findes no cause why he should take it away. But how shall Timothy, or any other Evangelical Minister or Christian be able so to keep it? it followeth , &c.Occupatio est. by the Holy Ghost; The duty indeed is very difficult, but by calling in the help of the Spirit of God, Believers shall be enabled to do it; and he is not far from every one of them;Rom. 8.26. Col. 1.29. for so it follows by the Holy Ghost WHICH DWELLETH IN ƲS; He is IN them as a Principle of life and power by his vertue and influence helping their infirmities, and working in them mightily: Great is the opposi∣tion that Believers meet withall: and Satan, and this present evill world hath been too hard for many; not Professors only, but Mini∣sters also, men that seemed to be stars of the first magnitude, they have proved to be but falling-stars, meer Comets, that for a time make a great blaze, but quickly extinguish: They went on from us, because they were not of us, 1 Joh. 2.19. But real Saints, true Believers shall hold out; why? because, great∣er is he that is in them, then he that is in the world, 1 Joh. 4.4. — keep, by the HOLY GHOST THAT DWELLETH IN ƲS. Christians, walk in the Spirit, and pray for the Spirit; cry mightily to God for the continual presence and operation of the Holy Ghost; and for your encouragement,Luke 11.13. take along with you that blessed promise of our Saviour. If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible,1 Tim. 1.7. the only wise God, be honor, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen. FINIS.
Books Printed for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Corn-Hill. THE works of that learned and laborious Divine John Weemse, in four Volumes, 4. Mr. Byfield on the Collossions, fol. Mr. Thomas Edwards Gangraena, four Volumes in 4. Ainsworths works, fol. And his communion of Saints, 12. Dr. Staughtons heavenly conversation, 12. Bp. Downam on the Covenant of grace, 12. Robins Essayes, 12. Mr. Dicksons Exposition on Matthew. Mr. Brinsley a learned Treatise of Christs Mediatorship, and the souls implantion, 8. Mr. Brinsley Brazen Serpent, and Christs Membership— Mr. Dicksons Exposition on the whole book of the Psalms, one Volume, 8. second edition. Mr. Watsons works, viz. 1. The Art of Divine Contentment, the fourth edition. 2. The Christians Charter, shewing the priviledges of believers in this life, and the life to come, the fifth edition. Mr. Ashes Sermon, at Mr. Whitakers funeral— Dr. Spurstow on the Promise, second edition. Retorford on the Covenant of grace — Mr. Cottons Exposition on the book of Ecclesiastes and Canticles, second edition. A learned Treatise, proving the Deity of the Holy Ghost, by Mr. Estwick. Mr. Gurnals Christian Armor, third Edition. Mr. Hutcheson on the Gospel according to St. John, in fol. On the twelve small Prophets, second edition. Mr. Gurnals Christians Armour, the second part. Dr. Guile on the Canticles.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE Relating to the chief Heads handled in this TREATISE. A. ADAM able of Creation, to keep the Law. p. 108, 109. The one man by whom sin entred into the world. p. 136. His sin is entailed on all his seed. 137, 138. transmit∣ted by imputation. p. 139, and 140. made ours without any impeachment of Gods justice. p. 141. by generati∣on, not imitation. p. 142, 143. hurt received by him, must quicken the ac∣ceptance of the second Adam. p. 145. his sin will not be our acquittance. p. 148. Advantage great by systems and modules of Religion. p. 16, 17, 18, 19. Adoption, its kinds. p. 436. its name explained. 437. Divine differs from humane Adoption. p. 438. Adoption presupposeth Ʋocation, Rege∣neration, and Justification. p. 438. it entitles to God, Christ, and Heaven. ibid. Adoption, the properties. p. 439. and priviledges of it. p. 440. Adoption is different from Regenerati∣on, yet not divided from it. p. 446. Adoption an effect of faith. p 469. Affections unruly, cashier'd when we come to heaven. p. 650. Angels, their service to the Lord Jesus Christ. p. 323, 324. not confirmed, not reconciled by Jesus Christ as Me∣diator. p. 338, 339. Antinomians refuted. p. 423, 424. Apparel of Saints in heaven. p. 652. 653. Atheisme three sorts. Ʋita. pag. 51, 52. Ʋoto. pag. 51, 52. Judicio. pag. 51, 52. Assent to Gods being and bounty, ground of Addresses to him. p. 30. Assurance an effect of faith. p. 472. B. Bars to communion with God, three; and how removed. p. 272. Barring sinne, imports punishment. p. 346.
Belief of Gods being, the foundation of Religion. p, 30. fountain of obe∣dience. p. 54. Belief of Christ to be the Son of God, is not easie. p. 66. Believing sinner, the subject of Gospel-repentance. p. 489. Believers, their dignity and duty. pag. 433. Believers united to Christ. p. 278. Believers whom. p. 379. Believers persons, graces, and duties, relate to Christ. p. 395, 396. Birth-right despised, is dreadful. p. 448. Blessedness of mans-natural rectitude. p. 111. Blessed estate of the New Covenant. p. 254, 259. Blessed, how said of the Saints. p. 664, 665. Bodies of Saints re-united to souls. p. 657. Bodies of Saints and sinners differ at Resurrection. p. 591, 592. Body of man subject to Gods wrath. p. 184. Body, its very self-same substance shall be raised. p. 591, 592, 593. Its prime endowments at Resurrection. p. 593, 594. Bodily infirmities shaken off in heaven. p. 651. Blood of sin to be shed for the blood of Christ. p. 296. Bowing at the Name of Jesus, what it means. p. 321. by whom to be done. p. 322, 323. C. Cause encourageth to suffer. p. 2, 3. Captain encourageth contest. ibid. Calling effectual. p. 353. what it is, and how wrought. p. 357, 358. Called, who. p. 359. few. p. 360. by what. ib. from what causes. p. 361, 362, 363. by what means. p. 365. to what end. p. 366. when. p. 367. Call is holy. ib. heavenly. p. 368. without noise. p. 370. immutable. p. 371. Care accompanieth true r pentance. 541. Case of man fallen, helpless by nature 207. Catechismes commended. 21. Children of God by Regeneration and Adoption. 435. Children of God, their carriage dire∣cted. 448, 449, 450. Christ is Lord, how. 330, 331. a good Captaine. 2, 3. Christ is truly God. 266, 267. and truly man. 268. God and man. 269. Christ and promises, not God the imme∣diate object of saving faith. 460. Christians changes, three. 557. Christian Religion reasonable. 483. Come ye blessed, what kinde of speech. 666, 667. Command to Adam and Covenant of works. 122. Complaints against God, charmed. 267. Compassion to brethren, sheweth a sense of our own natural weakness. 215. Communion an evidence of union with Christ. 385.
Conditions in order to mans Re∣demption between God the Father, and God the Son. p. 222, 223. Conquest of enemies, an effect of Faith. 470. Conscience proveth that there is a God. 43, 44. Conscience engendreth fear. 46, 47. Consent of Nations universal and perpetual, proves that there is a God. 48. Confession of sin a part of Repen∣tance. 509, 510. How to be made. 511, 512, 513, 514. Conviction, wherein it consists, and how it acts. 493, 494. Contrition, wherein it consists. 496, 497. Conversion, its parts. 502. Crown of Saints in heaven, what. 654. Its threefold wreath. 655, 656. Covenant what it means. 123, 124, 235. Covenants in Scripture. 235. Covenant Natural, what it is. 236. Legal, what it is. 237, 238. Evangelical, what it is. 239. Covenant, an act of condescenti∣on in God. 130. Imports Gods promise, and mans duty. 239. Gods dealing with Adam in Para∣dise, how and why called a Co∣venant. 125. Covenant of Works wherein it consists. p. 126, 127. How and why given by Moses. 128, 129. Israel was not under it; ibid. Men out of Christ, yet under it. 130. Covenant of Redemption what it is, and between whom. 216, 217, 218, 219. It is to be particularly improved by Believers. 230, 231, 232. It confirms the Covenant of Grace, its blessings. 228, 229. Covenant what. 233. Gospel Covenant the best of Co∣venants. 235, 239. Covenant of Works and Grace, are to be differenced by men. 131. Covenant of Redemption different from Covenant of Grace. 218. Creation the work of God. 31. Man created holy and mutable. 105. Creatures execute Gods wrath on man. 189. Themselves liable to Gods wrath. 190. Creeds, Apostles, Athanasii, Ni∣cene, &c. justified. 20. Curse of the Law due to man by nature. 181. Cure of faln man, Omnipotent. 208. D Death of Christ its kinde, manner
and grounds. p. 283. The Reasons thereof. 290, 291, 292. Death of Christ a sacrifice, and on∣ly so possible. 342. Deserving cause of Christ his death. 345. Death of Christ was in our place and stead. 347. Diligence in duty and readinesse to dye for Christ, but a reasonable recompence for his death for us. 297, 299. Christ dyed willingly, obediently and humbly. 287, 288, 289. Death of Christ a pregnant Argu∣ment to Repentance. 528, 529, 530. Death destroyed by the death of Christ. 303. Desire accompanieth Repentance. 544. Dependence on God the duty of such as believe God is. 60, 61. Divel an enemy to Faith. 481. Divels subject to Jesus Christ. 326, 327. Divel limited by Christ. 328. Doctrine of Trinity to be prized. 82. Dominion of Saints. 442. E Elect dead in sin before called, and poor in the world. p. 359. Entrance of sin into the world, what and how. 136. Enemies of man foiled by the death of Christ. 301. Entertainment of Christ. 434. Epistle to the Romans, a Module of Religion. 8. to the Hebrews. 9. to Galathians. ibid. Ephesians. 10. Timothy and Titus. ibid. Errors are obviated by a Module of Religion. 12, 14. Errors about Repentance. 55. Error in fundamentals inconsistent with Faith. 480. Morning Exercise when it begun, and how profitable it hath been, 23, 24. Duties towards it. 25. Extremity of hell torments by their inflammation, fire, and prepara∣tion, and association with Divels. 628, 629, 630, 631. Eternity the property of hell tor∣ments. 632, 633. Evidences of eternal life laid down in a Module. 15. Exaltation of Christ opposed to his Humiliation. 306, 307. Its pri∣ority to his humiliation, as a merit or meer antecedent, dis∣cussed, 308 309. it was exceed∣ing high. 311. Exaltation of Christ by three steps 312, 313, 314.
F Faith commended. p. 455, 456. Faith distinguished into its kinds. 456, 457. Faith defined. 449. By its genus and subject. 460. causes 461, 462, 463, 464, 465, 466, 467. Effects. 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474. properties. 475, 476, 477, 478. and opposites. 479. 480, 481. Faith if saving, receiveth whole Christ on judgement and choice. 475. Faith groweth and persevereth, and purifieth. 477, 478, 479. Faith and salvation how connexed. 473, 474. Faith strengthned by the Covenant of Redemption. 228. Faith how it justifieth. 421. Faith greatly opposed. 480. Faith goeth before Repentance in order of nature as its cause. 490. Faith in its essential acts without its reflexions, is the cause of Re∣pentance. 491. Faith of Scriptures authorities to be strengthened. 103, 104. False Repentance seven kinds; viz. Popish. 515. Pagan. 516. Pro∣fane. ibid. Legal. 517. Slaves. ibid. Sullen. p. 518. Quakers Re∣pentance. ibid. 519. Fall of man was from his own mu∣table, self-determining will. 111. Federal transaction did pass be∣tween God the Father and Son, and that from all eternity. 219, 226. Fear of God, the duty of such who believe God is. 58, 59. Fear accompanieth true Repentance. 542. Filiation to God is by Adoption and Regeneration. 447. Filial priviledges Believers com∣forts. 451, 452, 453. Flesh an enemy to Faith. 480. Flesh crucified by union with Christ. 391, 392. Forme of sound words to be held fast. 670. By Magistrates how. 674, 675, 676, 677. By Mini∣sters how. 678, 679. By the People how. 680, 681. Freedome of God, Father and Son in transacting the Covenant for mans Redemption. 224. Free-grace the ground of Adoption and Regeneration. 477. Fruitfulnesse a note of union with Christ. 392, 393.
G God is. p. 30, 31. Gods being is evident in nature. 31. & 48. and Scripture. 48, 49. Gods being consistent with the ad∣versity of the just, and prosperi∣ty of the wicked, and evidenced by them. 45, 50, 51. God is the only efficient of Faith. 461, 462. God could not be the original of sin. 111. Gods glory the ground of Adopti∣on and Regeneration. 447. God as Judge justifieth, how and when. 122. God the object of beatifical visi∣on. 654, 655. Gospel a good cause. 3. Gospel-means to work Faith. 465. and call loudly to Repentance. 525. Gospel how it justifieth. 421. Gospel-Covenant better than the Legal. 245, 246, 247, 248. Gosepl-Manner of propounding Re∣pentance, is by way of duty and priviledge. 426 Gospel-Arguments perswading Re∣pentance, most pregnant and mo∣ving. 527, 528. Gospel-Helps to Repentance, most powerful and operative. p. 533. Grace of God magnified by mans fall. 213, 214. First cause im∣pulsive of justification. 420. Graces are the fruits of the Spirit. 390. Grudge not the prosperity of the wicked. 645. H Of Hell. 621. the wicked turned into it. 623. its name explained. ibid. nature described. 624. its pain. ibid. The Properties of its punishment: Extremity. 628, 629. Eternity. 628, 629. Hell discerned by the Heathen. 635. Hell pro∣ved by Equity. 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641. Merit. 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641. No Bar or hinderance. 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641. Heresie an hindrance to Faith. 480. Heresies and Errors disbanded when we come to heaven. 649. Hearing must be fixt and con∣stant. 22. So it will help Re∣pentance.
p. 545. Heart the subject of Faith. 459. and seat of Holinesse. 558. Heaven. 647. it is a Kidgdome, how. 649. Hindrances to the understanding Scripture, what they are, and how removed. 100, 101. Holding fast what it meaneth. 5. Holinesse. 554. a state, trade, ha∣bit and disposition. 555. Holinesse defined. 556. Holinesse the designe of God in all his acts. 559, 560. Holinesse constitutes a Christian or Saint. 561, 562. Holinesse spreads over the whole man. 558. Holinesse changeth a man. 557. Holinesse necessary unto communi∣on with God. 563. Holinesse its properties. 567. Com∣panions, peace, righteousnesse, un∣blameablenesse. 268. its opposites, filthinesse of flesh, of spirit, over∣reaching and hypocrisie. 569, 570. Holinesse of the Publisher proveth the Scripture to be the Word of God. 94. And so doth the holy matter pressed in it. 91, 92. and its holy Arguments. 93. Humility the effect of sensible im∣potency. p. 214. Humiliation of Christ. 278. three steps of it. 280, 281. the man∣ner of it. 287. Humanity of Christ, a miracle of humiliation. 280. Humility must go before honour. 333. I Ignorance inconsistent to Faith. 479. dangerous. 483. Impotency of man since the fall very great. 202, 203. Impossible to recover of himself. 204. Impotent in respect of the Law. 205. Of the Gospel. 206. 207. Impotency determined in Scripture. ibid. Impotency no bar to the demand of duty, direction of means, or infliction of punishment. 210, 211, 212, 213. Impotency is to be seen and known. 214. Infants distempers and death, an effect and evidence of original sin. 143. So is their aptitude to evil, and backwardness to good. 144.
Inheritance of Saints hath no cor∣ruption, succession or division. p. 441. Inheritance, why heaven so called. 661. Inherited by Adoption. 662, 663. Donation. 662, 663. Redemption. 662, 663. Inspiration what it imports. 87. Inventions, and many inventions what they signifie. 106. Indignation accompanieth Repen∣tance. 442. Judgements of God prevented. 521, 522. and removed by Repentance. 523, 524. Last Judgement provokes holiness. 563. and perswades to Repentance. 531, 532, 533, Judge, whom. 608. Manner of his coming. 610. Last Judgement, its day. 605. It is particular and general. 606. why it must be, and when. 607. its method and order. 609. Justice of God satisfied by the death of Christ. 301. Justification, its nature opened. 402, &c. Differeth from Sanctification. ib. Justified implies guilt, plea and acquittance. p. 403. Justified persons are acquitted on their plea. 419. Justification its causes. Gods free grace. 421, 422. Christs satisfaction. 421, 422. The Gospel. 421, 422. Faith. 421, 422. God Law-giver. 421, 422. God Judge. 421, 422. Works. 421, 422. Spirit. 421, 422. Justification by what plea procu∣red. 406. Justification not from Eternity. 423. Justification procured by Christs death. 341. is evident by the Possibility. 342, 343, 344. Necessity. 342, 343, 344. Nature. 342, 343, 344. Cause. 342, 343, 344. Vicegerency. 342, 343, 344. Peculiarity to this end. 342, 343, 344. Justification doth manifest the wis∣dome, holinesse and mercy of God. 428. Justification the priviledge of the Gospel-Covenant. 140.
Justification the ground of com∣fort. p. 429. to be sought by sin∣ners. 430. prized by Saints. 432. K Kingly Office of Christ, what it is, and how executed. 255, 256. Kingly Office the Saints priviledge by Adoption. 441. L Law Regulans. 110. Law Regulata. 110. Law of God the rule of rectitude. ib. Law given Adam in Creation, was partly natural, partly positive. 108. Law requireth duty, exacts penal∣ty, terrifieth and stupifieth. 204, 205. Law general and special obeyed by Jesus Christ. 223, 224. Law fulfilled in Christ his death. 301. Law given in Paradise was not executed or abrogated, but released and dispensed with. p. 413, 414, 415. Light burning and shining. 1. Likenesse of sinful flesh what it means, and how Christ was found in it. 281, 282. Likenesse to God in dignity, offices and dominion, the priviledge of Adoption. 441. Love of God, Father and Son, ma∣nifest in the Covenant of Redem∣ption. 227. Love of Christ in his death. 293. and union with Sinners. 386. Love to God the evidence of Faith, concerning his being. 55, 56, 59. Losse of all good, the paine of Hell Natural. 625, 626. Spiritual. 625, 626. Eternal. 625, 626. M Mans composure of body, and pow∣ers of soul, prove that there is a God. 41. Man comprehends the whole species of such a creature. 106. Man made mutable, though holy, and why. 113. Man is depraved,  sinful. 111.
Mans misery by sin. 173, 174, 175, p. 176. Man, not Angels, subjects of Faith. 455. Mediator needful. 263, 264, 265. Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, who. 241, 261. Mediator one, named man, and why; named Christ Jesus, and why. ib. Mediator is Christ, and none but Christ. 265, 266, &c. Mediator comfortable in all condi∣tions, giving man confidence of accesse to God. 254, 255. Misery inevitable to such as despise the Mediator. ib. Merit of Christ the ground of A∣doption and Regeneration. 447. Method in Sermons necessary and profitable. 22. Means of Repentance. 546. Ministry needful unto Faith. 483. Ministers must be burning and shi∣ning lights. 1, 2. Ministers must suffer affliction. ib. Mixture of grace and sin is in the best men. 167. Mutability the meer cause of mans sin. 112. Mutability of mans created estate was just and necessary. 113. Mutability attended mans Happi∣nesse as well as Holinesse. p. 114. Mutability and its sequel must lead us to God for confirmation. 119. N Name of Christ part of his Ex∣altation. 315, what it is. 316. how it is above every Name. 317, 318, 319, 320. how Christs Name was given by God. 320, 321. Nature by three Arguments proveth that there is a God. 30, 31. Natural Agents by their operation, proveth a God. 42. Natural conscience proveth a God. 43. Nature stained with Adams sin. 151. Nature without Divine revelation discovereth not a Trinity, nor yet opposeth it when revealed. 77, 78, 79, 80, 81. Nature of God well studied, a special help to repentance. 547. New Covenant better than the old. 243. Nobility no cause of boasting. 145. Notes of repentance. 539, 540.
O Object External could not necessi∣tate man to sin. p. 112. Object of New, better than of the Old Covenant. 251. Obedi∣ence in Subjection to Commands. Submission to Providence. The duty of such who believe God is. 63, 64. Offence at preaching, Gods anger a∣gainst sin is groundless. 192, 193. Offices of Christ fit him to be the only Mediator. 271, 272. Offices of Christ communicated to the Saints. 441. Old Covenant abrogated. 252. Opposition of Christ consistent with subjection to Christ, how. 327, 328. Sin Originale originans, discussed. 135, &c. Originale originatum, discussed. 150, 151, &c. Original sin is a defection. 112. Original, how said of mans pravity. 155, 156. Original sin is hard to be understood. 134. Original sin confirmed by counsel. 144. Acknowledged by Heathens. ib. Original sin is called man, and old man, in what sense. p. 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162. a body, and a body of sin. 162, 163, 164. Original sin hath polluted mans na∣ture. 151, 152, 153. Original sin is to be subdued. 170. Original sin to be conf ssed and be∣wailed. 165. Original sin imbitters all worldly comforts. 171. Ordinances argue original sin in mans nature. 153. Ordinances means of union with Christ. 383. P Pain in Christ his death. 285, 286. Pardon of sin freely given, how. 425, 426. Parents beget their children in their own image. 151. Parents good, yet children by nature evil. 152. Parents care for posterity, quickned by the miscarriage of the first Pa∣rent of us all. 147. Parents childrens looking glasses, by which they dresse their lives. ib. Penitent must be humbled, and why. 498, 499, 450. Peace a duty and blessing to be pur∣sued. 556. Peace an effect of Faith. 47.
Pelagius the first opposer of origi∣nal sin. p. 144. Person in the Godhead what it is 69. Persons in the Godhead three. 70. Plurality of persons in the Godhead proved. 71, 72, 73. Persons in the Godhead distinguish∣ed, not divided. 75. their order declared. 76. Person, promises, properties and pro∣vidences of Christ, all belong to believers. 393, 394. Persecution of Saints a crimson sin. 386. Perseverance of Saints certain. 387. Pleading at Gods bar necessary to ju∣stification. 404. Plea of not guilty can never procure justification at Gods bar. 405. Popish Repentance false. 515. Pravity and inbred corruption, what it is. 155. the parts of it. 156. Pravity and a naughty nature is in every man. 150. Pravity of the nature of man evi∣denced by Scripture. 151, 152, 153. Salvation of Christ. 151, 152, 153. Sacraments. 151, 152, 153. Sad effects. 151, 152, 153. Prayer an help to repentance. 552. Prayer answered, an effect of Faith. 469. Prayer, its extent and encourage∣ment. p. 262. Preparations of heaven, how from the foundation of the world. 660, 661. Preparation to last Judgement cha∣racterised. 617, 618. Priestly office of Christ, and its parts. 272, 273. Price of the soul of Christ his death. 298. Price paid for man, was not idem, but tantundem. 425. Principle and cause two distinct things. 69. Principles good and bad, two distinct, blasphemous to assert. 112. Promises were made to Christ on the account of his satisfaction for mans sin. 209, 300. Promises of Justification. Sanctification. Resurrection. Eternal life. The Promises of the better Cove∣nant. 240, 241. Promises of temporal mercy, better under the New, than under the Old Covenant. 248. Protestant doctrine of the imputation of Christs righteousness defended. 387.
Profane repentance what it is. p. 516. Prosperity of profane, no plea a∣gainst Deity. 50, 51. Q Quakers repentance, vile, false and wicked. 518, 519. R Reason and sensation evince the Di∣vine authority of the Scriptures. 90. Revelation from God admitted by all, and reason it should. 88, 89. Revelation not to be received, untill cleared to be of God. ibid. Rectitude is conformity to a Rule. 107. Rectitude of Adam by Creation, was of the whole man, understanding, will and sensitive appetite. 109. Rectitude natural, and not natural to man, how. 111. Regeneration explained. 442. its Synonimas. 443. it is defined. ib. Regeneration compared with natu∣ral generation. 443, 444. they agree in cause, subject and manner of production. ib. & 445. disa∣gree in properties. 446. Religion making known Christs sa∣tisfaction most excellent. 350. Relations of men subject to Gods wrath. p. 187. Relation to God, reason of comfort and duty. 436. Repentance not to be repented, ex∣plained 485. In its Nature. 487. Necessity. 520. Notes. 539. Next way to it. 546. Repentance defined. 487. Repentance is a recession from sin, and return to God. 502, 503, 504, 505. Return to God, the second part of Conversion. 506, 507, 508. Repentance, seven false kinds. 515, 516, 517, 518. Repentance contemned, when. 334, 335, 336. Repentance neglected, when, and with what issue. 537, 538. Resurrection possible and credible. 579, 582, 583, 584, 585. what it means. ib. who to be raised. 480. to be believed. 581. rea∣sons of it. 586, 587, 588, 589. Resurrection the effect of the New Covenant, and union with Christ. 388. Resurrection after what manner, and with what difference. 591. how
effected. p. 593. it is to be belie∣ved. 595. a ground of comfort. ib. 596, 597, 598, 599. a ground of terror. 560. how made happy to our selves. 603, 604. Revenge accompanieth repentance. 545. S Sacraments in the Old Testament were various and many. 122. Tree of life a Sacrament in Para∣dise. ibid. Sacraments prove corruption of na∣ture. 153. Saints are good company. 3. Salvation by Christ, an Argument of original pravity. 153. Salvation the end of Faith. 473. Salvation difficult. 482. Sanctification Covenant priviledge. 14. Satisfaction of Christ explained. 337, 339, 340, 341. its Matter. 408 Form. 412. Terms. 417. Satisfaction not made by man him∣self. 407. but by Christ. 408, 409, 410. and how done. 402. Satisfaction of Christ the only plea to procure justification at Gods bar. ib. Scripture the Word explained. 86. Scripture proves a God. 48. Scripture similitudes shew the union between Christ and Believers. 384. Scripture only discovers mans natu∣ral pravity. 151. Sea its course and confinement, pro∣ved a God. 35, 36. Secret sins discovered by natural conscience. 44. Sense of Scriptures power on the soul, prove them Divine. 98. Sense of sin, and sorrow for it, are precursive parts of true Repen∣tance. 492. Sense of a short life helps to Repen∣tance. 349. Self sinful to be studied. 168. Self examination an help to Repen∣tance. 548. Severity of Gods justice. 295. Sense its pain in hell. 626. Constitu∣ted by Real presence of all evil. Impression of justice. Personal Feeling. 627, 628. Sentence of last day. 614. Sight of things invisible, an effect of Faith. 471. Sin to be feared, and fled from. 643, 644. Sin a defect, nothing positive. 112,
113. it is most unreasonable. p. 114. subjects man to an impotency of saving himself. 115. justifieth God in punishing man. 116, 117. should rather be gotten out, than in∣quired how it came into the world. 113. Sins evil seen in Christ his death. 294. Sin better discovered by the New, than Old Covenant. 250. Sin abolished by Christ his death. 302, 303. Sin is imputed inherent, extensive, diffusive. 165. Sin may exist and prevaile in a true Saint. 505. Sin mortified by the Spirit. 389. Sinner elect, and called the subjects of Faith. 460. Shame was in Christs death. 206. Sensible sinner, subject of true re∣pentance. 489. Society in heaven, what. 658 659. Sons of God, partakers of the whole essence of the Father, is the same numerical nature. 66. 67. Sonship to God is by Creation. 435. Generation. 435. Marriage. 435. Adoption. 435. Sonship by Adoption Honourable. 437, 440. Free. 437, 440. Permanent. 437, 440. Sonship to God, marks of it. p. 453, 454. Sorrow and humility usher faith. 476. Soul of Christ suffered. 410. Souls in heaven subject to Jesus Christ. 324, 325. Spirit of God in man a signe of u∣nion with Christ. 389. Spirit of God justifieth, how. 422. Spirits evil shall be chained, when Saints go to heaven. 652. Speed, facilitates repentance. 452. Sting of conscience a note of Dei∣ty. 45. Sting in Christ his death. 286, 287. Study of Scriptures a duty. 99, 100. Suns scituation and motion proveth a God. 33, 34. Sullen repentance what. 518. Systems of Religion profitable for Ministers and people. 5. they in∣struct in the faith; antidote er∣ror. 7, 12. Adorn the truth. 16. help the understanding. 17. the memory. 18. affections. 19. such are found in Scripture. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. to be studied by young Divines. 21.
T Temptation of Satan did not ne∣cessitate man to sin. p. 112. Things in heaven subject to Christ, what. 323, 324. Things on earth subject to Christ, what they are. 325. Things under the earth. 326. Every Tongue, what it means. 329. Terms of Covenant between God the Father and his Son. 225. Torments of Hell, Exquisite, Intolerable; Easelesse, Remediless; Universal and various. 629, 630 631. Tryal of last day shall be 1. Uni∣versal. 2. Formal. 3. Imparti∣al. 4. Exact. 5. Perspicuous. 6. Supreme. 610, 611, 612. its consequence. 613. Trinity proved by Old Testament text. 72. New Testament. 74, 75. Turning from all sin to God, is the formality of true repentance. 50. U Union of two natures in Christ, with∣out confusion or transmutation. 270. Union of believers and Christ ne∣cessary. p. 377. what kind it is not. 379. what kind it is. 381, 382. its causes. 383. grounds. 385. its marks. 389, 390, 391, 392. it is to be sought by sinners, and improved by Saints. 396, 397, 398, 399, 400. Unbelievers miserable. 48. not Gods sons. 447. Vocation, its twofold estate. 437. Vocation a Resurrection, a new Creation. 361. W Will of God signified in a rule of rectitude. 107. Witness from heaven differs in six particulars from witnesse on earth. 67, 68. we have both to prove Christ the Son of God. 66. Word of God declareth his wrath. 181, 182, 183. World visible, its being and parts. 31, 32. World an enemy to faith. 481. to be slighted by aints. 549. Works, their use in point of Cove∣nant. 126, 127. how they justifie. 422. Wrath of God, what, and how aggra∣vated. 177, 178, 179, 180. falleth on man here. 184. fully at the day of judgement. ibid.
sheweth his justice and wisdome. p. 193, 194, 195, 196. it is to be avoided. 197, 198. Y Yoak of the Law borne by Jesus Christ. 280, 281. Z Zeal Negative. p. 2. Affirmative. p. 2. Zeal accompanieth true Repentance. 544. FINIS.
