G74B R226163 99899614 154156
'ΑΣΤΡΟΛΟΓΟΝΑΥ'ΤΗΣ: OR, THE Astrological Seaman: DIRECTING Merchants, Mariners, &c. Adventuring to SEA, How (by God's Blessing) to Escape many Dan∣gers which commonly happen IN THE OCEAN. Unto which (by way of Appendix) is Added, A DIARY of the WEATHER For XXI. Years, very Exactly Observed in LONDON: With Sundry Observations made thereon. By JOHN GADBURY, Student in Physick and Astrology. Etiam nescire hominem tempus suum. Eccl. Cap. 9. Flat and Flexible Truths are beat out by every Hammer: But Vul∣can and his whole Forge Sweat, to work out Achilles his Ar∣mour. Dr. Brown's Urn Burial. LONDON: Printed by Matthew Street, MDCXCVII.
To the Right Honourable Sir ROBERT HOWARD, KNIGHT and BARONET; One of the LORDS of His Ma∣jesty's most Honourable Privy Council, and AUDITOR-GENERAL of His Ma∣jesty's EXCHEQUER: Health, Happiness, and Length of Days be ever wished. Right Honourable, and Thrice Learned Sir; IT is now more than XXVII. Solar Revolutions since I first enjoy'd the Felicity of being known to Your Honour. Which, to me, was the Great∣est of Mundane Favours I ever received: because the Earliest, and of Longest Dura∣tion.
And, I should be very Ungrateful, not only to Your Honour, but also to the God of Mercies, did I not upon all laudable Occasions acknowledge it.— For, I must freely profess to owe, not only my Liberty, but (in a great measure) even my Life to Your Interest and Goodness. And, I expected long before this, to have met a better Opportunity to have testify'd my Gratitude for all Your signal Favours, or else had not deferr'd my Duty herein so long. Be pleased therefore, to accept of this my Humble Acknowledgment, until my Better Stars shall enable me to present You with a more Ample and Agreeable Evidence of my Thankfulness. To be Grateful, was ever an Inherent Principle in me: And, I shall scarce leave the VVorld with a contented Mind, un∣less I live to make a more MARBLE Declaration of Your many Noble and Seasonable Obligations, viz. Such an One, as may continue (were it possible) as long as Time it self; To tell Future
Ages, That there liv'd in this Polite, yet Profligate, and Plotting Age, such an Ho∣norable and Compassionate Nohleman and Patriot, as the Thrice Excellent Sir RO∣BERTHOWARD: A Person of so Great and Exemplary Charity and Good∣ness, who was always Ready and For∣ward to Protect the Innocent from the Greatest of Dangers: Nay, even from Death it self. And, now (Noble Sir) give me leave to Affirm, That I have not Prefixed Your Great Name to this Small Book with any other Design, than Gratitude, and to submit my Self and Labours to Your most Learned Judgment and Censure. Of the Meteorological Part, I, almost, promise my self Your Just and Candid Ap∣probation. That, being matter of Fact, and, with all imaginable Care observed in London, for XXI years together. And, if in the Astrological, I hap to be too great a Trespasser, I shall rely on Your Noble and
Generous Nature for an Amnestia. The Deities would even cease to be such, were there not reiterated Human Frailties for them to remit. And, tho' I know You have, not only Privately, but Publickly Profess'd—That You have not the same Opinion of Astrology, as of other Parts of the Ma∣thematicks. Yet, since You have con∣stantly vouchsaf'd Your Favour and Pro∣tection to me, (a Poor Astrologer) I cannot (methinks) wholly Despair of Your Countenancing of me, even in That also. The Substantial Part of which being, not Common Astrology, but the Result of some of my many Years Ob∣servations and Experience. And, were this Antient Art (now, too frequently Prosti∣tuted to Mean and Ignoble Ends) by just Experiments Rectified (as the Reverend Childrey affirm'd) it might most easily be Justified. And, here I will Humbly presume to acknowledge to Your Honour and the World together,— That after more than Forty Years Study thereof, I see many things therein, and some of them own'd
as Principles) which I most earnestly wish were well Corrected, for the Honour of God, and of all his Coelestial Host. But, lest my Prolixity should render me a Criminal, under pretence of owning Favours, I forbear all farther Discourse of these matters— My Conclusive Humble Vote shall be— That the God of Mercies, and all his Holy Angels, may ever Protect and Defend both Your Honours Person and Con∣cerns, together with all Your Honourable Rela∣tions, as Constantly and Readily, as You have Defended Me: And, (as I am credibly in∣form'd) many Hundreds more, under their greatest Straits and Troubles. So ever wisheth, and prayeth, (Most Honourable Sir!) Your ever Obliged, and most Grateful Servant and Votary, JO. GADBURY.
This may be Printed. Septemb. 9th. 1689. Rob. Midgley. Two Escapes, not mentioned in the Errata, the Skil∣ful Reader is desired to Correct, viz. Epistle p. 1. read , and p. 2. of the Book, r. .
TO THE READER Of the Ensuing DISCOURSE. THE worthy Galen, in his Book of Forma∣tion, &c. asketh, (or biddeth rather) all the Philosophers, That if they have found any Truth, they should Communicate it; for nothing was yet known that could satisfie a Learning Soul. Truth in Science is easier talked of, than taken. Many enquire after Truth, but use not the proper means to attain it: like St. James's Petitioners, That ask and re∣ceive not, because they ask amiss. And many there are that pretend to pursue it too, that are only Objects of its Disdain, unfit for the Employment, or for so ravishing and delightful acquaintance. Verity is a Lady of Caelestial Lineage, and therefore too Coy for Common or Ordinary Courtship. St. Basil surely was in the right, when he so Elegantly wrote, . Truth is a Queen that is hard to be taken by hunting, she must be obtained by a Curious and Secret search on every side. I have been (I bless God for such opportunity) not only a Week, Month, or Year, but more than Six Legal Ages, in pursuit of Truth: and can with a just confidence affirm,
that I have discovered something, that I can joyfully cry , unto. Nay, I can assure you, that if an Ingenious Man doth mix his Observations with his Theories, he may arrive at something in Science beyond Midas his Ears. And I hope, the following Discourse will plainly evince the same to the World. If my Hypothesis should chance to be infirm in anything, (and I have a great hopes to the contrary) my Examples may make my Reader amends for his Pains and Charge. They being all exactly true, as they are set down; not one of them taken barely upon trust from any Man, but examined and proved before they were admitted a place in my Book. And, in this, I find my self warranted by the Exquisitie Pen of that great Ornament of Learning, the Honourable Mr. Boyle, in his Essays, p. 10. When a Writer (saith he) acquaints me only with his Thoughts or Conjectures, without enriching his Discourse with any Real Experi∣ment, or Observation, if he be mistaken in his Ratioci∣nation, I am in some danger of Erring with him, and at last, am like to loose my time, without receiving any valuable Compensation for so great a loss. But if a Writer endeavours, by delivering New and Real Obser∣vations or Experiments, to credit his Opinions, the case is much otherwise. For let his Opinions be never so false, (his Experiments being true) I am not obliged to believe the former, and am left at my liberty to benefit my self by the latter. And though he have Errone∣ously superstructed upon his Experiments, yet the Foun∣dation being Solid, a more wary Builder may be very much further'd by it, in the Erection of a more Judici∣ous and Consistent Fabrick. Since the Vertuosi of this Mercurial Age seem to design, chiefly the Promotion of Experimental Philosophy, (the only way indeed, to prevent the Learned Author of Rel. Medici, his being out-talked by a Prating Marriner.) Why should not Experiments in Astrology be, at least a little looked on, if not Patronized by them? If there be a Truth
in the Art, it cannot be unworthy, as well the Countenance as the Acquaintance of the best Learned. 'Tis Astrolo∣gies greatest unhappiness that it wanteth a Cardan, Bellan∣tius, Heydon, Rantzovius or Goclenius, &c. in our Age to defend it. My inclinations aim at a certainty in Science: and I can truly say, that I have found more in Astrology, than in all others put together. But such is my ill Fortune (though perhaps better than I am aware of) that I want Parts to Demonstrate that to be certain and true to others, which by assiduous Experience I am my self Con∣vinced of: and therefore am doubtful whether my after Discourse (although I know it be truely done) be well perfor∣med, and Convictive to my Readers Reason, as well as to my own. My Education hath been below my Birth, and both be∣neath my Mind. I can, and do design in my Studies, as much, and as great Honour to the Stars, (as they are the Instru∣ments of my Creator, by whom he Governs this Infe∣riour VVorld) as they themselves enjoy of Lustre and Brightness. And when I cannot so clearly satisfie the VVorld, as my self in these matters, I am troubled that my Mercury is so much, or not more Combust. Where Astrology parts hands with Verity, there I do part with Astrology. And it is for the Truths sake that I have ever appear'd so publickly in defence of the Syderal Sci∣ence. I desire no longer to plead for Astrology, than the Verity thereof will indempnifie me. 'Tis matter of Fact I here defend. And such Fact too, that is not inhi∣bited by the Catholick Church. What that forbids, I readily renounce. What that Indulges, I should cease to be a Christian if I did not Embrace. God hath made me, non Brutum, sed Hominem, (as Morine says of himself) not a Senual, but a Reasonable Creature; and hath en∣dued me with a Soul that disdains to Court any Science out of any other design, than the discovery of Truth. VVe know Astrology, (an Art in it self, Harmless, Useful, Pious, as Mr. Carpenter, Dr. Gell, and others have pro∣ved,
in their Sermons to the Society of Astrologers) hath ever been impugned by some, and yet by the generality of the Learned allowed of and defended. Few deny the Influences of the Stars, but many (with the Excellent Author, of Pseud. Epidem.) Suspect the due Applications of them. That all Natural Beings are invigorated, and impaired by Stellary Influx, the best Divines, Philosophers, and Physicians have affirmed. But that those Influences should reach to things Artificial, as Ships, &c. (the Subject of this present Tract) that cannot sink into the Reason of many to apprehend. The Author of Cometomantia (supposed to be Dr. H. More) is down-right angry with Astrologers for presuming to Ascert, The Stars shed their Beams upon Buildings, or upon Hard Stone, as well as upon Soft Flesh. His Objections are Answer'd in my Cardines Coeli; and so they were also by Vitruvius and others, long before they were made, or the Author of them born. Nay, the Learned Gaffarell, in his unheard of Curiosities, Cap. 6. affirms the Influences of the Stars upon Things Artificial, so certain and true, that neither St. Thomas Aquinas, (who, he says left nothing un∣examin'd in the Question) nor Albertius Magnus, could possibly deny it. And every one but meanly Vers'd in Astrology, well knows, that the Argument is greatly supported by Gauricus, Junctinus, Garcaeus, Cardanus, Morinus, &c. But, what can be said after the Angelical Doctor? An Author so Eminent, Happy, and True, in all his Ratiocina∣tions, that all Christian Divines, Philosophers, &c. most readily Embrace and Follow. I say, when the Truth of the Question is by so great Authority Evinced, for me to proceed further, were but to light a Candle to the Sun.— I doubt not but I shall meet, not only Friendly, but Cen∣forious Readers. The Ingenious will, as guided by the Laws of Civility, cast a Charitable Covering over my Imperfe∣ctions, and conclude my Book to be the work of a Man. The Envious will pick Quarrels where none are to be found: and all Men that Write, must ever be subject to the Ma∣lignancy of his Whip-cord.
'Tis far more easie (as the former Learned Author, in his Epistle to his Sceptical Chymist observes) To frame Objections against any proposed Hypothesis, than to pro∣pose any Hypothesis not liable to Objections. And he that can write a Book to please the Gust of all Readers, must have, not only a Wit, but Fate, as Monstrous, as that Shoe-maker Skill and Cunning, who could make a Shoe to fit every Mans foot. But I write not (as I said) to Court Applause, but to ad∣vance Truth. And therefore it is, that I have chosen at this time, to present, not a Great Book unto the Reader; Nor dare I account it a good one, until it have obtain'd the general Suffrage, and happily passed the Fire-Ordeal of Calumny and Contempt. And yet, methinks, having been so free in my Method, and so just in my Examples, I can∣not reasonably despair of the Ingenious Artists acceptance. Howbeit, I will not be either so Arrogant or Ambitious, as to Opinion I have so much as merited his thanks. Time may possible set me up such a Glass, that I may thereby discover many things in this Essay, for Alchimy, which at the pre∣sent I esteem right Sterling Silver. I will not therefore (I say) be too Fond of this Brat of my Brains, lest as it grows up into an acquaintance with the World, it may (instead of attaining Vigour, and a delightful lovely shape, &c.) grow Ricketty, or into an Exanthemata, Epilepsy, or Palsy. A Dropsy I do not dread, for it is design'd to grow no bigger; it hath taken Knot-grass and Dasy-roots already, even in its Swadling-Cloaths. But, passing these fears, I can assure you, no Disease Hereditary attends it. If it chance to be Maimed, or Mutilated, Envy alone must do it. The Luminaries were both Free at its Birth, and so was the Horoscope also. Nay, I can affirm further, that it had shining Fixt Stars on all its Angles. And yet I cannot promise to my Book Immortality; no, should it be never so well received or approved of: Syth not only Solomons Herbal, and the best Books of the most Famous Philosophers, in tract of
time, have suffer'd Oblivion; but even in our own Age, Helmonts Book de Magnetica Vulnerum curatione, so much esteemed, and so highly cry'd up, in Anno 1651. is now not only neglected, but, by the Learned Voted Extra∣vagant and Useless. Mr. Boyl, Scept. Chymist. Men therefore ought well to weigh things before they ex∣pose themselves to the Press, lest in the room of being re∣puted Sober and Judicious Promoters of Science, they labour only for the contemptible Character, of being a Fool in Print. Omnia probate, quod bonum est te∣nete. I have only this to add, That this Astrological Sea-Man was Compleated above a dozen years since, as may be known by the Judgments on several Ships; as par∣ticularly the Edgar, where I mention Persons and things, as they were then; and not as they are at present. Fare∣wel, and be Industrious. I am, Thine and Astrology's Servant, JOHN GADBURY.
Nauticum Astrologicum. OR, THE Astrological Sea-Man, &c. AMong all the parts of Astrology, (since the No∣ble and most Useful Art of Navigation hath been so Eminently improved) there is none to be found more particularly necessary and profitable, for the adventurous Merchants and Seamen, (whom I aim in this Discourse principally to assist and serve) than that of Elections. In great Undertakings, (and what of Mundane Af∣fairs, setting Government aside, so great as Merchandize?) great Care and Caution is to be used. Sober and Steady Men, and such as can pretend any fair Claim or Title to Reason, should not (methinks) suppose, that the wisest of Mortals, was either mistaken, or in a Rhetorical Dream or Delirium, when he asserted, (and besides too, it is a part of Sacred Writ.) There is a time for all Things. Nor ought we to think, that all the Sages of antient times stood in need of Hellebore, when they trans∣mitted, as Truth to Posterity, and fit for them to mind, That, Beginnings are deemed Ominous. And, ad limen offendere, or In portu impingere: For a Man to trip at the Threshold, when going out of door, or, a Ship to strike on the Bar, or run on Ground, when setting to Sea, have ever been look'd on as bad Signs. And,
Rarus principii est exitus bonus mali. A bad Beginning seldom comes to a good End. And, as an Axiom in the Canon-Law, it is observed — Prin∣cipio quae sunt-inchoata malo, vix est ut bono peragantur exitu, (1.) Those things that are ill begun, scarce ever end well. Nay, the Great Philosopher possitively avers (, &c.) It to be impossible, but that which is faulty at the first, should prove ill at the last. And the Grave and Incomparable Seneca therefore, from Bio the antient Greek, determines the point — Let every Man set it down for a Rule, and know it for an un∣doubted truth, which Bio sometimes said, Omnia homi∣num negotia similia initiis esse; That all the Affairs of Men, will prove either good or bad, according to their Beginnings. Neither, yet, should the true born Christian, or worthy Philosopher, think lightly or meanly of our blessed Lord and Saviours — Nonne duodecim sunt hora diei? in answer to the timorous doubts of fome of his Disciples: it being impossible for him, who was the Lord of all Truth, to breath any thing but Truth to the then unbelieving World. Let me be then excused, or not censured at least, that I assume herefrom — If a time be to be observed in, or for all things, it must be so observed, either to humane Advantage, or Loss. If the former, it is naturally necessary to be known, that it may be the more happily improved and made use of. If the latter, 'tis also convenient to be understood, that it may the better be shunned and avoided, or at the least mitigated. Our ignorance of Times and Seasons, may, (and often doth) plunge us into manifold, and sometimes Fatal Er∣rors and Dangers, in the Management of our greatest Affairs or Concerns; whereas a right Understanding or Knowledge of them, is profitable, and may prevent the
greatest Damage or Prejudice, that our Nescience can any way expose us unto; And, (favente Deo) may make English-men as Honourable and Fortunate as the Men of Issachar, of whom Divine Writ gives this Grave and True Testimony — That they had Ʋnderstand∣ing of the Times, to know what Israel ought to do. 1 Chron. c. 12. v. 32. But passing all prefatory Arguments or Apologies, as being no way desirous to entertain my Reader only with words or Rhetorical Flourishes, but, on the contrary, to befriend him with something of Experimental Astrology, which is not novel, in respect of Caelestial Order and Energy, although it may probably appear at first some∣what New and Uncouth unto him, — I will forbear all further Preamble, and propound unto him the Method I intend to pursue in this Treatise, which I have adventu∣red (for what Reasons, will appear in the Sequel hereof) to Entitle The ASTROLOGICAL SEA-MAN. And it shall be thus. 1. A Brief System to the Introductory part of Astro∣logy; the better to invite my Reader to the right under∣standing of the following (or any other Astrological) Di∣scourse. For all Arts are as well buried, as preserved, in their own Terms; and no Man can understand any Science, that is ignorant in the Terms thereof. 2. I shall briefly Treat of the Nature and Use of Elections in an Astrological Sence: and of the difference between an Election, Nativity, or Question. Such Di∣stinctions being necessary to be known, but scarce at all understood by our vulgar English Astrologers, who pra∣ctice certainly, at a very strange rate for Truth, by rea∣son of their ignorance herein. 3. The Third part shall consist of Rules or Aphorisms, proper for the right understanding of the Success or Mis∣fortune of any Ship at Sea, relating to the beginning of its Voyage; Time of its first Launching; or, upon an Horary Question of such Ship or Vessel, the beginning
of whose Voyage is not known; so far (I mean) as is [yet] discernable by the power of second Causes. For surely, there is a Plus ultra in all Arts and Sciences, and, in respect of Men, (I need not pretend to Prophecy, but be bold to assert) there ever will be, even till Time shall be no more. 4. The truth of this Doctrine Illustrated, and made good by sundry famous Instances and Examples; toge∣ther, with the Nativities of many of his Majesties Ships-Royal; the times of whose Launching, &c. were taken with curious Care and Exactness; some of them by Persons of Honour and of great Skill in these Matters: Others of them, by Persons of Ingenuity only; and so kindly Communicated to me, by the Original Obser∣vers. And this Method pursued as here propounded, will bring me to the Conclusion of my present purposed design; where I intend (unless by some occasional acci∣dent prevented) until the perfect Birth of my long ex∣pected, and often promised, BODY of ASTRO∣LOGY, to take leave of my Courteous Reader.
CHAP. I. Containing a Brief System to the Introductory Part of ASTROLOGY, assisting my Reader in the better Ʋnderstanding of the following Discourse, &c. The Definition of ASTROLOGY. ASTROLOGY is an Art which teacheth us to understand the Motions, Natures, and Influences of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, as well Fixed as Erratick, and how we should apply the significations of such Inslu∣ences unto all humane persons and actions, that are (fa∣vente Deo) by God's permission Governed, brought forth, or begun under them, as Secondary Causes of such Gubernation, Production, or Original. And, as it teach∣eth these differences, in, of, and over Persons, Things, or Actions, so it hath the Sun, Moon, Stars and Heavens for its Subjects or Principles; and these visible to be seen by any industrious, willing, or knowing Eye. I can∣not here stand to tell you how they come to express their Natures or Influences in, or upon, Persons or Actions, &c. 'tis too large a Discourse to enter upon in this place. Nor is it the design of this Treatise to explain such Arcana of Nature; it will better befit our intended BODY of ASTROLOGY, than a short or brief System thereof, which is only to instruct our ASTROLO∣GICAL SEA-MAN. To proceed then, The Stars (the Subjects or Principles of this Art) are divided into Fixed and Erratique. The Fixed Stars are those which be placed in the Eighth Sphere; and yet; are not void of Motion, but are termed Fixed, Fixed Stars. why so called? in respect of the slowness of their Motion, which is not much above a Degree in an hun∣dred
years; as also, in regard of the swift and Anoma∣lous Motions of the Erratique Stars. They are com∣monly known to Astrologers, to be 1022 in number; of their Natures, Magnitude, Places in the Heavens, &c. you may be very fully informed in a Book of them, En∣tiled, Hartgils Tables reduced to this our Age. The Erratique Stars. The Erratique or Wandering Stars are the Seven Pla∣nets; and are so called, by reason of their being found to move differently in, and about the Zodiacal Circle, according as their Latitudes are found to be, more, or less, North or South, of the same. And they, together with the North and South Nodes of the Moon, are thus called and character'd. The Planets Names. ☉. The Sun. ♄. Saturn. ♃. Jupiter. ♂. Mars. ♀. Venus. ☿. Mercury. ☽. Luna. ☊. Dragons Head. ☋. Dragons Tail. ⊕. Part of Fortune. The Natures and Influences of the Planets are thus known and distinguished, according to Antient Observation of Astrologers, in Conjunction with our quotidian Expe∣rience of them. The Planets Natures, &c. ♄. Saturn, is cold and dry, Melancholly, Diurnal, Unfortunate. ♃. Jupiter, is hot and moist, Sanguine, Diurnal, For∣tunate. ♂. Mars, is hot and dry, Chollerick, Diurnal, Un∣fortunate.
☉. The Sun, is hot and dry, Temperate, Diurnal, Fortunate. ♀. Venus, is cold and moist, Phlegmatique, Noctur∣nal, Fortunate. ☿. Mercury, is convertible in Nature, and either Fortunate, or Unfortunate as he is configurated with ei∣ther good or bad Stars. ☽. Luna, is cold and moist, Phlegmatique, Noctur∣nal, Fortunate, per se, and always, unless oppressed of ♄. or ♂. or void of Course, or Combust. ☊. Dragons Head, is always reputed Fortunate, like Jupiter or Venus. ☋. Dragons Tail, is ever held Unfortunate, like Sa∣turn or Mars. The Division of Heaven in Twelve Parts, or Signs. The Heavens are by Astrologers (for their better ac∣commodation in their Observations of those Glorious Crea∣tures the Stars) divided into Twelve equal parts or por∣tions, which for distinctions sake, and for the better im∣printing them in their Memories, they have called Signs, (and not improperly, as their Enemies unequally suggest, because they do truly and really Signifie, which is the Na∣ture and Purport of a Sign so to do; as I shall, I hope, elsewhere discourse more at large) and assimilated them to several Creatures here on Earth, whose Natures (pos∣sibly) as well as Names. they are known to bear. And they are Called and Charactered thus. The Signs of the Zodiack. Northern Signs. ♈. Aries. ♉. Taurus. ♊. Gemini. ♋. Cancer. ♌. Leo. ♍. Virgo. Southern Signs. ♎. Libra. ♏. Scorpio. ♐. Sagitary. ♑. Capricorn. ♒. Aquarius. ♓. Pisces.
Now, the beforesaid seaven Planets or wandering Stars, are, not only observed to be constantly moving in this Zodiacal Circle, but are also found to be there either well or ill posited or scituated, according to some certain known Dignities or Debilities they happen to receive therein; or, as they shall fortune to be in Conjunction, or in good or bad aspects of one ano∣ther. The Order of Nature excludes Chance, and proves a Deity For we are not to believe that the Beams of Light or Influence are directed by Chance, but by a supream Reason designed in such a Line Ma∣thematical, to such and such particular purposes; as is most happily demonstrated by Sir Ch. Heydon. Other∣wise, we should not only accuse Nature for want of skill in Proportions, but open a direct Gap to the Atheist, who is already too much apt to believe too cheaply of a Deity; and would, no doubt, be glad to imbibe such a Principle (as best pleasing to his Appetite) That all things come by Chance, and that there is neither Method nor Order in the Influences of Heaven: but that they are a sort of con∣fused Contingencies, that thereon depend, brought to pass by the Energy of a meer Huddle of Attoms: and conse∣quently, that the Planets which Astrologers term good, may instil bad Influences, and the Planets they call bad, good ones; and that Trines and Sextiles may as well shower down Injuries as Kindnesses, &c. and produce Mischie∣vous Natures, as well as Mild ones, in the World; all which to assure you, is, as well against the Sovereignty of a Deity, as against the Truth of Astrology: I will here but only tell you, that the very daily Motion and Alteration of the Weather doth manifest it to be false; and surely then much more doth the divers Natures and Dispositions of Men, most constantly refute so great an Error. Differences of men, and why? Let but any Antagonist to Astrology shew me a Person that hath a Square, Conjunction, or Opposition of Saturn, Mars, or Mercury in the Angles
of his Genesis, and I will shew him a Lyar, and an unquiet Person, by his natural inclination, unless good Education help to prevent. On the contrary, let him pro∣duce me a Person born under a Trine of Jupiter, Venus, Sol, Mercury, &c. from good parts of Heaven, and I'll acquaint him with a Person fit to be confided in, and one that is naturally of just Principles. But I digress. Of the Five Aspects. Of Aspects, there be five in number, which are by Astrologers principally observed for the conveying Coe∣lestial or Planetary Influences unto each Physical body in the Ʋniverse, by which they are (as Experience constant∣ly testifies) either happily affected, or unhappily afflicted; and this is even visible and manifest in inanimate Bodies, as well as animate. Their Characters and Names are thus. 1. ☌. Conjunction, though improperly called an Aspect, is when two Planets are found in one and the same Sign, Degree, &c. 2. ✶. Sextile, is when Planets are two Signs distant, which is sixty Degrees, or the sixth part of the Zodiack, and therefore so called. 3. □. Quadrate, is when Planets are three Signs di∣stant, which is ninety Degrees, or the fourth part of the Zodiack, and from that so called. 4. △. Trine, is when Planets are four Signs distant, or one hundred and twenty Degrees, which is the third part of the Zodiack, and therefore so termed. 5. ☍. Opposition, is when Planets are distant six Signs, or one hundred and eighty Degrees, which is one half of the Zodiack, the whole Cirle consisting of three hundred and sixty Degrees. The Nature of the Aspects. The Natures of these Aspects or Beams, are Eminent∣ly found to differ in transmitting the Planetary Influxes to all things on this Terrestial Globe; and to be brief, be∣cause
I intend no large introduction here, they are thus by Astrologers noted and understood. A Conjunction, is either good or bad, according to the Nature of the Planets conjoyn'd. If it be of Jupiter or Venus, which are good Planets, it is good. As unition of Roses, begets the greater Redolence. Et contra. A Sextile, is an Aspect of Friendship, but imperfectly such, as being but half a Trine; and is found experimen∣tally to enforce the Influences of the good Planets, and abate the vigor of the Malefiques. A Quadrate, is a Ray of imperfect Enmity, being half the Opposition; and irritates the Influences of bad Planets, and retards the Energy of the good Ones; un∣less other assistances appear, which very frequently do. A Trine, is a most perfect Beam of Happiness, and denotes true Concord, Amity, and Friendship. It is a Ray so powerful, that not only the good Stars diffuse their Influences most forcibly upon Persons or things, &c. but even the bad ones distil good Atoms thereby: as a Miser, by the Tongue of a powerful Orator, is compelled to Club towards a general Charity. An Opposition, is the very worst of Aspects, and de∣clares absolute Enmity and Discord, and seldom is any good performed by this Beam, unless consequentially, as Peace is said to be the Effect of War. Signs Movable, Common, Fixed. Some Signs are observed to be Movable, others Com∣mon or double bodied, and others Fixed. and they are thus termed for several reasons; some of which I will here set down. When the Sun or Planets are in Movable Signs, the Air is ever observed to be more apt to Change and Vary, than in other Signs. When in those called Common Signs, the Weather is neither very fixed, nor yet much subject to Mutation, but partakes of a middle quality between both. When in a fixed Sign, the
Weather is generally fixed, and, unless some Apertio Portarum happen, tis rare to find an alteration therein. And, hence it is, the Sun in Leo, generally brings along with it, parching hot Air; and in Aries, dry, but lofty Winds; in Pisces, much moisture, &c. they are thus known and observed of Astrologers. ♈. ♋. ♎. ♑. are Movable, Cardinal Signs. ♉. ♌. ♏. ♒. are Fixed, Constant Signs. ♊. ♍. ♐. ♓. are Common or By-corporeal Signs. Triplicities of the Planets and Signs. Then are these Signs observed to make up four Tripli∣cities or Trigons agreeable to the four Aristotelean Ele∣ments; which are not so soon banished the Schools, as talked against; syth even some Eminently Learned in Chymistry, begin to think as worthily of them, as of the Chymists three Principles. And possibly, this Ages bait∣ing of Aristotles, and the Peripatetical Doctrine, will prove, in the room of an Erradication, an Establishment thereof: and those Antient Truths he first discovered, may come to be embraced again. Nay, what if it should appear at length, that every thing that hath been said against him, that looks like a Truth, is no more, or other, than what himself hath long since avowed; saving that it may have been express'd in other words? But I am not here to enter upon Controversies, therefore to my Purpose. ♈. ♌. ♐. are Signs of the Fiery, Triplicity. ♉. ♍. ♑. are Signs of the Earthy, Triplicity. ♊. ♎. ♒. are Signs of the Airy, Triplicity. ♋. ♏. ♓. are Signs of the Watery, Triplicity. And these Triplicities have several Planetary Gover∣nours, or Rulers; as the Sun and Jupiter Rule the Fiery. Venus and Luna, the Earthy. Saturn and Mercury, the
Airy. Mars, the Watery Trigon. In my intended Body of Astrology, I shall give you a Reason hereof. Some Signs are again termed Masculine, Diurnal, &c. others Feminine and Nocturnal, by Astrologers.—as, ♈. ♊. ♌. ♎. ♐. ♒. are Signs Masculine, Diurnal. ♉. ♋. ♍. ♏. ♑. ♓. are Signs Feminine, Nocturnal. And tell me honest Reader, have you not seen, not on∣ly different Sexes in the World; but even in the same Sex, at some times, a Vigour, or Weakness, remarkable viz. An Effeminate Man, and a Masculine Woman, a Vira∣go, &c. Besides these, and fundry other Divisions, and sub-Divisions of the Signs (too many for me here to enu∣merate, and therefore I shall refer my, Reader for them to my Doctrine of Nativities already abroad in the World; or, unto my Body of Astrology, when it comes into the World, Dignities and Debili∣ties of the Planets. wherein I have trea∣ted of them at large.) I may not here omit to acquaint you, that the Planets are found to receive Dignities and Debilities, to suffer, and raign in some particular parts of the Zodiack, more than in others.— So ♄. receives the Dignity of House in ♑. and ♒. and his Exaltation in ♎. the mea∣ning whereof is this, Astrologically, viz. If ♄. be Sig∣nificator of the Weather, and in ♑. ♒. or ♎. he makes it more Cold and Piercing, &c. than when in any other Sign. If he be significator of a Person in a Nativity, and so posited, he declares him to be more Saturnine, viz. more Prudent, 'Tis of the Nature of Sacurn to be Scri∣ous, Suspicious. &c. Grave, Envious, Ti∣morous, Suspicious, Jealous, Reser∣ved, Thoughtful, Plotting, &c. and so of all the rest. But because the Table of Dignities, &c. according to Ptolemy, doth more readily express them to the Eye, I shall here insert the same, for the use and conveniency of every Reader.
A Table of the Essential Dignities of the PLANETS, according to Ptolemy. Signes. Houses of the Planers. Exaltation. Triplicity of the Plan. The Terms of the Planers. The Faces of the Planets. Detriment. Fall. Di. No. ♈ ♂ D ☉ 19 ☉ ♃ ♃ 6 ♀ 14 ☿ 21 ♂ 26 ♄ 30 ♂ 10 ☉ 20 ♀ 30 ♀ ♄ ♉ ♀ N ☽ 3 ♀ ☽ ♀ 8 ♀ 15 ♃ 22 ♄ 26 ♂ 30 ♀ 10 ☽ 20 ♄ 30 ♂   ♊ ☿ D ☊ 3 ♄ ♀ ♀ 7 ♃ 14 ♀ 21 ♄ 25 ♂ 30 ♃ 10 ♂ 20 ☉ 30 ♃   ♋ ☽ N D ♃ 15 ♂ ♂ ♂ 6 ♃ 13 ☿ 20 ♀ 27 ♄ 30 ♀ 10 ☿ 20 ☽ 30 ♄ ♂ ♌ ☉ N D     ☉ ♃ ♄ 6 ☿ 13 ♀ 19 ♃ 25 ♂ 30 ♄ 10 ♃ 20 ♂ 30 ♄   ♍ ☿ N ☿ 15 ♀ ☽ ♀ 7 ♀ 13 ♃ 18 ♄ 24 ♂ 30 ☉ 10 ♀ 20 ☿ 30 ♃ ♀ ♎ ♀ D ♄ 21 ♄ ☿ ♄ 6 ♀ 11 ♃ 19 ☿ 24 ♂ 30 ☽ 10 ♄ 20 ♃ 30 ♂ ☉ ♏ ♂ N     ♂ ♂ ♂ 6 ♃ 14 ♀ 21 ☿ 27 ♄ 30 ♂ 10 ☉ 20 ☿ 30 ♀ ☽ ♐ ♃ D ☋ 3 ☉ ♃ ♃ 8 ♀ 14 ☿ 19 ♄ 25 ♂ 30 ♀ 10 ☽ 20 ♄ 30 ♀   ♑ ♄ N ♂ 28 ♀ ☽ ♀ 6 ☿ 12 ♃ 19 ♂ 25 ♄ 30 ♃ 10 ♂ 20 ☉ 30 ☽ ♃ ♒ ♄ D     ♄ ♄ 6 ☿ 12 ♀ 20 ♃ 25 ♂ 30 ♀ 10 ☿ 20 ☽ 30 ☉   ♓ ♃ N ♀ 27 ♂ ♂ ♀ 8 ♃ 14 ☿ 20 ♂ 26 ♄ 30 ♄ 10 ♃ 20 ♂ 30 ☿ ♀   5 4 3 2 1   5 4 This Table is very easily understood, being explained even by the Title over each Collum thereof; but least it should to any prove difficult, I will briefly unfold it. Un∣der the Signs in the first Collum, you find ♈. and under the Houses of the Planets, in the second Collum, you find ♂. D and under Exaltation, in the third Collum, you find ☉. 19 and under Triplicities in the fourth Coll. you find ☉. ♃. all which tell you, that ♈. is the Day.
house of ♂. and Exaltation of the ☉. and Triplicity of the ☉. and ♃. ∽ Then under the Terms of the Planets, against ♈. you find ♃. 6 ♀. 14 ☿. 21, &c. which tells you, that ♃. governs the first 6 Degrees of ♈. by his term, ♀. hath her term from 6 to 14. ☿ hath his term from 14 to 21 Degrees, and so of the rest. And under the Faces of the Planets, against ♈. still, you will find ♂. 10 ☉. 20 ♀. 30. which acquaints you that ♂. hath his Face or Decanate in the first 10 Degrees of ♈. the ☉. hath his Face in the second 10 Degrees of ♈. and ♀. hath her Face in the last 10 Degrees of ♈. do so in all the rest. Under the Titles Detriment and Fall, you have the Detriments and Falls of the Planets expressed; as against ♈. Detriment opposite to house, and fall opposite to Exaltation. under Detriment, you find ♀. and under Fall, ♄. which tells you, that ♀. hath her Detriment in ♈. and ♄. there receives his Fall, where Note, that a Planets Detriment is always opposite to his House; and his Fall opposite to his Exaltation. And whereas you will find Figures at the Foot of the Table, under their respective Collums, it is to explain the Number of Dignities they receive by being in such parts of the Heavens, and the Debilities they suffer, by being in Opposition to some of them.— As a Planet being in his own House, receives five Dignities; by being in his Ex∣altation, four Dignities; by being in his Triplicity, three Dignities; by being in his Term, two Dignities; by be∣ing in his Face, one Dignity. So, by being in his Detri∣ment, he suffers five Debilities; by being in his Fall, he suffers four Debilities. This Table needeth no further, or other Explanation. I should now have proceeded here, and shewn you how to set a Figure of Heaven, and annexed thereunto all the principal terms of Art; but not designing any ex∣act Introduction to the Science of the Stars in this place, as before I informed you, I shall here omit that, and refer
you to my Doctrine of Nativities, where I have treated threof at large. Only remember further here, if you please, that as the Zodiacal Circle is divided into twelve equal Parts or Signs; so the whole Heavens are divided into twelve equal Angles or Houses. All things relating to humane Life, referred to the heavens. And, unto these twelve Angles, are referred by Astrologers, all matters or things relating to Humane Life; as is aptly expressed in this Dystichon. Vita, Lucrum, Fratres, Genitor, Nati, Valetudo, Ʋxor, Mors, Pietas, Regnum, Benefacta{que} Carcer. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. Which I have elsewhere thus Englished. First House notes Life. The Second, Wealth doth give. The Third, how Brethren. Fourth, how Parents live. Issue, the Fifth. The Sixth, Diseases bring. The Seventh, Wedlock. And the Eighth, Death's sting. The Ninth, Religion. The Tenth, Honour shews. Friendship, the Eleventh. And the Twelfth, our Woes. Of these Angles or Houses, some are termed Angular, others succedent, and cadent; all which together with their several significations, is readily expressed in the following Figure.
astrological chart NOMINA ET SIGNIFICATA DOMORUM. See Morine's Demonstration of this Coelestial Division into 12 parts, in Astrol. Gallica; or as he is excellently Translated in∣to English, by the Learned Capt. George Wharton And, having brought my Reader thus far, by way of Introduction, to acquaint him with the first Rudiments of Astrology, that he may be the better enabled (by this Chapter) to understand what follows. I shall (by Divine permission) proceed unto.—
CHAP. II. Which Treats of the Nature and Ʋse of Elections, in an Astrological Sence; and, of the difference between an Election, Nativity, and Question. Of an Election and its use Astrologically. PAssing by the nice Grammatical construction, and various uses of the words, Electio, and ; with the many curious Definitions, and Derivations, that the Ingenious Critiques in both Tongues afford us thereon: It shall suffice me here to inform you,— That an Election, in an Astrological Sence, is the serious and exact Choise of a Genuine and Proper time, wherein we may (by God's assistance) according to the Energy and In∣fluence of second Causes, begin, or attempt, any matter or business of eminent weight and consideration, prosperously and to good effect. Or, more concisely, it is the chusing of a good and favourable Position of Heaven, and the shunning of a bad one, in our commencement of any eminent or weighty Affair, relating to humane Life. And this Election, or Choice, may be made three man∣ner of ways, according to the Opinions of Astrologers, for the favouring of any undertaking. But, because I resolve not to transgress my Original intention, which is, not to treat of Elections at large, but only of that part thereof, in this place, which relates to the benefit of the Worthy and Adventurous Merchant and Sea-man; (al∣though I must tell you, that an ingenious Reader may, by varying what he reads, make this Discourse servicea∣ble and useful unto him, in all manner of Elections what∣soever.) I shall here propound these three several ways,
by which an auspicious Election (sub Deo) may be made, and an inauspicious one avoided. First way of making an Election. The first (and indeed the chief) way, of making or framing an Election, is, from the Genesis or Nativity of the Person or thing, for whom it is designed to be sevicea∣ble, in case that can be but truly known and obtained. And this is the best and most rational way of making or framing an Election, and so approved of by the best and learned of Astrological Writers; because here is a se∣cure ground or foundation for the Artist to build on: It being a most certain, splendid, and ruled truth — That all Progresses and Ends of Things, are Analogous or suita∣ble to their beginnings. And there can be no beginning so absolute and perfect, and, in all respects, so fit to be re∣ly'd on, in these matters, as a Radix or Nativity truly known and proved. To illustrate this way of making an Election, it is con∣venient, that I descend to a practical Instance. Know then, that if thou wouldest Elect a time favou∣rable from the Nativity or Birth of any thing, for thy purpose, thou must then make the Figure of Heaven, for thy Election, agreeable thereunto, by framing it in Sextile or Triue unto that; or by making the places of the Fortunate Stars, viz. ♃. ♀. ☉. or ☽. or their Trine and Sextile, places therein, the Ascendant or Mid-Hea∣ven, or the Sun, or Moons, or Part of Fortune's places, in thy Election, ever being careful to avoid the places of Saturn, Mars, or the Dragons Tail in the Radix, or their Opposite or Quadrantal places, as dangerous for either your Horoscope, Medium Coeli, Sun, or Moon, &c. in your Election, and then leave the Issue to providence. And, here by the way, let not the ingenious Reader mistake me, or think that I assert a Reminiscency in the Stars, as in Animate or Reasonable Creatures; or that
I believe the Planets to wear Socks, Dr. Henry More, in his Mystery of God∣liness. either perfum'd or of an ill scent, as a late Learned Author is pleased, in the room of better matter, to cast scoffingly upon Astrologers. I only assert a Harmony and Similitude in the Sphears of Heaven, and in the Mo∣tions of the Planets; together with an Energy by their Motion, to stimulate Influences, kind, or unkind, in re∣spect of us poor Mortals. And although the Stars should have no knowledge of the places they were in at a Nati∣vity, that they should be presumed to remember what they did there, or what Influences they irritated and emit∣ted the last time they passed their Radical places; yet, certainly, the God of Stars knew well enough, that he had Created them, and appointed them also, to act and do his pleasure (as we must acknowledge they are always performing) when they come there: And that is by as∣suring us, they have in themselves a known and unaltera∣ble Influence in one and the same part of Heaven always; and this as certain as in a Clocks striking, when the hours it directs to, are accomplished. Thus the Sun when he comes to rise Cosmically with the Stars of the Eagle, always pro∣duceth Rain and Winds. So also, Transits very Powerful in every respect. with Vergiliae, or Seven Stars. And, the like also, when he comes to their op∣posite places. After this manner, when he riseth with the Dog-Star (although some think that Canis non Mordet in Anglia) have we a hot and parching Air, and an in∣temperate Season. Cum multis aliis, &c. And, thus al∣so ♄. or ♂. passing the Ascendant ☉. or ☽. in any ones Nativity, (chiefly, if they oppressed them, or any of them in the Radix thereof) irritates Choller, or in∣creaseth Melancholly; whereas, ♃. ☉. and ♀. passing the same places, exite a Generous, Pleasant, Free and Cheerful humour. And of the truth hereof, can I pro∣duce abundant Testimonies. Nay any Man, that hath
but his Nativity by him, may easily prove the truth hereof in himself, and that frequently. Let but the Antagonist be so ingenious as to observe a little these matters, and then Character me for an Impo∣stor, and a broacher of Fables to delude the World with, in the room of Truth to inform it, if he do not find these things true. But to our Election again. I shall give an Example in the Nativity of a Ship, and an Election from it to confirm the Method or Rule fore∣going. astrological chart A SHIP first Launched after Her being Built. IN an Astrological sence, the first Launching of a Ship to try its ability in the Water, in which Element it is to live, and shew its Force and Activity, and to undergo its Fortune, is its true Nativity, Radix, or Birth∣hour, &c.
Howbeit, although its General Fate, be written in the particular Position of Heaven; yet, we find that is apt to be either augmented or diminished, by a careful heed∣ing, or a non-observance, of such Times, wherein it is to be Re-launched, or, when it shall weigh Anchor, in or∣der to some particular Service or Action for the future. Now, we know a Ship can be Launched but once, in re∣gard of its Nativity, and in relation to its General Fate: but, it may be Re-launched forty times, in respect of its Particular Fate; which is terminated in every Voyage or Action, for which she happens to be thus particularly fitted. Therefore, to Elect a time favourable for this Ship to begin any Eminent Action, from its Nativity, is to ob∣serve the same, and the places of the good Planets there∣in; (as before you were taught) and let the Figure of the Election, as near as you can, be under either ♐. ♈. ♊. ♎. Horoscopical: they being the Trine and Sextile places of the Figure. Or else, let it be the same with the Nativity it self. But, if neither of these can be ob∣tained, (as sometimes it may so fall out) then take the places of the Fortunate Stars, or of the Sun or Moon, for the Horoscope; ever observing, to posite the Moon well, and in good Configuration with the principal Significa∣tors; which always are, the Lords of the Ascendant and Ninth Houses, and the dispositers of the Moon and Part of Fortune. Now, in this Nativity foregoing, ♃. ♀. ☉ ☽ are in ♓ ♈ ♉ take therefore those Signs, or the Signs of their Triangles, for the Horoscope, or Moons place, and (faventae Deo) your Election will be success∣ful and happy. But you must always have a care of that part of ♉. which ♄'s . or ♂. his ☍. hurts, least thereby you destroy the hopes of a good Election.
astrological chart A Figure of an Election from the foregoing Nativity IN this Election you see ♊. to ascend the Horoscope, which was the Eleventh House of the Nativity, and therefore it must be Friendly. The Lord of the Ascen∣dant here, is on the place of the ☽. there, and ♃. here in ✶. to his Radical place, in △. of ☉. and ♄. the ☽. herein on the Ascendant of the Radix; otherwise the ☽. in ♌. is not good in Sea-Affairs. Thus all things (you see) conspire to make it a good and fortunate Election. And, in any the like case, you need not be affraid to trust
unto our Method of Practice. And so you have the first way of Electing, (which is from the Radix) ex∣plained. The second way of making an Election. 2. The Second way of making or framing an Election, or finding out a Friendly time for the Launching or setting Sail of a Ship, is from an Horary Question, (of the Ma∣ster or Captain thereof, or of any other Person eminent∣ly concerned therein) seriously, and, intento animo pro∣pounded. (i. e.) when his or their minds shall be ear∣nestly solicitous and thoughtful about either the safety or hazzard of a Vessel, or, of their own profit or loss ari∣sing therefrom. — For, the mind in these matters is principally busied or affected, as it first of all is informed either with hope or fear of the matter in question, by the Pulse of the Primum Mobile, or Soul of the World; (Call it whether of the two you please) and thence comes it to pass, that our hopes and fears, are, not only imper∣manent, but very suddenly transient, and slide from one thing to another in moments; even as the Universal Spi∣rit of the World moves either with, or against our parti∣cular Spirits; advancing to our Expectancy's, or contra∣dicting our desires, according to the Nature and Disposi∣tion of the Mundane Figure, at that time when such fears or desires are prevalent. And this is the true reason and ground of an Horary Question; and plainly demonstrable from the Coelestial Mathematicks, even in all the Actions and Passions of every person in this inferiour world. Neither can any Man (let him suppose himself a Socra∣tes) by all his policy and subtilty, wholly exempt himself from this Energy; Syth we cannot assure our selves of ever having the same thoughts (I mean in all respects exactly and fully, for I know we often have the like, and very nearly the same) which once we have en∣joyed;
or, which have rather passed through us. It be∣ing as impossible that it should be so, as for the same Po∣sition of Heaven ever to return again. Which cannot be, unless we should suppose (with the Learned His Learned Notes on the Scriptures. Gregory) that the world should out-last all reasonable supposition: nor indeed then neither. But since we are not upon the subject of Horary Que∣stions at large, we will pass all further discourse of this Nature here, as Anomalous to our present design; and return to the Matter in hand. To make an Election then from an Horary Question, for a Ship, Voyage, &c. you must frame the Figure of your Election agreeable to that of the Question, in case the Fi∣gure were Fortunate. Otherwise you must alter the Scheam of the Election from that of the Question, by fortunating the parts thereof, that were Unfortunate therein. For a bad Fate Astrologically, may be embet∣tered, and a good one improved; or else were all Know∣ledge useless. And that is the meaning of Ptolemy in the 8th. Aphorism of his Centiloquium. Sapiens anima confert Coelesti operationi, quemadmodum optimus Agri∣cola arando expurgando quae confert Naturae, Ptol. To explain this fully (for I am unwilling to be guilty of Riddles, or to leave any thing in obscurity, whereby to torment my Readers) I will produce you an Eminent. Instance. A person having a Ship to put to Sea (and having seve∣ral doubts in his mind concerning her) enquires of me, whether he may safely, and with success, adventure up∣on the present intended Voyage. The Heavens were in the following posture at the time of his Interrogation.
astrological chart If the intended Voyage be Profitable? IN the Figure of this Horary Question, are many Argu∣ments of discouragement to the Querent about the Interrogated undertaking. As (1.) ♂ in the Ascendant. (2.) the Lord of the Ascendant in the Eighth House, and (tho' in his Exaltation) Combust there. (3.) the Moon in ☌ ☋. in the Ninth House, the Angle that naturally signifies Sea Voyages. (4.) ♄ in ☌ ♁. in the Se∣cond House. (5.) The Lady of the Tenth on the Se∣venth, in ☍. to the Ascendant, and ♂ there. (6.) Mercury, which signified the Vessel, as Lord of the 7th. Angle, is also Lord of the 9th. and in the 8th. Combust and Retrograde. (7.) ♄ Lord of the Hour. All which were Arguments of great infelicity to the intended Voyage, and of Dammage both to the Owner, and Ship likewise. Sickness, if not Imprisonment, is
threatned to the Querent; Contradictory weather, and a fear of Pyrates, &c. to be brief, the Testimonies of ill were so many, and so little of good in the Figure to ballance them, (nay none at all, but the Position of ♀. on the 7th. Angle in △. of ☽. who happily transferred the Light of ☿. to her.) That I positively advised the Querent to a pretermitting of that intended Undertaking, acquainting him with the several Menaces of the Hea∣vens towards him; bidding him be careful how he temp∣ted Providence, lest it proved worse than I feared, which indeed was bad enough. But, notwithstanding the unhappy Menaces of the Fi∣gure, and my Advice given, he tells me, he is engag'd with, and to, several Owners, who have agreed with him upon the Voyage; and it is not now in his power to avoid the undertaking thereof, without great disparage∣ment unto him, together with the ill opinion of his Owners and Friends. Yet confesseth he is suspicious of the improsperousness of the Voyage; (as indeed, who is not, that hath Mars in the Ascendant of such an En∣quiry?) and therefore propounds he the Question. What is now to be done? 'Tis dangerous to go: yet go he must. No hopes, neither of embettering these rugged and severe Menaces by an auspicious Election, as can be gathered from the Question; unless the Moon in Trine of Venus, Lady of the 5th. and 10th. Houses can afford us any. And, to go at all adventures, what is it but to hazzard both Ship, Men, and Goods. The Nativity of the Ship under Question is unknown; I therefore (syth there is no remedy for the Querent, but going) must endeavour to frame an Election for the Voyage, from the Figure of the Question, by opposing therein, the unhappy threats it intimates. To assist me herein, I demanded of the Querent, in what time, since he must go, he was (God permitting) to begin his intended Voyage? about three weeks hence he tells me, (i. e.) from the time of the Question) or any
time after that, to Bartholomew-Tide; which was five or six weeks from the time of the Question. To be short, the time I pitched upon, was August the 10th. 9h. 55′. A. M. or ten of the Clock at the farthest, for him to set Sail, or first of all to weigh Anchor for his Voyage. And the Figure of Heaven was as followeth: — astrological chart Figura Electionis The Figure of the Question being so pernicious in all re∣spects, required the greater care and industry of an Ar∣tist, in framing an Election that might conveniently Me∣liorate it: And a bettet I could not possibly meet with, in that limitation of time, the Tide, and all other matters and circumstances considered.
Herein the Ascendant and Moon are made the Mid-Hea∣ven of the Figura Questionis. The Angles of the Scheam and Moon, all in Movable Cardinal Signs. The Lady of the Ascendant in the Ninth House, in great reception of the Moon. The Lord of the Ninth and Eleventh Angles both, one Planet, and he in Conjunction of Jupiter in the Medium Coeli, in Domo Solis. The Moon Lady of the Tenth in the Horoscope with Noble Fixed Stars. The La∣dy of the Ascendant in △. to ♁. in the Second House. The Moon transfers the Light of the Lady of the Ascen∣dant to the Sun and Mars by a Sextile Aspect, and they, in noble Trine of each other; one of them being partly Lord of the Mid-Heaven, and the other wholly Lord of the Seventh and Second Houses. And lastly, which is not the least to be considered, there are Eminent Fixed Stars on all the Angles of the Figure. All which Arguments (if nothing were to be minded but this Election) pronounce it to be a most happy and Heaven-favouring Election of Time in earnest, for such a purpose: and declares the Voyage, not only to be happy, and profitable, but Eminently Reputable also. As indeed, with respect had to the Original hereof, which was the Figure of the Question, it was. But, we must always consider, that God and Nature do nothing in vain; for, had not this Querent been irritated to an Interrogation, this auspicious Election could never have been liable to an abatement of its good significations: but, as it hath a de∣pendance upon that for its Radix, we cannot expect it should have the full Effects of so many Illustrious Signifi∣cations. For we must know, and shall ever be sure to find it true, That an Election (be it never so good or bad in it self) can never totally alter the Promises or Menaces of an Original Question, which is its Nativity, but only augment to the Good, or mitigate the Evil of them. For therein are the Seeds of the Happiness or Misfortune of such Voyage or Vessel inclosed; as Fruit is originally in its Root; or as Scent and Colours of Vegitables are ver∣tually in their Seeds.
Nor need any trouble themselves with objecting, that, not a Question, but a Nativity, is the Radix properly of an Election. Sith the Question, if with a serious and so∣licitous mind propounded, is ever the same, (or very like unto it) in signification with the Radix; and may therefore be reasonably presumed equal with the proper Root thereof; especially when the true Nativity is not known, or not by any means to be found. As a Step-Father, in the room of the natural Sire, performing all the Offices of a Father, is, by a Child to be looked upon and owned in the same Capacity, and Relation to him, as was his real Father, when alive. And if experience will serve to vouch this verity further, (if there be at least any need thereof) I can produce sufficient.— But to the Effect. The Ship did weigh Anchor at the time Elected; and within six days did receive Dammage by a Storm, wherein it had like to have been Wrecked. In twenty days af∣ter, it had neerly been cast away again, by running into the Quick-sands; but, with greater danger than loss, in little time got very well off again. Afterwards, this Vessel made its Port both prosper∣ously and speedily; so also, it did make a happy return home again, and this without any material or remarkable prejudice or dammage; excepting that they were distressed somewhat in their return, for Provision, and fresh water, some of theirs proving ill; by reason whereof, (as might be reasonably suppos'd) both the Master and Marriners were a little unhealthful.— There happen'd also a small Mutiny in the Ship, (like ♂ in the Horoscope of the Que∣stion) occasion'd by an unlucky impudent fellow, a Car∣penter belonging to the Ship; this was still as they were returning home, To conclude, the profit of the Voyage was much less than was either expected, or at first propounded by the Owners; or, (as I have heard the Master of the Vessel say) than was ever known before.
Thus have you a brief, but true History of the whole matter. And, in every respect, most suitable to the sig∣nifications of the bad portended in the Scheam of the Question, and likewise of the safety denoted by the Fi∣gure of the Election. By which we may observe,— That an ill Question may be bettered by a fortunate Election of Time. And, that a good Election is really serviceable and profitable. But then, we may also observe, That tho' the Election be never so good in it self, its auspicious significations can∣not totally avert the unhappy Menaces of that Figure, or Radix, from whence you make or frame the Election. And, so you have the second way of framing an Electi∣on explained. The Third way of making an Election. The Third way of making an Election, Astrologically, is, when neither the Nativity of the Ship or Vessel is known, nor yet an Horary Question propounded concer∣ning it. And, thus I can assure you, it often falls out. For there is scarce one Man of ten, that knows his time of Birth; and, I presume, there is scarce one Ship of an hundred, whose Genesis, or time of first Launching, was ever taken notice of. The greater part of the World either thinking to over-look all Starry Influences, or else are readily willing to neglect them; as believing such knowledge, (though both excellent and veritable in it self) to be only the Apocriphal part of Philosophy, and therefore in no wise fit to be minded by any that Hunger and Thirst after true Wisdom. ☞ But this Obiter.— If the Birth-hour be not known nor yet a Question concerning your matter propounded, the Artist must then endeavour to find a Position of Hea∣ven, wherein the Moon, and Lord of the Horoscope, &c. shall be in good and fortunate places of the Figure, and in Signs Superiour and Commanding, free from affliction and impediment of any kind.
I would not, now, here, have any over Curious or Critital Person (and yet I know Astrology hath its Here∣liques, as well as Divinity) from Opinion and Humour only, object to me.— That Elections are not to be made, but from some known Radix. For, if by an unknown Radix (which is the reverse of the known) they mean the Nativity of a Person or Vessel not to be found, or of a Question unpropounded, &c. Then to some persons, Vessels, &c. the Heavens must as to humane Science be wholly useless; because it is impossible to Derive, or Elect, from that which is not, or is not, at least to our knowledge. But this were a gross absurdity, as well as a great untruth to suppose,— Syth the , or aetherial matter, is in every place constantly operating to some particular end. And, although the Lines by which this subtile Influence is directed, serve not me, or is not forcible enough to move me, to doubt, it may, be yet strong enough to direct me to Act; and, so I may happily make choise of a good time to commence my Af∣fairs in, although I know not the Nativities of the Persons or things, which are Instruments or Mediums by which my purposed Affairs are brought to pass. For, God and Nature, as they are never idle, so they do nothing, but to some signal effect or purpose. Heaven hath its various Seasons in it self, as well as to us: and Beginnings, whether to Men known or un∣known, have proportionate progresses and ends. And, (if Seneca may be believed) it is not in humane power to contradict an Original Destinated Intention: so, that if thy Election be good, thou needest not doubt, but the Ra∣dix belonging to the Vessel thou framest thy Election for, is good also. If therefore by an unknown Radix, they mean a time involved in the general Rowl of the Heavens, which are the first movers, augmentors and decayers of all things; we must freely acknowledge that such Time, by reason of an infinite Coelestial variety, is too hard for Mortality
to discover, without the advantage of Divine Inspiration. Yet is this no injury to our way of Election, but rather seems to conclude our Question. For, it is in this sence that I assert Elections, profitable and truly to be made and known, tho' the Nativity be Ignote, or that there be ne∣ver any Question propounded: Sith the Election is ever the Image of the Radix; and what is Ignote to us, is not so in it self, but hath a place in the Universal Regi∣ster of Nature. And all things derive from the Heavens. But yet, if any shall further object, that, should we allow of such kind of Elections, they are as probable to prove Bad as Good. As Morine and some others, among us, very idly from him have suggested; urging that the Eighth or Twelve Houses, &c. as well as the Eleventh, Fifth, or Tenth, &c. of a Radix, may ascend the Eastern Finitor in an Election. Or, that the places of Saturn and Mars, or their Oppositions or Quadrantal places, may in a Figure of Election, happen to be Horoscopical, as well as the places of Jupiter or Venus, or their Sextile, or Trigonal Beams: And so come to render that Pernitious and Destructive, which our Election pronounceth good, happy, and hopeful. And, on the contrary, may de∣note that to be Fortunate and Successful, which we may not only fear, but find to be attended with absolute Ruine and Destruction. To this I answer. If the thing were possible which is urged by this Ob∣jection, the Inference, would indeed, prove too strong to be shaken or invalidated by any Man. But it is not possible that there can be any Contradiction to the Ope∣rations of Nature, where a Mans Will is at liberty, and only to be Exercised, as himself pleaseth, as it is in the framing of an Election of Time, when a Radix is whol∣ly unknown. Besides, Nature would be found guilty of offering Violence to its own Decrees, if it should destroy its ge∣neral intention for the sake, or advantage of any one par∣ticular, as in this Case. As is the River, so is the Stream,
for either Goodness or Badness. And if the Tree be good, the Fruit thence issuing cannot be improsperous. Know therefore, that if thy Radix be kind; (let it be known or unknown) thy Election cannot be cruel. Can any one accuse Nature for want of skill in Geometry? if not, why may we not (by God's Blessing) thereby, be directed to a favourable Election, although we do not know our Radix or Nativity? But, methinks, the matter is most plain, and put be∣yond all doubt, in the verity of Horary Questions, (of which we mention'd somewhat before.) Inasmuch, that either the same Horoscope, with that of the Nativity, or a Sign of the same Trigon, (which is ever semblable unto it) hath ever been found to possess the East Angle at the time of the serious propounding any Horary Question. And this I have more than an hundred times proved true, by an after knowledge of the true Genesis or Nativity of sundry Querents. A Conspicuous Truth thereof it is, that the Heavens, in respect of the same Subject, move to the same effect, by a similitude of Figure. And consequently, an Electi∣on may be profitably made, although the Radix be not known. Some, may also yet further object. If neither a Ra∣dix be known, or a Question seriously propounded by a Querent concern'd, and it be true that the Progresses and Ends of Things answer to their Beginnings; what need then have we to make Elections? — I Answer, — Although the Radix be unknown, and the Person con∣cerned cannot be serious or solicitous enough in his mind to propose a Question; yet is an Election useful. [Tho' I say not so much unto such a Person, as to one more se∣riously and Philosophically affected with the Matter or Thing the Election relates unto.] And that for these Rea∣sons. 1. It discovers Truth in Coelestial Influences, and pre∣vents our admiration at the Events of Things, which
our ignorance often exposes us unto; and convinceth us, that Nature hath a particular design in all her Operations, which is certainly not only a happiness but a honour to understand. , is an Axiome, a Man need not be ashamed of. 2. By an Election we may probably embetter time, (as before I mentioned) and make it more kind to our purpose. It teaching us the true difference between , and , between the opportunity of time to favour us; and Time in general, which may be either prosperous or impropitious unto us. Thus also is Reason known from Chance, or hap-hazzard, and prescience di∣stinguisheth a Man from a Brute. Thus it is, that we are preserv'd by Wisdom, while Fools go on and are punished. 3. And lastly, an Election declares the Fatum Navis, the success of the Ship or Vessel, &c. which cannot but be a satisfaction (at least) unto such Men that are the most indifferent in these Matters. I say, it cannot but be a sa∣tisfaction unto them, to know this, although they can∣not command their Minds or Tongues to an enquiry after it. The Knowledge and Observance of an Election, (be the Radix known or unknown) must therefore be effectu∣al and advantageous. But, leaving these, perhaps too curious disquisitions, as not very proper, or useful to my honest and well∣meaning Sea-Man, or for our vulgar English Readers; for those I foresee will be the cheif Inspectors of this dis∣course. (And indeed I do not Calculate it for the Meri∣dian of any Taller Understanding.) I will now (and it is but time to) come to an Example, the better to Illu∣strate this third way of making an Election.
astrological chart Schema Electionis IN this Figure you see the Lord of the Ascendant and Moon (and pray think not that I do omit minding the Moon to have Cancer for her House, and that Jupiter doth there receive Exaltation) are admirably well posited, and in the prime Angles of Heaven. The Moon also is above the Earth, (which Haly says, is very profitable in such matters) Very swift in motion, and in Trine and Reception of Jupiter (an Eminent advantage in all Na∣val Expeditions) and happily transferrs the Light of Sol and Marsby an amicable Beam unto him, promising all imaginable Felicity to the Voyage, or Undertaking, de∣signed by this Election. 'Tis true, the Sun and Jupiter are in Opposition from the Ascendant and seventh Angles: but that is not of force sufficient to destroy, or yet to much prejudice the De∣sign,
by reason of the aforesaid Noble Configurations, and the happy transferrency of Influence mentioned. Indeed, Saturn in the Ninth, should, not only make the Voyage somewhat more slow, than might be expected, but a little improsperous also, had he not been Lord of the Ninth House, and his Languid Plumbeous Nature and In∣fluence, so happily vivify'd by the presence of Venus, and by the Sextile Ray of Mercury cast unto him, à dignitati∣bus Jovis. To acquaint you with matter of Fact, (for this is no assumed, but a real Instance.) This Vessel did then first of all weigh Anchor for its Voyage designed; but could not then go very far, because it was against the Tide. How∣beit, it having so fortunate a beginning, its progress both backward and forward was prosperous; and its return also was moderately speedy, non obstante Saturn his Po∣sition in the Ninth House, and in a Fixed Sign. Whence it is Obvious, that the Moon is to be preferred before the Lord of the Ninth Angle, The Moon Governess of the Seas. in an Election for a Sea-Voyage. She is indeed, the Lady of the Seas, and it is by her Magne∣tique Virtue and Influence, that they both Ebb and Flow, and in all things they are obedient to her Motion. And thus you have all the three several ways of Framing an Election taught you, and that I conceive very plainly; which was the design of this particular Chapter to do. To conclude this, A Nativity more No∣ble than a Question. A Question than an Ele∣ction. It will not be amiss to mind you here, that a Na∣tivity in these matters, is more No∣ble than an Horary Question, as the Root is more Excellent than the Branch. And an Horary Question is more worthy than an Election, singly and alone considered; as preventative Physick is preferrible before Curative.
CHAP. III. Consisting of Astrological Rules and Aphorisms, proper for the right understanding the Success or Misfortune of any Ship at Sea, relating to the beginning of its Voyage; or its Original Launching: or to an Horary Question of such Ship or Vessel, the beginning of whose Voyage is not known, or the Nativity thereof to be had; or to Elections, &c. thereunto belonging, so far as is discerna∣ble by the Power of second Causes. THe Great and Manifold Hazzards that Princes and Merchants do daily run at Sea, either by Enemies, ill Weather, Rocks and Sands, &c. should (methinks) invite them to a serious minding of the Position of Hea∣ven and Stars, under which they begin such Eminent Un∣dertakings. And, that I may be the more serviceable unto Persons, of all Conditions, in so Eminent and Weighty an Affair, and thereby yield some probable encouragement at least, unto so Noble and Useful an Art as Navigation; I will (God permitting) in this Chapter, produce unto you, some, of the many Aphorisms left us by the Antient Sages in this Science, relating to the Safety or Danger of all Maritime Affairs. And for Methods sake, I shall divide this Chapter into the several Parts or Sections following. 1. Of the Division of the Ship, and how the parts thereof are Astrologically referred to the parts of the Zodiack, according to the Arabian Haly. 2. Of the proper Significators of a Ship or Vessel, both in respect of a Question, Election, &c. 3. Of the several Arguments that promise safety or secu∣rity to a Ship rither at, or going to Sea. 4. Of the Testimonies of Hazzard and Danger, that Astrologically, attends all Maritime Affairs.
SECT. I. Of the Division of the Ship, and how the parts thereof, are referred to the parts of the Zodiack. THe Learned Haly, De judici is Astre. p. 3. cap. 14. fol. 115. from Peo∣lemy, refers the parts of a Ship to the several parts of the Zodiack, thus, — Da Signum ♈. Pectoribus Navis, ♉. ei quod est sub pectoribus modicum versus aquam, ♊. gubernaculo Navis, ♋. fundo Navis, ♌. summitati Navis quae stat super aquam, ♍. Ventri Na∣vis, ♎. ei quod sublevatur & deprimit de pectoribus Navis in aqua, ♏. loco ubi morant Nauta, ♐. ipsi Nautae, ♑. finibus existentibus in Nave, ♒. Magistro Navis, ♓. Re∣mis, (i. e.) Give (saith he) the Sign ♈. to fignifie the Breast of the Ship, and so of the rest of the parts, as in the following Scheam. ♈. The Breast of the Ship. ♉. That part under the Breast towards the Water. ♊. The Rudder or Stern. ♋. The Bottom or Floor. ♌. The Top above Water. ♍. The Belly. ♎. The part above the Breast of the Ship in the Water. ♏. The place for the Marriners. ♐. The Marriners themselves. ♑. The Ends of the Ship. ♒. The Master or Captain. ♓. The Oares. This Division of Haly's, or Ptolemy's rather, was not wholly followed by Alkindus. For he, in these matters, gave the Ascendant to signifie the Breast of the Ship, and the seventh Angle to represent the hinder part of the Ship, the Mid-Heaven to denote the upper part of the Vessel, Haly, pars. 3. cap. 14. fol. 115. and the fourth-House to denote the Bot∣tom of the Ship, or that part of her which is under Water. Then, the four intermediate
Houses between the Mid-Heaven, Ascendant and fourth House, to signifie the right side of the Ship, viz. the 11th. 12th. 2d. and 3d. and the four succedent and cadent Houses between the fourth House, the Occident, and Mid-Heaven, to signifie the left side of the Ship, &c. — Now, I am so far from siding with one of these Learned Authors against the other, that I know no reason but I may embrace both their Opinions as to this matter. Nei∣ther do they thwart, but strengthen each other, and the Truth also. For, the first Opinion, makes a Division in regard of the Signs of the Zodiack; the second, in re∣spect of the Houses of Heaven. Nor is the one perfect, or fit to be relied on, without the assistance of the other. For the Houses have their perfect and unalterable signifi∣cations, (as both these Authors largely teach) as well as the parts of the Zodiack. And, when Morinus preten∣ded to Demonstrate this as Truth unto the World, (which I must needs commend, with the Learned Oughthred, for an Excellent piece of service done, not only to this Science, but to all the Sons of Art. Yet) he had been more ingenious, I must needs say, and more Eminently to have been extolled, had he related what others had hinted at (in that matter, although not all out so happily) before him. Nor do I find, that, that Great Philosopher and Physician hath made any remarkable Discoveries in, or Additions to Astrology, beyond what the Ingenious Cardan, and (before him) Ptolemy, and sundry Greek and Arabian Authors had done. Only, he hath had the happiness to live in an Age, wherein the Latine Tongue, and perhaps Logique and Philosophy too, have been more Eminently encouraged, and made use of, than in some of their more Cloudy Days; and so he hath been enabled to speak the same things as they did, in more Curious, Apt and Quaint terms. I wish he had not let slip, (not to say Exploded, many of the Excellent Practical Truths that those Worthy Fathers of this Art took great pains to Advance and Promote. Morine was a Man fitted
more for Oratory, than Astrology, as by his Elevated Mercury is sufficiently Demonstrable. And, his Nativi∣ty in a great many things, better bespeaks his Parts and Abilities, than his Book; although the one had but a small portion of time spent in its Erection, and the other Thir∣ty years in its Compiling. Not that I envy the Industry and Pains of this Worthy Philosopher, (for I am willing to pay him the Tribute of thanks for lending me in ma∣ny things his Eyes) but wish only, that he had spent as much time among Practical, as Theorical Authors, in this Science, or had been as happy as Cardan, or Gocleine, &c. in the general Practice thereof. SECT. II. Of the proper Significators of a Ship or Vessel, as well in an Election, as Question, &c. SOme Astrologers are of Opinion, that the Ascendant shall in all respects, signifie a Ship or Vessel, be it either in Question, Nativity or Election. Others urge, that the Moon and Ascendant generally are Significators of the State of the whole Ship and its Voyage. So Haly. These are his words — Luna & Ascendens generaliter sunt significatores totius Navis, & suorum statuum, &c. (i. e.) The Ascendant and the Moon are generally the significators of the whole Ship, and of its success, and the Lord of the Ascendant shall signifie the Persons Sail∣ing therein. — Bonatus tells us, that we ought prin∣cipally to have regard to the Moon. For, saith he, — Ipsa habet participationem & significationem in omni Prin∣cipio, in omni Itinere, in omni Loco, in omni Tempore, in omni Re, at{que} in omni Hora, (i.e.) The Moon hath par∣ticipation and signification in every Beginning, in every
Journey, in every Place, in every Time, in every Thing, and in every Hour. So great is the Influence of the Moon, she being the Conveyer of all the other Pla∣nets Influxes to us, that she is, by us, to be excluded no∣thing, that hath relation to Humane Business or Action. And it is no way to be doubted, but that the Ascendant and the Moon both, have a very great power and signi∣fication of the good or bad success that attends not only Ships, &c. but all things under the Sun; as they shall happen to be either afflicted or assisted in your Figure. But, of this more anon, when I come to the Third Section. But then, by the leave of the Learned Haly, &c. I must tell you, that it is thus to be understood only in Elections, or in the Radix, or time of the first Launching of a Ship. For in Questions concerning Vessels or Voyages, &c. Not the Ascendant, but seventh House shall positively signifie the Vessel; That being the Grand Angle of Matters or Business quesited, as casting an op∣posite Ray to the Horoscope, which ever must signifie the Person Enquiring, or thing begun, &c. unless (to con∣tradict the reason hereof) we should suppose the Ship of a capacity to speak, and so able to propound its own Question; Then indeed, the Ascendant were proper to signifie the Vessel. But since all things inanimate, as wanting the Organs of Speech, cannot therefore be thought to desire, much less to discourse their Necessi∣ties; we will therefore rest satisfy'd, that there is an ab∣solute inability in them, either to Enquire, or Require, &c. Therefore the Ascendant in matters of Questions, shall only signifie the Person Enquiring; and the seventh An∣gle shall ever represent the Ship or Vessel enquired after. And, this is the difference between a Question, and a Radix or Election, in an Astrological sence. In the Question, there is a Person Interrogating, which the As∣cendant (you have heard for what reason) must ever sig∣nifie. In a Radix or Election, there is no Person Enquiring,
any more than in the Figure of the Birth of a Man or Woman: and therefore the Ascendant therein (with our Learned Arabian) shall represent the Vessel or Ship. That being the prime Angle, (or Point rather) upon, or toward which the Coelestial Atoms make their Impression principally, to be distinguished in time, by Effects of Good or Bad Fortune, upon the Person or Thing born or begun under it; as is to be known by observing the true panctum temporis thereof. The Astrologer therefore, must vary his Rules or Aphorisms in matters of Questions, from those of Elections and Radixes, by remembring (as he is here taught) ever to take the seventh Angle in the place, or stead of the Horoscope; and the Lord of the seventh, in the room of the Lord of the Ascendant, and therewith consider, and apply thereto, the Moons Configurations, together with her Applications and Separations, &c. and you shall rarely fail (except through inadvertency) in your Judgments. Further proof hereof, I shall produce in its proper place. Thus are you informed of the proper significations of a Ship or Vessel; and how they are to be varied in rela∣tion to a Question, Radix or Election, which was the business of this Section. SECT. III. Astrological Aphorisms, or Rules, of the safety of a Ship, either at, or going to Sea; or at the time of its first Launching. THe Artist having well weighed the nature of the Question, and considered and compared it with all its Circumstances, must first erect his Scheam of Hea∣ven, with respect to the time it is propounded in, and
Latitude of the place it is propounded under; and then, either mentally, or otherwise, he must sum up all the Arguments of Happiness and Misfortune he shall find therein; and, according to the Major, or great number of Testimonies, let him give his Judgment, either of success or prejudice. And to assist him the better here∣in, let him well ponder the sence and meaning of the following Rules. 1. When in your Figure you find the Principal Signifi∣cators of a Ship or Vessel, (you were acquainted which they were before) and of the Men failing therein, to be strong and well posited, and every way free from Affli∣ction, you may then Judge safety and success to the Ship, and to the Mariners also. 2. If the Ascendant of the Figure shall be Fortunate, and the Lord of the Ascendant Unfortunate, and in ab∣ject places of the Heavens; you may then Judge that the Ship or Vessel shall do well, and arrive happily to its intended Port, or Haven; but that there will happen Dammage and Misfortune to the Men sailing therein. 3. And, if you find in the Figure, the Moon, and the Fortunate Stars Angular, and well affected, and the In∣fortunes Cadent, and otherwise dejected and oppressed; you may then conclude, that the Ship and her Lading will go very safe to her Harbour, or intended Port; and this without any interruption. So happy is it, when you find the Arguments of Mischief under Hatches, and those of good success, exalted. 4. If at any time you chance to find in your Figure, the Arguments of safety, and the Testimonies of danger to be equal; and that your Significations of safety hap to be derived from the more Noble parts of the Figure, then shall the Vessel in question be wholly freed from the dan∣gers menaced, although it fortune to be never so severely and smartly besieged or encountered by them. 5. When you find that the principal significators of the Ship or Vessel are swift in motion, and happily assisted
of the Fortunate Stars; and that those Stars fortune to be in good places of the Figure above the Earth, the Ship shall then make both a speedy and successful Voyage. Such an one, as shall be profitable to the Owners, and re∣putable to the Master thereof, &c. and this shall be the more Eminent and Considerable, if together herewith, the Lord of the Second, and of the part of Fortune shall assist. 6. Royal Fixed Stars upon the Angles of the Figure, at the time when any Ship or Vessel is first Launched; or at the beginning of a Voyage, or its first weighing Anchor, &c. always denotes such Ship or Voyage to be more than or∣dinary famous for, and in Action and Business; and to be capable of doing and enterprizing something, beyond what other Ships do commonly promise, or are known to perform. 7. In Sea-Voyages, or in matters of Maritime con∣cern, it is most natural and proper for Signs of the Wa∣try Trigon to ascend the Horoscope; (chiefly Cancer: that being, not only the Mansion-house of the Moon, but the Exaltation of Jupiter, as by the foregoing System is taught.) And if the Moon be above the Earth, in good Aspect, viz. Sextile or Trine thereunto, and free from all Oppressions of the Ʋnfortunate Stars; there is then no fear or doubt, but happiness will attend such Voyage. 8. When the Degrees of the Horoscope, Mid-Heaven, Sun and Moon, the Lord of the Horoscope and Dispositer of the Moon, are found to be such, as Astrologers term, Light, Masculine, and Encreasing Fortune, (for there are such particular affections to parts of the Signs, as well as to the whole Sign, as I shall elsewhere prove.) A Ship then setting sail, weighing Anchor, or being then Launched, will (in its Life, or Voyage) meet with splen∣did Honour and Success, other Arguments of good For∣tune herewith concurring. 9. Moveable Cardinal Signs posessing the Horoscope of your Figure, (if other Testimonies but moderately con∣cur)
do declare a Happy, Prosperous, and Swift Voyage to a Ship then setting sail. The same occurring at the Launching of a Ship, denotes it to be excellently happy for service and sailing. 10. The Sun, Moon, Jupiter, Venus, &c. in your Ascendant, or Mid-Heaven, or, the Lord of the Ascen∣dant in the Tenth, or Lord of the Tenth in the Ascendant ever declares Fortunate Vessels at their first Launching; and, if it thus happen at the beginning of Sea Voyages, it portends not only good success to the Ship or Vessel, &c. but Presages great Honour to the Commander thereof, and advantage to the Labourious and Industrious Mari∣ners. 11. Many Fortunate Stars in the Eleventh House, well beholding the Part of Fortune, the second House or their Lords, always declares the Ship or Vessel to be succesful in Merchandizing, and that the Owners of such Ship shall grow Rich apace by her. Such Positions in a Man of War, shews her Victorious, and to be Master of many Prizes, and over many Enemies. 12. The Moon in Sextile, Quadrate, or Trine of the Sun, Jupiter or Venus, increasing in Light and Motion, denotes admirable sailers; and makes also, very auspi∣cious and speedy Voyages. And, if she happen not to be in her Detriment, or, in via Combusta; but on the contrary, free from all manner of Affliction, and Posited in a good part of Heaven, the success and swiftness thereof, will be the more remarkable. 13. The Moon with Mercury in the second House, or in good Aspect unto it, or to the Lord thereof; or, their being in Conjunction in the Tenth House, in amicable Po∣sition of the second, or of his Lord, declares Fortunate and Prosperous Voyages; and likewise portends such Ves∣sels to be thriving and successful, that are so Launched. 14. When you find the Moon in good Aspect of Mars supra Terram, and in an Airy or Fiery Sign, it declares a Vessel so Launched, or then setting Sail for a Voyage,
to have, not only success against, or freedom from Ene∣mies, but a Victory over them: and it also adds Courage and Confidence to the Commander and Sea-man thereof. 15. The Fortunate Planets in the Oriental Quarter of Heaven, or above the Earth, and the Infortunes in the Occidental, or under the Earth, declares success to a Ves∣sel so Launched, or setting Sail, &c. at the beginning, or in the first part of its Voyage, or Life; but, toward the latter part of either, an Eclipse thereof. ☞ Note here, good Reader, that it is in Astrology, as in Grammar. There is no General Rule but admits of an Exception. And therefore the Artist must be sure in his Judgment upon things of this Nature, not to pro∣nounce Happiness rashly, or, upon one single Testimo∣ny, to a Ship, or Voyage, but consider the Arguments or Exceptions against his Rule for success, as well as that alone; and so doing, he may (by Gods assistance) pro∣ceed to give his Opinion or Judgment thereon determi∣nately, and for the Honour of Truth. SECT. IV. Shewing the several Arguments of Danger, which Astro∣logically attend any Ship or Vessel from the time of its first Launching, Weighing Anchor, &c. HAving already acquainted you with the several Ar∣guments of good success, that impends over Ves∣sels, at the time of their first Launching, &c. (and I need not Apologize that I began with them, since happi∣ness ought to have the precedency of Misfortune, at least in the esteem of Men, let them be never so severe in the Study and Practice of Philosophy; Good being ever preferrible to Evil.) I come now to present you with
the most Eminent Testimonies of Danger that naturally attends such Eminent Actions; hoping thereby to assist Mankind how to prevent many of the Misfortunes they are constantly subject unto, by a non-observance of the Principiums of such great Affairs. And beginning with the 55 Aphorism of Ptolemy's Centiloquium for the Ease and Benefit of the Artists Memory, I shall give you them Aphoristically, as I did the other. 1. The Malignant Influence of Mars against Ships is diminished, when he is placed neither in the Mid-Heaven, or Eleventh Angle; In those places if he be posited, the Vessel will be destroy'd by Pirates: But if the Horoscope be afflicted by any Martial Fixed Stars, the Ship will then be burned. 2. When you find the significators of a Ship or Vessel, weak and infortunated of the Malefiques, (for there is a great difference between a Negative and a Positive weak∣ness of a Planet) and in ill places of the Heavens also; much danger then attends, not only the Vessel or Ship that is then Launched, or so setting sail, or weighing Anchor, &c. but of all things or persons in her, or belonging to her; if not a total or absolute loss of both them and her too. 3. If in your Figure you find, a Malevolent Planet ha∣ving Dignities in the Eighth House, to be posited in the Ascendant; or, that the Lord of the Ascendant shall be posited in the Eighth; or in evil Aspect of the Lord of the Eighth, Twelfth, Sixth, or Fourth Houses; all these declare the Loss or Ruine of the Vessel, and of all things in her, or at least a very great hazzard thereof. Nor can such Ship be successful either to Commander or Sea-men. 4. When in the Figure you find the Moon to be under the Suns Beams, applying to Combustion, or in that part of Heaven called the Combust-way; or otherwise afflicted under the Earth, you may then be bold to pronounce great Danger and Misfortune, to attend such Ship or Ves∣sel, that is so Launched, or that under such a position ei∣ther weigheth Anchor, or sets sail.
5. If at any time you happen to find the Ascendant and Moon unfortunate in the Figure, and the Lord of the Ascendant to be strong and well posited; The Ship is then likely to be in a bad condition, and to encounter many misfortunes; but her Lading, and the Men in her, will do well, and come off without much prejudice. 6. When the Infortunes shall be in Angles or succedent parts of the Figure, and the Fortunes happen to be Ca∣dent, &c. the Vessel that is then Launched, will be sub∣ject to many Eminent misfortunes; or, the Ship that is then weighing Anchor for a Voyage, will receive very signal and remarkable prejudice therein. And (let the industrious Artist be but careful to observe it, and he shall find) the misfortune will happen upon that part of the Vessel, signified by the Sign where the Infor∣tune is posited. 7. If the Infortune threatning Danger, be Saturn; In a Radix, or the Launching of a Ship, he menaceth it with a troublesome, but a short Life, and that it shall be split or sunk, before it have done or performed any Emi∣nent or Considerable Service. In a Vessel setting sail for a Voyage, he declares it to be improsperous, and in great danger of sinking, running into Sands, or splitting, &c. and that the Men shall either be drowned, or else subject to very much sorrow and hardship: unless their own par∣ticular Fates are contradictory to the general Fate of the Ship; then (indeed) they may escape with the less haz∣zard or mischief. 8. But when the Infortune threatning danger, shall be Mars, and he in any of his Essential Dignities, or aspe∣cting a place where he hath power, or else posited in an Earthly Sign, he then portends the same prejudices that Saturn did, but with much greater violence: and, before the Catastrophe of the Vessel, he declares many remarka∣ble and various troubles to happen unto it.. 9. If Mars shall be found to afflict the Lords of the Chief Angles of the Figure, and the Dispositer of the
Moon also, the Men that sail in the Ship, shall be in very great dread of their Enemies, and that in such a manner, vehementur trepidabunt, that they shall exceedingly trem∣ble by reason of them. 10. If, together with this affliction of Mars, there hap∣pen other Arguments of Evil in the aforesaid Parts or Signs, there will then be Quarrelling, Controversies, Wounds, and several Thefts committed, among the Men of the Ship, and thereby they will give advantage to their Enemies: they will (under such Positions) be al∣ways putting Frauds upon, and Cozening of one another. But this chiefly, when Mars shall be placed in Signs re∣presenting the upper part of the Ship. 11. But if it fortune that Saturn do afflict after the same manner, as before we have said of Mars, there will then also happen many Thefts and Knavery's in the Ship, and sundry of the forementioned Mischiefs, but not so violent, and together therewith, tedious and troublesome Voyages; but yet there will be no blood∣shed in the Vessel. 12. When the Signs Infortunated happen to be in the Mid-Heaven and Ascendant, and Mars prove the affli∣cting Planet, the Vessel will then be burnt, either by ac∣cident within it self, or else will be extreamly torn and shatter'd, nay possibly destroyed by the force of her Ene∣mies, and the Captain or Prime Officer thereof, slain; (except, as formerly I noted, his particular Fate shall con∣tend against the general Fate of the Ship, to preserve him; yet then shall he not escape without great danger) to di∣stinguish herein, you must consult Mars his Relation in the Figure, viz. whether he have better Dignities in the Eleventh, than in the Seventh House. But if Saturn be the oppressing Planet, then extremity of Weather, or some Leak springing, or accidental running on the Rocks, &c. will either greatly distress, or destroy the Vessel; or else a tedious Captivity will attend her; chiefly, if the Lord of the Twelfth concur in signification.
13. If Mars be in a Humane Sign, the Ship shall then be burnt by the Power and Fury of her Enemies in Fight, (if Mars in your Figure be Lord of the Seventh House) or by accident from some of the Men within her: And the danger shall begin in that part of her, signified by the Place, or Sign, that Mars is possessed of in the Heavens at the time of Launching, &c. 14. But if Saturn shall be the threatning Planet, in the stead of Mars, and he posited in the Mid-Heaven, the Ship will then be either sunk, or very much dammaged by violent Winds and Weather, by bad Sayls, &c. and the Impediment or Prejudice, will be greater or lesser, ac∣cording to the Dignity or Debility of the Infortune (be it either Saturn or Mars) and his remotion from, or pro∣pinquity to, the Beams of the Fortunate Stars. 15. When the Lord of the Eighth shall Infortunate the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Lord of the Ascendant or Moon shall be in the Eighth, the danger that will then happen to the Vessel, will be of the Nature of the Lord of the Eighth, (i. e.) if the Lord of the Eighth shall op∣press the Lord of the Horoscope, the Moon, or her Disposi∣ter; it betokens the Death of the principal Officer of the Ship, viz. the Captain or Master thereof; and many other infelicities will befal the Ship, and the Persons and things therein. 16. When the Lord of the Ascendant, the Moon, and her Dispositer and the Lord of the Ninth, shall be slow in Motion, then will the Ship or Vessel, in all probability make a very long and tedious Voyage, and of little pro∣sit to the Owners. Chiefly, if the Lords of the Angles fortune to be slow in Motion also. 17. If it chance to fall out, that there be in the Figure Enmity between the Lord of the Ascendant and Disposi∣ter of the Moon, and no reception happen between them nor yet any assistance from the Benevolent Planets; the will the Sea-men or Marriners Contend or Quarrel with each other, and there will be great Discord, Grumbling
and Murmuring, between the Captain, or Master, and them: And they, whose Significator is the strongest and best posited, shall prevail (i. e.) if the Lord of the As∣cendant be most powerful, the Sea-men will prevail, and overcome their Superiors: (we have known it too true, that sometimes a Mutiny or Rebellion hath prospered.) But, if the Dispositer of the Moon be strongest, the Captain, Master, and Officers of the Ship, will have the better, and shall, with little trouble, hansomly reduce the Marriners and Sea-men to Obedience, and good Order. 18. VVhen violent fixed Stars shall be upon the Ascen∣dant, or with the Sun, Moon, or in Opposition to any of the principal parts of the Figure, at the time of first Launching of a Ship, or, at a Vessels first setting Sail, &c. much Violence, and sundry various Hazzards attend such Vessels or Voyages. 19. If the Moon shall be in Conjunction, Quadrate, or Opposition of Saturn or Mercury, at the Launching of a Ship, or at the beginning of a Voyage, it declares much infelicity to befal it in its Progress: And, unless other Testimonies interpose, the absolute loss of the Vessel, either by Enemies, or ill weather; according to the re∣lations of those Planets in the Figure. But, if there be Arguments of safety to the Vessel in general, it shall (by Gods blessing) escape both Captivity and Submersion. Howbeit, it shall undergo much Hardship, Labour, Dif∣ficulty and Trouble; and sometimes, (Saturn being the Natural Significator of Indigence and Poverty; and is so to purpose, when he oppresseth the Significator of Activity and Industry, &c.) may be driven to a want or scarcity of Victuals and fresh water; or, at the least, a want of that which is good and fit for their nourish∣ment and use. 20. If, in your Figure, you find the part of Fortune, the part of Substance, and their Lords to be unfortunate, such affliction threatens much Loss and Dammage to the
Master and Owners of the Vessel, in the Commodities or Goods, with which the Ship is La den. Nota bene. —And, here, let me advise the nimble Artist, that he do not too confidently explode the Arabian parts, &c. but consider wisely, whether they are not to be admitted as assisting Causes, of good or bad Fortune, and whether they, in Conjunction with other more powerful ones, do not, only remarkably add weight, but turn the Scale too, in many Mundane Effects? If Experience may bear any Testi∣monie, that speaks loudly for the Truth hereof. Many will say, no Reason can be rendred of such things. If by reason, they mean a Logical Demonstration, it will be as hard thereby, to prove that twice two makes four. But, if by Reason, they mean a probable Analogy to some certain Mathematical, or Geometrical Truth, why may not a part proportional be as well drawn from the Sun, Moon, and Ascendant, &c. as from any Arithme∣tical , or Numbers known and given? I, and this to some apparent, reasonable, and visible effect also? But, if nothing were to be urged for proof of it, save Experience only; we are not to reject fair and known Truths, because we can give no Philosophical Reason for them. Then, what would become of the Load-Stone, Weapon-Salve, Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea? cum mul∣tis aliis, &c. Sith the best of Philosophers have ever been, are, and perhaps ever will be, in quest after the Reason of these Matters. And, since we are necessitated, many times, to allow of a Faith in Natural Knowledge, how much more then ought we to admire and adore Theo∣logy, which by that Divine Clue, brings us, from all our troublesome Enquiries here below, unto the Habitation of God and Angels? But to my purpose again, from whence I digressed. 21. When the Lord of the Second shall be remote from his Second, and also from the second House from the Moon; and the Lord of the Part of Fortune, removed
from the Part of Fortune, (i.e.) Cadent from them, or in Quadrate or Opposition to them; Significat quod habebunt victus indigentiam, &c. it betokens (saith my Author) want of Victuals, Haly, de judic: Astrorum. and of common Necessaries for the Sea-men and Passengers. And if these things happen in Watry Signs, there will be a scarcity of Fresh Water fit for their use: If in Earthy Signs, or those of the Airy Trigon, then will they be put to it for want of Victuals and Fireing, by reason whereof, much trou∣ble and discontent will befal them. 22. When Mars shall be weak in the Figure of Hea∣ven, at the Launching of a Man of War, or, at the setting Sail of any Vessel, Merchants Ship, or Other, and in ill aspect of the Moon and Lord of the Ascendant, it declares several troubles to such Vessel, and shews them always to be worsted by their Enemies in Fight. 23. The Moon slow in Motion, and in ill aspect of Sa∣turn or Mars, though other Trstimonies are moderately promising, it intimates to a Ship then Launched, or setting Sail, &c. a troublesom and doubtful Fate, or Voyage: And shews likewise that the Sea-men which shall be, or go, in her, to be much out of heart, desponding and despairing of either success or security. 24. All the Planets slow in Motion, and under the Earth, at the time when any Ship is first Launched, Por∣tend it to be a Vessel but of obscure Fame, and of very poor and mean Action. If, at the beginning of any Voyage, they happen to be so found, they demonstrate it to be tedious and flow, and in many things improspe∣rous, Cloudy, and Unsuccessful. Howbeit, the Fate of the Former, and Success of the Latter, shall prove bet∣ter at the last, than at the first. 25. The Dragons Head is to be considered in these Judg∣ments, as an adjuvant Testimony of Good, and the Dra∣gons Tail is ever known to encrease Arguments of Evil.
26. When Dark, Azimene, Pitted, Void, or Smoa∣ky Degrees ascend the Horoscope, under which a Ship is first Launched, or doth set Sail for a Voyage, a Cloudy Fortune will attend the Former, with several notable haz∣zards, &c. and, it is to be feared, that much Mischief and Unluckiness will befal the Latter, before its return home. Chiefly, if, together herewith, other Arguments concur. To conclnde, you must ever remember, to observe, in all your Judgments of this Nature, the Major Number of Testimonies, whether they be for Good or Evil For∣tune, and by them you are to guide your Opinion in all matters Astrologically. If the Major Number of Testi∣monies be for Good, then there is no doubt (by Gods Blessing) of Prosperity to the Ship, or Voyage. If the greater Number of Arguments be for Evil, then an un∣successful Voyage, or Vessel, is to be feared. And, in this Latter, can you do better, than either to perswade your Querent to let the Voyage alone, or else to save him∣self by Insurance? And, in the Former, you may con∣fidently give encouragement, and (when the worst is doubted or dreaded) perswade him to keep his praemium Money. Thus have you all the (necessary) Aguments, both of Good and Evil, of Encouragement and Dis∣couragement, proper and pertinent to this most weighty and considerable purpose. And so I have finished my Theorical Part of this Treatise, and shall in the next Chapter endeavour to improve it (for the Artists ease, and the Worlds benefit) with Variety of Practical Ex∣amples.
CHAP. IV. In which you have the Truth of the former Doctrine Illu∣strated, and made good by sundry Famous Instances and Examples; being so many certain Experiments of the verity of Coelestial Influences. ANd, as I have proceeded in the Theorical Part, by a tripartite distinction, so I shall here (by Gods assistance) endeavour to make that good in a triple Divi∣sion of Proofs or Experiments, by applying them to their several Parts therein, &c. 1. In 10 Nativities, of Ships or Vessels. 2. In 10 Elections, of Ships or Vessels. 3. In 20 Questions, of Ships or Vessels. Not, but that I could in the room of these, if it were needful, produce Hundreds of Examples of this Nature, that have happily occur'd to me in my almost Forty years Practice of Astrology. But presuming these to be, pos∣sibly, super-sufficient for the proof of the Matter in Que∣stion, or under Discourse, rather; I shall not trouble my self to multiply Instances, but rest satisfy'd with these few, as having thereby shewn the Ingenious Merchant, and Industrious Sea-man a way, how he may (sub Deo) befriend himself in the beginning of his greatest Maritime Affairs. And so I come to my Examples.
SECT. I. Of the Nativities of Ten Excellent Ships, some of which have seen their Fates already; and others of them, have the Success or Misfortune, (unto which they are liablt) hinted at Astrologically. BUt, before I begin, I must request you to bear in mind, That the Nativity of a Ship or Vessel (as I have formerly told you) is that Time, in which it was first Launched after its being Built; it receiving then the Im∣pression of Coelestial Atoms, or Influence (for it is all one) for its Success or Misfortune ever afterwards; the Water being that Element, in, and by, which it shall be more or less Active or Passive, and shall receive accordingly Honour or dishonour, &c. I. NATIVITY, is that of the Gallant Ship call'd the Defiance. astrological chart The DEFIANCE Frigat Launched at Deptford, ☿ 1666.
Having in my Ephemeris for 1670. Printed this Emi∣tent Example, I shall here Transcribe the same verbatim, that I therein said of this Noble Vessel. This Gallant Ship was first Launched at the time with∣in mentioned; and then began to receive the Impression of the Stars, for its Action and Duration in the World. The Nativity of it was inauspicious, as you may see by that reciprocal Argument of Mischeif, so Fatal in all Coe∣lestial Figures, viz. The Lord of the Ascendant in the Eighth, and Lord of the Eighth in the Ascendant. Haly advises us in every thing we begin, to see that the Moon be not in any ill condition. And fol. 303. de Jud. Astr. numbers up ten ways she may be said to be ill: and, in this very Figure, I find her suffer in three of them directly. (1.) In her being Cadent froman Angle. (2.) As in the Terms of the Infortunes; to which I may add, she is with Violent and Tempestuous Stars. (3.) By being void of Course. The same Author tells us in another place, That in an Election (or Nativity of this kind) we ought not by any means, to place either of the Infortunes in the Ascendant, or in any of the Angles. These are his words. — Ne sint Infortunia in Ascendente, nec in aliquo Angulorum. But herein we find his advice directly opposed: for both the Infortunes are in Angles, and the Dragons Tail also. He further says, Ascendens fignificat initium illius cujus est res, & Dominus Ascendentis, Medium; & Dominus Domini Ascendentis significat finem illius cujus est res. And herein, the Reciprocal and Receptional position of the Lord of the Eighth, and Lord of the Ascendant expound the Rule exactly as shall appear by the matter of Fact, which was thus.— As soon as this curious Built Ship was fitted for Service, that Honourable and Valiant Person, Sir Robert Holms, was Graced with the Command of her, or she rather, with such a Worthy Commander. And in her he bravely Fought the Dutch, and did Gallant Service against them,
as well in open Sea, as at the Vly. You see the Moon is in Trine of Mars, making her successful enough for Action, though not for Duration. For after all the No∣ble Services performed in her, she was laid up in Har∣bour in the Thames; where, on De∣cember the 8th. Vid. Ptol. Centilo{que} Aph. 55. 1668. she (being then not full three years old) was, by an unhappy accident Fired, and make uncapable of Service. We have an old Proverb, which says, Tide will stay for no Man. And it is true: but if one Tide be not fit for the favouring so Eminent a matter, as the Launching of such a Ship, it had been no great injury to have tarried for another. But now this Gallant Ship is lost, it is too late to complain. Any one vers'd in Astrology will tell you, That at the very time this Vessel was burned, it laboured under the malicious Influences of two bad Directions, viz. The Ascendant to the Body of Mars, and the Moon to the Pleiades. And; what if I should tell you, That the en∣vious Planet Saturn, was just upon the Ascendant in its Revolutional Figure for that year? It is true. And is al∣ways dangerous, as well in the Nativities of Ships, as of Men, when ill Directions happen. — These are no illu∣ding Impostures, but concluding Truths. And, I could wish that Astrology were more Universally understood, that such Eminent Dangers might be shun'd and avoided; or, at the least, mitigated.— By this Instance we find, that the Influences of the Stars extend themselves to Things, as well as Men: And that there is nothing in Art or Nature, but is guided (sub Deo) by Astral Power.
II. NATIVITY, is of the good Ship called Charles the Second. astrological chart CHARLES the Second, Launched 1667/8. That this good Ship from its Radix, should be, not on∣ly Fortunate, but, in its kind, Honourable also, a Kingly Sign Ascending, and a Regal Star, (viz. Cor Leonis) ri∣sing therewith, and the Sun, Lord thereof, in Reception of Jupiter and Venus, with Venus her Partil Trine to the Horoscope, do very naturally declare. — Add hereunto, that she was Launched in hora Solis. And what if I should tell you, that it may be looked on, as an Omen of Good, in that it so exactly corresponds with the Good Things, in the Geniture of that Glorious Martyr, King Charles the First, whose Horoscope is the same herewith to a Degree.
The Moon in the Dignities of Mars, in Sextile of Sa∣turn, makes it not only Eminent for Action, but Dura∣tion too. If any one will tell me, that Saturn in ♒. is very strong, which signifies the Enemies of this good Ship; and that the Sun is weak in the Eighth House; and that Saturn is Superiour to the Sun, both in Power in this Fi∣gure and in Order of the Ptolemaick System of the World. I shall tell them again, that Saturn is in the sixth House; (the House of Bondage and Slavery) and although the Moon give virtue to him, yet Mars, the Dispositer of the Moon, infests and afflicts him by a Dexter Quadrate: and that the Sun is in Noble reception of Jupiter, (a Planet on the Medium Caeli in this Figure) and of Venus, who is Lady of the Angle of Honour and Action; and that Venus, the only Friend in this Figure (by her Trigonal Beam to the Horoscope) is in great reception of Mars; all which toge∣ther with Jupiter his being in reception of the Lady of the Mid-Heaven, declare it to be a Ship of Eminent Ser∣vice and Duration, and of Great and Honourable per∣formance; giving Honour to such as shall Command in her, after an extraordinary manner, and also betokens her to be a Victor over all Enemies she shall Encounter with. If the Moon be Hylech, Mars is Alchocoden of this Noble Ship, (and what can be better in the Nativity of a Man of War?) and he being Angular, declares her to live gloriously his great years, and generally, to prove a Terrour to her Enemies. And, hark thee good Reader, do not think but I know, what ♂. and ☋. in Domo 4°. means? and it is no uncommon thing, for a Glorious Morning Sun, that continues his Brightness and Clartude the whole day, to set Cloudy in the Evening.
III. NATIVITY, is of the Loyal London. astrological chart The Loyal LONDON, Launched at Deptford. 1666 In this Figure of Heaven we find, that the Moon is in Opposition to the place of Mars, in the Geniture of the City of London, whose Name this curious Vessel did bear. And things of this Nature, are as properly to be compa∣red with their Originals, as Childrens Nativities are to be considered with their Fathers Radixes; and this course all the Learned in Astrology, unanimously Warrant. The Misfortunes attending this Vessel, are plainly in∣cluded in our second Aphorism of Caution against ills, which before I presented you withal. Mars is in the Ascendant of this Scheam, and in Quadrate Aspect of the Sun in the Mid-Heaven, and both of them Dignified in
the Eighth House, which Astrologically portended a short Life to this curious built Vessel. And accordingly, when the Sun was directed to the Quadrate of Mars, and the Ascendant to his Body, cum & sine Latitudine, this Ship was unfortunately burnt at Chattam in the River of Thames, in somewhat above a years time after its first Launching. Compare the unhappy Fate of this Ship with Aphorism the 11th. of Danger, &c. and tell me if it agree not exactly therewith. In the Genitures of short-liv'd Ships, as were this, and the Defiance before-mentioned, there is no more use of an Alchocoden, than in those of short-liv'd Persons. IV. NATIVITY, is of Sir William Petty's Double Bottom'd SHIP. astrological chart Sir William Petty's Double-bottom'd Ship, Launched 1664
In the Nativity of this curious, but uncouth Vessel, we find as well the Decanate as Terms of Saturn to as∣cend the Eastern Finitor; and the Pleiades, a violent tur∣bulent Costellation there. The Moon was in Opposition of Saturn and Mercury, and carrying their Light to the Sun, by the same unhappy Beam; and Venus Lady of the Ho∣roscope, is in Conjunction with Cauda Draconis, in Domo Saturni. All which, by Aphorisms the 4.6.17.18. before-mentioned, were dangerous, and denoted a short Life and a violent Death, to this neat built Vessel. And accordingly, notwithstanding the Rarity and Curiosity of her Contrivance, she was not suffered long to please the eyes of the World. For in, or about the middle of November 1665. viz. a Year and a Month from its first Launching, it was cast away in a violent Storm about Yarmouth-Road. — It is observable, That Saturn was then on the opposite Point of the Moon in the Nativity thereof. A Transit very dangerous indeed, because they are therein in Opposition Radically. — For Direction, the Moon you see was near the Opposite Points of Mercury and the Sun. And, I can tell you, that both in Men and Things, the Influence of Mercury is oftner felt than his Body is seen. And in this Nativity he may reasonable be esteemed an Enemy: Especially, as having the Sun and Saturn for his Co-partners. Astrologers need not wonder that I do not trouble my self about the Alchocoden in his Geniture, any more than in the last mentioned one: It being, like unto that, a Na∣tivity of short Life.
V. NATIVITY, is of that Gallant Ship, called the EDGAR, Launched at Bristol. astrological chart The EDGAR Launched 1668 This Curious Vessel was called the Edgar, in Honour of Prince Edgar, Son to His Royal Highness James Duke of York; Brother to King Charles the Second, and (then) Lord High Admiral of England, &c. If Fortunate Planets on the Horoscope declare Happi∣ness and Success to Ships that are then Launched, as by Aphorism the 10th. among the Rules of Safety, appears; then will this Princely Vessel generally be Happy, Fortu∣nate and Successful; but chiefly, in the former part of her Life: all the Arguments of Success and good Fortune, in this Nativity, being supra Terram, and in singular good parts of the Heavens.
And, to denote her apt for the more Illustrious and Eminent Actions and Performances, she hath the Lumina∣ries in Sextile Aspect of Jupiter, from the Ninth and Eleventh Houses of the Heavens. And for an absolute and sure Token or Argument of Victory over her Ene∣mies, we find the Lord of the Ascendant in this Figure stronger than the Lord of the Seventh House; and he in Sextile of Mars, the Patron of War and Victory. And, although the Launching of this Gallant Vessel happened a little after a New Moon, and that both the Luminaries are in Platique Quadrate of Mars; yet, the Sun being so Eminently strong in the Figure, and Jupiter casting his Sextile between the Sun and Moon, prohibits what prejudice that menaceth. And the Ship may, (by God's Blessing) and good Repairing and Looking to, live many years, viz. the great years of the Sun, and do very notable and signal Service against her Enemies. Howbeit, I will not say, but the Quadrate mention'd, may denote her liable to many Accidents and sundry Al∣terations in the time of her life; but yet still for the better, by reason of the other more potent Arguments. If Virgo be a Sign Mathematical, and Astrological, as all Astrologers averr; why may I not presume to assert, That this Noble Vessel will have the good Fortune to En∣tertain for her Commanders, good Navigators, and Astro∣logers generally? And this the rather, since Mercury is in Virgo, and so near the Degrees wherein he receives Exaltation.
VI. NATIVITY, is of that Brave and Gallant Vessel, called the RUPERT. astrological chart The RUPERT, Launced 1670. This Curious Vessel, had its Name given it in Honour of the Thrice Illustrious and Valiant Prince, Prince Rupert; Nephew to our Sovereign Lord, King Charles the Second, and second Son to the late King of Bohemia, by that Excellent Queen, the Lady Elizabeth, Sister to King Charles the First, of every Glorious Memory. If Movable Cardinal Signs upon the Angle of a Nati∣vity, shew Eminent and Successful Action, this Gallant Vessel will (no doubt) share considerably therein; and will be more often imploy'd than many of its Fellows: and many times to singular Success, Honour, and Ad∣vantage. I know about seven years old, the Mid-Hea∣ven
herein comes to an Opposition of Mars, and can tell you what it signifies; but I know also, that at the same time, the same significator comes to a Trine of Saturn, and he Exalted both in the Aseendant and second House; which Direction doth considerably ballance the heat of Mars. Howbeit, I must confess, That were not the Glorious Constellation call'd Arcturus Horoscopical, and Jupiter, not only in the Angle of Honour and Dignity, but exal∣ted there, and Venus Lady of the Ascendant in Noble Reception of the Sun; together with Mars Lord of the seventh, his being Stationary in Sextile of Saturn his Dispositor. — Were it not, I say, for these great Ar∣guments of Success, Honour, and good Fortune to this Princely Vessel; — I should somewhat have feared the significations of Luna with the Bulls Eye, applying ad Quadratum Saturni, as also the Position of Venus, in the Eighth House in her Detriment there. Howbeit, I could wish (and I am sure I wish no harm) that, when at any time this Noble Vessel is Launched for service, those Honour'd Persons who shall have the Charge thereof, would not suffer it to be done when the Moon is in any ill Aspect of Saturn; or when the Horo∣scope shall be afflicted of him, or Mars, or Cauda Dra∣conis. Good care being used, this Ship may Live and Flourish happily Eighty and Two Years, from the time of its first Launching. I say, if care and diligence be but used, in the making choise of favourable Elections, when she is to be Launched or fitted for Service.
VII. NATIVITY, is of that Excellent Ship, called the Loyal LONDON. astrological chart The Loyal LONDON, Launched at Deptford. 1670 The Honourable City of London built this Ship in the room of the other of that Name, which was unhappily burnt in the River of Thames; with whose Nativity I presented you before. I cannot say that the Surveyors of this Curious Vessel went Astrologically to work in the Launching of her; and yet I know, there are many Merchants, and Citizens of Eminent Quality, that understand the Art of Astrology very well. But, whether it were done by Art, or Ac∣cident, it is a most singular Election of Time for such a purpose, and an Astrologer could not have performed it better.
If Mars in the Horoscope of the other Ship, called the Loyal London, and in Quadrate of the Sun, were Argu∣ments of that Fatal Catastrophe it so soon underwent; the Sun and Jupiter assisting the Ascendant of this Brave Vessel, signifies, not only a long and prosperous Life unto it, (ever submitting to Divine Providence, which we know, can contradict the Current of second Causes, when, and as oft as it pleaseth) but declares it capable of doing many Great and Noble Things, as well for the Honour of the King and Kingdom in general, as to the Eminent Fame of that Honourable City in particular, whose An∣tient Name she so happily and deservedly beareth. The Moon in Sextile of Mars from the Dignities of the two Superiour Stars, is an Argument of the good Cou∣rage and Conduct that shall always attend it from its Offi∣cers and Commanders. Venus in Taurus in the , together with Ca∣put Draconis on the Cusp thereof, shews it ever to be hap∣pily befriended. The Trine of the Sun and Saturn, and the Position of the Lord of the Medium Coeli in the Horoscope, declares it not only Honourable, &c. but also signifies its Honour to be Eminent and Increasing. It hath a worthy and remarkable Nativity in earnest; and, if not contradicted in its Noble Significations, either by the Fate of Nations, or by that of Persons that shall have the Command of her, she will do very great and admirable things, and fit to be Recorded. The Sun is Hylech, and the good Planet Jupiter Alcho∣coden. Ergo, this curious Frigat may live his great years, which are Seventy and Nine.
VIII. NATIVITY, is of that Princely Vessel, called the Royal CATHERINE. astrological chart The Royal Catherine, Launched at Woolwich, 1664 This curious Vessel was called the Royal Catherine, in Honour of our most Gracious and Pious Queen Kathe∣rine. And, (for a secret Astral Reason) I am of Opini∣on, That the Appellation will prove an Omen of much advantage unto it. That this Noble Vessel shall both do, and suffer, many times, great violence; is most manifest from the Moon, her applying ad oppositum Martis, from violent parts of the Heavens; and from their being in Quadrate Aspect of the Ascendant, and Seventh Angles; as also from its being Launched in hora Saturni.
But that it shall be capable of doing more and greater violence, then it can possibly undergo or suffer, is well denoted by the Great and Signal Receptions of Jupiter, with Saturn, and Mars; as also by Jupiter his being in partil Sextile of the Sun, and above the Earth diurnally, which Astrologers call his Hayne: and these Testimonies are added unto very happily, in that the Ascendant is befriended by Jupiter, Sol, and Mercury. — And, al∣though Jupiter be in Capricorn his fall, Mercury (Lord of the Seventh) is both Retrograde and Combust, and hath no assistance but what he receives from Jupiter. As if this curious Vessel were, not only promised Victory over her Enemies, but to be kind unto them afterwards, and to do them manifest Curtesies. If the Ascendant be Hylech, I am sure Jupiter must be Alchocoden, or Dominus Annorum, and declares this curious built Vessel to continue, from the time of its first Launching, at the least his middle years: perhaps (for the Reasons before-mentioned) she may reach unto his great years.
IX. NATIVITY, is of that Excellent Ship, called the CAMBRIDGE. astrological chart The CAMBRIDGE Launched 1666. This Gallant Vessel had the Name of the Cambridge given unto it, in Honour of the late Duke of Cambridge, a Son of His Illustrious Highness the then Duke of York, Brother unto our Sovereign Lord King Charles II. As the Ship it self is a very curious goodly Vessel in earnest, so it hath a Nativity or Radix suitable. And the Honourable Commanders thereof, will, (I have a con∣fidence) find, that it is no ill or mean Position of Heaven, to have Libra Ascending, and Venus (Governess thereof) in the Medium Caeli, in Trine and Reception of Jupiter. Besides this, as if God and Nature had Destinated this curious built Ship for the performance, and enjoying,
of some more than ordinary Action and Honour, she hath, not less, than four Eminent Shining Stars, and those of great Magnitude too, upon, and in her Mid∣Heaven, viz. Ras Algense, or the Head of Castor, the Head of Hercules, Procyon, and Markob. And she hath three more as considerable Constellations upon, and in her Horoscope, viz. Algarab, or the Right Wing of the Raven,) the Mast of the Ship, and Spica Virginis; of great Mag∣nitude also. Ptolemy in the 36. of his Centiloquium tells us, That the Fixed Stars do design admirable advantage, and remar∣kable Action, &c. which (unless Divine Providence con∣tradict the common Current of Astral Influence) must naturally attend this Excellent Frigat, and Persons rela∣ting to her. Let not the Critical Antagonist think that I overlook the Moons Application ad Quadratum Martis, or Mars being so near the Ascendant, nor yet her being Launched in hora Saturni; or the Sun his being in Platique Opposition of Saturn. I know well, that great Honours are not to be obtained without as great hazards and difficulties; the one, being the Natural way or means to the other. The Angles of this Caelestial Scheam are in movable, Cardinal Signs: which I take to be an additional Ar∣gument of Honour and Success, and greatness of Action. And I can tell you of a very great and active Prince, not long since Regning in Europe, viz. Carolus Gustavus, King of Sweden, that had almost such a like Nativity. And the Heavenly Influences are the same over Things, as Persons, with respect to their Conditions and Capacities. If the Sun be Hylech in this Scheam, the Moon will be Alchocoden; (some I know would accept Jupiter, as be∣ing in Trine of the Lady of the Horoscope; and so, should I have done, had the Ascendant been Hylech) and will therefore (Astrologically) protect this Ship, her middle years. Doth any one desire to know what happen'd unto her,
when the Medium Caeli was directed ad oppositum Saturni? I will answer them, that under that Direction, she was actually against the Dutch in some of the late Eminent Sea Engagements.— I only aim at things in general here, or else I could tell you, when the Ascendant comes ad Quadratum Saturni, and Sol, ad Oppositionem Saturni (nearly about the same time) and the Moon also ad Qua∣dratum Martis.— And when (a little after) the Medium Caeli comes ad Conjunctionem Veneris, & Trinum Jovis, and the Ascendant ad Spicam Virginis.— I say no more but this.—It is a Gallant Vessel in its self; and is likewise (with eminent Hazzards and Dangers) to do great things, as well to the Honour of the English Nation in general; as to the Noble and Valiant Persons that shall have the good Fortune to Command in her, unless their particular Fates oppose her good Significations.— And at last to perish by Fire. X. NATIVITY, is of the Excellent Ship, Named the St. Michael. astrological chart The St. MICHAEL, Launched 1669.
Here are not less than five Planets above the Earth in this Figure; and three of them essentially dignified; and all the Planets in Configuration with one another. If Planets, being above the Earth, dart forth the most powerful Atoms or Influences, upon Persons or Things, born, or begun under them; this curious Ship must hap∣pily share therein, and that to an Eminent degree. And, if the Dignities of the Planets presage publick Honour and Success, &c. this gallant Vessel will never fail there∣of; nor yet of such Employment, Action, or Service, that shall necessarily be an Induction thereunto. Variety of Configurations, declare variety of Action to this hap∣py Vessel. And Mars's Square to the Horoscope, shews them to be violent. To add unto the former Arguments of Fame, and Honorable Action, &c. we have Spita Virginis Culmina∣ting, with the Sun; and divers Stars of the Nature of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, arising with the Horoscope. The Fate of this Ship is like to be such, that she will out∣do many of her Equals, (I mean Ships of the same Rate) in publick Action; and perhaps be oftner in Employment, and upon Business, than many of them: Or, else, I must profess to be ignorant of those notable Arguments for Action and Success mention'd; as also, of all the Planets (Saturn excepted) being very swift in motion in this Ra∣dical Figure. Astrologers tell us, that a Trine of the Sun and Saturn in the Genitures of Persons, (chiefly, from the Ascending part of Heaven) shews them not only Honourable, and Eminent, &c. but gives them Power or command over the Lives and Fortunes of others.— Why may not this goodly Vessel then, have the same good Fortune, and Command over Ships, as the Persons, &c. over Men? But herein, is, not only a Trine of the Sun and Saturn, but the same benign Ray between Jupiter and Venus, and that from watery Signs too; which enforceth the former Significations, and declares this Princely Vessel, to
be attended with an Active and Admirable Fate in earnest, during the time of its continuance. The Sun is Hylech, being in the Medium Caeli, with an Eminent Star, of an Excellent Influence and Nature Which notably adds to the former mention'd Arguments of Suc∣cess. The Friendly Planet Venus, is Alchocoden, or giver of years; and although she be in Scorpio, (her Detriment) she is in Trine of Jupiter and Sextile of Mars her Dispo∣siter, and locally placed in the Angle of Friendship; in∣timating, that she may give her mean years at the least, which are 45, and so long (Favente Deo) will this curi∣ous built Ship be capable of bringing Honour to her Friends, and striking Terror to her Enemies, or such as she shall engage against at any time. Thus much for this curious Vessel; and also for a Con∣clusion to the first part of my Ternary of Proofs and In∣stances, which concerns the Nativities of Ships. SECT. II. Of Elections, in Ten choise Instances or Examples, which we have an assured Experience of; and helpeth to prove (I hope so at least) the second part of our former Theory. AN Election (I told you formerly) in the sence I make use of the word here, is nothing else, but that particular time, which is made choise of, by an Ar∣tist, for a Ships first setting Sail, or weighing Anchor, in relation to some particular designed Voyage. And a Ves∣sel may have many of these in its Life time, viz. as many as it shall please God to permit it to perform Voyages therein. Whereas it can have but one Nativity or Ra∣dix: there being no such thing as Regeneration in Astro∣logy.
That, is a Science which depends upon Natural and Rational Principles, and intrencheth not upon Theo∣logy in the least; although many Men in these days, are taught to believe the contrary. And, to the Advance∣ment of so great an Error, and Injury to the Truths of God and Nature, some, calling themselves Astrologers, have most Irrationally, (I was about to say, Knavishly) contributed, by promoting (under pretence of the Syde∣ral Science) Merlin's, and Mother Shipton's Fables, for Prophecies; Aggrippa's Retracted Vanities, and Trithe∣mius's Suspected Discourses, &c. for true Philosophy. But, my present Theam not leading to an Examination of such matters, I shall leave them, and come to my Instances. I. ELECTION, is of Sir Jeremy Smith's setting Sail, as Admiral of the English Fleet, &c. astrological chart Sir JEREMY SMITH set Sail from the Spit-head, with the English Fleet, ☽ Decemb. 18. 7h. 50′. A.M. 1665.
Sir Jeremy Smith, in the Mary, with about a dozen more of our Noble English Ships of War, viz. Sir Fre∣cheville Holles in the Antilope, (the Frigate in which he unhappily afterwards lost his Arm.) Captain Hubbert in the Lyon, Captain Wager in the Crown, &c. set Sail from the Spit-Head, at the time within written. Every one Versed in Astrology, will admire that this Royal Fleet, setting Sail under so direful a posi∣tion of Heaven, could ever live to return again. All the Planets in the Scheam are disposed of by Saturn and Mer∣cury, and they both emminently afflicted: the one, by Combustion; the other by being in Conjunction of Cauda Draconis. And, that which did not meanly aggravate the unhappiness threatned to this Gallant Fleet, was, the Moon her being in Conjunction of Mars in Domo Mortis; and Mars his being in Quadrate of the Ascendant and the Sun. The Story is thus (as I had it from my Honoured Friend Sir Frecheville Holles; The whole Voyage was at∣tended with but indifferent Fortune; for in Christmass following, (or rather on Decemb. 28. Mercury having then just changed his Sign.) A very violent Storm ari∣sing in, or about the Latitude of 42°. Degrees, in some few days time, carried away the Masts of the Lyon, An∣tilope, Crown, and Milford; forcing these four back a∣gain into England. The rest of the Fleet was very much Scatter'd, and Dammag'd in their Masts: They continu∣ed forth a considerable time, and missed much of their intended Design. May it not be of good use to our Noble English Nep∣tunes, to avoid beginning their Eminent and Remarkable Voyages, when either the Moon is in Conjunction of Mars in the Eighth, or when the Lord of the Ascendant is Combust; or the Dispositer of the Moon with the Dra∣gons Head, or Saturn, as in this Election?— I must seriously tell them, that had not the Fate of divers of the Worthy Commanders in this Fleet been more Powerful
and Successful, than that of the Voyage was unfortunate, it had been little less than a Miracle, if but one of so ma∣ny Gallant Ships had been saved, as appears by the First, Fourth, Sixth, and Fourteenth Aphorisms of Danger be∣fore-mention'd. Let the greatest Enemy to Astrology shew me but one Fortunate Figure that hath been attended with unhappy Success, (& contra) and I will be content to yield him the Bucklers for ever; and not so much as once plead for Astrology any more. II. ELECTION, is of Captain Owen Cox, in the Nathan Frigate. A Fatal one indeed. astrological chart Captain Owen Cox, in the Nathan Frigate, first set Sail, on July 8o. 7h. mane. 1665.
This is the very time that Captain Owen Cox (my ve∣ry good Friend) fell down toward Gravesend, in order to a Voyage for the Straights, &c.— He had my Opinion upon a Horary Question of the success of his Voyage be∣fore; which when I come to my third part of Instances, I intend to insert at large; as I have formerly (viz. in my Ephemeris Anno 1667.) done it already. Only, here we are to take notice that this Election (I do not mean of this Captains own framing, but of the Fates; as you shall hereafter be informed) is a most pernicious one in earnest; and, as unfortunate, as the effect it self was fatal. For first, the Ascendant and seventh House are both in the terms of Mars; and the Ascendant and its Lord in Azimen and Pitted Degrees. Secondly, the Moon is in Tenebrous degrees, and entring the Via Combusta. The former is rendred dangerous by the 25 Aphorism, and the latter by the third. Thirdly, the Moon is in Quadrate Aspect of Saturn and Mercury; which by Aphorism 18. presages the loss of the Vessel. The Moon ('tis true) is applying ad trinum Jovis: but to what purpose? He being Lord of the Eighth, and in Opposition to the Ascendant. The fifth Aphorism also, is (almost) of force herein; and, to add hereunto, the Horoscope it self is naturally unfortunate, it being, as Cardan calls it, signum infelicissimum; a Sign most unhap∣py. Chiefly, the latter part thereof. On Monday August 14. following, when the Moon came to a Conjunction of the Lord of the Eighth, and Mars was neerly come to the place of the Sun in this Fi∣gure, this Valiant Captain had his Ship broke all to pieces in Yarmouth Road by a Storm then arising; in which, not only himself, but all his Men perished.
III. ELECTION, is of the French Fleet setting Sail for Candia, under the Command of D. de Beaufort. astrological chart The Fleet under Duke de Beaufort, set Sail from Thoulon, ☿ June 5th. 4h. P.M. 1669. In this Electional Figure, you will observe an eminent and unusual Satellitium of Planets in the Eighth House, viz. Angulum Mortis, and Cauda Draconis in Ascendente, to∣gether with the Moon her separating a vacuo Cursus, and applying ad Quadratum Veneris, Lady of the Eighth; and she the peculiar Significatrix of both their publick and their private Enemies. As if by this their unhappy setting forth, they had unhappily hastned to their Ruine and Perdition: as indeed, not long after it unfortunately proved.
For, in twenty days time from the beginning of this Fatal Design, viz. on June the 25th. day following, they were all Routed by the Turkish Power in Candia: and the Famous Duke de Beaufort himself, was in the Conflict slain. What think you of violent Stars upon the chief An∣gles of the Figure, and the Arguments of unhappiness before-mentioned? Compare this Scheam of Heaven with the second, and twenty fourth Arguments of Danger, and tell me if the Effects have not punctually answered to them. I say no more to this Observation. IV. ELECTION, is of the Lord Willoughby his setting Sail from the Barbadoes, and was never seen any more. astrological chart The Lord Willoughby set Sail from the Barba∣does, 1666.
This Fatal Figure was given me by several Ingenious persons well acquainted with Astrology, who were curi∣ous in the Observation thereof; and all of them agreed in one, as to the truth of the time. And, do you not see the Lord of the Ascendant Retro∣grade in the , or the Angle of Despair, &c. in Quadrate Aspect of Mars, Lord of the Medium Coeli? And, see you not likewise, that the Sun and Mercury Lords of the Seventh and Eighth Angles, are in Opposition to the Ascendant, and the Moon in Quadrate of Jupiter, and ♁. afflicted of ♈. Corporalliy? They are all Omens of Eminent Danger. Nay, to add unto these, you may observe, that the Sun, Jupiter, and the Medium Coeli, are in Pitted Degrees; the Ascendant between Dark and Feminine; the Moon, in Pitted, Void, and Feminine; Saturn, between Smoaky and Pitted; Venus, in Azimene; Mars, in Via Combusta; and Dark, though near Spica Virginis. Nor is the con∣sideration of this part of Astrology Apochryphal; although many pretending to this Science (without a true Know∣ledge thereof) have branded it as such. Let Experience be weighed a little, and reason a little therewith; and perhaps it will be found, that we often reject good Wheat for Chaff. There is not one Planet to be found in Degrees rejoy∣cing, but Mercury who is Lord of the Angle of Death. 'Tis a most Remarkable Observation. And Death on∣ly triumphed in this fatal Undertaking. For, this Ho∣nourable Lord (and Twenty Two Sail of Ships, with him) was devoured of the Sea, and never so much as once heard of any more. Let me ask the Modest Astrologer, whether such Ar∣cana are to be slighted? And, whether any person pre∣tending to acquaintance with Philosophy, can hear of such stupendious Misfortunes, and, with patience, rest igno∣rant of their Causes?
V. ELECTION, is of the Advise Frigate, setting sail from Dover, Commanded by the Valiant Capt. Young. astrological chart The Advice Frigate set sail from Dover, ☿ June 1. 6h. 30′. A.M. 1670. This Ship set sail from Dover at the time within writ∣ten, under the Command of Captain Young. And, on July the 3d. day following, she was pursued by seven Turks Men of War; and, being set upon by them, Va∣liantly Fought them, and giving them a brave Resistance, came off with a great deal of Honour in the Engage∣ment. Only, the Worthy Captain was slain therein, and some Men wounded What think we now? Is the Moon in the Medium Coeli, (which signifies the Commanders of Vessels always) in Quadrate Aspect of Mars, a good and proper
signification hereof, or not? — The propinquity of Jupiter to the Horoscope, was sufficient to save the Vessel, but not the Commander thereof. I will acknowledge to you, that an Astrologer would not (it is possible) have been positive in his Opinion, that this Noble Captain should have been slain in this Expedi∣tion; but he would, and might have been confident, that the Vessel it self should meet with Enemies, and that the Captain or Commander thereof should be in danger of Death. See the Seventh and Eleventh Aphorisms of Dan∣ger, &c. and that is as much as an Artist need contend for in these matters. We know but in part; was the Holy Apostle St. Pauls Rule, and an absolute, true, and unerring one. Can any Man tell me in what Science, now in use among Mortals, we may meet perfection? Surely not. No, although Geometry it self be Courted for it. An Astrologer should be modest in his Predictions, and not too confident. The knowledge of particular kinds of things, is, not only denied Mortals by God and Na∣ture: but acknowledged also by Ptolemy impossible to be attained by them. See Aph. 1. Centiloq. We need not pry into the Almighties Secrets on the one hand, nor yet crave Assistance from the Devil on the other. Can we not be acquainted with the heats of Mars, but by doing dishon∣our to God? And must we needs make use of unlawful Studies to come to the knowledge of Natural things? There is no necessity thereof at all. The Astrologer, if in such a case, he had given a Caution of Danger, had acquitted himself like an Artist, and to go further, had been presumption at the least.
VI. ELECTION, is of a Vessel that was sunk with all her Goods, as soon as she was gotten out of Harbour. astrological chart A Ship set sail from Yarmouth, ☉ March 21. 10h. mane. 1668/9 This Vessel (the Name whereof I have forgotten, but yet can give any one satisfaction of the truth of the Story, if it shall be required, and that by an Owner of her, an Eminent Citizen, &c.) was no sooner got out of the Har∣bour of Yarmouth, but was accidently fallen foul of by a great Ship, (then riding in that Road) and by her weight and force sunk immediately to the bottom of the Sea, with all the Goods in her. But the Men (God be praised) all escaped. Pray be so good a Friend to the Truth, as to compare the Fate of this Vessel, with the third Aphorism of Danger, &c.
Besides the Eminent Omen of ill, in its setting Sail in hora Saturni, we find the Sun, Moon, and Mars, in this Election, in Pitted and Azimene Degrees. But, that which is worse than all this, was, the Moon her being Combust of the Sun, and applying to his Con∣junction in Aries. Saturn in the Ninth House is of ill im∣port: so also the Lord of the Mid-Heaven in the Angle of Sorrow, Fear, and Hazard; together, with the Lord of the Fourth (which signified the end of the Affair.) his be∣ing Retrograde and Combust in a Moveable Sign, in Qua∣drate to the Horoscope. Say, Antagonist, is there no distinction to be made of Times in the beginning of Humane Enterprizes? Know ye not that there are twelve hours in the day? said our Blessed Saviour. VII. Election, is of a Ship that set Sail from London to New-Castle. astrological chart A Ship set sail from New-Castle, ♂ Octob 5th. 5h. 30′ A.M. 1669
This Vessel made a singular good Voyage, and that free from all manner of Hazards or Troubles, either from the Weather, or publick Enemies, &c. and returned safe, and well loaden to London again, in less than three weeks time, from the day of its first weighing Anchor; although at such a season of the year. Indeed, the Arguments of good were so many, and so prevalent; and those of ill were so few, and inconsi∣derable withal; that had it fallen out otherwise with her, it had been a positive contradiction to the Rules of Astro∣logy. First, the hour is governed by Jupiter. (2.) The Moon is applying ad Conjunctionem Jovis, in Medio Coeli. (3.) The Moon and Jupiter both powerful in the Figure, and in a happy reception of each other. (4.) The Moon is in Trine of Mercury, Lord of the Ninth, and he Dis∣positer of the Part of Fortune. (5.) A noble Trine of Jupiter and Venus from the Tenth and Second Houses. (6.) The Sun, Lord of the Eleventh, in the Ascendant. And, a Man not over-superstitious, would not be affraid to make the Sextile of Jupiter and Mars, a seventh Ar∣gument of Happiness. The ill of this Scheam is so little, that it is scarce worthy mentioning: howbeit, to make things the more plain, I will take notice of them, viz. (1.) Saturn his Quadrate to the Lady of the Ascendant in the Second; which is overballanced by the Sun's Trine to him from the Horoscope. (2.) ♈. on the second; which is allevia∣ted by the presence of ♀. and ☿. in it. The Ship made a happy, prosperous, and successful Voyage.
VIII. ELECTION, is of a Fleet of Merchant-Men, that Sailed out of the Downs, &c. astrological chart A Fleet of Ships set sail from the Downs ☉ Sept. 10h, 7h. mane. 1671. Under the above-said Position of Heaven, the good Ship called the Providence, with sixty or seventy Sail of Merchant-Men more, being then in the Downs, weighed Anchor for their intended Voyage. But, upon the Oppo∣sition of Saturn and Mars, just following, (those Planets having great Dignities in the Ascendant and Seventh An∣gle) were strangely separated one from the other, and un∣happily shattered and distressed by the badness of the weather; and the most of them, thereby suffered very great dammage and prejudice, several ways.
Behold the effects of an Opposition of the Moon and Mercury from Angles, and Cardinal Signs! The rugged Influence thereof being aggravated and increased by the Opposition of Saturn and Mars. It is not for nothing, that Astrologers have assigned an equal Government to Mercury with Saturn in the Airy Trigon. Had not Venus been in Trine of Saturn, and in Sextile of Mars and Jupiter; and that the Sun (though in the Twelfth Angle by Position) had ruled the hour, at the time they first set Sail, they might all have perished in the Ocean. Thus we see, there may be Naumachies or Conflicts at Sea, without one Nation or Kingdom contending against another by the power of their Fleets. And, Navies, as well as Persons, are preserved, and advantaged, by a little Armour in the right place. These are Truths, yet fresh in every Man's memory, and easie to be contradicted, if I should but dare to im∣pose upon the World in my recording of them.
IX. ELECTION, is of a Ship that set sail after the aforesaid Fleet, but was beaten all to pieces by the Weather. astrological chart A Ship set sail after the Fleet, ☉. September 10th. 5h. 8′. 1671. This Ship (being of the Company of the former Fleet) set Sail under this Position of Heaven to follow the rest of its Fellows and Companions. But such was its unhap∣py Fate, that in less than a weeks time, from its weigh∣ing Anchor, it was beaten all to pieces in a violent Storm at Sea; and, (with much ado) all her Men were saved. Do you not see an Opposition of Saturn and Mars from Angles? and the Moon, (the conveigher of all the Pla∣nets Influxes to the Earth) in Opposition of Mercury, from Angles also? and applying ad vacuum Cursus. To make this Election the more fatal and cruel, the
Moon was in Aries, a Sign of Violence, and Saturn was, not only Lord of the hour, but of the Ascendant. Pray, do not think that I beg the Question of you, when I ask you, whether Astrology may not be servicea∣ble to Man-kind in these matters? If you distrust me, do but commence some of your more Eminent Affairs under such Positions, as I have set up my Mark at, as dangerous, among the Aphorisms be∣fore going: And, possibly, you will prove the Truth hereof, at your own charge and dammage. (A thing that I in this Treatise labour to prevent) which neverthe∣less is, (I confess) a way far better to convince Men of any approved verity, than all the Arguments in the World can be, if used to that purpose, by the ablest Philosopher, or Rhetoritian in the World. X. ELECTION, is of a Ship that sailed from London to New-Castle. astrological chart A Ship set sail from London, toward New-Castle, ☿ August 27 11h. P.M. 1669.
At the time in this Figure mentioned, this Ship set Sail from London toward New Castle, and she made, not on∣ly a prosperous, but a speedy Voyage; as indeed, un∣der so Auspicious a Position of Heaven, it had been strange if she had missed so to have done. For, herein you see Jupiter in the Ascendant in Sextile Aspect of the Sun; and the Moon, who is Lady of the Horoscope, and Governess of the hour, in which she weighed Anchor, is applying ad Trinum Veneris. She returned to London again very well laden, in three weeks time, to the great content, as well as advantage of the Owner. Hence, you may observe the happy Effects of the Ascendants being befriended by Jupiter, and of the Moon her being in Trine of Venus. See the 5th. 7th. 9th. and 12th. Aphorisms of Safety, and consider them herewith. And so I have (by Gods Blessing) finished the second part of my Ternary of Instances or Examples, which consists of Elections. I am now come to my third and last part thereof, which treateth of Horary Questions. SECT. III. Of Horary Questions, in Twenty Remarkable Examples, with the true Histories of them annexed, as a proof of the last part of my Theory preceding. A Question Horary, is nothing else (as I have former∣ly in this Treatise, and elsewere told you) but an Interrogation made to an Artist, by a Desponding Que∣rent, at the particular time, in which his mind is most troubled and sollicitous, about any matter or thing Cognoscible to Humane Skill, as he is thereunto directed
and guided by the Coelestial Clock-work. But, in this place, I shall limit this Definition, particularly, to mat∣ters Maritime, those being the Subject of my present Discourse. The difference also of an Horary Question from an Election or Nativity, I have likewise before acquainted you withal, so that I need not (actum agere) to do it here again. I will therefore come to my intended purpose, and present you with twenty Examples of Questions, &c. they being double the Number to those of Elections or Nativities, and much more plentiful with me, (and, so I believe they are with all other Practical Astrologers) then either of the other. For, Man-kind is naturally subject to thousands of Doubts about one and the same Thing or Vessel, that cannot be presumed to have more than one Radix, or Launching Originally; or more than one proper Election of Time for a Voyage to Sea. Not, but that I could have enlarged all three of them to a far greater Number, if I had conceived it requisite so to have done. But, a Thesis or Doctrine, being once well proved, if we should add a thousand Instances, it cannot thereby be the better, although (I confess) it may be the more often evinced.
I. QUESTION, is of the Grey-Hound Frigate, If Alive? astrological chart The Grey-Hound Frigate, if alive? For many days together, before the time wherein this Question was propounded, the Exchange News was, that this Rich Laden Vessel was lost in the Sea, by the extremity of ill weather. An Ingenious Merchant, having a Thousand Pounds (and upward,) of concerns in her, being, by the Ensu∣rers, refused the Ensurance of any Sum upon her under Sixty Pounds per Cent. desired my Opinion of her Con∣dition under the above said Position of Heaven. I considered, that the Moon being lately separated from an Opposition of Mercury, Lord of the Third of the Fi∣gure,
and in the Twelfth House, might very naturally de∣clare false News, as also together therewith, the Fears of the Querent. But then I found Venus, the Significa∣trix of the Ship to be Angular, (in Platique Trine of the Moon) and in Conjunction of Jupiter, and both of them in Sextile of Mercury, who is the Dispositer of Luna, which made me conclude, (and good reason there was for me so to do, Jupiter being Superior to Mercury, both in Nature and Influence) that the Ship was alive and safe; and would (by Gods Blessing) be suddenly heard of; and that there was no need for him to Ensure: The Lady of the Second House being the same Planet that signified the Ship, and so happily Fortunated as you have heard. No, notwithstanding the Moon was applying ad Quadra∣tum Saturni, and the Sun his being (though separated) in Opposition of Mars, Lord of the Ascendant and Eighth House. The Effect was thus. The Ship was safe; and, in two or three days time, there was News come, that she was (by contrary Winds) forced into the Isle of Wight. And the Merchant saved all his Premium Money, which I think was no harm to him. But, the ill Aspects before-mentioned, might have their Effects in this, with respect to the Querent, viz. The Querents Friends and Correspondents living at New-Castle, and he having Orders to Ensure for their parts in the Vessel, did so, at the before-mention'd Rate; and they lost their Money that was thus given. A Conjunction of Jupiter and Venus in an Angle, is much more powerful for good, than an Opposition of the Sun and Mars, and a Quadrate of the Moon and Saturn, from Cadent places of the Heavens, can be for Evil.
II. QUESTION, is of the Ship called the NICHOLAS of London, if Safe? astrological chart The NICHOLAS of Lon∣don, if safe? Several Vessels in this Ships company, were destroyed by Wreck in Stormy and Tempestuous Weather; and there came the unkind News to the Owners thereof, that she was wreck'd and sunk among the rest: upon which report, one, considerably concerned in her, proposed the above-said Question. I considered that Mercury, the Significator of the Ves∣sel, was Angular (though in Sagitary) and in Trine of Jupiter, his Dispositer, who was Angular also. Next, observed that the Moon was strong, viz. in Taurus, her Exaltation; and, from a good House of Heaven, ap∣plied
to a Trine of Saturn, Lord of the Querents Sub∣stance, as the Moon was Significatrix of the Ships Sub∣stance. I therefore concluded, that profit and advan∣tage was coming to the Querent by the Ship. And, to∣gether herewith, finding the Hour to be fortunate also, as being governed by the Sun. — I affirmed to the Que∣rent, That the Vessel (according to the Rules of Safety before-going) was alive; and that he would hear of her suddenly. Howbeit, I acquainted him that I conceived she had been greatly distressed, because the Moon separa∣ted from void of course; and Mercury was in Detriment in Opposition to the Horoscope of the Ship. The Issue was thus. The Ship came home in three days time from the Question, viz. upon the Trine of Jupiter and Mercury exactly. It had suffered some dam∣mage by Storms, but not so much as was supposed. What think you now of the Trigonal Beam of Jupiter? III. QU. is of the Mermaid of London, supposed to be taken by the Turks. astrological chart The Mermaid of London, if safe?
One of the Owners of this Vessel, having not heard any News of her in four months time, beyond what he might reasonably have hoped for Intelligence, and there∣fore supposing her to be lost in the Sea, or else taken by the Turks, (then very much infesting the Seas) moved this Question concerning her. — Finding Jupiter in the Seventh Angle, and the Moon in Sextile of Venus Lady thereof, and the Sun Lord of the Hour, not only Dispositer of Venus, but in Trine of Ju∣piter from Angles; — I adjudged the Ship to be safe, and in good condition. And, with that my Opinion I earnestly laboured to comfort the Querent: who, being signified by Mars, in Platique Opposition of Saturn, could scarce give credit to me, his fears were so great. From the Position of Venus in the Ninth Angle, and, for that the Moon was swift in Motion, and (by Latitude) not past, but applying to the Sextile of Venus; I ac∣quainted him, that I conceived the Vessel was on its way homeward, and would be heard of speedily. Yet, I supposed she had been a little affrighted by Enemies, as also by Tempestuous Weather; because Venus was late∣ly separated both from a Conjunction of Mars, and an Opposition of Saturn, and it was true. For, the Ship was heard of in a fortnights time from the propounding this Question; and came home very well, and in good condition, in November following. But, she had been chased by some Pirates in her way homeward, which she very happily escaped. Some in∣jury also, she sustained by ill weather. Thus you see, that the Bodies and Beams of Jupiter and Venus, are (sub Deo) certain Arguments of safety.
IV. QUESTION, is of the PRISCILLA of London, a Trader to New-Castle, if safe? astrological chart The PRISCILLA of London, if safe? This Vessel was a Collier, and having been at New-Castle, no News was heard of her in some considerable time; so that the Querent much feared she was lost. And there∣fore propounded the within written Question unto me, un∣der this Position of Heaven. I considered herein, that the Moon (though in Sexta Domo) was lately separated a Sextilo Martis, Significa∣tor of the Ship, and applied ad Trinum Mercurii, her Dispositer, and Lord of the Querents Substance; and that both of them were swift in Motion, together, with Ju∣piter, his being Lord of the Hour: And was thence en∣couraged
to tell him, that I doubted not (by Gods Bles∣sing) but the Ship was safe, and not only so, but that she would be speedily at home, or at least suddenly heard of. The truth is, — The Ship was well, and heard of the same day; and, in few days following, came safe home. What think you now? You, that are Enemies to Star∣ry Truths? Do Astrologers commit Error and Folly, when they attribute Intelligence to Mercury? Or, suc∣cess and safety to Jupiter? — Let us not hood wink the eyes of our understanding, and, we shall then find,— That Astrology is, as well Useful and Fruitful, as Truth-ful; Let the Learned Commentator upon Religio Medici, think what he pleaseth, when he says, Astrology is not so Truth∣less as Fruitless. — Certainly, no Tree so Fruitful as the Tree of Truth. And, no Fruit so useful, as that which grows on such Sacred Branches. For, not only Great is, but of Great Ʋse is, the TRUTH, and that shall prevail. V. QUESTION, is of the ELIZABETH Pink, if safe? astrological chart The ELIZABETH Pink, if safe?
In this Figure the Quesited Vessel was signified by Sa∣turn, and he near Cauda Draconis, and the Moon sepa∣rated a Oppositione Solis & Jovis, ex Angulis; which inti∣mated the same to have been in some danger (to my ap∣prehension) not only by Weather, but Enemies, &c.— Howbeit, the Moon applying ad Trinum Saturni, and Saturn so eminently strong in the Eleventh from the Se∣venth, casting a Trine to the Second of the Eigure; toge∣ther with the Sun and Jupiter hastning to a Conjunction in the Seventh.— From all which Arguments, I concluded the Vessel safe, (though lately in some danger, &c.) and that she would be heard of, if not come home, in three weeks or a months time at the farthest. You see the Sun wanted but three Degrees of the Body of Jupiter. The matter of Fact was thus. On March the 6th. following, she came home; but had been distressed very much by ill Weather in her return, and forced to make many Ports before her Arrival, for relief. — Here you see, the Sun and Jupiter did not signifie Enemies as I feared; but the Moon (being in the Dignities of Mercu∣ry) in Opposition of the Sun and Jupiter, had Relation to the Weather only, though from the Angle of Enemies. I will not here enquire, whether the Weather may not be as well the greatest Enemy, as Friend to Maritime matters? Because I meant Martial Enemies when I gave my Opinion hereon. I was, I confess, in that particular deceived. — How even, and calm, ought the mind of an Astrologer to be, when he is to distinguish of such cu∣rious matters!
VI. QUESTION, is of the Josiah, if safe? astrological chart The JOSIAH, if safe? That the Querent, or Owner hereof, was sufficiently besiedged with troubles and fears concerning the safety of this Vessel, the Lord of the Ascendant in the Sixth House, in the Dignities of Saturn, aptly denotes.— But that the Ship was safe, not only Jupiter his governing the Hour, but the Conjunction of the Sun and Jupiter in its Ascen∣dant plainly signified; as you may find by consulting the Arguments of safety, &c. The Moon separating from a Sextile of Mercury, and transferring Hermes his happy Beams to Venus, Lady of the Third and Tenth Houses, shewed good News was coming.
This Vessel (God be blessed) was safe, and in three weeks time from the Question, was heard of: and in some two months time, or thereabouts, arrived in the River of Thames, very happily Laden; and thereby quitted this Querent of his many & remarkable doubts concerning her. May we not, from these, and such like Instances and Examples, with good ground, presume to Predict secu∣rity to Ships or Vessels Interrogated; in case we find the same Arguments of safety in any future Question? From like Causes generally proceed like Effects. But hark thee good Reader, it is not every one that can shew thee how the Heavens are Posited, that can tell thee what they mean or signifie. To this it is required, that the Person giving Judgment, be not only born an Artist, and well read in the Caelestial Volume, but that he be under a good Fate also. When the mind of Man is become like a Chaos, the Judgment is not apt for either Logical, or Astrological distinctions. VII. QUESTION, is of the DEXTERITY, is safe? astrological chart The DEXTERITY, if safe?
Great News on the Exchange many days, that this Vessel was cast away. Ensurance of any thing in her, at reasonable rates, could not be purchased by any of the Owners of her. One of them being much afflicted thereat, in great trouble of mind, moved the before-said Question to me, and the Figure of Heaven was as here represented. The Moon with Cauda Draconis, and she, and Saturn, in Quadrate of the Sun and Mars, were eminent Argu∣ments of Danger to this Vessel. And, accordingly, she had been much distressed both by Weather, and by Pi∣rates, in her return home-ward. But, when I considered the great strength of Saturn, (though accidentally fallen into the Sixth Angle, which is the Twelfth from the Seventh) and that the Luminaries were Angular; and, that the Sun was in Sextile of Ju∣piter, Lord of the Medium Coeli; and he Lord of the Querents Second House; and that the Pars Fortunae, and most of the Planets, were in Fortunate Points or Degrees of Heaven; and also, that the Hour it self was gover∣ned by the Moon. When I considered these things, I say,— I advised the Querent not to Ensure, but be∣lieve that his Vessel would (Favente Deo) come home safe. He followed my Advice, and saved 100 l. in Ensu∣rance Money thereby. The Ship came safe home on April the 14th. following, viz. a little after the Trine of Jupiter and Venus; and before the Trines of Sol, Sa∣turn, and Mercury. By this Example, the Artist is taught, not to be frigh∣ted too much with ill Testimonies; but to consider whe∣ther the good ones be not stronger?
VIII. QUESTION, is of the Priscilla; if safe? astrological chart The Priscilla, if safe? This was a Trading Vessel to New-Castle, and having been somewhat longer out than usual, the Owner hereof, was very doubtful that some unhappiness had attended her; and therefore, with a troubled and solicitous mind, propounded the above-mentioned Question to me, under this Position of Heaven. I considered first, that the Horoscope of the Vessel was in a Degree increasing Fortune; and the Lord thereof very strong in the Heavens, though falling into the Sixth House, and that the Quadrates of the Sun and Jupiter to him, did not hurt, but help the Question. — Good Planets seldom shed bad Influences. Chiefly, when the Ray they emit them by, is of imperfect perjudice, as is the Qua∣drate Beam.
Next, I found the Moon was in exact Sextile of Mer∣cury, and he Lord of the Querents Second, and Dispositer of Pars Fortunae, and in Trine of Mars, Lord of the Ninth in the Figure, and transferring their good Beams to Venus, Lady of the Ninth in the Question, and Posited in the Eleventh of the Figure; viz. the Angle of Hopes, &c. From these Arguments I adjudged the Ship safe: And did thereby a little enlighten the heavy heart of the Owner, or Querent. But that which pleased him better than any thing I could possibly say to him, was, — That the Ship was really safe, (as I had given him my Opinion) and came home in four days time from the Question, very well Laden. Herein you see, the Great Good that depends on the Luminaries, being Posited in good Houses of Heaven, in Conjunction of the Benefique Stars. IX. QUESTION, is of the Elizabeth Pink; if safe? astrological chart The Elizabeth Pink, if safe?
There was great fear in an Owner of this Vessel of the absolute loss thereof; as Mercury in the Sixth House, Combust and in Detriment, sufficiently declared. But, finding the Moon in the Tenth House, in good Aspect of the Prime Angles of the Figure, and in Quadrate of Ve∣nus, a Fortunate Planet, (which Governed the Hora Questionis) and applying, after a small Vacuum Cursus, ad Trinum Martis, & Quadratum Mercurii, and the Dragons Head in the Eleventh, and Saturn and Jupiter both, in good Aspect of the Second House of the Querent, and of the Ship likewise; I was positive in my Opinion, That the Ship, (God not contradicting the Course of se∣cond Causes) was safe.— Howbeit, I conceived she had been in some hazardous condition, because Saturn had lately passed an Opposition of Jupiter (Significator of the Ship) and quadrate of the Sun, being yet within the Mediety of their Orbs. The Vessel was heard of in a fortnights time from the Question, and that she was in a good and safe condition; but her Voyage had been retarded by the unhappiness of the Weather; which having been very Tempestuous for a long time, had put the Vessel to very great distress, and notable hard labour; and the Men also that were in her. But both Men and Vessel were (by Gods Mercy) preser∣ved, and, in a short time after, came home to the con∣tent of the Querent. What sayest thou now Antagonist? Is not Saturn truly termed the Author of Fear, Labour, Sorrow, &c. in an Astrological Sence.
X. QUESTION, is of the SWALLOW, if alive? astrological chart The SWALLOW, if alive? An Ingenious Gentleman and Merchant, that had great concerns in this Vessel, hearing News of her being (with others) in danger of the Algerine Pirates, which it seems, were then in Chase of her; propounded the above-written Question concerning her. Indeed the Lord of the Seventh being Combust and Retrograde, and the Moon void of Course, and in the Combust-way; together, with her separating from a Con∣junction of Mars, intimated Danger sufficient to the Ves∣sel. But then, I considered, what might alleviate those threatning Testimonies: and finding, (1.) Venus on the Horoscope. (2.) The Sun and Saturn in Trine from
Friendly Houses. (3.) Jupiter his being in Sextile of the Sun and Mercury. (4.) The Moon in an eminent Angle; together with the Sun his being Dominus Horae. (5.) Venus in Sextile of Mars, Lord of the Eleventh.— I concluded, that the major number of Testimonies ought to be preferred before the minor: and therefore acquain∣ted the Querent, That though the Ship had been in great Danger, and possibly undergone strange and vio∣lent hazards; yet, she was now safe, and would be heard of suddenly. The Story was thus. This Vessel was heard of, Octo∣ber the 26th. following, viz. in five days time; when the Moon came ad Sextilem Mercurii, near the Horo∣scope.— But she had been in Fight with the Turks, and came off bravely, by the Valour and Courage of the Commander and Sea-men therein. And his Majesty, the better to encourage Generous and Valorous Actions, at the Ships coming home, gave unto Captain Battison, the Valiant Commander of her, a Medal and Chain of Gold, as a Signal Mark of Honour for his good Service performed against the Turks.
XI. QUESTION, is of the Gift of London, if safe? astrological chart The Gift of London, if safe? An Ingenious Merchant, that had much Concern in this Vessel, not hearing of her in any reasonable time, accor∣ding to his wonted Custom when she had been formerly abroad, in much discontent of mind, propounded the within-written Question. To come to the matter of Fact before I give my Rea∣sons in Art; The Vessel was alive and safe; and was heard of in less than a weeks time. But had been di∣stressed by Weather, and made no prosperous Voyage. And such a Judgment I had given to the Querent.
The Reasons why I pronounced safety to the Vessel, were these following. The Moon in Cancer strong, in Trine of Saturn, and Sextile of Jupiter, (though separa∣ted) and Jupiter the Dispositer of Venus, which signified the Ship. Neither did I forget that Jupiter Governed the Hour; or that Venus cast her Sextile to Mars, to miti∣gate his Fury; or, yet, that Benefique Stars, of the Na∣ture of Venus and Mercury, did Descend on the Cusp of the Seventh Angle. But, the Arguments of her Labouring under the hard∣ship mentioned, were, Mars infesting her Ascendant, and Saturn his being in Quadrate of Venus, Lady there∣of; together, with his being in Opposition to Jupiter her Dispositer. By this you see, that when there are good and bad Testimonies in your Figure, the Effects attending the in∣terrogated matter, will prove accordingly.— And, if the Arguments of Success, be greater than those of Mis∣fortune, be sure you shall find safety to succeed on the Question. But, yet, shall the ill Rays of the Planets have their Effects too, according to their Natures and Rela∣tions.
XII. QUESTION, is of the PATIENCE of London, if safe? astrological chart The PATIENCE of London, if safe? This Ship was bound toward Allicant, and the New∣found-Land, for the Fishing-Trade. And one of the Owners having a considerable share in her, and suspecting her to have been lost, (the Turks being then very fre∣quent in all parts, doing Dammage to all they lighted on) propounded the aforesaid Question to me concerning her. Saturn is Significator of the Ship, (as Lord of the Seventh Angle) and, being in Pisces in the Eighth of the Figure, in Quadrate Aspect of Mars and Venus in the Dignities of Mercury, Lord of the Eighth in the Que∣stion,
made me at the first doubtful of the safety of the Vessel. But, Venus being a Consignificatrix of the Per∣son enquiring, and of the Ship too, and in the Eleventh of the Figure, in Sextile of Jupiter, and in good Aspect to both the Ascendant of the Querent, and Vessel, did a little encourage me. And when, together with this, I considered that Saturn was in Sextile of the Sun in the Mid-Heaven, and that Mars was no Enemy in the Figure, either to the Vessel, or Querent; and also that both Lumina∣ries were Angular, and the good Planet Venus Governed the Hour.— I was sufficiently perswaded that the Vessel was safe; and encouraged the Querent according∣ly to be of the same Opinion with me. To be brief.— The Ship was safe; yet had been in some small Danger, but came happily home, and well Laden. But (as the Querent afterwards acquainted me) she came to no good Market, other Ships having brought in their Stores before her. Did you ever know Saturn a Significator in any Que∣stion, that you did not find an Effect therein, of his tar∣dous Nature or Motion?
XIII. QUESTION. If good to sell his Ship? astrological chart If good to Sell his Ship? 1668. An Ingenious Merchant, having been long Owner of a Vessel that now began to prove a little unfortunate (tho' formerly successful enough) was doubtful, lest she might prove so yet further; and, being somewhat loath to part with her, propounded the above-said Question to me. I first observed, That Violent Fixed Stars descended on the Cusp of the Seventh Angle; and next, that Venus La∣dy thereof (which signified the Ship) was in her Fall, Re∣trograde, Combust, and in Quadrate of Mars; as also, in the same Aspect of Jupiter, Lord of the 8th. in the Que∣stion. And, to make the matter in Question the more un∣fortunate, Cauda Draconis was in the Ascendant, and the Moon void of Course. All these Arguments considered, there is no Astrologer
but will believe, that I must needs, not only advise, but per∣swade the Querent to sell his Ship. And indeed so he did. But the Querent (though resolv'd sufficiently to follow my advise) being a little unwilling to part with an old Servant too hastily, did somewhat delay the Sale there∣of.— And behold, in ten weeks time from the Question, as she was going to New-Castle for Coals, was broken all to pieces, by the violence of a Storm. What thinks my Astrologian? Have not Things their Anareta's too, as well as Men? Nay, what thinks the Antagonist to the Stars? Can he shew me any one unfortunate Figure, that hath been attended with a fortunate Effect? Let him do it; and I do hereby promise to become his Convert; and will write my Recantation, and therein beg Pardon of the VVorld for deluding it, and my self, so many years to∣gether. XIV. QUESTION, is of the JOSIAH, if safe? astrological chart The JOSIAH, if safe?
Herein we must accept of Mercury for the proper Sig∣nificator of the Vessel Interrogated. And, he being in the Eleventh House of the Figure, no way afflicted or impedited; and the Luminaries in Friendly Trine of each other, and the Ascendant being Fortunated, and Fortified by Venus her presence there, together with the Sun his Governing the Hour. All which were Arguments that might very reasonably denote the Vessel to be in safety. [And so she was.] And this, non obstante Saturn his being in Quadrate to the Seventh House, and in the same Aspect of the Ascendant. And, because I found that Mercury, in ten days time from the Question, came ad Trinum Saturni, Lord of the Querent's Second House, and to a Sextile of Jupiter his Dispositer; and that the Moons next Aspect, (after a small Vacuum Cursus) was to a Trine of Venus in the As∣cendant, and this without Frustration. I told the Que∣rent (from thence) that he might (Favente Deo) most probably hear of the Vessel, or see her at, or much about that time. He did not much believe me; Jupiter you see is in Opposition of Saturn, heightening the Querents fears. Howbeit, he was a little enlightened in his humour, by my Encouragement. The Truth of the Effect was thus. The Vessel did then come safe home, and very well Laden also; to my no little Credit, and to the Satisfaction of the Querent. Thus you see, that if Saturn, Mars, or Cauda Draconis, in the Ascendant, destroy the hopes of the Question; Venue or Jupiter Posited therein, (not otherwise contradicted) preserve it.
XV. QUESTION, If the intended Voyage shall prove Prosperous. astrological chart If the intended Voyage shall prove Prosperous? I have already Printed this Remarkable Experiment in my Almanack Anno 1667. but the Observation being so Eminent, and our Annual Books seldom remembered af∣ter the year is expired, I shall Re-print it here again (toti∣dem verbis) for the advantage of Artists, viz. Captain Owen Cox, upon, or a little after his being made Commander of the Nathan Frigate, propounded the within written Question unto me, and received the following Answer, viz. That his Voyage would be unfortu∣nate, and that it was better for him to pretermit than pur∣sue it. In the Figure ♍ ascends, & ☿ Lord thereof is Stationary
in ☍ ♄ ex Angulis: ☽ Lady of his Hopes in the 8th. in Partil ☿ transferring his Beams unto ♄ by a ma∣licious . All which portended much Infelicity to at∣tend the Querent from his intended Design: and ♄. be∣ing in the 4th. there in ☍ ☉ ♀ and ☿ declared a Fa∣tal end unto it. I laboured all I could to disswade him from that undertaking; but he being engaged with many others in that business before, and having obliged several in the same, (as he told me) could not, without con∣tracting a great Dishonour upon himself, make use of that my Advise and Caution. When I saw there was no preventing his going, but that he was resolvedly bent upon it; I advised him (for mitigation of part of the dammage threatned, if it might be) to forbear going but seven or eight weeks, be∣cause the greatest prejudice was probable to fall out about that time from the time of the Question; the ☽ wanting seven Degrees of ♄'s and ♀ and ♄ much about the same distance in their ☍. This Querent did endeavour that, with many of those he had to do with, but in vain: for the more he delay'd time, the more he subjected him∣self to Censure and Suspition; and at length (to prevent the murmuring of his Owners) viz. On July the 8th. at seven in the morning he fell down to Gravesend. ☿ being at that time in ☍ ♄ again, and  lately separate from the 's of ♄ ♀ ☿.— A time so unluckie! and corre∣spondent to the Figure of the Question in mischief, that nothing could be greater: and it was attended with a suitable effect. For behold! — On August the 14th. following, being seven weeks and two days from the propoun∣ding the Question, this unfortunate Querent had his Ship broke all to pieces in a Storm, near unto Yarmouth, and himself with all his Men (except one or two) fell Sacrifices to the merciless Waves of the Sea.— Thus we see that the Stars sometimes, by a kind of irresistible Influence, direct, nay, hurl Men into dangers [almost] unavoidable, even beyond the Power of humane Counsel or prevention.
XVI QUESTION, is of the PROVIDENCE, if safe? astrological chart The PROVIDENCE, if safe? A little before, and also at the time of this question, there was great noise all over the Royal-Exchange, and City likewise, that this good Ship was lost, by reason of which report, 30 l. per Cent would not be taken by the Ensurers. The Querent having considerable concerns in her, mo∣ved the abovesaid Question to me, under this Position of Heaven. I viewed the Figure seriously; and finding Mercury, the Significator of the Vessel, in the House of Hopes, lately separated from a Sextile of Jupiter, and applying to a Trine of Saturn, Lord of the Second House; and that the Moon was in exact Sextile of the Sun, (an Emi∣nent Argument of Life) from the prime Angles of the Figure; I adjudged the Ship to be safe, and in good con∣dition,
both in respect of her self, and in relation to her Owners; and that I doubted not but the Querent would soon hear News concerning her. The Effect was thus. The Querent did hear of her in October the second following, about noon. And (first I should have told you) he having an Opinion of, and Cre∣dit for the Truth I told him, thereby saved his Ensurance Money. If, as the Learned Mirandula says, By knowing the uttermost force of Natural Agents, we come to know the Divinity of Christ. I may reasonably and innocently subjoyn,— By being acquainted with the Energy of Starry Influences, we may thereby, the more Eminently come to understand the Wisdom, and Power too, of God, who first of all gave Influence and Motion to the Stars. XVII. QUESTION, is of the St. JOHN, of Dantzick, if safe? astrological chart The St. JOHN of Dantzick, if safe?
This Vessel by contrary winds, had been driven from its Company, and no News heard of her in a fortnights time; which occasioned (as it might well) great fears in the Querent, that she was totally lost in the Sea. And, being in the mind to Ensure what he had upon her, was first desirous to know my Opinion thereof, from a Figure of Heaven, which happen'd to be this as you see. Finding the Moon, which claim'd Exaltation in the Seventh Angle, to be in Conjunction of Jupiter, in the Mid-Heaven, and he Governing the Hora Questionis; and, that Venus, the proper Significatrix of the Ship, was in the Ascendant in Sextile of Mars Lord thereof, in the Tenth House. It was encouragement sufficient for me, to give my Judgment.— That the Vessel was safe, and very probably in Harbour; and that I did believe he would have News of her being alive and well, in a short time. Nay, I therefore further advised him not to En∣sure, the Arguments of Hopes were so strong. The Querent followed my Advise, and, had no rea∣son to repent it; for he thereby saved his Praemium Mo∣ney. The Effect was thus. The Ship had been in Harbour, as I Judged: and came home in a fortnight following. Many Men, somewhat acquainted with Astrology, may, with a seeming shew of Reason, Object,— That Saturn in the Fourth, in Opposition of Mars, should not declare so good an Issue as is here set down.— I Answer,— Saturn is not in the Fourth of the Question, though he be of the Figure. And, it was nothing to the Fate of the Ship, what the Querent did with her Lading after she came safe home.
XVIII. QUESTION.— If his Ship were safe? astrological chart If his Ship were safe? This Vessel was a Trader to New-Castle, and being longer out than was usual, put the Owner of her into several fears, that all was not well with her. And, in great perplexity of mind, he moved the above-said Que∣stion concerning it to me, under this Position of Heaven. Venus is Significatrix of the Vessel, and Retrograde, in her Detriment, and by Retrogradation applying to Com∣bustion of the Sun, and he Lord of the Fourth House in the Question; which plainly argued that the Ship was in no good condition,— And, when, together with this, I
considered the Moon was in exact Opposition of Saturn, and, both of them in Quadrate Aspect to the seventh Angle,— I told the Querent positively, that I believed all was not well; and that I feared, his Vessel was in great hazard of loosing, if not already lost; because ☽ and ♄ were so exact and Diametrically opposite. The Truth of the Effect was thus.— The Ship was heard of in six days time; and though not lost, yet had she been in great danger thereof: having unhappily run on Ground at New-Castle, and so, not only sprung a Shrowd, but wholly lost her Keel, which put the Owner to a great deal of Costs to Repair, before she could be fitted for Sailing again. Honest Reader, I will readily acknowledge to thee, I am but a Man, and therefore am often subject to com∣mit Error in my Judgments, 'tis a Crime I hope thou wilt pardon. It is connived at in Physicians (I will not say 'tis tolerable in them) if they endanger Lives, before they come to a right understanding of their Profession. Shall not the poor Anstrologer be indulged a little, if he be found to give a mistaken Judgment? His after Expe∣rience may perchance teach him to make amends for a present failing.
XIX. QUESTION, is of the EAGLE, if safe? astrological chart The EAGLE, if safe? This Vessel had been at the Canaries, and some other parts Southward; and no News being heard of her for a considerable time, she was supposed to have been cast away in the late terrible Storm, that happen'd in the latter end of February before-going. The Fear was indeed two true. And, to confirm it, you see in this Scheam, Jupiter Lord of the Seventh An∣gle to be in the Eighth from the Seventh, Retrograde there, and nearly in Opposition of the Sun, and Quadrate of Mars, Lord of the Eighth in the Figure. And, to add unto these dismal Testimonies, here is Cauda Draconis in the Ascendant of the Vessel; all which denoted danger of Shipwrack.
Accordingly to these Astral Testimonies, and the Que∣rents Fears, (most certainly irritated by Coelestial Ener∣gie) this good Ship was cast away by ill weather on the Portugal Coasts, as she was coming homeward.— But, blessed be God, all her Men were saved, by the assistance and opportunity of another Vessel, that then happen'd to be near her, which was better provided for an Encoun∣ter with Storms at Sea. It is remarkable, that about the latter end of February, she was Wrecked, as was supposed; having been three days contending with her concluding Fate. The angry Planet Mars then becoming Direct, as Jupiter (Signifi∣cator of the Ship) fell Retrograde. As Naturally signi∣flying its Destruction, and Philosophically too. XX. QUESTION, is of a Barbadoes Ship, if best to Ensure? astrological chart A Barbadoes Ship, if best to Ensure?
This Vessel was supposed by the Querent to be lost, and that was the occasion of the above-mentioned Question. To resolve it, I considered that Jupiter Lord of the Seventh (Significator of the Ship,) was in the Fifth from the Seventh, and Venus a Fortunate Star, which received Exaltation in the Seventh, was not only in Trine there∣unto, but in great Reception of the Moon; and the Moon applied ad Sextilem Solis. All which were Arguments of Encouragement. But then I considered also, that the Moon was with Cau∣da Draconis in the Eighth House from the Seventh, and in Quadrate of Venus Lady of the Second in the Figure; and that the Destructive Planet Saturn ruled the Hour, which did really portend Dammage to the Querent in the matter quesited. Howbeit, the Arguments of Good being much more powerful, than those of Prejudice and Dammage, did incline me to perswade the Querent not to Ensure, but leave the Issue to Providence; being confident (sub Deo) that tho' there was some danger threatned, yet good suc∣cess was promised by the Figure to be more prevalent, and I doubted not of the safety of the Yessel. Observe how the grand Sorites of Nature links things together: And, how both the Arguments of Fear and Hope were answered with a suitable Event. The Ship at time of this Question, was taken by the Spaniards, but the mistake being clear'd (for the English and Spaniards were then, as they are at this time in peace) she was set at Liberty again, and let go with all her Cargo. But, the Querent (though a very ingenious person) not much crediting Judicial Astrology, yet willing to hear my Opinion, did Ensure.— And thereby lost his Money, to confirm my Judgment, and prove the Art true, &c. Laus Deo. FINIS.
HEre follows a DIARY of the Weather, Care∣fully Observed for XXI. Years Compleat, &c. beginning at November the 11th. Anno 1668. and ending the 31th. of December Anno 1689. Design'd for the Ser∣vice of Philosophers, Physicians, Astrologers, and all other Faithful Observers of the Various Wonders that are to be found in God's Creation.
A DIARY of the Weather, &c. November 1668. ☉ 2 3 4 5 6 7 ☉ 9 10 11 Gr. wds. and rain at nig. 12 Same continuing. 13 Still the same. Frost at nig. 14 Curious frosty air. ☉ Rainy, hail 3h. P. M. 16 Frosty, with sharp winds. 17 Frost continues. 18 Still frost holds. 19 Rainy A. M. frost at nig. 20 Glorious frost. 21 Cldy A.M. cold rain P.M. ☉ Cloudy A.M. frost P. M. 23 ● Clear air, freez. winds. 24 Frosty A. snow threatn. 25 Misty morn. variab. P.M. 26 Cold, close, raw air. 27 Cloudy, rain, P. M. 28 Cldy, high wds rainy nig. Frosty at ☉ rise. Showry. 30 Clouds, windy, moist air. December 1668. 1 Cold misl. rain all night. 2 Cldy, and gr. hollow wds. 3 Same as the former. 4 Cold, some rain hol. wds. 5 Cold & cldy, frost at nig. ☉ Fr. bright skie. Circ. ab. ☽ 7 Frosty and cloudy air. 8 Same as the former. 9 Cldy, misl. & great wds. 10 Fr. clear over-cast at nig. 11 Gr. winds, stor. ra. P. M. 12 Cloudy, dark, but warm. ☉ Cldy, warm, rainy, P. M. 14 Frosty air, gentle winds. 15 Misl. gr. winds, stor. nig. 16 Storms of wds and rain. 17 At 10 stor. of hail, thund. 18 Cloudy, rainy, windy. 19 Warm, thund. rain at nig. ☉ Gr. winds, and rain, P. M. 21 Rain. P. M. winds at nig. 22 Frosty, wdy, troubled air. 23 ● Cloudy, windy air. 24 A hard frost, red Even. 25 Fr broke A. M. fr. ag. P. M. 26 Hard fr. but thick air. ☉ Pleasant frost. 28 Fr. still, but broke at nig. 29 Misty A. M. frosty Even. 30 Moderate air, windy nig. 31 Freezing wds. like to sn.
✚ January 1669. 1 Cloudy cold, snowy nig. 2 Snow m. clear frosty day. ☉ Sharp frost, yet lowring. 4 Cold freez. wds. cir. ab. ☽ 5 High freez. wds. continue. 6 Same as the former. 7 ○ Pleas. fr. sn. in the nig. 8 Snow A. M. fr. continues. 9 Snow A. gr. thaw, ra. nig. ☉ High winds, frosty even. 11 Dark hard fr. strong wds. 12 Misty morn. misl at noon. 13 Hard frost, snow, hail, P. 14 Frost, snow, & brisk wds. 15 Dark cold fr. some sn. P.M 16 Obscure frost, little wind. ☉ Cold thaw, hail & ra. nig. 18 Fr. close air, bright night 19 Fr. drisl. snow at night. 20 Gentle thaw, fr. ag. at nig. 21 ● Hard cold frost. 22 Misty, cold drisling air. 23 Dark, rainy, windy. ☉ Rain, hail, & winds P. M. 25 Winds and rain. 26 Frosty, pleasant air. 27 Cold windy and drisling 28 Curious air, circle ab. ☽ 29 Pleasant, yet variable. 30 Frost N. winds, cir. ab. ☽ ☉ Curious fr. dropping nig February 1669. 1 Windy & cloudy ra. nig. 2 Hail, gr. wds, P.M. cold. 3 Storms of wd. ra. d. & n. 4 Same as the former. 5 O Frosty, yet variab. skie. 6 Cldy, warm, somet. drop. ☉ Rainy day, with gr. wds. 8 Pleas. with fr. but windy. 9 Cloudy, with dashes of ra. 10 Windy, cloudy, warm. 11 Pleasant warm air. 12 Cloudy and wind. ra. nig. 13 Storms of ra. and winds. ☉ Cldy & wdy. drop. P. M. 15 Pleasant, but high winds. 16 Ra. day with cutting wds. 17 Winds, rain, snow, hail. 18 Cold frost, high winds. 19 Pleasant frost. 20 ● Fr. wdy: sn. at 3. P. M. ☉ Sharp frost and snow, P. 22 Hard cold fr. continues. 23 Curious hard frost. 24 Fr. cutting wds. snow nig. 25 Wdy cold thaw, ra. nig. 26 Cold, some rain, wds. 27 Cold, windy, rainy day: ☉ Rain, and hail, P. M. March 1669. 1 Cloudy and windy. 2 Warm, some ra. at night. 3 Mist. m. pleas. warm, P. M.
4 Cloudy, rain about noon. 5 Misty, cldy, clear even. 6 Misty morn. pleas. P. M. ☉ ○ Cloudy, misl. windy. 8 Pleasant air, Star-light nig. 9 Cldy. moist warm air. 10 Cldy. moist warm air. 11 Windy, rain at night. 12 A pleasant warm air. 13 A pleasant warm air. ☉ A variable air. 15 Pleasant warm air. 16 Like the former, wind. ni. 17 Cloudy, cool, high winds. 18 A cool, yet pleasant air. 19 A warm, but cloudy skie. 20 Bright air, with pleas. wds ☉ ● Rainy, and windy. 22 ● Rainy, and windy. 23 Frost, hail & snow P. M. 24 Frost, snow, hail, rainy nig. 25 Snow and hail, gr. winds. 26 Snow, hail, and some ra. 27 Some more sn. strong wds. ☉ A cloudy moist air. 29 Moderately pleasant. 30 Misty m. pleasant, circ. ☽ 31 Pleas. with gent. winds.
April 1669. 1 Pleasant winds, glor. nig. 2 Same as the former. 4 Glorious air, brisk winds.
☉ Somewh. like the former. 5 Cldy. wdy. with some ra. 6 ○ Cold, hail, snow, gr. wds. 7 Fr. morn. windy, ra. at nig. 8 Windy, moist, warm air. 9 Cloudy, with sharp wds. 10 Blust. winds, hail and ra. ☉ Sharp cold air. 12 Somewhat clear, cold. air. 13 A close warm air. 14 A close warm air. 15 A close warm air. 16 Cool winds, yet pleas. 17 Windy & cloudy, some drops. ☉ Windy & cloudy, some drops. 19 Cloudy, warm, ra. at nig. 20 ● Cloudy and lowring. 21 Pleasant day, blust. night. 22 Showry days, blust. nig. 23 Showry days, blust. nig. 24 Pleasant and warm air. ☉ Pleasant and warm air. 26 Brisk wds. lightn. ra. nig. 27 Close air, misl. ra. P. M. 28 Obscure air, clearing, P. M 29 Close & warm. VVds nig, 30 Pleas. air, Halo about ☽ May 1669. 1 VVindy days, ra. P. M. ☉ VVindy days, ra. P. M. 3 VVindy days, ra. P. M. 4 VVindy days, ra. P. M. 5 ○ Cloudy, but warm. 6 Hot, Lightning at night.
7 Hot, but pleasant air. 8 Cloudy morn. pleas. P. M. ☉ Pleas and warm, wdy ni. 10 Hot, but glorious air. 11 Pleasant, with gent. wds 12 Blustering winds. 13 Wds & rain, hail & Ligh. 14 Foggy morn curious day. 15 A sabubrious air. ☉ Bright air, high winds. 17 Cloudy morn. clear, P.M. 18 A clear, but windy night 19 ● Wdy, cldy, warmair. 20 Pleasant, but wdy skie. 21 Pleasant, but wdy skie. 22 Wdy, warm, some ra. P. ☉ Hot air, pleasant winds. 24 Rainy aftern. windy nig. 25 Warm, with clouds & ra. 26 Cloudy, windy, moist skie 27 Windy, great rain, P. M. 28 Windy, ra. and Sun-shin. 29 Hot, moist & windy air. ☉ Rain & thund. a wet nig. 31 VVarm, yet windy skie.
June 1669. 1 Pleas. morn. cloudy P. M. 2 Cloudy morn. bright P. M. 3 A curious, but hot air. 4 ○ A very windy day. 5 Soultry hot, with gent. w. ☉ A pleas. day, wds variab.
7 Much rain, A. variable, P. 8 VVhite clds, strong wds. 9 Rain in the afternoon. 10 A windy rainy day. 11 Cloudy and windy air. 12 Pleasant, yet windy. ☉ Very hot days. 14 Very hot days. 15 Very hot days. 16 Hot day, night rainy. 17 ● Pleasant fresh air. 18 Hot and pleasant air. 19 Hot and pleasant air. ☉ Hot and pleasant air. 21 Hot and pleasant air. 22 Hot and pleasant air. 23 Hot and pleasant air. 24 Excessive hot, gr. wds. N. 25 Hot, but cloudy and wdy. 26 Foggy morn. great heat. ☉ Glorious, but hot air. 28 Very hot days. 29 Very hot days. 30 Hot, wdy, thund. & ra. July 1669. 1 Rain, A. M. pleasant day. 2 Rain & wds thund. at nig. 3 ○ Clouds and some rain. ☉ Rainy, but warm air. 5 A cloudy skie, threat. ra. 6 VVarm and pleasant. 7 Very hot air. 8 Very hot air. 9 Hot day, with brisk wds.
10 Like former, some drps A. ☉ Pleasant, but rain, P. M. 12 High wds, heat remitted. 13 Blustering windy day. 14 Curious air; gintle winds. 15 Curious air; gintle winds. 16 Cloudy, high wds, ra. P. M. 17 ● Ra. m. moderate air. ☉ Cloudy and windy. 19 Stormy & ra. day & nig. 20 Storms & rain continues. 21 VVindy and cloudy. 22 Pleasant, but cool air. 23 A rainy afternoon. 24 Moderately pleasant. ☉ Pleasant, with brisk winds. 26 Pleasant, with brisk winds. 27 A rainy afternoon. 28 Soultry hot air. 29 Cloudy, with brisk winds. 30 Cloudy, with brisk winds. 31 Close, but warm air.
August 1669. ☉ ○ Pleasant hot air. 2 Same with the former. 3 Cloudy and rainy, P. M. 4 Hot, yet pleasant days. 5 Hot, yet pleasant days. 6 Hot, yet pleasant days. 7 Much thunder and rain. ☉ More thund a rainy nig. 9 Great thunder, with rain
10 Stormy and rainy, but hot. 11 Stormy and rainy, but hot. 12 Hot, with gr. th. & ligh. ni. 13 A shower ab. noon, hot air. 14 Close air, mising P. M. ☉ Close air, mising P. M. 16 ● Hot, rainy afternoon. 17 Thick & cloudy, but hot. 18 Misty morn. clear day. 19 Cloudy, with rainy after. 20 Pleasant, and warm air. 21 Cloudy. and cool. ☉ A curious bright day. 23 Misty morn. but hot day. 24 Very great heat. 25 Excessive heat conti∣nues. 26 Excessive heat conti∣nues. 27 Still hot, lightning at nig. 28 Clondy, hot, lightn at nig. ☉ Thun. and lightn. hot air. 30 Very hot air, gentle winds. 31 ○ Very hot air, gentle winds. September 1669. 1 A very hot air. 2 A very hot air. 3 Misty morning, hot air. 4 A cloudy, dull close air. ☉ Moderately clear & pleas. 6 Cloudy morn pleas. P. M. 7 Mist. cold fr. m. clear P. 8 Mist. cold fr. m. clear P. 9 Mist. cold fr. m. clear P. 10 Mist. cold fr. m. clear P. 11 A clear, but cold wdy day. ☉ Pleas. but sharp cold air
13 A nipping frost. 14 ● Cold, frosty, but plea∣sant. 15 ● Cold, frosty, but plea∣sant. 16 Pleasant, but cold air. 17 Misty morning, cold air. 18 Misty morning, cold air. ☉ Cldy, & windy, cold abat. 20 Cloudy, warm, some rain. 21 Pleasant warm air 22 Misty morn. pleas. P. M. 23 Clear, but windy skie. 24 Moist, yet warm, rain nig. 25 Cloudy, windy, warm. ☉ Dark misty m. clear, P. M. 27 Frosty mornings, but glorious days. 28 Frosty mornings, but glorious days. 29 ○ VVarm, oft threat. ra. 30 Misty dark morn. clea. aft.
October 1669. 1 Pleasant warm air. 2 Cldy m. brisk wds. P. M. ☉ Flying clouds, gr. winds. 4 Rain, wind, thund. light. 5 VVarm air, hallow winds. 6 Drisling ra. brisk winds. 7 Sharp winds, but fair. 8 Cloudy, wind. threat. ra. 9 Dark and windy some ra. ☉ Sharp winds, but clear. 11 Dark clds, gr. wds. som ra. 12 VVdy cldy, viol. ra. P.M.
13 Sharp cold air, ra. at night. 14 ● Blustr. winds and rain. 15 Pleasant, but sharp air. 16 Frosty, but cloudy air. ☉ A white frost, variab. day. 18 Fr. morn. cold moist day. 19 A cold d. rainy P. & nig. 20 Cldy skie, cold remitted. 21 Misty morning, warm air. 22 A curious bright day. 23 A sharp fr. but pleasant. ☉ A sharp fr. but pleasant. 25 A sharp fr. but pleasant. 26 Fr. dark morn. pleas. day. 27 Sharp, cold, & variab. air. 28 ● Hard fr. cloudy, P. M. 29 Rainy dull days. 30 Rainy dull days. ☉ A very stormy dark day. November 1669. 1 Great winds, ra. dark skie. 2 Rain & winds, frosty nig. 3 Frosty, glorious day. 4 Cold, gr. winds, fr. broke. 5 Pleasant, inclinable to fr. 6 Frosty, misling at night. ☉ Blustering winds, clou∣dy. 8 Blustering winds, clou∣dy. 9 Windy, cloudy, ra. at nig. 10 Sharp freezing winds. 11 Sharp freezing winds. 12 Sharp freezing winds. 13 ● Dry winds, obscure air. ☉ Frosty glorious days. 15 Frosty glorious days.
16 Astinking thick fog. Frost. 17 Misty morn. freezing air. 18 Pleasant hard white frost. 19 Thaw morn. frosty at nig 20 Frost & mist, m. rainy nig. ☉ Cloudy & ra. cold remit. 22 A cloudy moist air. 23 Thick and cloudy skie. 24 Cloudy, rain, and winds 25 Cloudy, rain, and winds 26 A pleasant clear day. 27 ○ A cloudy cold air. ☉ Cloudy, winds & ra. nig. 29 A cold and cloudy skie. 30 Cloudy, sharp, inclin to fr.
December. 1669. 1 Frosty pleas. broke at nig. 2 Rainy morn. cloudy day. 3 Moist warm air, rain at night. 4 Moist warm air, rain at night. ☉ Misty, foggy, cold air. 6 Pleas. A. cldy, some ra. P. 7 Sharp air, frost at night. 8 Cold fr. mor. breaks P. M. 9 Cloudy, windy, with ra. 10 Windy, cloudy, moist air. 11 Frosty, and windy. ☉ A curious hard frost. 13 ● Hard fr. gr. hollow wds. 14 Hard frost continues. 15 Rain, froze as it fell.
16 Dark, moist, raw air. 17 A hard white frost. 18 Pleasant hard white frost. ☉ Frosty, but cloudy skie. 20 Cold frost, circle about ☽ 21 Hard frost, cutting winds. 22 Frosty, snow in the night. 23 Frost, snow, great winds. 24 Frosty, much snow fell. 25 Sharp, cold, frosty air. ☉ Hard frost, great winds. 27 ○ Frosty, but cold abat. 28 Hard fr. & high winds. 29 hard frost continues. 30 Cold fr. much snow fell. 31 More snow, cold abated. ✚ January 1670. 1 Cldy & moist, snow lies. ☉ Misty, cloudy air. 3 Grt. thaw, rain at night. 4 Rainy dark day. 5 Cloudy skie, some rain. 6 Rain & winds, thun light. 7 Great winds, doing misch 8 A very pleasant day. ☉ A misty cloudy air. 10 Pleasant warm air. 11 ○ Cloudy, close, warm. 12 ○ Cloudy, close, warm. 13 ○ Cloudy, close, warm. 14 ○ Cloudy, close, warm. 15 Brisk winds, and rain. VVindy and cloudy. 17 Great winds and rain.
18 A rainy morning. 19 Freezing winds, sleet air. 20 A hard pinching cold fr. 21 Frosty, A. M. Rain at nig. 22 Frost A. gr. wds & ra. P. ☉ Curious frosty days. 24 Curious frosty days. 25 ○ Ra. P. snow in the nig. 26 Cold freezing winds. 27 Frost, snow, cold winds. 28 Snow'd all day, frosty air. 29 Sharp frost, more snow. ☉ Fr. & windy, snow in nig 31 Frosty cold, blust. winds.
February 1670. 1 Cold frost, snow in the morning. 2 Cold frost, snow in the morning. 3 Sharp frost snow at nig. 4 Hard frost continues. 5 Hard frosty cold air. ☉ Frosty, with much snow. 7 Pleasant frosty air. 8 Hard frost, snow morn. 9 Frosty and more snow. 10 Cold fr. with much snow. 11 Fr. much sn. fr. bro. P. M. 12 A cloudy rainy day & ni. ☉ Rain, A. M. frost at nigh. 14 Pleasant but hard frost. 15 Rain, A. M. pleasant P. M. 16 Frost, A. M. rain P. M. 17 A misty mising rainy day.
18 Pleasant warm air. 19 Cloudy and misty, warm. ☉ Pleasant, but warm air. 21 Pleasant, but sharp air. 22 Rainy, A. M. fair, P. M. 23 Great winds, ra. at night. 24 ○ Rain, winds and hail. 25 Pleasant frosty day. 26 Like the form. windy ni. ☉ A cloudy and windy skie. 28 VVinds & ra. day & nig. March 1670. 1 Rainy m. pleasant, P. M. 2 Frosty, and pleasant air. 3 Frosty, and pleasant air. 4 Rainy and great winds. 5 Drislng, windy, yet warm ☉ Cloudy and warm air 7 Cloudy and warm air 8 Some rain, A. M. cold air. 9 ● Cloudy, and sharp air. 10 ● Cloudy, and sharp air. 11 ● Cloudy, and sharp air. 12 Cold wds, some rain, P. ☉ VVdy, cldy, with gent. ra. 14 Moist air, gr. rain at nig. 15 Thund. Lightn. rain at nig. 16 A very rainy day. 17 Moist & warm, ra at nig. 18 Close and misl. wdy nig.
19 A cold and cloudy skie. ☉ A cloudy rainy day. 21 A cold mislng air. 22 Cldy, moist and raw cold. 23 A curious pleasant air. 24 Misty m. cloudy and cool. 25 Great wds, rain at night. 26 ☉ ○ Great cold winds, with rain. ☉ ○ Great cold winds, with rain. 28 Cold air; with hail & ra. 29 Cold day, with stor. wds. 30 Sharp, cold, freezing wds. 31 Pleasant, cold frosty air.
April 1670. 1 A rainy day. 2 Misty m. the day cloudy. ☉ Cloudy, threatning rain. 4 Cloudy and rainy. 5 A rainy afternoon. 6 Pleas. & warm, high wds. 7 Much rain, but warm. 8 Fair morn. rainy aftern. 9 ● Rainy day, some thund. ☉ Great winds and rain. 11 Great winds and rain. 12 Cold winds frost at night. 13 A curious bright air. 14 A windy and rainy day. 15 Ra. P. terrib. wet wdy ni. 16 Great winds and rain, day and night. ☉ Great winds and rain, day and night. 18 Cold rain. VVinds abated.
19 Pleasant. Some rain, P. M. 20 Pleasant. Some rain, P. M. 21 A curious warm air. 22 A curious warm air. 23 Much rain m. variable P. ☉ Moist air, divers dashes ra. 25 ○ A cldy showering day. 26 A rainy cloudy day. 27 A great deal of rain fell. 28 Gloomy thick air. 29 Cloudy, A. M. plea∣sant, P. M. 30 Cloudy, A. M. plea∣sant, P. M. May 1670. ☉ Cloudy. A. M. rain, P. M. 2 A very glorious day. 3 Pleasant. Winds rise, P. 4 A rainy day and night. 5 Cloudy, often showring. 6 Pleasant warm air. 7 A rainy dark day. ☉ Cloudy m. pleasant, P. M. 9 ● A windy moist air. 10 Pleasant, with gentle wds. 11 Pleas. day. Hail, rain at N. 12 Moderate clear air. 13 Curious pleasant days 14 Curious pleasant days ☉ Fair A. cldy and wdy, P. 16 Clds & wds, some rain. P. 17 A pleasant day. 18 A clear, but cool air. 19 A clear, but cool air. 20 A clear, but cool air.
21 A pleas. day, brisk wds. ☉ A pleas. day, brisk wds. 23 A pleas. day, brisk wds. 24 ○ Hot, with pleasant winds. 25 Hot, with pleasant winds. 26 Hot, with pleasant winds. 27 Hot, with pleasant winds. 28 A hot suffocating air. ☉ Heat abates, brisk wds ris. 30 Very hot air. 31 Warm air, cloudy, P. M.
June 1670. 1 Thund. & rain, A. cldy, P. 2 Cldy, rain in the Even. 3 Very pleasant air, P. M. 4 Great thund. & storms, P. ☉ Moist, wdy. Threatens ra. 6 Cloudy, and sometime ra. 7 ● Cldy, close, but hot air. 8 The hot air continues. 9 The hot air continues. 10 The hot air continues. 11 Yet great heat continues. ☉ Pleasant, with brisk wds. 13 Cldy and wdy, yet hot air. 14 Cloudy A. M. Rain P. M. 15 A curious, yet windy air. 16 Hot day. Rain at Night. 17 Excessive heat. 18 Cldy, some ra. abt noon. ☉ Cldy day. Cleering at N. 20 Cldy, rain P. with H. wds-
21 Cldy, wdy. Rainy aftern. 22 Rainy and cloudy. 23 ○ Cldy, wdy. Clear at N. 24 Windy cloudy day. 25 A rainy windy day. ☉ Cloudy and windy day. 27 Blustring winds, and rain, P. M. 28 Blustring winds, and rain, P. M. 29 Cldy, wdy. Dropping, P. 30 Cloudy, yet warm air. July 1670. 1 Cold, but warm air. 2 Cold, but warm air. ☉ A glorious bright day. 4 Cloudy A. M Pleasant P. 5 Curious and warm day. 6 ● Very hot air. 7 Violent heat, but gentle winds. 8 Violent heat, but gentle winds. 9 Misty m. hot and pleasant. ☉ Hot air, with gentle wds. 11 Cldy, hot. Drops at noon. 12 Thick wdy air. Ra. noon. 13 Pleasant, with brisk wds. 14 Cldy, wdy, threatning ra. 15 Rain, and blustring wds. 16 Rainy D. & N. with wds. ☉ Windy and rainy. 18 Fair, with flying clouds. 19 Pleasant. Rain at night. 20 A very glorious day. 21 Pleasant, with brisk wds. 22  Hot air, & gentle wds. 23 Great wds. Rain at night.
☉ Very hot air. 25 Hot, gr. thund. & light. N. 26 A very hot air. 27 Misty morn. but hot day. 28 Glorious, but hot air. 29 Glorious, but hot air. 30 Cloudy morn. hot day. ☉ Windy: sudden storms P.
August 1670. 1 Blustring wds and rain. 2 Cool and gentle air. 3 Pleasant clear air. 4 Pleasant clear air. 5 ● Sweet air, & brisk wds. 6 Cldy; lightn. thund. at N. ☉ Rain morn. hot air. 8 Rain and Thunder. 9 A cloudy dark day. 10 Pleasant, hot air. 11 Misty morn Rain at night. 12 Cldy, wdy, heat abates. 13 Hot, with pleasant winds. ☉ Blustring winds. Some drops at noon. 15 Blustring winds. Some drops at noon. 16 Great and violent winds. 17 Violent, cold winds. 18 A curious bright day. 19 Pleasant with gentle wds. 20 ○ Pleasant air. ☉ Rain morn. Fair, P. M. 22 Pleasant sweet air. 23 Rainy day and night.
24 A pleasant day. 25 Hot air. Flying clouds. 26 Misty morn. pleasant, hot, P. M. 27 Misty morn. pleasant, hot, P. M. ☉ Misty morn. pleasant, hot, P. M. 29 Rain m. windy air. 30 Blustring windy day. 31 Great winds and rain. September 1670. 1 High and boistrous winds. 2 Cold, misty m. rain at nig. 3 Blustr. wds. Rain at nig. ☉ ● Great winds and rain. 5 Cloudy, threatning rain 6 A windy rainy day. 7 Moderate good air. 8 Cloudy, threatning rain. 9 Windy and cloudy air. 10 Rain and winds. ☉ Rain and winds. 12 Rain and winds. 13 Misty morn. pleasant, P. 14 Misty rainy m. pleas. P. 15 Cloudy, thick air. 16 Windy & cldy. Rain, P. 17 Winds and rain, by fits. ☉ Pleasant air. 19 ○ Rain and winds. 20 Pleasant day. Rain at nig. 21 Misty A. cold, windy nig. 22 Cold winds continue. 23 Frosty, cold winds. 24 Frosty, cold winds. ☉ Cloudy; rainy, P. M. 26 Cloudy, moist; rain at night. 27 Cloudy, moist; rain at night.
28 Rainy day and night. 29 Windy; Rainy night. 30 Rainy morn. windy day.
October 1670. 1 A curious frost. ☉ Cloudy thick air. 3 ● Misty m. pleasant P. M. 4 Misty m. pleasant P. M. 5 Misty m. pleasant P. M. 6 VVds & clds, some ra. P. 7 Cold winds. Rain. P. 8 Rainy day, winds abated. ☉ Misty A. Moist and eldy. 10 Cloudy with rain, wdy night. 11 Cloudy with rain, wdy night. 12 Brisk wds, a rainy night. 13 Rain A. cloudy & windy. 14 A windy day and nigt. 15 Gr. wds. Storm ab. 3. P. ☉ VVindy. Rain and hail, P. 17 Great wds and cldy air. 18 ○ VVindy rainy day. 19 VVindy and cloudy skie. 20 Storms of wind and rain. 21 Pleasant, but cool air. 22 Frosty. Rain at night. ☉ Storms of winds and rain. 24 Pleasant A. rain P. 25 Cool air. Rain, morn. 26 Cloudy dull air. 27 Moist & cldy. Mist at N.
28 Thick misty m. cldy day 29 Misty m. Lowr. moist air. ☉ Pleasant morn. cldy day. 31 Great wds. Rain at nig. November 1670. 1 Frosty, but pleasant. 2 ● White frost. Windy. cloudy. 3 ● White frost. Windy. cloudy. 4 Frosty, yet rain, A. M. 5 Frosty A. M. rain, P. M. ☉ Tempestuous dark day. 7 Great, but cold winds. 8 Hard frost, but pleasant. 9 Frosty, cold. Rain at nig. 10 Cloudy, cold remitted. 11 Misty, and cloudy air. 12 Clondy. Misling windy nights. ☉ Clondy. Misling windy nights. 14 Moist, cold and cloudy. 15 Moist, cold and cloudy. 16 ○ Cold and cldy. Rain, P. 17 Curious frost. Broke, P. 18 Great winds. Rain at nig. 19 Strong wds. Ra. abt noon. ☉ Cloudy & windy. Rain P. 21 High winds, and rain. 22 Cold wds, sometimes ra. 23 Storms of winds and rain. 24 Cloudy and windy. 25 Cold air. Rain at night. 26 Frosty, cold, and cloudy. ☉ Pleasant frosty air. 28 Frosty, and variable. 29 Frosty, thick & cldy skie. 30 Frosty, windy. Snow A.
December 1670. 1 Great winds. Some rain. 2 ● Sharp cold winds. 3 ● Sharp cold winds. ☉ Misty. Cloudy misl. day. 5 Cold and cldy. Rain at N. 6 Rain, wd, snow. Freez. p. 7 Cold freez. wds; some sn. 8 Cold, yet pleas. A. Low. P. 9 Misty, cloudy, close air. 10 Cold & cldy. Much ra N. ☉ Moist & cldy. Gent. wds. 12 Moist & warm. Rain at N. 13 Stormy winds and rain. 14 A curious bright day. 15 Thick fog, A. Hard frost. 16 ○ Windy, & much rain. 17 Frosty. Wdy, cldy. Ra. N. ☉ Frosty, but curious day. 19 Frost, A. Cldy, wdy, ra. N. 20 Blustr. wds. Cldy, warm. 21 Pleasant, inclined to frost. 22 Rainy morn. cloudy day. 23 Close and cloudy air. 24 Cldy, brisk wds, some ra. ☉ Windy, cloudy, moist. 26 Misl. Gr. wds, Lightn. Th. 27 Great wds, rain at night. 28 VVindy, dark, rainy air. 29 Clear, sharp cutting wds. 30 VVindy, cold and cloudy. 31 Cold freez. wds, & cldy
January 1671. ☉ ● Pleasant, but cold frost. 2 A windy rainy day. 3 Curious white frost. 4 Great rain and winds. 5 Frosty, with sharp winds. 6 Frosty, A. Tempestu. P. 7 Much rain, A. M. Great winds. ☉ Much rain, A. M. Great winds. 9 Wdy & cldy, circle ab. ☽ 10 Strong wds; Cldy, moist. 11 Rain, A. Great wds, cldy. 12 VVdy. Rain, hail, a Rain-b 13 Frosty A. M. cold winds. 14 Frosty A. tempestuous P. ☉ ○ Much winds and rain. 16 Cldy. Great wds, rainy N. 17 A very windy day. 18 Frosty A. cldy, wdy, rain 19 A white fr. with cold wds. 20 Rain A.M. cldy & wdy. 21 VVindy, cloudy. Rain P. ☉ Great wds, and cldy air. 23 Curious air, great winds. 24 VVdy, cldy, threatning ra. 25 A rainy windy day. 26 Frosty A. wds & rain, P. 27 Cold winds. Rain, P.M. 28 Cldy, drisl. cold remitted. ☉ VVdy, moist. Ra. ab. noon. 30 High winds and rain. 31 Violent & boistrous wds. February 1671. 1 Cold wds, & cloudy skie. 2 A curious hard frost. 3 Fr. misty, cold, like to sn. 4 Same as former. Thaw N. ☉ Misty A. Hard white ft. 6 Fr. like to sn. small rain. 7 Misty, cldy; A little sn. 8 VVindy, with small rain. 9 Cldy, moist; great winds. 10 Drislng rain. Great winds. 11 Pleasant, but windy air. ☉ Cloudy, windy; rain P. 13 ○ Cool and cloudy. 14 ○ Cool and cloudy. 15 ○ Cool and cloudy. 16 Cold and cloudy. Drisl P. 17 Stinking fog. Pleasant P. 18 Cold and cloudy. Rain P. ☉ Cldy, moist. Gentle wds. 20 Cold rain, & wds. Hail P. 21 VVds, rain & hail. Cold air 22 Frosty; cloudy, some sn. 23 Misty, cold and cloudy. 24 A cloudy day. 25 Cloudy drisling air. ☉ Small ra. Sometimes clear 27 Pleasant frosty air. 28 ● Raw air, cold & cldy. March 1671. 1 Cold and windy day. 2 Pleasant frost, but windy.
3 Windy, and sometimes rain. 4 Windy, and sometimes rain. ☉ Drisling A. Rainy, P. 6 Cold dark rainy air. 7 Frosty, cloudy, windy. 8 Pleasant frosty air. 9 Pleasant frosty air. 10 Misty A. much rain P. 11 Frosty. Blustring rainy N. ☉ A cloudy rainy day. 13 Moist air. Rain at night. 14 Misty A. M. Fair day. 15 ○ Cloudy. Rainy night. 16 Rain A. Moist and cloudy. 17 Cloudy rainy day. 18 Pleasant. Cold wds rise. ☉ Wdy, cldy, sleet, hail. 20 Cldy, cold, wdy. Some sn. 21 Frost A. Snow and sleet P. 22 Black frost. Pleas. days. 23 Black frost. Pleas. days. 24 Black frost. Pleas. days. 25 Frosty and windy. ☉ Misty A. M. Cloudy day. 27 Rain A. Cloudy & wdy. 28 Lofty wds. Cldy misling. 29 Rain & winds A. Fair P. 30 ● Rain A. Cldy & wdy. 31 Windy, yet fair.
April 1671. 1 Great winds and rain. ☉ Great winds and rain.
3 Clear air, but high wds. 4 Pleasant frost, and windy. 5 Same as the former. 6 Cloudy, windy day. 7 Bright air. Brisk winds. 8 Cloudy, with rain P. M. ☉ Cldy, showring D. & N. 10 Pleasant warm air. 11 Misty A. Some drops P. 12 Cldy, wdy, rain at night. 13 Rainy, dark, and windy. 14 ○ Moderate cool winds. 15 Great cold winds. Clear air. ☉ Great cold winds. Clear air. 17 Cold, wdy, clear Sun-shin. 18 A glorious day; cold abat. 19 Bright air, with gintl. wds. 20 Thick, cloudy, windy air. 21 Curious warm, brisk wds. 22 A pleasant, but hot day. ☉ Glorious days, with hot air. 24 Glorious days, with hot air. 25 Clear, but hot air. 26 Clear, but hot air. 27 Heat drops, A. Rain at nig. 28 ● Cldy, wdy; rain at nig. 29 Cldy, some ra. brisk wds. ☉ Rainy, windy, dark air. May 1671. 1 Wdy, but hot. Rain in N. 2 Some Rain A. Variable. 3 Rain A. M. Wdy warm. 4 Cldy, wdy, warm. Rain P. 5 Rain A. M. Windy warm.
6 Pleasant hot air, gentle winds. ☉ Pleasant hot air, gentle winds. 8 Pleasant hot air, gentle winds. 9 Pleasant hot air, gentle winds. 10 Pleasant hot air, gentle winds. 11 Pleasant hot air, gentle winds. 12 Hot day. Rain, P. M. 13 ○ Hot air, gentle winds. ☉ Cldy, windy. Rain P.M. 15 Great wds, threaning rain. 16 Cloudy, windy. Rain, P. 17 VVindy and cloudy skie. 18 Cool and cloudy air. 19 Cold winds; some rain. 20 Cold winds; some rain. ☉ Cold winds; some rain. 22 Pleasant. Rain at night. 23 Thunder, much rain P. 24 Hail & thunder. Cloudy. 25 VVdy; ra. P. Tempest. N. 26 Rainy, with great winds. 27 Lowring, with high wds. ☉ ● VVarm air. Rain, P. 29 Misty morn. Rain, P. M. 30 Showring, yet warm air. 31 Rainy day, strong winds.
June 1671. 1 Rainy, windy, warm air. 2 Rainy, windy, warm air. 3 Pleasant, with brisk wds. ☉ Brisk wind. Rain P. M. 5 Cool and windy air.
6 Pleasant, but windy. 7 High wds. Rain at night. 8 Blustring winds. Rain, P. 9 Cloudy, & great winds. 10 Rainy, windy day. ☉ Cloudy and windy. 12 ○ Brisk wds. Rainy P. 13 Great winds and rain. 14 Cloudy, but warm air. 15 Pleasant. warm air. 16 Pleasant. warm air. 17 Pleasant, warm & wdy. ☉ Pleasant, warm & wdy. 19 Pleasant, warm & wdy. 20 Cldy, wdy, some rain. P. 21 Bright hot air, but windy. 22 Hot but pleasant. 23 Very hot, but cloudy. 24 Brisk wds, yet hot air. ● ☉ Brisk wds, yet hot air. ● 26 Brisk wds, yet hot air. ● 27 Cloudy and windy skie. 28 A glorious bright day. 29 Misty morn, hot day. 30 Soultry hot, yet bright air. July 1671. 1 Thunder. rain, and hail. ☉ Cloudy and wind. Some rain. 3 Cloudy and wind. Some rain. 4 A curious bright day. 5 Storms of wind and rain. 6 VVdy, & cldy. Rain P. 7 Hot, soult. Thick cldy air 8 Cloudy wdy: yet warm
☉ Hot, wdy. Lightn. at nig. 10 Hot, & pleas. Gentle wds. 11 ○ Rain, A. Cool & cldy. 12 Cool and cloudy. Much rain, P. M. 13 Cool and cloudy. Much rain, P. M. 14 A rainy day. 15 Great wds, & some rain. ☉ Pleasant. Rain at night. 17 Pleasant warm air. 18 Pleasant warm air. 19 Pleasant warm air. 20 Close, cloudy, windy air. 21 Cloudy; and cool winds. 22 Misty, rainy, A. Gr. wds. ☉ VVdy air, scattering clds. 24 Rainy days, with wds 25 ● Rainy days, with wds 26 Rainy days, with wds 27 Cloudy. Rain P. M. 28 Rainy, but hot air. 29 Rainy, but hot air. ☉ Close, hot air. Rainy nig. 31 Thunder, wds and rain.
August 1671. 1 Cool & cldy. Gentle wds. 2 Flying clouds. Yet fair. 3 Cloudy, and hot air. 4 Very windy. Rain, P. 5 Cloudy, windy, rainy. ☉ A windy, cloudy day. 7 Rainy, cloudy, windy. 8 Rainy, cloudy, windy.
9 Thunder, rain and winds. 10 ○ Cldy, great wds & rain. 11 Cldy, great wds & rain. 12 Cldy, great wds & rain. ☉ Cldy, moist. Gr. wds abate 14 Pleasant sweet air. 15 Somewhat cloudy, warm. 16 A very pleasant day. 17 Cloudy, and some rain. 18 Indifferent good air. 19 Pleasant, but hot air. ☉ Great wds Rain at night. 21 VVindy, yet warm air. 22 Cldy, wdy. Heat drops, P. 23 Pleasant, & hot. Rain at N. 24 ● Cldy, & variable air. 25 Pleasant, and hot air. 26 A glorious bright day. ☉ Cloudy, but warm air. 28 Cloudy. A misty night. 29 Misty m. but bright day. 30 Cloudy, and variable. 31 Misty A. Hot bright day. September 1671. 1 Cloudy A. but hot day. 2 Rain A. wdy, yet hot air. ☉ Rain A. a very wdy day. 4 Great winds, rain P. M. 5 Pleasant, with flying clds. 6 Misty A. Hot day, ra nig. 7 VVdy, cldy, hail. VVet N. 8 ○ VVindy, and some rain. 9 Cloudy, dark, rainy day. ☉ Pleasant clear air. 11 Rainy day. Tempest. nig. 12 Tempestuous day & nig.
13 Moist air. High winds. 14 Thick, cloudy, dark air. 15 Pleasant healthful air. 16 Pleasant healthful air. ☉ Cloudy. Rain about ☉ set. 18 A curious pleasant day. 19 Rainy, windy, and cldy. 20 Tempestuous day & nig. 21 A moist and windy air. 22 ● Moderately pleasant. 23 Hard, pleas fr. Rainy nig ☉ Dark Tempestuous air. 25 Pleasant frosty day. 26 Frosty A. M. Rain P. M. 27 Frosty, and pleasant air. 28 A dark rainy day. 29 A moist and variable skie. 30 Dark, windy, rainy day.
October 1671. ☉ Stormy wind and rain. 2 Stormy wind and rain. 3 Cloudy, windy, some rain. 4 A windy and cloudy air. 5 A cloudy dark day. 6 VVdy & cldy. Rain at nig. 7 Dark, windy, rainy day. ☉ ○ VVdy, moist, warm air. 9 A rainy cloudy day. 10 Rainy A M. pleasant P. M. 11 Misty, A. M. pleasant P. M. 12 Misty, A. M. pleasant P. M.
13 Cloudy, cold & lowring. 14 Cold, yet pleasant air. ☉ Cold, yet pleasant air. 16 Cold, & sometimes Rainy 17 Curious frosty day. 18 Curious frosty day. 19 Cldy. Much rain in th' nig. 20 Rainy day and night. 21 Cloudy obscure air. ☉ ● A curious but cool air. 23 A Tempestuous day. 24 Temp. continues. Thun. P. 25 Curious warm air. 26 Cldy, moist, & variable. 27 Cloudy, but warm air. 28 Cloudy, but warm air. ☉ Misty m. pleasant day. 30 Cldy, dull, obscure air. 31 Dark, cold, sharp air. November 1671. 1 Cold, cloudy, misling. 2 Cloudy, thick, moist air. 3 Dark, cloudy, very cold. 4 Cold, cldy, drislng at nig. ☉ Wdy, cold, freezing air. 6 ○ Frosty, wdy, rain at N. 7 A hard, but pleasant frost. 8 A hard, but pleasant frost. 9 Frosty. Gr. & violent wds. 10 Cldy A. M. Bright P. 11 Rain & sleet, & high wds. ☉ Curious frost; great winds. 13 Curious frost; great winds. 14 Rain with snow & sleet. 15 Cldy moist, cold remitted. 16 Rainy, cloudy, warm.
17 Cloudy, windy, dark air. 18 A curious bright day. ☉ Cldy, dark, moist. VVarm. 20 Moist, cldy, obscure air. 21 ● Thick clds, high wds. 22 Misty, cloudy, mislng. 23 Cloudy, moist. Great wds. 24 Drisling. Cloudy and windy. 25 Drisling. Cloudy and windy. ☉ Cold, yet somewhat pleas. 27 Cloudy, cold, and windy. 28 VVindy. Rain at night. 29 A rainy cloudy air. 30 Cloudy, dark, cold air.
December. 1671. 1 A cloudy, dark, cold day. 2 Misling, cldy. Rain at nig: ☉ Cold, dark, and cloudy. 4 Rainy dark, A. Clear P. 5 ○ Fr. A. Cldy, some ra. 6 Cold, somewhat frosty. 7 Cold, somewhat frosty. 8 Cold, somewhat frosty. 9 Hard, frosty dark day. ☉ Hard, frosty dark day. 11 Rainy, windy, dark day. 12 Cold, windy, misling air. 13 Frosty, but cloudy air. 14 Frosty, but cloudy air. 15 Frosty, but cloudy air. 16 Cold, raw, misling air.
☉ Cloudy, dark cold air. 18 Cloudy, dark cold air. 19 Cold, dark rainy day. 20 Very cold, but dark skie. 21 ● Sharp cold air. 22 A misty day and night. 23 Frosty A. Misty P. & nig. ☉ Cold sharp air. 25 Cldy & wdy. Sleet at nig. 26 Frosty, and pleasant air. 27 Very cold hard frost. 28 Frosty, and some snow. 29 A curious frosty d. wds P. 30 Gr. wds, D & N some ra. ☉ Gr. wds cloudy moist air. ✚ January 1672. 1 Cldy drisl. Gr. wds abate 2 Moist and cloudy air. 3 A cloudy dark cold air. 4 ○ Snow A. cold dark skie. 5 Cloudy, cold, windy. 6 Cloudy, cold, windy. ☉ Cloudy, cold, windy. 8 Black frost, cloudy, dark 9 Frosty, misty, dark air. 10 Frost. Stinking fog, P.M. 11 VVinds A. pleasant day 12 Hard frost. Gr. wds at nig. 13 A curious pleasant day. ☉ Rainy, warm VVdy nig. 15 A good and pleasant air. 16 Frosty, but pleasant day 17 Frosty, but pleasant day 18 Misling, and warm air. 19 Cldy. Misty misling night. 20 ● A cldy dark rainy air.
☉ Dark obscure clouds. 22 Misty, misling cold day. 23 Sharp cold windy air. 24 Sharp cold windy air. 25 Cold freez. wds, yet clear. 26 Pleas. frost, sharp wds. 27 Pleas. frost, sharp wds. ☉ Pleas. frost, sharp wds. 29 Frosty, cldy Snow at nig. 30 Frosty, cloudy. Snow lies. 31 Curious cold frosty day.
February 1672. 1 Curious hard fr. continue. 2 ○ Cold, cldy. Sn. all nig. 3 A great snow all day. ☉ Cold, wdy. Thaw on sn. 5 Some snow. Frosty nig. 6 Some snow. Frosty nig. 7 Some snow. Frosty nig. 8 Frosty. Gentle sn. all day. 9 Cold fr & snowy D. & N. 10 Frosty, sharp cutting wds. ☉ A curious cold frosty day. 12 Fr. breaks. Gr. thaw, P. 13 Cold & gentle ra. all day. 14 Ra. A. Misty, cldy, moist. 15 Cold, misty, and cloudy. 16 Misty, misl. A. Pleasant, P. 17 ● Curious frosty air. ☉ ● Curious frosty air. 19 ● Curious frosty air. 20 Fr. broke. Cldy, close air.
21 Cold, cloudy, thick skie. 22 Cloudy A. Pleasant P. 23 Close, but warm air. 24 Curious warm & plea∣sant. ☉ Curious warm & plea∣sant. 26 Cldy, cold, & misling. 27 Misling, cldy, yet warm. 28 Drisling rain and cloudy. 29 Sharp cold cloudy air. March 1672. 1 Hard, but pleasant frost. 2 Hard, but pleasant frost. ☉ ● Stinking fog, A. Pleas. P. 4 Frosty, pleasant air. 5 Moist, windy, cloudy. 6 Cloudy. Showry, P.M. 7 Cold, frost, snow, & hail 8 Hard fr. A. Sn. & sleet, P. 9 Hard, but pleasant frost. ☉ Great wds. Rainy even. 11 Frosty, and cloudy skie. 12 Sn. & sleet. Cold & cldy. 13 Frosty, windy, & cloudy. 14 Cldy, wdy. Hail & rain, P. 15 Frosty, A. VVds & rain, P. 16 Great wds, Rain & hail. ☉ Wdy, cldy, moist, warm 18 Cloudy and moist air. 19 ● Misty morn. Pleasant warm air. 20 Misty morn. Pleasant warm air. 21 Foggy A. Lowring day 22 Cloudy, A. Pleasant, P. 23 A cloudy lowring day.
☉ Pleasant clear air. 25 Windy, cldy, cold moist. 26 Cloudy. Rain at night. 27 Curious bright air. 28 Cloudy, some misling rain. 29 Curious warm air. 30 Cloudy, misling air. ☉ Rainy morn. Pleasant, P.
April 1672. 1 Great winds and rain. ○ 2 Great winds and rain. ○ 3 Great wds, & violent hail. 4 Frosty, with cutting wds. 5 Rainy and brisk wds. 6 Rainy and brisk wds. ☉ Cldy: Some rain at nig. 8 Wdy, dark & misling. 9 Cloudy A. Pleasant P. 10 Dark air; misling rain. 11 Cldy, moist; brisk wds. 12 Cldy, moist; brisk wds. 13 Cldy, moist; brisk wds. ☉ Cloudy A. Glorious day. 15 Cldy A. Ra. P. & in the N. 16 Cloudy, moist, windy. 17 ● Cold frosty air. 18 Frosty, yet very bright. 19 Frosty, yet very bright. 20 Frosty, yet very bright. ☉ Frosty, yet very bright. 22 Frosty, yet very bright. 23 Frosty, yet very bright.
24 Still like the former. 25 Still like the former. 26 A windy and cloudy air. 27 Cldy, with blustring wds. ☉ Pleasant air. Some wds. 29 Cloudy, but warm air. 30 Hot air, and gentle wds. May 1672. 1 ○ Rainy, and cloudy. 2 Great wds & rain all day. 3 Wdy, some thund. & ra. 4 Wdy, and flying clouds. ☉ Boistrous wds, yet fair. 6 Boistrous wds, yet fair. 7 Boistrous wds, yet fair. 8 Boistrous wds, yet fair. 9 Cool & cldy, N. E. wds. 10 Very pleasant days. 11 Very pleasant days. ☉ Very pleasant days. 13 Very pleasant days. 14 Still th' same, but wds rise. 15 ● Wdy, fair & clear. 16 ● Wdy, fair & clear. 17 ● Wdy, fair & clear. 18 Cldy, & pleasant showers. ☉ Cloudy, and brisk wds. 20 Wdy, & cldy, some rain. 21 Cloudy, great S.W. wds. 22 Hot yet windy. Some drops, P. M. 23 Hot yet windy. Some drops, P. M. 24 A curious warm air. 25 A curious warm air. ☉ A curious warm air. 27 A curious warm air.
28 Very glorious, but hot days. 29 Very glorious, but hot days. 30 ○ Strong N. winds, but fair. 31 ○ Strong N. winds, but fair.
June 1672. 1 Great N. wds continue. ☉ Cloudy, and brisk winds. 3 Cloudy, and cool winds. 4 Cloudy, and much rain. 5 Cloudy, and gentle rain. 6 Cloudy, and some rain. 7 Pleasant: some rain A. 8 Rain, thunder & lightn. ☉ VVarm. Some ra. & thund. 10 A very glorious day. 11 Hot, & pleas. some ra. N. 12 Hot, & cloudy. Rain P. 13 Cloudy and S. VV: wds. 14 Cldy, and windy. Rain, P. 15 ● Brisk wds, threatn. ra. ☉ Rain, and great winds. 17 Hot & wdy. Lightn. at N. 18 Pleasant, with gentle wds. 19 Great wds, and some rain. 20 Blustring wds and rain. 21 Brisk wds, and some rain. 22 Very windy days. ☉ Very windy days. 24 Gentle winds. Hot air. 25 Some drops, A.M. wdy. 26 High wds, & some rain. 27 Rainy A. Pleasant P.
28 VVindy, and rainy days. 29 VVindy, and rainy days. ☉ ○ VVindy, and rainy days. July 1672. 1 VVdy, cloudy, moist air. 2 Pleasant, but windy. 3 High winds and rain. 4 Great winds and rain. 5 VVindy, & some rain. 6 Rain, wds, & thunder. ☉ Pleasant, sweet air. 8 Brisk wds. Rainy night 9 A rainy day. 10 VVindy, and some rain 11 VVindy, and some rain 12 VVindy, and some rain 13 VVindy, and variable. ☉ ● Cloudy and windy. 15 Cloudy and windy. 16 Cloudy, rain at night. 17 A glorious day. 18 Misty A. Pleas. day. Ra. P. 19 Hot air, & gentle wds. 20 Soultry hot air. ☉ Hot air, with pleas. wds 22 Hot air, but cloudy. 23 Cldy, and somewhat cool. 24 High and lofty winds. 25 Great wds, & some rain. 26 Rain A. windy & cldy. 27 Hot, but close air. ☉ Pleasant, hot air. 29 ○ A rainy day. 30 Gr. wds, & rain all day. 31 Cloudy and windy. August 1672. 1 Windy and cool air. 2 Glorious days. 3 Glorious days. ☉ Glorious days. 5 A soultry hot air. 6 Rain, A. Pleasant P. 7 Hot. A tempestuous nig. 8 Rain A. Wdy & fair P. 9 Wdy, & some showers. 10 Brisk wds, & some rain. ☉ Rain, wds, hail thunder. 12 ● Wdy. Tempestu. nig. 13 Windy rainy days. 14 Windy rainy days. 15 Moderately pleasant. 16 Moderately pleasant. 17 A rainy day and night. ☉ Like to the former. 19 Cldy, much rain P. 20 Rain A. Wdy & cloudy. 21 Windy and cool air. 22 Windy and cool air. 23 Cldy Some drops at noon. 24 Cloudy, but calm air. ☉ A glorious day. 26 Warm, but somewhat cloudy. 27 Warm, but somewhat cloudy. 28 ○ Great rain and winds. 29 Great rain and winds. 30 Wdy day. Rain at night. 31 Cloudy, with rain.
September 1672. ☉ Cloudy. Much rain P. 2 VVindy, and cloudy. 3 Much rain A. Fair at nig. 4 Rainy and windy. 5 Rainy and windy. 6 Rainy and windy. 7 Great winds and rain. ☉ Pleasant. Some rain P. 9 Pleasant, yet fresh air. 10 Frosty A. Showring P. 11 ● A very rainy day. 12 A glorious day. 13 Fair A. M. Rain P. M. 14 A pleasant, but cold air. ☉ Frosty A.M. Rainy nig. 16 Cloudy, rainy, windy. 17 Frosty, & somewhat pleas. 18 Misty A. M. Rain P. M. 19 Misty A. Pleasant day. 20 Pleasant, but windy. 21 Cloudy, windy, misling. ☉ Variable. Rain P. M. 23 Variable. Rain P. M. 24 Pleasant, but rainy night. 25 Cloudy, warm. Some rain 26 ○ Much ra. A. Curi. air, P. 27 Foggy A. VVdy & cldy. 28 Rainy A. Pleasant P. ☉ VVindy air. A rainy nig. 30 Pleas. A very wdy night. October 1672. 1 VVdy D. & N. Some rain. 2 Great winds and rain. 3 Frosty. Rain, P. M. 4 Misty & wdy. Some rain. 5 VVds & rain, A. Clear P. ☉ Tempestuous day & nig. 7 Neerly like the former. 8 VVdy, sometimes showr. 9 Cldy, threatning rain. 10 ● Pleasant warm air. 11 Pleasant warm air. 12 Frost A. M. Curious day. ☉ Like to the former. 14 Cloudy, but warm. 15 VVdy, cold, like to rain. 16 Pleas. air. Some, rain P. 17 Cloudy A. M. Fair day. 18 Sometimes like to rain. 19 Cold winds and cloudy. ☉ Cold winds and cloudy. 21 Cldy, cold. Some rain P. 22 Frosty and curious air. 23 Frosty and curious air. 24 Cloudy, cold & windy. 25 Frosty & pleasant air. 26 ○ Rain A. Moist & wdy. ☉ Rainy, with wds stirring. 28 Pleas. A. Rain at night 29 Cldy & wdy; rain at nig. 30 Frosty, & pleasant air. 31 Misling, cloudy & windy. November 1672. 1 Very sharp cold winds. 2 Frosty, nipping air.
☉ Curious frosty air. 4 Curious frosty air. 5 Misling cloudy skie. 6 Windy and cloudy. 7 Cold and cloudy air. 8 Cold, cldy. Tempestu. N. 9 ● Great wds & cldy air. ○ Pleasant day. Drisling nig. 11 Cold and cloudy air. 12 A curious frosty day. 13 Raw cold wds, & cloudy. 14 Dark ra. & wds, D. & N. 15 Blustring winds. Rain, P. 16 Windy, cloudy, moist. ☉ Rainy and windy. 18 Pleasant day. Stormy nig. 19 A rainy dark day. 20 Cloudy, blustring winds. 21 Violent wds, & some rain. 22 A pleasant day. 23 Cldy & moist. Wdy nig. ☉ ○ Dark clouds, & winds. 25 A pleasant bright day. 26 Glorious m. Cloudy P. 27 Cloudy, moist, but warm 28 Cloudy, misling air. 29 Cloudy, misling air. 30 Cloudy, misling air.
December 1672. ☉ Great winds and rain. 2 Cldy & wdy. Some ra. A.
3 Frosty and pleasant. 4 Somewhat like the formr. 5 Cloudy and mising air. 6 Hard frost, and cloudy. 7 Snowy day; great winds. ☉ Snow lies. Cldy & wdy. 9 ● A dark cold thaw. 10 Cold, trosty, and cloudy, 11 Snow, & ra. Tempestu. N. 12 Wind, and cold rain. 13 Wind, and cold rain. 14 Wind, and cold rain. ☉ Dark lowring moist air. 16 A cloudy cold air. 17 Wds & rain day & nig. 18 A rainy cloudy day. 19 Pleasant A. Cldy, wdy, P. 20 Cloudy and windy, P, M. 21 Warm wds, cldy. Rain N. ☉ Rain & great wds. warm. 23 Warm. Tempest. D. & N. 24 ○ Great wds. Rain at N. 25 Winds abated. Clear day. 26 A rainy, windy air. 27 A rainy, windy air. 28 A rainy, windy air. ☉ A rainy, windy air. 30 Great wds. Some rain, P. 31 A windy rainy day. ✚ January 1673. 1 Windy, moist air. 2 VVds abate. Pretty clear. 3 Rain and gentle winds. 4 Much rain and winds. ☉ Frosty cold air.
6 Tempestuous day. 7 Pleasant frost. Stormy nig. 8 ● Rain, wds, hail, D. & N. 9 Hail, rain, wind & snow. 10 Frosty, but curious air. 11 Foggy A. Pleasant frost. ☉ Curious frosty air. 13 Curious frosty air. 14 Curious frosty air. 15 Cloudy, cold, and some snow. 16 Cloudy, cold, and some snow. 17 Cold, drisling rain. 18 Misty, cloudy, dark air. ☉ Misty, cloudy, dark air. 20 Cldy, wdy, snow at nig. 21 Cold, cloudy, thick air. 22 ○ Cold & wdy. Sleet nig. 23 Freezing winds: Snow like hail. 24 Freezing winds: Snow like hail. 25 Great freezing winds. ☉ Great freezing winds. 27 Great freezing winds. 28 Windy. Foggy, P. M. 29 Cold, cloudy, moist air. 30 Cold, cloudy, moist air. 31 Frosty, wdy, yet pleas.
February 1673. 1 Misty, misling windy air. ☉ Frost, A. Misty cold air. 3 Cldy, cold, with some wds 4 Pleas. but brisk cold wds. 5 Frosty, cutting winds.
6 ● Frosty, misty, foggy. 7 Misty, cold black frost. 8 Misling rain, snow or sleet. ☉ Cloudy, windy, moist. 10 Cold winds, cloudy dark. 11 Sturdy winds, and rain. 12 Cloudy, cold, dark air. 13 Sharp wds. Pleasant frost. 14 Frosty, wdy, snow all day. 15 Rainy, windy, days and nights. ☉ Rainy, windy, days and nights. 17 Rain, winds, and hail. 18 Pleasant, but wds stirring. 19 A curious bright day. 20 A windy cloudy day. 21 ○ 6 r. wds, & rainy day. 22 Gr. wds. Rain about noon. ☉ Pleasant, rain at night. 24 Pleasant, rain at night. 25 Moist & wdy. Rain at N. 26 Cldy & wdy. Some rain. 27 Boistrous wds & rain. 28 Wdy, clear. A stormy N. March 1673. 1 Great & violent winds. ☉ Violent winds continue. 3 Cold viol. wds. Some sn. P. 4 Fr. sn. sleet, viol. N.E. w. 5 Frost. Great wds. Hail P. 6 Cold drisling, windy. 7 Curious frosty air. 8 ● Frosty, cold & cloudy.
☉ Frosty. Viol. wds D. & N. 10 Rain & wds. snow at nig 11 Cloudy, windy, moist air. 12 Cold, snow, rain & winds 13 Cold abated. Pleasant. 14 A very pleasant air. 15 Misty A. Rain & wds P. ☉ Tempestuous day & nig. 17 Gr. wds & rain continue. 18 Vio. wds abate, Fair, warm 19 VVds, rain & variable. 20 A curious bright warm d. 21 Cold, moist, cloudy, wdy. 22 ○ Cold dark air. East wind. ☉ Cold dark air. East wind. 24 Great winds and rain. 25 Hail A. Cldy, misling, wdy. 26 A windy variable skie. 27 Rainy, dark and windy. 28 VVindy, cloudy air. 29 VVinds, rain and hail. ☉ VVinds, rain and hail. 31 Gr. wds, rain, snow, hail.
April 1673. 1 VVds, rain, some snow. 2 Cold wds. Viol. hail storms 3 Much snow: wds & rain. 4 Cold winds and rain. 5 Cold winds and rain. ☉ Blustring wds & cold rain. 7 Gr. wds, rain and hail. 8 Cold abates. Somet. rainy.
9 Windy with some rain. 10 Pl. ♀ seen near ☽ by day 11 Windy. A rainy night. 12 Brisk wds, fair. Rain at N. ☉ Brisk wds with rain. 14 Pleasant with cool wds. 15 Pleasant with cool wds. 16 A glorious hot air. 17 A glorious hot air. 18 Great wds. A rainy night. 19 Tempestuous day & nig. ☉ Cloudy. Great winds continue. 21 ○ Cloudy. Great winds continue. 22 Cloudy. Great winds continue. 23 Cloudy. Great winds continue. 24 A pleasant glorious day. 25 Hot & pleas. some rain. 26 VVarm & wdy. Rain at N. ☉ Brisk cool wds, showers. 28 Cldy and wdy. Rain P. 29 Fair, but great East wds. 30 Hot air, and gentle wds. May 1673. 1 Hot air. Thunder, P. 2 Hot, cloudy. Rain, P. 3 Cldy, warm. Gentl. wds ☉ Close & cldy. Gentl. wds. 5 Cloudy, cool, wdy skie. 6 ● Cool and windy, but pleasant. 7 ● Cool and windy, but pleasant. 8 Rain A. M. Cldy, wdy. 9 Cool air. Rain P. M. 10 VVindy, cool, yet pleas. ☉ North wds. Rain P. M.
12 Great N wds and rain. 13 VVds & rain, day & nig. 14 Cldy, moist, but warm air. 15 Pleasant rain P. and nig. 16 Blustring N wds, & rain. 17 Great N winds, but fair. ☉ Cloudy. Brisk N winds. 19 Pleasant, with N winds. 20 ○ VVarm. Ra nig. N wds 21 Pleasant. Some rain. VVind S. W. 22 Pleasant. Some rain. VVind S. W. 23 Hot. Gr. S.W. wds. Ra. nig. 24 Rain, W. wds. Temp. N. ☉ Thunder & great W. wds. 26 Moist & warm. W. wds. 27 Much rain. High W. wds. 28 VVarm, rainy. W. wds. 29 Cldy, some ra. High W. w. 30 Great W, wds and warm. 31 A hot day. VVds S. E.
June 1673. ☉ A hot day, with E. winds. 2 Same as before. Light. N. 3 Hot. Some ra. A. gr. E. wds. 4 ● Hot, & gr. N. E. wds. 5 Same as before. Rainy N. 6 Some rain. High S. W. w. 7 Showering often. VV. wds. ☉ Cloudy, moist, wind East. 9 Cldy, rainy, & East wds. 10 Cloudy, warm, wd N. E. 11 Pleasant, wind N. E.
12 Cldy, warm E. wd. Ra. P. 13 Rainy, cldy; gr. E. wds. 14 Cldy, moist. VVind S. W. ☉ Rain A. Pleasant; wd W. 16 Hot & pleas VVind S. W. 17 Hot. Rain P. VVind N.E. 18 A showry day. VVd N.E. 19 ○ Cldy, ra. Gr. N. E. wds. 20 Hot. Some drops. P. W. 21 Hot. Some drops.P. W. ☉ Hot. Some drops. P. W. 23 VVarm air. Ra. P. wd W. 24 Pleasant. VVds. N. W. 25 Hot. Rain P. wind N. W. 26 Much ra. great W. wds. 27 Stormy wds still. Some rain. 28 Stormy wds still. Some rain. ☉ Rain & Thund. Gr. W w. 30 VVarm. Some rain. West. winds. July 1673. 1 Close, Cldy. Some rain. W 2 Cloudy. Rain P. Great winds, W. wds. 3 Cloudy. Rain P. Great winds, W. wds. 4 ● Hot. Thund. ra. P. W. 5 Rain, & Violent W. wds ☉ Pleasant. Rain at nig. W. 7 Rainy dark air. VVd W. 8 Pleas. W. wd. Rain at nig. 9 Rainy, great S.W. wds. 10 Rainy, great S.W. wds. 11 Rainy, great S.W. wds. 12 Moderate air. S. W. ☉ VVarm, W. wd. Rainy nig.
14 Pleas. with Heat drops. W. 15 Curious air, wind W. 16 Curious air, wind W. 17 Some drops, A. Hot. W. 18 ○ A hot day, wind N. E. 19 Hot, cldy. Some drps. N. ☉ Hot air, and wind W. 21 Hot air, and wind W. 22 Pleas. Brisk S. W. winds. 23 Cloudy, hot. The wind W. 24 Cloudy, hot. The wind W. 25 Cldy, moist. Brisk W. wds. 26 Some heat drps, gr. W. w. ☉ Hot blustring wds. S. W. 28 Cloudy, warm. wind W. 29 Some heat drps, wind W. 30 Cldy. Ra. N. High W. wd. 31 Gr. W. wds d. & n. Rain.
August 1673. 1 Hot close air. S. W. 2 ● Hot, & pleasant W. wd. ☉ Much rain, gr. wd. S. W. 4 Hot, cldy. Brisk wds. W. 5 Hot, cldy. Brisk wds. W. 6 Hot, cldy. Brisk wds. W. 7 Pleasant, wind N. E. 8 Like to the former. 9 Frost m. Hot day. wd E. ☉ Hot close air. Hig. wds, E. 11 Blustring winds. S. W. 12 Hot. Rain at night. S. W. 13 Hot air. S. W.
14 Hot close air, gr. wds. S. W. 15 Hot close air, gr. wds. S. W. 16 Hot close air, gr. wds. S. W. ☉ ○ Cloudy, with W. wds. 18 Cool and pleasant, W. 19 Cldy. High S.W. w. Ra. N. 20 Great blustring West. winds. 21 Great blustring West. winds. 22 Cldy, rainy, winds S. 23 Hot. E. wd. Blustring nig. ☉ Hot. Gr. S.W. wds. Ra. N. 25 Rain, and S. W. wds. Blustring rights. 26 Rain, and S. W. wds. Blustring rights. 27 Rainy day, variable wd. 28 Drisling air, and wind W. 29 Showring, gr. S. W. wds. 30 Like the former. Tem. N. ☉ ● Rainy day & nig. W. September 1673. 1 Warm, S. W. Rainy nig. 2 Rainy day Gr. N.W. wds. 3 Some rain, and N.W. wds. 4 Pleas. VVd N.W. Blust. N. 5 Tempestuous day. W. 6 Tempest day and nig. W. ☉ Pleas. day. terible nig. W. 8 Tempestuous day. W. 9 Pleas. day, blustr. nig. W. 10 Some ra. great W. winds. 11 Stormy day and nig. S.W. 12 A rainy day, wind W. 13 Moist. Rain at night. W. ☉ Pleasant, wind S. W. 15 Pleasant, cool air. VV.
16 ○ Tempest. D. & N. W. 17 Tempest. D. & N. W. 18 Tempest. D. & N. W. 19 Violent S. W. winds. 20 Pleasant. Rain P. S. W. ☉ Tempestuous day, wd south west. 22 Tempestuous day, wd south west. 23 Tempestuous day, wd south west. 24 Tempestuous day, wd south west. 25 Frosty, pleasant, wd W. 26 Rainy, great fouth west winds. 27 Rainy, great fouth west winds. ☉ Pleasant, wds S. E. 29 Cldy, wds S.W. Rainy N. 30 ● Some rain, P. wds W.
October 1673. 1 Cold and frosty, N. W. 2 Cold, sharp W. wds d. n. 3 Tempestuous day. N. W. 4 Frosty. Strong W. wds. ☉ Pleas. fr. wd W. Ra. nig. 6 Rain, & brisk W. winds. 7 Frost A. Rain P. wd W. 8 Pleas. Brisk wds, N. W. 9 Rainy, and misty, W. 10 Misling, S.W. Temp. nig. 11 Tempestuous day & nig. ☉ Tempestuous day & nig. 13 Pleas. W. Frost at nig. 14 Temp. day & nig S. VV. 15 Pleas. gr. S.VV. wds hold
16 Cloudy, misling, wind E. 17 Pleas. wd S. W. terible nig. 18 Cloudy, great west wds. ☉ Frosty & pleasant, S. W. 20 Frosty, cloudy, wd N. W. 21 Tempestuous day & nig. 22 Rainy dark days, wds west. 23 Rainy dark days, wds west. 24 Pleasant warm, winds west. 25 Pleasant warm, winds west. ☉ Pleasant warm, winds west. 27 Pleasant warm, winds west. 28 ● Misty, misl. warm, E. 29 ● Misty, misl. warm, E. 30 ● Misty, misl. warm, E. 31 Cloudy & misling, wd E, November 1673. 1 Cold & misling, N. E. ☉ Cold & misling, N. E. 3 Cold & misling, N. E. 4 Cold and cldy. Little wd. 5 Cldy, wd W. Rain at nig. 6 VVarm, misling, N. W. 7 Cold snow and rain, N.W. 8 Pleasant frost, wind W. ☉ Frosty. Much snow P. W. 10 Misty A. Frosty, wind W. 11 Pleasant frost, wd S. W. 12 Hard white frost, wind west. 13 Hard white frost, wind west. 14 ○ Curious hard frost W. 15 Same as the former. ☉ Cloudy, frosty, wd west. 17 Pleas frost at night, S. W. 18 Hard white frost, wd E.
19 Thaw, wind south east. 20 Rainy, cloudy, south wd. 21 Pleasant frost, & wd west. 22 Stormy D. & N. wd S. E. ☉ Tempest abated, wd west. 24 Tempestuous again, S. E. 25 Still tempestuous, wd S. E. 26 Cldy, gr. S.E. wds hold. ● 27 Cldy, gr. S.E. wds hold. ● 28 Cldy, gr.S.E. wds hold. ● 29 Cldy, moist, wds S. W. ☉ Pleasant with west wds.
December 1673. 1 Cloudy, brisk west wds. 2 Cold, cldy, sharp wds, S.W 3 Cldy, ra at nig. wd west. 4 Cold air, wd north west. 5 Frost & cldy, great E. w. 6 Hard frost, great east winds. ☉ Hard frost, great east winds. 8 Dark rain, high west wds. 9 Cloudy, moist, strong west winds. 10 Cloudy, moist, strong west winds. 11 VVarm. Misling at night, wind west. 12 VVarm. Misling at night, wind west. 13 ○ VVarm, S.W. Temp. N. ☉ Tempestuous, wds south. 15 Frost. S. W. Temp. nig. 16 Temp. D. & N. w. S.W. 17 Cloudy, moist, wd west. 18 Rain, W. wd. Temp. nig.
19 Tempestuous, with wind south west. 20 Tempestuous, with wind south west. ☉ Cldy, great winds abate. 22 Misty, cldy, cold, wd S.W. 23 Cldy, misling, wd S.W. 24 Cldy, misling. Strong w.W. 25 Misty, rainy. Warm, S.W. 26 Blustring S.W. wds, rain. ● 27 Blustring S.W. wds, rain. ● ☉ Blustring S. W. wds, rain. ● 29 Frost. Wd N. wet night. 30 Rain, & hail, wind west. 31 Rainy day & nig. wd W. ✚ January 1674. 1 Great N. W. wds. 2 Frosty, rain at nig. wd W. 3 Frosty, and wind west. ☉ Cold, & frosty, west wds. 5 Curious frost, west wds. 6 Pleasant frost, wind east. 7 Cldy, thaw with E. wd. 8 Rainy day & nig. wd E. 9 Rainy day & nig. S. W. 10 Cldy. Great S. W. wds. ☉ Dark & rainy, west wds. 12 ○ Cold & cldy, wd. S.W. 13 Misty, misling; W. Ra. N. 14 Cldy, moist, strong W. wds. 15 Pleasant. Rainy night, W. 16 Cldy, moist. Great W. wd. 17 Snow all day. Gr. E. wds. ☉ Cldy. High W. w. Stor. N. 19 Rainy d. & n. Gr. S.W. w. 20 Cold, ra. wd S.W. Sn nig 21 Hard frost. N.W. Sn. nig
22 Frost. S. E. wds. Stor∣my night. 23 Frost. S. E. wds. Stor∣my night. 24 Cloudy and rainy. E. wd. ☉ Frosty. Wind S. VV. 26 ● Misty, cloudy, N. E. 27 Dark, cold, snow, wd E. 28 Cold, cloudy, dark, E. 29 Cloudy, some rain. N.E. 30 Pleas. S. E. Stormy night. 31 Tempest. day & nig. W.
February 1674. ☉ Rainy. Great wds S. W. 2 Misty. Rain P. wds S. W. 3 Fr. cldy, strong N. E. wds. 4 Fr. Sn. all d. cold. E. wd. 5 Frosty, cldy, great E. wds. 6 Frosty, wind N. E. 7 Frosty, wind N. E. ☉ Frost, snow, wind N. E. 9 Pleasant frost, wind N. E. 10 ○ Snow & hail wd west. 11 Pleasant frost, great wds north east. 12 Pleasant frost, great wds north east. 13 Thaw, snow, & S.E. wds. 14 Gr. wds, S. W. Rainy N. ☉ Misling dark air. wd S. E. 16 Frosty. Cold N. E. wds. 17 Frosty with variable wds. 18 Cldy. Sharp N. E. wds. 19 Pleas. frost. Gentle N. w. 20 Cold wds N.E. Snowy N. 21 Much cold rain, wds N.E.
☉ Cold, and some rain. E. 23 Tempest. day & nig. W. 24 Rain, snow, & N.E. wds. 25 ● Frost. Much snow. E. 26 Hard frost. Strong N. wds. 27 Frosty. Some snow. Great N. E. wds. 28 Frosty. Some snow. Great N. E. wds. March 1674. ☉ Much snow; viol. N. wds. 2 Snow, & sharp N.E. wds. 3 Much snow. N. E. wds. 4 Frosty, cldy. Gr. E. wds. 5 Frosty. Some snow. N.E. 6 Hard frost, and N.VV. winds. 7 Hard frost, and N.VV. winds. ☉ Frost. Much snow. N. E. 9 Frosty. High E. winds. 10 Much snow P. VV. winds. 11 Pleas. frost. Strong E. wd. 12 ○ Much sn H. E. thaw, P. 13 Misty, and some rain. S.W. 14 Rain, & clds. gr. S.W. wds. ☉ Pleasant and warm. VV. 16 Cloudy and rainy. wd N. E. 17 Cloudy and rainy. wd N. E. 18 Sn. & ra. great N. E. wds. 19 Cldy, and cold N. E. wds. 20 Sn melted, gr. N. E. wds. 21 Cold misty air, wind E. ☉ Misty, some snow. N. E. 23 Cloudy, moist, wind VV. 24 Misty, variable, wind W.
25 Pleasant. Strong west winds. 26 Pleasant. Strong west winds. 27 ● Misty, warm, VV. 28 ● Misty, warm, VV. ☉ Pleasant, hot, wind S. W. 30 Cldy, cool, great E. wds. 31 Pleasant, but cold E wds.
April 1674. 1 Bright air. Cold E. wds. 2 Pleas. warm. Variab. wds. 3 Cldy, some ra. gr. S.W. w. 4 Rain, and brisk S.W. wds. ☉ Pleasant, warm, S. VV. 6 Cldy, & ra. variab. wds. 7 Rain, and cold E. winds. 8 Pleas. but cold E. winds. 9 Cold and cloudy, N. W. 10 ○ Cloudy and rainy, VV. 11 Rain, with E. winds. ☉ Cloudy, with VV. winds. 13 Rain A. Pleas. P. N. E. 14 Glorious air, wind S. E. 15 Glorious air, wind S. E. 16 Cloudy, with VV. winds. 17 Cldy, some ra. P. N.VV. 18 Pleasant air, wind N. E. ☉ Glorious air, wind N.W. 20 Cldy, rain P. gr. W. wds. 21 Rainy days and nights, great N. winds. 22 Rainy days and nights, great N. winds. 23 Some rain, wind W. 24 Some rain, wind W.
25 ● Cldy, great VV. wds. ☉ Rain, & gr.S. VV. wds. 27 Rain A. pleas. P. wd VV. 28 Pleasant, wind N. W. 29 Cloudy, and rainy, N.W. 30 Cloudy. Brisk VV. wds. May 1674. 1 Rain, and hail, wind W. 2 Rainy; brisk W. wds. ☉ Rainy; brisk W. wds. 4 Rain, A. Hot air, S. VV. 5 Warm air, brisk S.VV. w. 6 Thunder and Light. VV. 7 Hot air, gentle S. W. wds 8 Hot & moist, great S.VV. winds. 9 ○ Hot & moist, great S.VV. winds. ☉ Pleasant, brisk VV. wds. 11 Rain and brisk VV. wds. 12 Cldy, strong S. VV. wds. 13 Warm, some rain, N. VV. 14 Hot and pleasant, N. VV. 15 Glorious air, S. VV. 16 Glorious air, S. VV. ☉ Cldy, hot, E. Rainy nig. 18 Pleasant, S. VV. Rainy nig. 19 Rain A. pleasant, VV. 20 Glorious day, wind VV. 21 Hot and cldy, wind VV. 22 Heat abates, high VV. w. 23 Some ra. h. S.W. w. d. &n. ☉ Cldy, some ra. h.S. VV. 25 ● Hot air, wind S. VV. 26 Curious air Brick S. VV 27 Hot and cloudy. S. VV.
28 Hot. Rain at night. S. W. 29 Pleas. with brisk N.E. w. 30 Pleas. with brisk N.E. w. ☉ Pleas. with brisk N.E. w.
June 1674. 1 Pleasant, & brisk N.E. winds. 2 Pleasant, & brisk N.E. winds. 3 Hot air; wind N. E. 4 Glorious day, gent. E. w. 5 Hot air. Fine west wind. 6 Hot air. Fine west wind. ☉ Fair, with N. VV. wds. 8 ○ Cldy, with west wds. 9 Some ra. & brisk VV. wds. 10 Hot close air, and west wind. 11 Hot close air, and west wind. 12 Soultry hot, wind S. VV. 13 Soultry hot, wind S. VV. ☉ Soultry hot, wind S. VV. 15 Cloudy and N.E. wds. 16 Rain, A. variable wds. 17 Cloudy; and N. VV. wds. 18 Cloudy, some ra. wd N. 19 Pleas. & brisk N. VV. w. 20 Very hot, N. VV. wds ☉ Very hot, N. VV. wds 22 Very hot, N. VV. wds 23 ● Cloudy with N.E. wds. 24 Hot, and pleasant, S. VV. 25 Heat abates, wind N.VV. 26 Cloudy. Brisk N. E. winds. 27 Cloudy. Brisk N. E. winds.
☉ Cloudy. VVind north. Rainy night. 29 Cloudy. VVind north. Rainy night. 30 Some rain, wd N. VV. July 1674. 1 Great west wds. Rainy N. 2 Rain, & great west wds. 3 Strong north west wds. 4 Rain & north west wds. ☉ Ra. hail, thund wd variab. 6 Rain & hail, wd N. VV. 7 ○ Cldy & rainy, wd W. 8 A very rainy day. S. E. 9 Some showers; variab. wd 10 Pleas. wd W. Rain at nig. 11 Pleasant, with west winds. ☉ Pleasant, with west winds. 13 Rain, & great S. W. wds. 14 Thund & storms, wd W. 15 Pleasant with west wind 16 Hot, & brisk east wds. 17 Like the former Light. ni. 18 Hot. Lightn. thund. ra. W. ☉ Cldy, gr. S.W. wds. Ra. N. 20 Cldy, some ra. Strong W. w 21 Pleas but great VV. wds. 22 Rain & thund. gr. E. wds. 23 ● Gr. N. VV. wds. Ra. N. 24 Pleasant, brisk south west wds. 25 Pleasant, brisk south west wds. ☉ Wd S.W. Gr. Thun. Lig. 27 Hot, some ra. Gr. S.W. w. 28 Rain A. Strong S.W. wds. 29 Boistrous S.W. wds. 30 Tenipestous day & nig. 31 Rainy day, wds.S. W.
August 1674. 1 Cldy, great S. W. wds. ☉ A soaking rain, & W. wds. 3 Pleasant air, wds. VV. 4 Rainy, & N. VV. wds. 5 Pleas some ra. P. VV. wd. 6 ○ Moist air. VV. w. Ra. N. 7 Pleasant, with north west winds. 8 Pleasant, with north west winds. ☉ Pleasant, with north west winds. 10 Pleasant, with north west winds. 11 Pleasant, & N. E. wds. 12 Same as the former. 13 Misty A. Pleas. N.E. wds. 14 Pleas. with N. VV. wds. 15 A glorious day, wd VV. ☉ Rain A. Pleas. P. wd VV. 17 Like former. Temp. nig. 18 Rain, and great west winds. 19 Rain, and great west winds. 20 Much rain & thund. N.E. 21 ● Pleas. air. VV. winds. 22 Cldy, with S. VV. wds. ☉ Pleas. N.E. Rainy night. 24 Rain, and south east wds. 25 Gr. S. wds. Rain at nig. 26 Much rain, and east wds. 27 Rainy, and N. E. winds. 28 Much rain, and E. wds. 29 Cldy, misling, N. E. wds. ☉ Gldy, some ra. N. W. wds. 31 Drisling Brisk N. W. wds.
September 1674. 1 Cldy, some ra. Gr. N. wd. 2 Great winds abated. 3 Cldy, and great N.E. wds. 4 Cloudy, wind N. W. 5 ○ Good air, with N. E. winds. ☉ ○ Good air, with N. E. winds. 7 Variable, with E. winds. 8 Cloudy, and great wd N. 9 Cldy, misling, N. E. wds. 10 Cold and cloudy, N. wds. 11 Cldy, N. W. wd. Ra. at N. 12 Cldy, some rain, N. W. ☉ Some ra. & hail, N. VV. 14 Cloudy, great N. VV. wds. 15 Some ra. great N. VV. wd. 16 Cldy, high N. E. winds. 17 Cold, cloudy, wd N. VV. 18 Cloudy, cold, wind N. 19 ● Misling, P. M. N. VV. ☉ Cloudy, and N. VV. wds. 21 Pleasant, with west winds. 22 Rain, & great S. VV. wds. 23 Rain, & high west winds. 24 Moist, hail, P. wds S. W. 25 Rain, and cold north wds. 26 Cold, moist, great N. wds. ☉ The cold abate, wd VV. 28 Cldy, misling, wds S. W. 29 Warm rain, & S.W. wds. 30 Rain, and high south wds. October 1674. 1 Stinking fog, ra. & S. W. 2 Wds S. W. Blustr. ra. nig. 3 Dark rain, great south west winds. ☉ ○ Dark rain, great south west winds. 5 Some rain, violent wds, S. W. 6 Some rain, violent wds, S. W. 7 Pleasant, with west wds. 8 Foggy A. Pleasant day. W 9 Cldy, misling, N. E. wds. 10 Rain, A. M. wind west. ☉ Pleas. VV. Rain at night. 12 Pleasant, wind west. 13 Rain, and brisk E. wds. 14 Cloudy, dark, moist, wind east. 15 Cloudy, dark, moist, wind east. 16 Cldy, misling, gr. VV. wds. 17 Cldy, warm, s. drops W. ● ☉ Cldy, warm, s. drops W. ● 19 Cldy, warm, s. drops W. ● 20 Pleas. VV. Lightn. at nig. 21 Cloudy, great west winds 22 Pleasant, S. VV. Storm. N. 23 Moderate air, wind west. 24 Rain D. & N. wind west. ☉ Like former. Lightn. at N. 26 Cloudy, wet, great west winds. 27 Cloudy, wet, great west winds. 28 Great VV. wds abate. P. 29 Pleasant frost, wds west. 30 Misty, some rain. S. VV. 31 Frosty air. The wd S. W. November 1674. ☉ Cldy, S. VV. Temp. N. 2 Tempest d's & n's W. 3 ○ Tempest d's & n's W. 4 Tempest d's & n's W.
5 Pleasant frost, wind west. 6 Pleasant frost, wind west. 7 Cold rain, wind N. E. ☉ Cloudy, misling, wd VV. 9 Cloudy, moist, wd VV. 10 Cloudy, moist, wd VV. 11 Cloudy, moist, wd VV. 12 Dark, cold misling wd. N. 13 Cold, cloudy. wd N. E. 14 Misty, and cold, wd N. E. ○ Cldy, and cold, wd. VV. 16 Pleasant, hard frost, N. W. 17 ● Frosty A. Rain P. W. 18 Tempestuous day & nig. 19 Tempest continues. W. 20 Stormy with snow, S. W. 21 Stormy, cold; wd S. W. ☉ Curious frost, wind west. 23 Cold & slabby, wd west. 24 Curious frost, wind N. E. 25 Frost, som snow. Strong N. E. winds. 26 Frost, som snow. Strong N. E. winds. 27 Frosty, stinking fog, N. E. 28 Frosty. N. W. Thaw at N. ☉ Dark, ra. Gr. S. W. wds. 30 Pleasant air, wind west.
December 1674. 1 Pleasant, with west wd. 2 Cloudy, and west wind. 3 ○ Pleasant frost. S. VV. 4 Frost and fog, wd N. VV.
5 Tempest. day & nig. S. W. ☉ Some ra. Gr. S. W. winds. 7 Moist air. south west wds. 8 Frosty air, & S. W. winds. 9 Flying clds. Brisk S. W. wds. 10 Dark, rainy. Variable wds. 11 Cldy, moist, cold N. wds. 12 Frosty, wd N. E. Temp. N. ☉ Cloudy, moist. High west winds. 14 Cloudy, moist. High west winds. 15 Cloudy, moist. High west winds. 16 Cloudy, moist. High west winds. 17 ● Misl. cldy. Gr. S. W. wds 18 Moist. Great south west wds. Tempest. nights. 19 Moist. Great south west wds. Tempest. nights. ☉ Moist. Great south west wds. Tempest. nights. 21 Rain & hail, gr. west wds. 22 Curious frost, wind N.W. 23 Moist and cloudy; wind south west. 24 Moist and cloudy; wind south west. 25 Misty, frosty, gr. west wds. 26 Cldy, close, with west wds. ☉ Frosty, pleasant, wd. west. 28 Misling air, wind west. 29 Cldy. Gr. S. W. wds D. & N. 30 Some ra. S. W. wds D & N. 31 Moist & warm. Pleas. P. ✚ January 1675. 1 ○ Pleasant frost, wind south west. 2 Pleasant frost, wind south west. ☉ Pleasant frost, wind south west. 4 Pleasant frost, wind south west. 5 Cold & misling, wd west. 6 Cold & misling, wd west. 7 Cold & misling, wd west.
8 Cloudy, cold, wd east. 9 Cloudy, cold, wd east. ☉ Cloudy, cold, wd east. 11 Cloudy, cold, wd east. 12 Cloudy, cold, wd east. 13 Cloudy, cold, wd east. 14 Cldy & cold, wd E. by N. 15 ● Cold, but pleasant. N. W. 16 ● Cold, but pleasant. N. W. ☉ ● Cold, but pleasant. N. W. 18 Cold & dry. High W. wds. 19 Hard curious frost N. wds. 20 Frosty, wd VV. Sn. at nig. 21 Tempest. D. & N. S. W. 22 Rainy, dark, great south west winds. 23 Rainy, dark, great south west winds. ☉ Rain, and strong south west winds. 25 Rain, and strong south west winds. 26 Pleasant, with S. VV. wds. 27 Frosty, with S. VV. wds. 28 Cldy, W. Tempest. nig. 29 Tempestuous day & nig. 30 Violent W. wds. Some ra. ☉ ○ Frosty, pleas. hail, W.
February 1675. 1 Pleasant frost, wd west. 2 Pleasant frost, wd west. 3 Pleasant, Cold N.W. wind. 4 Tempest. day & nig. W. 5 Pleas. wd W. Snow in nig. 6 Freezing air. Snow in nig. ☉ Hail storms, some sn. N. E.
8 Cldy, & cold N. E. wds. 9 Snow & sleet, cold N. wds. 10 Freez. N. wds, some snow. 11 Same as the former, with hail. 12 Same as the former, with hail. 13 Sn. & hail, freez. N. E. wds. ☉ ● Sn. & sleet. N.E. wds. 15 Cold, misling, wind east. 16 Cold freezing east winds. 17 Pleasant, & N. E. winds. 18 Cold and frosty, wd east. 19 Cldy skie, cold E. wds. 20 Cldy skie, cold E. wds. ☉ Cldy skie, cold E. wds. 22 Fr. E. wd. Some sn. & ra. 23 Frosty, cold with E. wds. 24 Misty, misling, N. W. wds. 25 Some ra. & gr. E. winds. 26 Cold & cldy, wd N. VV. 27 Pleasant frost, wd N. E. ☉ Rainy D. & N. gr. W. w. March 1675. 1 ○; Some rain, wd N. VV. 2 Pleasant frost, wd N. VV. 3 Cold, snow, wd N. VV. 4 Hard fr. Hail. Gr. N. E. w 5 Rain, & great N. E. wds. 6 Like to the former. ☉ Pleas. frosty. wd N. E. 8 Hard frost, wind N. E. 9 Hard frost, wind N. E. 10 Fr. sn. hail, great N. E. wds
11 Cold, but pleasant frost, 12 Cold, but pleasant frost, 13 Pleasant frost, & E. wds. ☉ Rainy D. & N. wd east. 15 Rainy, some sn. wd N. E. 16 Cold, great North winds. 17 ● Frosty, great N. E. w 18 Like former, Rain at N. 19 Cold sn. some ra. Str. E. w. 20 Cold, some sn. great E. w. ☉ Cloudy, sharp north wd. 22 Cloudy, cold, north wd. 23 Frosty, W. Rain at night. 24 Cldy, & rain, wind west. 25 Warm, cloudy, moist, W. 26 Pleasant, warm. wd west. 27 Warm, S. W. wds. Ra. P. ☉ Pleasant, wind S. W. 29 Hot, some ra. Brisk W. w. 30 Brisk S. W. wd. Rainy N. 31 ○ Ra. day. Variable wds.
April 1675. 1 Hail, rain. Great west winds. 2 Hail, rain. Great west winds. 3 Cold & cldy, wind N. E. ☉ Pleasant. Great N. E. wds. 5 Rainy day, & east wds. 6 Cold air. gr. N. E. wds. 7 Frost A. Rain P. wd N. 8 Frosty, great N. E. wds. 9 Cldy, warm, great W. wd 10 Pleasant, brisk W. wds.
☉ Fair, great north east winds. 12 Fair, great north east winds. 13 Pleasant, strong E. wds. ● 14 Pleasant, strong E. wds. ● 15 Pleasant, strong E. wds. ● 16 Pleasant, strong E. wds. ● 17 Glorious days, great N. E wds. ☉ Glorious days, great N. E. wds. 19 Fair, with cold N. E. wds. 20 Fair, with cold N. E. wds. 21 Fair, with cold N. E. wds. 22 Rain, and great N. E. wds. 23 Very great east winds. 24 Pleasant. Brisk N. E. wds. ☉ Pleas. wd N. Rain at nig. 26 Fair, with N. E. winds. 27 Cloudy; cold north east winds. 28 Cloudy; cold north east winds. 29 ○ Cloudy; cold north east winds. 30 Cloudy; cold north east winds. May 1675. 1 Misty, A. N. E. Rainy N. ☉ Rain, & brisk S. W. 3 Cldy, and gentle W. wds. 4 Moderate air, N. VV. wds. 5 Warm, with W. wds. 6 Warm, with W. wds. 7 Frosty, A. M. wind west. 8 The same as the former. ☉ Pleasant, with various wd. 10 Some drops, P. Brisk W. w 11 Cloudy, and west winds. 12 Warm, and some rain, W.
13 Curious air, & W. wds. ● 14 Curious air, & W. wds. ● 15 Brisk E. wd Rain at nig ☉ Rainy day, great E. wds. 17 Cloudy, cool, wd N. E. 18 Pleasant, wind west. 19 Pleasant, wind west. 20 Pleasant, wind west. 21 Pleasant, wind west. 22 Pleasant, & brisk E. wds. ☉ Very hot, with west wds. 24 Thunder and rain. W. 25 Much rain, and west wds. 26 Rain, and west winds. 27 Rainy day and night. W. 28 ○ Cldy, and rainy, wd E. 29 Cldy, some rain, wd N. ☉ Cool air, and east wind. 31 Rain and hail, wind W.
June 1675. 1 Rain, hail Brisk S. W. wds. 2 Cloudy, showring, S. W. 3 Pleasant, with W. wds. 4 Pleasant, with W. wds. 5 Curious air, wind west. ☉ Rain, hail. Brisk W. wds. 7 Rainy day, wind N. E. 8 Cldy, some rain. Brisk north winds. 9 Cldy, some rain. Brisk north winds. 10 Cldy, some ra. Gr. N. wd. 11 Hot, some rain, wind N. 12 As th former. Tempest. N
☉ ● Temp. D. & N. wd N. 14 Frosty, wind west. 15 Rain, and west wds. 16 Rain, and west wds. 17 Rain, and west wds. 18 Rain, and west wds. 19 Some rain, gr. N. W. wd. ☉ Rain, hail, and west winds. 21 Pleasant, and west winds. 22 As the former. Rainy N. 23 Cldy, s. drops, wd S. W. 24 Pleasant, wind S. W. 25 Pleasant, wind S. W. 26 Rain & thunder, wd west. ☉ ○ Cldy, wd W. Rainy N. 28 Dark & rainy. Gr. E. wds. 29 Temp. D. & N. wd N. E. 30 Cldy, moist. Gr. N. E. wds. July 1675. 1 Hot. Ra. at ☉ set. S. W. 2 Hot air, wind south west. 3 Glorious, but hot, wd W. ☉ Like former, s. drops P. 5 Very hot, wind west. 6 Very hot, wind west. 7 Very hot, wind west. 8 Very hot, but wd got east. 9 Very hot, but wd got east. 10 Very hot, but wd got east. ☉ Very hot, but wd got east. 12 ● Hot air, wind west. 13 Same with the former. 14 Cloudy, cool, with west winds. 15 Cloudy, cool, with west winds.
16 Hot air, brisk west wds. 17 Hot. Some drops P. S. W. ☉ Cloudy. Brisk south west winds. 19 Cloudy. Brisk south west winds. 20 Rainy days, wds west. 21 Rainy days, wds west. 22 Cool and moist, wd S. VV. 23 Hot & close air, wd S. VV. 24 Rain; and brisk south west wds. ☉ Rain; and brisk south west wds. 26 ○ Pleasant, wind west. 27 Temp. day & nig. wd. VV. 28 Continuing almost same 29 Cldy, warm with VV. wds 30 Cool, wd W. Stormy N. 31 Stormy day, & west wds.
August 1675. ☉ Dark & rainy, gentl. W. w 2 Rainy A. Pleas. P. wd W. 3 Moist air, and west winds. 4 A hot day, with W. wds. 5 Hot, & pleasant, wd W. 6 Hot, & pleasant, wd W. 7 Curious bright air, wd east. ☉ Curious bright air, wd east. 9 Thund. & rain P. wd W. 10 Pleasant, and wind west. 11 ● Some rain, strong W. w. 12 Pleas. wd W. Rain at nig. 13 Some ra. blustring W. wd. 14 Tempestuous, W. winds. ☉ Still tempestuous, wd W.
16 Pleasant, but the wd. W. 17 Hot & pleasant, wd VV. 18 Hot & pleasant, wd VV. 19 Hot & pleasant, wd VV. 20 Cldy wd S. VV. Rainy N. 21 Cool, yet pleasant, wd W. ☉ Pleasant, brisk west wds. 23 Cool & cloudy, wd west. 24 Rain. And great west wds. 25 ○ Pleas. frost & west wds. 26 Misty A. pleasant, wd W. 27 Great south west wds, Rain at night. 28 Great south west wds, Rain at night. ☉ Some drops P. Brisk w. w. 30 Pleasant air, wind west. 31 A glorious day, wd. N. W.
September 1675. 1 Misty A. Glor. day. N. VV. 2 Curious sweet air. VV. 3 Cloudy, and N.E. wd. 4 Cloudy, and N.E. wd. ☉ Some ra. P. Brisk N. E. wd. 6 Pleasant, winds N. E. 7 Cloudy and brisk north east winds. 8 Cloudy and brisk north east winds. 9 ● Some rain, great north east winds. 10 Some rain, great north east winds. 11 Cloudy, & great N. E. wd. ☉ Cool & pleas. N. E. wds. 13 Fair, but great VV. wds. 14 Like the former. Stor. N. 15 Cldy, moist. Gr. VV. w. 16 Cldy, moist. Gr. VV. w. 17 Cldy, moist. Gr. VV. w. 18 Cldy, moist. Gr. VV. w. ☉ Cldy, moist. Gr. VV. w.
20 Moist. gr. N. E wds. Ra. N 21 Tempestuous, west wind. 22 Tempest abates. wd VV. 23 ○ Pleasant air west wds 24 Cldy, blustring west wds. 25 Some rain, and brisk west winds. ☉ Some rain, and brisk west winds. 27 Fair, & brisk west wds. 28 Rain, blustring S. W. wds. 29 Small frost, gr. S. W. wds. 30 Pleasant, gentl. S. W. wds.
October 1675. 1 Misty A. Pleasant wd VV. 2 Cloudy, and north east wds. ☉ Cloudy, and north east wds. 4 Pleasant, with VV. wds. 5 Cldy, S. VV w. Stormy N. 6 Rainy, gr. wds, stormy N. 7 Tempestuous day & nig. 8 ● Cldy, strong VV. wds. 9 Cldy, great wds abate. ☉ Pleasant, with west wds. 11 Cold and cloudy, wd VV. 12 Frosty, misty A. wd VV. 13 Cloudy, warm, with west winds. 14 Cloudy, warm, with west winds. 15 Cldy, gr. VV w. Storm. N. 16 Cldy, close, brisk VV. wds. ☉ Cldy, some drops P. N. VV 18 Pleasant frost, wind west. 19 Misty A. pleas. frost. VV.
20 Cldy, wd W. Stormy nig. 21 Tempestuous day & nig. 22 Cldy, moist, great W. wds. 23 ○ Tempestu. day & nig. ☉ Tempest yet continues. 25 Frosty A. Rain P. VV. 26 Cold freez. air, gr. W. wd. 27 Same as former. Rainy N. 28 Cold, sleet, wind S. VV. 29 Frosty, & north east wds. 30 Hard frost, wind east. ☉ Hard frost, wind east. November 1675. 1 Frost. Rain P. M. N. E. 2 Like the former, ra at nig. 3 Tempestu. day & nig. W. 4 Tempest continues. 5 Cold freezing air, N. W. ● 6 Cold freezing air, N. W. ● ☉ Cold freezing air, N. W. ● 8 Thaw. Cloudy, S. W. 9 Cldy, misling, wd west. 10 Cldy, misling, wd west. 11 Cldy, misling, wd west. 12 Cldy, misling, wd west. 13 Cldy, misling, wd west. ☉ Pleasant frost, wd N. VV. 15 Cloudy, moist, wind west. 16 Cold, but pleasant, wd W. 17 Cldy, cold. Ra at nig. VV. 18 Cloudy, cold, north east. 19 Hard frost, wind east. 20 Hard frost, wind east. ☉ Hard frost, wind east. 22 ○ Thaw, freeze again. E.
23 Curious frost, wd N. E. 24 Thaw, some rain, wd W. 25 Frosty, cldy, great W. wds. 26 Moist and cloudy, wd W. 27 Cldy, drisling, great W. w. ☉ Very pleasant, wind south west. 29 Very pleasant, wind south west. 30 Pleasant, wind west.
December 1675. 1 Cloudy, moist, wind west. 2 Misty, cloudy, wind west. 3 Misty, cloudy, wind west. 4 Misty, cloudy, wind west. ☉ Misty, cloudy, wind west. 6 ● Cldy, wd W. Rain in N. 7 Cldy, gr. W. wd D. & N. 8 Frosty, pleasant, west wd. 9 Frosty, great west winds. 10 Some rain, great VV wds. 11 Stormy day and nig. VV. ☉ Clear and pleasant, VV. 13 Stormy days & nig. W. 14 Stormy days & nig. W. 15 Stormy days & nig. W. 16 Rainy. Great west winds. 17 Rainy. Great west winds. 18 Frost. W. Tempestu. nig. ☉ Rain, and clouds. Great west winds. 20 Rain, and clouds. Great west winds. 21 Rain, and clouds. Great west winds. 22 ○ Rain, and clouds. Great west winds.
23 Frosty air, and west wds. 24 Frost, some ra. P. wd S. W. 25 Dark air, great S. W. wds. ☉ Rain, & great S. W. wds. 27 Rain, & great S. W. wds. 28 Rain, & great S. W. wds. 29 Frosty air, wind S. W. 30 Misty, misling, wd S. W. 31 Dark & cldy, wd S. VV. ✚ January 1676. 1 Cold dark air, wd S. E. ☉ Cold dark air, wd S. E. 3 Cold dark air, wd S. E. 4 Frosty and cldy, wd S. E. 5 ● Hard white frost, wd E 6 Frost A. rain P. wd S. E. 7 Cold dark air, wd N. E. 8 Dark cold air, wind E. ☉ Dark cold air, wind E. 10 Cold, raw sleet, wind E. 11 Cold, snow, sleet, wd E. 12 Cold, & some snow, E. 13 Raw cold, frost at nig. W. 14 Rain. W. Tempestuous N. 15 Snow at ☉ rising. N. W. ☉ Cold and moist, wd west 17 Frost A. M. Rain P. M. wind west. 18 Frost A. M. Rain P. M. wind west. 19 Tempest. day & nig. N. W 20 ○ Moist & cldy. N. W. 21 Pleasant frost, wind W. 22 Tempestuous days and nights. ☉ Tempestuous days and nights. 24 Tempestuous days and nights. 25 Warm, & great S. W. wds
26 Tempestuous day, S. W. 27 Frosty, some rain P. VV. 28 Rain A. frost P. wd N. W. 29 Hard fr. Ra. at night, W. ☉ Warm rain, wind west. 31 Pleasant air, wd S. VV.
February 1676. 1 Clear. Brisk S. VV. wds. 2 Same as former. Storm. N. 3 ● Fair, great west winds. 4 Frosty, wd W. Stormy N. 5 Stormy d's & n's VV. ☉ Stormy d's & n's VV. 7 Stormy d's & n's VV. 8 Cldy, and great VV. wds. 9 Rain & hail, great W. wd. 10 Tempestu. day & nig. W. 11 Some rain, brisk W. wds. 12 Misling air, wind west. ☉ Cldy, warm, wind west. 14 Pleasant air, VV. wind. 15 Fair, great N. VV. winds. 16 Pleasant frost High W. wd. 17 Variable, & cold east wd. 18 Cold, & cldy, some rain, E. 19 ○ A black frost, wind E. ☉ A rainy day, great W. wds 21 Frosty, cldy, with VV. wd. 22 Frosty air, wind N. E. 23 Frosty air, wind N. E. 24 Frosty air, wind N. E. 25 Pleas. & brisk S. E. wds.
26 Pleasant, warm, S. wds. ☉ Misty, A. Pleasant, S. W. 28 Frosty air, south wind. 29 Misty A. Pleasant, wd S. March 1676. 1 Pleasant frost, wind north east. 2 Pleasant frost, wind north east. 3 Rainy, and S. VV. wds. 4 ● Cldy, blustring S. VV. w. ☉ Rainy d. & n. gr. S. W. w. 6 Glorious days, wd east. 7 Glorious days, wd east. 8 Pleasant, wd turn'd west. 9 Cold, & great N. E. wds. 10 Curious frost, & E. wd. 11 Curious frost, & E. wd. ☉ Curious frost, & E. wd. 13 Curious frost, & E. wd. 14 Curious frost, & E. wd. 15 Pleasant frost, wind S. 16 Cloudy, some rain, W. 17 Cloudy, some rain, W. 18 Cloudy, some rain, W. ☉ ○; Dark and rainy, wd E. 20 Moist and warm, winds south west. 21 Moist and warm, winds south west. 22 Misty A. Some rain, VV. 23 Cldy, some ra. gr. E. wd. 24 Dark rain, great east wind. 25 Dark rain, great east wind. ☉ Pleasant, high east wind. 27 Pleasant frost, gr. E. wd. 28 Pleasant frost, gr. E. wd. 29 Pleasant frost, gr. E. wd.
30 Glorious frosty day. E. 31 Cloudy, wind north west
April 1676. 1 Cldy frost, cold N. E. w. ● ☉ Cldy frost, cold N. E. w. ● 3 Cldy frost, cold N. E. w. ● ● 4 Some drops A. wd N. E. 5 Pleasant frost, wind N. E. 6 Warm & close, wd N. W. 7 Cldy. Rain at nig. S. VV. 8 Rainy day, brisk W. wds. ☉ Cldy, cool, N. E. winds. 10 Rainy, cloudy, wd S. W. 11 Curious warm air, S. W. 12 Cldy, brisk, variab. wds. 13 Much rain A. wind VV. 14 Rainy day, wind west. 15 Cldy, moist, & VV. wd. ☉ Pleasant air, wind N. E. 17 Cldy, cold, brisk N. E. w. 18 ○ Much rain, wind north east. 19 Much rain, wind north east. 20 Pleasant frost wd. north. 21 Pleasant frost, wind east. 22 Pleasant frost, wind east. ☉ Cloudy & cold N. wds. 24 Cldy, & great W. wds. 25 Cloudy, and east winds. 26 A glorious day, E. wds. 27 Bright air, brisk S. W. wds. 28 Hot and pleasant, gentle south west wds. 29 Hot and pleasant, gentle south west wds.
☉ Like the former. Lightn. and rain at night. May 1676. 1 Hot, some rain, south west 2 ● Pleasant, brisk W. wds. 3 Cldy, and cold N. wds. 4 Pleasant, but cold north east winds. 5 Pleasant, but cold north east winds. 6 Cloudy. Great south west winds. ☉ Cloudy. Great south west winds. 8 Rain, great west wds. 9 Rain, great west wds. 10 Pleasant, winds N. W. 11 Rain, and great west winds. 12 Rain, and great west winds. 13 Cloudy, and great west winds. ☉ Cloudy, and great west winds. 15 Rain, and west winds. 16 Rain, and west winds. 17 ○ Some rain, brisk W. w. 18 Rain, and great N. E. wds. 19 Fair, but great N. E. wds. 20 Pleasant, gentle E. wds ☉ Rain, and great N. wds. 22 Rain, brisk S. W. winds. 23 Glorious days, wind southwest. 24 Glorious days, wind southwest. 25 Like former. Light. at N. 26 Rain, strong S. W. wds. 27 Rain, strong S. W. wds. ☉ Rain, strong S. W. wds. 29 Dark rain, and wind VV. 30 Much rain, and great west winds. 31 Much rain, and great west winds.
June 1676. 1 ● Thick clds, great W. w. 2 Cloudy, hot. Great west winds. 3 Cloudy, hot. Great west winds. ☉ Still the same. Ra. at nig. 5 Pleasant, and gentle west wind. 6 Pleasant, and gentle west wind. 7 Still the same. Ra. at nig. 8 Same as the former. 9 Cloudy, hot, wd S. W. 10 Close, hot, wind west. ☉ Close, hot, wind west. 12 Close, hot, wind west. 13 Like to the former. 14 Very hot, wind west. 15 ○ Excessive hot, S. W. 16 Very hot, wind turn∣ed east. 17 Very hot, wind turn∣ed east. ☉ Hot, thund. light. &c. S. E. 19 Hot air, south west wds. 20 Hot, gr. thund. lightn. N. E. 21 Hot air, brisk S. W. wds. 22 Thund. lightn. storms, S. W. 23 Fair, brisk S. W. wds. 24 Hot, close air, south west. ☉ Glorious air, brisk W. wds 26 Rain, and brisk W. wds. 27 Cloudy, moist, wind south west. 28 Cloudy, moist, wind south west. 29 Same as former. Rainy N. 30 ● Same still as to the for∣mer.
July 1676. 1 Cloudy, moist, wd S. W. ☉ Rain, hail, thunder, S. VV. 3 Cldy, some ra brisk W. w. 4 Rainy, strong west wds. 5 Cloudy, & great VV. wds. 6 Cldy, some ra gr. W. wd. 7 Tempestuous days and nights, wds west. 8 Tempestuous days and nights, wds west. ☉ Rainy, and great VV. wds. 10 Strong N. VV. wds. Cldy. 11 Glorious days, wd N.E. 12 Glorious days, wd N.E. 13 Glorious days, wd N.E. 14 Cldy, and strong E. wds. 15 ○ Thund rain. N. E. wds. ☉ Pleasant, hot. S. VV. wds. 17 Curious air, gentle VV. winds. 18 Curious air, gentle VV. winds. 19 Hot, Thunder, wind west. 20 Hot, Thunder, wind west. 21 Heat abates, wind west. 22 Rain and thunder, brisk west winds. ☉ Rain and thunder, brisk west winds. 24 Pleasant, brisk S. W. wds. 25 Rain, and brisk W. wds. 26 Fair, and brisk west winds. 27 Fair, and brisk west winds. 28 Rain, thund. & lightning. 29 ● Very hot, wd N. W. ☉ ● Very hot, wd N. W. 31 ● Very hot, wd N. W. August 1676. 1 Cldy, great N. E. wds. 2 Pleasant, & dry, N. E. 3 Hot, & pleasant, E. wds. 4 Hot, & pleasant, E. wds. 5 Hot, & pleasant, E. wds. ☉ Hot, & pleasant, E. wds. 7 Hot, & pleasant, E. wds. 8 Pleasant, wind turned west. 9 Pleasant, wind turned west. 10 Pleasant, and cool west winds. 11 Pleasant, and cool west winds. 12 Pleasant, strong west wind. Rainy nights. ☉ ○; Pleasant, strong west wind. Rainy nights. 14 Pleasant, and west wds. 15 Pleasant, and west wds. 16 Pleasant, and west wds. 17 Pleasant, and west wds. 18 Pleasant, and west wds. 19 Rain A. Pleasant P. VV. ☉ Pleasant, brisk west winds. 21 Pleasant, brisk west winds. 22 Still the same Rain at N. 23 Pleasant, with wind west. 24 Rainy, and N. W. wds. 25 Pleasant, & west winds. 26 Pleasant, & west winds. ☉ Clouds flying, winds VV. 28 Much rain, great S. W. wd. 29 ● Pleasant frost, brisk south west winds. 30 ● Pleasant frost, brisk south west winds. 31 Fair, & high W. winds. September 1676. 1 Curious frost, wind W. 2 Curious frost, wind W. ☉ Curious frost, wind W.
4 Dark and rainy, wd west. 5 Pleasant, with west wind. 6 Rainy d. strong N.VV. winds. 7 Rainy d. strong N.VV. winds. 8 Cloudy great north west winds. 9 Cloudy great north west winds. ☉ Some rain. Brisk north ○ east winds. 11 Some rain. Brisk north ○ east winds. 12 Cldy, with north west wds. 13 Fair, W. Tempestu. night. 14 Fair & moist, wind, N.W. 15 Dark rain, great north west winds. 16 Dark rain, great north west winds. ☉ Pleasant frost, cold N. wd. 18 Some ra. brisk N.E. wds. 19 Pleasant frost, wind north west. 20 Pleasant frost, wind north west. 21 Rainy, warm, wind west. 22 Frosty, pleasant, wd S. W. 23 Pleasant frost, wd south east. ☉ Pleasant frost, wd south east. 25 Sometimes misling, wd north east. 26 Sometimes misling, wd north east. 27 ● Curious frost, wd N. E. 28 ● Curious frost, wd N. E. 29 ● Curious frost, wd N. E. 30 Fr. broke, rainy n. wd N.
October 1676. ☉ Cldy, and great N. wds. 2 Curious fr. brisk N.E. w. 3 Tempestu. day & nig. W.
4 Much rain, various wind. 5 Some rain, & N. VV. wd 6 Some rain, & N. VV. wd 7 Some rain, & N. VV. wd ☉ Temp. D. & N. N. VV. 9 Frost A. M. Rain P.M. wind north west. 10 Frost A. M. Rain P.M. wind north west. 11 ❍ Pleasant frost, N. VV. 12 Frost A. Rain P. wd N.E. 13 Rain, & north west winds. 14 Misling rain, wind west. ☉ Fair, and great north winds. 16 Fair, and great north winds. 17 Rain, and cold north wind. 18 Cloudy, and cold N. wd. 19 Cldy, misl. cold N.E. wd. 20 Some drops P. Cold. N.E. 21 Cloudy, & moist, cold N. E. winds. ☉ Cloudy, & moist, cold N. E. winds. 23 Curious frost, wd N. E. 24 Cloudy, & moist, cold N. E. winds. 25 Cloudy, & moist, cold N. E. winds. 26 ● Curious frost, wd N. 27 Cldy, moist, and VV. wd 28 Cldy, some rain, wd VV. ☉ Cldy, cold freezing N. w. 30 Hard frost, sharp N. wds. 31 Hard frost & fog, wd N. November 1676. 1 Rain, & great VV. wds. 2 Rain, & great VV. wds. 3 Rain, & great VV. wds. 4 Still the same. Temp. N. ☉ Continuing the same.
6 Pleasant frost, wind N. 7 Cldy, frost, N. E. wds. 8 Pleas. frost, great E. wds. 9 Foggy, N.E. Rainy night. 10 ○ Pleasant frost, wd N.E. 11 Hard white frost, wind east. ☉ Hard white frost, wind east. 13 Foggy, misling, wind E. 14 Cold, misling, wind north east. 15 Cold, misling, wind north east. 16 Frosty, cold east wind. 17 Frosty, cold east wind. 18 Thaw and rain, wd west. ☉ Curious hard fr. N.VV 20 Curious hard fr. N.VV 21 Curious hard fr. N.VV 22 Frost, Rain at night. N.E. 23 Hard frost, wind N. 24 Hard frost, wind N. 25 ● Hard frost, wind south west. ☉ ● Hard frost, wind south west. 27 Thaw, great S. W. wds. 28 Like th' former, s. drops. 29 Thick clouds, wd S. W. 30 Hard frost, stinking fog, W
December 1676. 1 Cold and cloudy, wd E. 2 Frosty. Cold E. wind. ☉ Frosty. Cold E. wind. 4 Frosty. Cold E. wind. 5 Frosty. Cold E. wind.
6 Still like the former. 7 Still like the former. 8 Still like the former. 9 Great snow, wind N. ☉ ❍ More snow, & wd N. 11 Hard frost, wd N. VV. 12 Frost, stinking fog. Sn. W. 13 Frost, and foggy, wind west. 14 Frost, and foggy, wind west. 15 Hard frost, snow, wd VV. 16 Frosty, cldy, N. VV. wd. ☉ Cldy, frost, snow, wd W. 18 Curious frost, west wd. 19 Curious frost, west wd. 20 Curious frost, west wd. 21 Cold & cloudy, wd west, 22 Thaw, wd W. Fr. at nig. 23 Cold thaw. Frost again, ● wind east. ☉ Cold thaw. Frost again, ● wind east. 25 Black frost, sharp E. wd. 26 Frost, snow, wd N. E. 27 Hard frost, wind N. E. 28 Same as before. Sn. at N. 29 Same as before. Sn. at N. 30 Same as before. Sn. at N. ☉ Hard frost, wind east. The River of Thames now froze, that Booths were built thereon, and Peo∣ple commonly passed over to Lambeth. ✚ January 1677. 1 Misty hard frost, wind east. 2 Misty hard frost, wind east. 3 Tempestu. day & nig. W. 4 Cldy, rainy, gr. S. VV. wd.
5 Pleasant, wind west, rainy night. 6 Pleasant, wind west, rainy night. ☉ Cldy, moist, great W. wd. 8 ❍ Pleasant. Little fr. W. 9 Rain, and clouds, great west winds. 10 Rain, and clouds, great west winds. 11 Tempestuous day and night, wind west. 12 Tempestuous day and night, wind west. 13 Fr. sn. hail, sleet, west wd. ☉ Pleasant frost, west wind. 15 Cldy, some rain, wd VV. 16 Pleasant frost, wind VV. 17 Hard frost, rain P. S. E. 18 Cloudy, some rain, S. VV. 19 Cldy, moist, variable wd. 20 Moist and cloudy, VV. ☉ Curious frost, wd VV. 22 Curious frost, wd VV. 23 ● Black frost, cold N. w. 24 Curious frost, cold N. E. winds. 25 Curious frost, cold N. E. winds. 26 Cldy, & black frost, E. 27 Cold sn. & sleet gr. E. wd. ☉ Hard frost. Great east winds. 29 Hard frost. Great east winds. 30 Rainy, & great S. W. wds. 31 Curious frost, wind west.
February 1677. 1 Some rain, wind west. 2 Cloudy, moist, wind VV. 3 Rain, & great S. VV. wds. 4 Fog A. Rain, hail, wd VV.
5 Frosty, & great west wds 6 Moist, gr. W w. Temp. N. 7 ❍ Ra. hail, great W. wds. 8 Freezing air, snow, VV. 9 Like the former. 10 Frost, snowy nig. N. E. ☉ Snowy day & nig. N. E. 12 Great thaw, frost P. VV. 13 Pleasant frost, wd S. VV. 14 Misty, cold thaw, S. VV. 15 Moist, but moderate, VV. 16 Cloudy, rain, south east. 17 Rain, & great S. E. wds. ☉ Moist, ra. nig. strong S. W. 19 Rain, and cldy, wd S. VV. 20 ● Rainy days & nights, wind south west. 21 ● Rainy days & nights, wind south west. 22 ● Rainy days & nights, wind south west. 23 ● Rainy days & nights, wind south west. 24 Tempest. day, wd. mutab. ☉ Curious air, wd N. VV. 26 Pleasant frost, wd. VV. 27 Fog, A. M. Frosty, VV. 28 Pleasant frost. wind VV. March 1677. 1 Pleasant frost, wind east. 2 Frost, & cold east wind. 3 Frost, & cold east wind. ☉ Frost, & cold east wind. 5 Cldy, s. drops. gr. E. wd ab. 6 Cloudy and rain, wd east.
7 Cloudy, misling. wd E. 8 Cloudy, misling. wd E. 9 ❍ Like the former, Ra. N. 10 Cldy, & rain, gr. east wds. ☉ Cldy, rain, wd turn'd W. 12 Cold air, some rain, W. 13 Snow & ra. gr. S. W. wds. 14 Cldy, wet, great W. wds. 15 Pleas. frost, cold N. W. w. 16 Pleas. frost, cold N. W. w. 17 Pleas. frost, cold N. W. w. ☉ Pleas. S. W. Rainy night. 19 Warm air, W. Rainy nig. 20 Rain & temp. of W. wds. 21 Hail, some ra. brisk W. w. 22 Frost, hail, and rain, W. 23 ● Foggy m. rain all nig. 24 Rain, & great N. E wds. ☉ Close & cldy, wind N. E. 26 Pleas. but sharp N. wds. 27 Close, cold N. wd Ra. nig. 28 Fair, wd, N. E. Rainy N. 29 Pleasant, with N. W. wds. 30 Pleasant frost, wd W. 31 Pleasant frost, wd W.
April 1677. ☉ Cloudy, wind south west. 2 Curious air, wind west. 3 Same as former, s. drops P. 4 Cloudy, obscure, N. VV. 5 Sweet warm air, west. 6 Same as the former, E.
7 Cloudy, some drops P. wind east. ☉ Cloudy, some drops P. wind east. 9 Pleasant air, N W. wds. 10 Bright air, brisk W. wds. 11 Cldy, some ra. gr. W. wds. 12 Very pleasant, wind west. 13 Some drops, gr. E. wds. 14 Rain, hail, great E. wds. ☉ Rain, and great W. wds. 16 Hot, thund. lightn. rain. 17 Some showers, blust. W. w. 18 Frosty, wind south west. 19 Rain, and brisk E. wds. 20 Cloudy, some drops, ● brisk east winds. 21 Cloudy, some drops, ● brisk east winds. ☉ Fr. A. some ra. brisk, N. E. 23 Pleasant frost, wd N. W. 24 Cldy, rain, hail, wind W. 25 Pleas. with brisk S.E. wds. 26 Showring, strong S. W. wd. 27 The same with th'former. 28 Variable, some drops. S W ☉ Rain, and high W. wds. 30 Cldy, with rain, W. wds. May 1677. 1 Rain, & brisk W. wds. 2 Cldy, rain, & cold. N. E. 3 Rainy, cloudy, & high west winds. 4 Rainy, cloudy, & high west winds. 5 Foggy, fr. Ra. P. Cold N. E. ☉ Good air, but cold E. wd. 7 ❍ Rain A Pleas. P. wd E. 8 A curious warm day, S.W.
9 Cldy, warm, wind west. 10 Hot & pleasant, wd S. W 11 Hot air S. wd. Rainy nig. 12 Hot, brisk S. W. wds. Ra. ☉ Cldy, warm, gr. S. W. w. 14 Cldy, warm, gr. S. W. w. 15 Cldy, warm, gr. S. W. w. 16 Hot air, and small east winds. 17 Hot air, and small east winds. 18 Hot. Thund. & rain, wd E. 19 Cldy, & much ra. N. E. ☉ Cool air, brisk N. E. wds. 21 ● Small frost, gr. N. E. w. 22 Fair, & great N. E. wds. 23 Hot air, and brisk east winds. 24 Hot air, and brisk east winds. 25 Rain & hail. Brisk N E. w. 26 Hot air, great N. E. wds ☉ Hot, som. ra. P. wd N. E. 28 Brisk S. wds. Rain at N. 29 Rainy day, great S. W. wd. 30 Cldy, rainy, brisk W. wds 31 Hot air, wind south west.
June 1677. 1 Hot, thunder storms, VV. 2 Rain, some thund. VV. ☉ Cldy & cold rain, N. W. 4 Cold, cldy, brisk N. E. wd. 5 A glorious day, N. VV. 6 ❍ Curious air, wd E. 7 Warm, & flying clouds E. 8 Much rain, & west wind.
9 Cldy & rain, with VV. w. ☉ Rain A. Pleas. P. wd VV. 11 Rain and hail, wd N. VV. 12 Cldy, rain. Brisk N. W. w. 13 Hot, and pleasant, wd west. 14 Hot, and pleasant, wd west. 15 Cldy. A gr. storm n. N. E. 16 Glorious bright air, VV. ☉ Cldy and rainy, wind west. 18 Cldy and rainy, wind west. 19 ● Hot and pleas. wd E. 20 ● Hot and pleas. wd E. 21 ● Hot and pleas. wd E. 22 ● Hot and pleas. wd E. 23 Misty A. Hot air, wd. E. ☉ Excessive heat, wind E. 25 Like former, Light. at N. 26 Yet the same. Thunder at night. 27 Yet the same. Thunder at night. 28 Cldy, & cool, N. E. wds. 29 Fair, with great west winds. 30 Fair, with great west winds. July 1677. ☉ Cloudy, with brisk S. VV. winds. 2 Cloudy, with brisk S. VV. winds. 3 Hot & pleasant, wind VV. 4 ❍ Hot, some drops, P. wind N. E. 5 ❍ Hot, some drops, P. wind N. E. 6 Hot and pleasant, wind E. 7 Hot air. Thund. s drops. ☉ Hot, s. ra. strong S. VV. w. 9 Cldy, great S. VV. wds. 10 Some ra. High S. VV. w.
11 A rainy day gr. west wds. 12 Cldy, rain, great VV. wds. 13 Rain & thunder, wd west. 14 Rainy, & cldy, wd N. VV. ☉ A rainy day, wd N. VV. 16 Cloudy, but fair, wd west. 17 Cldy, wd W. Rain at nig. 18 Cloudy, & wind N. VV. 19 ● Hot, yet cldy, wd VV. 20 A glorious day, wd N. W. 21 Hot. Clds gathering, N. W. ☉ Hot days, wind N. E. 23 Hot days, wind N. E. 24 Hot days, wind N. E. 25 Hot, and cloudy, wd W. Rain nig. 26 Hot, and cloudy, wd W. Rain nig. 27 Rain & thunder, wd VV. 28 Rainy day, wind west. ☉ Rainy, and S. W. wds. 30 Rainy, and S. W. wds. 31 Rainy, and S. W. wds.
August 1677. 1 Some rain. Brisk south west winds. 2 Some rain. Brisk south west winds. 3 ○ The same, temp. night. 4 Tempestu. day. N. VV. ☉ Cloudy, moist. Great west winds. 6 Cloudy, moist. Great west winds. 7 Rainy, cldy, with VV. w. 8 Frosty, cloudy, wind VV. 9 Hot and pleas. S. VV. 10 Cldy, hot, some ra. VV.
11 A rainy day, & S. VV. wd. ☉ Cldy, mist, wind west. 13 Temp. day & nig. VV. 14 Cloudy, and some rain, brisk west wind. 15 Cloudy, and some rain, brisk west wind. 16 Flying clouds, wind west. 17 Fr. ra. at nig brisk W. wd. 18 ● Fair, & brisk N. E. wds. ☉ Cold rain, P. Brisk N. W. 20 Cold, fair, brisk N. W. wd. 21 Cldy, rain P. wd S. W. 22 Rainy day & nig. wd. VV. 23 Tempestuous day, S. VV. 24 Cldy, & brisk VV. wds. 25 Curious bright days, W. ☉ Curious bright days, W. 27 Curious bright days, W. 28 Curious frost, wd west. 29 Lightn. & ra. at n. wd E. 30 Tempestuous day & nig. 31 Pleasant, & brisk W. wds. September 1677. 1 ❍ Fog A. Cloudy, wd VV. ☉ Pleasant, wind south west. 3 Pleasant, wind south west. 4 Cloudy skie, wind N. VV 5 Cldy, misling, wd N. E. 6 Pleasant, with E. wds. 7 Pleasant frost, wind N. E. 8 Pleasant frost, wind N. E. ☉ Pleasant frost, wind N. E. 10 Pleasant frost, wind N. E. 11 Pleasant frost, wind N. E. 12 Pleasant frost, wind N. E. 13 Cldy, & some rain, wd W.
14 Close and warm, wd west. 15 Great fog A. wd S. VV. ☉ ● Rain, P. Brisk S. VV. w. 17 Pleasant, wind west. 18 Flying clouds, wds west. 19 Foggy morn. wd west. 20 Close and warm, wd VV. 21 Misty A. Some rain. VV. 22 Cldy, warm, s. rain. VV. ☉ Cldy, warm, s. rain. VV. 24 Cldy, warm, s. rain. VV. 25 Close, warm, with W. wd. 26 Rain, yer warm wd. west. 27 A glorious day, wd west. 28 Some drops A. wd N. VV. 29 Some rain, and brisk ❍ west winds. ☉ Some rain, and brisk ❍ west winds.
October 1677. 1 Pleasant frost, wind west. 2 Pleasant frost, wind west. 3 Rain P. Great west wind. 4 Pleasant frost, brisk W. wd 5 Dark, cold ra. brisk W. w 6 Dark, cold ra. brisk W. w ☉ Dark, cold ra. brisk W. w 8 Dark, rainy, gr. N. W. w. 9 Cldy, some ra. brisk W. w. 10 Pleasant frost, wd N. W. 11 Like former, storm at 8. P. 12 Pleasant frost, & west wd. 13 Frost, ra. hail, snow, W.
☉ Blustring stormy VV. wds. 15 Pleasant frost, brisk ● west wind. 16 Pleasant frost, brisk ● west wind. 17 Cldy, wd VV. Rain at N. 18 Cldy & rain, wind VV. 19 Cldy, moist warm, S. W. 20 Cldy, moist warm, S. W. ☉ Cldy, moist warm, S. W. 22 Some gentle rain, wd W. 23 Pleasant frost, wd N. E. 24 Pleasant frost, wind E. 25 Pleasant frost, wind E. 26 Frosty air, wind E. 27 Cldy, dark skie, wind E. ☉ Cldy, & some rain, wd E. 29 Snow, hail, rain, Cold E. w. 30 ❍ Fr. A. dropping P. N. E. 31 Freezing cold air. N. E. November 1677. 1 Curious frost, wind west. 2 Misty A. Hoar frost. VV. 3 Frosty. Some rain, S. VV. ☉ Dark warm, rain, S. E. 5 Tempests day & nig. S. E. 6 Misling rain, wd S. VV. 7 Rain, and west wind. 8 Tempests, day & nig. VV. 9 Tempests, hail, lightn. at n. 10 Pleasant frost, brisk S. VV. winds. ☉ Pleasant frost, brisk S. VV. winds. 12 Tempests d. & n. S. VV. 13 Cold rain, wind west. 14 ● Cold rain, wind E. Tempest. night. 15 ● Cold rain, wind E. Tempest. night.
16 Cold dark rain. wind N. W. 17 Cold dark rain. wind N. W. ☉ Misty A. Pleas. P. wd VV. 19 Hard frost & fog, N. VV. 20 Hard frost, wind N. VV. 21 Rain. Cold N. E. wd. Sn. n. 22 Frost, snow, sleet, N. E. 23 Frost, snow, hail, wind E. 24 Frost, some sn. sharp E. w. ☉ Frost, snow, fierce E. wd. 26 Pleas. A. cldy P. wd S. W. 27 Pleasant frost, wd N. W. 28 Mist, & frost. Thaw n. W. 29 ❍ Cldy, S. W. Temp. n. 30 Cldy, & ra. gr. S. W. wd.
December 1677. 1 Warm rain, gr. west wind. ☉ Moist, yet pleasant, S. VV. 3 Tempests d. & n. wd E. 4 Cldy, moist, wd turn'd W. 5 Rainy dark air, wd N. E. 6 Foggy, moist, wind west. 7 Cloudy, cold wind east. 8 Dark & tempestu. N. E. ☉ Frost, wd W. Tempest. n. 10 Cloudy, moist, wd west. 11 Frosty & pleasant, wd W. 12 Rainy day, great VV. wds. 13 Some rain. Stormy VV. w. 14 ● Freezing air, brisk W. w. 15 Cldy. Rain, cold N. wds.
☉ Cold and cloudy, wd E. 17 Frosty air, wind E. 18 Frosty air, wind E. 19 Frosty air, wind E. 20 Frosty air, wind E. 21 Fog and frost, wind E. 22 Fog. Thaw P. wd S. ☉ Pleasant frost, wind S. VV. 24 Misty, cloudy, wd S. VV. 25 Dark, raw, cold, wd E. 26 Pleasant frost, wd S. E. 27 Tempests days & ❍ nights, wds S. VV. 28 Tempests days & ❍ nights, wds S. VV. 29 Curious frosty air, wd W. ☉ Stinking fog. Frosty. VV. 31 Frosty, wd W. Thaw at n. ✚ January 1678. 1 Pleasant, & west winds. 2 Some rain, high west wds. 3 Pleasant. & brisk VV. wds. 4 Tempests d's & n's. W. 5 Tempests d's & n's. W. ☉ Tempests d's & n's. W. 7 Rain, great S. VV. winds. 8 Cold rain, brisk N. VV. w. 9 Sharp cold air, wd N. VV. 10 Cold, dark, rainy, N. E. 11 Freezing air, cold E. wd. ☉ ● Frost, sn. & gr. VV. w. 13 Pleasant fr. Snow lies, wind west. 14 Pleasant fr. Snow lies, wind west. 15 Like former Thaw at nig. 16 Tempests d. & n. wd W. 17 Tempest, thund light. N.
18 Much rain; and great west wind. 19 Much rain; and great west wind. ☉ Moist air, and great west winds. 21 Moist air, and great west winds. 22 A black frost, wd north west. 23 A black frost, wd north west. 24 Frost, and much snow, E. 25 Cldy, misling, wd E. ❍ 26 Cldy, misling, wd E. ❍ ☉ Cldy, misling, wd E. ❍ 28 Frosty, fair, brisk E. wds. 29 Snow, freezing air, wd E. 30 Hard frost, snow, wd E. 31 Black fr. sn. cold N. E. wd
February 1678. 1 Curious frost, wd N. W. 2 Fr. sn. ra. Great VV. wds. ☉ Cldy, moist, high VV. wd. 4 Some rain, & gr. VV. wds. 5 Pleas. fr. & brisk VV. wd. 6 Cldy moist, great VV. w. 7 Some ra. & gr. VV. wds. 8 Frosty, brisk VV. winds. 9 Cldy, moist, high VV. wd. ☉ Cldy, warm, wind VV. 11 ● Frosty, pleasant, wd W. 12 Cloudy, warm, wind VV. 13 Misty & cldy, wind VV. 14 Curious frost, wd N. VV. 15 Frosty, cloudy, wd W. 16 Frosty, cloudy, wd W. ☉ Frosty, cloudy, wd W.
18 Pleasant frost, west wind 19 Pleasant frost, west wind 20 Rainy, brisk south west winds. 21 Rainy, brisk south west winds. 22 Frosty, fair, wind W. 23 Frosty, fair, wind W. ☉ Rain, and cold E. wind. 25 Some sn. hail, & cold E. w. 26 ❍ Pleas. frost, cold, S. VV. 27 Pleasant frost, wd S. W. 28 Cldy dark air, wd S. VV. March 1678. 1 Cloudy, misling, wind west. 2 Cloudy, misling, wind west. ☉ Rain, hail, and west, wd. 4 Ra. hail, sn. gr. N. E. wds. 5 Snow, hail, strong east winds. 6 Snow, hail, strong east winds. 7 Cold cldy, great E. wds. 8 Cldy, cold, misling, wd E. 9 Cold, cldy, rainy nig. E ☉ Moist, cldy, warm, wd E 11 Pleasant air, wd south west 12 ● Mutable air. Loud west winds. 13 ● Mutable air. Loud west winds. 14 Pleasant, & N. W. wds 15 Some rain, viol. E. wds. 16 Rain and hail, wind west. ☉ Rain, great N. VV. wds 18 Tempestuous day, wd W 19 Tempests continue, E. 20 Rain & great west wind.
21 Moist & cldy, great W. w. 22 Fair and warm, wind west. 23 Rain A. Fair P. wd west. ☉ Cldy, warm, wind west. 25 Fair, but cold E. wds 26 Fair, but cold E. wds 27 Pleasant air, N. E. wds. 28 ❍ Cldy, wd N. Rainy n. 29 Frosty, Cloudy. Cold east wind. 30 Frosty, Cloudy. Cold east wind. ☉ Pleasant frost, wd N. E.
April 1678. 1 Fair, dry, N. E. winds. 2 Cold, s. drops p. N. wd. 3 Fair, but cold N. E wd. 4 Some rain, & great W. wd. 5 Fair A. rain P. wind west. 6 Snow, hail, ra. gr. N. E wd. ☉ Rain P. High west winds. 8 Hail & rain, P. wd west. 9 Fair & cold, N. W. wd. 10 Rain, hail, P. Cold N. E. w. 11 ● Rain A. Pleasant p, E. 12 Pleasant, and cold E. wd. 13 Some rain, and cold east wind. ☉ Some rain, and cold east wind. 15 Rain A. Pleas day, N.E. 16 Cloudy, rain, wind N. E. 17 Cldy, ra. blustring, N. E. 18 Bright air, some drops. E. 19 Rain, and blustring north east winds. 20 Rain, and blustring north east winds.
☉ Cldy, warm, s. drops N. E. 22 Warm & pleas. N. VV. 23 Cloudy, rain, wd N. VV. 24 Cldy, rain, hail, wd N. 25 Rain, & brisk N. W. wd. 26 ❍ Pleasant air, south west. 27 Cldy & rainy, brisk E. w. ☉ Ra. Gr. S. VV. wds. Ra. n. 29 Rain, & great S. W. wds. 30 Pleasant. S. W. Rainy n. May 1678. 1 Tempestuous day, S. W. 2 Pleasant air, wd VV. 3 Pleasant air, wd VV. 4 Cloudy, rain, wd S. W. wet night. ☉ Cloudy, rain, wd S. W. wet night. 6 Pleasant air, great south west winds. 7 Pleasant air, great south west winds. 8 Hot, but pleasant, W. ● 9 Hot, but pleasant, W. ● 10 Hot, but pleasant, W. ● 11 Still the same, Thun. at N. ☉ Rain, thund. gr. W. wds. 13 Cldy, & variable, wd W. 14 Pleasant, & cool, north east winds. 15 Pleasant, & cool, north east winds. 16 Pleasant, & cool, north east winds. 17 Pleasant, & cool, north east winds. 18 Curious bright days, wd east. ☉ Curious bright days, wd east. 20 Very hot, south west wd. 21 Hot, gr. E. wd. Rainy nig. 22 Cldy, rainy, brisk E. wds. 23 Cldy, some rain, west.
24 Rain A. Pleasant, S. VV. 25 Tempestuous day, S. VV. ☉ ○ Cldy, rainy, brisk E. w. 27 Pleasant air, wind S. VV. 28 Hot. Rain A. M. Brisk west wind. 29 Hot. Rain A. M. Brisk west wind. 30 Pleasant air, and brisk west wind. 31 Pleasant air, and brisk west wind.
June 1678. 1 Rain P. Brisk west wind. ☉ Cldy, wd west. Rainy nig. 3 Thick & cldy, wd west. 4 Glorious days, wind west. 5 Glorious days, wind west. 6 Cloudy, rainy, wd S. E. 7 Pleasant, s. drops, p. S. W. 8 Rainy and cloudy, wd ● north west. ☉ Rainy and cloudy, wd ● north west. 10 Hot air, s. drops p. S. W. 11 Hot, close air, wind N. E. 12 Curious, but hot air, N. E. 13 Hot, thund. & rain N. 14 Cldy, hot air, wind N. 15 Pleasant hot air, wind north west. ☉ Pleasant hot air, wind north west. 17 Pleasant hot air, wind north west. 18 Pleasant hot air, wind north west. 19 Hot, much thund. wd E. 20 Great heat, wind N E. 21 Hot, much thund. rain, E. 22 Cloudy, hot wind N. W. ☉ Hot, s. rain & thund. W.
24 ○ Hot air, gr. N. W. wds. 25 ○ Hot air, gr. N. W. wds. 26 ○ Hot air, gr. N. W. wds. 27 Hot & pleasant, N. W. 28 Like th' former. Ra. at N. 29 Hot, cloudy, wd N. W. ☉ Cldy, thunder, rain. W. July 1678. 1 Hot air, some drops, W. 2 Rainy and cldy, wd VV. 3 Rain, & brisk VV. wds 4 Very hot, and brisk west winds. ● 5 Very hot, and brisk west winds. ● 6 Very hot, and brisk west winds. ● ☉ Very hot, and brisk west winds. ● 8 Very hot, and brisk west winds. ● 9 Very hot, and brisk west winds. ● 10 Very hot, wind north west. 11 Very hot, wind north west. 12 Hot, cldy, variable wds. 13 Glorious hot air, W. ☉ Glorious hot air, W. 15 Glorious hot air, W. 16 Hot and pleasant, wind south west. 17 Hot and pleasant, wind south west. 18 Ra. at noon Gr. S. VV. wd. 19 Cldy, with rain. wd west. 20 Rain, hail, thunder, W. ☉ Fair, great west winds. 22 Gr. ra. thund. lightn. W. 23 ○ Some ra. gr. S. W. w. 24 ○ Some ra. gr. S. W. w. 25 ○ Some ra. gr. S. W. w. 26 Rain strong S. W. wds.
27 Frost A. Rain P. wd S. W. ☉ Frost. A. Thund. rain, S. W. 29 Great thunder, rain, S. W. 30 Cldy, rain thund. wd. W. 31 Rain and hail, wd VV.
August 1678. 1 Pleasant air, wd west. 2 Pleasant air, wd west. 3 Pleasant air, wd west. ☉ Rain A. Pleasant, wd W. 5 Glorious air wind west. 6 Rain A. M. wd S. W. 7 ● Hot & pleasant, wd W 8 Rainy, cloudy, high west winds. 9 Rainy, cloudy, high west winds. 10 Pleasant air, wd west. ☉ Pleasant air, wd west. 12 Pleasant air, wd west. 13 Pleasant air, wd west. 14 Pleasant air, wd west. 15 Pleasant air, wd west. 16 Pleasant air, wd west. 17 Pleasant air, wd west. ☉ High W. wds. Rainy nig. 19 Cloudy, moist brisk west winds. 20 Cloudy, moist brisk west winds. 21 ○ Pleasant, warm wd. west. 22 ○ Pleasant, warm wd. west. 23 Cloudy, obscure, wd VV. 24 Notable high E. winds. ☉ Hot, some rain, thund. E. 26 Cldy, hot, with E. wind.
27 Misty, frost A. M. Hot day wind N. E. 28 Misty, frost A. M. Hot day wind N. E. 29 Misty, frost A. M. Hot day wind N. E. 30 Misty, frost A. M. Hot day wind N. E. 31 The same, greater wds.
September 1678. ☉ Mist, frost, A. M. Hot day. E. winds. 2 Mist, frost, A. M. Hot day. E. winds. 3 Mist, frost, A. M. Hot day. E. winds. 4 Mist, frost, A. M. Hot day. E. winds. 5 Soultry hot, wind S. E. ● 6 Soultry hot, wind S. E. ● 7 Hot, misty m. Ra. at n. S. E. ☉ Hot & pleasant, wd S. E 9 Hot. Light. at nig. wd S. W. 10 Great heat, wind VV. 11 Heat abates, cldy, wd W. 12 Misty A. Pleasant, wd W. 13 Cldy. Rain at night. VV. 14 Cldy, obscure, wd N. VV. ☉ Misty A. s. ra. cold N. E. w. 16 Misty frosty A. Pleas. day. 17 Cloudy and rainy, wd. W. 18 Frosty A. M. Pleasant, wind west. 19 Frosty A. M. Pleasant, wind west. 20 ○ Cldy, & great W. wds. 21 Cloudy, some drops, great W. wds. ☉ Cloudy, some drops, great W. wds. 23 Cloudy, some drops, great W. wds. 24 Cldy. Rainy nig. wd S. W. 25 Cloudy, variable. Cold N. W. winds. 26 Cloudy, variable. Cold N. W. winds. 27 Frosty, pleasant, wd N. W. 28 Cldy, and strong W. wds. ☉ Moist. A ra. nig. h. w. W.
30 Cloudy, rain, wind west.
October 1678. 1 Pleasant frost, wd west. 2 Frosty A. Ra. thund. S. W. 3 Moist air, high west wds. 4 Pleasant, great west wds. 5 ● Dark rain, wind west. ☉ Cldy, strong W. wd. Ra. N. 7 Dark & Temp. W. wds. 8 The Tempest continues. 9 Tempest still continues. 10 Pleasant frost, wd west. 11 Cldy, some rain, wd west. 12 Frosty, pleasant, wind west. ☉ Frosty, pleasant, wind west. 14 Foggy A. Pleasant. N. W. 15 A pleasant day, wd west. 16 Cldy, some rain, wd W. 17 Cold, sn. ra. viol. W. wds. 18 Cloudy. Cold N. W. wd. 19 ○ Cold frosty air, wind west. ☉ ☉ Cold frosty air, wind west. 21 Misty, frosty air, N. VV. 22 Pleasant air, wd N. VV. 23 Frosty, and cold north west winds. 24 Frosty, and cold north west winds. 25 Rainy dark skie, N. W. 26 Misty dark air, wind west. ☉ Misty dark air, wind west. 28 Pleasant, & cold N.E. wd. 29 Cldy, and sharp E. wd.
30 Misty, cldy, brisk E. wds. 31 Pleasant, & brisk E. wds
November 1678. 1 Cloudy, and brisk east winds. 2 Cloudy, and brisk east winds. ☉ Fog, A. Pleasant P. wd E. 4 ● Rain, & cldy, S. E. 5 Pleasant frost, wind west. 6 Pleasant frost, wind west. 7 Misty, rain, strong E wd. 8 Pleasant, and cold east winds. 9 Pleasant, and cold east winds. ☉ Misty, A. M. Pleas. wd E. 11 Pleasant frost, wind east. 12 Pleasant frost, wind east. 13 Frosty still, but west wd. 14 Misty, cloudy, wd west. 15 Frost A. Fog at nig. W. 16 Dark foggy air, wd W. ☉ Dark misling, wind ○ west. 18 Dark misling, wind ○ west. 19 Rain, & great west wds. 20 Rain, & great west wds. 21 Rain, & great west wds. 22 Frost, rain at nig. wd W. 23 Rainy & dark air, wd W. ☉ Great west wds. Rainy nights. 25 Great west wds. Rainy nights. 26 Frosty air, brisk W. wds. 27 Rain, and great west wds. 28 Cldy, & ra. brisk N. E. w. 29 Rainy day. Cold N. E. w. 30 Frosty, s. sn. sharp E. wd. December 1678. ☉ Hard frost, cold east wind. 2 Hard frost, cold east wind. 3 ● Frost, mist, sn. rain, E. 4 Rainy, cloudy. N. E. wd. 5 Cldy, & brisk N. VV. wd. 6 Frosty, mist, A. wd N. W. 7 Cldy, raw air, wind east. ☉ Pleasant frost, wind east. 9 Hard white frost, wd E. 10 Cloudy. Cold east winds. 11 Frosty, & cold east wds. 12 Like the former, sn. at nig. 13 Snowy day, great E. wds. 14 Frost, snowy nig. wd E. ☉ Cldy, frosty, cold E. wd. ○ 16 Cldy, frosty, cold E. wd. ○ 17 Cldy, frosty, cold E. wd. ○ 18 Frosty, cldy, cold N. wds. 19 Thaw, dark, cold. N. W. 20 Raw, dark air, cold N.wd. 21 Rainy, dark, great N. E. winds. ☉ Rainy, dark, great N. E. winds. 23 Frost, rainy night, N. E. 24 Curious frost, wind N. 25 Misling rainy days, N. 26 Misling rainy days, N. 27 Misling rainy days, N. 28 Misty, cloudy, wd west. ☉ Cldy, s. sn. Cold N. E. wd. 30 Frosty, cold N. E. wind. 31 Pleasant frost, wd N. E.
✚ January 1679. 1 Hard frost, cold E. wind. 2 ● Thaw P. wind N. E. 3 Hard frost A. Thaw, mutable winds. 4 Hard frost A. Thaw, mutable winds. ☉ Hard frost A. Thaw, mutable winds. 6 Dark & frosty, wd west. 7 Frosty, & cold N. E. wd. 8 Like the former. Sn at N. 9 Dark, misl. ra. cold, N. E. 10 Moist. Sn. P. Cold N. E. 11 Frosty. Sn. P. Cold N. E. ☉ Snow, s. rain. Cold N. E. 13 Hard fr. sn. P. Cold N. E. 14 Pleasant frost, wind east. 15 Pleasant frost, wind east. 16 ○ Cldy, snow, wd N. W. 17 Dark air, snow lies, wind east. 18 Dark air, snow lies, wind east. ☉ Dark frosty air. Great east winds. 20 Dark frosty air. Great east winds. 21 Like the former. Snow P. 22 Dark thaw, cold N. W. 23 Snow, dark, slabby, wd E. 24 Frost, snow, thaw, p. N. E. 25 Frost, sn. cutting E. wd. ☉ Frost, sn. cutting E. wd. 27 Frost, sn. cutting E. wd. 28 Pleasant fr. thaw p. N. E. 29 Frost. Rain P. wd N. VV. 30 Frost, thaw at noon N. W. 31 Misty, misl. brisk N. W. w. February 1679. 1 ● Frost, s. sn. Cold N. wd. ☉ Pleasant frost, wd N. VV. 3 Misling rain, wd N. VV. 4 Cldy, snow, hail, N. VV. 5 Frost, snow, wind N. E. 6 Pleasant frost, wind N. E. 7 Hard frost, snow, wind, north west. 8 Hard frost, snow, wind, north west. ☉ Snow, & rain, wd S. W. 10 Frost, rain, P. wd S. W. 11 Moist, some rain, S. W. 12 Frost, s. ra. P. wd S. VV. 13 Cldy, moist, wd S. VV. 14 ○ Cold moist air, wind west. 15 ○ Cold moist air, wind west. ☉ Misling, & great west wd. 17 Misty A. but pleas. d. W. 18 Pleasant frost, wd N. VV. 19 Cloudy, moist, wind south west. 20 Cloudy, moist, wind south west. 21 Pleasant, warm, wd W. 22 Moist & lowring, wd W. ☉ Cldy, rain at nig. wd W. 24 Pleasant, and wd N. E. 25 Close and cloudy, wd N. 26 Pleasant air, wd N. W. 27 Curious frost, wind west. 28 Curious frost, wind west. March 1679. 1 Frosty air. Cold east ● wind. 2 Frosty air. Cold east ● wind. 3 Cold & lowring, E. wd.
4 Frost, much snow, wd east. 5 Frost, much snow, wd east. 6 Thaw, some rain, S. VV. 7 Cloudy. Cold east wind. 8 Pleasant, and cold E. wd. ☉ Cldy, rain, cold E. wd. 10 Cldy, rain, cold E. wd. 11 Cldy, rain, cold E. wd. 12 Cldy, rain, cold E. wd. 13 Cldy, rain, cold E. wd. 14 Cldy, rain, cold E. wd. 15 Cldy, rain, cold E. wd. ☉ Somewhat pleasant, wd ○ east. 17 Somewhat pleasant, wd ○ east. 18 Rain & great S. W. wds. 19 Rain & great S.W. wds. 20 Rain & great S. W. wds. 21 Rain & great S. W. wds. 22 Pleasant, brisk W. wds. ☉ Tempestuous day, wd W. 24 Cloudy, variable wind. 25 Cloudy, & cold E. wd. 26 Fair, but cold E. wind. 27 Curious frost, wd E. 28 Curious frost, wd E. 29 Curious frost, wd E. ☉ ● Rain, and brisk west winds. 31 ● Rain, and brisk west winds.
April 1679. 1 Dark rain, great W. wd. 2 Cloudy, moist, west wind. 3 Cldy, some ra. gr. W. wd.
4 Pleasant, s. drops, S. VV. 5 Dark and rainy, wind west. ☉ Dark and rainy, wind west. 7 Pleasant, cold north east wind. 8 Pleasant, cold north east wind. 9 Rain & clouds, wind E. 10 Cldy, s. drops, wd N. E. 11 Rain, hail, great N. E. wd. 12 A rainy day, and E. wd. ☉ Dark air, great N. wd. 14 Frosty, & cold N. W. wd. 15 ○ Snow, rain, & wd VV. 16 Pleasant frost, wd E. 17 Pleasant frost, wd E. 18 Pleasant frost, wd E. 19 Pleasant frost, wd E. ☉ Pleasant frost, wd E. 21 Pleasant frost, wd E. 22 Cloudy, rain, N. E. wds. 23 Pleas. frost, cold N. wds. 24 Curious frost, wd N. W. 25 Curious frost, wd N. W. 26 Curious frost, wd N. W. ☉ Pleasant, hot, wd. west. 28 Pleasant, hot, wd. west. 29 Pleasant, hot, wd. west. 30 ● Same air continuing.
May 1679. 1 Pleasant air, wind north west. 2 Pleasant air, wind north west. 3 Pleasant air, wind north west. ☉ Pleasant air, wind north west. 5 Refreshing showers S. W. 6 Much rain, wind S. VV.
7 Rain, and brisk south west winds. 8 Rain, and brisk south west winds. 9 Clouds and rain, wind east. 10 Clouds and rain, wind east. ☉ Pleas. fr. great N. W. w. ○ 12 Pleas. fr. great N. W. w. ○ 13 Pleas. fr. great N. W. w. ○ 14 Pleas. fr. great N. W. w. ○ 15 Pleas. fr. great N. W. w. ○ 16 Close hot air, wind west. 17 Pleasant, but hot, wd W. ☉ Pleasant, but hot, wd W. 19 Pleasant, but hot, wd W. 20 Pleasant, but hot, wd W. 21 Pleasant, but hot, wd W. 22 Hot, thund. lightn. W. 23 Cloudy, hot, with W. wd. 24 Like th'former, s. drops P. ☉ Cldy, s. drops, gr. S. W. wd. 26 Much rain, great W. wd. 27 Hot air, rainy night. W. 28 ● Hot air, rain, wd W. 29 ● Hot air, rain, wd W. 30 ● Hot air, rain, wd W. 31 Hot, but close air, wd W.
June 1679. ☉ Hot and pleasant, with west winds. 2 Hot and pleasant, with west winds. 3 Pleasant. Rain P. wd VV. 4 Rain, & strong S. VV. wds 5 Cldy, brisk south west winds. 6 Cldy, brisk south west winds.
7 Hot air, & brisk W. wds. ☉ Hot air, & brisk W. wds. 9 Hot air, & brisk W. wds. 10 Cldy, & great west wds. 11 Hot and pleasant, wind west. 12 Hot and pleasant, wind west. 13 ○ Very hot air, wind west. 14 Cldy, s. rain, great W. wd. ☉ Hot & pleas. Brisk W. wd. 16 Cldy, hot, rain P. wd S. W. 17 Cldy, great S. W. winds. 18 Rain, hail, great S. W. wd. 19 Much rain, & S. W. wds. 20 Somewhat pleasant, wd west. 21 Somewhat pleasant, wd west. ☉ Somewhat pleasant, wd west. 23 Somewhat pleasant, wd west. 24 Cldy, hot, great N. E. wds. 25 Pleasant, but hot, wd ● north west. 26 Pleasant, but hot, wd ● north west. 27 Pleasant, but hot, wd ● north west. 28 Pleasant, but hot, wd ● north west. ☉ Yet the same. Rainy nig. 30 Much ra. thund. lightn. W.
July 1679. 1 Flying clds, brisk S. W. w. 2 Rain, great S. VV. wds. 3 Cldy. Hollow S. VV. wds. 4 Cloudy, cool, wind west. 5 Pleasant air, wind west. ☉ Like th'former, s. drops. P. 7 Hot, & pleasant, wd west. 8 Hot. Some rain, wd west. 9 Hot, some drops, wd W.
10 Misty A. Hot day, wd W. 11 As the former, but wd E. 12 Thunder, Lightn. rain. E. ☉ ❍ Hot and pleasant, wind west. 14 ❍ Hot and pleasant, wind west. 15 Much thund. light. ra. W. 16 Hot, cldy, some ra. N. W. 17 Hot and pleasant, wd W. 18 Hot air. Rain P. M. wind west. 19 Hot air. Rain P. M. wind west. ☉ Hot and pleasant, N. E. 21 Cldy, hot, wind S. W. 22 Very hot, and gentle west wind. 23 Very hot, and gentle west wind. 24 Excessive heat, wd N. W. 25 Same, Ra. & light. at nig. 26 Hot air, with ra. S. W. ☉ ● Rainy, & brisk W. wd. 28 Hot air, lightn. at night, wind west. 29 Hot air, lightn. at night, wind west. 30 Very hot. Rain P. wd E. 31 Very hot, wind N. E.
August 1679. 1 Hot air, brisk N. E. wds. 2 Hot, s. ra. gr. N. E. wds. ☉ Thunder, lightn. rain. wind north east. 4 Thunder, lightn. rain. wind north east. 5 Hot, fome thund wd VV. 6 Like the former, some ra. 7 Hot & pleasant, wd W. 8 Hot & pleasant, wd W. 9 Hot & pleasant, wd W.
☉ Still like the former. 11 Same as former, some ra. 12 ○ 'A glorious day, S. W. 13 Cldy, & rain, wd S. VV. 14 A glorious day, wd S. VV. 15 Like former. A rainy nig. 16 Cldy, but hot, wd west. ☉ Rain A. Fair P. wd S. W. 18 Cldy, & rain, wd west. 19 Much rain, & west wind. 20 Rain & great N. W. wds. 21 Pleasant frost, strong north west winds. ● 22 Pleasant frost, strong north west winds. ● 23 Pleasant frost, strong north west winds. ● ☉ Pleasant frost, strong north west winds. ● 25 Pleasant frost, strong north west winds. ● 26 Pleasant frost, strong north west winds. ● 27 Rain, gr. thund. light. nig. 28 Much rain, wind west. 29 Much rain, wind west. 30 Pleasant frost, wind west. ☉ Pleasant frost, wind west.
September 1679. 1 Pleasant frost, wd west 2 Rain A. pleasant day, W. 3 Cldy, some rain, wd W. 4 Pleasant frost, wind west. 5 Rainy day, wind west. 6 Rainy day, & N. W. wds. ☉ Cldy, & most, wd N. W. 8 Cldy, & rain, wd N. W 9 Pleasant air, wind north ○ east. 10 Pleasant air, wind north ○ east. 11 Misty A. Cldy, wd N. E. 12 Good sweet air, wd N. E.
13 Misty A. Rain, & N. E. w. ☉ Cloudy, moist, wd west. 15 Much rain, & S, VV. wd. 16 Much rain, & S, VV. wd. 17 Much rain, & S, VV. wd. 18 Misty A. M. Frost, wd south west. 19 Misty A. M. Frost, wd south west. 20 Pleasant frost, west wds ☉ Some rain, and brisk west winds. ● 22 Some rain, and brisk west winds. ● 23 Some rain, and brisk west winds. ● 24 Some rain, and brisk west winds. ● 25 Cldy, gr. N. W. wds. Ra. n. 26 Rainy, dark, brisk south west winds. 27 Rainy, dark, brisk south west winds. ☉ Cldy, rainy, wd S. VV. 29 Misty, cldy, wd turn'd E. 30 Misty A. small frost, N. E
October 1679. 1 Misty A. M. some rain, wind S. E. 2 Misty A. M. some rain, wind S. E. 3 Moist air. Cold N. E. wds. 4 Stormy rain, viol. E. wds. ☉ Dark and rainy, wind north west. 6 Dark and rainy, wind north west. 7 Cold, but pleasant, wd north west. 8 Cold, but pleasant, wd north west. 9 ○ Tempests d. & n. N. W. 10 Rain, thund. & lightn. W. 11 Rain & great N. VV. wds. ☉ Cldy, s. rain, gr. S. W. wds.
13 Like to the former. 14 Dark and rainy, wd S. W. 15 Much rain, wind S. VV. 16 Tempests d. & n. wd S. W. 17 Tempest continues. 18 Pleas. frost N. W. Ra. n. ☉ Dark & rainy, wd west. 20 Pleasant frost, wind west. 21 Cldy, rain brisk VV. wd. 22 Pleasant frost, wd west. 23 Frosty air, with N. E. wds. 24 ● Same as the former. 25 Cldy, & cold N. winds. ☉ Cldy, and cold N. W. wds 27 Dark misling air, wind N. VV. 28 Dark misling air, wind N. VV. 29 Pleasant frost, cold N. E. w. 30 Pleasant frost, wind west. 31 Rainy, & cldy, wd N. W.
November 1679. 1 Pleasant frost, wd N. VV. 2 Misling rain, cold N. W. ☉ Pleasant frost, wind north. 4 Pleasant frost, wind north. 5 Cldy, remiss, wd west. 6 A pleasant bright day. 7 ○ Misty morn. moist air. 8 Misty, cold air, sn. i'th'nig. ☉ Rain A. frosty & pleasant. 10 Pleasant frost, some snow. 11 Misty A. M. Pleas. frost. 12 Same as before. Ra. at nig. 13 Misty A. Curious frost. 14 Misty A. Curious frost. 15 Misty A. Curious frost.
☉ Yet continuing the same. 17 Misty and cloudy air. 18 Stinking fog, but frosty. 19 Stinking fog, but frosty. 20 Foggy morn, rain at nig. 21 Cldy, rain and winds. ● 22 Cldy, rain and winds. ● ☉ Cldy, rain and winds. ● 24 Pleasant bright air. 25 Cloudy, dark moist air. 26 Cloudy, dark moist air. 27 Cloudy, dark moist air. 28 Misty, cloudy, obscure. 29 A misling dark air. ☉ A misling dark air.
December. 1679. 1 Dark rainy air. 2 Frosty and pleasant. 3 Foggy morn. hard frost. 4 Misty, fr. A. Some ra. P. 5 Cloudy moist air. 6 Stinking fog, rain and ○ cold air. ☉ Stinking fog, rain and ○ cold air. 8 A cold black frost. 9 Pleasant frosty air. 10 Pleasant frosty air. 11 A great deal of snow fell. 12 Cold frosty air. Snow lies. 13 Cold hard frost, with sn. ☉ A dark cold air, & thaw. 15 A misling dark day.
16 Black frost, & cloudy air. 17 Cold, raw, misling air. 18 Dark, cold, & cldy air. 19 A frosty air, & W. wds. 20 Pleasant frost, some snow. ☉ A hard pinching fr. snow. 22 ● Curious frosty days. 23 ● Curious frosty days. 24 Misty air. The frost broke 25 A cloudy and windy skie. 26 Close mild air. Rain at night. 27 Close mild air. Rain at night. ☉ Close mild air. Rain at night. 29 Close mild air. Rain at night. 30 A close warm air. 31 A close warm air.
✚ January 1680. 1 A warm, but close air. 2 A warm, but close air. 3 A rainy day. Hail i'th' nig. ☉ Pleas. day. Rain in the nig 5 ○ Cloudy, windy, some rain. 6 ○ Cloudy, windy, some rain. 7 Stormy, cold wds & rain. 8 Curious frosty air. 9 Fair, but close air. 10 Close & cldy, yet warm. ☉ A pleasant warm air. 12 A cloudy and close air. 13 Pleasant, inclin'd to frost. 14 Cloudy, but warm air. 15 Cloudy, but warm air. 16 Cold, inclined to frost. 17 somewhat frosty, gr. wds. ☉ Cldy, moist; but warm air.
19 Like to the former. 20 Close & warm rainy nig. 21 ● A pleasant warm day. 22 Cldy, and somewhat cold. 23 Moderately pleasant. 24 A curious bright day. ☉ Cldy, & cold sharp wds. 26 Cold, & somewhat fr. air. 27 A very glorious day. 28 Frosty, and cloudy air. 29 A cloudy, and cold air. 30 A cloudy, and cold air. 31 Rain, & sharp cold wds.
February 1680. ☉ A curious hard frost. 2 Cldy, rain, & great wds. 3 Frost A. Wds rain, snow. 4 ○ Moist air, violent wds. 5 Moist & wdy, with rain. 6 Cldy, windy, moist air. 7 Some rain, & great wds. ☉ Moist air, great winds. 9 Hail, rain, & cold winds. 10 Curious frost, W. wds. 11 Curious frost, W. wds. 12 Curious frost, W. wds. 13 Cldy, like to sn. Cold N. w 14 Pleasant, cold N. E. wds. ☉ Cldy, s. drops P. Cold E. w. 16 Pleasant frost, cold E. w. 17 Pleasant frost, cold E. w. 18 Pleasant frost, cold E. w.
19 Gr. S. W. wds. Temp. nig. 20 ● Very pleasant, wd W. 21 Pleasant, moist, wd west. ☉ Rain, & great west winds. 23 Frost A. Rain P. wd west. 24 Cldy, & rain, warm W. w. 25 Cldy, s. rain. Gr. W. wds. 26 Cldy, s. rain. Gr. W. wds. 27 Cldy, s. rain. Gr. W. wds. 28 Moist air, great W. winds. ☉ Pleas. frost, great W. wds.
March 1680. 1 Frost, hail, great W. wds. 2 Frost, hail, snow, wd W. 3 Pleasant. Rainy night. W. 4 Fair, gr. W. wds continue. 5 ○ Cldy, ra. gr. S. W. wd. 6 Hail, and stormy W. wds. ☉ Cold, moist, viol. wds abat. 8 Rain, and great west winds. 9 Rain, and great west winds. 10 Pleasant, with gr. W. wds. 11 Some rain, violent west winds. 12 Some rain, violent west winds. 13 Rain, hail, great W. wds. ☉ Glorious day, wind west. 15 Cldy, rain at nig. wd W. 16 Rain, hail, s. thund. N. wd. 17 Cold and moist, winds north west. 18 Cold and moist, winds north west. 19 Pleasant, and west winds. 20 ● Misty A. Pleasant. W.
☉ Pleasant frost, wind north east. 22 Pleasant frost, wind north east. 23 Pleasant frost, wind north east. 24 Pleasant frost, wind north east. 25 Pleasant, frost, thund S. W. 26 Frosty, fair, strong N. winds. 27 Frosty, fair, strong N. winds. ☉ Frosty, fair, strong N. winds. 29 Frosty, fair, strong N. winds. 30 Misty A. Pleasant, wd E. 31 Some rain, brisk E. wds.
April 1680. 1 Cldy, some rain, wd west. 2 Rain, hail, cold E. wind. 3 ○ Rain and great north east winds. ☉ ○ Rain and great north east winds. 5 ○ Rain and great north east winds. 6 ○ Rain and great north east winds. 7 Cold and cldy, wd N. E. 8 Pleasant, wind turned west. 9 Pleasant, wind turned west. 10 Rainy day, and S. W. wds. ☉ Rain, hail storms, gr. W. w. 12 Rain, & great S. W. wds. ● 13 Rain, & great S. W. wds. ● 14 Rain, & great S. W. wds. ● 15 Rain, & great S. W. wds. ● 16 Rain, & great S. W. wds. ● 17 Rain, & great S. W. wds. ● ☉ Rain, & great S. W. wds. ● 19 Moist, some rain, wd W. 20 Moist air. Rainy nig. S.
21 Somewhat like former. 22 Pleasant frost, wd S. VV. 23 Fair & cool, brisk S. E. wd. 24 Pleasant air, wind E. ☉ Pleasant air, wind E. 26 Pleasant air, wind E. 27 Hot and pleasant, gen∣tle E. winds. 28 Hot and pleasant, gen∣tle E. winds. 29 Hot and pleasant, gen∣tle E. winds. 30 Hot and pleasant, gen∣tle E. winds. May 1680. 1 Cldy skie, & east winds. 2 Pleas. & cool brisk east winds. ☉ ○ Pleas. & cool brisk east winds. 4 Pleas. & cool brisk east winds. 5 Pleas. & cool brisk east winds. 6 Cldy, thund. rainy n. E. 7 Cldy, with rain, E. wd. 8 Pleasant sweet air, W. ☉ Pleasant sweet air, W. 10 Pleasant sweet air, W. 11 Cold & cldy, wd N. E. 12 Soaking rain, cold E. wd. 13 Pleasant, and east wind. 14 Cloudy, & cold E. wd. 15 Pleas. with cool N. E. wd. ☉ Cldy, much ra. gr. W. wd. 17 Rain, thund. hail, gr. W. 18 ☞ ● Gr. Hail, ra. thun. 19 Dark and rainy, and west wind. 20 Dark and rainy, and west wind. 21 Hot air, wd W. Rainy n. 22 Rain, & brisk W. wind. ☞ Viz. 7 or 8 Inches about.
☉ Fair, great hollow wd VV. 24 Hot air, & brisk W. wds. 25 Hot air, wd turned E. 26 Cldy, hot s. drops, wd E. 27 Cloudy, rain. Little wind. 28 Cloudy, rain. Little wind. 29 Rain, with hail & thund. ☉ Rainy, A. Brisk VV. wd. 31 Warm air. Brisk W. w.
June 1680. 1 Cldy & warm, wind VV. 2 ○ Pleasant, brisk north west winds. 3 Pleasant, brisk north west winds. 4 Much rain, gr. VV. wds. 5 The same as the former. ☉ Cldy & brisk N. VV. wd. 7 Rainy, with west winds. 8 Cldy, brisk N. VV. wds. 9 Pleasant frost, N. VV. winds. 10 Pleasant frost, N. VV. winds. 11 Cldy, brisk S. VV. winds. 12 Rain, & brisk S. VV. wds. ☉ Cldy, some rain, wd VV. 14 Somewhat pleas. wd W. 15 Pleasant, hot, wd S. E. 16 ● Same as the former. 17 Cldy & rain. wind west. 18 Cldy, cold N. VV. wind. 19 Hot & pleas. wd N. VV. ☉ Cldy, close air wd S. VV. 21 Curious hot air, wd VV. 22 Excessive heat, wd S. E.
23 Like to the former. 24 Like to the former. 25 Like to the former. 26 Like to the former. ☉ The same. Ra. thund. at n. 28 Hot air, and gentle west winds. 29 Hot air, and gentle west winds. 30 Cldy, some rain, wd, west. July 1680. 1 ○ Cloudy air, wd, S. VV. 2 Cldy, s. drops, wd, S: W. 3 A rainy day, strong W. w. ☉ Cloudy, moist, wind VV. 5 Rain, & clouds, wd, VV. 6 Rain A. Pleasant, wd, W. 7 Cldy, ra. at nig. wd, west. 8 Rain A. M. and wd, VV. 9 Glorious frost, wd, E. 10 Glorious frost, wd, E. ☉ Glorious frost, wd, E. 12 Very hot air, wd, N. E. 13 Cldy and moist, wd, west. 14 ● Cloudy, rain, wd, W. 15 ● Cloudy, rain, wd, W. 16 ● Cloudy, rain, wd, W. 17 Cldy, ra. at nig. wds S. W. ☉ Rain, some thunder. VV. 19 Rain, and brisk VV. wds. 20 Pleasant, some drops. VV. 21 Much rain, brisk W. wds 22 Pleasant, some drops. VV. 23 Curious air, wd W. Ra. nig. 24 Cldy, hot, s. drops, wd. W. ☉ Pleasant sweet air, wd, W.
26 Rain, & thund. wd west. 27 Rain, with brisk W. wds 28 Frosty, pleasant, wind west. 29 Frosty, pleasant, wind west. 30 Rainy, & brisk VV. wds. 31 ○ Curious frost, & wd W.
August 1680. ☉ A rainy day, wind, west. 2 Cldy, & rain, wd, N. VV. 3 Rain, A. Pleasant, wd N. W. 4 Warm & pleas. N. VV. 5 Warm & pleas. N. VV. 6 Warm & pleas. N. VV. 7 A rainy day, wd, S. VV. ☉ Cldy, hot, wind S. VV. 9 Cldy, s. drops, brisk W. w. 10 Much rain, gentle W. wd. 11 Much rain, gentle W. wd. 12 Much rain, gentle W. wd. 13 Cldy, & great west wds. 14 ● Rainy, and great west winds. ☉ ● Rainy, and great west winds. 16 Tempest abates, wd VV. 17 Pleasant frost, wind west. 18 Pleasant frost, wind west. 19 Pleasant frost, wd N. E. 20 Pleasant frost, wd N. E. 21 Pleasant frost, wd N. E. ☉ Pleasant frost, wd N. E. 23 Pleasant frost, wd N. E. 24 Same. Thunder in the nig. 25 Pleas. day. Rainy nig. N. E.
26 Excessive hot, wind east. 27 Excessive hot, wind east. 28 Rain, light. thund. wd E. ☉ ○ Some rain, wind S. E. 30 Pleasant, but moist, wd south west. 31 Pleasant, but moist, wd south west. September 1680. 1 Mist m. pleasant, wd S. W. 2 Rain, thund. light. wd E. 3 Pleasant air, wind south west. 4 Pleasant air, wind south west. ☉ Some rain, gr. wds. S. W. 6 Pleasant frost, wind west. 7 Pleasant frost, wind west. 8 Fog, m. hot day, wd west. 9 Same as the former. ● 10 Same as the former. ● 11 Same as the former. ● ☉ Same as the former. ● 13 Hot, yet pleasant, wd W. 14 Mist, morn. very hot, wind east. 15 Mist, morn. very hot, wind east. 16 Cloudy, rain, wind east. 17 Hot & pleasant, wd E. 18 Mist, m. Hot day, E. ☉ Mist, m. Hot day, E. 20 Mist, m. Hot day, E. 21 Cldy, misling, wind E. 22 Pleasant bright air, wd E. 23 Fair, m. misling P. wd E. 24 Misling, rainy nig. wd E. 25 Storms of rain & hail. E. ☉ Much rain, wind N. E. 27 Pleasant air, wind west. 28 ○ Rainy, wind west.
29 Fair, wind west. 30 Cold, misling rain. N. E.
October 1680. 1 Cldy, cold, wind N. E. 2 Rainy day, wind N. E. ☉ Cldy, m. pleasant, p. W. 4 Fair, wd W. Tempestu. n. 5 Cloudy, moist, sharp winds, west. 6 Cloudy, moist, sharp winds, west. 7 Cold, but pleasant, wd W. 8 Frosty, wd W Rainy nig. 9 Rain, and great winds, west. ☉ Rain, and great winds, west. 11 Frosty, pleasant, wd W. ● 12 Frosty, pleasant, wd W. ● 13 Cloudy, brisk winds, W. 14 Misty, dark, rainy, wd W. 15 Fair, & pleasant, wd W. 16 Fair, & pleasant, wd W. ☉ Fair, & pleasant, wd W. 18 Still the same, greater wd. 19 Frosty, cldy, great wds W. 20 Rainy, cloudy, wind west. 21 Pleasant frost, wd west. 22 Rainy cold, wind east. 23 Fair, pleasant, wd N. E. ☉ Rainy P. Great wds, S. W. 25 Humid air, wd south west. 26 Some rain, great wds VV. 27 ○ Much rain, wd S. W. 28 Cold, yet pleasant, wds E.
29 Cloudy, cold, win E. 30 Misty, cloudy, winds north west. ☉ Misty, cloudy, winds north west. November 1680. 1 Dark, rainy, great wds W. 2 Pleasant, brisk wds, west. 3 Curious frost, winds west. 4 Rainy, dark, cold wds, east. 5 Rainy, dark, cold wds, east. 6 Some rain, cold wind, E. ☉ Frosty, pleasant, cold wind, N. E. 8 Frosty, pleasant, cold wind, N. E. 9 Cloudy, with rain, wind east. 10 Cloudy, with rain, wind east. 11 ● Fair m. Ra. P. gr. S. W. 12 Dark, rainy, wind west. 13 Cold, moist air, wind W. ☉ Misty m. Rain at nig. W. 15 Pleas. d. rainy n. gr. wd, W. 16 Moist air, wind S. W. 17 Fair, cold, wind north east. 18 Fair, cold, wind north east. 19 Cloudy, wind east. 20 Cloudy, wind east. ☉ Cloudy, cold, wind N. E. 22 Pleas. frost, cold wd, E. 23 Pleas. frost, cold wd, E. 24 Pleas. frost, cold wd, E. 25 ○ Cldy, moist wd N. W. 26 Cldy, misling, cold wd, E. 27 Pleasant frost, wind E. ☉ Cloudy, cold wind. E. 29 Frosty air, cold wind E. 30 Cldy, some rain, wd west. December 1680. 1 Cldy, some snow. N. W. 2 Hard fr. pleas. cold. N. 3 Cldy, hard frost, wd N. 4 Hard fr. pleas. wd N. VV. ☉ Frosty, some sn. wd N. W. 6 Snow & rain, wd west. 7 Fr. some sn. cold wd E. 8 Snow, cold wind, W. 9 Hard fr. pleas. s. sn. N. W. 10 Very hard fr. cold, N. W. 11 ● Hard frost, snow, wd north. ☉ Hard frost, snow, wd north. 13 Hard frost, cldy, wd N. E. 14 Cldy rain, wd north west. 15 Cldy, moist. Cold wds, north east. 16 Cldy, moist. Cold wds, north east. 17 Pleasant hard frost. E. Some snow 19. 18 Pleasant hard frost. E. Some snow 19. ☉ Pleasant hard frost. E. Some snow 19. 20 Pleasant hard frost. E. Some snow 19. 21 Misty, obscure air. A thaw. 22 Mist, fr. m. Thaw p. N. E. 23 Cldy, rainy, gr. wd, S. VV. 24 Frosty, pleasant, wd VV. 25 ○ Frosty m. Cldy, N. VV. ☉ Some rain gr. wds N. E. 27 Some rain gr. wds N. E. 28 Some rain gr. wds N. E. 29 Hard frost great wds. E. 30 Frost, ra. hail, sn. wd E. 31 Hard fr. cldy, cold, wd E.
✚ January 1681. 1 Frost, cold. Snow in the night, wind N. E. ☉ Frost, cold. Snow in the night, wind N. E. 3 Frosty, cold, cloudy, wd. N. E. 4 Frosty, cold, cloudy, wd. N. E. 5 Pleasant, hard frost, wind N. VV. 6 Pleasant, hard frost, wind N. VV. 7 Frosty, some snow. Cold wind west. 8 Frosty, some snow. Cold wind west. ☉ ● Pleasant frost, wind west. 10 ● Pleasant frost, wind west. 11 Cloudy. A Thaw, wd, W. 12 Moist and cloudy, wd, W. 13 Cold, but pleasant, N. E. 14 Pleasant, fr. Cold wd, N. E. 15 Cldy, cold, wind N. VV. ☉ Fair, but cold, wd N. VV. 17 Misty, frost, wind N. VV. 18 Cldy, cold remits. S. W. 19 Cldy, dark. wind west. 20 Very cold, cloudy, wd N. W. 21 Very cold, cloudy, wd N. W. 22 Some ra. hail. Cold. N. E. ☉ ○ Pleas. hard frost, N. E. 24 Pleas. hard frost, N. E. 25 Pleas. hard frost, N. E. 26 Hard frost, cldy, wd E. 27 Hard frost, pleas. wd, E. 28 Cldy, cold, frosty, wd, W. 29 Cldy, cold, thaw, wd, VV. ☉ Rain & hail. great wd, W. 31 Pleasant frost, gr. wd, VV. February 1681. 1 Rain, blustring wds, W. 2 Cold frost, some snow, wind north west. 3 Cold frost, some snow, wind north west. 4 Pleasant hard frost, wd west. 5 Pleasant hard frost, wd west. ☉ Some snow, great wds, west. 7 Some snow, great wds, west. 8 ● Fr misty, cldy. S. W. 9 Cold rain, gr. wds, S. E. 10 Rainy; blustring, wd, W. 11 Frost, snow, wind west. 12 Cloudy, some rain, wd, west. ☉ Cloudy, some rain, wd, west. 14 Fair and moist, wd, west. 15 Cloudy, warm, wind west. 16 Cloudy, warm, wind west. 17 Cold rain, hail, gr. wds, W. 18 Rainy, cloudy. Cold winds, west. 19 Rainy, cloudy. Cold winds, west. ☉ Cldy, some rain, wd, west. 21 Cloudy, wind north west. 22 ○ Cldy, some ra. wd, N. E. 23 Mist, m. pleasant d. N. E. 24 Frost, m. misling rain. S. W. 25 Frosty, pleasant, wd west. 26 Cold, cldy, some ra. wd, W. ☉ Cold, cldy, moist, wd, east. 28 Pleasant air, wind S. E. March 1681. 1 Cldy, raw, cold wd, N. E. 2 Pleas. rain P. wd, west. 3 Hail, ra. sn. i'th' nig. W.
4 Some snow, cold wd. N. E. 5 Ra. hail, sn. Cold wd. N. E. ☉ Pleasant, fair, wd, N. VV. 7 Frosty, cldy, wd N. E. 8 Frosty, cldy, wd N. E. 9 Frosty, cldy, wd N. E. 10 ● Pleas. fr. cold wd. N. W. 11 Cldy, brisk winds, west. 12 Fr pleas. cold wds. N W. ☉ Fair, variable, brisk W. W. 14 Cldy, rainy, wind west. 15 Pleasant, frosty, wd, west. 16 Cloudy, moist, wd, wrst. 17 Cldy, some rain, S. E. 18 Frosty, pleasant, wd S. E. 19 Pleasant frost, cold wd. E. ☉ Sober rain, tot. die. N. E. 21 Cldy, ra. cold wds. N. W. 22 Ra. blustring wds. N. VV 23 Cldy, s. ra. gr, wds. N. E. 24 ○ Rain, hail, cold w. N. W. 25 Rain, hail, cold w. N. W. 26 Rain, hail, cold w. N. W. ☉ Snow, & cold wds. N. E. 28 Rain, sn. great wds. N. E. 29 Pleasant air, wds west 30 Pleasant air, wds west 31 Pleasant air, wds west
April 1681. 1 Cldy, brisk wds, N. W. 2 Warm, somet. cldy. N. W. ☉ Cloudy, dry, wind west.
4 Fair, pleasant, wind north east. 5 Fair, pleasant, wind north east. 6 Pleasant hot air. N. W. 7 Pleasant hot air. N. W. 8 ○ Pleasant hot air. N. W. 9 Cloudy rain, P. great winds, west. ☉ Cloudy rain, P. great winds, west. 11 Fair, pleasant, great winds west. 12 Fair, pleasant, great winds west. 13 Fair, pleasant, great winds west. 14 Fair, pleasant, great winds west. 15 Cldy, dry, winds north east. 16 Cldy, dry, winds north east. ☉ Moderate, s. drops, p. S. E. 18 Cloudy. great winds, S. W. Rainy night. 19 Cloudy. great winds, S. W. Rainy night. 20 Rain, m. Cldy, wd N. W. 21 Pleasant, fair, wd N. W. 22 ○ Hot and pleasant all this time, wd N. E. 23 Hot and pleasant all this time, wd N. E. ☉ Hot and pleasant all this time, wd N. E. 25 Hot and pleasant all this time, wd N. E. 26 Hot and pleasant all this time, wd N. E. 27 Hot and pleasant all this time, wd N. E. 28 Hot and pleasant all this time, wd N. E. 29 Hot and pleasant all this time, wd N. E. 30 Hot and pleasant all this time, wd N. E. May 1681. ☉ Gr. heat, thun. s. drops. N. E. 2 Hot, pleas. gr. wds. N. E. 3 Cldy, cool, winds N. E. 4 Cldy, cool, winds N. E. 5 Cldy, cool, winds N. E. 6 Pleas. fair, cold wds. N. E.
7 ● Cldy, rain P. wd N. E. ☉ Pleas. Cool wds N. W. 9 Pleas. Cool wds N. W. 10 Pleas. Cool wds N. W. 11 Pleasant, warm, wd N. W. 12 Close warm, s. rain. N. W. 13 Glorious hot air, brisk winds, W. 14 Glorious hot air, brisk winds, W. ☉ Glorious hot air, brisk winds, W. 16 Glorious hot air, brisk winds, W. 17 Glorious hot air, brisk winds, W. 18 Glorious hot air, brisk winds, W. 19 Glorious hot air, brisk winds, W. 20 Cloudy, great wds, N. E. 21 Moderate; brisk winds N. E. & some rain. ☉ ○ Moderate; brisk winds N. E. & some rain. 23 Hot plasant, wd N. E. 24 Hot plasant, wd N. E. 25 Hot plasant, wd N. E. 26 Great heat, wd N. W. 27 Great heat, wd N. W. 28 Great heat, wd N. W. ☉ Great heat, wd N. W. 30 Great heat, wd N. W. 31 Cldy, in. hot d. gr. wd W.
June 1681. 1 Pleasant, hot, wd, west. 2 Cldy, rain at nig. wd, W. 3 Cldy by fits, wind west. 4 Cldy, ra. P. gr. wds. N. W. ☉ Cldy, brisk wds, west. 6 ● Some ra. blustring w. W.
7 Cldy, cool, gr. wds. N. W. 8 Cloudy, thick air, wd west. 9 Cloudy, thick air, wd west. 10 Hot and pleasant, wind north west. 11 Hot and pleasant, wind north west. ☉ Cldy, warm, wd N. VV. 13 Cldy, some drops. N. VV. 14 Cldy, some rain. N. VV. 15 Cldy, great winds N. VV. 16 Pleasant, warm, wind north east. 17 Pleasant, warm, wind north east. 18 Pleasant, warm, wind north east. ☉ Pleasant, warm, wind north east. 20 ○ Cloudy, rain, wind E. 21 Much rain, great wds, north east. 22 Much rain, great wds, north east. 23 Much rain, great wds, north east. 24 Much rain, great wds, north east. 25 Cldy, some rain, lightn. at nig. wind N. E. ☉ Cldy, some rain, lightn. at nig. wind N. E. 27 Rain m. Thunder, wd E. 28 Hot, close air, wd N. W. 29 Thunder, some ra. N. W. 30 Rain, tot. die, gr. wds. N. W July 1681. 1 Rainy. High wind N. W. 2 Pleasant, brisk wind, north west. ☉ Pleasant, brisk wind, north west. 4 Hot and pleasant, wd W. 5 ● Fair wd E. Tempestrn. 6 Rain, cldy, warm, E. 7 Rain, cldy, warm, E. 8 Rain, cldy, warm, E. 9 Hot air, wind N. E.
☉ Pleas wd. variable, ra. nig. 11 Rain m. Pleasant, p. N. W. 12 Cldy, some rain. S. W. 13 Cldy, some rain. S. W. 14 Cldy, some rain. S. W. 15 Pleasant, moist skie. S. W. 16 Rainy, brisk winds, S. W. ☉ Rainy, brisk winds, S. W. 18 Cldy, moist, wind south west. 19 Cldy, moist, wind south west. 20 ○ Glorious, hot day. S. W. 21 Mist, m. Hot, close. S. W. 22 Pleasant, hot days, wd west. 23 Pleasant, hot days, wd west. ☉ Cldy, moist, brisk wds E. Rain in the nig. 25 Cldy, moist, brisk wds E. Rain in the nig. 26 Much thund. & rain. S. E. 27 Very hot. Rain i'th nig. wind south east. 28 Very hot. Rain i'th nig. wind south east. 29 Very hot, wind S. VV. 30 Hot, close air, wind west. ☉ Hot, close air, wind west.
August 1681. 1 Cool, close air, wd VV. 2 ● Hot, pleasant, wd N. 3 ● Hot, pleasant, wd N. 4 ● Hot, pleasant, wd N. 5 Frost, fog, m. Hot, sair, wind north. 6 Frost, fog, m. Hot, sair, wind north. ☉ Cldy, dry, wind N. VV. 8 Cldy, rain, wind S. W. 9 Much ra. brisk wds. S. W.
10 Cldy, moist, brisk wd. W. 11 Rain, m. Cldy P. wd VV. 12 Pleasant, hot, wind west. 13 Rain, m. Hot, pleas. VV. ☉ Hot, thund. s. rain, wd W. 15 Hot, some rain, wd west. 16 Cldy, some drops, wd west. 17 Cloudy, hot, wind west. 18 Cool, and cloudy, wd west. 19 ○ Cool, and cloudy, wd west. 20 Mist, m. Frosty, pleas. wind north east. ☉ Mist, m. Frosty, pleas. wind north east. 22 Frost, m. Hot day. S. W. 23 Very hot, thund. ra. n. S. W. 24 Fair & bright gr wds, W. 25 Rain m. great wds, west. 26 Moist air, great wds, west. 27 Rain, m. cldy, brisk w. W. ☉ Cldy, m. pleasant, p. W. 29 Frost, m. pleas. hot, west. 30 Some ra. hot, pleasant. W. 31 Rainy, wind west. September 1681. 1 Cldy, moist, brisk wds. W. 2 ● Some ra. High wds. W. 3 Rain, blustring wds W. ☉ Rain, blustring wds W. 5 Rain, blustring wds W. 6 Mist, morn. Pleasant, wind west. 7 Mist, morn. Pleasant, wind west. 8 Rain, m. brisk wds. W. 9 Cloudy, high winds, west. 10 Cloudy, high winds, west. ☉ Pleasant, cool winds, west. 12 Pleasant, cool winds, west.
13 Cldy, great wds, west. 14 Cldy, s. rain, high w. W. 15 Cldy, s. rain, high w. W. 16 Cldy, s. rain, high w. W. 17 ○ Frosty, pleasant, wd, W. ☉ Much rain, great wds. W. 19 Frosty, pleasant, wd, west. 20 Pleas. s. ra. P. wd, N. W. 21 Fair, brisk winds, N. W. 22 Mist, m. pleasant, N. W. 23 Dark, misling, gr. wd, N. 24 Dark, misling, gr. wd, N. ☉ Dark, misling, gr. wd, N. 26 Pleasant, brisk winds, north west. 27 Pleasant, brisk winds, north west. 28 Misty m. pleasant. N E. 29 Misty m. pleasant. N E. 30 Misty m. pleasant. N E.
October 1681. 1 ● Cldy Ra at night, E. ☉ Some rain brisk winds. south east. 3 Some rain brisk winds. south east. 4 Frosty. Pleasant, wd S. W. 5 Cldy skie, wd south west. 6 Pleasant srost, wind E. 7 Misty, m. Pleasant, wd E. 8 Rain m. Cldy, misty. S. W. ☉ Rainy, wind east. 10 Rainy, wind east. 11 Pleasant, moist, wind E. 12 Frosty, pleas. High wds E.
13 Like the former. 14 Rainy, cldy, great wd, E. 15 Cold cldy, wd E. Halo ☽ ☉ Frosty, pleas. w E. Halo ☽ 17 ○ Pleasant, wind west. 18 Some tain, brisk wd, W. 19 Cldy, moist, high wd, W. 20 Frost, m. Cloudy, great wind west. 21 Frost, m. Cloudy, great wind west. 22 Dark, rainy, wd, N. W. ☉ Cloudy, very cold, wd nortth east. 24 Cloudy, very cold, wd nortth east. 25 Dark, rainy, days and nights, winds west. 26 Dark, rainy, days and nights, winds west. 27 Dark, rainy, days and nights, winds west. 28 Dark, rainy, days and nights, winds west. 29 Some rain, and great ● winds west. ☉ Some rain, and great ● winds west. 31 Rainy, cold, wind west. November 1681. 1 Rainy day & nig N. E. 2 Frosty, pleasant, wd, N. W. 3 Fog, hard frost, wd, N. W. 4 Frosty, cold, wd, east! 5 Rainy, cold, wind, N. E. ☉ Close air, great wd. E. 7 Close air, great wd. E. 8 Close air, great wd. E. 9 Frosty, pleasant, wd, east. 10 Rain, m cldy, wd, S. E. 11 Misty, cloudy, wd, S. W. 12 Misty, cloudy, wd, S. W. ☉ Misty, cloudy, wd, S. W. 14 Rain, brisk wds, west.
15 ○ Cloudy, wind west, rain in the night. 16 Cloudy, wind west, rain in the night. 17 Pleasant frost, wd, W. 18 Pleasant frost, wd, W. 19 Pleasant frost, wd, W. ☉ Cloudy, remiss, wind west. 21 Cloudy, remiss, wind west. 22 Black frost, wind west. 23 Close obscure air, wd, W 24 Close obscure air, wd, W 25 Close obscure air, wd, W 26 Cloudy, misling, wd, west. ☉ Cloudy, great winds, west. 28 Pleasant, frosty, wd, west. 29 ● Frost, cold, cldy, W. 30 Pleasant frost, wd, west.
December 1681. 1 Cloudy, moist, wind west. 2 Cloudy, moist, wind west. 3 Tempestuous, wind west. ☉ Frosty, pleasant, wd, west. 5 Cloudy, cold, brisk wd, west. 6 Cloudy, cold, brisk wd, west. 7 Pleasant frost. Halo ☽ wind west. 8 Pleasant frost. Halo ☽ wind west. 9 Misling rain, wind west. 10 Rain, great winds, west. ☉ Frosty d. stormy n wd W. 12 Tempestu. day, wd, west. 13 Frost, m. s. ra. gr. wds. W. 14 Rain, great winds, west.
15 ○ Frost great wind, west. 16 Misling rain, wind west. 17 Rain, great winds, west. ☉ Moist air, great wds, west. 19 Rainy, winds west. 20 Frosty, pleasant, wd, west. 21 Some rain, wind west. 22 Frosty, pleasant, wd, west. 23 Cloudy, rainy, wind west. 24 Frosty, pleasant, wd N. W. ☉ Dark, rainy, wd; west. 26 Storms of rain, gr. wds, W. 27 Frosty, pleasant, wd, west. 28 Frost, m. Rain, wind ● west. 29 Frost, m. Rain, wind ● west. 30 Much rain, great wds, W. 31 Cloudy, cold, wd, N. VV. ✚ January 1682. ☉ Frost m. Rainy day. W. 2 Frosty, W. Halo ♄ & ♃ 3 Rain m. great wds, west. 4 Frosty, pleasant, wd, west. 5 Mist, frosty, wind west. 6 Misty, cloudy, wind west. 7 Misty, cloudy, wind west. ☉ Rain m Pleas. P. wd, west. 9 Rainy, cloudy, wd, west. 10 Cloudy, cold, great wds west. 11 Cloudy, cold, great wds west. 12 Cldy, much ra. gr. wds, W. 13 ○ Cloudy, great wds, west. 14 Cloudy, great wds, west. ☉ Rain, and great winds, west. 16 Rain, and great winds, west.
17 Rain, m. great wds west. 18 Hard frost, pleasant. N. 19 Cldy, rain, great wds W. 20 Pleasant frost, wd west. 21 Rain, winds, S. VV. ☉ Rain, winds, S. VV. 23 Frost, m. Rain P. wd W. 24 Misty, cloudy, wind west. 25 Cloudy, some rain, wind west. 26 Cloudy, some rain, wind west. 27 Mist, m. pleasant frost. ● wind east. 28 Mist, m. pleasant frost. ● wind east. ☉ Curious frost, wind east. 30 Frosty, cldy, cold, wd E. 31 Frosty, cold, some sn. N. E.
February 1682. 1 Frost, snow, cold winds, east. 2 Frost, snow, cold winds, east. 3 Pleasant frost, wind west. 4 Pleasant frost, wind west. ☉ Frosty, great wds, S. VV. 6 Frosty, cold, gr. wds, E. 7 Frosty, cold, gr. wds, E. 8 Frosty, cold, gr. wds, E. 9 Cldy, misling, brisk wds, E. 10 Cldy, cold, some sn. wd, E. 11 Cldy m. Pleas. P. Cold, E. ☉ Frosty, cold, pleasant. E. 13 Misty m. Pleas. P. wd, E. 14 Frost, mist, cldy, wd, N. E. 15 Cloudy, cold, wind E. 16 Cloudy, cold, wind E.
17 Cldy, mist, cold abates, wind south west. 18 Cldy, mist, cold abates, wind south west. ☉ Cldy, mist, cold abates, wind south west. 20 Some rain, brisk wds W. 21 Cloudy, some rain, wd west. 22 Cloudy, some rain, wd west. 23 Moderate fair, wind west. 24 Rainy day & nig. wd E. 25 Cloudy some rain, wind south east. ☉ Cloudy some rain, wind south east. 27 ● Fair & cool, wd S. E. 28 Rain, wind west.
March 1682. 1 Cldy, rain, wind W. 2 Dry and fair, wd N. E. 3 Frost, some snow, wd E. 4 Frosty, pleasant, wind north cast. ☉ Frosty, pleasant, wind north cast. 6 Frost, hail like sn. wd. N. 7 Frost, cold, some snow, wind N. E. 8 Frost, cold, some snow, wind N. E. 9 Frost sn. ra. great wd S. E. 10 Frost, pleasant, cold, wd north west. 11 Frost, pleasant, cold, wd north west. ☉ Much rain, brisk winds, west. 13 ○ Much rain, brisk winds, west. 14 Frost, hail, rain, wd N. E. 15 Pleasant frost, wd N. E. 16 Pleasant frost, wd N. E. 17 Pleasant frost, wd N. E. 18 Curious air, wind N. E. ☉ Curious air, wind N. E.
20 Much ra. brisk wds N. W. 21 Cldy, cold rain, wd VV. 22 Cold, sn.ra. gr. wd N. E. 23 Some snow, cold wd, N. E. 24 Cldy, moist, wd N. E. 25 Some rain, great wds N. E. ☉ Cold, cloudy wd N. E. 27 Some rain, wd N. VV. 28 Some rain and hail, wd ● north east. 29 Some rain and hail, wd ● north east. 30 Hail, sn. ra. gr. wd, N. E. 31 Cold, yet pleasant. N. E.
April 1682. 1 Pleasant, cool, brisk wd, east. ☉ Pleasant, cool, brisk wd, east. 3 Cldy, cold, dry. N. E. 4 Cldy, cold, dry. N. E. 5 Cldy, cold, dry. N. E. 6 Dry, pleasant, mist at set, wind west. 7 ☉ Dry, pleasant, mist at set, wind west. 8 Misty m. pleasant, wd E. ☉ Fog m. cldy, rain S. VV. 10 Mist m. rain, great wds W. 11 ○ Rain, hail, great wds. south west. 12 Rain, hail, great wds. south west. 13 Frost cldy, Temp. n. S. W. 14 Rainy, tempestuous. W. 15 Cldy, some rain, wd VV. ☉ Frost, m. Cloudy, rain, wind east. 17 Frost, m. Cloudy, rain, wind east. 18 Cloudy, rain, wd south east. 19 Cloudy, rain, wd south east.
20 Like the former. 21 Cldy, some rain, VV. 22 Cldy, some rain, VV. ☉ Cldy, some rain, VV. 24 Pleasant, warm, ra.n wd E. 25 Thund. m. Showring. E. 26 A showring day, S. VV. 27 ● Showers by fits, wd south west. 28 ● Showers by fits, wd south west. 29 Rain, P. wd south west. ☉ Much rain, wind S. VV. May 1682. 1 Cldy, rainy, str. wds VV. 2 Fair, rainy nig. wd VV. 3 Open air, some rain, VV. 4 Rain, tot. die, wind west. 5 Rainy, cool, wind E. 6 Cldy, some rain, wd E. ☉ Ra.m. cldy, brisk wds, E. 8 Rain, great wds, south west. 9 Rain, great wds, south west. 10 ○ Pleasant air, wds west. 11 Fair, s. drops ab. noon W. 12 Ra m.cldy, brisk wds, W. 13 Curious serene skie, wind west. ☉ Curious serene skie, wind west. 15 Curious serene skie, wind west. 16 Pleasant, some rain, wd south west. 17 Pleasant, some rain, wd south west. 18 Frost m. Very hot, wd west. 19 Frost m. Very hot, wd west. 20 Frost m. Very hot, wd west. ☉ Frost m. Very hot, wd west. 22 Hot. Thund. Light. at nig.
23 Cloudy, and rain, wind west. 24 Cloudy, and rain, wind west. 25 Pleasant, warm, wd, S. W. 26 ● Cldy, brisk wd, west. 27 Glorious, hot air, wd, west. ☉ Very hot, pleas. wd E. 29 Very hot, pleas. wd E. 30 Very hot, pleas. wd E. 31 Very hot, th: ra P. gr. w. E.
June 1682. 1 Cldy, moist, wd S. VV. 2 Rainy, wind south west. 3 Cool, s. drops, brisk w. VV ☉ Hail, rain, wind west. 5 Much rain, wind E. 6 Rain m. wind west. 7 Cldy, rain wd S. VV. Rain-bow 11h. P. 7 d. 8 Cldy, rain wd S. VV. Rain-bow 11h. P. 7 d. 9 Moist air, wind S. VV. 10 ○ Rain, m. great wds south west. ☉ Rain, m. great wds south west. 12 Rain, P. wind VV. 13 Rain, P. wind VV. 14 Rain, P. wind VV. 15 Rain, P. wind VV. 16 Thund, hail, rain p. VV. 17 Cldy, s ra. brisk wds N. E. ☉ Cold air, s. drops P. west 19 Cldy, threatning wd VV. 20 Cloudy, rain, P. Stormy winds, west. 21 Cloudy, rain, P. Stormy winds, west. 22 Cloudy, rain, P. Stormy winds, west.
23 Thunder & rain, wd west. 24 Rainy, wind west. ☉ ● Pleasant, some rain. W. 26 Hot, pleas. Ra. ☉ set. W. 27 Hot & pleasant, wd, west. 28 Cldy, rain, gr. wds W. 29 Cldy, rain, gr. wds W. 30 Cldy, rain, gr. wds W. July 1682. 1 Rain, great winds, west. ☉ Rain, great winds, west. 3 Much rain, wind west. 4 Pleasant, warm, wd, N. W. 5 Hot, yet pleas. w. S. W. Lightn. the 6 at nig 6 Hot, yet pleas. w. S. W. Lightn. the 6 at nig 7 Hot air, rain, wind west. 8 Hot, pleasant, wind ○ west. ☉ Hot, pleasant, wind ○ west. 10 Hot air. Rain, P. wd, W. 11 Cldy, hot, some ra. wd, W. 12 Hot, but pleasant, wind west. 13 Hot, but pleasant, wind west. 14 Hot, but pleasant, wind west. 15 Hot, but pleasant, wind west. ☉ Cldy, with rain, wd, W. 17 Cldy, with rain, wd, W. 18 Cldy, with rain, wd, W. 19 Cldy, dry, brisk wd, west. 20 Cldy, some rain, wd, W. 21 Cldy, rain, gr. wds W. Rain-bow, 23d, 7h. P. 22 Cldy, rain, gr. wds W. Rain-bow, 23d, 7h. P. ☉ Cldy, rain, gr. wds W. Rain-bow, 23d, 7h. P. 24 ● Pleasant air, wind west. 25 ● Pleasant air, wind west.
26 Cloudy, wind east. 27 Some rain m. Pleasant P. wind N. W. 28 Some rain m. Pleasant P. wind N. W. 29 Fair, pleas. wd, W. Halo & circ. ☽ 30 d. at n ☉ Fair, pleas. wd, W. Halo & circ. ☽ 30 d. at n 31 Cloudy, rainy, wind west.
August 1682. 1 Cldy, some rain, brisk winds, west. 2 Cldy, some rain, brisk winds, west. 3 Cldy, dry, wd E. Halo, circ. ☽ 3d. day at nig. 4 Cldy, dry, wd E. Halo, circ. ☽ 3d. day at nig. 5 Cldy, dry, rainy nig. w. E. ☉ Rain, thund. lightn. w. E. 7 Cldy, some rain, wind E. 8 ○ Cldy, threat. ra. w. W. 9 Cldy, hot, m. Pleas p. W. 10 Very hot d. Rainy nig. W. 11 Flying clouds, hot wd south west. 12 Flying clouds, hot wd south west. ☉ Cldy, hot, s. ra. gr. w. W. 14 Cloudy, hot, wind, W. 15 Cloudy, hot, wind, W. 16 Cloudy, hot, wind, W. 17 Cldy, wd, N.E. Rainy nig. 18 Rain, & stormy, wd. N. E. 19 Cldy, s. ra. gr. wds. N. E. ☉ Fair, brisk wds, N. E. 21 Pleasant air, wind E. ● 22 Pleasant air, wind E. ● 23 Cldy, brisk wds, W. Ra.n. 24 Much rain, great wds. N. W. 25 Much rain, great wds. N. W.
26 Rain, wind west. ☉ Cldy, some rain, wd, W. 28 Obscure, cldy, wd, VV. 29 Pleasant air, wind west. 30 Mist, m. Cldy, warm S. W. 31 Some rain, brisk wds W. September 1682. 1 Frost m. pleasant, wd, W. 2 Cloudy, brisk wind, west. ☉ Dark, rainy, tot. die. W. 4 Ra. bef. ☉ set, cldy N. W. 5 Cloudy, cool, brisk winds, north west. 6 ○ Cloudy, cool, brisk winds, north west. 7 Cloudy, cool, brisk winds, north west. 8 Cloudy, cool, brisk winds, north west. 9 Pleasant, wind N. W. ☉ Cldy, some ra. p. N. W. 11 Cloudy, rainy, wd, N. W. 12 Pleasant air, wd, N. W. 13 Cloudy, warm, wind north west. 14 Cloudy, warm, wind north west. 15 Cloudy, warm, wind north west. 16 Cloudy, warm, wind north west. ☉ Cldy, s. drops ☉ set. W. 18 Cldy, some dewing, VV. 19 Pleasant air, wd west. ● 20 Pleasant air, wd west. ● 21 Pleasant air, wd west. ● 22 Hazy m. Pleas. day, W. 23 Rain, stormy wds, N. W. ☉ Cldy, some drops, west. 25 Frost m. Cold, wd, N. E. 26 Cldy, threatning wd, E. 87 Frost, m. Pleas. W. Halo & circ. ☽ 28 at nig. 28 Frost, m. Pleas. W. Halo & circ. ☽ 28 at nig.
29 Fog, frost, m. Pleas. W. 30 Fog m. Rain P. wd west.
October 1682. ☉ Cldy, rain. An Iris. N. W. 2 Pleas. warm, S. E. Ra. nig. 3 Warm, some threatn. w. E. 4 A glorious day, warm, wind E. 5 A glorious day, warm, wind E. 6 ○ Mist, m. Curious warm wind N. E. 7 ○ Mist, m. Curious warm wind N. E. ☉ ○ Mist, m. Curious warm wind N. E. 9 Mist, m. Curious warm wind N. E. 10 Mist m. Pleasant, wd, E. 11 Cldy, threatning, w. S. E. 12 Moist, variable, wd, S. E. 13 Fr. m. Rain P. wd, N. VV. 14 Cldy, threatning, wind west. ☉ Cldy, threatning, wind west. 16 Cldy, rain, P. & nig. VV. 17 Cloudy, rain, wind west. 18 Rainy, great wds, west. 19 Frost m. Rain P. wd, VV. 20 ● Cold, much ra. gr. wd north west. 21 ● Cold, much ra. gr. wd north west. ☉ ● Cold, much ra. gr. wd north west. 23 Pleasant, great wds abate. 24 Frost, fog, m. Pleas. VV. 25 Cldy, some rain, wind north west. 26 Cldy, some rain, wind north west. 27 Cool, moist, wind E. 28 Cold fr. pleas brisk, N. E.
☉ Cldy, some rain, wd N. E. 30 Fr. m. Fair, wd E. Halo & circ. ☽ both nights. 31 Fr. m. Fair, wd E. Halo & circ. ☽ both nights. November 1682. 1 Hard frost, wind east. 2 Frost, m. Cldy, ra n. west. 3 Rainy most part, wd W. 4 Fair, wind west. ☉ ORa. temp. d. & n. W. 6 Fair, great winds, west. 7 Cold, frost, pleas. N. E 8 Cold, frost, pleas. N. E 9 Cold, frost, pleas. N. E 10 Frosty, pleasant, wd E. 11 Frost, cold, cldy, wd E. ☉ Frost, cold, cldy, wd E. 13 Frost, cold, cldy, wd E. 14 Hard frost, ra. nig. N. W. 15 Cloudy, rain, wd W. 16 Cloudy, rain, wd W. 17 Frost, m. Rain P. wd W. 18 Rainy d. & n. wind west. ☉ ● Fr. m. Cldy, gr. wds, W. 20 Cldy, rainy nig. wds W. 21 Rainy d. clear ☉ set. W. 22 Fog, frost, wind west. 23 Fog, cloudy, wind VV. 24 Cloudy, cold, wd N. E. 25 Cldy, W. Halo, circ. ab ☽ ☉ Pleasant frost, wind west. 27 Pleasant, frost, E. Halo, & circ. ☽ 27 at nig. 28 Pleasant, frost, E. Halo, & circ. ☽ 27 at nig. 29 Cloudy, moist, wind north west. 30 Cloudy, moist, wind north west. December. 1682. 1 Dark, misling, wd N. W. 2 Cloudy, dark, wd W. ☉ Cloudy, dark, wd W. 4 ○ Cloudy, cold, wind E. 5 Hard frost, wind E. 6 Dark, thick fog, wd E. 7 Misty, cloudy, misle, wind E. 8 Misty, cloudy, misle, wind E. 9 Cldy, moist, wd S. W. ☉ Pleasant m. Foggy p. W. 11 Pleasant m. Foggy p. W. 12 Pleasant m. Foggy p. W. 13 Rain, m. pleas. P. wd W. 14 Pleasant frost, wind VV. 15 Cldy, moist, blustr. wd W. 16 Ra. m. Pleas. P. gr. w. N. W. ☉ Frosty, pleasant, N. W. 18 ● Fr. sometimes cldy, W. 19 Pleasant frost, wind VV. 20 Cloudy, fog, wind VV. 21 Pleas. day, fog at nig. VV. 22 Cloudy, fog, wd VV. 23 Cloudy, fog, wd VV. ☉ Dark, misty, misle. S. VV. 25 Dry, blustring wind, VV. 26 Pleasant day, wind VV. 27 Dark, rainy, great wd, south west. 28 Dark, rainy, great wd, south west. 29 Pleas. fr. wd VV. Circ. ☽ 30 Dark, rainy, viol. wds, W. ☉ Frost, pleasant, wds VV.
✚ January 1683. 1 Cldy, moist, brisk wd, W. 2 Frost, pleasant, wind VV. 3 ○ Mist, cold, frost, wd W. 4 Mist, cold, frost, wd W. 5 Mist, cold, frost, wd W. 6 Cold, dark, drisle, N. W. ☉ Cldy, cold, gr. wd N. VV. 8 Frost, cold, cloudy, N. 9 Cldy, rain, wind VV. 10 Frost, pleasant, wd VV. 11 Cloudy, warm, wd west. 12 Rainy m Clear P. wd W. 13 Cloudy cold, wind E. ☉ Frost, pleasant, wd N. E. 15 Frost, cloudy, cold, wd N. 16 Close, cloudy, wind ● west. 17 Close, cloudy, wind ● west. 18 Cold air, sn.n.gr. wds, N. E 19 Hard frost, pleasant, N. 20 Fair day. Snowy nig. N. E. ☉ Misling rainy, wind E. 22 Sharp, cold Snow, wd E. 23 Frost, cold, wind E. 24 Cold, frosty, pleas. wd E. 25 Cold, cldy, misling, wd E. 26 Hard frost, pleasant, wd E. 27 Hard frost m. misle p. E. ☉ Cldy, misling, wd S. W. 29 Cldy, misling, wd S. W. 30 Cldy, misling, wd S. W. 31 Cloudy, great wds, W. February 1683. 1 ○ Cldy, brisk w. E. H. tide. 2 Cldy, ra. P. gr. wds, S. W. 3 Drisling rain, wind VV. ☉ Cldy, warm, wd S. VV. 5 Pleasant, warm, wd VV. 6 Cldy, warm, wind W. 7 Cldy, dry, great winds. 8 Cldy, cold, sn. gr. w. N. W. 9 Cldy, cold, wind N. VV. 10 Cold, frost, pleas. N. VV, ☉ Mild, close, rainy n. N. VV 12 Pleasant frost, snowy nights, wds N. VV. 13 Pleasant frost, snowy nights, wds N. VV. 14 Frost m. rain P. wd VV. 15 Cold, rain, great wd, VV. 16 Pleasant frost, wd N.VV. 17 ● Cloudy, dry, wind W. ☉ Close, misling, wind E. 19 Rain, cloudy, wind E. 20 Moderate air, wind E. 21 Fair m. Ra. P. High w. N. E 22 Cldy, some ra. cold wds, N. some snow 23d. 23 Cldy, some ra.cold wds, N. some snow 23d. 24 Cldy, offer at snow, S. ☉ Snow & rain, wd S. VV. 26 Fr. pleas. s. ra. Hig. wd, W. 27 Cldy, moist, wind VV. Halo, circ. ☽ 27. day. 28 Cldy, moist, wind VV. Halo, circ. ☽ 27. day. March 1683. 1 Frosty air, wind west. 2 ○ Frosty air, wind west. 3 Fair, very cold, wd N.E.
☉ Frost, pleasant, wd, west. 5 Cldy, brisk winds west. 6 Dry, ra. i'th'n. gr w. W 7 A glorious day, wd, west. 8 Cold, s. drops, gr. wd, VV. 9 Frosty, cold, brisk w. W. 10 Frosty, cold, brisk w. W. ☉ Frosty, cold, brisk w. W. 12 Cloudy, cold, dry, w. VV. 13 Mist, frost, m. Pleasant, wind south west. 14 Mist, frost, m. Pleasant, wind south west. 15 Mist, frost, m. Pleasant, wind south west. 16 Mist, frost, m. Pleasant, wind south west. 17 Rain, brisk wds west. ☉ ● Cold air, high wds VV. 19 Hail, rain, brisk wd west. 20 Pleas. frosty, brisk w. VV. 21 Fair, dry, blustr. wds VV. 22 Some ra. Iris. Ligh gr. wd. 23 Some ra. blustr. wds VV. 24 Fair, brisk w. S. W. Paretia, 7h.m ☉ Fair & dry, brisk w. S. VV. 26 Frost, pleasant, wd, VV. 27 Frost, pleasant, wd, VV. 28 Frost, pleasant, wd, VV. 29 Frost, pleasant, wd, VV. 30 Rain, m. pleas. P. wd, VV. 31 Frost, dry great wds, VV.
April 1683. ☉ ○ Frost m some rain & hail, wind W. 2 Frost m some rain & hail, wind W. 3 Cold, cldy, a little sn. W.
4 Cloudy, some rain, gr. winds, west. 5 Cloudy, some rain, gr. winds, west. 6 Cldy, hot, thund. ra. n. W. 7 Hot, great winds, S. VV. ☉ Cldy, dry, gr. wd, N. VV. 9 Rainy, great winds, N. VV. 10 Rainy, great winds, N. VV. 11 Pleasant air, wind west. 12 Frost m. Cldy, P. wd, VV. 13 Cldy, much ra. P. wd, VV. 14 Rain, hail, wind, west. ☉ Cldy, dry, wd, N. VV. 16 ● Rainy, cold, wind, west. 17 Thund. ra. hail, wd, west. 18 Cldy, some rain, wd, west. 19 Frost, m. Rainy, wd, VV. 20 Rain, great wds, N. VV. 21 Some rain, gr. wds, VV. ☉ Fair, brisk winds, west. 23 Warm, pleasant, wd, VV. 24 Fair, m. Rain P. wd, VV. 25 Fair, m. cldy, ra. n. west. 26 Thick clds, ra gr. w. VV. 27 Fr. pleas. great wds, VV. 28 Rainy m. pleas. P. w. VV. ☉ Much rain, wind N. 30 Cldy. Blustring wds VV. May 1683. 1 Fair, great wds, N. E. 2 Much ra. m. Fair p. VV. 3 Some ra. cldy, cold, E. 4 Frost; pleasant, wd, west. 5 Close, rainy, wind, E.
☉ Frost, fair, hot, wind, west. 7 Frost, fair, hot, wind, west. 8 Frost, fair, hot, wind, west. 9 Frost, fair, hot, wind, west. 10 Cloudy, dry, wd, N. E. 11 Rain and hail, wd, N. E. 12 Cldy, ra. nig. wd, N. E. ☉ Rain, m. pleasant, wd, VV. 14 Rain m. cldy, brisk w. W. 15 Cloudy, rain, wd, west. 16 ● Pleas. s. ra. ab. noon. S. VV 17 Rain m. hot, brisk w. VV. 18 Pleas. ra. p. S. VV. temp. n. 19 Cldy, dry, brisk w. N. VV. ☉ Hot, lig. th: S. W. Hal. circ. ☽ 21 Ra. m. hot, S. W. Hal. circ. ☽ 22 Pleasant, hot, wind VV. Halo circle ☽. 23 Pleasant, hot, wind VV. Halo circle ☽. 24 Much ra. m. th. light. N. W 25 Thund. storms m N. E. 26 Drop. p. brisk, E. Th. midn. ☉ Thund. storm 2h. m. VV. 28 Much ra. th: at noon, N. E. 29 Much ra. & thund. wd, E. 30 ○ Much ra. some thund. E. 31 Ra. m. pleas. p. wd, N. VV.
June 1683. 1 Rain m. cldy, wd, west, 2 Gr. ra. morn. fair even. E. ☉ Fair, pleasant. wd, N. E. 4 Cldy. ra. nig. gr. wds, E. 5 Fair, pleasant, wd, N. W.
6 Cldy. A shower, p. S. VV. 7 Much ra. brisk wds, S. VV. 8 Pleas. very hot, wd VV. 9 Pleas. very hot, wd VV. ☉ Pleas. very hot, wd VV. 11 Pleas. very hot, wd VV. 12 Pleas. very hot, wd VV. 13 Heat encreases, wd west. 14 ● Hot, and glorious, wd west. 15 ● Hot, and glorious, wd west. 16 Stormy, ra. P. gr. w. VV. ☉ Great hallow wds, west. 18 Ra. m. pleas. p. gr. w. VV. 19 Much ra. th: light. hail, VV. 20 Cldy, cool, some ra. VV. 21 Cldy, cool, some ra. VV. 22 Cldy, cool, some ra. VV. 23 Cloudy some drops, gr. winds, west. Cloudy some drops, gr. winds, west. 25 Glorious air, gr. wds, VV. 26 Hot and pleasant, wd, west. 27 Hot and pleasant, wd, west. 28 ○ Cldy, soultry hot, VV. 29 Pleasant, hot, wd, west. 30 Fair, great wds, west. July 1683. ☉ Cloudy, with rain, great wind, west. 2 Cloudy, with rain, great wind, west. 3 Pleasant air, wind, west. 4 Fair, pleas. rainy nig. VV. 5 Pleas. m. ra. p. ra. nig. VV. 6 Cloudy, rain, great wd, west. 7 Cloudy, rain, great wd, west. ☉ Cldy, moist, brisk w. VV.
9 Hot, pleasant, brisk wd, west. 10 Hot, pleasant, brisk wd, west. 11 Cldy, some ra. variabl. w. 12 Hot, pleasant, wind, VV. 13 Storms of ra. P. wd, S. W. 14 ● Some ra. blustr. wd, W. ☉ Pleasant, but hot, wind, west. 16 Pleasant, but hot, wind, west. 17 Pleasant, but hot, wind, west. 18 Pleasant, but hot, wind, west. 19 Hot. Rain P. wd, west. 20 Much rain, wind, S. W. 21 Ra thund. lightn. wd, W. ☉ Cloudy, some rain, wd, W. 23 Flying clouds, hot, wd, W. 24 Hot, pleasant, wind, west. 25 Hot, pleasant, wind, west. 26 Fair, hot, wd, east. 27 Fair, hot, wd, east. 28 ○ Fair, hot, wd, east. ☉ Fair, hot, wd, east. 30 Fair, hot, wd, east. 31 Fair, hot, wd, east.
August 1683. 1 Rain, great winds, east. 2 Dark, rainy, wd, west. 3 Cldy, sometimes ra. W. 4 Cldy, sometimes ra. W. ☉ Cldy, sometimes ra. W. 6 Cldy, sometimes ra. W. 7 Cldy, sometimes ra. W. 8 Cldy, ra. rainy n.gr. w. VV
9 Rain, wind, south east. 10 Fr. m pleas. brisk wd, W. 11 Fair, dry, wind, west. ☉ ● Cldy, some rain, wd, W. 13 ● Cldy, some rain, wd, W. 14 ● Cldy, some rain, wd, W. 15 Stormy rain, wind, west. 16 Dashes of rain, wd, west. 17 Frost m. some ra. wd, VV. 18 Rain, hail, thund. wd, W. ☉ Frost m. pleasant, wd, VV. 20 Cloudy, dry, wind, west. 21 Fair, some drops P. wd, west. 22 Fair, some drops P. wd, west. 23 Frost, m. pleasant, wd, east. 24 Frost, m. pleasant, wd, east. 25 Cldy, hot, s. drops, E. ☉ ○ Fr. m Cldy, f. ra. gr. w. W 27 Fr. m. much ra. P. wd. W. 28 Cldy, some ra. gr. wd, VV. 29 Fair, & pleas. gr. wd, VV. 30 Cldy, brisk wds, west. 31 Fair, pleasant, wd, west. September 1683. 1 Fair, pleasant, wd, west. ☉ Frost m. Fair, wind, west. 3 Frost m. Fair, wind, west. 4 Mist m. pleasant, wd, VV. 5 Cldy, E. Thund. stor. nig. 6 Cldy, s. ra. thund. at nig. 7 Much ra. s. thund. wd, S. E. 8 Cldy, hot. Ra. P. wd, S. E. ☉ Cldy, moist, wind, east. 10 ● Cldy, s. ra brisk wds, E. 11 Pleas. some drops, wd, W.
12 Like the former. 13 Like the former. 14 Like the former. 15 Pleasant m. Rain p. W. ☉ Frost m. Pleasant, wd, E. Halo ☽ 18 day. 17 Frost m. Pleasant, wd, E. Halo ☽ 18 day. 18 Frost m. Pleasant, wd, E. Halo ☽ 18 day. 19 Cold, fog, fr. wd, E. Drisl. n. 20 Cldy, close, warm, wd, W. 21 Cldy m. pleas. P. wd, N. W 22 Frost m. pleas. wd, N. ☉ Fr. cold, pleas. W. Halo ☽ 24 Some ra. m. brisk wd, W. 25 ○ Frost, sair, cold. Rain in the nights, wd, VV. 26 Frost, sair, cold. Rain in the nights, wd, VV. 27 Frost, sair, cold. Rain in the nights, wd, VV. 28 Frost, sair, cold. Rain in the nights, wd, VV. 29 Frost, sair, cold. Rain in the nights, wd, VV. ☉ Mist, frost, m. wind, E.
October 1683. 1 Mist m. cldy, gr wds, E. 2 Cldy, gr. hollow wds, E. 3 Cldy, high wd, E. Ra. nig. 4 Cldy, misle, P. brisk w. E. 5 Cldy, moist, wind, east. 6 Cloudy, wind, west. ☉ Cloudy, wind, west. 8 Fr. pleas. s. dr. 4. h. p. VV. 9 Cldy, ra. P. & nig. VV. 10 ● Frost, pleas. wd, VV. Rain 11th. d. at nig. 11 ● Frost, pleas. wd, VV. Rain 11th. d. at nig.
12 Cldy, misling. Ra. P. wd, W 13 Frost, m. cold, wind, north west. ☉ Frost, m. cold, wind, north west. 15 Fr. s. drops, P. Cold. N. W. 16 Cloudy. Rain P. wd, VV. 17 Fr. cold, cldy, W. Halo ☽ 18 Cloudy, rain, wind, west. 19 Mist, cloudy, warm, wind, west. 20 Mist, cloudy, warm, wind, west. ☉ Fr. pleas. wd. W. Ra. nig. 22 Cldy, cold. Hail P. w. W. 23 Frost, cold, pleas. wd, W. 24 Cold, fr. Mist, P. wd, VV. 25 ○ Fr. mist m Sn. ra. P. VV. 26 Cloudy, misle, wind, west. 27 Frost, pleasant, wd, west. ☉ Fr. mist. Ra n. gr. wd, VV. 29 Fair, pleasant, wind, VV. 30 Pleasant frost, wd, N. VV. 31 Cloudy, misling, wd, VV. November 1683. 1 Frost, pleasant, wind, W. 2 Fr. cldy. Rainy nig. wd, N. 3 Fair, cold. Rainy nig. N. ☉ Cldy, ra. Stormy nig. W. 5 Fair, cold Gr. w. W. d. & n. 6 Freezing, pleasant, wd, west. 7 Freezing, pleasant, wd, west. 8 ● Cldy, cold, misling, wind, west. 9 ● Cldy, cold, misling, wind, west. 10 Drisle m. pleas. P. wd, W. ☉ Frost m. cloudy, misle, P. wd, west. 12 Frost m. cloudy, misle, P. wd, west. 13 Cloudy, moist, wind. west. 14 Cloudy, moist, wind. west.
15 Pleasant, frosty, wd, west. 16 Frost, mist, cldy, wd, E. 17 Thick fog, tot. die, wd, E. ☉ Frosty, cldy, cold, wd, E. 19 Cold, cldy, frosty, wd, E. 20 Raw, cldy, cold, wind E 21 Cloudy, frost, cutting wind, E. 22 Cloudy, frost, cutting wind, E. 23 Frosty, cold, offer at sn wind, north west. 24 ○ Frosty, cold, offer at sn wind, north west. ☉ Frost sleet, Fog at nig. VV. 26 Fr. sleet, offer at snow, N. 27 Cldy, melting sn. all d. N. 28 Cloudy, misty, wd, N. E. 29 Mist m. cold, pleas. w E. 30 Pleasant, hard frost, N. VV.
December 1683. 1 Pleas. fr. high w. W. Ra. n. ☉ Cold, some snow, wd, W. 3 Frost, sn. cold wind, N. W. 4 Hard fr. cold wd, E. Sn. n. 5 Fr. cold. Snow lies, wd, E. 6 Pinching hard fr. wd, E. ● 7 Pinching hard fr. wd, E. ● 8 Pinching hard fr. wd, E. ● ☉ Cold rain, these days, wind, north east. 10 Cold rain, these days, wind, north east. 11 Cold rain, these days, wind, north east. 12 Cldy, with rain, wd, VV. 13 Pleasant frost, wd, west. 14 Fr. m. mist, misling, w. W.
15 Cold, mist, misling, N. E. ☉ Snow, sleet, cold, wd, E. 17 Fr. m. cold, moist p. E. 18 Hard frost, pleas. w. N. E. 19 Frosty, pleasant, w. N. E. 20 Frost, some snow, N. E. 21 Hard cold frost, w N. E. 22 Fr. snow P. great wd, VV. ○ Bitter hard fr. sn. lies, wd, VV. & some blew mist. 24 Bitter hard fr. sn. lies, wd, VV. & some blew mist. 25 Bitter hard fr. sn. lies, wd, VV. & some blew mist. 26 Bitter hard fr. sn. lies, wd, VV. & some blew mist. 27 Bitter hard fr. sn. lies, wd, VV. & some blew mist. 28 Bitter hard fr. sn. lies, wd, VV. & some blew mist. 29 Bitter hard fr. sn. lies, wd, VV. & some blew mist. ☉ Bitter hard fr. sn. lies, wd, VV. & some blew mist. 31 Hard fr. still. Cldy P. E. ✚ January 1684. 1 Hard frost, cldy, wd, E. 2 Hard frost, cldy, wd, E. 3 Hard frost, cldy, wd, E. 4 Hard frost, cldy, wd, E. 5 Hard frost, cldy, wd, E. ☉ ● Bitter cold frost, w. N. 7 Frost, cldy, offer sn. N. E. 8 Frost, cldy, offer sn. N. E. 9 Frost, cldy, offer sn. N. E. 10 Cldy, cold, drisle, w. N. E. 11 Frost, m. Drisle, p. wd, E. 12 Cldy, moist, wd, S. E. ☉ Frost, cold, dark, wd, N. E. 14 Hard frost, cldy, wind, east. 15 Hard frost, cldy, wind, east. 16 Hard frost, pleas. wd, E. 17 Hard frost, snow, N. E.
18 Frost, snow, great wd, north east. 19 Frost, snow, great wd, north east. ☉ Frost, cold, dark, wd, E. 21 Hard frost, some snow, wind east. 22 Hard frost, some snow, wind east. 23 Bitter cold frost, and snow, wd, E. 24 Bitter cold frost, and snow, wd, E. 25 Bitter cold frost, and snow, wd, E. 26 Bitter cold frost, and snow, wd, E. ☉ Hard cold fr. pleas. N. E. 28 Fr. cldy, m. Pleas. p. N. E. 29 Cldy, fr. some sn. p. N. E. 30 Fog, hard frost, wind, east. 31 Fog, hard frost, wind, east.
February 1684. 1 Hard frost, wind, E. 2 Fr. cold, some snow, E. ☉ Pleasant hard frost, w. E. 4 Bitter fr. pleas. VV. Sn. at n. 5 ● Fr. m. ra. gr. w. p. tot. noct. 6 Gr. wds continue tot. die. W 7 Much rain, wind, west. 8 Cldy, some rain, wd, west. 9 Fr. wd, VV. Stormy nig. ☉ Storms of rain, wd, S. 11 Rain m. & p. gr. wd, S. Halo ☽ 13 d. 8h. p. 12 Rain m. & p. gr. wd, S. Halo ☽ 13 d. 8h. p. 13 Rain m. & p. gr. wd, S. Halo ☽ 13 d. 8h. p. 14 Fr. m. rainy p. wd, west. 15 Fair. pleasant, wd, west. 16 Frost m. rain, p. wd, E. 17 Cldy, rain P. wd, west.
18 Rainy, great wd, west. 19 Cldy, great hollow w. W. 20 ○ Fair, cold, N. W. Halo ☽ 21 Some rain, great wd, W. 22 Some rain, great wd, W. 23 Some rain, great wd, W. ☉ Frost, m. cldy p. wd, west. 25 Cloudy, wind, west. 26 Rain, m. and p. wind, E. 27 Rain, snow, sleet, wd, E. 28 Pleasant hard frost, wd, E. 29 Hard frost, wind, E. ☞ This was the time of the greatest First of our Age. The Thames frozen over almost 6 weeks together. There were Booths upon the water for many Trades, &c. It was called — Blanket-Fair. March 1684. 1 Frost, cold, pleas. wd, E. ☉ Fr. cold, some sn. n. N. E. 3 Fr. cldy, offer at sn. N. 4 Cloudy, cold dry, wd, N. 5 Offer at snow, some ● drops, wind N. 6 Offer at snow, some ● drops, wind N. 7 Frost, cold, wd, N. E. 8 Frost, cold, wd, N. E. ☉ Cold, frost, offer at snow great wind, east. 10 Cold, frost, offer at snow great wind, east. 11 Cold, frost, offer at snow great wind, east. 12 Cold, snow, gr. wds, N. E. 13 Fr. pleas. some sn. N. E. 14 Fr. sharp wds, N. Sn. nig. 15 Snow, m. cldy, cold, E. ☉ Cold, snow & rain, p. N. 17 Fr. m. Cldy p. cold, w. N. 18 Fr. s. sn m. Ra. p. gr. w. W. 19 Frost, snow, & sleet P. wind various, 20 Frost, snow, & sleet P. wind various,
21 ○ Cold sharp air, N. VV. 22 Cldy, cold. N. Hail ☉ set. ☉ Frost, sharp cold wind, north east. 24 Frost, sharp cold wind, north east. 25 Frost, sharp cold wind, north east. 26 Frost, sharp cold wind, north east. 27 Rain m. pleas. P. wd, E. 28 Cloudy, moist, wind, south. 29 Cloudy, moist, wind, south. ☉ Cldy, rain, warm, wd, W. 31 Rainy by fits, wd, west.
April 1684. 1 Frost m. pleasant, wd, VV 2 Rain, great wds, west. 3 Fr. m. s. ra. Gr. wd, S. VV. 4 ● Some dropp. blustr. S. W 5 Cldy, misling, rain, VV. ☉ Fair, pleasant, great wd, west. 7 Fair, pleasant, great wd, west. 8 Cloudy, great wd, west. 9 A glorious day, wd, west. 10 Cldy, m. pleasant p. S. W. 11 Rainy, wd, N. E. Ra. nig. 12 Cldy m pleasant p. VV. ☉ Pleasant air, wind, north west. 14 Pleasant air, wind, north west. 15 Frost, cloudy, cold, E. 16 Frost, cold, pleasant, E. 17 Pleasant frost, wind, E. Halo ☽ both nights. 18 Pleasant frost, wind, E. Halo ☽ both nights. 19 ○ Rainy day, wind, S. ☉ Cloudy, wind, S.
21 Mist m. pleasant, wd, S. E. 22 Hot, but cldy, wd, S. E. 23 Some drops, blustring wind, west. 24 Some drops, blustring wind, west. 25 Hot, pleasant, wd west. 26 Pleasant, hot, wind, south east. ☉ Pleasant, hot, wind, south east. 28 Hot, some drops, gr. w. W. 29 Cool rain, and brisk wind, west. 30 Cool rain, and brisk wind, west. May 1684. 1 Some ra. brisk wds, S. W. 2 ❍ Fair, hot, brisk wd, S. W. 3 ❍ Fair, hot, brisk wd, S. W. ☉ ❍ Fair, hot, brisk wd, S. W. 5 Pleas. m. s. drops p. S. W. 6 Hot, pleasant, wd, S. VV. 7 Mist m. hot, pleasant, wind east. 8 Mist m. hot, pleasant, wind east. 9 Cloudy, warm, wind, west. 10 Cloudy, warm, wind, west. ☉ Fair, warm, brisk wds, west. 12 Fair, warm, brisk wds, west. 13 Rain m. brisk wd, S. W 14 Hot, rain P. wind, S. W. 15 Rain m. hot, wd, N. W. 16 Hot, pleas. brisk wds, N. 17 Cloudy, m. hot, fair, P. wind, north. ☉ ○ Cloudy, m. hot, fair, P. wind, north. 19 Pleasant, hot, wd, N. W. 20 Cldy, moist, brisk wd, E. 21 Cldy, m. pleas. wd, N. 22 Cldy, m. pleas. wd, N. 23 Cldy, m. pleas. wd, N.
24 Like the former. ☉ Like the former. 26 Like the former. 27 Like the former. 28 Fair, pleasant, wind, S. 29 Great wds, W. Rainy n. 30 Cldy, moist, s. drops, W. 31 Misty, cldy. Rainy nig. W.
June 1684. ☉ Cloudy, some rain, gr. wds, south west. 2 Cloudy, some rain, gr. wds, south west. 3 ○ Pleas. hot m.Ra. P. w. W. 4 Fair, warm, brisk wd, W. 5 Hot, sometimes cldy, wind, west. 5 Hot, sometimes cldy, wind, west. 7 Hot, sometimes cldy, wind, west. ☉ Hot, sometimes cldy, wind, west. 9 Very hot, but pleasant, wind, east. 10 Very hot, but pleasant, wind, east. 11 Very hot, but pleasant, wind, east. 12 Very hot, but pleasant, wind, east. 13 Very hot, but pleasant, wind, east. 14 Very hot, but pleasant, wind, east. ☉ Very hot, but pleasant, wind, east. 16 Very hot, but pleasant, wind, east. 17 ○ Excessive, melt. heat, wind, south west. 18 Excessive, melt. heat, wind, south west. 19 Excessive, melt. heat, wind, south west. 20 Cldy, but hot, wd, S. W. 21 Cldy, hot, some sprinkle, wind, south east. ☉ Cldy, hot, some sprinkle, wind, south east. 23 Very hot, brisk wds, E.
24 Like the former. 25 Like the former. 26 Hot & pleas. wd, S. E. 27 Still the same. 28 Still the same. ☉ Still the same. 30 Cloudy, hot, wind, west July 1684. 1 Hot, cloudy, wd, west. 2 ● Cldy, gentle ra. w.S.W. 3 Cldy m. pleas. p. S. W. 4 Cldy, s. drps, 5h. P. gr. S. W. 5 Cloudy m. hot, pleasant wind, S. W. ☉ Cloudy m. hot, pleasant wind, S. W. 7 Hot, pleas. s. drps, ☉ r.S. W. 8 Gr. wd, S. W. Ra. 4h. p. n. 9 Ra. at noon, brisk w. S. W. 10 Fair m. cldy P. wd, S. VV. 11 Cldy m. clear P. gr. w. S. W. 12 Ra. till 4h. P. gr. w. S. VV. ☉ Pleasant, cool, great wind S. W. 14 Pleasant, cool, great wind S. W. 15 Rain, thick clouds, great winds, S. VV. 16 ○ Rain, thick clouds, great winds, S. VV. 17 Cldy, ra. brisk wd, S. W. 18 Hot, somewhat cloudy, wind, south west. 19 Hot, somewhat cloudy, wind, south west. ☉ Pleas. drops at noon. W. 21 Hot, pleasant, wind, west. 22 Hot, pleasant, wind, west. 23 Fair, hot, wind, north east. 24 Fair, hot, wind, north east. 25 Very hot, pleasant wd, E. 26 Ra. bef. ☉ rise, E. Ra. n.
☉ Melting hot. Thun. S. W. Some rain i'th' nig's. 28 Melting hot. Thun. S. W. Some rain i'th' nig's. 29 Very hot, rainy, N. VV. 30 Frost m. hot day, N. VV. 31 Frost, fog, m. Hot, fair, E.
August 1684. 1 ● Hot and pleasant, wind, north east. 2 ● Hot and pleasant, wind, north east. ☉ Cloudy m. hot, wd, N.E. 4 Pleasant m. hot, cloudy, p. wind, N. W. 5 Pleasant m. hot, cloudy, p. wind, N. W. 6 Pleasant m. hot, cloudy, p. wind, N. W. 7 Ra. m. hot, pleas. p. N. W. 8 Fr. m.s. drops, S. W. Ra.n. 9 Cldy, ra. S. W. Th. ra. n. ☉ Bright flying clds, S. VV. 11 Hot, pleasant, some rain, wind, S. VV. 12 Hot, pleasant, some rain, wind, S. VV. 13 Cldy, wd, VV. Rainy nig. 14 Storms 9 & 10 m. wd, VV 15 ○ Pleasant, hot, wd, VV. 16 Rainy, dark, wd, S. W. ☉ Fair, hot, cldy, p. N. W. 18 Cldy, dry, wind, N. E. 19 Mist, m. hot, pleasant, wind, north east. 20 Mist, m. hot, pleasant, wind, north east. 21 Mist, m. hot, pleasant, wind, north east. 22 Mist, m. hot, pleasant, wind, north east. 23 Mist m. hot, pleasant, wind, south west. ☉ Mist m. hot, pleasant, wind, south west. 25 Much ra. brisk wd, N. E. 26 Pleasant, wd, VV. Rainy n.
27 Some rain, high wds, west. 28 Cldy m. pleas. p. wd, west. 29 Rainy by fits, wd. west. 30 ● Much rain, wind, west. ☉ Fair & pleasant, wd, west. September 1684. 1 Much rain, wind, west. 2 Fair, pleasant, south west. 3 Fr. m. Ra. thund. S. VV. 4 Cldy m Pleas. p. S. W. Ra. n 5 Rainy day & night, E. 6 Ra. E. Thund. lightn. nig. ☉ Rainy, wind, north west. 8 Rainy, wind, north west. 9 Frost, cloudy, N. VV. 10 Frost, m. Rain p. N. VV. 11 Fair, pleasant, wind, west. 12 Fair, m. Ra. p. N. VV. Ra.n. 13 ○ Dark, rainy, wd, west. ☉ Frost, m. pleasant, wd, west. 15 Frost, m. pleasant, wd, west. 16 Fr. m. cldy, W. Ra. at n. 17 Cldy, ra. wd, N.W. Ra.n. 18 Cl.m.pleas. W. drps 5h. p. 19 Frost m. pleas. wd, west. 20 Frost m. pleas. wd, west. ☉ Frost m. pleas. wd, west. 22 Frost, fog, m. Pleasant, wind, west. 23 Frost, fog, m. Pleasant, wind, west. 24 Mist m. pleasant, wd, west. 25 Fog, m. Pleasant, wd, west. 26 Fog, m. Pleasant, wd, west. 27 Cldy, rainy, wd, S. W. ☉ ● Cldy, threatn. wd, west.
29 Rainy, m. Cldy, p. wd, W. 30 Fr. m. flying clds, wd, W.
October 1684. 1 Rainy, dark, wind, west. 2 Cldy, warm; wd, west. 3 Cldy, some ra. P. wd, west. 4 Fr. pleas, W. Ra. n. Hal. ☽ ☉ Cldy, s. showers, wd, west. 6 Fair, checker'd clds, VV. 7 Much ra. bef. ☉ r.gr.w.W. 8 Much rain, gr. wds, N. E. 9 Fr. m. flying clds, w. west. 10 Rain m. variable, w. west. 11 Rainy morn. gr. wds, west. ☉ Fr. m. cldy by fits, west. 13 ○ Fr. m. s, drps p. wd, west. 14 A moist, wdy skie, N. W. 15 Fr. m. ra. temp. n. S. VV. 16 Fair, pleas. brisk wd, S. W. 17 Mid, fr. m. glorious d. VV. 18 Cldy, s. ra. brisk wd, VV. ☉ Frost, mist, m. Pleasant p. wind, west. 20 Frost, mist, m. Pleasant p. wind, west. 21 Frost, mist, m. Pleasant p. wind, west. 22 Frost, mist, m. Pleasant p. wind, west. 23 Cldy, some ra. & hail N. 24 Fr. sn. hail, wd, N. Sn. n. 25 Cldy, sharp freez. w. N. W. ☉ Cold fr pleas. wd, N. VV. 27 Hard fr. Snow i'th' night. 28 ● Sn. lies, hard fr. west.
29 Pleasant hard frost, west. 30 Fr. much sn. N. W. Thaw n 31 Thaw, cldy, sleet, gr. w. N. November 1684. 1 Fr. m. bit. n. ra. sn. w. VV. ☉ Sharp fr. Thaw at n. S. W. 3 Cloudy, rain, wind, S. 4 Ra. gr. wd, W. freez at n. 5 Cldy, cold, rainy, N. W. 6 Pleas. fr. mist at nig. E. 7 Mist m. pleas. wd, W. Ra. n. 8 Cldy, some rain, wd, E. ☉ Cldy, cold rain, wd, E. 10 Rainy, cloudy, wd, E. 11 Cldy, rainy, wind, west. 12 ○ Frosty, pleasant, wd, west. 13 Frosty, pleasant, wd, west. 14 Misty, cloudy, wd, S. W. 15 Frosty, cold, wd, north west. ☉ Frosty, cold, wd, north west. 17 Frosty, pleasant, wind, north west. 18 Frosty, pleasant, wind, north west. 19 Fr. cold, much sn. p. E. 20 Thaw, much ra. p. gr. N. E. 21 Frosty, pleasant, wd, west. 22 Rainy, dark, wd, west. ☉ Pleas. wd, W. Temp. nig. 24 Fair, gr. wds, W. Ra. nig. 25 Dark, rainy, wd, west. 26 ● Dark, s. misle, W. Ra. n. 27 Rain m. Cldy, wd, west. 28 Cold, obsc. Ra. ab. noon, N. 29 Dark, cold, rainy, N. VV ☉ Cldy m. pleas. p. w. N. W. December. 1684. 1 Hard fr. cldy, wd, N. W. 2 Fr. m. Mist n. N. W. Halo ☽. 3 Snow and rain, wd, west. 4 Cldy, misle, wd, S. VV. 5 Frosty, pleasant, wd, west. 6 Mist, m. dark, misle, E. ☉ Pleas. frost, cold wd, E. 8 Dark, misling, wd, E. 9 Pleas. sharp wds, N. E. 10 Frost m. Cldy, wd, N. E. 11 ○ Cldy, cold, s. misle, N. E. 12 Cldy, cold, s. misle, N. E. 13 Cldy, cold, s. misle, N. E. ☉ Hard frost, pleasant, wind, E. 15 Hard frost, pleasant, wind, E. 16 Snow m Frost, fair. N. W. 17 Hard fr. cldy, gr. w. N. W. 18 Fr. sharp wd, N. E. [Sn. n. 19 Cldy, cold, remiss, w. W. 20 Ra. m hail, sn. fr p. N. W. ☉ Hard fr. some sn. wd, W. 22 Hard frost, fair, wd, W. 23 Sharp fr. cldy, gr. wd, E. 24 Tempest abate. Fr. N. VV. 25 Frosty, wind, N. E. 26 ● Frosty, sn. at nig. VV. 27 Hard frost, pleasant, VV. ☉ Dark, rainy, wd, west. 29 Misty cldy, brisk wd, W. 30 Frosty, clear, high wd, W. 31 Frost m. cldy, wind, E.
✚ January 1685. 1 Hard fr. snow at nig. E. 2 Much snow lies. Frost. E. 3 Pleasant frost, wd, N. ☉ Pleasant frost, wd, N. 5 Bitter frost, w. N. Halo ☽ 6 Mist, fr. thaw noon. N. W. 7 Pleasant, bitter frost, wind, west. 8 Pleasant, bitter frost, wind, west. 9 Frost, some snow, wd. W. 10 ○ Pleasant frost. Thaw P. wind, N. W. ☉ Pleasant frost. Thaw P. wind, N. W. 12 Cold thaw, wind, N. W. 13 Frost, dark, cloudy, wind, west. 14 Frost, dark, cloudy, wind, west. 15 Frost, m. Thaw, p. w. W. 16 Cldy, mist, misle, w. W. 17 Cldy, mist, misle, w. W. ☉ Cldy, mist, misle, w. W. 19 Misle m. cldy, wd, N. W. 20 Cloudy, misling, wd, E. 21 Fr. m. s. sn. W. Temp. n. 22 Moist, pleasant, wd, VV. 23 Ra. till 1 h. P. wd, S. W. 24 ● Fr. pleas. gr. wds, S. W. ☉ Pleasant, gr. wd. S. W. 26 Rain m. cldy. P. wd, W. 27 Mist m. pleasant P. wd, W. 28 Fr. fog, cldy, wd, west. 29 Cold, cloudy, wd, N. W. 30 Fr. m. pleas. P. wd, N. W. 31 Ra. m. frosty nig. w. N. W. February 1685. ☉ Fr. mist. Ra n. wd, N. W. 2 Cold rain, wind, N. E. 3 Pleasant, cold, wd, E. 4 Curious frost, wd, E. 5 Curious frost, wd, E. 6 Curious frost, wd, E. 7 Cold, fr. offer at sn. w. E. ☉ Fr. m. sn. & ra. P. wd, N. 9 ○ Hard frost, pleas. W. 10 Frost, fog, wd, west. 11 Frost, fog, wd, west. 12 Frost, pleas. cold, N. W. 13 Frost, pleasant, wd, W. 14 Frost, pleasant, wd, W. ☉ Frost, pleasant, wd, W. 16 Fog, frost, wind, N. E. 17 Cold, cloudy, wind, east. 18 Cold, cloudy, wind, east. 19 Hard fr. cold, pleas. E. 20 Misty, cldy, cold, wd, E. 21 ● Cloudy, cold, offer at snow, wd, N. E. ☉ ● Cloudy, cold, offer at snow, wd, N. E. 23 ● Cloudy, cold, offer at snow, wd, N. E. 24 ● Cloudy, cold, offer at snow, wd, N. E. 25 Cloudy, cold, yet plea∣sant, wd, N. W. 26 Cloudy, cold, yet plea∣sant, wd, N. W. 27 Cold, sn. & hail, wd, N. W. 28 Much sn cold frosty, N. E. March 1685. ☉ Frost, cold, pleasant, wind, N. E. 2 Frost, cold, pleasant, wind, N. E.
3 Cloudy, some drops. Cold abates. N. E. 4 Cloudy, some drops. Cold abates. N. E. 5 Cldy, s. misle. N. E. Halo ☽ 6 Ra.m cold wd, E. Ra. nig. 7 Rain, blust. w. W. Halo ☽ ☉ Ra. hail, gr. wd, W. Halo ☽ 9 Cldy, moist, brisk winds, west. 10 ○ Cldy, moist, brisk winds, west. 11 Cldy, moist, brisk winds, west. 12 S. ra. & hail, P brisk w. W 13 Frost m. cold sharp w. N. 14 Fr. m. s. drops at nig. N. ☉ Cldy m. pleasant, wd, N. 16 Pleasant, warm, wd, N. W. 17 Frost, pleas. brisk wd, W. 18 Frost, pleas. brisk wd, W. 19 Frost, pleas. brisk wd, W. 20 Frost, mist m. Fair, wd, east 21 Frost, mist m. Fair, wd, east ☉ Mist m. pleas. warm. S. W. 23 Cldy, s. drops, 3h. p. W. 24 ● Pleasant. Cold wd, N. W 25 Ra. m. pleas. cool, w. N. W 26 S. droping, brisk, w. N. W. 27 Cloudy, great wds, N. W. 28 Frost, hail, some rain, great wds, N. VV. ☉ Frost, hail, some rain, great wds, N. VV. 30 Snow, hail, cold wind, west. 31 Snow, hail, cold wind, west.
April 1685. 1 Cold fr. m. s. drops, N. W. 2 Cldy, ra. wd, W. Halo ☽
3 Rain m. hot, W. Halo ☽ 4 Ra. gr. wds, S. W. Halo ☽ ☉ Fr. m. pleas. w. W. Halo ☽ 6 Cl. s. dr. m. gr. w. W. Hal. ☽ 7 Dropping m. blustring winds, west. 8 Dropping m. blustring winds, west. 9 ○ Dropping m. blustring winds, west. 10 Ra. most part, blust. w. W. 11 Frost, pleasant, wind, east. ☉ Frost, pleasant, wind, east. 13 Frost, pleasant, wind, east. 14 Frost, pleasant, wind, east. 15 Cldy, m. pleas. brisk w. W. 16 Pleas. d. wd, W. Ra. n. 17 Ra. light. thund. 7h. p. VV. 18 Some rain, great wd, VV. ☉ Ra. gr. wds, W. d. & n. 20 Fr. m. ra. hail, gr. wd. W. 21 Frost m. pleasant, wd, west. 22 Frost m. pleasant, wd, west. 23 ● Ra. most part, gr. w. W. 24 Fair, dry, great wds VV. 25 Pleasant, great winds, west. ☉ Pleasant, great winds, west. 27 Frost m. very hot, wd, W. Halo ☽ 28 day. 28 Frost m. very hot, wd, W. Halo ☽ 28 day. 29 Cldy, cool, s. drops p. VV. 30 Frost m. cloudy, wd, W. May 1685. 1 Cloudy m. warm, wd, west. 2 Cloudy m. warm, wd, west. ☉ Fair, brisk winds, E. 4 S. drops, a thund clap, W. 5 Ra. warm, W. Th: Halo ☽
6 Rain m. great wds, west. 7 Frost morn. Pleasant, wd, west. 8 ○ Frost morn. Pleasant, wd, west. 9 Cloudy, rain, wind, E. ☉ Pleas. brisk wds, S. VV. 11 Cldy some drops, west. 12 Cldy m. Pleas. hot, west. 13 Dropping, morn Fair, warm, wd, west. 14 Dropping, morn Fair, warm, wd, west. 15 Ra. hot, light. th. at nig. E. 16 Rain m. warm, wd, E. ☉ Frost, mist, m. Pleasant, wind, N. E. 18 Frost, mist, m. Pleasant, wind, N. E. 19 Cloudy m. Hot, pleas. wind, N. E. 20 Cloudy m. Hot, pleas. wind, N. E. 21 Cldy, s. drps, P. gr. w. N. W 22 Fair, great wds, N. VV. 23 ● Pleasant, hot, brisk wds, N. VV. ☉ ● Pleasant, hot, brisk wds, N. VV. 25 Cloudy, some drops, Cold wind, N. 26 Cloudy, some drops, Cold wind, N. 27 Cloudy, some drops, Cold wind, N. 28 Cloudy, some drops, Cold wind, N. 29 Pleas. rain P. wind, west. 30 Cloudy, warm, wd, S. W. ☉ Pleas. warm, wd, west.
June 1685. 1 Cldy, ra. 6h. P. Iris, gr. W. 2 Mist m. pleas. s. drops p. W. 3 Pleasant, warm, wd, W. Halo ☽ 4 day. 4 Pleasant, warm, wd, W. Halo ☽ 4 day. 5 Hot, pleasant, wind west.
6 ○ Cldy, hot, wd, N. W. ☉ Pleasant, warm, wind, north east. 8 Pleasant, warm, wind, north east. 9 Cloudy, warm, wind, north west. 10 Cloudy, warm, wind, north west. 11 Cldy, gr. w. N. E. s. dr. 8h. p. 12 Hot, bright air, wd, N. E. 13 Cldy m. Pleas. p. wd. N. E. ☉ Hot, pleasant, wind south west. 15 Hot, pleasant, wind south west. 16 Cldy, some rain p. wd, W. 17 Pleasant, brisk wds, west. 18 Frosty m. Cldy, gr. wds. Rain, 3h. P. 19 d. 19 Frosty m. Cldy, gr. wds. Rain, 3h. P. 19 d. 20 Fair, pleasant, wd, west. ☉ ● Windy, rainy, day & night, wind, west. 22 ● Windy, rainy, day & night, wind, west. 23 Some rain, m. Cldy, VV. 24 Fair, moist, hot, wd, west. 25 Much rain, days and nights, gr. wds, W. 26 Much rain, days and nights, gr. wds, W. 27 Gr. rain, & thund. P. W. Hail, 10h. M. 28 d. ☉ Gr. rain, & thund. P. W. Hail, 10h. M. 28 d. 29 Some ra. cldy, variable w. 30 Cldy, dry, wind, west. July 1685. 1 Hot, pleasant, wind, west. 2 Hot, pleasant, wind, west. 3 Rain, m. hot, fair, wd, W. 4 Very hot, cldy, W. ☉ ○ Very hot, cldy, W. 6 Very hot, cldy, W. 7 Cloudy, m. Fair p. brisk winds, west. 8 Cloudy, m. Fair p. brisk winds, west.
9 Hot, pleas s. drops, w. VV. 10 Some rain, hot, great winds, west. 11 Some rain, hot, great winds, west. ☉ Cldy, hot, wind, west. 13 Cldy, s. drops P. wd, W. 14 Thund. much ra. P. w. W. 15 Cldy, some rain, brisk winds, north west. 16 Cldy, some rain, brisk winds, north west. 17 Much rain. Stormy, w. W. 18 Cldy, rain, wd, west. ☉ Some drops m. Cldy, VV. 20 pleas. brisk wds, west. 21 ● Ra. m. Fair p. gr. wd. W. 22 Fair, pleasant, great wind, west. 23 Fair, pleasant, great wind, west. 24 Fair m. Rainy p. wd, west. 25 Rainy, blustring wds, W. ☉ Cldy, dry, variable wind. 27 Fair, pleasant, wd, west. 28 Ra. d. & n. blustr. wds, W. 29 Rain m. Pleas. p. wd, west. 30 Fr. m. ra. p. &. n. w. N. W. 31 Rainy, great wds, west.
August 1685. 1 Moderate w. W. Temp. n. ☉ Ra. m. Plea. gr. w. W. wet n. 3 Showr. smart show. 6h. P. 4 ○ Ra. high wds, W. [wet n. 5 Warm, pleas. brisk w. W. 6 Pleas. m. dropping p. W. 7 Hot. Rain p. wd, west. 8 Rainy m. Fair p. wd, E.
☉ Frost m. Fair, wd, north east. 10 Frost m. Fair, wd, north east. 11 Ra. P. gr. wds, W. tot. die. 12 Much & smart ra. gr. w W 13 Fair, great wds, west. 14 Fair, great wds, west. 15 Cldy, hot, wind, west. ☉ Drops m. pleasant, VV. 17 Cloudy, and rain, wd, east. 18 Cloudy, and rain, wd, east. 19 ○ Rain m. Cloudy, wd, north east. 20 Rain m. Cloudy, wd, north east. 21 Fr. m. Ra. p. gr. wd, S. W. 22 Close, yet fair, wd, N, W. ☉ Some ra. wd, W. Halo ☽ 24 Cldy m. hot, pleas. p. VV. 25 Much ra. d. & n. wd, VV. 26 Some ra. blustr. w. N. W. 27 Fair, dry, blustring wd, north east. 28 Fair, dry, blustring wd, north east. 29 Frost m. Pleas. wd, N. E. 30 Frost, mist, m. pleasant, wind, N. E. 31 Frost, mist, m. pleasant, wind, N. E. September 1685. 1 Cldy, cold, s. ra. wd, N. W. 2 ○ Pleas. cold, wd, N. W. 3 Pleas. cold, wd, N. W. 4 Pleas. cold, wd, N. W. 5 Cold, some rain, wd, N. ☉ Pleasant, cold, wind, E. 7 Cold, some drisle, w. N. E. 8 Rainy, cold, wd, north. 9 Cldy, drisle sometimes. N.
10 Cloudy, dry, wind, N. E. 11 Cold, sometimes rain, wind, N. W. 12 Cold, sometimes rain, wind, N. W. ☉ Frost, mist, m. pleas. p. E. 14 Fog m. cldy, wind, N. E. 15 Cldy, warm, wd, S. VV. 16 Rainy d. & n. wd, S. VV. 17 Cldy, ra. n. gr. wd, S. VV. 18 ● Frost, m. pleasant, wind, south west. 19 ● Frost, m. pleasant, wind, south west. ☉ Rainy day, wind, S. W. 21 Frost m. hot day, wd, W. 22 Cloudy, misty, wd, west. 23 Mist, m pleasant, wd, E 24 Ra. m. pleas. w. S. Halo 25 Cloudy, cold, wind, east. 26 Cloudy, cold, wind, east. ☉ Mist m. rainy, wd, S. E. 28 Rain m. great wds, N. E. 29 Ra. d. & n. Th. noon, E. 30 Cldy, s. drops at noon. S. W October 1685. 1 Fr. fog, m. Pleas. gr. w. S. W. 2 ○ Warm, pleas brisk S. W 3 Frost, fog, m. Fair, wd, south west. ☉ Frost, fog, m. Fair, wd, south west. 5 Rainy by fits, wd, west. 6 Fr. m. Fair. Rainy n. W. 7 Much rain, wind, N. E. 8 Frosty, pleasant, wind, north east. 9 Frosty, pleasant, wind, north east.
10 Great fog m. hot, fair. little wd ☉ Great fog m. cldy. little wd 12 Fr. fog m. hot, pleas. little wd 13 ● Foggy, dark air, E. 14 ● Foggy, dark air, E. 15 ● Foggy, dark air, E. 16 ● Foggy, dark air, E. 17 ● Foggy, dark air, E. ☉ ● Foggy, dark air, E. 19 ● Foggy, dark air, E. 20 ● Foggy, dark air, E. 21 ● Foggy, dark air, E. 22 Frost m. pleas. wd, west. 23 Fr. ra hail, thun lightn. VV 24 Fr. cold, rainy nig wd, VV. ☉ Fog m Fair. Rainy n. VV. 26 Fair, pleas. w. VV. Halo ☽ 27 Cldy, ra. p. & n. wd, W. 28 Fr. m. pleas. w. W. Halo ☽ 29 Fr. m. fair. Ra. n. w. N.W. 30 Moderate. Ra. n. w. N. VV. 31 Fair, s. drops, 5h. P. w. VV. November 1685. ☉ ○ Much ra. gr. wd, S. W. 2 Fr. m. some showers. W. 3 Mist, frost m pleasant, W. 4 Cldy, ra. 8h. P. wd, S. W. 5 Mist, ra. m. fair P. wd, W. 6 Ra. bef. ☉r. cold, fair, N. W. 7 Fr. fog. cold, ra. n gr. N. W. ☉ Ra. Tempest n gr. wd, S. 9 Cldy, cold, brisk wd, VV. 10 Pleas. m. rainy P. wd, W. 11 Rain m. fair. Rainy n. E,
12 Mistm. fair, cold, wd, N. VV. 13 Mistm. fair, cold, wd, N. VV. 14 Cloudy, cold, wd, N. VV. ☉ Cldy, misle, P. west. 16 ● Fr. m. pleas. hig w. N. 17 Fr. m Ra. at noon. N. E. 18 Much rain, wind, west, 19 Fr. m. Tempest. n. w. S. E. 20 Cloudy, windy, west. 21 Fr. m. pleas. S. W. Halo ☽ ☉ Cldy, rain, great wd, S. W. 23 Frost, mist m. Pleasant, wind, west. 24 Frost, mist m. Pleasant, wind, west. 25 Fr. pleas. wd, W. High Tides.Halo ☽ 26 d. 26 Fr. pleas. wd, W. High Tides.Halo ☽ 26 d. 27 Frosty, foggy, W. Halo ☽ 28 Fr. fair. Cldy at even. VV. ☉ Mist, fog, cold, wind, ○ west. 30 Mist, fog, cold, wind, ○ west.
December 1685. 1 Cldy, raw, cold, wd VV. 2 Frost m. cold cldy, wd, west. 3 Frost m. cold cldy, wd, west. 4 Fr. m. some ra. hig. w.W. 5 Tempestu. gr. hail, n S. W ☉ Gr. hail, 3 m fr gr. w. S. W. 7 Frost m. Rain p. wd, W. 8 Cold fr. cldy. Ra. n. w. W. 9 Fr. thick fog, m. Ra. n S. W. 10 Fr. cldy. Rainy nig. S. VV. 11 Rainy day & nig. wd, E.
12 Fr. m. cldy. Temp. n. W. ☉ Tempest d. & n. wd, W, 14 Cldy, rainy, wind, west. 15 ● Pleasant frost, wind, west. 16 ● Pleasant frost, wind, west. 17 ● Pleasant frost, wind, west. 18 ● Pleasant frost, wind, west. 19 Mist m. cldy, misle, w. W. ☉ Cloudy, misle, wd, west. 21 Ra. m. cldy, ra. n. W. Hal. ☽ 22 Much rain, wd, S. VV. Halo ☽. 23 Much rain, wd, S. VV. Halo ☽. 24 Cloudy, rain, wind, south west. 25 Cloudy, rain, wind, south west. 26 Dark, rainy, wd, S. VV. ☉ Frost, m. foggy day, VV. 28 Fr. m. ra. & temp. n. S. W. 29 Rain m. pleasant. N. VV. 30 ○ Hail, & rain, wd, west. 31 Fr. wd, ra. hail, n. wd, W. ✚ January 1686. 1 Rainy m. cldy, wd, west. 2 Fr. pleas. Rainy n. w. W. ☉ Rain m. wd, W. Halo ♀ 4 Fr. m. dris 10h. m. wet n. W 5 Cldy, Tempest. n. wd, W. 6 Cldy, ra. tempest. n. VV. 7 Fr. m. cldy, moist, w. VV. 8 Fr. m. cldy, ra. p. E. Light. 9 Frost m. pleas. wd. VV. at nig. ☉ Frost m. pleas. wd. VV. at nig. 11 Frost m. fair, cold, wd, east. 12 Frost m. fair, cold, wd, east. 13 ● Frost, m. pleasant, wd, south west. 14 ● Frost, m. pleasant, wd, south west.
15 Cldy, calm, dry, wd, S. 16 Cldy, mis. p. Sn. n. gr. w.SW ☉ Mist m. Fair. Ra. n. gr. w. W 18 Cold cldy, Ra. n. gr. w. W. 19 Much ra hail, s. sn. w. W. 20 Cold & moist, wd, N. VV. 21 Mist, hard frost, wd, west. 22 Frosty, pleasant, wind, west, great Circle a∣bout ☽ 23d. at nig. 23 Frosty, pleasant, wind, west, great Circle a∣bout ☽ 23d. at nig. ☉ Frosty, pleasant, wind, west, great Circle a∣bout ☽ 23d. at nig. 25 Frost, fog, m. Pleasant, wind, north. 26 Frost, fog, m. Pleasant, wind, north. 27 Rainy, cldy, wind, S. VV. 28 Fr. m. Thaw noon. Tem. n. 29 ○ Temp. of wd, ra. contin. ♀ like a Comet. 30 Fr. pleas. wd, VV. Halo ♀ Cldy, rain, great wds, W.
February 1686. 1 Cloudy, great wind, W. ♀ big and bright. 2 Cloudy, great wind, W. ♀ big and bright. 3 Pleasant frost, wd, N. W. 4 Pleasant frost, wd, N. W. 5 Pleasant frost, wd, N. W. 6 Cldy, moist, frosty n W. ☉ Pleas. fr. red even wd, W. 8 Mist m. cldy, mild, wd, W. 9 Mist m. cloudy, wd, west. 10 Cldy, m. pleas N E. Hal. ♀ 11 ● Pleasant frost, wd west. 12 ● Pleasant frost, wd west. 13 Mist m. cldy, cold, wd W. ☉ Cold, fog all day, w. W.
15 Like the former. 16 Frost, cold, pleas wd, W. 17 Fr. cold, fair, W. Halo ☽ 18 Cldy, sharp wd, N. VV. 19 Misty m. Misle p. wd, west. 20 Frost m. Mist p. wd, N. W. ☉ Fr. fair, W. ♀ like a Comet. 22 Cloudy, cold, wd, west. 23 Cloudy, cold, wd, west. 24 Cloudy, cold, wd, west. 25 Cloudy, cold, wd, west. 26 Frost, cold, cloudy, wd, north east. 27 Frost, cold, cloudy, wd, north east. ☉ ○ Fr. fair, very cold, N. E March 1686. 1 Cold, frosty, wind, E. Halo ♀ each night. 2 Cold, frosty, wind, E. Halo ♀ each night. 3 Cold, frosty, wind, E. Halo ♀ each night. 4 Cldy some ra. gr. w.S.W 5 Cldy some ra. gr. w.S.W 6 Cldy, moist, brisk w. S. W. Rainy nig. ☉ Cloudy, some ra. brisk wd, south west. 8 Cloudy, some ra. brisk wd, south west. 9 Tempestuous days and nights, wd, S. VV. 10 Tempestuous days and nights, wd, S. VV. 11 Fr. m. W. Temp. n. Halo ♀ 12 ● Cold, moist, Ha∣lo ♀. 13 ● Cold, moist, Ha∣lo ♀. ☉ Ra bef. ☉ r. gr. w.W. Ra n. 15 Cloudy, dark, misle, great wd, west. 16 Cloudy, dark, misle, great wd, west. 17 Cldy, dry, W. Ha. ☽ ♀ too
18 Frosty, pleas. high wd, W. 19 Ra. m. cldy, warm, S. W. 20 Fair m. s. drops p. S. W. ☉ Violt. wds, S. Stormy nig. 22 Hail, P. violent wds, VV. 23 Fair, great winds, west. 24 Cold rain, great wd, S. W. 25 Pleas. m. ra. p. gr. wds, W. 26 Cold, much hail p. gr. N. W. 27 Hail, rain, blustring wd, west. ☉ Hail, rain, blustring wd, west. 29 ○ Cold, frosty, fair, wd, west. 30 ○ Cold, frosty, fair, wd, west. 31 Pleasant, brisk wds, N. W.
April 1686. 1 Frosty, pleasant, cold, wind, east. 2 Frosty, pleasant, cold, wind, east. 3 Frosty, pleasant, cold, wind, east. ☉ Frosty, pleasant, cold, wind, east. 5 Fr. very cold, ga. wd, N. E. 6 S. dr. m. very cold, gr. N. E. 7 Ra. sn. temp. d. & n. N. E. 8 Cold, s. ra. hail, gr. w. N. E. 9 Cold, rain, and hail, wind, west. 10 Cold, rain, and hail, wind, west. ☉ Pleas. ra. at n. wd. S. W. 12 ● Mist, frost m. Pleas. wind, west. 13 ● Mist, frost m. Pleas. wind, west. 14 Cloudy, blustring wds, S. W. Rainy nig. 15 Cloudy, blustring wds, S. W. Rainy nig. 16 Much rain and hail P. great wd, S. W. 17 Much rain and hail P. great wd, S. W.
☉ Some ra. gr. blustr. w. S. W. 19 Frost m. pleas. wd, S. VV. 20 Close, warm, wind, west. 21 Pleasant, warm, wd, west. 22 Pleas. m. cldy p. gr. wd, W. 23 Cloudy, some rain, p. wind, west. 24 Cloudy, some rain, p. wind, west. ☉ Cldy, some drops, wd VV. 26 Cloudy m. drisle p. Ra. nig. wd, south west. 27 Cloudy m. drisle p. Ra. nig. wd, south west. 28 ○ Fair, cool, gr. wd, S. W. 29 Much rain, gr. wd, S. VV. 30 Cldy, ra. by fits, gr. w. S. W. May 1686. 1 Rainy day & nig. wd, E. ☉ Fr. m. ra. p. gr. wd, S. E. 3 Fair, pleasant, wd, S. W. 4 Ra. m. fair. Rainy n. VV. 5 Cldy, wet m. fair p. S. W. 6 Fair, warm, wd, S. VV. 7 Much ra. p. & nig. wd, E. 8 Cl. drisle tempest. n.S. W. ☉ Tempestuous day & nig. 10 Fair, warm wind, west. 11 Cldy, some ra. gr. w. S. W. 12 ● Much ra. blustr. w. S. W. 13 Fair, warm, wd, VV. Ha∣lo ♃ 11h. P. 14 Fair, warm, wd, VV. Ha∣lo ♃ 11h. P. 15 Hot, fair, ra. at nig. wd. W. ☉ Cldy, s. ra. strong wd, west. 17 Ra. m. warm, brisk w. W. 18 Fair, hot, wd, W. Halo ☽ the 18 day. 19 Fair, hot, wd, W. Halo ☽ the 18 day. 20 Fair, hot, wd, W. Halo ☽ the 18 day.
21 Like the former. 22 Cldy, hot, brisk wds, north west. ☉ Cldy, hot, brisk wds, north west. 24 Some drops, cold, N. W. 25 Showr. p. cold, blit. w.N. W 26 Ra. hail m. cl. wet p. N. W. 27 ○ Much ra. some hail, W. 28 Some rain & hail, N. W. 29 Cloudy, rain, hail, 1 h.P. wind, north west. ☉ Cloudy, rain, hail, 1 h.P. wind, north west. 31 Much rain P. wd, west.
June 1686. 1 Much rain, great wind, west. 2 Much rain, great wind, west. 3 Much rain, great wind, west. 4 Much rain, great wind, west. 5 Fair, warm, wd, west. ☉ Hot air, ra. p. wd, S. VV. 7 Gr. heat, pleasant, S. E. ● 8 Gr. heat, pleasant, S. E. ● 9 Gr. heat, pleasant, S. E. ● 10 Gr. heat, pleasant, S. E. ● 11 Gr. heat, pleasant, S. E. ● 12 Hot, pleasant, wd, east. ☉ Gr. heat continues, E. 14 Much ra. m. hot, thund. W. 15 Ra. th: very hot, wd, S. W. 16 Very hot, still, wd, S. W. 17 Much thunder and rain, hot, wd, south west. 18 Much thunder and rain, hot, wd, south west. 19 Cldy, hot, wd, south west. ☉ Hot, much ra. wd, S. VV.
21 Cloudy, hot, some drops wind, west. 22 Cloudy, hot, some drops wind, west. 23 Ra. blustring wds, S. W. 24 Fair, great wds, S. VV. 25 ○ Pleasant, warm, wd, W. 26 Rain, great wds, west. ☉ Cloudy, some ra. great winds, west. 28 Cloudy, some ra. great winds, west. 29 Much rain, wind, west. 30 Soultry hot, cldy, wd, VV. July 1686. 1 Very hot, brisk wind, west. 2 Very hot, brisk wind, west. 3 Hot and cloudy, wd, E. ☉ Fair, dry, bliting wd, E. 5 Fair, dry, bliting wd, E. 6 Fair, dry, bliting wd, E. 7 Very hot, gentle wd, E. 8 Much rain. Thund. light. wind, east. 9 Much rain. Thund. light. wind, east. 10 ● Soaking rain, wd, N. W ☉ Cldy, dry, great wd, N. E. 12 Rainy day, wd, N. E. 13 Cold, yet pleas. wd, N. E. 14 Cloudy, brisk wd, VV. Rain in the night. 15 Cloudy, brisk wd, VV. Rain in the night. 16 Cldy, some rain, wd, west. 17 Frost, m. Pleasant, wd, W. ☉ Cloudy, dry, wd, west. 19 Cold, ra. by fits. Th: hail, W 20 Cldy, cold, W. Star-light n. 21 Frost m. Pleasant, VV. 22 Frost m. Pleasant, VV. 23 Frost m. Pleasant, VV.
24 Much ra. some thund. W. ☉ ○ Cldy, warm, gr. N. W. 26 Fair, warm, wind, north west. 27 Fair, warm, wind, north west. 28 Much ra. & thund. S. W. 29 Fair, warm, wind, west. 30 Cloudy, hot, rain, P. wind, west. 31 Cloudy, hot, rain, P. wind, west.
August 1686. ☉ Cldy, s. ra. brisk wd, west. 2 Some smart showers, wind, west. 3 Some smart showers, wind, west. 4 Ra. by fits, gr. wds, west. 5 Rain, tempestuous, west. 6 Fair, brisk winds, west. 7 Cldy m. Rain p. wd, west. ☉ ● Pleasant, warm, wind, west. 9 ● Pleasant, warm, wind, west. 10 Much rain, great wind, west. 11 Much rain, great wind, west. 12 Fair, threatn. Ra. gr. w. W. 13 Rain, great wind, west. 14 Some ra. wd, W. Ra. nig. ☉ Fair, hot, wd. W. Tem∣pestuous night. 16 Fair, hot, wd. W. Tem∣pestuous night. 17 Cloudy, great wd, west. 18 Frost, m. Fair, Hot, wd, west. 19 Frost, m. Fair, Hot, wd, west. 20 Thund & storms m. gr. W 21 Frost, fog, m. fair, hot, wind, west. ☉ Frost, fog, m. fair, hot, wind, west. 23 ○ Very hot. Pleasant. W.
24 Like the former. 25 Rain m. Cloudy, wind, west. 26 Rain m. Cloudy, wind, west. 27 Fr. m. cldy p. Ra. nig. S. W. 28 Rainy day, wind, west. ☉ Rain & cloudy, wd, VV. 30 Fr. fair, brisk wds, west. 31 Cldy, rain, great wd, VV. September 1686. 1 Cldy, blustring, wd, west. 2 Cldy, moist, brisk wd, E. 3 Much rain, wind, west. 4 Fair, warm, wind, west. ☉ Hot, curious air, wind, west. 6 Hot, curious air, wind, west. 7 ● Very hot, pleas. much Lightn. n. wd, west. 8 ● Very hot, pleas. much Lightn. n. wd, west. 9 Fr. m. Hot d. s. drops noon. 10 Frost m. Hot, great wd. west. 11 Frost m. Hot, great wd. west. ☉ Frost m. Fair, cool, wd, west. 13 Frost m. Fair, cool, wd, west. 14 Fr. mist, m. Cldy p. W. 15 Fr. mist, m. Cldy p. W. 16 Fr. mist, m. Cldy p. W. 17 Fr. mist, m. Cldy p. W. 18 Fr. mist, m. Cldy p. W. ☉ Cold, cldy, s. rain, N. W. 20 ○ Cold, cldy, s. rain, N. W. 21 ○ Cold, cldy, s. rain, N. W. 22 Cldy, cold, wind, N. W. 23 Cldy. m. Rain p. wd, west. 24 Rain m. fair, cool, wd, W. 25 Much rain, wind, west.
☉ Frost, fair, clouds, in Storyes, wd, west. 27 Frost, fair, clouds, in Storyes, wd, west. 28 Fog m. fair, cold wind, north east. 29 Fog m. fair, cold wind, north east. 30 Fog m. cold, heavy air, N. E.
October 1686. 1 Fog m. Cloudy, cold, wind, N. E. 2 Fog m. Cloudy, cold, wind, N. E. ☉ Ra. 4h. P. Tempest. n. W. 4 Cloudy, rainy, wd, west. 5 Fair m. Rain p. wind, W. 6 Rain m. fair p. wd, W. 7 ● Frost m. rain p. wd, W. 8 Moist air, ra. n. gr. w. W. 9 Much ra. gr. w. W. Temp. n ☉ Pleasant frost, wind, W. 11 Pleasant frost, wind, W. 12 Pleasant frost, wind, W. 13 Gr. fog. frost m. fair, W. 14 Mist m. cloudy, rain in the night. 15 Mist m. cloudy, rain in the night. 16 Rain m. pleas. p. wind. E. ☉ Misty, cold, cldy, ra. n. E. 18 Cloudy, misty, wind, east. 19 Cloudy, misty, wind, east. 20 Fair, cold, brisk wd, E. 21 ○ Fair, cold m ra. p. N. E. 22 Cold, pleasant, wd, N. E. 23 Rainy, dark, wd, N. E. ☉ Cldy, misling, ra. n. N. W. 25 Mist, ra. m. cldy, w. N. W.
26 Fog, mist m. pleas. N. VV 27 Mist m. ra. p. cold w. N. E. 28 Fr. m. pleas. wd. N. VV. 29 Fr. m. pleas. wd. N. VV. 30 Fr. m. pleas. wd. N. VV. ☉ Cldy, heavy air, wd, west. November 1686. 1 Cold, cldy, dry, wd, E. 2 Frost, fair, cold, wind, east. 3 Frost, fair, cold, wind, east. 4 Mist, cloudy, misle, wd, south west. 5 Mist, cloudy, misle, wd, south west. 6 Rain P. great wd, S. VV. ☉ ● Rain, great wd, S. VV. 8 Ra. m. cldy, warm, S. 9 Ra. m. cldy, warm, S. 10 Ra. m. cldy, warm, S. 11 Cloudy, Tempestuous wind, south west. 12 Cloudy, Tempestuous wind, south west. 13 Fr. m. ra. p. Temp. w. S. W. ☉ Tempest. wd, & ra. west. 15 Cloudy, cold, close, wd, south west. 16 Cloudy, cold, close, wd, south west. 17 Cold, fair, wind, E. 18 Rainy, cold, wind, N. E. 19 Fair, sharp, wind, E. 20 Cold, much rain, wd, E ☉ ○ Frosty, pleasant, E. 22 Fr. m. excessive rain, E. 23 Frosty, fair, wd, west 24 Frosty, fair, wd, west 25 Ra. m. cold w. W. Temp. n. 26 Cloudy, great wd, west. 27 Rainy, great wd, west. ☉ Cldy, blustr. ra. at n. VV.
29 Cldy, rain, gr. wd, west. 30 Misling air, gr. w. W. ra. n.
December 1686. 1 Cold, frosty, pleas. VV. 2 Cold, frosty, pleas. VV. 3 Cold, frosty, pleas. VV. 4 Misty, cldy, cold, wd, west. ☉ ● Cold, inclin'd to freez, W 6 Frost, pleasant, wd, west, Halo ☽ 8 day. 7 Frost, pleasant, wd, west, Halo ☽ 8 day. 8 Frost, pleasant, wd, west, Halo ☽ 8 day. 9 Cold, misty, cloudy, W. Halo ☽ 10 day. 10 Cold, misty, cloudy, W. Halo ☽ 10 day. 11 Cold, misty, cloudy, W. Halo ☽ 10 day. ☉ Cldy, cold, gr. wds, S. W. 13 Cloudy, tempestuous d. & n. wd, south west. 14 Cloudy, tempestuous d. & n. wd, south west. 15 Much rain, and great wd, S. W. Halo ☽. 16 Much rain, and great wd, S. W. Halo ☽. 17 Much rain gr. wds, S. VV. 18 Fr. m. pleas. w. VV. Ha. ☽ ☉ ○ Rainy d. & n. gr. w. VV. 20 Fair, cold, wind, west. 21 Much rain, cold wd, N. 22 Cold, pleasant, wd, N. W. 23 Frost, mist, cold, N. VV. 24 Cldy, cold, dry, wd, E. 25 Cold, s. drops noon Ra. n. E ☉ Cold, cldy, misle, gr. w. E 27 Cold, cldy, misle, gr. w. E 28 Cold, cldy, misle, gr. w. E
29 Cold, cloudy, inclin'd to snow, wd, E. 30 Cold, cloudy, inclin'd to snow, wd, E. 31 Fr. cold, pleas. wd, N. ✚ January 1687. 1 Fr. m. cldy, cold, wd, N. ☉ Fr. mist, offer at sn. w. VV. 3 ● Misty, cold, cldy, VV. 4 Cold aba. fair, S.W. Tem. n 5 Fr. m. cldy, brisk w. west. 6 Fr. m. s. ra p. SW. Temp. n. 7 Cldy, some ra. gr. wd, W. 8 Cldy, freezing, wd, N. E. ☉ Fr. cold, some snow, E. 10 Fr. cold, some snow, E. 11 Fr. cold, some snow, E. 12 Hard fr. some sn. wd, S. E. 13 Hard fr. fair, E. Halo ☽ 14 Mist, sleet, cold, E. Halo ☽ 15 Mist, cold, cloudy, wd. north east. ☉ Mist, cold, cloudy, wd. north east. 17 ❍ Hard fr. fair, N. VV. 18 ❍ Hard fr. fair, N. VV. 19 ❍ Hard fr. fair, N. VV. 20 Hard fr. relent p. wd, west. 21 Cldy, cold, fr. n. W. Ha. ☽ 22 Hard fr. pleas. wd, west. ☉ Cldy, very, cold, misty, wind, west. 24 Cldy, very, cold, misty, wind, west. 25 Cold, s. drops, brisk, N. W. 26 Alternat ☉ & ra. gr. w. N. 27 Cold ra. turbul. wds, N. W. 28 Pleas. hard fr. wd, west. 29 Much rain, wd, N. VV. ☉ Cold, fair, frost-like, wind, north west. 31 Cold, fair, frost-like, wind, north west. February 1687. 1 ● Mist m. fair cold, wind, north west. 2 ● Mist m. fair cold, wind, north west. 3 Mist m. pleas. rain at nig. 4 Fr. mist m. fair, wd, VV. Halo ☽. 4. Tides this d. 5 Alternate ☉ & ra. wd, W. ☉ Fr. m. ra. p. gr. wd, W. 3 ☉'s seen 11h. m. 7 Rainy days & nights gr. winds south west. 8 Rainy days & nights gr. winds south west. 9 Fair, pleasant, wd, west. 10 Cldy m. pleas. p. cold. N. W 11 Fr. fair, cold w. W. Halo ☽ 12 Hard fr. E. Halo, Circle ☽ ☉ Cloudy, cold, wd, E. 14 Cloudy, cold, wd, E. 15 Cold, yet pleasant, wd, E. 16 Mist m. very cold, wd, east. 17 ○ Mist m. very cold, wd, east. 18 ○ Cold, cl. E. Light. at 10h. n. 19 Cold, cloudy, dry, wd, north east. ☉ Cold, cloudy, dry, wd, north east. 21 Cold, but fair, wd, west. Halo's about the Stars. 22 Cold, but fair, wd, west. Halo's about the Stars. 23 Mist m. cold, cl. drisle. N. 24 Frost m. cloudy, dark, wind, north west. 25 Frost m. cloudy, dark, wind, north west. 26 Hard fr. pleas. wd, N. W. ☉ Hard fr. pleas. wd, N. W. 28 Hard fr. pleas. wd, N. W.
March 1687. 1 Frost, fair, cool, wind, west. 2 Frost, fair, cool, wind, west. 3 ● Cldy m. ra. p. gr. w.S. W. 4 Tempests of wd, & ra. wind, south west. 5 Tempests of wd, & ra. wind, south west. ☉ Rainy by fits, wd, west. 7 Much rain, cold, wd, E. 8 Cldy, some rain. Tem∣pest. wind, west. 9 Cldy, some rain. Tem∣pest. wind, west. 10 Much rain, and violent winds, west. 11 Much rain, and violent winds, west. 12 Much rain, and violent winds, west. ☉ Much rain, and violent winds, west. 14 Fair, wd, W, Halo, circ. ☽ 15 Frost m. rain p. w. S. W. 16 Some ra. fair even gr. W. 17 Fr. fair, w. W. Halo circ. ☽ 18 ○ Cold, fr. fog, wd, west. 19 Cold, ra. by fits, gr. w. W. ☉ Cold, fair m. cldy p gr. w. 21 Fair, hail p. cold, w. N. W. N. W. Rainy n. 22 Frost, hail, very cold, wind, north west. 23 Frost, hail, very cold, wind, north west. 24 Cold, frost, hail, sn. ra. N. E. 25 Cold air, hail storms, N. 26 Fr. sn. hail, ra. wd, N. W. ☉ Cldy, cold, s. sn. w. N. W. 28 Fr. sn. ☉ r. sharp w. N. E. 29 Very cold, fr. sn. hail, N. W 30 Much sn. m. ra. p. wd, W. 31 Fair m g. hail, ra. h. w. N. W April 1687. 1 Cldy, dry, Halo ♄ Arctur. 2 ● Cldy, some ra. wd, west. ☉ Frost, cldy, great wd, W. 4 Cldy m. fair, ev. gr. w. W. 5 Ra. m. fair, warm, w. W. 6 Fr. m. ra. p. brisk w. S. W. 7 Showr. hail, thund p. W. 8 Cldy, ra. p. w. W. Storm. n. 9 Cldy, wet, gr. w. W. Ha. ☽ ☉ Fair, warm, wd, west. Halo ☽ 11 d. 11 Fair, warm, wd, west. Halo ☽ 11 d. 12 Cold, fr. fair, E. gr. circ. ☽ 13 Cold frost, m. fair, wd, north east. 14 Cold frost, m. fair, wd, north east. 15 Fr. m. s. drops p. cold, W. 16 Cldy, cold, gr. wd, N. I saw ☿ near 8h. P. ☉ ○ Cold, fair, blustring, N. 18 Cold hail, rain, wd, N. Stormy night. 19 Cold hail, rain, wd, N. Stormy night. 20 Fr. m. hail, ra. W. Halo ☽ 20 day after mid-nig. 21 Fr. m. hail, ra. W. Halo ☽ 20 day after mid-nig. 22 Rainy day and night. 23 Fair m. ra. p. wd, N. W. ☉ Cold, fair, frosty, wind, west. 25 Cold, fair, frosty, wind, west. 26 Frost m. fair, very cold, wind, north. 27 Frost m. fair, very cold, wind, north. 28 Much rain, wind, N. 29 Fair, warm, wind north west. 30 Fair, warm, wind north west. May 1687. ☉ ● Fair, bright skie, N. W. 2 Mist m. pleasant, wind, east. 3 Mist m. pleasant, wind, east.
4 Like the former. 5 Fair, hot, wind, north west. 6 Fair, hot, wind, north west. 7 Fair m. cldy p. W. Halo ☽ ☉ Tempestu. d. & n. S. VV. 9 Fair, gr. wd contin. S. VV. 10 Hot, pleas. brisk wd, W. 11 Hot, thund. at noon, S. W. 12 Ra. 11 m. turbul. w. S. W. 13 Fair, great wind, S. VV. 14 Ra. cool, brisk wd, S. VV. ☉ Fair, cool, wd, S. VV. Halo ☽. 16 Fair, cool, wd, S. VV. Halo ☽. 17 ❍ Curious warm, air, wd, east. 18 ❍ Curious warm, air, wd, east. 19 ❍ Curious warm, air, wd, east. 20 ❍ Curious warm, air, wd, east. 21 ❍ Curious warm, air, wd, east. ☉ ❍ Curious warm, air, wd, east. 23 Cldy, some rain, wd, S. 24 Cldy, warm, brisk wd, S. 25 Much ra. p. & n. gr. S. W. 26 Cldy, s. ra. gr. wd, S. VV. 27 Much ra. brisk wd, S. VV. 28 Frost m. fair, wd, S. VV. ☉ ● Cloudy, some rain, gr. wds, south west. 30 ● Cloudy, some rain, gr. wds, south west. 31 Fair, pleas. brisk wd, S. VV
June 1687. 1 Cldy, warm, s. ra. W. 2 Cldy, warm, s. ra. W. 3 Cldy, warm, s. ra. W.
4 Hot, bright air, wd, west. ☉ Fair m. cldy p. wd, VV. 6 Much wd & ra. gr. w. W. 7 Much wd & ra. gr. w. W. 8 Much wd & ra. gr. w. W. 9 Ra. m. fair p. brisk wd, W. 10 Fair m. ra. p. brisk wd, W. 11 Fair, ra. at n. brisk w. VV. ☉ Some rain, wind, west. 13 Fair m. s. drops p. wd, west. 14 Fair m. rain p. wd, west. 15 ❍ Rainy, tempestu. VV. 16 Cldy, some ra. gr. w. VV. 17 Cldy, some ra. gr. w. VV. 18 Cldy, some ra. gr. w. VV. ☉ Cloudy, brisk wind, south west. 20 Cloudy, brisk wind, south west. 21 Hot, glorious air, brisk wd, south west. 22 Hot, glorious air, brisk wd, south west. 23 Hot, thund. & rain, N. VV. 24 Rainy m. great wd, S. VV. 25 Fair, hot, great wd, S. VV. ☉ Very hot, brisk wind, south west. 27 Very hot, brisk wind, south west. 28 Mist m. very hot, wd, W. 29 ● Very hot, fair, brisk wind, E. 30 ● Very hot, fair, brisk wind, E. July 1687. 1 Ra. Gr. thund. light. N. W. 2 Cldy, warm, brisk wd, E. ☉ Curious air, wind, E. 4 Cldy & rain, wd, S. E. 5 Very hot, wind, west Halo ☽ 6 Very hot, wind, west Halo ☽ 7 Very hot, wind, west Halo ☽
8 Cloudy & rain, wd, west. 9 Hot, pleasant, wd, N. VV. ☉ Hot, cldy, dry, gr. wds, E. Halo ☽ 13 day. 11 Hot, cldy, dry, gr. wds, E. Halo ☽ 13 day. 12 Hot, cldy, dry, gr. wds, E. Halo ☽ 13 day. 13 Hot, cldy, dry, gr. wds, E. Halo ☽ 13 day. 14 ○ Ra. m. hot, fair, w. E. 15 Hot, but pleasant, wd, E. 16 Ra. th: lightn. n. wd, S. W. ☉ Warm, s. showers, S. W. 18 Hot, pleasant, wd, south west. 19 Hot, pleasant, wd, south west. 20 Cldy, s. drops p. wd, N. E. 21 Pleasant, very hot, wd, north west. 22 Pleasant, very hot, wd, north west. 23 Very hot, s. drops, gr. S. W. ☉ Rain m. hot, wind, west. 25 Mist, m. hot, pleasant p. wind, east. 26 Mist, m. hot, pleasant p. wind, east. 27 Hot, some rain, wd, E. 28 Much ra. gr. th: light. S.E. 29 ● Rainy, cldy, wind, N. 30 Fair, pleasant, brisk wd, north. ☉ Fair, pleasant, brisk wd, north.
August 1687. 1 Hot, rain P. wd, north west. 2 Hot, rain P. wd, north west. 3 Fair, hot, wind, west. 4 Much rain, wind, S. W. 5 Thick, mist m. Hot, pleasant, wd, S. VV. Halo ☽ 5th. day. 6 Thick, mist m. Hot, pleasant, wd, S. VV. Halo ☽ 5th. day. ☉ Thick, mist m. Hot, pleasant, wd, S. VV. Halo ☽ 5th. day.
8 Cloudy skie, wind, E. 9 Rain m, cloudy, brisk wind, east. 10 Rain m, cloudy, brisk wind, east. 11 Close rainy, W. Halo ☽ 12 Frost m. cldy, wd, N. VV. 13 ○ Much rain, gr. wd, west. ☉ Much rain, gr. wd, west. 15 Much rain, gr. wd, west. 16 Cldy threatning, wd, west. 17 Cldy some rain, wd, west. 18 Rainy d. & n. gr. wd, W. 19 Cldy & ra. gr. wd, west. 20 Fair, great wind, west. ☉ Mist m. fair, wind, west. 22 Cloudy, some rain, great wind, west. 23 Cloudy, some rain, great wind, west. 24 Fr. m. s. ra. even. gr. w. N.W 25 Frost m. fair, wind, west. 26 Rain m. moderate wd, W. 27 ● Cldy, ra. at nig. w. W ☉ Fr. m. fair, warm, N. W. 29 Fr. m. fair, warm, N. W. 30 Fr. m. fair, warm, N. W. 31 Fr. fair. Rainy nig. N. W. September 1687. 1 Cldy, s. ra. gr. wd, S. VV. 2 Much ra. p. gr. wd, S. W. 3 Cldy, cool, dry, wd, west. ☉ Fr. m. ra. p. & n. gr. w. W. 5 Much rain, cold wd, N. W. 6 Fr. m. cldy, wd, N. W. 7 Fr. m. cldy, wd, N. W. 8 Fr. m. cldy, wd, N. W. 9 Fr. m. cldy, wd, N. W. 10 Fr. m. cldy, wd, N. W.
☉ ○ Rainy day, wd, S. W. 12 Rainy, cloudy, wind, south west. 13 Rainy, cloudy, wind, south west. 14 Fair, a dash ra. ab. noon, W 15 Fair m. ra. p. & n. wd, VV. 16 Rainy by fits, wind, west. 17 Ra. temp. W. Halo ☽. ☉ Cldy, m. fair p. wd, VV. 19 Much showring, wd, N.E. 20 Cldy m. fair p. wd, N. E. 21 Fr. m. rainy d. wd, N. E. 22 Rainy d. & n. gr. wd, N. W 23 Ra. gr. wds, N. VV. light. n. 24 Fair, cool, wind, N. ☉ Frost, fair, wind, N. VV. 26 ● Rain m. wd, N. VV. 27 Cloudy, moist, wd, N. VV. 28 Fr. fair, warm, gr, w. VV. ☉ Fr. fair, warm, gr, w. VV. 30 Fr. fair, warm, gr, w. VV.
October 1687. 1 Mist m. fair, warm, wd. W. Halo ☽ 4. day. ☉ Mist m. fair, warm, wd. W. Halo ☽ 4. day. 3 Mist m. fair, warm, wd. W. Halo ☽ 4. day. 4 Mist m. fair, warm, wd. W. Halo ☽ 4. day. 5 Cloudy m. fair wd, E. Halo ☽ 5 day. 6 Cloudy m. fair wd, E. Halo ☽ 5 day. 7 Much rain, wind, west. 8 Cool, but pleas. wd, west. ☉ Cloudy, rainy, wind, ○ west. 10 ○ Cloudy, rainy, wind, ○ west.
11 Rain blustring wN. VV. Halo ☽ 12 day. 12 Rain blustring wN. VV. Halo ☽ 12 day. 13 Fr. m. much ra. wd, S. E. 14 Fr. fair, w. N. VV. Halo ☽ 15 Rain m, fair, wd west. ☉ Pleas. m. cldy, gr. wd, VV. 17 Some ra. p. gr. wd, west. 18 Frosty, cold, pleasant, great wd, north west. 19 Frosty, cold, pleasant, great wd, north west. 20 Misty, m. cldy, warm VV. 21 Frosty, fair, cold, wd, west. 22 Much rain, wind, west. ☉ Frosty, fair, wind, west. 24 Cldy, threatning, wd, west. 25 Much ra. gr. wd, west. 26 ● Frost, much ra. west. 27 Fair m. ra. p. wd, west. 28 Fr. fair, cold wd, N. VV. 29 Fr. thic fog m. fair p. N. W. ☉ Fr. fog m. fair p. w. N. E. 31 Cold fr. m. cldy ra. n. E. November 1687. 1 Ra. by fits, brisk w. S. H. ☽ 2 Rain m. fair p. wind, E. 3 Rain, m. great wd, S. VV. 4 Fair m. ra. 2h. p. W. Ra. n. 5 Frost m. fair, wd, west. ☉ Mist m. fair, cold wind, east. 7 Mist m. fair, cold wind, east. 8 Cl. cold, ra. p. gr. wds, S. 9 ○ Blustr. w. S. VV. Ra. 1 h. p 10 Fr. m. ra. 3h. p. gr. S. VV. 11 Hail, ra. p. gr. wd, contin. 12 Fair m. gr. storms ra. hail, p ☉ Fr. m. cl. p. stormy n. w. VV
14 Cldy m. much rain p. W. 15 Frost, cold, fair, wd, west 16 Frost, fog, cold, wd, west. 17 Stinking fog, cold, all d. W. 18 Frost, cold m. fog p. wd, north west. 19 Frost, cold m. fog p. wd, north west. ☉ Hard frost, cold, wd, north west. 21 Hard frost, cold, wd, north west. 22 Fair, fr: rainy n gr. wd, W. 23 Mist m. fair p. Temp. nig. wd, west. 24 ● Mist m. fair p. Temp. nig. wd, west. 25 ● Mist m. ra. p. & n. gr. W. 26 Fr. s. sn. Tempest. n. VV. ☉ Great hollow winds, W. Rainy nights. 28 Great hollow winds, W. Rainy nights. 29 Cldy, moist, gr. wd, west. 30 Fr. m. cldy, gr. wds, west.
December. 1687. 1 Cold fr. fair, VV. Halo ☽ 2 Ra. bef. ☉ rise, cldy, VV. 3 Ra. bef. ☉ r. & 2h. p. n. S. W ☉ Fair, hail, ra. ☉ s. gr. w. S. W. 5 Fair, moist gr. w. S. W H. ☽ 6 Fr. m. ra. at n. wd, S. E. 7 Mist m. rain p. wd, E. 8 ○ Fr. m ra. p. S, VV. gr. tide 9 Fr. cold, cldy, VV. gr. tide. 10 Fr. m. ra. p. & all n. VV. ☉ Fr. fair m. cldy p. wd, VV. 12 Fr. m. some ra. p. wd, west. 13 Cold, cloudy, wind, west.
14 Frosty, ra. after ☉ set, VV. 15 Fair, dry, wind, west. 16 Mist m. rainy, wd, west. 17 Misling rain all day, west. ☉ Cldy m. fair, wind, west. 19 Gr. mist m. fair, temp. n. N. 20 Cldy, cold, wet, gr. wd, N. 21 Frosty, cold, wind, N. 22 S. sn ra. gr. cold w. N. E. 23 Sn. & sleet, gr. cold w N. E. 24 ● Hard fr. sharp cold, N. E ☉ Hard frost, wind tur∣ned west. 26 Hard frost, wind tur∣ned west. 27 Hard fr. misty, dark, VV. 28 Frost, cold snow, wd, north west. 29 Frost, cold snow, wd, north west. 30 Fr. m. cold, thaw, p, N. W. 31 Fr. m. misle at noon, N. W. ✚ January 1688. ☉ Frost, mist, cold, offer at snow, N. VV. 2 Frost, mist, cold, offer at snow, N. VV. 3 Mist, fr. m. misle p. S. W. 4 Misling ra. with sn. w. S. W. 5 Hard frost, gr. wd, west. Halo ☽ 6 day. 6 Hard frost, gr. wd, west. Halo ☽ 6 day. 7 ○ Cold remits. Cldy, w. VV. Halo ☽ 7 day. ☉ Cold remits. Cldy, w. VV. Halo ☽ 7 day. 9 Misling rain, wind, west. 10 Fr. m. some ra. wd, west. 11 Frost m. fair, wd, west. 12 Fr. m. dark, hail at noon, W 13 Pleasant frost, cold, gr. wind, S. E. 14 Pleasant frost, cold, gr. wind, S. E. ☉ Rainy, gr. wds contin. S. E. 16 Cldy with ra. gr. wd, N. W
17 Fr. m. cldy, E. Ra at ☉ set. 18 Moderate, fair, wd, east. 19 Mist m. cloudy, wind, north east. 20 Mist m. cloudy, wind, north east. 21 Frost, mist m. wd, N. W. ☉ ● Mist m. cldy, N. VV. 23 Ra. m. cldy, dark, N. W. 24 Fr. m. some sn. & hail, E. 25 Frosty, fair, wind, E. 26 Hard fr. very cold, wd, E. Halo ☽ 27 day. 27 Hard fr. very cold, wd, E. Halo ☽ 27 day. 28 Fr. m. misle, thaw, N. VV. Halo ☽ ☉ Pleasant frost, wd N. 30 Pleasant frost, wd N. 31 Pleasant frost, wd N.
February 1688. 1 Pleasant frost, wind, E Halo &Circle Moon; 2 d. 2 Pleasant frost, wind, E Halo & Circle ☽ 2 d. 3 Gr. stinking fog & fr. E. 4 Pleasant frost, wind, E. ☉ Cloudy, misty, foggy, south. 6 ○ Cloudy, misty, foggy, south. 7 Cold, raw, cloudy, wd, south east. 8 Cold, raw, cloudy, wd, south east. 9 Hard frost, fair, cold, wind, N. E. 10 Hard frost, fair, cold, wind, N. E. 11 Hard frost, fair, cold, wind, N. E. ☉ Hard frost, fair, cold, wind, N. E. 13 Frosty, fair, mist p wd, E. 14 Pleasant frost, wd, S. E. 15 Frost m. rain p. wd, S. 16 Some rain, gr. wds, west.
17 Fr. m. some ra. gr. w. S. W. 18 Cldy, moist, viol. w. S. W. ☉ Frost, fair, wind E. 20 Frost, fair, wind E. 21 ● Misty, cloudy, cold wind, E. 22 Misty, cloudy, cold wind, E. 23 Misty, cold, cldy, E. Ra. n. 24 Cldy m. fair p. N. VV. 25 Cldy, cold, moist, wd, N. ☉ Black frost m. fair, N. 27 Cold fr. sn. at nig. wd, N. 28 bitter cold frost, some sn. & rain, great wd, N. 29 bitter cold frost, some sn. & rain, great wd, N. March 1688. 1 Sharp, cold, frost, wd, east. 2 Sharp, cold, frost, wd, east. 3 Bitter cold fr. offer at sn. E. ☉ Snow, cold frost, wd, E. 5 Hard fr. m. sn. p. w. vario. 6 Hard bitter frost, wd, N. E. Snow nig. 7 ○ Hard bitter frost, wd, N. E. Snow nig. 8 Cold, cl. ra. offer at sn. E. 9 Cold, snow, ra. sleet, E. 10 Sn. m. sleet, cold cldy, E. ☉ Cold, some sn. & ra. E. 12 Cold, ra. & sn. wd, N.E. 13 Cold, s. drops P. gr. w. W. 14 Cloudy, cold remits, great wind, west. 15 Cloudy, cold remits, great wind, west. 16 Fair, warm, wind, S. 17 Hard frost, fair, wd, W. ☉ Hard frost, fair, wd, W. 19 Hard frost, fair, wd, W. 20 Hard frost, fair, wd, W.
21 ● Fr. cold, gr. w. S. W. Ra. n. 22 Ra. temp. d. & n. wd, S. W. 23 Ra. & hail, stormy w. S. W. 24 Fr. m. s. ra. hail, gr. w. S. W. ☉ Much ra. some sn. wd, VV. 26 Fr. m. cldy, some ra. west. 27 Much ra. great wds, S. VV. 28 Cold, fair, s. drops, p. W. 29 Fr. cold, ra. hail, ☉ set, W. 30 Fr. mist m. ra. hail, N. VV. 31 Frosty, very cold, N. VV.
April 1688. ☉ Fr. fair, rainy n. wd, N. W. 2 Cold, snow & ra. N. VV. 3 Cold, hail, r. n. N. W. Ha. ☽ 4 Ra. m. fier. hail 5 h. p. Ha. ☽ 5 ❍ Cl. cold, st. ra. hail, N. W. 6 Cold, ra. hail, m. gr. N. W. 7 Much hail, ra. thund, W. ☉ Cldy, some ra. brisk w. W. 9 Frost m. pleasant, wind, west. 10 Frost m. pleasant, wind, west. 11 Fr. cold, cldy, blustr. N. E. 12 Fr. cold, fair, gr. wd, N. E 13 Fr. cold, fair, gr. wd, N. E 14 Fr. cold, fair, gr. wd, N. E ☉ Frost m fair, wd, N. E. 16 Fr. m. cldy, cold, wd, N. E. 17 Much ra. p. & n. gr. wd, W. 18 Rainy, wind, east. 19 ● Frost m. cold, fair, wd, east. 20 ● Frost m. cold, fair, wd, east.
21 Cloudy, with rain, wd, west. ☉ Cloudy, with rain, wd, west. 23 Cldy, some ra. gr. w. N. W 24 Ra. by fits, very cold, N. W 25 Fair, cold, ra. n. wd, N. VV. 26 Fair, clear, wind, west. 27 Cl. s. drops, gr. wd, N. W. 28 Cold, but fair, brisk w. E. ☉ Rainy, & great wds, west. 30 Rainy day and night. May 1688. 1 Rainy by fits, gr wd, west. 2 Much ra, & gr. wd, west. 3 Fair m. rainy p. wd, west. 4 Cldy rainy, wind, west. 5 ○ Fr. m. ra. p. & n. west. ☉ Fair, warm, brisk wd, west. 7 Ra. m. fair p. gr. wd, west. 8 Fr, m. s. drops, Ra. nig. W. 9 Fair m. cldy p. gr. wd, west. 10 Cldy, s. drops p. gr. w. W. 11 Fair, warm, wind, west. 12 Cloudy, some rain, wd, east. ☉ Cloudy, some rain, wd, east. 14 Fair, & hot, wd. N. W. 15 Fair, & hot, wd. N. W. 16 Fair, & hot, wd. N. W. 17 Hot, but pleas. wd, west. 18 ● Rainy m. great winds, south west. 19 ● Rainy m. great winds, south west. ☉ Much rain, wd, S. VV. 21 Much rain, wd, S. VV. 22 Much rain, wd, S. VV. 23 Cldy, some ra. wd, S. VV.
24 Fr. m. cold, s. drops p. N. W. 25 Frost m. cold, rain and hail, wd, N. VV. 26 Frost m. cold, rain and hail, wd, N. VV. ☉ Fr. m. cold, fair, N. VV. 28 Fr. m. cldy p. wd. N. VV. 29 Frost m. fair, wd, east. Halo ☽ 21 day. 30 Frost m. fair, wd, east. Halo ☽ 21 day. 31 Frost m. fair, wd, east. Halo ☽ 21 day.
June 1688. 1 Cl. m. Fair, gr. w. E. Hal. ☽ 2 Cloudy, hot, wind, west. ☉ ○ Much ra. th. lightn. W. 4 S. ra. m. hot, fair, brisk, W. 5 Ra. most part, brsik w S. E. 6 Rainy, warm, wd, S. E. 7 S. drops m. warm, fair, S. E 8 Ra. m. hot, cldy, wd, S. E. 9 Cldy, cool, brisk w. N. E. ☉ Ra. m. high wd, N. VV. 11 Cldy, cool, great wd, N. 12 Cl. warm, so. ra. p. N. VV. 13 Mist m. very hot, ra. p. W. 14 Cldy, cool s. drops p. N. 15 Cloudy m. fair, wind, north west. 16 Cloudy m. fair, wind, north west. ☉ ● Warm, ra. most pt, S. W. 18 Cool m. fair, hot, w. W. 19 Cool m. fair, hot, w. W. 20 Cool m. fair, hot, w. W. 21 Pleasant, hot, wind, west. Lightning at night the 23d. day. 22 Pleasant, hot, wind, west. Lightning at night the 23d. day. 23 Pleasant, hot, wind, west. Lightning at night the 23d. day.
☉ Cldy, cool, s. ra. p gr. N. W. 25 Cldy m. s. drops p. gr. VV. 26 Cldy, very hot, brisk W 27 Cldy, very hot, brisk W 28 Cldy, very hot, brisk W 29 Cldy, ra. gr. wd, S. VV. 30 Ra. thund. great wd, S. W. July 1688. ☉ Cldy ra. th, ☉ s. gr. w. S. W. 2 Cldy, rainy, blustring wd, south west. 3 Cldy, rainy, blustring wd, south west. 4 Fair, but threatn. R. gr. W. 5 Fair, pleas. Ra. ☉ s. w. W. 6 Cloudy, warm, wind, west. 7 Cloudy, warm, wind, west. ☉ Very hot, fair, wind, west. 9 Cloudy, warm, wd, E. 10 Cldy m. hot day, N. W. 11 Mist m. hot, fair, wind, east. 12 Mist m. hot, fair, wind, east. 13 Cldy, hot, s. drops p. gr. W. 14 Cldy, but hot, wind E. ☉ Heat, to excess, wd, E. Lightn. 16 d. at nigh. 16 Heat, to excess, wd, E. Lightn. 16 d. at nigh. 17 ● Hot, much th: ra. light. n. 18 Hot, cloudy, wd, west. 19 Rain m. hot, wind, west. 20 Very hot, but fair, wd, west. 21 Very hot, but fair, wd, west. ☉ Cloudy, some ra. brisk wind, west. 23 Cloudy, some ra. brisk wind, west. 24 Pleasant, but hot, great wind, west. 25 Pleasant, but hot, great wind, west. 26 Hot, cldy, m. much ra. p. W
27 Cldy, s. drops, gr. wd, W Some thund. 28 d. 28 Cldy, s. drops, gr. wd, W Some thund. 28 d. ☉ Sudden showr. th. gr. W. 30 Cldy, much ra. wd, west, 31 Cldy, threatning, wd, west.
August 1688. 1 ○ Mist m. fair hot, S. E. 2 Mist m. fair hot, S. E. 3 Mist m. fair hot, S. E. 4 Cldy, hot, brisk wd, N E. ☉ Fair, melting heat, N. W. 6 Cldy m. hot, pleasant p. wind, north west. 7 Cldy m. hot, pleasant p. wind, north west. 8 Hot cl. s. drps, ☉ s. gr. N. W 9 Fair. hot, wind, west. 10 Cldy ra. p. high wds, west. 11 Fair m. ra. p. wd, west. ☉ Cldy, m. ra. hail, p. wd, W. 13 ● Frost m. fair, cool, wd, north west. 14 ● Frost m. fair, cool, wd, north west. 15 ● Frost m. fair, cool, wd, north west. 16 ● Frost m. fair, cool, wd, north west. 17 Ra. ☉ r. fair, cool, brisk N. 18 Cl. much ra. gr. wd, west. ☉ Cldy, some ra. wd, west. 20 Fair m. cldy p. wd, west. 21 Cldy, much ra. wd, west. 22 Rain m. cloudy, hot, wind, west. 23 Rain m. cloudy, hot, wind, west. 24 Much ra. hot, wd, west. 25 Fr. m. fair, hot, wd, west. ☉ Mist m. hot, pleas. wd, W.
27 Frost, mist, m. fair, hot, wind, west. 28 Frost, mist, m. fair, hot, wind, west. 29 Cldy m. fair, hot, wd. west. 30 Cloudy, hot, blustring wind, west. 31 ○ Cloudy, hot, blustring wind, west. September 1688. 1 Fr. m. cldy, brisk wd, W. ☉ Mist m. much ra. N. VV. 3 Cldy, drisle, rainy n. N. W. 4 Cldy, m. fair, warm, west. 5 Fr. m. fair, brisk wd, N. W. 6 Stormy ra. & wd, S. VV. 7 Fr. m. much ra. gr. w. S. W. 8 Fr. m. ra. p. gr. wd, S. W. ☉ Much ra. high wd, S. W. 10 Much ra. high wd, S. W. 11 Much ra. high wd, S. W. 12 Cldy, dry, warm, wd, west. 13 Pleas. m. cldy, some ra. W. 14 ● Cldy, much ra. p. gr. S. W 15 Frost m. fair. High tide 16 day. ☉ Frost m. fair. High tide 16 day. 17 Frost m. fair. High tide 16 day. 18 Fr. mist m. pleas wd, west. 19 Fair, fr. m. cldy, p. west. 20 Cldy, somet. dropping W. 21 Cl. th: lightn. at n. gr. w. W. 22 Warm, rain p. wd, west. ☉ Frost, fair m. rain p. west. 24 Frost m. fair, wind, west. 25 Frost m. much ra. p. VV. 26 Fr. m. fair, wd, W. Halo ☽ 27 Mist m. ra. by sits, W. H. ☽ 28 Cloudy, rainy, wind, west. 29 ○ Cloudy, rainy, wind, west.
☉ Fair m. rain p. gr. wd, W.
October 1688. 1 Cldy, cold, ra. p. brisk VV. 2 Cold fair, dry, wd, N. VV. 3 Frost m. cold, fair, brisk wind, north west. 4 Frost m. cold, fair, brisk wind, north west. 5 Cl. remiss, wdy d. n. S. W. 6 Fair, brisk wd, N. VV. ☉ Fr. fair, cold, ra. n. N. VV. 8 Cold, s. drisle, ra. n. N. VV. 9 Frost m. cold, fair, wd, north. 10 Frost m. cold, fair, wd, north. 11 Hard fr. m. ra. p. N. VV. 12 Frost, fair, cold, wd, N. VV 13 Mist, fr. m. cold, cldy, N. ☉ ● Mist m. cldy, ra. n. N. W. 15 Ra. most part. Stor. n. N. W 16 Cl. ra. stormy, wds, N. W. 17 Fr. cold, fair, gr. wd, N. 18 Mist m. cloudy, cold, wind, north west. 19 Mist m. cloudy, cold, wind, north west. 20 Fair m. ra. p. temp. n. S. W. ☉ Fair m. Tempest. d. S. W. 22 Fr. fair, cold, rainy n. VV. 23 Ra. m. cldy, cold, W. Hal. ☽ 24 Fr. m. tempest. p. & n. west. 25 Fr. m. fair, ra. ☉ s. W. Ha. ☽ 26 Fr. m. ra. p. & n. wind E. 27 Fair m. much ra. p. W. H. ☽ ☉ ○ Pleas. hard fr. ra. ☉ set, wd, west. Halo ☽. 29 Fr. fair m. cldy p. wd, VV.
30 Fr. fog, m. fair p. wd, E. 31 Cloudy, cold, wind, E. November 1688. 1 Cldy, very cold, wd, E. 2 Cldy ra. sleet, gr. w. N. E. 3 Sharp, cold, dry, wind, north east. ☉ Sharp, cold, dry, wind, north east. 5 Misty, rainy, wind, E. 6 Great fog, rainy nig. VV. 7 Rainy day, gr. wd, S. VV. 8 Fair m. cldy p. wd, west. 9 Cldy, misling, rainy n. VV. 10 Cloudy, moist, cold, wind, north. ☉ Cloudy, moist, cold, wind, north. 12 Cloudy, rain, gr. wds, E. 13 ● Fr. mist m. cl. cold, N. W. 14 Frost, fair, cold, wind, north west. 15 Frost, fair, cold, wind, north west. 16 Frost, and fog, wind E. 17 Pleasant, but sharp frost wind, west. ☉ Pleasant, but sharp frost wind, west. 19 Hard fr. much sn. wd, E. 20 Gr. thaw, temp. n. S. VV. 21 Fr. sn. m. temp. d. & n. S. W. 22 Tempest d. & n. wd, S. VV 23 Temp. wds hold, s. ra. S. W 24 Frosty, cold, fair, wd, west. ☉ Hard frost, m. Temp. p. & nig. wd, S. VV. 26 Hard frost, m. Temp. p. & nig. wd, S. VV. 27 ○ Fr. sn. m. rainy p. west. 28 Fr. mist m rain p. wd, VV. 29 Cold misling rain, wd, E. 30 Cold, much sn. & ra. great wd, N. E. December. 1688. 1 Snow & sleet, wd, N. E. ☉ Cold, misling rain. N. E. 3 Still cold, misling, wd, north east. 4 Still cold, misling, wd, north east. 5 Frosty, cold, wind, E. 6 Very cold, cloudy, wd, north east. 7 Very cold, cloudy, wd, north east. 8 Fr. cold, misle, n gr. w. N. E ☉ Much ra. gr. wd, N. E. 10 Fair, but moist, wd, S. VV. 11 ● Cloudy, and rain, great wind, west. 12 ● Cloudy, and rain, great wind, west. 13 Much ra. strong wd, west. 14 Fr. fair, tempest. n. west. 15 Cldy, moist, gr. wd, west. ☉ Fair & pleas. gr. wd, S. VV. 17 Much, and fierce rain, violent wd, west. 18 Much, and fierce rain, violent wd, west. 19 Cold, sn. & sleet, N. VV. 20 Hard frost, fair, wind, west. 21 Hard frost, fair, wind, west. 22 Bitter sharp fr. wind, north east. ☉ Bitter sharp fr. wind, north east. 24 Cldy, very cold, sn. n N. E. 25 Cloudy, bitter frost, snow lies, wd, E. 26 ○ Cloudy, bitter frost, snow lies, wd, E. 27 Cloudy, bitter frost, snow lies, wd, E. 28 Frosty, cold, s. sn. E. Halo ☽ 29 Frosty, fair, sn. i'th' n. N.E. ☉ Hard fr. fair, wind, N. 31 Hard frost m. sn. p. bitter wind, N.
✚ January 1689. 1 Hard fr. very cold, N. W 2 Frost, some snow, wd, west. 3 Frost, some snow, wd, west. 4 Fr. much sn. wd, E. 5 Sharp frost, fair, wd, E. ☉ Sharp frost, fair, wd, E. 7 Sharp frost, fair, wd, E. 8 Mist, much rain, wd, E. 9 Gr. mist, much ra. S. VV. 10 Mild, & gentle air, west. 11 ● Frost, snow, cold, N. 12 Cldy, frosty, sn. lies, west. ☉ Fr. fair, thaw, p. w. N. W 14 Hard frost, fair, wind, west. 15 Hard frost, fair, wind, west. 16 Snow m. cold ra. wd, VV. 17 Mist, fog, misle, wind, south west. 18 Mist, fog, misle, wind, south west. 19 Very cold, wd, N. Halo ☽ ☉ Cldy, foggy, misle, N. W 21 Cldy, foggy, misle, N. W 22 Cldy, foggy, misle, N. W 23 Moderate fair, wd, west. 24 Fr. m. cldy p. wd, west. 25 ○ Cldy, dry, wind, west. 26 Some rain morn. wind. west. ☉ Some rain morn. wind. west. 28 Moist, sprinkling, gr. S. W. 29 Cloudy, moist, wind, west. 30 Cloudy, moist, wind, west. 31 Fair, but cold, wind, west. February 1689. 1 Cold, yet fair, wd, west. 2 Rainy day, wind, west. ☉ Cldy, moist, wind west. 4 Frost m. fair, wind, west. 5 Pleas. warm air, wd, west. 6 Cold, cldy, misty, west. 7 Mist m. fair, wind, west. 8 Mist, fog, m. wind, west. 9 ● Fair, cool, wind, west. ☉ Frosty, fair, wind S. E. Rainy night 11 day. 11 Frosty, fair, wind S. E. Rainy night 11 day. 12 Stormy d. & n. wind, S. 13 Tempest continues, west. 14 Fr. m. fair, w. W. Hal. ☽ 15 Fr. m. ra. p. brisk W. Hal. ☽ 16 Fr. m Hail p. w. W. Halo & Circle ☽ 16 day. ☉ Fr. m Hail p. w. W. Halo & Circle ☽ 16 day. 18 Fr. m. rain p. cold wd, W. 19 Frost, fair, wind, west. 20 Cold, ra. sleet, W. Halo ☽ 21 Cldy, s. ra. S. VV. Halo ☽ 22 Fair, moderate, wd, S. W. 23 Cloudy, moist, great wd, south west. ☉ ○ Cloudy, moist, great wd, south west. 25 Frosty, fair, wind, west, 26 Frost m. cloudy, brisk winds, west. 27 Frost m. cloudy, brisk winds, west. 28 Frost m. rain p. Thunder, Tempestu. n. wd, west. March 1689. 1 Fr. blustring, w. W. Ha. ♀ 2 Some rain, wind, west. ☉ Fr. fair, wd, W Rainy n.
4 Rain & hail, wd, N. VV. 5 Frost m. rain, hail, N. W. 6 Fr. ra. sn. hail, wd, N. W. 7 Fog m. cold cloudy, wd, north west. 8 Fog m. cold cloudy, wd, north west. 9 Cold, cloudy, s. drops, wind, north west. ☉ Cold, cloudy, s. drops, wind, north west. 11 ● Cloudy, dry, wind, west. 12 ● Cloudy, dry, wind, west. 13 Cldy, some drops wd, W. 14 Cold, ra. sn. sleet, N. VV. 15 Hard fr. cold, cldy, E. 16 Cold rain, blustring wd, south west. ☉ Cold rain, blustring wd, south west. 18 Fair, frosty, wd, W. Ha. ☽ 19 Ra. gr. hollow w. W. Ha. ☽ 20 Cldy, rain, gr. wd, west. 21 Tempest, rain & wd, W. 22 Hail, s. ra. gr. w. W. Circ. ☽ 23 Some drops, gr. wd, west. ☉ Frost m. cldy, wd, E. 25 ○ Fr. storm, ra. hail p. W. 26 Fr. fair, very cold, wd, E. 27 Mist, fr. m. rain p. wd, W. 28 Frost m. rain p. wd, west. 29 Cloudy, rain, great wd, south west. 30 Cloudy, rain, great wd, south west. ☉ Ra. gr. audible wd, S. W.
April 1689. 1 Fair m. ra. p. wd, S. VV. 2 Rain, stormy, wd, S. VV. 3 Ra. sleet, gr. wd, S. VV.
4 Pleasant, cold wind, north west. 5 Pleasant, cold wind, north west. 6 Fair m. ra. p. wind, west. ☉ Fair, cold, wind, N. W. 8 ● Fair, dry, warm, wd, west. 9 ● Fair, dry, warm, wd, west. 10 Frost, fair m. cldy p. gr. wind, west. 11 Frost, fair m. cldy p. gr. wind, west. 12 Frost, fair m. cldy p. gr. wind, west. 13 Frost m. high winds, south west. ☉ Frost m. high winds, south west. 15 Hot, fair, ra. n. brisk w. W. 16 Much rain, wind, west. 17 Fair, warm, brisk wd, W. 18 Mist m. ra. n. gr. wd, S. W 19 Some rain, wd, west. 20 Cldy, cool, S. W. Halo ☽ ☉ Rainy, wd, south west. Halo ☽. 22 Rainy, wd, south west. Halo ☽. 23 Pleasant air, wd, west. 24 ○ Fair, mild, wind W. gr. Circ. ☽ 9h. P. 25 Fair m. cldy, s. drops, S. W. 26 Frost, mist, m. hot, wd. west. 27 Frost, mist, m. hot, wd. west. ☉ Some drops m. fair p. W. 29 Pleasant, but hot, wind, east. 30 Pleasant, but hot, wind, east. May 1689. 1 Cldy m. fair p gr. w. NE 2 Cldy m. fair p gr. w. NE 3 Cldy m. fair p gr. w. NE 4 Fair, hot, wind S. E. ☉ Fair m. ra. p. & n. w. S. W.
6 Much ra. & hail, gr. w. S. W 7 Fair, cool, wind, west. 8 Moist, cloudy, rain in the nig. wd, west. 9 ❍ Moist, cloudy, rain in the nig. wd, west. 10 Cl. moist, warm, variab. w. 11 Fair, warm, wind, E. ☉ Fair, warm, wind, E. 13 Fair, warm, wind, E. 14 Mist m. pleasant, wind, east. 15 Mist m. pleasant, wind, east. 16 Hot, ra. thund. p. w. S.W. 17 Cldy, warm, wd, S. VV. 18 Frost m. ra. p. wd, S.VV. ☉ Fr.m.s. drops, cold, wd, N. 20 Fr. m. cldy, ra. n. wd, N.W 21 Cloudy, cold, wind, north west. 22 Cloudy, cold, wind, north west. 23 Cldy, ra. day, gr. wd, S.W. 24 ○ Cldy, ra. i'th' n wd, S.W. 25 Fair m. s. ra. p. cold, N.W. ☉ Ra. most part, gr. w. S.W. 27 Fair, warm, wind, west. 28 Cldy, some rain day & night, wd, west. 29 Cldy, some rain day & night, wd, west. 30 A very hot day, wd, west. 31 Fair m.ra.noon, ra.n. S.W.
June 1689. 1 Cl. variable, gr. wd, S. W. 2 S. ra. m. &. p. gr. wd, S. W. 3 Cl. gr. wd, S. W. Rainy n. 4 Ra. at ☉ r. & setting, W. 5 Ra. ☉ r. fair, warm, wd, W
6 ● Cloudy, close, warm, wind, west. 7 ● Cloudy, close, warm, wind, west. 8 Hot, cloudy, wd, west. ☉ Very hot, fair, brisk wind, west. 10 Very hot, fair, brisk wind, west. 11 Cloudy, cool, threatn. wind, west. 12 Cloudy, cool, threatn. wind, west. 13 Cldy m. fair p.wd, S. W. 14 Fair, warm, wind, S.VV. 15 Hot, fair, lightn. at n. VV. ☉ Cldy m. fair, hot, w. S.E. 17 Pleasant, hot, wind, S.E. 18 Cldy, & rain, wd, west. 19 Cldy m. hot, fair S. VV. 20 Hot & pleasant, wd, west. 21 Cl. hot, s. drps, W. Iris 7h p. 22 ○ Cl. s. heat drops, gr. w.W ☉ Cl. ra. ☉ set, gr. wd, N.W. 24 Misty m. hot, fair, w. W. 25 Very hot, ra. p. wd, west. 26 Much ra. & thund. w. W. 27 Hot, fair, wind, west. 28 Hot, cldy most part, brisk wind, south west. 29 Hot, pleas. rainy n. S. W. ☉ Much rain, wind, west. July 1689. 1 Ra. ☉ rise, fair, wd, S. W. 2 Rainy, thund. 7 p. N.VV. 3 Rain, blustring wind, north west. 4 Rain, blustring wind, north west. 5 Cldy, gr. wd, north. 6 ● Cldy m. fair, hot wd, W. ☉ Excessive heat, wind, south west. 8 Excessive heat, wind, south west.
9 Very hot, brisk wd, N.W. 10 Thund. light. ra. wd, E. 11 Hot, s. drops 5 h. p. w. vario. 12 Rain m. hot, fair, wd, E. 13 Very hot, fair, wind, north east. ☉ Very hot, fair, wind, north east. 15 Cldy m. hot, fair, wd, W. 16 Misty m. hot, fair, wd, west. 17 Misty m. hot, fair, wd, west. 18 Cloudy, close, hot, brisk wind, south west. 19 Cloudy, close, hot, brisk wind, south west. 20 Ra. d. & n. brisk wd, W. ☉ Rain m. fair p. wd, various. 22 ○ Fr. m. pleas. wd, S.W. 23 Mist m. fair, s. drops, n. W. 24 Cldy, threatnig, wd, S.W. 25 Fair, warm, pleas. wd, W. 26 Hot, and fair, wind, south west. 27 Hot, and fair, wind, south west. ☉ Hot, and fair, wind, south west. 29 Hot, and fair, wind, south west. 30 Hot, and fair, wind, south west. 31 Cldy, s. drops ☉ set, w. S.
August 1689. 1 Fr.m. ra. p. brisk w. W. 2 Iris's 5h. p. 2 Cldy, s. showers, S. VV. 3 Cldy, s. showers, S. VV. ☉ ● Frost m. cloudy, showr∣ing, wd, south west. ● Frost m. cloudy, showr∣ing, wd, south west. ● Frost m. cloudy, showr∣ing, wd, south west. 7 Fr.m. fair, warm, wd, W. 8 Curious, pleas. but hot, W.
9 Like the former. 10 Like the former. ☉ Like the former. 12 Cloudy, fair, hot, wd, north east. 13 Cloudy, fair, hot, wd, north east. 14 Cldy, hot, s. drops, gr. SW. 15 Hot, much ra. i'th'n. S.W. 16 Hot, much ra. thund. p.W. 17 Hot, close air, wd, west. ☉ Fair, warm, wd, north east. 19 Fair, warm, wd, north east. 20 ○ Cl. ra. p. w. E. Iris 4h.p. 21 Rain m. fair p. wind, E. 22 Mist m. fair, hot, wd. W. 23 Mist m. fair, hot, wd. W. 24 Mist m. fair, hot, wd. W. ☉ Cldy m. ra. p. &. n. w. S. W. 26 Fair m. cldy p. wd, S. W. 27 Hot, fair, ra. thund. light. n. 28 Ra. m. cldy, rainy n. gr. w. S. 29 Much ra. gr. S. W. Temp. n. 30 Cldy, rainy, strong w. S. W. 31 Much rain, wd, south west. September 1689. ☉ Cldy, s. drops, p. brisk W. 2 Cldy m. pleas. p. brisk W. 3 ● Pleasant frost, wd, S. W. 4 Rainy most part, wd, W. 5 Pleas. fr. wd, W. rainy nig. 6 Much ra. gr. wd, W. Ha. ♃ 7 Fair, some ra. at noon, W. ☉ Cldy, some dewing, w. W. 9 Fair. A show. 1h. p. W. ra. n 10 Cloudy, rainy, gr. wd, W. 11 Much rain. high wd, S. W.
12 Frost, m. pleasant, wd, W. 13 Sometime cldy, warm, wd, west, Halo ☽. 14 Sometime cldy, warm, wd, west, Halo ☽. ☉ Gr. thund. light. ra. N. 16 Fair, but great winds, north. 17 Fair, but great winds, north. 18 Fair, pleas. brisk wd, N.E. 19 ○ Fr. m. fair, warm, S. 20 Fr. mist, m. fair, S. Halo, ☽ 21 Cldy, brisk wd, W. Ra. n. ☉ Fr. m. fair cold, wd N.W. 23 Cold frost m. ra. p gr. W. 24 Mist, s. ra. fair p. wd, S. E. 25 Some ra. m. & p cold W. 26 Cldy, some ra. wd, S. E. 27 Much rain, great wds, west. 28 Much rain, great wds, west. ☉ Fog, rain at nig. wd, S W. 30 Rainy m. pleas. p. wd, w.
October 1689. 1 Great fog, some ra. S. E. 2 ● Mist m. cloudy, rain, wind, south east. 3 ● Mist m. cloudy, rain, wind, south east. 4 Mist m. pleasant, wd, west. 5 Pleasant frost, wd, west. ☉ Fog, frost, m. ra. p. w. S. E. 7 Fr. m. ra. p. blustr. n. w. E. 8 Fair, dry, violt, cold E. d. n. 9 Fair, dry, great wind, E. 10 Cold, cloudy, dry, rain i'th' night, wd, N. E. 11 Cold, cloudy, dry, rain i'th' night, wd, N. E.
12 A glorious day, wd, N E. ☉ Cold, cldy, ra. p. & n. E. 14 Much ra. wd, S. E. Ha. ☽ 15 Fair dry, brisk S. W. ra. n. 16 Rainy most part, wd, S. W. 17 Fr. fair, wd, W. Halo ☽. 18 ○ Cldy, ra. p. W. Ra. n. 19 Ra. strong w. W. Lightn. n. ☉ Cloudy, some rain, gr. wind, west. 21 Cloudy, some rain, gr. wind, west. 22 Cloudy, wet, great wd, south west. 23 Cloudy, wet, great wd, south west. 24 Fair, pleasant, great w. west. 25 Fair, pleasant, great w. west. 26 Fair, dry, great wds still. ☉ Fair m. ra p. great wd, W. 28 Cldy, close, wind, west. 29 Fair, dry, great wind, W. 30 Cldy, dry, W. Halo ♃. 31 Fair, dry, cold, S. W. Ra. n. November 1689. 1 Cldy, rainy, wind, E. 2 ● Some ra. cldy, cold, E. ☉ Pleasant, frost, cold, wind, E. 4 Pleasant, frost, cold, wind, E. 5 Rain, some hail, gr. w. N. E 6 Some rain, great wind, day and night, N. E. 7 Some rain, great wind, day and night, N. E. 8 Much snow, great wd, E. 9 Cldy, cold sn. lies, wd, N. ☉ Fr m. s. drops p. N. E. H. ☽. 11 Some drifling rain, wd, E. 12 Dry, cloudy, cold, E. 13 Cold, frost, fog, N. E. 14 Bitter cold, wd, W. Ra. n.
15 Fr. m. hail, ra. p cold, W. 16 ○ Cold frost, pleas. W. ☉ Cold, ra. m. fr. fair, p. W. 18 Hard, cold fr. wd, west. 19 Cldy, ra. brisk wd, S. W. 20 Cldy, ra. brisk wd, S. W. 21 Cldy, ra. brisk wd, S. W. 22 Fr. hail, ra. i'th' n. Halo ♃ 23 Frost, cold, fair, wind, W. Halo ♃ and ♂. ☉ Frost, cold, fair, wind, W. Halo ♃ and ♂. 25 Cloudy, some rain, gr. wind, west. 26 Cloudy, some rain, gr. wind, west. 27 Fair, & moist, gr. wds, W. 28 Some rain, great winds, west. 29 Some rain, great winds, west. 30 Frosty, pleas. wd, west.
December 1689. ☉ ● Frost, pleasant, wd, west. 2 ● Frost, pleasant, wd, west. 3 Foggy, cold, cldy, w. E. 4 Foggy, cold, cldy, w. E. 5 Foggy, cold, cldy, w. E. 6 Foggy, cold, cldy, w. E. 7 Foggy, cold, cldy, w. E. ☉ Frost, fair, cold, wind, E. Halo ☽ 10 day. 9 Frost, fair, cold, wind, E. Halo ☽ 10 day. 10 Frost, fair, cold, wind, E. Halo ☽ 10 day. 11 Fog, cldy, thaw, wd, W. 12 Cldy, cold, wd, W. Halo ☽ 13 Pleasant, frost, wd, west. 14 Cold and cloudy, wd, W.
☉ Fair, frosty, cold, wd, W. 16 ○ Ra.m. clear p.cold, N.W 17 Pleas. white frost, wd, W. 18 Cold, mist, misling, wd, W. but rainy nights. 19 Cold, mist, misling, wd, W. but rainy nights. 20 Cold, mist, misling, wd, W. but rainy nights. 21 Fr. fair, wd, W. Stormy n. ☉ Ra. sn. hail, gr. wds, N. E. 23 Hard fr. stormy wds, N. E 24 Ra. m. fr. p. wd, west. 25 Dry, wds, S.W. Rainy n. 26 A glorious day, wd, S. 27 Rain m. pleas. p. wd, S. 28 Mist, misling, S. Rainy n. ☉ Fair, & frosty, wind, W. 30 Fr m. ra. p. stormy n. S. W. 31 ● Frosty, pleas. wd, W. FINIS.
Something touching the DIARY of the WEATHER, BY WAY OF POSTSCRIPT. AS for the foregoing Diary of the Weather, some Men (such as know how to value their pre∣cious Hours) would fancy they had deserv'd well at the hands of the World by so great a Labour, and so kind a Communication. But I, who never knew what it was to Adore the Great Mundane Goddess, INTEREST; especially when set in competition with TRUTH, dare not challenge any thing from it of Merit. He lives to little (if to any) purpose on this Terrene Theatre, that makes no Observations on Natures Vicissi∣tudes: and if he make any, and not inform the World thereof to the best of his Skill, he does it no Service at all; Is a Drone for all his Industry; or like the churlish Miser, makes a Feast only for himself. But, alas! I am none of the , or Hail. Observers in Ordinary, as Seneca mentions, in Lib. 4. Nat. Quest. and yet dare say I have imparted in this Diary, as many Meteorological Rarities, as if, with them, I had Sacrificed a Lamb or a Pullet. It is a Free-will Offering, and done at my own Charges too; No Man contributes to the Pains of my Nocturnal Watchings, nor do I, or ever did, receive any Sallary to recompence my Diurnal Studies. I deem it Guerdon sufficient, and am fully sa∣tisfied,
if what I have done serve to inform future Ages, how for their sakes, more then my own, I have been thus Sedulous in waiting upon Nature, and observing how mutably (yet constantly too) she hath vouchsafed to shew her self to us Sub-Lunars for XXI Years together. Pos∣sibly, 'twill appear some Novelty even to the most Intelli∣gent Reader (if he have not done the like himself, as I question not but many have;) and such that he'll not every day, or in every Book receive an account of. No! Not in the Vollumes of some who Pride themselves with the Trim and Gaudy Titles of Vertuoso's in this Envious and Critical Age. The Industrious and Modest Reader, who truly Thirsts or Pants after an acquaintance with the works of God, will thank me for thus lending him mine Eyes, and for doing so great, but useful a peice of Drudgery for the ser∣vice of the Divine Ʋrania. While in the mean time, the envious Sciolist will perhaps disdain the work, and cry Tush! Term it a Trifle: and it may be, will be so thankless and ungrateful, as to tell me, I might have spent my time to better purpose, if (with Sir W. P.) I had numbered all the Lawyers Chimneys in the several Inns of Court in London; or full as well, if I had slept away my time with Lampatho's Spaniel. But, do not all wise Men know, that Envy. hath no Commerce, or Communication with true Industry. The invidious Man, like the Dog in the Manger, is never contented; he'll do nothing him∣self, yet be still snarling at the performance of others. Howbeit,— Jacta est Aleâ. The work is done, and I am proof against all Censure. The Commendation of Good Men will not make me Proud, neither shall I value what witty Malice, or gross Impudence can speak, or do against these my Endeavours. That worthy Gentleman Doctor Beal, Votes it useful, for the Advancement of Natural Philosophy, to have old Almanacks wrote rather than new ones: To give an account of past, rather than of future Storms. Which were in∣deed, (beyond Question) the ready road to come to a
right understanding of the Heavenly Influences. And, if God spare my (much envy'd) Life, I resolve shortly, to Reprint all Ephemerides that (to my knowledge) have been Printed since the first Discovery of that most Excellent Art, (for so it is, if not to base purposes prostituted) and perhaps may add unto them the Planetary Motions for Fifty or a Hundred Years before that time; (if my Friends, and Amanuenses fail me not.) Whereby, not only the Causes of all Storms, but of most other amazing Mundane Vicissitudes, for the said number of Years, may be plainly seen. Astrology wanteth its History as much, (if not more) than any other Science; That being the only via regia to its Perfection, as was worthily and truly observed by the Ingenious Doctor Childrey. I find it Recorded in the History of Oxfordshire, set forth by the Learned Dr. Plott, as a Rarity worth the preserving.— That one William Merle, Fellow of Mer∣ton-Colledge in Oxford, Compiled a Diary of the Wea∣ther for VII. Years together. Fol. 6. If such a piece of service for the Planetary Philosophy, were worthy to be remembred to Posterity, certainly, a Diary of triple the length, will not, with the Ingenious and knowing Natu∣ralist, be refused a Friendly Entertainment into his Thoughts, and Library. It was the Opinion of the late Excellent Dr. Goad. That the Heavens and Stars were like a well-order'd Instru∣ment which the Planets making their Appulses to, or Passing by, do constantly stimulate such Influences as are agreeable to their Natures, and to the constellations whence they pro∣ceed. As a skillful hand touching the several Pegs of the Harpsechord, or Virginals, move them to discourse to the Ear variety of Melodious Aires.— And, have you not heard of the Musique of the Sphears? The Noble Plutarch thinks that on every Coelestial Orb there is a Syren fixed, who, by vertue of her Ra∣vishing Charms, Creates, not only Admiration, but De∣light among Mortals. This is certain, that the serious Observations made of the Stupendious variety of weather,
which one single year affords, is sufficient to strike the Atheist Dumb for ever: and can teach us to Honour, Love, and Fear Him who brings forth Mazzaroth in his Season, and Guides Arcturus with his Sons. Many are the uses unto which this Diary is Applicable. I. It will prove to us, and that by more than CXL. Instances, (if any will take but the pains as I have done to observe them.) That the Heavens are ever subject to Disturbance and Ʋnquietude, when Mercury Changes his Sign. Probably one main reason why the Antient Astrolo∣gers have Assigned him a Government equal to Saturn in the Airy Trygon. II. That we have a fall of wet upon every New or Full Moon, at least within the compass of the Triduum, which Rarely failing verity is Eminently supported by Dr. Goad in his Astro-Meteorologica. Consult his admirable History of the Moon therein. III. That the Sun, Venus, Mars, do occasion the like Commotions and Alterations as Mercury, more or less, when They pass from one Sign to another.— Doctor Goad, considering the certainty of Mars his Effects in the Mutation of the Air, was pleas'd to term him his IDOL. See his Learned Discourse of the Pleiades. And this our Diary affords abundant Proof of this Truth to any Man that shall be pleased to take the pains to observe it. IV. That all the aforesaid Planets passing by, or rising or setting with the Fixed Stars, as are the Pleiades, Aselli, Vindemiator, Eagle, Dolphin, &c. or transiting their Opposite places, do produce an alteration in the Air, suta∣ble to the Natures of those Constellations, and to that of the several Seasons of the Year. The Learned Hartgil affirm'd an Influence in the Aspects of the Fixed Stars, as well as in the Erratique. V. That hereby is sufficiently evinced to every Indu∣strious and Skilful Observer, how the Four Seasons of the Year, viz. Winter, Summer, Spring, Autumn, are to be
found, and fairly distinguished, even in a Lunar Revolution, (and in the Winter Season too) according to the Opinion of Cicero, de Divin: Lib. 2. though not so palpably, I must confess, as in the Solar; by reason of the Moons velocity of Motion, and often largeness of the Shadow, and of the Cold, which is Naturally and Universally then prevailing. VI. That the greatest share of Cold Weather in Summer, or of Warm weather in Winter, (for such Variety is plainly to be found almost in every year; but in some most re∣markable) happens when the Moon, and Ruling Planets are posited in Winter or Summer Signs. VII. That the Planets or Lunations, or Conjunctions, or Oppositions Regnant, happening in Azimene, Deep, Pitted or Smoaky Degrees of the Signs they possess, do irritate the most Ʋnwholsome and Ʋnhealthy Storms, and Disturbed weather. Pray observe a Famous proof hereof in the New Moon succeeding New-Years-day last, which was Celebrated in such Degrees; and at the same time Mars being in Degrees Azimene, and Pitted, and the Moon passing Aquarius, where almost half the Sign con∣sists of such like Degrees. And lo! What a continuant Storm for near three days and nights together, happen'd im∣mediately after. Let us remember also the Fogs that fell on September, the 29th. and 30th. days; and on Decem∣ber the 22d. and 23d. days, Anno 1682. And consider how the Planets were then Posited. To these we may justly add the several Foul Holes which Dr. Goad hath so happily set up his Mark at. You may find which they are, by the Second Part of my Ephemerides, Printed, Anno 1680. where (that so useful a Discovery might not be obliviated, with the consent of that my Worthy Friend) I have inser∣ted them. VIII. That the Conjunctions, Oppositions, and Luna∣tions, &c. of the Sun, Moon, and Planets falling in Bright, Lucid and Fortunate Parts of Heaven, are commonly at∣tended with Pleasant Air, and very Salubrious Effects; but still with regard to the Season. Pray try these things, and trust them as you find them true. I could produce
sundry Instances of this Conspicuous Truth, both out of This, and also out of the Learned Keplers, Diary. But that is needless, since you may discover them here, even by INSPECTION, in a manner, without further trouble. It being much easier to prove these things by Inspection, than the troublesome Calculations of the Planets Places, as some lately, with more Confidence than Truth, have presumed to do. IX. That hereby is taught and proved, that the latter part of Cancer is the Hottest part of the whole Heaven. And also, that the last week in May is generally inclined to Moisture. There are but three Instances in the whole Diary that oppose it; and even those produce great Heats, which are the certain Prodromi, (if not the proper Pa∣rents) of Moisture. And, for a clear Demonstration of the Former, (besides many others) you may consult June 1673. May 1675. September 1680. August 1682. Ju∣ly, in the years 1684. 1686. 1688. I need not be more plain in a thing so obvious. In all your Exceptions to our Rule, I must advertise you to heed the prevailing constitution. X. That Planets near the Aequinoxes are of the most Powerful, and rarely failing Influences. And this the Learned Vossius, and most Naturalists, allow of. A Fa∣mous Evidence whereof is the Month of March, in its proving Windy, Turbulent, &c. to a Proverb. Chiefly, the latter part thereof; the Sun being then in Aries, in Opposition to the Virgins Spike. Nor is it much different in September, when the Sun is in the Autumnal Aequinox. Neither do the other Planets fail to irritate the same re∣markable Commotions or Turbulencies, when they also in their Turns approach the Aequinoxes. This is general. But the Learned Goad goes further, and affirms that the Weather may be found, not only to a Week, and Day, but time of the Day also; For the Planet Mars (saith he) Strikes the Hour of the Day as well as the Clock. And this chiefly when in the Aequinoxes, &c. XI. Hence likewise is plainly proved that the Year which affords the fewest Frosts in it, Exhibits to us, in this
Climate, more than LXX. Days fraught with that Meteor: And sometimes the Solar Revolution produceth 80.90. nay an 100 days of Frost in them. Which considered, may we not justly brand such Almanack-Men among us, for Ignorant Impostors, that pretend to give an account of the Weather, and yet scarce afford us a mention of one Frosty Day in a whole year. These silly Wretches forget, That Ianiveer, is Freeze Pot by the Fire. But I am not for Controversy. XII. That the East-winds (as the Learned Mr. Bohun observes) do most commonly prevail in the Spring with us. But we find the West-winds more generally accom∣pany us all the year; as the whole Diary most plainly affirms in its Evidence. And is it thus in the Alterations of the Air, and Seasons of the Year? Then certainly we shall find Astrology so far from being an Inanity, or a Sonorous Nothing, as a more witty, than wise Antagonist (viz. Dr. More) has been pleased to term it; That we may reasonably affirm it will hold good in other matters, viz. even in Mundane Mutations: and most probably also, in the va∣rious Destinies of Men. Yea, perhaps, in the common Oeconomy of all Humane Concerns: Were we but so wise and fortunate as to find out the Mystery. Nay, I dare aver, that Men and Women may learn by the Stars good Husbandry, and Huswifery, though they never were so happy as to be acquainted with the Georgicks. Some∣what of this Nature I have formerly hinted at in my Car∣dines Coeli; wrote in Reply to some part of Cometoman∣tia, unto which Book I refer the Reader. It were no hard matter to produce out of this Diary Variety of Instances for a further Dilucidation of this Iury of Particulars, having them Collected in readiness by me. But to publish them at large, would require more Copious room to breath in, neither is it very fit Furniture for a Postscript. 'Tis sufficient that I have here deliver'd the INSTRUMENT, for the service of the Ingenious, and likewise Explain'd to them (in part at least) to what ad∣mirable
Aires it is Tuneable. If Men are but meanly In∣dustrious, they will very soon learn to Play thereon, and that without much Study or Tutoring. Happy, yea more than thrice happy must that Man be, who comes truly to understand how God Almighty is pleased by the Agency of the Stars and Planets, to Ring the various PEALS of his PROVIDENCE on this Ter∣rene Globe, sometimes to the Pleasing, othertimes to the Amazing Wonder of Humane Ears. He that knows, and Religiously admires how the Sun, Moon and Stars do Praise their Maker, is to be look'd on as one of the best sort of Men and Christians, being in Possession of some part of Coelestial Verity, and little less than a Privy Councellor of Heaven. To conclude, the Caelestial Orbs disown all Anti-Mo∣narchical, Disloyal, and Rebellious Principles. There are no Commonwealths-men (falsely so called) to be found in those Superiour Franchises. All are for Monarchy in the Heavenly Regency, and readily bow to one Supreme Being, upon whose Regular Motion that of all others depend. The Ecliptique is the Suns Whitehall or Windsor; where his Illustrious Satellites, his Stars of Honour, do, in their several Posts and Turns wait upon this Ʋisible Deity, and affirm him unaccountable to any Power but that of God; as our Laws (not wrested by Machivillian Interest) declare our Kings to be. And, he that dares (with Lucifer) but think of Dethroning the August Emperor of these Di∣vine Mansions from his Royal Office, upon any pretence whatever, is deem'd a Traytor against the God of Order, an Arch-Incendiary, and Introducer of Confusion. And such a Wretch ought to be abhorred by all Good Men, as the Coloquintida and Bane not only of Humane Conversa∣tion, but of Government. For to this VVight, let his pre∣tences be never so specious, every thing he Acts is Just so it be Safe. The Event only proving his doings Fair or Fraudulent. That's his Principle. And, God knows, a very sad and sandy one. But alas! If this (worse than Turkish) Doctrine had any Face or Colour of Truth in it,
why, as a late Learned Prelate said, do Men Pray? or give Thanks? or why do not all Men Temporise, turn VVeather-Cocks, or VVitnesses? after the Egregious Exam∣ples of, &c. — Oh Reader! Have a care of seeming Semi-Christians; (for some such we have that pretend to Astrology) they are more dangerous than Anti-Chri∣stians. These are Hypocrites, and those plain Atheists. The Latter you may easily avoid. The Former charms you by his seeming an Angel of Light, which the Devil too oft transforms himself into. They are Religious in their words, but their Actions render them scarce Men. Be careful of them I say, and observe not the way, but the end of such. A little knowledge of Philosophy puffeth up (as the Apostle speaks) and only serves to shew an Atheist or Scoffer. But it is a solid and serious understanding in the works of God and Nature that renders a Man a true Adeptus. Let us therefore likewise shun Prophane and Atheistial Persons, (Ʋraniah Fosters such Brats also, tho' against her will) for such that take no Care of their own Souls, we may be sure will have little regard to the Life, Liberty, or Estate of another) shunning such, I say, Let us with the Learned Causabon begin and end every thing we undertake, with an Orison to God. So may we expect our Lawful En∣deavours to prosper, and meet an happy Issue in this Life, and at length (when God shall vouchsafe to shift this Scaene of our Mortality) hope to arrive with Joy, at the Port of the Blessed, and there Commence a Conversation among the Holy Angels, and with them be made partakers of the Beatifical Vision; where, and when, we shall see all Arts (and Artists too) in their Perfection and Glory. Whereas here, being cloathed with Flesh and Blood, we must be content with our Earthly Portion, which is, To know but in part. I am, (Gentlemen) Yours and Ʋraniah's meanest Servant, JOHN GADBURY. Brick-Court, in Colledge-street by the Deans-Yard, Westminster.
The Names of those Ingenious Gentlemen, and Excellent Artists, who had the Honour to Build the X. several Brave SHIPS of WAR, whose Genitures are herein Re∣corded, which the Author (Deeming wor∣thy to Live with Their Noble Works) hath thought fit to Commemorate to Posteri∣ty, by Incerting Them at the end of his ASTROLOGICAL SEA-MAN. I. THe Defiance; Built by Mr. Robert and Mr. Willi∣am Castle, at Deptford. II. The Loyal London; Built at Deptford, by Mr. Commissioner Taylor. III. Charles the Second; Built by Mr. Jonas Shish, at Deptford. IV. Sir William Pettyes Double-Bottom'd Ship; Built by Mr. Jonas. Shish, at Jamaica, near Redriff. V. The Edgar; Built at Bristol, by Mr. Taylor; and Re-built by Mr. Isaack Bets, at Portsmouth. VI. The Rupert; Built by Mr. (now Sir) Anthony Dean, at Harwich, VII. The II. Loyal London; Built by Mr. Jonas Shish, at Deptford. VIII. The Royal Catherine; Built by Mr. Christopher Pett, at Woolwich. IX. The Cambridge; was Built by Mr. Jonas Shish, at Deptford. X. The Saint Michael; was Built at Portsmouth, by Sir John Tibbets.
ERRATA. PAge 9. line. 2. read vnless Gods Grace and Good Edu∣cation, l. 30. r. Circle, p. 18. l. 6. r. serviceable, p. 27. l. antepenult, r. better, p. 31. l. 2. r. Critical, p. 33. l. 19. r. therefore, p. 53. l. 19. r. Testimonies, p. 54. l. 23. r. Arguments, p. 63. l. 4. r. Constellation, l. antepenult, r. this, p. 106. l. penult, r. prejudice, p. 119. l. 8. r. Owners, p. 115. l. 4. and 7. r. drops, also, r. August, 1684. p. 124. l. 20. r. Astrologer. p. 220. l. 16. r. drops. p. 229. r. February. Other Literal Errors the Author will stand indebted to the Readers Charity to amend as he meets with them. Advertisement about the Abbreviations used in the Diary of the Weather. THey are easily understood thus. — Fr. stands for Frost. Ra. for Rain. Sn. for Snow. Dr. or Dris. for Drisle. Cldy for Cloudy. Mis. Misl. for Misle, or Misling. Th. for Thunder. Ha. ☽ for Halo ☽. Temp. for Tem∣pest, or Tempestuous, Wd for VVind. The Capital Let∣ters express the prevailing Winds; as E. East. W. VVest. N. Nortb. S. South. S. E. South East. S. W. South VVest, &c. The Letters m. n. p. d. denote m. morning, n. night, p. post, or afternoon, d. day. Of these I thought fit to advertise the Reader, to remove all Blocks, or Re∣mora's out of his way.
