h2418 E166_13 99859997 112102
THE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from the Earle of HOLLAND, to an Honourable Lord, at the Parliament. Anno Domini. 1641.
The Coppy of a Letter sent from the Earle of Hol∣land, to an honourable Lord, at the Parliament. MY LORD, IN the discharge of my care and duty to the Parlia∣ment, I can onely say this, That having receiued their Orders for present disban∣ding of the Army, begin∣ning with the Horse, I have given order, that the Regiments of my Lord of Carnarvan, Master Wilmot, and Sir Tho. Lucas, to∣gether with Master Percies Troope shall as farre as for the present I can doe, be prepared to be forthwith disbanded; and so the rest to
follow. Having given directions, that the accounts of these Regiments may be in readi∣nesse for those Gentlemen that are appointed to take care of the Counties satisfaction, both in the debts of the Officers, and likewise for the billiting of the common Souldiers; which I have howsoever put in a way by the casuall meeting of Sir Tho. Hansby at Doncaster, where some of our Horse-troopes are quarte∣red, which I drew together to attend his Ma∣jesty into the Towne; which occasioned some discourse betwixt us, That as yet I had not received the names of those Gentlemen, neither had any of them bin with me, that are appoin∣ted to assist in these accounts between the Ar∣my and the County: whereupon he shewed me a Letter written unto him and some others, for the West riding of the Knights of the Shire to that purpose; but told me as yet they had not met to agree of any thing about it, but that within one day or two they should doe it. My advice unto him then was, out of my desire to obey (as speedily as possibly I might) the orders of the Parliament, that
they would loose no time in it; and by a joynt letter informed me, of their orders for this service; that so I might for that Division (a place being named) appoint the Officers to ajust their accounts with them: and likewise that those Gentlemen for the other Divisions may doe the like. Who I suppose (the Assizes and comming of the Iudges to this Towne being upon Monday next) may have deferred the giving me the Account of this their im∣ployment untill this time, I pray God, by the private intelligence that comes amongst us, there be not a generall Assizes and judgement appointed for this Kingdome in these great troubles, which are such as cannot be preven∣ted or averted, but by the advised counsels that are expected from our great and highest Coun∣cell the Parliament; who may be both assured, and secured of all readinesse in our obedience to those orders I have received from them, being ful of that respect & duty that becomes me towards their Lordships; My Lord J am most faithfull. We heare that the Generall of the Scotch
Army, will shew unto his Majesty their Army as he passeth by Newcastle; the which some say hath beene recrewted of late. If it hath beene so, I conceive it onely to make it ap∣peare in a better posture before his Majesty; since now there can be no other end for it, this Parliament being assured of their sudden marching away out of this Kingdome. And likewise I conceiue of their speedy disban∣ding in Scotland, which will both ease their Charge and the hearts of many in these parts, that otherwise will continue in their feares; How reasonable I know not. Yorke 13. Aug. 1641. Your Lordships most humble and faithfull servant, Holland.
