L35 669.f.16[13] 99870031 163170
Old SAYINGS and PREDICTIONS Verified and fulfilled, Touching the young King of SCOTLAND and his gued Subjects Jockey. I Jockey turne the stone of all your plots, For none turnes faster then the turne coat Scots. Presbyter. We for our ends did make thee King be sure, Not to le us, we will not that endure. King. You deep dissemblers I know what you doe, And for revenges sake, I will dissemble too. THE SCOTS HOLDING THEIR YOVNG KINGES NOSE TO YE GRINSTONE Come to the Grinstone Charles tis now to late To Recolect tis presbiterian fate You Couinant pretenders must Ibee: The subiect of youer Tradgie Comedie: THis Embleme needs no learned Exposition, The World knows well enough the sad condi∣tion Of regall Power, and Prerogative Dead, and dethron'd in England, now alive In Scotland, where they seeme to love the Lad, If hee'l be more obsequious then his Dad. And Act according to Kirk Principles, More subtile then were Delphick Oracles. For let him lye, dissemble, kill and slay, Hee's a good Prince that will the Kirk obey. This blind obedience teach the Popes of Rome, And Popes of Lambeth we have had at home: Whose doctrine made our English royall State As odious as the Italian Potentate. But now the Scots all falshoods do engrosse, And will defend them with St. Andrews Cross. They will protest against all violence, 'Gainst sacred Kings, yet blast their innocence. Abhor that Civil Power that dares take The life of Kings away, yet way will make For justice stroke both by their Tongue and Pen, And then accuse our State for Murthering men. Did not the Kirk-men Presbyrerian Scots Thus Crowne and Scepter with the righteous spots Of blood and tyrannie besmeare, and stir our State To doe Heroick Justice, and t'expiate With blood the blood of many thousands spilt By one whom they more infamous with guilt Of horrid murther made, then all those ten Vile persecuting Emperours and monstrous men? But Law and Justice at the last being done On the hated Father, now they love the Son, And now have Crown'd their Convert Proselyte, Whom they adore, if he adore the right, And dictates of the Scottish Hierarchie, With which the Crowne and Scepter must comply, And be subordinate unto, for Kirk must rule, This is a Tenet of the Romish Schoole. Then stoop gued King, it was thy Fathers Fate To be so indulgent to that grand Prelate, Whose old impostures now have gul'd, and can Transforme a Scottish Levite from a man Into a Monster Sphinx, whose knotty sense In his darke riddles nones intelligence Could extricate; so Kirk-mens subtile stiles Wrapt in religious Covenants beguiles The Laick Jockies, who at their command Will daret invade and spoile their Neighbours Land. Turne Jockie turne (for gold will turne thy heart And make thee to renounce in Christ a part) The Grindstone to make sharp thy Levites Laws Or else t'abate the edge of regall Cause, And priviledge. And Jockie for thy paines Great treasures, pleasures, offices, and gaynes Shall be thy large Reward when England's wonne, Till then hang on the hopes which thou hast spunne. Loe here the Chicken of the Eagle lies Like to be made a Scottish Sacrifice. But, wants he King-craft to create a Plot To undermine the Sicophanting Scot? No; hee'l a Presbyterian Brother be, And vow to ratifie their Hierarchie, Nay more, hee'l not disdaine in shew to be Subject to their proud Kirk's Supremacie: The Sins of's Fathers house he will bewaile, Mourne and lament under a Scottish Veile. But this religious mock we all shall see, Will soone the downfall of their Fabel be. Rouze up true English Hearts and let them see The sad effects of Mask't Hypocrisie, Curbe their proud hearts that they in time may know That God is working of their overthrow. Yet why should valiant Souldiers fight and toyle To get the nothing of a barren soyle? And for a speedy issue to these wars Heaven send them store of fearfull fatall jarres. As in a Glasse, that they (though late) may see What 'tis attends the STEWARD's Family. COurteous Reader, Although this Emblme doth chiesly represent the Rigid Presbyterie of Scotland, yet it is too apparent, they have many Friends both of the Clergy and Gentry in England, that are not behind hand in assisting them, in their present actings, and for so much as concernes our present occasion, I shall briefly cite Mr. Lilie's words expressed in his Astrologicall predictions this present yeare, 1651. wherein he ingeniously confesseth, he hath no malice, either to Presbyterian or Malignant, except they disturb our quiet, and molest our present Government and Councell of State; but in the second page of his booke, he describs the Parliament of England's perfectionall figure, for the 11. yeare of their sitting, from which he concludes the Genuine sense of that quadrant aspect, runns thus, or doth signifie in effect thus, that our present state shall be still, a great part of this yeare dangerously molested and pestered by a refractorie people of their owne, called a Scotified Clergy, a generation of men from whom both the Spirit of Truth, and the meeke Spirit of obedience, due by the Lawes of God unto their Superiors is departed: certainly these men doe our Parliament more mischiefe, and whole Nation moe pre∣judice, then an Army of Forraigne Forces would doe, let God reward them according to their iniquity; from the second figure, he concludes, that the present power or Counsell of State shall stand firme, and shall not be dissolved, by any earthly power, worldly force or treacherie, during this annuall resolution. Observe this also, viz. That forty yeares were the English under the government of two Scottish Kings, even just as many yeares as the Children of Israel did wander in the Wildernesse before they came unto rest, God hath now delivered us from that servitude, and wee are very neere entring into the Land of Canaan, viz. liberty, if we repine not at Gods mercies, nor rebell against his authority, wee shall assu∣redly enjoy it. 2 The grand cause of the Scots being at variance and enmity with us, is our change of government, and why may not England change againe a third and a fourth time, if they see good, and aske Scotland no leave, it being a right in all Nations to alter their govern∣ment, for the publique benefit; Scotland may take notice, how long they were in former times without a King, and how little power they afforded him, certainely it was their antient custome, to hold his Nose to it, with the Bridle both of Kirke and State, so that this is no new or strange Embleme of them; the difference betwixt them is this, that wee having cast off their King, it is their designe to settle him upon us againe, by force, they proclaimed him King of Great Brittaine, &c. But wee have more reason to breake the line of succession, made up of tyranny, cruelty and oppression: The Norman bastard the Father of them all, had no other title to the Crowne but his long sword, by which he became Conquerour against the Lawes and liberties of England, and after him proceded his Sonnes, and their Successors obtained the Crowne, one from another, by power and policie, till the time of Henry the seventh, who laid claime to it by the same title also, of Conquest, after he had slaine Richard the third, save that he descended from a Bastard of John of Gant, and from this King, did our late Tyrant King CHARLES derive his title, he being descended from a Daughter of that Henry married into Scotland, by vertue whereof his Father K. James, by the unhappy policie of some Courtiers, did obtaine the Crowne, who was then attended with a heavy curse, and terrible plague, into England, if it were no more but the weake and unjust title of the usurping pretenders, the English Nation have sufficient cause to cast off this accursed Monarchie, but which is more, through all their reigne hath been exercised, a constant course of tyranny, for not one of them since William the Conquerour, but did exceedingly abuse, and enslave the people, as the Chronicle makes mention: So that it was nobly done of our Parliament to lay hold on a season of liberty, after the Nation had groaned under slaverie, for five or six hundred yeares. Suppose the title of this young King had been good and right, hath not the Fathers treason cut off the Sonne? hath he not from the beginning been in actuall warre against the Parliament? hath he not had his Fathers Counsellours, and principles? and hath he not been bred up under poperie and prelacie, and hath had hand in the blood of the three Nations, making use of all Parties, to serve his owne malicious ends and interest, and are not Englands eyes yet open, to see what will be the sad condion, and wofull effects of it? If they should be so base spirited, as to suffer this young pretender to take rooting againe, to bring them back into slaverie, and Monarchcall bondage, a yoake too heavy for Englands shoulders to beare. I wil conclude with an old Prophesie of a Jesuite in Hen. VII. time, of all the Kings and Queens that should succeed in England; thus, Mars, Puer, Alecto, Virgo, Vulpes, Leo, Nallus. The English of it is this, Mars the God of war, Hen. 8. Puer, a Boy, Edward the 6. Alect, a Fury, Queene Mary, Virgo, a maiden Queen Elizabeth, Vulper, a Fox King James, Leo a Lyon King Charles, Nullus, None. By J. L. Philalethes. London, Printed 1651.
