L445 E1786_1 99896095 154026
THE TRUE EFFIGIES, OR Portraicture Of the chief Philosophers, Historians, Poets, Grammarians, and Oratours. OR, A Compendious VIEW of each, both dignified with, and distinguished by, their peculiar CHARACTERS. By Ed. Larkin, A. M. late Fellow of Kings Colledge in Cambridge, and now of Limesfield in Surrey Minister. LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Greyhound in St. Pauls-Church yard, 1659.
ΕΙΚΩΝ ΦΙΛΟΣΟΦΩΝ: OR, THE Philosophers, In their Express IMAGES. By E. Larkin, M. A. and late Fellow of Kings Colledge in Cambridge; now of Limesfield in Surrey Minister. LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Greyhound in St. Pauls-Church-yard, 1659.
TO THE Right Worshipfull Sir WILLIAM HAWARD OF TANDRIDGE, KNIGHT; A great Honourer of LEARNING, and Learned Men. Noble SIR, HAving considered of some few choice Philosophers, and Historians, when spare
houres were for such pleasing Recreations, I have here re∣presented them in as brief Cha∣racters as I could, onely begging your favourable View of them. Sir, your high Deserts, in respect of your Excellent Parts, and your large Improvement of them in all Literature, together with that serene Candour which is in you to Admiration, have emboldned me to make these rude Draughts yours, and to shroud them under the Wings of your great Name. I know I have pitcht upon, as a most Judicious, so, a most Candid Patron; And were I
sure to meet with as gentle a Reader, I should not then feare that black Coale, which young Writers so much dread. Sir, your Indulgent Accep∣tance of this so mean a Present, will tye me to you with the stron∣gest Cords of Observance, and force, me not only to write, but also, to shew myself ever more, Yours, to Honour and Reverence You, Edw. Larkin.
The Names of the Philosophers as they are handled in order. HErmes, Pythagoras, Democritus. Heraclytus, Socrates, Plato, Epicurus, Zeno, Chrysippus, Cleanthes. Anaxagoras, Carneades, Aristoteles, Diogenes, Theophrastus, Seneca, Plinius, Plutarchus, Apollonius Tyan. Epictetus, Arianus, Plotinus, Porphyrius, Maximus Tyrius, Boethius, Whereunto are added the Chara∣cters of those two most Emi∣nent Physitians, HIppocrates. Galenus.
THE CHARACTERS Of the chief of the PHILOSOPHERS. Hermes, i. e. Mercurius. HErmes, i. e. Mercurius, called by Gy∣raldus, Trismegistus, because he was in three respects great; as a Philosopher, as a Priest, and as a King. He was esteemed as the wisest of the Egyptians, and is thought by learned Suidas, to have flourished in the World before Pharaoh: He calls him Ter∣maximum, not upon that account as Gyraldus doth, but because he spake something that did intimate to him, he had some acknowledgment of the Trinity. Lactantius expresseth this wise Ancient in his
Book de Ira Dei, where he saith, Ob virtutem multarumque artium Scientiam, Trismegistus nomina∣tus, non modo Plaone, verum etiam Pythagora, septemque illis sapientibus antiquior. Hermes named Trismegistus, for his Vertue and Science of many Arts, not only more ancient then Plato, but Py∣thagoras also, and the seven wise Men. Lypsius tells us, That though he was an Egyptian, and a Heathen man, Tamen in eo multa esse mysteria & ar∣cana nostrae legis. Yet there are in him many my∣steries and secrets of our Law. I'le let him pass with those Verses of Joseph Scaliger. — Quid vetus ejusdem Tyrannus aulae terque maximus Nili Regnator Hermes, qui logisticis punctis Collegit astra, coelici penetrali Reseravit adyta, venit ad Deos ipsos, Coelo potitus sic per astra captivo? Pythagoras. PYthagoras the Samian Philosopher, was the Son of Mesarchus a Jeweller, of whom it is sayd, That in the Trojan War, his Name should be Euphorbus, according to that of the Poet, —Trojani Tempore belli Panthoides Euphorbus eram. —
But being there slain, and afterwards reviving, he was called thenceforward Pythagoras, whence arose that mad opinion of the Pythagorean , whereby they report, that there is a migration of Souls out of one body into ano∣ther, as they suit each with other in their Con∣stitutions and Tempers; so that according to this principle, if a man of a fierce and fiery dispo∣sition dies, then his Spirit goes into some wild and ravenous Beast, such as is the Bear, or Lyon; and so their Bodies are inform'd with an hu∣mane Soul. Now what a Chimaera this is, I need not stand to shew, it being in its self absurd, and mon∣strous unto every eye. This Philosopher is by Justinus in his Dialogue with Tryphon, joyn'd with the great Plato, and cal'd with him, Vir sapiens, & quasi murus praesidiumque Philosophiae. A Wise man, and as it were the Wall, and Bul∣wark of Philosophy. Valerius Maximus in his seventh Book, stiles him perfectissimum opus sapi∣entiae, Wisdomes most perfect Work. And Plutarch tells us, That the Decrees of him, and of Empedocles were the only Laws of the Anci∣ent Graecians. He was against any mans eating of things, wherein there was Blood, and Life, as is ex∣pressed by the Poet in the fifteenth Book of his Metamorphosis. I'le conclude him with that of Lypsius, Ejus singula sententiarum frusta gemmas habent. All his Crusts of Sentences have their Jewels.
Democritus. DEmocritus, Sirnamed Abderites, and called (as Suidas saith) , quod inania ho∣minam studia derideret; Because he derided the vain Studies of men. Aelianus further calleth him , Wisdome, and , and , because he was learned in Physicks, Ethicks, Mathe∣maticks, and in all other liberall Arts, and Disciplines. Epicurus in Laertius, , A Censurer of toyes. Or else as Hadrianus Jun. would have it read, , from the Greek word . This Philosopher placing himself in his Gar∣den, scituate neer the City Walls, did there purposely put out the sight of his Eyes, that he might be the better disposed for Contempla∣tion. His Opinion was, That all things were made of Atomes, and that there were more Worlds then one. He learned Theologie, and Astronomy from the Chaldeans. He bought him∣self to great want by reason of his tedious and frequent Travaile, which he undertook for no other end but to advantage his Knowledge by them. He was the first Anotamist. Pliny calls him Virum sagacem & vitae utilissimum. He lived untill he was very Aged, as being an hundred and nine years old when he dyed. He wasted himself in supplying the necessities of o∣ther men. His Father was so rich in Substance, that it is reported of him, that he entertained
Xerxes huge and mighty numerous Host with a sumpteous Banquet. Heraclitus. HEraclitus the Ephesian Philosopher had af∣fections quite contrary to those of Demo∣critus, for he would weep at every Object, as the other laughed: He is by Suidas cal'd , bscure, and dark, because he so clouded all his Speeches, that the best eyed, and most judicious Philosophers could very hardly discover the meaning of them. Some say, that he never had any Master to instruct him, but that he learnt all he knew, by his own only labour and industry; however others affirm, that he was Schoold both by Xe∣nocrates, and Hippasus the Pythagorean. Declining in years, he fell into a Dropsie, but would not use the help of Physitians for the curing of him. At last, tumbling himself all over Head and Ears in Dung, he was torn in pieces by greedy Dogs, or as some others say, overwhel∣med, and smothered in the Dirt. Pliny sayes of him, that for his rigour, and inflexible roughness of nature, he was called , a man without passion: In Laertius we meet with this Epigram upon him. .
He was stiled by Epicurus , an Ape, or Affe∣ctatour, as also  mero bibus; he said of him∣self, that when he was young, he knew no∣thing, and when he came to ripe years, he was ignorant of nothing. He flourisht in the Reign of the last Darius the Persian; he wrote many things in a Poeticall strein, and way, and is of∣ten times cited by the great Peripatetick Ari∣stotle; There were four others of this Name. Socrates. SOcrates the Athenian Philosopher was the Son of Soproniscus, and Phanarota, his Father being a Statuary, and his Mother a Midwife. He had two Wives, whereof one was named Xantippe, a Woman of an unquiet, turbulent, and restless Spirit; of whom its nois'd, that whilst her labouring husband was reading of his grave Lectures, and in serious conference with his Disciples, she would frequently break in upon them, and overturn the Tables, on pur∣pose to vex him; whence the good man was called, as we read in Seneca, Perpessitius Senex, per omnia aspera jactatus; Invictus tamen. It was his frequent saying; Quae supra nos, nibil ad nos. Those things which are above us, are nothing to us: The Delphick Oracle spake thus of him, as it is noted in Aristophanes his Nubibus. ,
. Sophacles is wise, Euripides wiser; but of all men, Socrates is the wisest. Eunapius cals him , A li∣ving Image of Wisdome. Valerius Maximus, Huma∣nae sapientiae quasi quoddam terrestre oraculum. As it were an earthly Oracle of humane wis∣dome. Heinsius, Solem sapientiae: only Zeno of all men adventures to disparage him, in calling him, Scurram Atticum. Quintilian affirms, that he was the first Phi∣losopher that brought down Wisdome from Heaven, and placed it here on earth in the habi∣tations of men. He learned to play upon the Harp, when he was somewhat aged, he was com∣peld to drink a draught of Poyson, and so he dyed. I'le add but his Character from Maximus Tyrius: Homo (saies he) & corpore purissimus, & animo optimus, & vivendi ratione perfectissimus, & in dicendo suavissimus, qui pie cum Deo, & sancte cum ho∣minibus versabatur. A man most pure in body, and best in mind, most perfect in his way of li∣ving, and most sweet in his expressions, one that lived piously with God, and holily with Men.
Plato. PLato the Prince of the Academick Sect, was the Son of Ariston, and Parectonia, so cal'd (as Appuleius saith, A corpori habitudine, from the habitude of his Body; for he had broad Shol∣ders, whereas before, he was named Aristocles. Being young, he acquired the Art of Limning, and spent also some time then in composing of Poems and Tragedies: when he grew in years he followed Socrates, from whom he suckt his Rudiments of Philosophy; wherein he so out∣stript all others of his time: that (as Cicero saies) he was accounted Deus Philosophorum, the God of the Philosophers, and cal'd (as in the Epigram) . Tully further in his Book de Divinatione, tel∣leth us, That being a Child, and lying in his Cradle, a Swarm of Bees ligted upon his Lips, and thence it was answered, That he should prove the sweetest of all Oratours: His Elo∣quence was thus foreseen in his Infancy, and to it doth that Epigram of Owens relate. Quae primum in labris pueri sedere Platonis, In Libris resident us{que} Platonis apes. What sayes Antimachus of him in Cicero's Bru∣tus; Plato unus mihi instar omnium millium, Plato alone is o me as many thousands. Maximus Tyrius is bold to affirm, That Nature herself
never saw any thing more eloquent, no, not so much as great Homer excepted; Panoetius there∣fore stiles him the Homer of Philosophers: Pliny, Sapientiae Antistitem, The President of Wisdome. Salvian, Romanum Catonem, The Roman Cato. Et alium Italiae Socratem; And another Socrates of Italy. He is further compared by a Philosopher to Moses, and cal'd , Moses speaking in the Artick Dialect. Lipsius saith, That he utter∣ed many things worthy of the Gods, and that, though he sometime spake, yet he did not think with the Multitude. He was named Philosychus, because he extreamly loved to seed on Figgs; he lived his whole life a Batchelour, and as some say, He dyed Morbo pediculari, Of the lousie Disease. Epicurus. EPicurus the Head of that Sect, called the Epi∣curian, was an Athenian Philosopher, of whom it is reported, That he should place Mans chiefest happiness in Pleasure, yet not with Aristippus, in that of the Body, but in that of the Mind. Seneca tells us, that he did San∣cta, & recta praecipere, Command things holy and just, and that he did Male audire Infamis im∣merito. They further write of him, That he should deny the Divine Providence, as though
all things of the World were upheld and main∣tained without it: what ever these say of him, yet Lucretius most highly extolleth him, doubt∣ing not to affirm, That this Epicurus hath as far dim'd the light of other Philosophers, as the Sun doth out-shine the other Planets. He was a man of most continent life, notwith∣standing that his placing of mans chief good in Pleasure hath caused this; that all voluptuous men are from his Name cal'd Epicurians: He writ very much, whereupon he is in Diogenes Laertius cal'd . Suidas saith, That he was seven years old at Plato's death; and that when he was a young man, he could with much ado get out of his Bed, and that his Eyes were so weak, that he could not bear the Sun∣shine. Timocrates cal'd his Philosophy , A nocturnall and secret Conventicle; he cared not for Logick, asserting that Philosophy might be comprehended in simple, and naked words. Zeno. ZEno the Head of the Stoick Sect, was had in so great esteem and admiration with the Athenians, (as Laertius hath reported) that they would dare to commit the custody, and trust of their City Keys to him, honouring him
moreover with a Golden Crown, and a brazen Image. This man one day hearing a Youth to prate idlely and foolishly, spake thus unto him, Ideo duas habemus aures, os autem unum, ut scilicet multa audiamus, pauca vero loquamur. Therefore have we two Ears, and but one Mouth, that we might hear many things, and speak but few. Cicero tells us, That this was the Philosopher which did distinguish with his hand, those two Arts of Logick, and Rhetorick, Nam cum com∣presserat digitos, pugnumque fecerat, dialecticam ae∣bat ejusmodi esse, cum autem diduxerat, & manum di∣lataverat, palmae illius similem eloquentiam esse dicebat. When he contracted his Fingers, and clenched his hand, then it resembled Logick, but when those Fingers were spread abroad, and when he had opened his hand, then did he represent Rhe∣torick, or Eloquence. Its further sayd, to his great praise, and ho∣nour, that he did verba vertere in opera, Even live, as he spake, there being no dis-harmony betwixt his Conversation and Doctrines. So that his Life was proposed to the Athenians, as a Pattern for them to imitate. He is stiled by a learned man , A severe Philo∣sopher, and one that uttered very sublime things. And he is called by Laertius, Aegiptius palmes; for the talness and procerity of his lean, and slender Body.
Chrysippus. CHrysippus the Son of Apollonius, or as others will have it, Apollonides, and the Disciple of Zeno, was an eminent Stoick: His Opinions were repugnant to many of his Contemporaries; He was so excellent a Logician, that it was an ordi∣nary expression in the World concerning him; That it there were any use of Logick amongst the Gods, they then used none other then that of Chrysippus. He is called by Carneades, , for the smalness of his Body, who speaks further in the praise of him: Nisi Chrysippus esset, ego non ssem, Unless Chrysippus had been, I had not been. Heinsius calls him very wittily Retiarium Chrysip∣pum, As if like to a Net, he was apt to catch all men; for his voluminousness, and multitude of Books, he was thought to emulate Epicurus, and therefore was well named by Carneades, Li∣brorum ejus parasitus, His Books parasite. I meet not with any contemptuous or scorn∣full affront put on him, but only with one from Zeno, who playing upon his Name, very disdainfully cal'd him Chesippum, which word is derived from the Greek term , and signi∣fies an immodest Act, Cacare. Laertius sayes of him, How that next to Cleanthes, he was the principall Member of the Stoick School.
Cleanthes. CLeanthes a Stoick Philosopher, was the Dis∣ciple of Grates, and Successor to Zeno, whose Philosophy he ever adhered to, and propagated it to all, that he could converse with. Suidas saith of him, that he was so , Such a great Pains-taker, that he attai∣ned the name of another Hercules. Being very poor, and not able to supply himself with dayly Food, he would suffer his Labour to be hired all Night, and to be used in drawing of water, and when the day was come, he would spend the greatest part of that either in his private Studies, or in Conferences with Disciples: yet because he wrought so hard when he came to his handy Labour, there∣fore instead of Cleanthes, they would very often call him Phreanthes, which being in epteted, (sayes Laertius) signifies one that is an Emptier of Wells. Cicero calls him notwithstanding, Stoicum ma∣jorum Gentium, & Zenon is auditorem, A Stoick of the highest Rank, and the Auditor of Zeno. He was so poor, that when he was the Schollar of the forementioned Zeno, not being able to buy Paper for his own use, he would write the In∣structions which he received from his Master, in Shells, and Bones.
Anaxagoras. ANaxagoras the Disciple of Milesius, and the Son of Hegesibulus, was called (as Plutarch sayes) , because he asserted that  and , Matter, and Mind, were the Maintainers, and Preservers of all things. Suidas reports, that he was very rich, but left all his Lands to be de∣voured by Cattell, whence Apollonius Tyaneus took occasion to say handsomly, Anaxagoram potius ovibus, quam hominibus philosophatum fuisse. That Anaxagoras rather philosophiz'd to Sheep then Men. At length, the question being asked him by his Friends, why he took no more care of his Country, He forthwith stretching forth his Arm to Heaven-ward, raplyed (as it is in Laertius) Patriam eam esse, That that was his Country: At last returning home, and finding every thing out of order, his Lands unmanur'd, and untilled, and his Houses ruinated, he brake out into these, or such like words, Non essem ego salvus, nisi istae periissent. I had not been safe, if they had not perished. This Philosopher was the first man that found out the Lunary Ecclipse (as Plutarch af∣firms in the life of Nicias) for Nicias his Soldi∣ders at the fight of one, were therewith all ter∣rified, and looked upon it, as a Sign of the Gods displeasure, not knowing that there was a naturall cause of it.
Laertims also writes, that he was the first too that undertook to publish to the World the Works he had composed. It was his opinion of God, That he was Infinita mens, quae per seip∣sam movetur, as Polydore Virgil hath recorded it, Cicero hath stiled him, Virum summum in maximae∣rum rerum scientia, A man most eminently know∣ing in the most transcendent things. Carneades Cyrenaeus. CArneades Cyrenaeus called by Suidas, Novae, Academiae Autor, The Author of a new A∣cademy, was a great Admirer of the Chrysippaean Philosophy, and opponent to the Principles of the Stoick Zeno: They say, that he made use of the Art of Memory. Cicero, Gellius, and Quintillian write, that he was sent with others in an Embassie, by the men of Athens to Rome, but as soon as Cato had espy∣ed him, he informed the Senate, that he was a very dangerous man, and that it concerned them to be wary of dealing with him, least his eloquent and winning Tongue should so ma∣ster them, as to make them grant whatsoever he demanded. Tully extolls the Abilities of this man, in this following Character; Carneadis vis incre∣dibilis illa dicendi, & varietas perquam esset optanda
nobis qui nullam unquam in illis suis disputationibus rem defendit, quam non probarit, nullam oppugnavit, quam non everterit; How well were it to be wi∣shed, that we had that incredible faculty of Car∣neades his Eloquence, who never undertook a Cause, but did maintaine, never impugned one, but over-threw it. Whence it was, sayes Cicero, that it was called Vis Carneadea aut Aristotelia: Either a Carneadean, or Aristotelian Ability. Valerius Maximus cals him Laboriosum sapientiae militem, Wisdomes laborious and painfull Sol∣dier: and if Pliny may be thought worthy of Credit; It was the Censor Catoes opinion, and saying, That it was a very difficult thing to discern the truth, when this Philosopher was disputing. He lived ninety yeares, and as the forementioned Historian saith of him; Idem illi vivendi, ac Philosophandi finis fuit. Aristoteles. ARistoteles the Stagyrite, the Son of Nicoma∣chus was the Master of great Alexander of Macedon, whose Works were had in that reve∣eence with Chosroes the King of the Persians, that he had gotten them all by heart. He was Plato's Auditor at Athens for the space of ten years, and so profited in the Study of Philoso∣phy, that one would think, the Characters which the Learned afforded him, are Hyperbo∣licall,
and yet some there be, that think, that they do not transcend the mans merit. Cicero calls him, Aureum eloquentiae flumen, A golden River of Eloquence. Plutarch, Virum eloquentissimum, & peritum flectendi animos quaqua vellet, A man most eloquent and skilfull to in∣cline, and draw mens Minds whithersoever he pleased. Averroes informs us, that he invented three of the Sciences, Logicam, Naturalem, & Divinam, and in another place the same Author sayes, Aristoteles est regula, & exemplar, quod natura Invenit ad demonstrandam ultimam perfectionem hu∣manam; Aristotle is that Rule, and Sample which Nature hath found out to demonstrate mans ultimate Perfection. He is called by Suidas  Natures Scribe: and in the Greek Anthology, ; To Arnobius, he is Pater peripate∣ticorum, The Father of Peripateticks. To Julius Scaliger, Summus acprimus omnium scien∣tirum dictator, The chief and prime Dictator of all Sciences. And as the same Author further speaketh, Neque ipso, Pindaro minor, neither inferiour to Pindar himself. Lastly, He is to Lipsius, Summus rerum omnium Jude, The chief Judge of all matters. It is noys'd, that he withstood the learnedst of men, divine Plato, whence Aelian takes an occasion to bring in great Plato, calling his Schollar most unthankfull, who like a wanton Calf filled with the Mothers Milk, lifts up its
Heel against its own Damme. He died in the sixty eighth of his Age, in the same yeare as did Demosthenes. Diogenes Synopensis. Diogenes Synopensis, the Disciple of the Phi∣losopher Antisthenes, who would have him to be his Master, even against his will, for when he refused to take upon him the charge of Schollars, Diogenes would not be put off, nor recede from him; and when he threatned to strike him with his Staff, the Cynick most wil∣lingly submitted his Pate to it, saying withall, Nullus tam dirus baculus est, qui me a tuo possit obse∣quio seperare. There is no stick so hard, as to be able to seperate me from your Service. He was familiarly and frequently called , a Dog, and being demanded, why he was so na∣med, his answer was to this purpose, Quod iis blandior, qui dant, in eos vero qui non dant, oblatro, malos autem mordeo; Because I flatter and fawn on those which give, and bark at such as give not; and for the wicked ones I bite them. So that that Verse which the Poet Horace applies to sordid Avidienus, may very well suit with this Diogenes. Cui Canis ex vero ductum cognomen adhaeret.
For as it is in Diogenes Laertius, Suidas saith, That this Philosopher was emi∣nent for his Valour, and Courage, as others were for other Vertues. Xenocrates for mild∣ness, Theophrastus for Gravity, Zeno for Austeri∣ty, and Plato for Majesty: The latter of which called this Diogenes , Distracted Socrates. Being Courted once by Great Alexander, and desired to ask of him any thing he liked. In answer, He wished, that the King would not take that from him, which he could not give him. Alexander being so great a Potentate, wondred greatly what that might be, and forth with he understood that it was the comfort of the Sun-beans, for indeed the King stood be∣twixt him and the Sun.
Theophrastus. THeophrastus, a Philosopher of the City Eresse, whence called Eresseus, was the Dis∣ciple of great Aristotle, who departing from his School to Chalcis, left this man behind to be his Successor. Suidas saith, that at the beginning, his Name was Tyrtamus, but afterwards he was called by Aristotle, Euphrastus, and at length by some others Theophrastus; his Philosophy indeed being Heavenly and Divine; It was a familiar speech of his, that a learned man could never be Amicorum inops, Without Friends: the same, Seneca hath delivered of the wise man. They say, that he had two thousand Schollars, the like not being affirmed of any Philosopher, either before, or after him. Casaubon saith of him, That he was, Vir dig∣nissimus qui eo seculo viveret, quod tulit Socratem, vidit Platonem, Aristotelem generi humano dedit, Triumviros constituendae philosophiae divinitus sine du∣bio excitatos: A man most worthy to live in that Age, that brought Socrates into the World; Saw Plato, and gave Aristotle to Mankind, the Trium∣iri that were raised by Divine Providence, for the constitution of Philosophy. Therefore he saith further of him, Seeing he was, as it were, bred in the very Bosome of those, It is no wonder, if he arrived to that
deptst of Learning, and vein of Eloquence, that nothing could seem to proceed from him, which was not every way thought perfect by all that were studious of Wisdome. He is stiled by Scaliger in his Poetices, Divina vir eloquentia, A man of divine Eloquence: and by Aegllius, Suavitate homo insigni, linguae, pariter ac vitae; One, both for Tongue, ana Life, of eminent Sweetness: Plutarch affirms, how that the Roman Orator M. Tullius was wont to call him his Deliciae; his Works are commemo∣rated by Diogenes: He died very aged. Lucius Annaeus Seneca. LƲcius Annaeus Seneca, of Corduba in Spain, was a Stoick Philosopher; and the Master of Domitius Nero, by whom he was very ill recom∣pensed for all his Learned and good Instructi∣ons; for that same Monster of men compelled him to open his own Veins, and to let out his own blood, and that only out of a suspition, that he had been one of Piso's Conspiracy. He was called as Gyraldus well observes, Mo∣ralis, The Moralist, whom Fabius in his tenth Book stiles Egregium vitiorum insectatorem, An eminent Scourger of the Vices: Quamvis in philosophia parum diligentem, Although not so di∣ligent in his Philosophy, as the same Author
there notes: But Pontanus in his Observations upon Macrobius his Saturnals, names him Romana philosophiae Syrenem, The Syren of the Latine Philosophy. And Lipsius, Magnum inter magnos virum, & sapientiae fontem: Great amongst the great ones, and the Fountain of Wisdome: He further calls him an Author amongst all others most praise worthy, and for the Study of Ver∣tue almost a Christian; his matter was so sweet to him, that he could not chuse but break thus out. Pura, & coelo digna mens, & ad coelum alios subducens O pure Mind, and worthy of Heaven and drawing others to Heaven. Erasmus could say this also of the man, Si legas illum ut paganum, scripsit Christiane, si ut christianum, scripsit paganice. If thou readest him as a Pagan, he writ like a Christian: If thou readest him as a Christian, he writ like a Pagan. Caussinus his Judgment of him was, That he had not his equall for Wit, and that he is ra∣ther to be admired, then commended. They say, that Quintillian and Agellius did for some∣thing or other dislike of him: but learned Lip∣sius sheweth that they did it without a cause, so that he concludes thus of him; Soli Caligulae, cui nihil boni placere poterat, displicuit: He was displeasing only to Caligula, whom no good thing could ever please. Those Fathers, Ter∣tullian, Augustine, and Jerome speak very honour∣ably of the man.
Plinius Secundus. PLinius Secundus of Verona, flourished when Vespasian was Emperour, to whose state af∣faires he was very serviceable, as appears by Suetonius, who in these following words ap∣plauds his Faithfulness; Equestribus militiis industrie functus, procurationes quoque splendidissimas atque continuas summa Integritate administravit, & tamen liberalibus studiis tantam operam dedit, ut non temere quis plura in otio scripserit. His Life was very diligently written by his Grandson Caecilius, whose Epistles we have now extant with a Panegyrick, in honour of Traja∣nus. But as for this man, his chiefest work, is his naturall History; upon the account where∣of, we have him stiled by one of the Learned, Naturae Bibliothecarium; in which Work of his Caussinus takes notice of some disparity, for sayes he in the third Book, de Eloquentia, Plinius non ubique sui similis, plaeraque enim acute scripsit, nonnulla neglecta & inculta: Pliny is not every where like himself, many things he hath writ acutely, others with more neglect, and with less Ornament. However there are others of the Learned, who highly extoll him, as Heinsius; Jam de Caio Plinio quid dicam? qui naturam universam & utrumque mundum plane inusitata ante caeteris auda∣cia, paucis voluminibus inclusit: qui imperio Romano,
cui universus terrae orbis concessisset, coelum quoque adjecit. Now what shall I say of Caius Plinius? who included the whole Universe in a few Vo∣lumes, a boldness that others before him did not dare to shew; who added Heaven also to the Roman Empire, to which the whole World had before submitted. His Grandson in one of his Epistles attri∣butes to him, Acre Ingenium, Incredibile studium, & summam vigilantiam, A quick Wit, an incre∣dible studiousness, and a wonderfull Vigilancy. Dempster the Grammariam heaps upon him many worthy Epethites. Scriptor diligentissimus, elo∣quentissimus, veracissimus, incomparabilis, unus om∣nium Instar. A Writer most diligent, most elo∣quent, most true, incomparable, and one in esteem that is worth all. He is said to have been consumed in the flames that issued out of the Mountain Vesuvius, whilst too carelesly he was enquiring into, and seeking out the causes of it. Plutarchus. PLutarchus of Choeronea in Boeotia, called by Eunapius, , divine Plu∣tarch. As also, . The Venus and Harp of all Philosophy. He was in great repute, when Trojanus, and Adrian were Emperours. Suidas saith, That he was honou∣red
with Consular Titles and Dignities by the former of the two Princes, and that he was sent by him into Illyria with very great Authority, the Magistrates being there required not to act or determine any thing without Commission from their Deputy. Heinsius in one of his Orations stiles him, Compendium eruditionis, Prudentiae Thesaurum, Antiquitatum utriusque generis, Quendam Delium Apollinem. An Epitome of Learning, a Trea∣sury of Prudence, and for Antiquities of either kind a certain Delius Apollo. Lipsius calls him, Meliorem omnino, quam acutiorem Doctorem. Ra∣ther a better, then more acute Doctor. Frisclinus did so admire his Works, that it was his Judgment of them; that in Case all o∣ther Authors were lost, yet they might be re∣paired, and made good again by these Writings of Plutarch. I'le let him pass with his Encomium from Bodinus, Est in eo, quod miremur, liberum de re qua∣que judicium ut non tam Historicus, quam principum Censor esse videatur; sic tamen existimo, si quis Ido∣neus est earum rerum arbiter, aut Plutarchum esse, aut neminem, quid enim tantam sapientiam latere po∣uit? There is that in him, we may admire, a free Judgment in every matter, that he seems not so much to be an Historian as a Censurer of Princes; so then I think, if there be any fit Arbiter, or Judge of those things, its either Plutarch, or no man, for what is there in the
World, that can be concealed and hid from so transcendent Prudence and Wisdom. Apollonius Tyaneus. APollonius Tyaneus, a Pythagorean Philosopher, stiled by Vopiscus, Celeberrimae famae authori∣tatisque vir, A man of most transcent Fame, and Authority, as also by the same Author, Ami∣cus verus Deorum, pro numine frequentandus. A t Friend of the Gods, and to be honoured as a Deity, had his life written by Philostratus, and before him, by one Damis the sole Companion of his tedious Travels. Sidonius in his Epistle extols him, as a man that was endued with all Vertues; Erat cupidus scientiae, continens pecuniae, inter epulas abstemius, inter purpuratos lineatus, inter alabastra censorius. He was desirous of Science, continent of money, in Banquets abstemious, amidst purpled Ones mean habited, and among the Alabastred cen∣sorious. This man being at Ephesus in that very houre that the Emperour Domitian was murthered. As he was disputing in a Throng of people, on a sudden, he cast his Eyes downward, and be∣came mute; but presently he burst out into these, or the like words, Euge Stephane pulchre, percute peccatorem, pulsasti, vulnerasti, & interfecisti.
Alluding therein to the ruine and destruction of that cruell and bloody Emperour. This man hath excellent Characters given him by the learned. Paulinus, sayes of him, Quod invenit ubique, quod disceret, & semper proficeret, That he every where met with something that he might learn, and that he alwaies profited. Casaubon affirms, that the Criticks called him , Faultless and Inculpable, in whome in∣deed there appeared more of Cae, then Wit. Eunapius speaks him to have been as it were of a middle Nature betwixt the Gods and Mor∣tals. Justinus Martyr notes him to have been  scientissimum, eoque stupendae mirabilitatis effectorem celeberrimum. Sui∣das preferred him before Simonides for strength of Memory, calling him Virum admirandum ac divinum. Caelius Rhodiginus sayes, that he was skilfull in the understanding of the Beasts Lan∣guage; it was his daily wish and prayer unto his Gods, that he might know the good ones, and avoid the evill.
Epicteus. EPictetus a Stoick Philosopher of Hieropolis in Phrygia, who going from thence to Rome, bound himself in Service to Epaphroditus, one of Nero's, principal Life-guard, and there lived untill the Reign of Domitian, whose Mis-go∣vernment, when he could not well digest, he left the City, and return'd again to Hierapolis: he fell lame by a Distillation, which had got∣ten into one of his Legs, and that lameness he intimated in this following Epigram, being of his Composing. , . . Lipsius calls him Philosophum optimi sensus, A Philosopher of the best sense: and in another place, Virum totum a se, & a Deo, nihil a Fortuna. A man wholly of himself, and of God, having nothing as from Fortune. Lucian tells us in one of his Dialogues, That one gave three thousand Drachmaes for this mans earthen Candlestick, or Lanthorn, hoping that if he might but read by that at Night, he might at∣tain to Epictetus Wisdome, and be like that ex∣cellant old man.
This Philosopher was had in high esteem with the two Antonies; his Enchiridion was writ in Greek, but afterwards Latiniz'd by Angelus Politianus. The Criticks have spoken very highly in the praises of it. What saith Lipsius? Enchiridion sane egregium, & Stoicae philo∣phiae velut anima, His Enchiridion is truly ad∣mirable, and as it were, the very Soul of the Stoick Philosophy. Another saies, that its a Book, more hea∣vy for weight, then great for Bulk, daily to be embrac'd, and kiss'd, and never to be out of mens hands. I'le end him, with that of Demp∣ster, Epicteti Enchiridion moribus utile, dissertatio∣nes graves, prudentiae plenae; Epictetus his Enchi∣ridion is profitable for manners, his Disputa∣tions grave, full of prudence. Arianus. ARianus of Nicomedia the Disciple of E∣pictetus, sir-named , The new Zenophon, or Zenophon the Junior; because he set forth the Dissertations of Epictetus, as the other had done of Cyrus. Suidas saith, That he lived at Rome, in the Raigns of Adrian, and Marcus Antonius then Emperours, by whom he was promoted to Consular Honours for his excellent Erudition, as is reported by Heliconi∣us.
Lipsius saies, That he had Epictetus his Dis∣courses, In via, Domo, Schola, In his Way, House, School, as being never out of his Hands, and Mouth, and Heart. Bodinus stiles him, Virum summo ingenio, summaque doctrina praeditum, A man endued with an admirable Wit, and with very great Learning, as indeed appears by those his Commentaries upon the Renowned Epictetus. Vossius admiring the sweetness of his Tongue, doth also call him Alterum Zenophonta, Ano∣ther Zenophon: for he writ History as well as Philosophy, having described the Warlike Feats, and Martiall Affairs of Great Alexander, whereupon he is called by Coelius Rhodiginus, Hi∣storicus , A truth-loving Historian. There is a certain Grammarian that chargeth him with Arrogancy, as one that gloried mightily in his own Writings, and that would be ac∣counted among the Greek Historians, as was Great Alexander amongst the Martial Captains: There was another of the Name, a Poet, with whose Verses, Suetonius writes, that Tiberius Cae∣sar was extreamly well delighted and pleased.
Plotinus. PLotinus named Lycopolita by learned Suidas, as being an Egyptian, and an Inhabitant of the City Lycus, who (as the same Author relates it) was E Bajulo philosophus. He was the Schollar or Disciple of Ammonius, and the Master of Porphyrus: He was a man of a spare and lean body, subject unto many Corporal Infirmities, and among the rest, to the Falling-sickness. He lived in the Raigns of Galenus, Tacitus, and Probus the Roman Emperours; Eunapius who writ the Lives of the Sophisters, calls him Mag∣num Plotinum, The great Plotinus. Theodoret, one of the Greek Fathers saith, That he was Origenis Auditor, One of Origen's Auditours; and he af∣firms moreover, that he well understood the Traditions of the Rabbins. The forementioned Eunapius further testifieth that this mans Speech was so obscure, and Ae∣nigmaticall, Quod a populari captu disjunctior vide∣batur; That it seemed to be much separated from, and far above the popular Capacity. Lipsius in the fourth Century of his Miscella∣nies, stiles him Virum sapientia inclytum, A man famous for his Wisdome.
Porphyrius. POrphyrius a Philosopher of Tyre, the chiefe City of the ancient Phoenicians, was at the beginnig called by the name of Malchus, which in the Syrian Language signifieth King: wher∣upon Suidas saith, that his Name was Basilius. However he was called by his worthy and learned Master Longinus, by the name of Por∣phyrius, and that from the Purple in his Gar∣ment, which is indeed an Ensigne of Ma∣jesty. This man taking his leave of Longinus, tra∣velled to Rome, and there heard the Philoso∣pher Plotinus, where for his Companions, and Condisciples, he had those two men of Fame, Origen, and Amelius. This Author doth seem in his Works to have delivered Contradictions; but the cause hereof, is thought to be his finall Retractation, as rejecting in the end those Principles, which he did at the beginning close with: In some of his Writings, he endeavours to cleer, that both Plato, and Aristotle were of one, and the same Sect. He writ against the Christians; as for the time he lived in, it was in the Reign of Aurelian, and he continued to Tacitus, and Probus.
Suidas in honour of his great Learning, gives him this ensuing Character; . A man that for∣med and expressed all kinds of Philosophy. And a∣gaine, . One promis∣cuously rowled in every Vertue. Nicephorus in his tenth Book, speaks him an Apostate from the Christian Faith, and that Libanius the Sophister should account of him as it were a God; Nazianzen also informes us, That Julian did glory in his fabulous Lyes, as though they had been the very Oracles of God. He fell sick once at Lylibaeum in Sicilie, but reco∣vering of that distemper, he died afterwards at Rome. Maximus Tyrius. MAximus Tyrius a Platonick Philosopher, called by Heinsius in his Epistle Dedica∣tory before Horace, Vir magnus & Terrarum Do∣mini praeceptor, A great man, and Tutor to the Emperour; for by Terrarum Domini is to be un∣derstood Marcus Antoninus then Reigning: what this man disputed in the Greek Tongue at Rome, was afterwards Latiniz'd, or made Ro∣man by learned Heinsius, who gives all his lear∣ned Disputations this excellent Eulogy.
Hujus viri disputationes, quae ad nostram pervene∣runt aetatem, tales sunt, ut unum quidem si excipias Platonem, nemini dicendi venustate, pariter ac sapi∣entia concedant, neque quisquam hodie legatur, qui tam accurate, ac feliciter indolem ac genium musae expresse∣rit Platonicae. The Disputes of this man which are come to our Age, are such, that if you do but except that one man Plato, they shall be in∣feriour to none in sweetness of Speech and wis∣dome. Neither can any one be now read, that hath so accurately, and happily expressed the Wit, Spirit, and Genius of the Platonick Muse. No wonder therefore if Casaubonus stiles him Platonicorum mellitissimum, The sweetest of Plato∣nicks. Whereunto also that description, that Heinsius hath made of him, doth very well ac∣cord. Scriptor ex Academia, Sapiens, Amaenus, Flo∣ridus, Facundus, & qui ubique patrem suum refert Platonem. An Academick Writer, Wise, Plea∣sant, Florid, Eloquent, and one that every where expresseth his Father Plato. Severinus Boethius. SEverinus Boethius, a man of Consular degree, and an excellent Aristotelian, whence Barthi∣us could say, That scarce any Writer was so commendable in the Schools as he, because he
Latiniz'd so well Aristotles Doctrine of Dis∣puting. Scaliger tels us, that Valla commended this Boethius, and this Boethius Valla; Vlla docet Bo∣ethium latine loqui, at Vallam Boetius bene sapere. This Philosopher was so good a Speaker, that a Critick could say of him Quod flumen Romani sermonis apud illum fere solum remansit. That the River of the Roman Tongue almost remained alone with him. He was banished by Theodoricus, when Zeno was Emperour, and afterwards Imprisoned, and last of all put to death with his Father-in-Law Symmachus one of the Senatours, and all for suspition of a Conspiracy for liberty. Angelus Politianus extols him as a man emi∣nent in all Sciences: Quis Boetio vel in dialecti∣cis acutior? vel subtilior in Mathematicis? vel in philosophia locupletior? vel in Theologia Sublimior? Who more acute then Boetius in Logicks? or more subtle in Mathematicks, or richer in Phi∣losophy? or more sublime in Divinity. And to all this I'le but add one thing more from Caspar Barthius, and it relates to this Au∣thor, Ejus Ingenium neque ante se multos, neque pest se aliquem toto Romani imperii tempore habuit simi∣lem. His Wit had not many before him, nor any after like unto him, in all the time of the Roman Empire.
THE CHARACTERS Of those two excellent Physitians, HIPPOCRATES, AND GALENUS. HIppocrates Cous the Son of Heraclidas, and the Auditor of Democrates, was for his knowledge in Physick far prefer'd before his own Grandfather an eminent Doctor, and of his own name; for Suidas gives him this ho∣nourable Encomium, . The Star and Light of Physick, which is most profitable for life. He was of great Repute with all that had ever heard of him. Artaxerxes (as Suidas relates it) that migh∣ty Emperour of the Persians did sollicite for, and woo his company by magnificent Largesses, and most high Advancements, as esteeming his presence equall almost to the Wealth of his whole Empire.
Cornelius Celsus calls him Medicinae parentem virumque arte & Facundia insignem, The Parent of Medicine, and a man famous for his Art and Eloquence, he is stiled by Agellius, Divina vir scientia, A man of Divine Knowledge: By Seneca, Maximus medicorum & hujus scientiae condi∣tor, The greatest of Physitians, and the Crea∣tor as it were of this Science. Macrobius speaking also of him, hath this very passage, Hippocratis proprium, ne fallere, aut fallisciat, 'Tis proper to Hippocrates, not to know, either to deceive, or to be deceived. There is an handsome Epigram in the Greek Anthology, and it runneth thus. — . Cicero saith this of him, That he thought more sick and languishing persons were reco∣vered by this Hippocrates, then were by Aescula∣pius: I'le let him go, but with a word from Heinsius, Quid cum solo conferendum Hippocrate ulla vidit aetas. What hath any Age seen worthy to be compared with Hippocrates. There were more of the Name, one a Soldier mentioned by Thucidides. Another a Mathematician, spo∣ken of by learned Plutarch.
Galenus. GAlenus was of Pergamus, the Son of Nicon, that famous Geometrician and Architect. He is called by Caelius Rhodiginus, a Philosopher, as well as a Physitian; who further saith of him, That in the common rumour and Fame of the World, he through his wonderfull Tempe∣rance, and Sobriety, prolonged his life to an hundred and forty years, and that he breathed alwaies Odoriferously. Whence, saith Rhodigi∣nus, it became a Proverb, Vt Galeni valetudinem dicamus pro ea, quae ultra humanum captum nimis sit prospera, nimisque inoffensa. That we say, Galens Healthiness, for that, which is too prosperous, and too inoffensive beyond the naturall Capa∣city of men. He flourished in the Reigns of Marcus, and Commodus; as he compiled much in Physick, so he writ also much in Philosophy, Rhetorick, and Grammer. The Learned have afforded him many eminent Eulogiums. By Diaconus, he is stiled, Medicus optimus, The best Physitian, by Casaubon, Criticorum non minus, quam medicorum princeps, No less the Chief of Criticks, then of Physitians: By Dempster, Medicorum, ex primo primus. But of all others, Heinsius is most high upon his Merit, who calls him, and that with∣out flattery, Mare eruditionis, Oceanum disciplina∣rum,
Omnium Ingenuarum artium promum, condum, & quasi quandam Bibliothecam; A Sea of Learning, an Ocan of Disciplines, a Butler or Drawer out of all ingenuous Arts, and as it were a certaine Library; He Composed a Dictionary in an Al∣phabetick way, upon the Learned Works of Hip∣pocrates; How, and where he died, I certainly read not.
ΤΥ'ΠΟΣ 'ΙΣΤΟΡΙΧΩ' Ν, OR, THE HISTORIANS In their proportionable LINEAMENTS. LONDON, Printed by E.C. for Henry Eversden, at the Grey-hound in S. Pauls Church-yard, 1659.
THESE ARE THE NAMES Of some of the chief HISTORIANS, As they are handled in Order. THucidides, Zenophon, Polybius, Herodotus, Dyonysius Halicarnassius, Caius Julius Caesar, Velleius Paterculus, Diodorus Siculus,
Crispus Salustius, Titus Livius, Valerius Maximus, Quintus Curtius. Cornelius Tacitus, Lucius Annaeus Florus, Josephus, Suetonius Tranquillus, Junianus Justinus, Pausanias, Herodianus, Procopius, Ammianus Marcellinus,
THB CHARACTERS Of some of the chief of the HISTORIANS. Thucidides. THucidides an Historian of Athens, was the Son of Olorus, who flourished in the time of the Peloponesian War, which he undertook to write, and perform'd it most ac∣curately; for having hired both sides with pie∣ces of Silver, to inform him with the most true intelligence, he was thereby enabled to deliver his Narration incorrupt, and impartiall: he learnt Philosophy of Anaxagoras, and Rheto∣rick of Antiphon; Demosthenes was so transpor∣ted with his History, that transcribing it very often, he at length had it by heart.
Quintillian compares him with Herodotus, and Cicero prefers him to all others, him onely excepted: he is called , The Star of Rhetorick; and is equalled on that account, to Demosthenes, and Aristides. Lipsius in his Poli∣ticks affords him this following Character; Res nec multas, nec magnas nimis scripsit, sed palmam fortasse praeripit omnibus, qui multas ac magnos. He writ neither very many, nor great matters, however he is advanced above those that wrote both many and great. Gregory Nazianzen could not contain himself from breaking forth into this praise; Quis mihi Herodoti ac Thucididis otium linguamque suppeditabit? Who will supply me with the Leasure and Language of Herodotus, and Thucidides? Vossius gives him Tergeminam gloriam, in that he was, Et bonus Philosophus & Historicus, & bello dux bonus. Both a good Philosopher, and an Historian, as also a good Warriour; There were others likewise of this Name, but none equall to him in Repute and Fame.
Zenophon. ZEnophon the Son of Gryllus was the Disciple of Socrates, and an Historian of Athens; he was called for the sweetness of his stile Musa Attica, The Athenian Muse, he was the first of the Philosophers that writ an History, where∣in he shewed himself a most accurate Imitatour of Socrates; Cicero affirmeth of him, That his Speech is sweeter then Honey, and that the Muses did, as it were, use his Language, when they spake. He is stiled Apis Attica, The Athenian Bee by Laertius, as before, Musa Attica, The Athe∣nian Muse by Suidas. P. Cornelius Africanus was so high an Esteemer of him, and his History, that he would never suffer him to be out of his hands; and Lucius Lucullus, who was sent a∣gainst that subtle and potent Enemy Mithryda∣tes, being himself but a raw, and unskilfull Warriour, yet by reading the Works of this Zenophon, he so bettered his Judgment in Mili∣tary Affaires, that at last he subdued him, and triumphed over him. The stile of this man is sublime, and his Expression Candid; so saith Dempster. Agelli∣us informes us, that he lived sometimes in vari∣ance with great Plato. There were three more of this Name, one of Antioch, another of Ephe∣sus, and a third of Cyprus, so saith the learned Suidas.
Polybius. POlybius an Historian of Megalopolis, a City of Arcadia, was the Master of Scipio Africanus; he wrote the Roman History in forty Books, beginning from the Banishment of Cleomenes, the Spartan, and Philip the Son of Perseus, and afterwards joyning the Roman Affaires with the Macedonian, where this man ends, Possido∣nius proceeds, as also doth Strabo. Cicero and Plutarch, with many others of the Learned, do in his Philosophy admire his Learning, in his Manners, his Honesty, and in his History his prudence. Titus Livius was so great an Admirer of his Works, that he would be perpetually writing of them, and rehearsing them, as though they had been the Product of his own Brain. And Marcus Brutus that eminent Censurer both of Mens Writings, and Manners, to whom Cicero himself could not give sufficient satisfaction, would never suffer this Polybius to be out of his hands. Cicero stiles him Bonum Autorem, A good Au∣thor: Lipsius saith, Recta & salutaria ubique esse ejus monita; That his Admonitions and Coun∣sels are every where right, and wholsome. And its Vossius his Character of him, Cedit uni, alte∣tique Graecorum eloquentia, civili prudentia, & scien∣tia
militari, nulli secundus. He is inferiour to one, or other of the Greeks, for Eloquence, but for civil Prudence, and military Science, he is behind none of them. Herodotus. HErodotus of Hallycarnassius, an excellent Hi∣storian, wrote nine Books of History, cal∣ling them by the Names of the Muses; he be∣gan from Cyrus King of the Persians. This man being discontented at the Tyranny of Lygdanus, withdrew himself to Samus, but af∣terwards returned, upon the Tyrants expul∣sion: he is called Thurius Scriptor, because be∣ing envied by his Fellows, he departed to Thurius, a Colony of the Athenians, where he wrote his History. Cicero calls him Patrem Historiae, The Father of History; and Quintilian saith, That he is both, Dulcis, candidus, & fusus, Sweet, candid, and flowing. Thucidides would be present at the reciting of his Books, and upon the hear∣ing them read unto him, he would frequently fall on weeping. Dionysius Halycarnassius makes him the chief of the Historians, as Sophocles of the Tragaedians and Plato of the Philosophers. Scaliger could say of him, Herodoti libros mihi difficilius est depo∣nere, quam cyathum, Its more difficult to me to
lay aside Herodotus his Books, then the Cup: he died either at Thurius, or at Pella; and where he died, there he was buried. Dionysius Halycarnassius. DIonysius Halycarnassius the Son of Alexan∣der, wrote eleven Books of the Roman Antiquities; he flourished according to the Judgment and report of Suidas, in the Reigne of Caesar Augustus, Eo accuratius tempora nemo ob∣servavit, sayes Scaliger of him, No man observed the times with more diligence and care then he. Some prefer him before Livie, because he seems to deliver many things pertinent to the Roman Antiquities, with more accurateness then other Writers, his stile is said to be , To savour of comely novity: he was a noble Censurer of other mens Labours, and Stile, even as Quintilian was amongst the La∣tines, being a Rhetorician, and Critick of that Repute and Credit, that all men would close with his Sentence and Judgment. Dempster calls him Historicorum clarissimum, elo∣quentissimum, veracissimum, antiquitatis studiosissi∣mum, & omnium ultissimum. The most famous, most eloquent, most true, most studious of An∣tiquities, and the most profitable of all Histo∣rians.
Besides his History, he wrote the Cha∣racters of the ancient Orators, together with a Method of composing Epithalamies, Epitaphs, and Panegyricks; all which were translated into Latine by Theodore Gaza. Caius Julius Caesar. CAius Julius Caesar, the Founder of the Ro∣man Empire, is very well Characteriz'd by Velleius Paterculus; whose words I shall hear recite. Secutus deinde Consulatus Caii Caesariis, qui scribenti manum injicit, & quamlibet festinan∣tem in se morari cogit. Then followed the Con∣sulship of Caius Caesar, who as I am writing lay∣eth his hand upon me, and what haft soever I am in, constrains me to pause upon him; he being extracted from the most noble Julian Fa∣mily (which was accounted by all men of the greatest Antiquity) deriving his Descent from Anchises and Venus; of person the most lovely of all the Citizens of Rome, in vivacity of Spi∣rit most sharp, in Bounty most liberall, of Courage, either above the nature or belief of any mn, in greatness of his Desires, Celerity in execution, Patience in dangers, most neerly resembling that great Alexander, but him sober, and not transported with Anger. Finally, That used both Sleep and Meat to live, and not for Voluptuousness: this is Paterculus his Fi∣guration of him.
Now if his Person and Qualities were so Eminently Illustrious, we cannot but esti∣mate his Writings also conformable. Quintilian saith thus of him, C. Julius Caesar si foro tantum vacasset, non alius ex nostris contra Cice∣ronem nominaretur: Had Caesar onely imployed his time at the place of Pleas, he and none else of all the Romans might have been opposed to Cicero. Ʋnus mihi (saith Gyraldus) Caeteros vicisse & scribendo & pugnando videtur, He alone seemed to me to have overcome both in Writing and Fighting. Lipsius speaks him an Historian eloquent, his Language pure without any meritricious Pain∣tings, worthy of the Roman or the Athenian Muses. And Dempster compares him with the best of the Orators. Velleius Paterculus. VElleius Paterculus was at the first a Military Tribune in Thrace, afterwards Praefect of the Horse in Germany. Then Quaestor, then Tiberius his Legate in the Pannonian Warre, all which he publisheth of himself in his own Hi∣story; He sprang out of the eminent Princes
of Campaine: he wrote his History in the six∣teenth yeare of Tiberius; his Ancestors were all famous for Military Discipline; he dedicated his two Books of History to Marcus Vinicius. Tacitus maketh mention of him in the sixth of his Annals, where speaking of his Descent, he tels us, that his Father and Grandfather were of Consular Degree and Dignity: a great part of what he writ is lost. Vossius thus Characteriseth him, and in his little Work: Dictio ejus plane Romana, ac ele∣gans; Quaedam etiam habet, quae haud alibi invenias, sed in sui aevi rebus nimis Domui Augustae & Seja∣no adulatur. His phrase of Speech is truly Ro∣man and elegant; he hath also some things, which you may not elswhere meet with, but in the Affaires of his owne time, he too much flat∣ters both Caesars House, and Sejanus. Dempster herein complies with Vossius, who speaking of his History, affirms it to be Styli e∣legantis, sed pudendae adulationis; of elegant Stile, but of shamefull Adulation. I'le end with that of Lipsius; Compendium Velleianum laudabile fuit, sed potior pars periit, ju∣dicio, & ordine tamen scriptum, & quod exemplar pleniori Chronologiae sit ad Imitandum. Velleius his Epitome was worthy of praise, but the better part thereof is perisht, yet written judiciously, and with order, and which may be an Imitable Platform to a more full Chronology.
Diodorus Siculus. DIodorus Siculus of Agyrium a Towne in Sicily, according to the Geograpy of Clu∣verius (though others call it Argyrium, and Angyrium) lived in the Reign of Julius Caesar, as Eusebius reporteth; and yet this contradicteth not learned Suidas, who would have him to flourish in the time of Augustus, and so he did, his Life reaching unto the midst of his long Domination. He wrote an Historicall Libra∣ry, or as the Sholiast of Aristophanes, calls it, , A Librarie of Histories, who gave it that appellation, because it was Catholick, as treating of the Affaires of the Egyptians, Assyrians, Medians, Persians, Ro∣mans, Graecians, Carthaginians, and others; and this Work of his he comprized in forty books, the Argument whereof, he setteth down in his Preface, where he also saith, that he was full thirty years in compiling of it, much of the time being consumed in Travell through Asia and Europe: of all which Books, we have at present but fifteen remaining. What he writ was highly commended both by Justine Martyr and Eusebius; and yet Ludo∣vicus Vives reprehends his Matter, and Bodinus his Phrase, but Photius the Patriarch, had a more noble opinion of him, who saith, Ʋsum esse, . That he used a perspicuous Phrase of Speech, not too
much adorned with Tropes, but most convenient for an History. I'le let him pass with the phrase of Stephanus, Quantum solis lumen inter stellas, tantum inter omnes, quotquot ad nostra tempora pervenerunt, historicos (si utilitatis potius, quam voluptatis habenda sit ratio) noster hic Diodorus eminere dici potest. As far as the Suns light is beyond the Stars, so far doth our Diodorus excell the Historians of our times, if so be, that we regard rather profit then plea∣sure. And Dempster expresseth him to be an Author of ancient Erudition; and blames no∣thing else in him, but his corrupt Roman Names. Crispus Sallustius. CRispus Sallustius was born at Amiternum, of the Sabines, the year after that Catullus was at Verona, and died four years after the Actiack War, as Eusebius hath recorded. He was Tri∣bune of the People that same year that Cicero was recalled from banishment, and Clodius slaine of Milo; and in that Tribuneship of his, he be∣haved himself very loosly, for being taken in Adultry with Fausta, L. Sylla's Daughter, he was scourged with Rods by Milo, which was the cause that he acted with the Clodian Party a∣gainst him; he was removed the Senate for his
Adulteries and Rapes by Claudius Pulcher, and Calpurnius Piso; though afterwards restored a∣gain by Julius Caesar. Dion records, that he was set over Numidia, which he exceedingly pilla∣ged, but was absolved of the Crime by the very power that advanced him, yet the Infamy ever stuck to him, as one that acted those Obliqui∣ties, which he highly condemned in all others: he was at length so enricht with his Numidian Rapes, that he bought those stately Buildings on the Quirinall Hill, which were afterwards called Sallustii forum, The Court of Sallustius. His Deportment was so extravagant in his pub∣lick Capacities, that in respect of his Conver∣sation, it prevented him of all Praise; howe∣ver his Writings were ever matter of Applause unto him, being a good Writer, though a bad man. The Ancients do judge his phrase of Speech to be brief and finuous, as one that aemulated Thucidides. Turnebus calls him Scriptorem Atti∣cum, The Athenian Writer, and one that comes neerer to Demosthenes, then Cicero himself did. Tacitus in the third of his Annals, stiles him, Rerum Romanarum florentissimum autorem, A most flourishing Author of Roman Affaires. Scaliger calls him, Patrem Historiae, The Father of History; Scriptorem seriae & severae orationis. Agellius, a Writer of serious, and severe Speech. Principem senatus Historici, Lysius, the chief of the Historian Senate; Romana primum in historia, Martial, the first, for the Roman Story. And
S. Augustine calls him, Nobilitatae veritatis histori∣cum, An Historian of enobled Verity. Titus Livius Patavinus. TItus Livius Patavinus, called by Seneca in his first Book, De ira, vir disertissimus, A most eloquent man, flourished in the Reigns of Cae∣sar Augustus, and Tiberius, in the beginning of the latters Reign, he compiled his History, consisting of an hundred and forty two Books, as Petrarch reporteth, though others will have two bated of the said number. Therein be comprized all the Roman Affaires, from the Foundation of the City, to the German War, which was managed by Drusus; of all which Books, there are but left remaining thirty and five. No Writer expresseth more Majesty, and plenty, then this Historian. Quintilian stiles it, Lacteam ubertatem, and compares him to He∣rodotus, as Sallustius to Thucidides. On the o∣ther-side its written of Caligula, one of the Ro∣man Majesties, That he much vilified him, cal∣ling him Verbosum. Likewise Asinius Pollio quarrelling with his Phrase was wont to say, that he found therein a smack of Patavinity. But the forementioned Emperour did so distaste him, that he threatned his removall, and ej∣ction
out of all the Roman Libraries: but no wonder that he was thus transported against this noble Historian, when as those two re∣nowned Poets, Virgil, and Homer could not e∣scape his Censure; nay, he was like to consume them, if we may believe Suetonius in these his words; Cogitavit & de Homeri carminibus abolendis, cur enim sibi non liceret, dicens, quod Platoni licuit, qui eum a civitate, quam constituebat ejecerit? sed & Vir∣gilii, & Titi Livii scripta, paulum abfuit, quin ex omnibus bibliothecis amoverit, quorum alterum & nul∣lius ingenii, minimaeque doctrinae, alterum ut verbosum in historia, negligentemque earpebat. He thought of abolishing Homers Verses, saying, Why should it not be as lawfull for him to do it, as it was for Plato, who cast him out of that City, wher∣of he was the Founder. But the Judgment of this Savage Prince was no way prejudiciall to those two renowned Authors, and as little to this eminent Historian, let us therefore heare what better heads have sayd of him. He is called by Barthius, Patavina Syren, The Patavinian Mearmaid. Gruterus stiles him, Historiae latinae principem, The Prince of the Latine History. Lipsius, Historicorum uber∣rimum, Of Historians the most plentifull. And againe, sayes the same Author, In Livio nimia nobis bona, In Livy we meet with things that are too good for us.
Valerius Maximus. VAlerius Maximus, lived after Velleius Pater∣culus, as may be made to appeare from his depressing and disgracing of Sejanus, whilst Paterculus beyond the bounds of all Moderation parasitically extolls him, which shews, that when Paterculus writ, Sejanus was in his full Greatness, and Glory, but when Valerius com∣piled his Collections, he was under judgment, contempt, and Ignominy, as his own words do cleerly manifest, which are as followeth. Eum (speaking of Sejanus) omni cum stirpe sua Populi Romani pedibus obtritum, etiam apud Infe∣ros, si tamen illuc receptus est, quae meretur supplicia pendere. He flourished under Caesar Tiberius, for he saith in his second Book, and eighth Chapter, That he went with Sextus Pompeius into Asia, which Pompey was Consull with Sextus Appu∣leius on that very yeare, that Augustus died, and so were the first Consulls, which sware Allea∣giance to Tiberius. Further, its proved that he lived then, from another passage in his fifth Book, where spea∣king of Marcus Antonius, he saith, that he was the famous Orator of his Grandfathers time: Now this Antony flourished in Julius Caesars Reign,
Again, considering the Language where∣with he scourgeth the Parricide Brutus, all to gratifie the care of Tiberius; and that Speech of his also in reference to Cassius, whom he would not have named without a Note of the grandest Infamy. All these Arguments may cleerly convince, that he lived after Paterculus in the Reign of the Emperour Tiberius. Neither doth the meanness of his Language any way gainsay it: for Cicero himselfe could complaine in his time (which was many years before) that the Roman Tongue began even then to be corrupt, through the reception of Forreiners: no wonder therefore, if this Au∣thors Speech did somewhat decline from that sweet purity, that was in the Age before it. However let us heare what Testimonies, ei∣ther of Merit, or Demerit the Ancients have af∣forded him. Its Caussinus Character of him; Valerius Maximus, ut Aegyptus Homerica, bonis & malis mixtus est; in pleris{que} enim est acutus, & subtilis, in plerisque durus, & obscurus, & ad ple∣beium sermonem abjectus, a puritate, & candore latini sermonis longius discedit. Est tamen in eo jucunda, tot Historiarum quasi florum congesta varietas, & bre∣vitas narrationum, acuminibus sententiarum, non rao am apte aspersa, ut nihil videatur Amaenius. Valeri∣us Maximus, as Homers Aegyt, mixt with good and bad things, for he is in very many of them acute, and subtile, and againe, in many hard and obscure, and being immerst into the Vulgar Dialect, he deviates far from the purity and can∣dor
of the Latine Phrase, yet there is in him a sweet variety of so many Histories, as it were Flowers gathered into a heap, and shortness of Narrations, with acuteness of Sentences, not sel∣dome so aptly scattered, that nothing seems more delightfull. Thus Caussin. Dempster no way detracts from him, for he stiles him, Authorem rerum varietate, eloquentia{que} incomparabilem, An Author incomparable, both for variety of things, and for his Eloquence. Onely this he saith in his disparagement, That he did Sola adulationis foeditate vilescere, onely become vile through the deformity of Adula∣tion. And another calls him Ineptum affectatorem sen∣tentiarum, quanquam non inutilem propter exempla. A Fond Affectator of Sentences, though not un∣profitable for examples.
Quintus Curtius Rufus. QƲintus Curtius Rufus filled the World with the Exploits of Great Alexander, his Histo∣ry being contained in ten Books, two whereof are lost, yet supplyed by an addition from some other. There is a passage in his tenth Book, which discovers the Age he lived in, which passage is after this manner. Proinde jure merito{que} Populus Romanus salutem se principi suo debere fatetur. Which Prince who it should be, the Learned agree not: Some wil have him to be Caesar Augustus, but that Opinion can∣not well stand, because he brought not peace a∣long with him, as who had civil Wars for the space of thirteen years. Others affirm, that it may be Claudius Caesar, and that those Hurli-burlies before mentioned, might relate to the slaughter of Caligula, and the Confusions which happened thereupon; but this Opinion also is very rationally impugned by some learned Ones. Now a third sort refers it to the Reign of the Emperour Vespasian; and that because the foregoing words of the Historian, may suite well with those Distractions, that happened up∣on the death of Nero, when Romes Dominion was sought by force of Armes, between Galba, Otho, and Vitellius: And this is the Judgment of
Rutgersius, and Vossius: That he flourisht in the Reign of Vespasian; of whom its reported, that he should teach Rhetorick in the last yeare of Tiberius, which might well be, considering that there were but two and thirty yeares betwixt that, and the Reign of Vespasian, he being young, when a Rhetoritian, and old when an Historian; Vossius thus advanceth him. Ʋs{que} adeo auctor est is verborum eligens, nec per∣spicue minus, quam terse scribit. Acuius etiam est in sententiis, inque orationibus mire disertus. Imo vel Augustaeo aevo digna esus est dictio, vel proxime abit. That he is an Author very choice in his words, neither writes he less perspicuously, then neat∣ly: He is also acute in his Sentences, and in his Orations wonderfully eloquent. Nay, his Phrase is worthy of the Age of Augustus, or else that which immediatly followed it. Lipsius stiles him, Historicum proprium principum, & assidue iis in manu sinu{que} habendum. An Histo∣rian proper for Princes, and dayly to be had in their hands, and Bosomes. Floriditas Curtiana quatenus laudanda, sayes C. Barthinus? Alphonsus King of Arragon being very sick, and his Phy∣sitians having tryed all the waies they could to cure him with their Physick, but therein fail∣ing, he though very weak, on the sudden sell to reading of the History of Great Alexander, written by this Curtius, and thereupon he re∣covered, crying out, Valeant Avicenna, Hippo∣crates,
& caeteri medici, vivat Curtius sospitator me∣us. Away with Avicenna, Hippocrates, and o∣ther Physitians: and let Curtius live my onely Recoverer. Cornelius Tacitus. COrnelius Tacitus, in some old Editions cal∣led by the name of Publius, but misliked of, and rejected by the learned: he wrote his Hi∣story in the Reign of the Emperour Nerva, and not when Trajane Governed; as will appeare by his stiling of Nerva, Divus, but not Trajan: he writ his Annalls after his History, although they be placed before it. He begins them with the death of Augustus, and ends them within two years of the death of Nero. Besides his said Annalls and History, he left behind him a Book of the Scituation of Ger∣many, and the manners of that People, as also a Treatise of the life of his Father-in-Law, Ju∣lius Agricola, which he writ in Trajans time. Vossius comparing his History with his An∣nalls, speaketh thus of them. Dictio Taciti floridior, uberiorque in Historiarum est libris, pressior siociorque in Annalibus. Interim gra∣vis utrobique, & disertus. The Speech of Tacitus is more florid, and copious in the Books of his Histories; more contracted, and more dry in
his Annalls. In the mean, every where Grave, and Eloquent. However Alciatus a man well learned, prefers Paulus Jovius far before him, in comparison of which Author, he cals the Lines of this Tacitus, but Senticeta, Bryars: but this was sayd by him in regard of his transcendent Affe∣ction to his Friend Jovius. But the Emperour M. Claudius Tacitus so highly honoured this Historian, that he placed his image in all the Libraries, and caused his Books to be ten times transcribed in one yeare by his Notaries, for feare of perishing. Sidonius saith of him, that he should be never mentioned without praise. Tacitus nunquam sine laude loquendus. Lipsius calls him, Sallustii imitatorem, The Immitator of Sallustius: and of whom, he also further saith, Quod est omni vir∣tute antiquis proximus, & si linguae latinae esset eadem puritas, caeteris sic perfectus, ut vocare illos ipsos anti∣quos in certamen possit dignitatis. That he is in e∣very Vertue next unto the Ancients, and if there were but in him the same purity of Lan∣guage, in other matters be is so perfect, that he might contend for Dignity with those very An∣cients. The foresaid Critick moreover stiles him, Acrem & prudentem scriptorem: A sharp and pru∣dent Writer. The first five Books of this singular good Au∣thor, were found hid at Corbeia, and being brought to Leo the Great, the person which presented them, was rewarded with five hun∣dred
Pieces. Owen has an Epigram upon him, with which I shall end his Character. Veracem fecit probitas, Natura sa∣gacem. Obscurum brevitas te, Gravitasque brevem. Lucius Annaeus Florus. LƲcius Annaeus Florus, flourished (as some are of opinion) neer the end of the Reign of the Emperour Trajan, though others will have it to be in the time of Adrian. The Prologue of his History, Discovers the Age that he lived in: A Caesare Augusto in seculum nostrum (saith he) sunt non multo minus anni ducenti. From Caesar Augustus to our time, there are not much fewer then two hundred years. But there is a grand mistake in the very number, for if we will compute the term of years, which inter∣ven'd between Augustus and Trajan, we shall find that its short of it by fifty; and therefore Vossius taking speciall notice thereof, will have the number to be but an hundred and fifty.
It hath been a generall opinion, that this Author should be the Epitomizer of that volu∣minous History of Titus Livius, but they which will well observe him, will find much of Dis∣crepancy, or difference betwixt them. There are some that disagree likewise concerning his very name, occasioned by Lactantius, in his seventh Book of Institutions, where he thus writes, Non inscite Seneca Romanae urbis tempora distin∣guit in aetates. Soneca doth not unwittily di∣stinguish the times of the Roman City into A∣ges. But questionless they were distinct, and different persons, onely the one did imitate the other, as Florus Seneca. However it cannot be denyed, but that Florus was of the Family of the Senecaes, and therefore called in the an∣cient Books by the Name of Seneca, and Annae∣us, as well as Julius. The Senecaes being all of them Branches of the Annean Family. Now for his Character, we may receive it from that excellent Grammarian, Gerardus Vossius; who speaking of him in his Book of the Latine Hi∣storians, thus extolls him. Ea potissima est Flori nostri laus, quod scriptor est elegans, & disertus, & si paucula exceperis, quae frigidius dicta videntur, vere floridus. That is the principall commendation of our Florus, that he is a Writer, elegant and eloquent, and if you will but except some few things which seem more coldly spoken by him, he is truly florid. As for his stile, it is declamatory,
and neerer unto Poeticall, as one that pow∣reth out Virgils Hemisticks. Flavius Josephus. FLavius Josephus a Jew, was the Son of Mat∣thathias, born in the first year of Caius Ca∣ligula, by the Mother-side neerly related to the Royall Stock of the Maccabes. As for his Sect, he was a Pharisee, which Sext among the Jews was not unlike the Stoicks of the Gentiles: He when he was arrived at the Age of twenty six years, repaired to the Roman Court, that he might there mediate with the Caesarean Majesty for those Priests, which Felix the Governour had for some petty Offences cast into Prison; Now arriving at Rome, and falling into Favour with Poppaea, Augustus Caesars Wife: his success was such, that he did not onely procure liber∣ty for the Captives, but was dismissed with bountifull Rewards; but soon after returning into his Country, and upon an insurrection, being chosen chief Captain of those Galilaeans which rebelled, was at length besieged in Jota∣pata, and the City being taken by assault, he was commmitted unto safe Custody, that he might be sent thence, to give an account of his Sedition unto Caesar. Now being advertized of the Enemies design towards him, he requested the favour of Con∣ference
with the Generall Vespasian, into whose presence as soon as he was admitted, he saluted him with a Praediction, that he should be Em∣perour. Vespasian at first supposed that he de∣vised that shift, thereby to procure his liberty, but on the suddain, receiving Intelligence of the death both of Nero, and Galba, as also news of the Civill Wars already commencing be∣tween Otho and Vitellius, he forthwith not one∣ly discharged him of his Restraint, but cloath∣ed him with such Apparell too, as might suit with his Education and Condition. Now soon after these Attempts, and provi∣dences that followed them; he accompanied that Heroe Titus to the Siege of Jerusalem, which Siege he Ingenuously described, and commen∣ded it, when finisht, to Vespasian and his Son Titus. The latter of the two approving it by a Subscription from his Royall hand, and af∣terwards commanding it to be received into the publick Library. This Author writ also the Jewish Antiqui∣ties, which work was perfected by him in the thirteenth year of the Reign of Domitian. Many there were, that undervalued the Faith of this Writer: But Scaliger in his Book De Emendati∣one Temporum, doth most nobly vindicate him, where he thus Characters him. Diligentissimus , omnium scripto∣rum Josephus, de quo nos hoc audacter dicimus, non solum in rebus Judaicis, sed etiam in externis tutius ei credi, quam omnibus Graecis ac Latinis. Josephus
the most diligent and the greatest Lover of Truth of all Writers, of whom we dare boldly affirm this, That not onely in Judaicall mat∣ters, but also in externall, he may be more safe∣ly credited, then all other Authors, whether Greek or Latine. He is stiled by Isidore Pelusiote , A man most famous for Erudition and Eloquence. No marvell then, if he merited a Statue among the Romans for the Glory of his Wit, To all this I'le add but one thing more, and its this; That he gave an ex∣cellent Testimony to our Lord and Saviour, in the twenty second Book of his Antiquities. Caius Suetonius Tranquillus. CAius Suetonius Tranquillus, lived in the Reigns of Trajan and Adrian, being Magister Epistolarum, The principall Secretary to the lat∣ter of the two: As Spartianus hath recorded it in the life of that noble Emperour. His Fa∣ther was Suetonius Lenis, as he himself testifieth in his Otho, and not Paulinus, as some others have reported Plinius held great Correspondency with this Historian, as appeareth by some speciall, and choice Epistles directed unto him. This man among other of his works, writ the lives of the
Grammarians, and Rhetors, but the greater part of them is lost, and almost his whole Book of the Poets, none of them remaining to be seen, but the lives of Terence, and Horace; as for Lucan, and Persius, though they are with us, yet its questionable, whether their Lives were written by him; many of the learned Criticks doubt it, a Book he wrote . Whereof Suidas makes mention. Vopiscus stiles this man, Auctorem emendatissi∣mum, & candidissimum, & cui familiare sit amare brevitatem. A most faire, and most candid Au∣thor, and to whom its familiar to love brevity. Ludovicus Vives calls him also, Graecorum ac Lati∣norum scriptorum diligentissimum, atque Incorruptis∣simum. Of the Greek and Latine Writers the most diligent, and most pure. There are some that would prefer him be∣fore those Renowned Ones, Livy, Salust, and Tacitus, but the Grammarian Vossius will by no means assent to that, who approves of the En∣comiums given him by Vopiscus, and Vives, on∣ly in reference to such men that have written Lives like himself. Suidas calls him, The Ro∣man Grammarian, and Plinius, Virum probissi∣mum, Honestissimum, Eruditissimum.
Justinus. JƲstinus, whom Orosius calls Breviatorem Pompeii, The Epitomizer of Trogus Pompeius, and Ju∣stus Lipsius, variarum rerum, gentium, temporum, compendium: A Compend of various Things, Nations, Times. He lived almost Contem∣porary with Suetonius, though indeed both his Name, and the Age he lived in, fall under some mens doubts, and suspicions. Arnoldus his Edition expresseth him by the name of Frontinus; but the Medicaean Library calls him Junianus, and the latter may well carry with it more shew of truth, because of its Antiquity. And now for his time also, that hath been under some controversie; there are they, that think he lived after the Traslation of the Em∣pire to Constantinople, as seems to them out of those very words of his in his eigth Book, Grae∣ciam nunc & viribus, & dignitate, orbis terrarum principem: But their mistake lyeth in misap∣plying the Conjunction Nunc, which indeed is to be referred, not to the time he writ in, as they suppose, but to the subject matter where∣of he wrote. It is the Judgment of Vossius, that he lived un∣der Antoninus Pius, and dedicated his Epitome unto him, as is manifest by those very words
in the Preface, Quod ad te, Imperator Antonine, non tam cognoscendi, quam emendandi causa trans∣misi. And that he lived under this very Em∣perour: we have besides this, the Testimony of Martinus Polonus, as he hath asserted it in his Chronicles. Dempsier gives him none of the meanest Com∣mendations, calling him, Quantum stili genus patitur, disertum: As far as his kind of stile suf∣fereth, eloquent. Onely one tells us, that his Epitome is confused, Et omni temporum luce carens. Tilem.— Pausanias. PAusanias, a man of great Note and Repute in the Reign of Marcus Antoninus, was the Disciple of that Herod Atticus, who under those two Emperours Adrian and Antoninus Pius, had obtained a great Name amongst the Sophists of that Age. The Native Country of this gallant Histo∣rian was Cappadocia, and the place of his Com∣moration, Caesarea, whereupon it has been observed of him, that according to the Genius of the Cappadocians, he doth produce those Syl∣lables, which he should shorten; and on the
other side shorten those, that he should pro∣duce; and therefore he is very ingenuously resembled to a Cook, that provides unplea∣sing Sauce for good and savoury Meats. He declamed not at Athens onely, the famous Academy of all Greece, but at Rome also, the Metropolis of the whole World. Philostratus speaketh much of him in his Lives of the So∣phists. There is extant of his composure a Book De Graecia, wherein he describes the Scituation of her Cities, Regions, Countries, and what∣soever in any of her Confines is thought wor∣thy of notice-taking, a Treatise of more Lear∣ning, then Eloquence. As concerning his stile, it is accounted very weak, languid, and faint. However, that which Domitius Piso said once, may well be ap∣plyed to this Pausanias. Thesauros scribi debere, non libros. That Treasuries ought to be writ∣ten, not Books: for his Work is indeed a very Treasury. He is stiled also by the Learned, Autor, ob variarum rerum copiam, & Historiarum jucundam diversitatem, utilissimus. An Author for copiousness of divers things, and sweet va∣riety of Histories, most profitable.
Herodianus. HErodianus flourished much about the time, that Commodus was Emperour, a man of great esteem for his Abilities amongst the Ro∣mans; he wrote eight Books of History, be∣ginning them from the death of M. Aurelius Antoninus the Philosopher, and ending them at the decease of Balbinus and Maximus. His stile according to the Judgment of Pho∣tius is elegant, perspicuous, and indeed such, that he is comparable upon any account to the best Historian; he is much for the truth of things, onely in Alexander and Maximinus, he doth somewhat decline from it, which is well observed by that most exquisite Interpreter of him Angelus Politianus. He is commemorated by Julius Capitolinus in his Clodius Albinus, where he saith, Quod ad fidem pleraque dixit, as who was both . So doth also Trebellius Pollio make mention of him in his thirty Tyrants, as also Lampridius in his Alexander Severus, and Anto∣ninus Diadumenus. Ammianus Marcellinus stileth him, Artium minu∣tissimum sciscitatorem, A most exact Searcher of all Arts: and Dempster calleth him, Historicum ele∣gantem & copiosum, An elegant and copious Hi∣storian.
Of his History, it is Stephanus his Ob∣servation. Quod nulla Romana Historia extat, quae tam mirabiles rerum in Romano Imperio vicissi∣tudines non plurium annorum spatio complectatur. That there is no Roman History extant, which comprehends so wonderful vicissitudes of affairs in the Roman Empire, no, not in a larger space of years, as that doth in so short a time. Procopius. PRocopius lived when Justinian was Empe∣ror, and was called by Suidas . He was Notary to Bellisarius, whose Acts he composed, and publisht; he has written eight Books of History: The two first do treat of the Persian War, the two next of the Vandall, and the foure last of the Gothick. Those twain which give an account of the Persian, are Epi∣tomized by Photius in the sixty third Chapter of his Bibliotheca; but yet a Synopsis of the whole we meet with in the Preface of Agathius, who proceeded where this Procopius ended. Before he died, he added a ninth unto his former eight, which he called by the name of , because it contained those things, that were not before published. Suidas re∣ports,
That this Historian in this his Addition, was very invective, against the Emperor Justi∣nian, and the Empress Theodora, as also against Bellisarius, and his Wife: whatsoever is extant in the Greek Tongue of this Authors, the World is beholding to Heschelius for it; but as for the Translation of Porsena, it may be justly sayd of him, that what he undertook to con∣vert, he altogether perverted. Dempster stileth this man Historicum Insignem, A famous Historian. And Bodinus is no way a Detractor from him, who writeth thus, Cum singulas epistolas Decreta, foedera, conciones vario di∣cendi genere, ac stilo describit; magnum verissimi scriptoris praebet argumentum. Seeing that he describes all the Epistles, Decrees, Leagues, O∣rations, with variety both of Speech and stile, it is a convincing Argument, of a singular true Writer.
Ammianus Marcellinus. AMmianus Marcellinus flourished under Grati∣anus, and Valentinian, and wrote one and thirty Books, whereof thirteen are not now extant of what Nation, and Profession whence he took beginning of his History, and where he ended it; his own words in his Epilogue will cleerly manifest it, he began with Nerva, and ended with Valens: That he was a Greek, not onely a passage in his one and thirtieth Book, but also his phrase of Speech, or Dia∣lect bewrayeth it. Suidas saith, That he was familiar with Sallustius the Philosopher, who was Captaine of the Praetorians, and the first man that designed Valentinian to the Em∣pire. He is a grave, and serious Writer (saith Vossius) worthy to be beloved of all men, especially of the Germans, the Scituation of whose Country he most accurately described, as who had been engaged into a Military Em∣ployment in that Nation. But (saith the same Grammarian) Dictio horridior est; and no marvail if it be, for why should any won∣der, if a Soldier speak like a Soldier, more roughly then other Writers? And besides, he was a Greek, and therefore the more excusable, if he writ after his own Native Idiome; he is
remembred by Ammianus Priscianus. Barthius speaks nobly of him upon the ac∣count of a Soldier, whom in that respect, he thus Characters. Homo magno animo, Disciplinae militaris assecla, inter tubas & strepitum armorum pervenire eo absque ulla animi contentione potuit, quo nos studia per tot tantosque anfractus vix ducunt. A man of great Courage, and an Affector of Military Disci∣pline, one that could amidst the sound of Trumpets and noise of Armes arrive there without any reluctancy of Mind, whither our Studies, through so many and great streights can hardly lead us. Neither doth the same Critick speak less of him as a Schollar, Ʋtili∣tate monitorum, & veritate Historica, nescio an quis∣quam autor ullibi sit supra Ammianum Marcelli∣num. For profitableness of Admonitions, and Historicall Truth, I know not, whether there be any Author before Ammianus Marcellinus. Ile but add a Note from Dempster, to this of Bar∣thius, and so end; Ammianus, Luculentus Re∣rum Romanarum scriptor.
THE CHARACTERS Of some of the chief of the GRAMMARIANS AND ORATORS. LONDON, Printed by E.C. for Henry Eversden, at the Grey-hound in S. Pauls Church-yard, 1659.
THE NAMES Of the chief GRAMMARIANS Herein handled. VArro, Athenaeus, Julius Pollux. Aulus Gellius, Martianus Capella, Suidas, Coelius Rhodiginus, Erasmus, Budaeus, Julius Scaliger, Camerarius, Casaubonus,
Josephus Scaliger, Justus Lipsius, Janus Gruterus, Caspar Barthius. The Orators. ANtiphon, Gorgias, Isocrates, Demosthenes, Aeschines, Lysias, Demades, Cicero, Marcus Seneca, Petronius Arbiter, Hermogenes, Quintilianus, Lucianus, Elianus, Aristides, Symmachus.
ΜΟΡΦΗ' ΓΡΑΜΜΑΤΙΧ̄Ν▪ OR, THE GRAMMARIANS In their due FORMS. Marcus Terentius Varro. MArcus Terentius Varro, was one of the Learnedst among the Romans, highly honoured by Cicero him∣self, although Remmius Palaemon could most arrogantly and con∣temptuously call him Porcum, a Hogg, Where∣unto one wittily replyed, That he should have added, Literarum unto it, A learned one. He is by Lactantius equalled to any one of the Latines or, Greeks; Marcus Varro, (saith he) Quo
nemo unquam doctior, ne apud Graecos, nedum apud Latinos vixit. Marcus Varro, then whom, none lived more Learned, either with the Greeks, or Latines. Quintilian does prefer him before all the o∣ther Romans; Vir Romanorum eruditissimus: Ci∣cero likewise in his Brutus stiles him diligentissi∣mum investigatorem antiquitatis, A most diligent Antiquary. Valerius Maximus calls him Vitae humane exemplum, The Pattern of mans life; and Dempster names him Criticorum patrem Incom∣parabilem; The Incomparable Father of the Criticks. Ile but add to all this his Character from S. Augustine. Quis magno Varrone curiosius ista quaesivit? Quis invenit doctius? Quis consideravit attentius? Quis diligentius pleniusque conscripsit? qui tametsi minus est suavis eloquio, doctrina tamen, atque sententiis ita re∣fertus est, ut in onmi eruditione, quam nos secularem, illi autem liberalem vocant, studiosum rerum tantum iste doceat, quantum studiosum verborum Cicero de∣lectat. Who sought into these things more cu∣riously then Marcus Varro? Who more learn∣edly found them? who considered them more attentively? Who writ them more diligently and fully? Who, although he be not so sweet in his Language and Expression, yet he is so stuft with Learning and Sentences, that in all Erudition which they call liberall, we secular, he teacheth him that is studious of things, as
much as Cicero doth him, that is studious of Words. It's Terentianus his Versicle of him; Vir doctissimus undecunc{que} Varro. Athenaeus. AThenaeus was a Grammarian in the Reigne of Marcus Antoninus, and was called by the name of Noucratita; his Deipnosophists are a Work both commendable for variety, and al∣so for Erudition; he hath thereby described a magnificent and sumptuous Supper (The Or∣der and Structure of the Book, being the same with that of a great and large Feast.) Indeed his Disputes are set out with the greatest Ora∣tory and Rhetorick that can be, so that his transcendent Wit is very worthy the Readers Admiration. What pity is it then, that this laudable Work could not come unto our hands so per∣fect, as he intended it, a great part thereof be∣ing lost, indeed so great a part, that the re∣mainder may be called, but as it were an Epi∣tome of the whole. He is stiled by Isaac Casaubon, Scriptor vere , A Writer very learned in many things,
& ut paucis multa complectamur. Grecorum Varro, aut Plinius. And that we may comprehend much in a little, the Varro, or Pliny of the Greeks. Dempster also calleth him, Doctum ve∣terum autorum compilatorem: A learned Compi∣ler of ancient Autors. There was another of his Name before him, one that was an admirable Philosopher, as this was an Historian. Julius Pollux. JƲlius Pollux lived under Caesar Commodus, and taught Rhetorick at Athens; he dedicated his Onomasticon to his Scholar the Emperour. Suidas saith, That he writ also on other Sub∣jects, but they all miscarried. This Encomium is given to his Onomasticon, that its called, a Treasury of all Words and Things, fit for, and exposed unto every use. Isacus Casaubonus in an Epistle that he writ to one, that set him forth, hath Characterized him thus: Et sane Pollux, siquid Judico, scriptor optimus, e∣ruditissimus, utilissimus, & eo seculo, quod tot claros in literis viros tulit dignissimut. If I have truly any Judgment, Pollux is a very good Writer, very Learned, very profitable, and most worthy of that Age, which brought forth so many fa∣mous men for Learning.
Dempster sayes, That in his Collections, he is incomparably diligent, and erudite; he died in the fifty eighth year of his Age. Aulus Gellius. AƲlus Gellius, called by Gifanius Maximi Judicii vir, A man of deep and solid Judg∣ment, flourished according to the account of learned Petavius, in the Reigns of Trojan, and Antoninus; who in his Rationary of times, joynes him with some other eminent Gramma∣rians, which were then Contemporary with him: Nay, Gellius himself in his twentieth Book of Attick Nights, discovers unto us the Age he lived in, where he saith, That he was present at the Dispute which was betwixt Sex∣tus Caecilius the Civilian, and Favorinus the Phi∣losopher. Lipsius in his Miscellanies very highly com∣mends his Latine, stiling him Scriptorem purissi∣mae latinitatis, & plane ad comadiam antiquam, A Writer of the purest Latine, and plainly suita∣ble to the ancient Comaedian strain. Politian speaking of his Books of Attick Nights, saith thus of them, That they are Max∣ime candidae, Very candid. Onely Vives doth most injuriously condemn, and under value him, for which he is reproved by Henricus
Stephanus. Pareus calls him, Criticorum madul∣sam: and Dempster, Grammaticorum utilissi∣mum. As for this Authors Name, its uncertaine whether it be Agellius, as some have thought, or Aulus Gellius. Its Lipsius his confession, Se ejus nomen nunquam nisi dubitantem & haesitantem posuisse, That he never writ his Name without great haesitation, and doubting. Martianus Capella. MArtianus Capella was a Carthaginian of proconsular degree and dignity, whom Dempster calls Rebus latinum, verbis Africanum, For Things a Roman, for Words a Carthagi∣nian. And though Barthius acknowledgeth him to be Barbarior scriptor, A Writer that sa∣voureth in his Speech of too much Barbarism, yet in this he commends him, that he is, Ʋti∣lissimus ad autorum de singulis artibus liberalibus sententiam capiendam, very profitable in apprehend∣ing the Judgment of Authors, touching all the liberall Arts; and therefore not worthy to be prosti∣tuted by the Criticks unto that reproachfull Name of Tulliaster. I will but add to this the commendation, which that eminently learned Grotius is pleased to bestow upon him;
Ad ipsum Martianum te Relego, in quo plurima invenies, quae nec discere taedebit, nec didicisse poeni∣tebit, Neque hoc ipsos barbari seculi homines latuit, apud quos quani nominis fuerit Capella, vel solùs Turonensis satis superque docebit, qui eum in fine libri non aliter nominat, quam si Aristotelem, Ci∣ceronem, Varronem nominasset. I send thee to Martianus himself, in whom thou shalt find very many things, which it will not be irksome to learn, nor repent thee to have learned. Neither were the men of that barbarous Age ignorant of this, with whom in how great repute, and credit this Capella was, Turonensis alone will more then sufficiently make appear, who in the end of his Book calls him after no other name, then that of Aristotle, Cicero, Varro. Suidas. SƲidas was, as some say, a Monk of Byzan∣tium, and flourisht about six hundred years since, according to the opinion of learned Ca∣saubon. His Work is stiled, Thesaurus insignis & Amaltheae velut Cornu: which though it be im∣puted unto his Name, yet many learned men (whose Names are praefixed to the Book) were Instrumentall to the composure of it. The Grammarian Dempster thus is pleased to
limn him, and to afford us such a Draught of him, as may serve sufficiently to express him. Suidas admirabilis, incomparabilis, unus instar omnium Grammaticorum: Suidas an admirable and an incomparable Author, one that is worth all the rest of the Grammarians. This Encomi∣um may seem to some Censurers hyperbolicall, but if any Author in that kind hath merited such a Character: Surely this Suidas hath much more deserved it. Some there are, that have taken notice of a notable slip committed by this Critick, in that he hath passed by in his Thesaurus, the Names of many eminent Writers, particularly amongst the Historians, he neither mentions Polybius, nor Dion. However his Work is called by one that was very learned, Copiosa & perfecta quaedam Gramma∣tica. A certain copious, and perfect Grammar. There was another Grammarian also of this Name, one that was charged with this Fault by the Learned, as to be full of untrue Dis∣courses, and therefore deservedly stiled by some, Fabulosus scriptor, A fabulous Writer.
Caelius Rhodiginus. Caelius Rhodiginus, called Varro by Caesar Sca∣liger, as was Athenaeus by Isack Casaubon, yea, & Varrone major, And greater then Varro, and he thinks it spoken without the least shadow of Flattery: He is indeed an Author (as Demp∣ster saith) Admirandae eruditionis, Of wonder∣full Erudition, although he be, as the same Critick hath elsewhere decyphered him, Asperae dictionis, Of rough Phrase or Elocution. Jovius doth discredit this mans Thesaurus, af∣firming, that it seemeth to him Rancidum quid∣dam olere, To have a very rank, and offensive smell: however, those two well known Ver∣ses do sufficiently vindicate him. Abfuit usque adeo nihil, hoc in Cae∣lio haberent Tempora Varronem quo minus ista suum.
Desiderius Erasmus. DEsiderius Erasmus, of Rotterdam in Holland, honoured by Jovius with this Excellent Title, Varro sui seculi & Cicero Germaniae, The Varro of his Age, and Cicero of Germany; The same Author saith further to his honour, Quod ad arcana cujusque doctrinae infinita lectione, inusita∣taque memoria penetravit: That he pierced to the secrets of all Learning by his infinite reading, and unheard of Memory. The Monks were wont to say this of him, Erasmum posuisse ova, Lutherum, & caeteros exclu∣sesse pullos, That Erasmus layed the Eggs, and Lu∣ther, and others brought forth the young Ones. A certain Romish Doctor having gotten his Picture imprest upon a piece of Paper, set it up within his Parlour, which as he passed by, he would disdainfully spit upon, and being asked the question, why he did so? he returned an∣swer, Se Erasmo acceptum ferre calamitosum illud seculum: That he imputed to Erasmus the cala∣mity of that Age. He is called in allusion to his Name, by one that wrote his life, , Amiable, and by Gifanius, Alterum orbis jubar, maximumque rei lite∣rariae decus, Another Sun beam of the World, and the greatest Ornament, and honour of
Learning. Onely Gyraldus doth endeavour to abate somewhat of his true worth. Vir, saith he, Ʋbique magnus, sed an tantus fue∣rit, quantus a nonnullis existimatur, haud mihi parum liquet: Certe inter Germanos latinus, inter latinos ali∣quando Germanus. A man every where great, but whether so great, as he is thought by some, its not so clear to me; truly amongst the Ger∣mans, he is a Roman, and sometimes among the Latines, he is a German. There were some, that thus expounded this Versicle in that Psalm of Davids, Thou shalt tread upon the Lyon, and the Dragon. Upon the Lyon, that was Luther, and upon the Dragon, that was this Erasmus.
Gulielmus Budaeus. GƲlielmus Budaeus, called Gallicus Alcides, The French Hercules, and for his great Erudi∣tion and Knowledge, by Erasmus, Galliae por∣tentum, The Wonder of France: Nay, Jovius preferreth him before all the Learned men of Europe, Non Galliae modo, sed etiam totius Europae longe doctissimus, Not onely the Learnedst of the French-men, but also of all the Europae∣ans. Barthius honours him for his incomparable skill in the Greek Tongue, which did indeed give occasion to those two Verses of the Poet. Gallia quod Graeca est, quod Graecia barbara non est Utra{que} Budaeo debet utrum{que} suo. It was his earnest desire before he died, that all Solemnities should be omitted at his Fune∣ralls, and therefore they Inter'd him very pri∣vately in the deep silence of the Night. Its a gallant report, which the Poet Buchanan be∣stows on him in these following Verses.
Sunt universi splendor orbis Galliae Et Galliarum splendor est Lutetiae. Splendor Camoenae sunt sacrae Lute∣tiae, Budaeus ornat unus innocentia, Splendore vitae, literis, solertia Orbem, Camoenas, Galliam, Lute∣tiam. Julius Scaliger. JƲlius Scaliger stiled by learned Vossius, Erudi∣torum maximus, naturae miraculum, & vir ad un∣guem factus: The Greatest of Scholars, Natures Miracle, and a man exactly made, even to a Nails breadth. He was an excellent Poet, as well as a Grammarian, whose Poems Justus Lipsius equalls with the Poetry of the An∣cients. The said Critick speaketh thus of him, Quod de Tullio dixit vetus magister, profecisse multum, cui is placeret, ego verius, magnum esse, cui Julius iste magnus. Vossius saith, that he was, Sed uno Aristotele minor, Inferiour to none but great A∣ristotle. Barthius calleth him Hominum , The great wonder of men.
Isack Casaubon doth compare him with the very Gods themselves, giving him this sacred Epithet, , I'le let him pass with that of Vossius: Vir ille, hoc uno excepto, quod parem sibi filium genuit, caetera incomparabilis: That man (This one think being excepted) that he begot a Son not inferiour, but equall to him, is to all others Incomparable. Camerarius. CAmerarius graced by Turnebus with this en∣suing Appellation, Germaniae ornamentum, & Europae Decus, The Ornament of Germany, and the Honour of Europe; Thuanus saith, That he was of Noble Extraction, though his Wealth did no way answer to his Descent: He was endued with an Ingenuous, and hand∣some Shape, and delighted his Mind in such noble Exercises, as his Birth and Quality did require. He greatly affected good Horsman∣ship, being very skilfull in managing his Bri∣dle, and for all such Feats, as that Art could instruct him with. For his Learning, he was of that great Re∣pute, that Janus Gruterus on that account, sti∣leth him, Incomparabilem, Incomparable; and Justus Lipsius in his Miscellanies thus honours him: Vir quem Germania habuit sine paro: A
man that Germanie could not equall or paral∣lel. His knowledge was such both in the Latine and Greek Tongues, that Jovius said this of him, Quod scribendo pernobilis Ciceronis imitator evaserit; That in Writing he shewed himself a very noble Imitator of that eloquent Orator Marcus Cicero. Isacus Casaubenus. ISacus Casaubonus, is by Dempsterus called Qui∣dam Pythius, A certain Apollo; By Heinsius, Eruditionis sol, & aetatis Decus, The Sun of Lear∣ning, and the Glory of the Age: And by Jose∣phus Scaliger, Eruditorum Phoenix, The Phoenix of the Learned. His Writings were of that weight, and worth that one said of him, Quod tot palladas edidit, quot li∣bros conscripsit. That he begat so many Pallaces, as he wrote Books; and therefore saith another, Vir erat Nectare, & Ambrosia qui alatur, & sar∣rano qui dormiat ostro dignissimus: He was a man most worthy to be fed with Nectar, and Ambro∣sia, and to sleep upon a silken Bed. His Language and expression is so sweet, That Vossius calls him, Musarum-Favum, The Hive of the Muses: and for his great Learning he is stiled by Pareus  politioris litera∣turae.
Il'e but mention Barthius his Character of him, and so proceed unto the next. Immortale Galliae decus, quo digniorom omni laude alium ne historiae quidem continent: The Immortal Grace of France, then whom History mentions not any more worthy of all Praise. Julius Scaliger. IVlius Scaliger was the Son of Julius, whom Casaubon thus salutes: Magni parentis non mi∣nor Filius, O thou Son, no less then thy great Father. He is stiled by the same Critick, Her∣cules Musarum, The Muses Hercules. By Vossius Alter Varro; Another Varro. By Pareus, Cri∣ticus , A Critick skil'd in many Tongues. By Lipsius, Rei literariae Aesculapius, The Aescu∣lapius of Learning. And lastly, by Caspar Barthius, , Most divine. Heinsius in his Funerall Oration breaks out thus into his Praises: Alii Abyssum eruditionis, alii scientiarum mare, alii doctorum solem, Alii patris sobolem divinam, Alii genus Deorum, Alii perpetuum literarum dictatorem, Alii maximum naturae opus, & miraculum, Alii aliter vocare. Some call him an Abyss of Learning, Others a Sea of Sciences, Others a Sun amongst the literate, Others the divine Off-spring
of a divine Father, Others the Stock of the Gods, Others a perpetuall Dictator of Letters, Others the greatest Work, and Miracle of Na∣ture, Others, Natures utmost Strength, And others otherwise. Casaubon, honours him with the Title of Tripos, whereto all, which are in doubt are to repaire. And the same Grammarian further resembleth him to the ancient, and wise Cato: Plane quod de Catone olim dictum versatile inge∣nium, sic illi pariter ad omnia fuisse, ut natum ad id unum diceres, quodcun{que} ageret, id verissimum in eo reperiri, non seria magis, quam lusus evincunt. Truly that which was heretofore said of Cato, That he had a Wit so pregnant, and prompt to every thing, that you would say, it was formed for the very thing, whatsoever it was he was about; Now that this is found to be most true in this very man, his serious Affairs do not more evince it, then his Sports. Il'e end him with that of Heinsius: Vir sine exemplo magnus, A man Great, without his Peer.
Justus Lipsius. JVstus Lipsius is saluted by Pareus with the name of the Belgick Seneca, and called by Schottus, the very Eye of the Low Countries, by Woverius, Amor & deliciae Generis humani, The Love and Darling of Man-kind, by Gruterus, Apex eruditionis reconditae, The top of all myste∣rious Learning. By Dausqueius, Seculi literati Sydus: The Star of the learned Age: and by one more, Deliciae Musarum, The Muses De∣lights. Acidalius in his Readings upon Paterculus gives him this excellent ensuing Character. Quem virum per omnia Diis, quam hominibus inge∣nio propiorem, uti lumen unicum, & numen aevi nostri colo, & veneror praeter omnes, quos ille admiratores cultoresque ubique habuit plurimos. Which man in all things for Wit, more neer the Gods, then Men, as the onely light, and Deity of our Age I love, and reverence beyond those many Ho∣nourers, and Admirers which he hath. Il'e add to this but that of Heinsius: Lipsius suavissimae quidem, sed inimitabilis, & ut ipse judica∣bat, ne tentandae quidem aliis eloquentiae vir; Lipsius a man of most sweet, and yet of unimitable Elo∣quence, and as he himself did judge, not to be aspir'd unto by any others. And therefore it was well said by Gaulterus, That he was Major omni invidia, Above all Envy.
Janus Gruterus. JAnus Gruterus, an excellent Grammarian and Critick is commended by Caspar Barthius for his skill in correcting what in any learned Au∣thor may be amiss: Vir (sayes he) emendandi prudentissimus, ac perspicacissimus: Dempster extolls him for a Critick of incomparable reading, and Judgment, calling him Seculi sui alterum Varro∣nem, Another Varro of that age he lived in. Barthius advanceth his prudence, Honesty, Learning, and Wit. Praestantissimus Gruterus, vir intime bonus, prudens & super quam credibile, eru∣ditus, & acutus. But of all men Pareus bursts forth into a strange admiration of him. Janus Gruterus , qui vir , critico∣rum hujus seculi, , cujus scripta merum Nectar spirant & Ambrosiam. Janus Gruterus a Wonderment, which man is an Eagle in the Clouds, the Alpha and Omega of the Criticks of this Age, whose Writings breath forth meer Nectar, and Ambrosia.
Caspar Barthius. CAspar Barthius is called by one of the Lear∣ned, , and graced by Pa∣reus with this following Periphrasis: Clarissi∣mum Germaniae lumen, & columen nutantium litera∣rum. The most clear light of Germany, and the very Prop of staggering Learning. One saith of the Books he writ, that they are such, that we can scarce read the Indexes of them without astonishmment, much less the Books themselves. Another thus Characters him. Varro alter, si quisquam, merito dicendus, qui tam multa legit, ut aliquid ei scribere vacare, mire∣mur, tam multa scribit, quam vix quenquam legere posse credamus. Worthy to be called another Varro, if any man may be so named, who reads so many things, that we may wonder he had time to write, writes so many things, as that we may think no man able to read them. Ile end all with that Hyberbolicall Eulogy given him, by one that Comments upon Musaeus. . The all-seeing Eye of the Graces.
ΣΧΗ̄ΜΑ ΡΗΤΟΡΩ̄Ν: OR, THE ORATORS. In their right SHAPES. Antiphon. ANtiphon an Orator of Athens, was the first that did write an Oration, and delive∣red Precepts concerning it, whereupon he is stiled by Suidas, the most ancient of the Orators, of whom Cicero saith in his Brutus, That no man ever went beyond him in plead∣ing of Causes of life, and death: as it appeared, when he pleaded his own Case. No marvell therefore, if the foresaid Suidas calls him Nestor, and after Gorgius the Prince of
Orators: And Philostratus who writ the Lives of the Sophists, gives him also the same Chara∣cter, and withall inserts the reason, Because he was able to perswade, in whatsoever he propo∣sed. He used to sell his Pleadings at a very high rate, so that he became thereby wondrous wealthy, he was Contemporary with Socrates, with whom he had frequent Conferences: Ze∣nophon relates one, that he had with that Philo∣sopher, he studied also Poetry, and profest that the had an Art thereby to drive away all sadness. Plutarch tells us that he lived in an hired House neer the Forum, where he published by Pen and Paper, that he could cure all griefs, so that when any made their addresses to him, and related the causes of their sorrows, he very sweetly allayed them. I read not who was his Master, but Plutarch acquaints us, that he was , His own Instructer. I'le but add a word from Thuoidides which concers him, , second to none of his time, . And one that was most excellent both for Invention and Elocution. Suidas saith, that he was , The Master of this Thucidides.
Gorgias. GOrgias was a Rhetor of Scicily, the Disciple of Empedocles, and the Master of Isocrates, and other Orators, as Cicero hath recorded, of whom Philostratus hath said this, That as soon as he came forth into the Athenian Forum, he was wont to say continually, Propound to me what you please, and I will forthwith speak copiously to it, vanting unto them, that he knew all things, and could discourse excellent∣ly well on every Subject. Whence sayes the same Author, it was Proverbiall, Gorgias his E∣loquence, Caelius Rhodiginus informs us, that his Orato∣ry was had in so great esteem amongst the A∣thenians, that they would call those dayes wherein he was to plead, , and his Ora∣tions ; He gained so much Wealth by his Rhetorick, that of all the Orators which e∣ver were, he was the first that placed a Statue of beaten Gold within the Temple of Apollo Delphicus, whereupon Plato meeting him return∣ing from Delphos, said unto him, Behold the fair and golden Gorgias: You may read more of that Statue in Pliny. So sweet was this mans Eloquence, that it could detaine and chaine fast to his Society, those two famous young men, Critias and Alci∣biades,
as also the most excellent Thucidides, and Pericles, even then when they were both aged. Isocrates. ISocrates the Son of Theodorus a Rhetor of A∣thens, and Disciple of Gorgias, coaetaneous with Plato, whom of all the Orators (he him∣self could say) That he only admired: he was defective in his pronunciation, and therefore came not into the Forum to plead causes; yet he reconciled Philip by his Letters to the Athe∣nians, and in his excellent Panegyrick he stir∣red up the Greeks against Asia, and incited also the Rhetorician Gorgias to do the like. Cicero calls him Patrem eloquentiae, The Fa∣ther of Eloquence, Et singularem doctorem, and a singular good Doctor. Lipsius, Oratorem mili∣tum. Nay Tully speaking of him comparatively to other Orators, as he commendeth the sub∣tilety of Lysias, the acuteness of Hiperides, the sound of Eschines, the force of Demosthenes, so he prayses the sweetness of Isocrates. Philostrates calls him the Athenian Syrene, tel∣ling us that the Syren was placed on his Se∣pulchre as it were singing: In the Greek An∣thology he is named , The light of Rhetorick. The Roman Orator compares his
School to the Trojan Horse, out of which most eminent Rhetoricians came forth. Quintilian admireth him both for his speak∣ing, and teaching; whose words are these: Clarissimus ille praeceptor Isocrates, quem non ma∣gis libri bene dixisse, quam discipuli bene docuisse te∣stantur: That most excellent Schoolmaster I∣socrates, whom his Books do not more testifie to have spoken well, then his Scholars to have taught well: his Writings were so precious, that Pliny saith, He sold one only Oration for twenty Talents. Demosthenes. DEmosthenes a Citizen of Athens, and the Son of a Cutler, who, although he was left by his Father somewhat wealthy, yet be∣ing cheated through the dishonesty of his Guar∣dians, he became so poor, that he had not wherewithall to satisfie his Schoolmasters: however at length by his great Industry and paines, he attained to such a perfection in O∣ratory, that he became the onely Maintainer of the Liberties of Greece, making King Philip o∣dious by his Orations, for his endeavouring the infringement of them. Isodorus Pelusiota cals him , The head of all Greece: and another eminent
Author joyning him with Aristides and Thucidi∣des, stils them, Tria sydera Rhetorices, The three Stars of Rhetorick. In the Greek Anthology, he is honoured with this following Character: : The elo∣quent Trumpet of well sounding Oratory, a wise Father. Suidas telleth us, that Salust had by heart all his Orations, and that Nonnus had also read him over no less then six times. Cicero in his Brutus gives him this Eulogy: Oratorem plane perfectum, & cui nihil admodum de∣sit, Demosthenem facile dixeris. And again, in his Book de Oratore; Quo ne Athenas quidem ipsas magis credo fuisse Atticas. Then whom I believe Athens it self was not more Athenian. Quinti∣lian expresseth him with this Title. Lex orandi; to all this, I will but add that of of the Saty∣rist, Quem mirabuntur Athenae Torrentem, & pleni moderantem Frae∣na theatri.
Eschines. ESchines of Athens was first (as Suidas rela∣teth) a Stage-Player, then a Scribe, and afterwards an Orator: he was Demostenis aemu∣lus, but overcome by him in that Cause De Co∣rona. Cicero doth very highly extoll him, Ni∣hil illo oratore arbitror cogitari posse divinius. Indeed he was the first of Orators, that was said to speak Divinely, because what he delivered was without premeditation, as though he had been inspired by some heavenly Deity. Wherefore Philostratus saith of him, that his Eloquence was such, that none could imitate it; and hence it was, that his very Enemy De∣mosthenes (as it is in Vossius) would stile him, . Agellius calleth him, Acerrimum prudentissi∣mumque oratorum, qui apud conciones Atheniensium floruerunt. The most sharp and prudent of the Orators, which flourisht in the Athenian Fo∣rum. This man in a weighty Cause corrupted the Judges, for which Delinquency he was cast in∣to Prison, where by a Draught of Poyson he made himself away; he was by the way of jeer called by Demostenes, , A Cor∣rupter of Letters. Dionysius makes mention of seven more of this very Name.
Lysias. LYsias the Son of Cephalus, the Syracusane, was one of the ten Orators born at Athens, whi∣ther his Father had been transported, stiled by Marcus Cicero, Venustissimus scriptor, ac politissimus, A most gracious and polite writer, of whom in his Brutus also, he gives a most glorious Cha∣racter, preferring none before him, but that same Paragon of Greece, Demosthenes. Neither is Dyonisius any way behind that O∣rator in commending him, who saith this to his immortall praise, that he obscured the glo∣ry of all those Orators, which either were be∣fore him, or Contemporary with him; so that thereupon, he stiles him the very Rule, or Ar∣chetype of the Athenian Language then used. When he was a Boy, he went to the Colony of Thusios, where he continued, untill he was seven and forty years of age: and then returned a most excellent Orator. Quintilian speaks thus of him, Lysias subtilis atque elegans, & quo nihil, si oratori satis sit docere, quaeras perfectius; nihil enim est inane, nihil arcessi∣tum, puro tamen fonti, quam magno flumini propior: Lysias is subtile, and elegant, then whom (if it be enough for an Orator to teach) you can re∣quire nothing more perfect, for there is not a∣ny thing vain, nor any thing borrowed, being
neerer to the pure Fountain, then the great, and wide Stream. Ile let him go with this Character from Dyo∣nisius , None more diligent, and more gracious then Lysias. Demades. DDemades whom Suidas stileth , Crafty and fortunate, of a Mari∣ner, and Porter, became an Orator of Athens, he lived about the times of Philip, and Alexan∣der, Kings of Macedon; he writ, sayes Suidas,  which Olympias was the Wife of Philip, and Mo∣ther of great Alexander. He waxed exceeding rich, and Potent, and desired nothing more then the favour of the Macedonians, and especially of Antipater: He was much addicted to Luxury, so that he con∣sumed most of his Wealth upon his Belly; whence it was Antipaters scff, Nihil ei, sicuti & coesis victimis, praeter linguam, & ventrem superesse. That there was nought more remaining to him, then what was wont to the Sacrifices, even the Tongue, and the Belly.
Cicero reporteth, that he wrote nothing; but Suidas mentions somewhat that he should write, . Besides what he might dedicate to Olympias. Plutarch in the life of Demosthenes doth inform us, That Theophrastus being once asked the question, What kind of Orator was Demo∣sthenes? his Answer was, Worthy of this City. And then being demanded, what a one was this Demades, he replyed, Supra urbem, Above the City. He was an extream factious, and seditious man, never well, but when he was in the fire of Contention. However excusing himself one day as to that matter, he acknowledged, that he had oftentimes spoken words to his owne particular damage, but never any that were in∣jurious to the Common-wealth. Suidas sayes, . That he everted Judgments, and took away all Ora∣tory Contentions. He dyed under Antipater. Marcus Tull. Cicero. MArcus Tull. Cicero whose Father was a Ro∣man Knight, passed through all the Ho∣nours and Dignities of that excellent Repub∣like; being one of the Consuls, when Catiline broke out into Rebellion, he soon by his vigi∣lancy and prudence quieted that Commotion. In his old Age, he was first proscribed by Mar∣cus Antonius, and afterwards murthered, which caused that serious Apostrophe from Vellius Pa∣culus to the said Antony, which I shall here insert.
Rapuisti tu Marco Cicerone lucem sollicitam, & aetatem senilem, & vitam miseriorem te principe, quam sub te triumviro mortem. Famam vero, gloriam{que} facto∣rum, at{que} dictorum, adeo non abstulisti, ut auxeris, vivit, vivetq, per omnium seculorum memoriam, dum{que} hoc vel forte, vel providentia, vel utcunq constitutum rerum na∣turae corpus, quod ille poene solus Romanorum animo vi∣dit, ingenio complexus est, eloquentia illuminavit, mane∣bit incolume, comitem aevi sui, laudem trabet, omnis{que} po∣steritas illius in te scripta mirabitur, tuum in eum fa∣ctum execrabitur, citius{que} in mundo genus hominum, quam hujus nomen cadet. Thou hast snatcht from Marcus Cicero a solli∣citious light, and old age, and a life more misera∣ble under thee Prince, then death under thee Triumvir. The fame and glory of his deeds, thou art so far from taking away, that thou hast augmented them; He lives, & shall live through the memory of all ages, and whilst this Uni∣verse, or body of natural things, constituted ei∣ther by casualty, or by providence, or any o∣ther way (which he only of all the Romans ap∣prehended in his mind, comprehended with his wit, illuminated with his wisdome) shal remain in safety, his praise shall bear it company, and all posterity shall admire his Writings, against thee, and curse thy bloody deed against him, and man-kind shall sooner cease to be in the World then his Name shall perish. Its reported of Molon this Orators Master, (as it is affirmed by Aurelius Victor) that he wept very soare, because he did as it were fore∣see, that his Scholar being a Roman, should
deprive Greece of her Renown for Eloquence; Its the forementioned Paterculus his Observa∣tion of him, Quod omnia sua incrementa sibi de∣buit, vir ut vita clarus, ita ingenio maximus, qui effe∣cit, ne quorum arma viceramus, eorum ingenio vince∣remur. That he owed all his proficiency onely to himself, a man as eminent in life, so tran∣scendent for wit, who indeed effected, that we were not overcome by their wit, whose Armes we had conquered. Seneca the Rhetorician speaketh to the same purpose: Quicquid Romana facundia habet, quod insolenti Graeciae aut opponat, aut praeferat, circa Ciceronem floruit: Whatsoever the Roman Eloquence hath, which it may oppose, or prefer to inso∣lent Greece, it all flourished in Cicero. And a∣gain saith the same Author, Illud Ingenium solum populus Romanus par Imperio suo habuit. The Peo∣ple of Rome had that onely wit equall unto their Empire. Quintdian tells us, that he attained to the force of Demosthenes, the copiousness of Plato, and the sweetness of Isocrates: well might Sym∣machus then call it Tullianam Opulentiam.
Marcus Seneca. MArcus Seneca the Rhetorician, was the Fa∣ther of Lucius the Philosopher, and vul∣garly called by the name of Declamator, al∣though (as Justus Lipsius saith) Those Decla∣mations were not of his own Composure, but onely were digested, methodized, and set in or∣der by him; wherein (saies that learned Gram∣marian) Come ac amaenum ingenium suum satis o∣stendit, He sufficiently displayed his neat and pleasant wit. This same Lipsius saith further, That that work of his is very profitable for Eloquence, because he brings into one body thereby (as it were) the Members of all other Orators: And again, comparing him with his Son, he thus speaketh of him, Ʋnice me in filio sapientia delectat, in patre comitas, lepos & Facundia quaedam simplex: In the Son, Wisdome is the thing that onely affects me, In the Father Comity, Plea∣santness, and a certain naked Eloquence. Ile add but that of Andreas Scottus, Nihil in lingua latina cum a Cicerone, Fabioque discesseris, scriptum purius, aut elegantius. If you will but except Cicero, and Quintilian, there is nothing written in the Latine Tongue more purely, and more elegantly.
Petronius Arbiter. PEtronius Arbiter was a Knight of Rome, and very intimate and familiar with the Empe∣rour Nero, called thereupon Barthius, Arbiter no∣ctium voluptatumque Neronis, Pandar unto Neroes Nightly pleasure: for to this lascivi∣ous Writer, the Tyrant owed all his Sports, and Pastimes, and therefore was delighted with no mans company, as he was with his. Tacitus speaking of this bloody Prince, sayes this of him, Quod nihil amaenum & molle affluen∣tia putavit, nisi quod ei Petronius approbavisset. That he accounted nothing sweet, and soft, and pleasant, but what Petronius had appro∣ved of. It seems then that this Petronius had the skill to make Provision of such Dainties, as would be suitable to his lustfull Appetite: and this appears by those common Characters which severall Authors have bestowed upon him. Turnebus calls him, Obscenum & lascivum scri∣ptorem, An obscene and lascivious Writer. Et quod venustatem orationis suae spurcissimis inquinavit amoribus, And that he defiled the Elegancy of his Oration with his most filthy Loves.
Indeed his Latine is of the sweetest straine, and therefore deservedly stiled, Vernulae & latinae urbanitatis purissimus fons, The purest Fountaine of the Roman Language. What sayes Lipsius of him? Vidistine quidquam venustius, argutius post natas Musas? Hast thou seen any thing since the Muses were in the World, more sweet, and witty? And it is a pretty expression of the same Critick's; Fragmenta ejus purissimae impu∣ritatis. His Fragments are of a most pure im∣purity. Dempster also doth express him to the life in this following Character. Candidus, Tersus, suavis, in omnibus mirandus, modo absit obscoenitas. Candid, faire, sweet, ad∣mirable in all things, were but his obsceaness wanting.
Hermogenes. HErmogenes of Tarsus, sirnamed Xyster, wrote a Book of Rhetorick when he was but of the Age of eighteen; so that his Fame spread so far and wide, that it came to the Eares of the Emperour Antoninus, whose Imperiall Majesty did condescend and stoop so low, as to receive Instructions in that Art of Eloquence from him so young: as also did the grave Philosopher Musonius. But when he had arrived at the foure and twentieth yeare of his Age, he was deprived of his Wits, loosing all his Eloquence, without a∣ny visible cause of so suddain, and so sad a change. This made Antiochus the Sophist (as it is in the learned Suidas) to play upon him with this following Jeere. . Hermogenes which was amongst the Boyes as an aged man, became at length amongst the aged men a Boy. Vossius alluding to his Name calls him, Mer∣cury, si nomen spectes, patrem merito voces ipsum elo∣quentiae Mercurium. If you consider and regard his Name, you may very well call him the Fa∣ther of Eloquence Mercurius.
Quintilianus. QƲintilianus by nation a Spaniard, called by an eminent Critick, Romanae eloquentiae censor, & oratorum Coryphaeus, accompa∣nyed the Emperour Galba unto Rome, where he was afterwards made Tutor to the Nephews of Caesar Domitian. Angelus Politianus saith, and that out of Hierome, Quod primus omnium Romae publicum ju∣ventutis gymnasium instituit, & e fisco eximium sti∣pendium accepit. That he was the first which taught a publick Freeschool at Rome, and up∣on that account received a large Stipend from the publick Exchequer. Trebellius Pollio saith of him, That he was the acutest, and wittiest Declamator within the whole Roman Empire, and that the reading bu of one of his Chapters will sufficiently de∣clare it: no wonder therefore if Sidonius sti∣leth it, Acrimoniam Quintiliani, The Acrimony of Quintilian: and Barthius, Omnium qui unquam scripserunt auctorum elegantissimum, The most ele∣gant of all Authors that ever writ. Another Characterizeth him thus: Critico∣rum omnium , The most Criticall of all Criticks. And Dempster gives him thse two ensuing Periphrases: Orator eximius, ac necessarius, Optimusque dicendi Artifex, A famous and necessary Orator, and the best Master of
Language. Witty Martiall Commemorates him in one of his acute Epigrams. Quintiliane vagae moderator summe Juventae, Gloria Romanae Quintiliane Togae. He is also taken notice of by that same admi∣rable Satyrist Junius Juvenal. Lucianus Samosatensis. LƲcianus Samosatensis lived in the Reign of Trajan, he was in the beginning a Profes∣sor of the Christian Faith, but in the end he Apostatized and fell to disparaging, disgra∣cing, and reviling of it, thereby proving a Blasphemer of that glorious Profession, wher∣of he had been once, as it were a noble Cham∣pion. Suidas sayes that he was at length torn in pie∣ces by fierce and greedy Doggs, a very just Judgment from Heaven upon him, and a righ∣teous reward to his base Apostasy. He was sirnamed Blasphemus, or Dysphemus, because he would frequently deride the Oracles of God, and make but a mock of the true Religion.
Hence it is that Barthius stiles him, Deorum hominumque irrisorem, A derider both of Gods and men; and sayes Lactantius, Lucianus, Qui Diis & hominibus non pepercit. Lucian who spa∣red neither God nor man. Eunapius tells us, That he was altogether composed for merri∣ment. . A man as it were made for to provoke Laughter. Nay, he himself who best of all knew his own naturall temper, confesseth in his Pseudologista, that he was : Incontinent of laughing. I'le but ad that, which Caspar Barthius hath sayd of all his Writings. De philosophia hujus scriptoris dicere ausim nmini ad nos usque fuisse per∣spectam, & cognitam, neque impiam esse, nisi quatenus veritati sese opponit Christianae, & non paulo altius oculos in rerum divinarum considerationem immittere, quam vulgo censetur. Concerning the Philosophy of this Writer, I dare affirm that it was never well apprehend∣ed and known by any, even to our very selves; Neither is it impious, but where it opposeth Christianity, and that it looketh higher into the consideration of divine things, then is commonly imagined by the Vulgar.
Aelianus. AeLianus born at Praeneste a Town in Italy, was the Auditor of Pausanias: he taught Rhetorick at Rome, soon after the death of the Emperour Adrian. Suidas sayes, That for the sweetness of his Speech he was called . He writ De animalibus, de varia Historia, De Re Militari, all which are come safe into our hands, we find this Character given him by Eunapius, That he wrote as Athenian like, as the very Athenians themselves, a man most praise-worthy for his purity in the Greeke Tongue. Gesner speaking as to his History of living Creatures, saith thus of it: In Aeleani de Animalibus libris Temperamentum quoddam, & Harmonia utriusque philosophiae, moralis (inquam) & naturalis. In Aelian's Books of li∣ving Creatures, there is I say, a certain Tempe∣rament and Harmony of either Philosophy, morall and naturall. And sayes another occasionally, wherewith I shall let him pass; In ejus narrationibus, quid non egregium, non prae∣stans, non Idoneum vel ad cognoscendum, vel ad emi∣tandum, fugiendumve? Quid non in eo tersum, ele∣gans, politum, & Atticum? In his Narrations, what is there, that is not egregious and excel∣lent?
What not fit either to be known, or to imitate, or to be declined? What is there, that is not neat, polite, elegant, and Attick. Aristides Adrianensis. ARistides Adrianensis an excellent Sophist, was much affected with Contemplation, who not being naturally prompt to Oratory, yet through his painfull Industry, he attained to an incomparable strain of Elocution. When Mark Antonine the Emperour was at Smyrna, where he had been for the space of full three dayes ere this Orator would afford him his at∣tendance; at length coming to wait upon his princely Majesty, it was the Emperours first question, Quare te sero vidimus? Why so late before we saw thee? And the Rhetors reply was, Theorema O Rex nos occupabat, atqui mens aliquid considerans, ab eo quod quaerit, suspensa esse non debet. We were O King taken up with a The∣oreme, but the Mind being under meditation, must not be withdrawn from that it seeketh. Antonine being well pleased with this return, put this question also to him; Quando audiam te? Whom the Orator thus answered, Hodie propone, & cras audies; . Propound to day, and you shall heare to
Morrow, for we are not of those, that vomit forth things, but of them, that do all things ac∣curately. Philostratus calls him the Builder of Smyrna, for that City being destroyed by a most fearfull Earthquake, this Aristides wrote a lamentable Letter to the Emperour, such a Letter, as made him weep, and it so far prevailed with him, that in the end he condescended to rebuild it. He is highly applauded by one that set forth his Orations, and that in these ensuing words; Certe si quid judicare possum, videor mihi in uno hoc oratore & subtilitatem Thucididis, & suavitatem Herodoti, & vim deni{que}  Demosthenis, accuratissime expressas deprehendere. Truly, if I am able to judge, I seem most accurately to meet within this one Orator, the subtility of Thuci∣dides, and the sweetness of Herodotus, and the force and gravity of Demosthenes. Quintus Aurelius Symmachus. QƲintus Aurelius Symmachus was a man of Cosular degree, and Praefect of the City. He is much commmended by Marcellinus for his Learning, and modesty, and thus Characteri∣zed by Boethius, Illud pretiofissimum generis humani decus, vir totus ex sapientia ac virtutibus factus:
That most pretious Ornament of Mankind, al∣together composed of Wisdome and the Ver∣tues: As also thus by Prosper; Mirabili eloquie & scientia praeditus, Endued with wonderfull knowledge, and Eloqution. Ausonius wri∣ting an Epistle to him, gives him therein these following Commendations: Haud quis∣quam ita nitet, ut comparatus tibi non sordeat; Quis ita Aesopi venustatem, Quis sophisticas Socratis conclusiones, Quis Enthymemata Demosthenis, aut opulentiam Tullianam aut proprietatem nostri Ma∣ronis accedat? Quis ita affectet singula, ut tu imples omnia? Quid enim aliudes, quam ex omni bonarum artium ingenio collecta perfectio? Who comes so neer the Grace of Aesop? who the sophisticall conclusions of Socrates? Who the Enthymem of Demosthenes? Or the Opulency of Cicero? Or the propriety of our Maro? Who so affects each as thou fillest all? For what art thou else but collect Perfection from the Wit of all good Arts? Il'e but add a Note from Dempster: In Episto∣lis eloquens, in Relatione vehemens. Eloquent in his Epistles, in his Relation vehement.
ΧΑΡΑΚΤΗ'Ρ ΠΟΙΗΤΩ̄Ν OR, THE POETS In their lively PICTURES. LONDON, Printed by E.C. for Henry Eversden, at the Grey-hound in S. Pauls Church-yard, 1659.
TO HIS HONOURED FRIEND, JOHN HOLMDEN Of Limsfield in the County of Surrey, ESQUIRE. Ingenious SIR, AND I hope as kind, otherwise I must expect to meet with Frowns, for so slender hath my performance been, that if there be such a Grace, as Modesty, I may blush to own it. However a courteous Eye may pass over all my slips with a gene∣rous Indulgence; Indeed this is the presage, to which I may impute all my boldness, and if I am deceived, its my too forward praecon∣ception of your Candor hath beguiled me: And yet I am brief enough, and therefore guilty of the fewer Faults; had I been more prolix, I might have tyred out the greatest
Patience, but seeing you are secured from that, I hope it will be one Graine more in the Scale to make your Lenity the heavier. If I shall attain this undeserved Favour, I shall have my wish, and be engaged to ap∣prove my self, SIR, Yours to all Civilities, Edward Larkin.
THE NAMES Of the POETS As they are handled in Order. ORpheus, Alcaeus, Sappho, Musaeus, Homerus, Hesiodus, Pindarus, Anacreon, Theognis, Theocritus, Aratus, Lycophron, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Menander, Aristophanes, Plautus, Terentius, Callimachus, Afranius, Lucilius,
Accius, Ennius, Lucretius, Catullus, Virgilius, Corn. Gallus, Horatius, Ovidius, Manilius, Tibullus, Propertius, Gratius, Seneca, Persius, Pedo Albin. Pomponius 2us. Arunt. Stella, Juvenalis, Valerius Flac. Silius Italic. Lucanus, Martialis, Statius, Ausonius, Oppianus, Sidonius, Prudentius, Claudianus, Pontius Paul. Dracontius,
ΧΑΡΑΚΤΗ'Ρ ΠΟΙΗΤΩ̄Ν OR, THE POETS In their lively PICTURES. Orpheus. ORpheus an excellent Musitian and Poet, was a Thracian by Birth the Son of Oeagrus, and the Muse Calliope, much reverenced by the O∣drysae, a Mountainous and wild People, their manners answering to the Climate of their Country, who notwithstanding their Native Ferity, danced after his wel-tuned Instrument, nay, the very senseless Trees are reported to have skipt, whensoever his Harp sounded, whereunto the Poet Horace hath alluded.
Unde vocalem temere insecutae Orphea sylvae, Artemat erna rapidos morantem Fluminum lapsus, celeres{que} ventos Blandum & auritas fidebus canoris ducere quercus. Suidas saith of him, that he was , A wise man, and instructed in many Secrets. He was torn in pieces by the ra∣ving Maenades, neer the River Hebrus, whose rent and dispersed Members the Muses gathered up and buried. His Harp upon his death was faigned to have been taken up into Heaven. Suidas in  affirmeth, . That he was the first Inventor of the Mysteries of the Greeks, so doth also Tertullian in Apologetico. Alcaeus. ALcaeus of Mitylene a Lyrick Poet, equall with that Pittacus, which was one of the seven wise men; amongst other of his Works, wrote a Book called Stasiotica, wherein he
sharply reproved Pittacus, Myrsilus, Meglagyrus, Cleanthis, and other Tyrants for oppressing their Native Country. Stobaeus doth recite two of his Verses concern∣ing the dispraise of Poverty, the same being also recorded by that learned Writer Athenaeus, Plutarch the Philosopher in the life of Flaminius, doth rehearse those Verses which this Author hath written in the dishonour of King Phi∣lip. He was a most excellent Musitian, and a great Warrior, preferring his strength far be∣fore his Poetry. Athenaeus doth describe him to have been a Lover of Drink, wherein he would exceed without regard had either to the time of the year, or the disposition of the Hea∣vens. And Barthius gives him this mark, Quod erat omnium post Anacreonta maxime bibulus: That af∣ter Anacreon he was the greatest Tipler. Its sayd, that one part of his Writings is worthy of a golden Harp, but in the other part, he descends to his vain sports, and loves, being indeed fit∣ter for matters of greater weight and mo∣ment,
Sappho. SAppho a Lyrick Poetress, was born about the forty second Olympiad; she wrote Epigrams, Elegies, Iambicks, & nine Books of Lyrick Ver∣ses. Suidas saith of her, Quod , That she was the first Inventress of the Harp; she is cited both by Athenaeus and Stobaeus. Plu∣tarch in the life of Demetrius, makes mention of a Book, that she should write of Loves. Others say, That there was another Sappho, and a Poetress, which entirely loved the young man Phaon; however the Latines do commend but one, who is by Gyraldus stiled Mascula for her Virile Studies, which Epithet is likewise given her by Horatius, Temperat Archilochi musam pede mas∣cula Sappho. And she is called also Pulchra Fair, acarmi∣num pulchritudine, From the beauty of her Poems. In the Greek Anthology they characterize he thus, : The sweet Pie∣rian Bee. Whatsoever is extant of her compo∣sure, is printed in Greek and Latine by Henri∣cus Stephansis.
Musaeus. MƲsaeus a famous Poet, was the Disciple of Orpheus, if (as some say) not his Son: he had that renowned Harp of his conferd up∣on him at his death, being for his great skill in Musick, thought worthy of it. He is the first that wrote of the Genealogy of the Gods; so great was his esteem among his Countrymen, that Tertullian saith, they accounted of him as a God, Deus a suis habitus. There goeth a Poem under his authority and Name, called Leander and Hero, but learned Casaubon hath cleerly discoverd, that he was never the Author of it. Scaliger in his Poetices speaketh thus of him: Arbitror ego Musaei stylum longe esse Homerico po∣litiorem o comptiorem, Quod si Musaeus ea, quae Homerus scripsit, scripsisset, longe melius eum scriptu∣rum fuisse judicamus. I believe that Musaeus his stile is far more polite and neat, then Homers, so that if Musaeus had written upon Homers Sub∣ject, in my Opinion and Judgment, he would have written much better then he. Suidas saith, that there were no less then three of this Name, and all of them Poets.
Homerus. HOmerus so named by the Ionians for his blindness for  in their Language by the Figure Metathesis signifies blind; yet his proper Name was Melesigenes, because he was born neer the River Meletes: He is otherwise called Maeonides, from his Parent Maeone, though some others would needs have him to be the Son of Apollo, and the Muse Calliope: he was a Poet of that great Renown, that no less then seven Cities strove to have the honour and glory both of his Birth and Breeding. The Verses are very wel known. Septem urbes pugnant genus obsapientis Homeri; Smyrna, Chios, Colophon, Ithace, Pylus, Argos, Athenae. Neither only did these 7. lay claim unto him, but three times seven, if we will give credit to the learned Plutarch, and Suidas, amongst which, Rome is very urgent, that he may be accounted hers; Now the uncertainty hereof moved Ap∣pion the Grammarian to invoke his Ghost to come forth from the dead, and to declare the
Country, that so the Controversie might be decided. He wrote in twenty foure Books the Wars of Troy, which he calls his Illias, and in as many more the Travells of Ʋlysses, which he Names his Odysses. They were digested into that Order, wherein we now have them, not by himself, but by other men, and (as Suidas reports) chiefly by Pisistratus the Athenian Ty∣rant. His Works were so admired by Arcesilaus, that he would not take his rest, untill he had read some portion of them. And again in the Morning, as soon as he was risen, he would say, Se ad Amasium ire, That he was going to his Darling. Alcibiades would strike that Schoolmaster in the Eare, whom he found without the Books of this most renowned Author. Alexander the great King of Macedon, having taken a rich Ca∣binet from Darius, whom he had overcome in Battell, resolved, that it should serve to keep these famous Works in. Elian telleth us, That Plato at the beginning studied Poetry, and having compiled cer∣tain Heroick Verses, he came to examine them by these noble Treatises of Homer, and finding them to fall very short of this eminent Poeta Art and Faculty, he forthwith tare them, and burnt them. Dionysius Haliarnasensis calls him . The top of all, whence every Ri∣ver,
Sea, and Fountain flows. No wonder therefore if the Painter Galaton faigned him Vo∣miting, and all the other Poets like so many Dogs licking up what he had spued out. Cicero could say, Homero nemo similis, None like great Homer: And Velleìus Paterculus a most elegant and neat Historian, could give him a Character somewhat suitable to his merit. Clarissimum Homeri ingenium sine exemplo maxi∣mum, qui magnitudine operum, & fulgore carminum solus appellaripoeta meruit, in quo, hoc maximum est, quod neque ante illum, quem ille imitaretur, neque post illum, qui eum imitari possit, inventus est. The most bright and matchless Wit of Ho∣mer, who both for the greatness of his Works, and the clearness of his Verses did alone de∣serve the Name of Poet, in whom this is most glorious, That there was neither any one be∣fore him, for him to imitate, nor any found after him, that could imitate him. I meet with his Epitaph in Suidas, which is as followeth. . . He flourished about 160 years before Rome, the Mistress of the World, was sounded.
Hesiodus HEsiodus was called Cumaeus from his Native Soile, and Ascreus from the place of his Education, he lived an hundred yeares after Homer, so sayes Porphyrius, and some others, as it is in Suidas. Plutarch writes of him, That being a Boy, and keeping his Fathers Flocks and Heards, he was beloved of the Muses, who gave him Laurell to eat, whereupon he com∣menced a most excellent Poet; and a Homer was called Poeta Lacedaemoniorum, The Poet of the Lacedaemonians; so this Hesiod was stiled Poeta Helotarum, The Poet of the Helots. The one teaching the way of Warfare, the other of Tillage. The Philosopher Jeronymus reports, That Pythagoras descending into Hell, saw the Soule of this Hesiod fastned to a brazen Pillar, and there making a most dolefull, and dreadfull noise: as also the Ghost of Homer compast about with Serpents, and all for this cause, because they uttered in their Books false things of the Gods. Pliny, and Columella affirm, that this Poet was the first man that wrote of Agriculture: The Criticks have afforded him many worthy Encomiums. Hesiodi opuscula, (sayes Barthius)
Quantus Thesaurus Infucatae sunt sapientiae? The Works of Hesiod, how great a Treasury are they of untainted and unadulterated Wisdome? And for his Stile, Heinsius saith of it, That it is Mitis, facilis, ac amaenus, Mild, facile, and plea∣sant. Amongst the Tragaedians he is compared to Euripides, and amongst the Lyricks unto Sap∣pho, and amongst the Orators unto Isocrates. Paterculus thus Characters this Poet; Hesio∣dus vir perelegantis ingenii, & molissima dulcedine carminum memorabilis, otii quietisque cupidissimus, ut Homero tempore, ita operis autoritate prximus. Hesiod for the clearness of his Wit, and the dainty smoothness of his Verse, is worthy of memory, a man infinitely desirous of rest and quiet, and as he was in time, so also in esteem the next to Homer. Suidas speaking of his death, sayes, that he was slain upon mistake, by the two Brothers Antiphus, and Climenus, who in the Night thought they had been avenged on him, who had been the Deflowrer of their Sister.
Pindarus. PIndarus of Thebes, the Prince of the Greci∣an Lyricks, was Eschylus his equall, he wrote in the Dorick Dialect, whom Horace for his Sentences, Figures, and Expressions, calls unimitable, he being indeed a Poet so much a∣bounding with them. When Alexander the Macedonian King made an assault upon the City Thebes, and took it by storm: Curtius informs us, that he spared the Family of Pindar, for the respect and reverence that he bare him. But Suidas is of opinion, that it was another Pindar, the Son of Scopelinus, whom Alxeander so honoured, though the Cosin German of this Lyrick Poet. Yet Plato stiles this man , Most wise and divine: And Athenaeus expresseth him to be . In the Greek Anthologie he is tearmed . The sweet singing Heliconian Swan. As other Mu∣ses were feigned to inspire other Poets, so did Polyhymnia him. I'le say no more but a word from Lipsius. Pindarus ex ore humano praefert aliquid non huma∣num; Pindar out of an humane Mouth lets drop somewhat, that is more then humane.
Anacreon. ANacreon was a Poet of Ionia, whence he was called Ionum Gloria. He lived in Fa∣vour with Polycrates the Samian Tyrant: Cicero saith, that his Poem is amatorious, and lasci∣vious, as is also his life: He was much taken a∣mong others with the beauty of the Boy Batil∣lus, whereunto the Poet Horace alludeth in that Verse of his; Non aliter Samio dicunt arsisse Batillo Anacreonta Teium. He flourisht in LII Olympiad. He was named Teius from the City he lived in, which was cal∣led after that Name: Pliny writes, that he was strangled with the stone of a Raysin. Scaliger thus praiseth him; Hic excelluit adeo, ut ejus dictio quovis Indice a∣rundinis succo dulcior mihi videbatur. He so excel'd, that his Speech seemed to me sweeter then the juice of the Sugar-Cane. Dempster stileth him, Lyricum suavissimum, The sweetest Lyrick. Suidas saith of him, that he wrote , Drunken Verses and Iambicks; and all of them , in the Ionick Dialect.
Theognis. THeognis was of Megara in Sicilia, and flou∣rished about the LIX. Olympiad. He wrote an Elogy upon those of the Syracusanes, that were preserved in the Siege, dedicating it to one Cyrhus, whom he dearly loved: There was another of this Name, which was a Tragick Poet, so cold in all his Works, that he was pro∣verbially called , Snow: But this Theognis as he hath been discommended by some, so he hath been applauded by others. Ammianus Marcellinus saith, That he is both Poeta prudens, & vetus, An ancient and wise Po∣et. And although Barthius could lay it to his charge, That his Poem had neither Caput, nor Calcem, Head, nor Tail, yet Dempster affirms, That he is Vel Isocrate Judice necessarius. A neces∣sary Poet even in the Judgment of Socrates. He begins his Work with the usuall form of Invo∣cation; .
Theocritus. THeocritus was a Poet of Syracuse, the Son of Symmichus and Philina, though Suidas calls his Father by the Name of Praxagoras, he lived in the time of Ptolemy the Son of Lagus; some would have him to be of Cous, and that he was transported from thence in a Ship to Syracuse. He wrote Idylls, and that in the Dorick Dialect, which Virgil afterwards undertook to imitate. Heinsius stiles him, Bucolicorum principem, The Prince of Bucolicks, preferring him on that ac∣count far before the renowned Maro: he was named , as Homer was Poeta; of whom this is also Heinsius his Character. Theocritus scriptor, cujus gratias, & Veneres nemo satis capit, Theocritus a Writer, whose Graces, and sweet∣ness none sufficiently comprehendeth. Suidas joynes this Poet with Moscus, and Bion, and saith of them all, That they were . The three Bucolick Poets.
Aratus. ARatus called by Suidas , Solensis, from a Town of that name in Cilicia; was an an∣cient Greek Poet, the Son of Athenodorus, instru∣cted in Grammar by Menecrates the Ephesian, and in Philosophy by Timon, and Menedemus: so Suidas. Cicero testifieth of him, that being ig∣norant of Astrology, yet he described the Hea∣vens and Planets in most eloquent and excel∣lent Verses. Quintilian thus commends him, Sufficit operi, cui se parem credidit, He sufficeth for the Work whereunto he thought himself equall: Its O∣vids Verse of him; Cum sole, & luna semper Aratus erit. Suidas saith of his Phaenomena, . That the beginning of them is admirable, and his aemulation Home∣ricall. Cicero translated them when he was but a young man. Suidas informes us also, that besides his Poetry, he wrote , Epistles also in Prose. Barthius applaudeth him for this, Quod de Deo locutus est divinitus, That he spake divinely of God, more then could be expected from one that was ignorant of all heavenly truth: Saint
Paul himself makes use of a saying of this Po∣ets, Act 17.28. . For we are his Off spring. He was borne about the hundred and twenty fourth Olympiad. Lycophron. LYcophron of Ʋbaea, Citizen of Chalcis, the Son of Aricles, though adopted, as Suidas saith, by Lycus of Rhegium, was both a Grammarian, & a Tragick Poet: and . One of those seven which were cal∣led Pleiades. He wrote in all twenty Trage∣dies, whose Names are recorded by Suidas: and besides those, a very obscure Poem, na∣med Alexandra, which the forementioned Grammarian stiles (in respect had to the ob∣scurity of it) , A dark Po∣em. Laertius tells us, That he was the Author of that Treatise Menedemus, so called from the Philosopher, whom he doth therein extoll; of his death, the Poet Naso in his Ibin, thus writes. Utque cothurnatum periisse Lycophrona narrant, Haereat in fibris fixa sagitta tuis.
He was very gracious with Ptlomeus Philadel∣phus; his Works were so dark and obscure, that the Poet Statius makes it proverbiall of him, Carmina Battiadae, tenebrasque Ly∣cophronis atri, His Alexandra is set out by Meursius, from whose hand it hath received so much clearness, and light, that he who was before called Lyco∣phron, may be now named Glycophron. Eschylus. AeSchylus of Athens, according to the re∣port of the Orator Quintilian, was the first Composer of Tragedies. Suidas saith, that he writ in all ninety, and besides them some Elegies: his death was suddain, and strange, for fitting in an open place, on purpose to de∣cline that stroak, which by unhappy progno∣stication threatned his ruine. It fell out, that being bare-headed, and bald, an Eagle flying o∣ver him with a shell-fish inclosed in his Ta∣lons, and taking his Pate to be some stone, whereon it might crack the shell, to come at
the Meat, let it fall on the suddain, and brain∣ed him. Its reported of him, that being well heated with Wine, he would then compose his Tra∣gedies, and consecrate them to Bacchus: Plu∣tarch as he commends the wisdome of Euripides, and the eloquence of Sophocles, so he doth the sublimity of this Aeschylus, all the commenda∣tion that he himself would give his Works, was this, he would call them, The Crusts of Ho∣mers magnificent and sumpteous Suppers. He was a good Warrior, and as he did fight, so he did speak, wherefore Heinsius saith thus of him. Sane ad tubam etiam scripsisse credas, adeo subli∣mis in oratione, ac grandis, verbisque quibus utitur, ipsis prope par rebus, heroicam & audacem dictionem effundit. He wrote indeed with his Pen, as he fought with his Sword.
Sophocles. SOphocles was an Athenian, the Son of Sophi∣lus, borne in the seventy third Olympiad, a∣bout seventeen yeares before the Learned Socra∣tes: he was called : The Bee for the sweetness of his Expression; so saith Suidas. Its recorded, that his owne Sons accused him in his old age for a witless man before the Judge, whereupon the aged Father produced a Tragedy, which he had lately formed, and then asked the Judge the question, Whether that seemed to be the work of an Idiot? Wher∣fore the Judge commending him, and his Po∣em, rebuked his Sons, and sent them away with shame. Polemon the Athenian Philosopher, was so de∣lighted with this man, and Homer, that he would frequently say, they were both endued with equall wisdome, calling Homer Heroicall Sophocles, and Sophocles Tragicall Homer. Simonides the wise man, stiled him . The Flower of the Poets. Suidas saith, that he wrote one hundred and three and twen∣ty Tragedies: and in his Contentions for the palme with other Poets, he obtained no less then foure and twenty Victories, the last wher∣of happening far beyond his expectation, he was so transported with suddain joy, that he
forthwith expired: he dyed about six yeares after Euripides, and is preferred before him for the majesty of his stile, though short of him for number of Sentences. Suidas saith, that besides his Tragedies, . He wrote an Elegy, and Paeans, and also solute Prose. Euripides. EƲripides was the Son of Mnesarchus and Clito, and had not, as some have reported, a Seller of Herb for his Mother: Suidas vindi∣cates him from the disparagement of so mean a descent, asserting . That he was of noble Birth, as Philochorus doth demonstrate it. He was born on that very day, wherein that huge and numerous Host of Xerxes was overthrowne by the Athenians At the first, he was a Painter, but afterwards he became a most excellent Tragedian. For Rhetorick he was the Scholar of Prodicus, and for Philosophy the Auditor of the most learn∣ed Socrates; he had his Name from Euripus: for his Austerity, they called him, , A Hater of Women: and yet Suidas affirmes, that he was a married man, and had two Wives, be∣ing
divorced from the first for her unchastity, neither did he find the second more loyall to his Bed: he flourished in the Reign of Arche∣laus the King of Macedon. Suidas saith, That he was torne in pieces by ravenous and greedy Dogs, or rather in the Night by barbarous and bloody Women: The Athenians grievously be∣moaned his untimely and suddain death, his Monument is all Greece: He was aged seventy five yeares, and died in the ninety third Olym∣piad: he wrote (they say) seventy five Trage∣dies, for every year he lived a Tragedy, though others will have the number of them to be ninety two: however Suidas saith, that there are but seventy seven extant. He obtained five Victories, foure in his life time, and one after his death, his Brothers Son being the Actor of that Tragedy. Heinsius gives him this good commendati∣on, Omnium Oratorum non minus pater, quam opti∣mus Poeta. No less the Father of all Orators, then a most excellent Poet.
Menander. MEnander an ancient Comaedian of Athens, was sollicited (as Pliny reporteth) by solemne Ambassadours from the Kings of Ae∣gypt, and Macedon, to grace them with his So∣ciety, craving it from him, by very bounte∣ous and magnificent proffers of honour and wealth. This Poet wrote according to the Judgment of Suidas, an hundred and eight Comedies, though others affirm no less then an hundred and eighty; They were all translated into ele∣gant Latine by Terentius, but the ill success of the times prevented us of the enjoyment of them, they being all lost He writ also Epistles to Ptolomeus the Son of Lagus King of Aegypt, and some to his friend Glycera; he flourished a∣bout the hundred and fifteenth Olympiad: Sui∣das calls him  and besides he saith of him, that he was . Very mad in his love of Wo∣men. However Quintilian is very large in the setting out his praises. Menander vel unus meo judicio diligenter lectus ad cuncta quae praecipimus effingenda sufficiat, ita omnem vitae Imaginem expressit. Menander alone in my Judgment well read, may suffice for all that we command to be done, for he hath very well expressed every kind of life. The same Author
extolleth him both for his copiousness of In∣vention, and for his veine of Eloquence, nei∣ther is Plutarch less backward in his advance∣ment. Aristophanes. ARistophanes a Comaedian, lived in the hun∣dred and fourteenth Olympiad. Suidas, spea∣king of his Birth, saith thus of it; . Some affirme that his ex∣tract was servile. The same Author reports him to have been . He was called , because in his Comedy stiled , he doth satyrically tra∣duce Socrates, who indeed was by Oracle repu∣ted the wisest of the World Scaliger saith, that this Poet is Cum risu mor∣dax, Though merry, yet without biting: Its reported, that Plato so admired him, that when Dyonisius the Tyrant was desirous of the Athenian Language, he sent this mans Come∣dies unto him. And Chrysostome was so taken both with his Eloquence, and vehemency in taxing, and reproving the Vices of Women, that he would spend a great part of the day in rea∣ding of him, and at Night going to his rest, he would put him under his Pillow, and so sleep upon him, as Alexander the Great was wont to use Homer.
Quintilian joyning this Comaedian with Ari∣starchus, calls them Poetarum judices, The Judges of the Poets, and yet Athenaeus elleth us, that he was ever in drink when he composed his Ver∣ses, as was also Alcaeus. The Athenians so high∣ly honoured him, that they would have him, and none other to be supream, so saith Aelian. M. Acc. Plautus. M. Acc. Plautus, named at the beginning Plotus (as Festus reporteth) A planicie pedum, From the plainess of his feet, which the Ʋmbrians call Plotos, was a most witty Co∣maedian, stiled by Scaliger, Romanae linguae lex, The Law of the Roman Tongue: and by Lip∣sius, Decima Musa, The tenth Muse: as also Gra∣tiarum hortus, The Garden of the Graces. He lived in those times at Rome, wherein those e∣minent Romans, Publius Scipio, Fulvius Nobilior, and Marcus Cato flourished. Horatius Flaccus te∣stifieth, that he imitated in his Playes those Greek Authors, Demophilus, Piemon, and Epi∣carmus the Sicilian. It was Varroes opinion, that if the Muses spake in the Latine Tongue, they then used the phrase of Plautus. Meursius stileth him, Omnium leporum patrem, The Father of all witty Conceits. He was compeld to grind at a Mill, in regard of his extream poverty, and when he was tired by
that painfull and heavy work, then he would by way of recreation compose Comedies, and sell them for his provision and sustenance. Volcatius Sedigitus writing of the Comaedians, and setting every one in his place and order, preferreth this Plautus before all others, even next unto Caecilius: Jerome takes speciall no∣tice of this Author, Haec est Plautina elegantia, hic lepos Atticus, & musarum, ut dicunt, eloquio comparandus. This is Plautus his elegancy, this is the Athenian Wit, and (as they say) com∣parable to the elocution of the Muses. He died few years after Quintus Ennius in the hundred forty fifth Olympiad: what a great loss was su∣stained by his death, he himself witnesseth by these Verses, which he composed before his death. Postquam est morte captus Plautus, Comaedia luget, Scena est deserta. Deinde risus, ludus, jocus{que} & numeri Innumeri simul omnes collacrymarunt. There were imputed to this Poets compo∣sure an hundred and thirty Comedies, but Lae∣lius a most learned Writer will have but twenty five acknowledged to be his, many being com∣posed by one Plautius, whereupon the mistake might be grounded in respect of the vicinity of their Names.
Publius Terentius. PƲblius Terentius was by Birth a Carthaginian, but brought to Rome in his tender yeares, where he was ingenuously trained up, and edu∣cated both in good Literature, and Manners by Terentius Lucanus; being naturally furnished with a quick Wit, and ripe Judgment, he was taken into Fellowship by those two noble Ro∣mans Laelius, and Scipio, whose assistance he had (as Cicero writeth) in the composure of his most neat and elegant Playes. And the learned Varro is also of the same judgment. This Comaedian was an Imitator of Menan∣der, whereof Justus Lipsius calleth him Menan∣dri Imaginem, The Image of Menander: and so the Verses of Caius Caesar do Decypher him. Tu quoque, tu in summis o dimidiate Menander Poneris, & merito puri sermonis A∣mator. Africanus that great Comaedian prefers him before all other Comick Poets. Terentio non similem dices quempiam.
Heinsius saith, that his Wit is incredible, and that scarcely one in one hundred understands him. Caecilius, Afranius, and he, lived all about the same age. Dulces latini leporis facetiae per Caeci∣lium, Terentium{que} & Afranium sub pari aetate ni∣tuerunt. The dainty witty Conceits of the La∣tine Tongue about the same age were by Caeci∣lius, Terentius, and Afranius rendred worthy of an high esteem. So Paterculus. Horatius Flaccus the best Censurer of the old Poets, admires the Gravity of Caecilius, and the art of this Terence, wherein he wonderfully ex∣celled; and of the same judgment was also Quintilian, as the Epigrammatist Ausonius com∣pareth Virgil with Homer, so he doth Terence with Menander, attributing to him the very ele∣gancy of the Latine Tongue. Tu quo{que} qui Latium lecto sermone Te∣renti Comis, & astricto percurris pulpita socco. Concerning his death Authors vary, some say, that he died in Arabia, others, and amongst them the Poet Ausonius, do affirm, that the loss of his Playes (which happened through Ship∣wrack) broke his heart, so that he died for very grief.
Callimachus. CAllimachus the Son of Battus, and Mesaime was an Elegiographe of Cyrene, of whom Suidas saith, That his industry and diligence was so wonderfull, that he could compose Po∣ems in any kind of Verse, and also write most excellent smooth Prose. The said Author more∣over affirmeth, that he compiled no less then eight hundred Books: he lived in the time of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus: Quintilian stileth him, Elegiae principem, and saith Ovid of him. Battiades toto semper cantabitur orbe; Quamvis ingenio non valet, arte valet. He wrote a notable Work, De sucrorum origine, which he calls , The argument whereof is much after that of Ovid, de Fastis. Martiall commemoratos him in his tenth Book, in an E∣pigram to his friend Mamurra. Legas Aetia Callimachi. Before he came to converse with Ptolomy, he taught Grammar at Eleusine a Village of Alex∣andria. He married the Daughter of Euphrates a Syracusan, his sisters son was of his Name, and an heroick Poet, mentioned by Suidas.
Lucius Afranius. LƲcius Afranius, called by some Marcus A∣franius was a Comicall Poet and flourished in Rome at that time, when Terence, and Cae∣cilius were somewhat aged. Cicero in his Bru∣tus stileth him Hominem perargutum, in Fabulis etiam disertum: A witty man, and eloquent in all his Comedies. He came neer in his imita∣tion to Menander, according to that of the Poet Horatius. Dicitur Afrani toga convenisse Menan∣dro. Indeed Macrobius affirmeth, that he borrowed much from that old Comaedian, which the Po∣et himself very ingenuously acknowledgeth, as is to be seen in that answer of his, to his Ob∣trectors. Fateor, sumpsi non a Menandro modo, Sed ut quisque habuit, quod conveniret mihi, Quod me non posse melius facere credidi.
Quintilian commends his Elegancy, but withall takes speciall notice of his filthy loves, wherewith he did deprave and corrupt his Ar∣guments. He is remembred by that neat Epigramma∣tist Ausonius. Qui toga facundi scenis agitavit Afrani. And he is mentioned likewise together with Caelicius and Terentius, by Velleius Paterculus, ut supra. Aulus Gellius highly honours this Poet, and chiefly commends that Verse of his, where∣in he thus speaketh of Wisdome. Usus me genuit, mater peperit memoria, Sophiam me Graii vocant, vos sapien∣tiam. The Grammarians do frequently make men∣tion of him, but of his death the Ancients write not. Caius Lucilius. CAius Lucilius called by Juvenal, Alumnus Aruncae: was born of good Parentage, be∣ing Uncle (as some of the Grammarians have written) to Cneius Pompeius. Petrus Crinitus thus extolls him. Illud imprimis manifestum est, fu∣isse Lucilium in genio acerrimo, & in scribendis versibus festivo, & urbano.
He was very intimate and familiar with Quintus Philocomus, who was one chief Instru∣ment of the publication of the Works of this Satyrist, so records Suetonius. He was the first Poet that wrote Satyrs, be∣ing an Italian by Birth. He scourgeth the Vi∣ces of those that were his Countrymen, by name Rutilius, Carbo, Tubulus, and many others whose wickednesses his Ingenuity could not bear with. Horace fastneth this reproach upon him, that he should flow muddily. At dixi fluere hunc lutulentum. And Scaliger saith, Illum ne fluere quidem: that he floweth not at all; But Juvenal well obser∣ving his Acrimony, thus describes him. Ense velut stricto quoties Lucilius ardens Infremuit, rubet auditor, cui frigida mens est Criminibus, tacita sudant praecordia culpa, Inde Irae, & lacrymae. The Emperor Adrian preferd this Lucilius before all the Poets that had written Satyrs. Gellius and Quintilian were great Admirers of him, the En∣comium, which the latter hath given him, we will here publish. Satyra quidem tota nostra est, in qua primus insignem laudem adeptus est Poeta Lu∣cilius, qui quosdam ita deditos sibi habet amatores, ut cum non ejusdem modo operis autoribus, sed omnibus poet is praeferre non dubitent; Ego quantum ab illis, tantum ab Horatio dissentio, qui Lucilium fluere lu∣tulente, & esse aliquid quod tollere possis, putat, nam e∣ruditio in eo mira, libertas{que} & acerbitas, & abunde salis.
The Satyr is wholly ours, wherein the Po∣et Lucilius hath first attained transcendent praise, who hath indeed gained lovers so firme and constant to him, that they do not doubt, not onely to prefer him to the Authors of the same Work, but also to all other Poets. In asmuch as I differ from those so I dissent from Horace, who thinks that Lucilius floweth mud∣dily; and that there is in him, which you may strike out; for there is in this Author, learning to be admired, and freeness, and bit∣terness, and aboundance of salt. Now, that he was the first Satyrist, we ga∣ther it from those words of Pliny; Lucilius primus condidit stili nasum: He flou∣rished about the time of the second punick War; he died at Naples, and there was Interred after he had lived to the age of six and forty yeares: Some write, that he had a publick, and solemne Funerall.
Accius. ACcius a Tragaedian, Junior to Pacuvius, was borne when Macrinus and Seranus were the Roman Consuls: a Poet so belo∣ved of Decius Brutus, that he would adorne the Frontispieces of the Temples, and the Monuments of the dead, with his worthy Verses. This Poet would not arise to Julius Caesar, when he entred the Theater, not out of contempt to his Mighty Greatness, but be∣cause he thought himself in reference to his A∣bilities, far Caesars Superiour, and therefore he was not accounted insolent, because in those assemblies, there was a comparison of Vo∣lumes, and not of Images. This Accius journying into Asia, went to Tarentum, that he might converse with Pacuvi∣us, to whom he recited his Tragedy Atreus, which that grave Poet did indeed commend, but withall said (as it is in Crinitus) Simul gran∣dia & sonora esse, quae ab Accio scripta forent, videri tamen sibi duriuscula, & subacida. To which words of Pacuvius, Accius thus replyed (as I read in the same Author) Nec se poenitere, quo∣niam idem ferme ingeniis solet accidere, quod pomis, quae enim dura admodum, & acerba nascuntur, paula∣tim mitia fiunt, atque perfectiora redduntur; Quae vieta gignuntur, & mollia, nunquam ad veram fru∣gem,
& maturitatem perveniunt: Sic sentiendum est de hominum Ingeniis. Pliny sayes, that he was but of low stature, although he had placed his Image in the Tem∣ple of the Muses, in a very large form and pro∣portion: his Trajedies are often cited by our Grammarians. Quintilian conferring this Po∣et with Pacuvius, sayes thus of both. Nitor & summa in excolendi operibus manus ma∣gis videtur temporibus, quam ipsis defuisse. Virium ta∣men Accio plus tribuitur, Pacuvium videri doctio∣rem, qui esse docti affctant, volunt. Horace also thus compares him. Aufert Pacuvius docti famam senis, Accius Alti. Pacuvius gets the same of being learned, and Accius of being sublime, and high. That com∣parison of Quintilians makes me altogether for∣beare to speak of Pacuvius.
Quintus Ennius. QƲintus Ennius called Rudius, from Rudium a Town in Calabria, where he had his birth, and breeding, was in the Consulship of Quintus Valerius, and Caius Manlius brought by the Quae∣stor Cato into the City of Rome, where he had his habitation in the Mount Aventine. He wrote Annals, Satyrs, Comedies, and Tragedies, but they are all lost, there being nothing else com∣municated unto us, but a few scattered Verses, cited by severall Authors: Horace calls him, Alterum Homerum, Another Homer. Ennius & sapiens, & fortis, & alter Homerus. For he himself gave out, that Homers Soul was the Informer of his Body. Aulus Gellius affirms, that he would oft-times say, that he had three Hearts, Quod loqui Graece, latine & Osce sciret: Because he could speak both the Greek, Latine, and Oscian Languages. Whence it is, that Gy∣raldus also stileth him, Tricor, and Lucretius Tri∣pectorum. Its the common fame, that Virgil should say, Aurum se ex Ennii stercore colligere, That he ga∣thered up Gold from Ennius his Dunghill. Sci∣pio Africanus, so intimatly and intirely affected him, that he would needs rest in the same Se∣pulcher with him: he died through immode∣rate drinking; whereupon the Poet Horace in his Epods, changeth him with the guilt of drun∣kenness.
Quintilian so highly esteemed this Ennius, that he thought him worthy to be adored with the same Religion, they honoured their sacred Groves. Marcus Cicero affirms, that this Poet composed these following Verses of himself. Aspicite o Cives, senis Ennii Imaginis urnam: Hic vestrum pinxit maxima facta patrum. Nemo me lacrymis decoret, nec funera fletu Faxit, cur? volito vivus per ora virum. Titus Lucretius Charus. TItus Lucretius Charus, of the Family of the Lucretii, was a physicall Poet: Quintilian joyns him with Macer; Macer & Lucretius le∣gendi quidem, elegantes in sua quisque materia, sed alter humilis, alter difficilis. Macer and Lucretius are to be read indeed, as being both of them e∣legant in their matter, the one humble, the o∣ther hard: Lucretius wrote more purely, then
learnedly, shewing the Reader more of his Wit then Art, for he did nothing else but illustrate what others had invented, by the sweetness of his Verse. He wrote six Books of the Nature of things, wherein he followed the Doctrine of Epicurus, and the Poet Empedocles, whose Verse and Wit he did exceedingly admire. Some say, that this his Work was afterwards corrected by Cicero, himself deceasing ere he had time to revise it. They say of this Poet, that after some intervals of recreation, he would return unto his Poetry as one surprised with a spirit of madness, whence is that of Statius. Et docti furor arduus Lucreti. Of whom also thus writes Ovid. Carmina sublimis tum sunt peritura Lucreti, Exitio terras cum dabit una dies. In Vespatian's time there were those that for Virgil would read Lucretius, and for Horace, Luci∣lius; so sayes Crinitus. Eusebius tells us, That his own Wife Lucilia, by giving him a Philter, cast him into a Phrensie, whereof he forthwith died; whereas her only intent and design was to make him love her the better, he was not
much before Cicero's time, neither did he live above the age of forty. Caius Valer. Catullus. CAius Valer. Catullus, an Epigrammatist of Ve∣rona, was born when Terentius Varro that learned Grammarian flourished, one yeare be∣fore the Historian Salustius; much about that time, that Sylla and Marius rent the Common∣wealth of Rome with their intestine and bloody Factions: he was gracious with Virgil, as ap∣pears by that known Distick. Sic forsan tener ausus est Catullus Magno mittere passerem Maroni. He was brought unto the City by Mallius when he was but of tender years, where by the matu∣rity of his piercing Wit, and eminent Learning he soon found grace and acceptance with the Nobles, and chiefly with Cicero; to whom, as his Patron, he dedicates this neat and elegant Epigram.
Disertissime Romuli Nepotum. Quot sunt, quot{que} fuere Marce Tulli, Quot{que} post aliis erunt in annis, Gratias tibi maximas Catullus Agit pessimus omnium Poeta, Tanto pessimus omnium poeta, Quanto tu optimus omnium Patronus. He merited the name of Learned, because he so well expressed in the Latine Tongue, what the Greeks thought not immitable, for indeed a better Interpreter of the Grecian Poems, no Age can present us with, then this Catullus, whose success therein was so incomparable, that Mar∣tial could not choose but sound his praise. Verona docti syllabas amat vatis. Aulus Gellius honours him with this Title, Ele∣gantissimus poetarum, The most elegant of the Po∣ets. However Lasciva est pagina, his Book is la∣scivious, and biting too beyond moderation, so that its reported of him, That he would not spare Caesar himself, no, not even then when he was in his greatest Glory. He loved one Clodia, whom by a feigned Name, he called Lesbia, ac∣cording to Ovids Verses.
Sic sua lascivo cantata est soepe Ca∣tullo Foemina cui falsum Lesbia nomen e∣rat. The same Poet doth oppose this very man to Virgils Majesty, and the Epigrammatist Martial prefers him before himself in that Epigram of his to his Friend Macer. Nec multos mihi praeferas poetas, Uno sed tibi sim minor Catullo. Gellius in his Attick Nights commends him for a most elegant and sweet Poet He died but young, not exceeding the Age of thirty years. I'le let him pass with that well-known Distick. Tantum parva suo debet Verona Catullo, Quantum magna suo Mantua Vir∣gilio.
Publius Virgilius Maro. PƲblius Virgilius Maro, called Virgillius a virga, which Calvus alludeth unto in that Verse of his. Et Vates cui virga dedit memorabile nomen. The Poet to whom the Laurel Rod did give a memorable Name. Yet some others wil have it to be the Poplar; he was called Parthenias, from his modesty: of his Birth Martial thus speaketh. Maiae Mercurium creastis Idus, Augustis redit Idibus Diana. Octobres Maro consecravit Idus. He was born in the Village Ande, not far from Mantua, and therefore called by Silius Italicus Andinus vates. He studied at Cremina, and at Na∣ples, his Masters were Orbilius, and Scribonius, he put on his Viril Gown the same day that Lu∣cretius died. In his Bucolicks, he imitated The∣ocritus, in his Georgicks Hesiod, in his Eneids, Parthenius, Pisander, Apollonius, and chiefly Ho∣mer, and amongst the Latines, Ennius, Livius, Andronicus, Naevius, and Lucretius.
His choice Friends, he converst with, were Asinius Pollio, Cornelius Gallu, Quintilius Varus, Horatius Flaccus, and Maecenas. Nay, Caesar him∣slf was a transcendent Lover of him, they wri∣ting familiarly each to other. Jerome in one of his Epistles compareth him unto Homer, stiling him Alterum Homerum. Lam∣pridius writing his life, names him Platonem poe∣tarum, the Plato of the Poets, and so Caelius Rho∣diginus, Poeta platonicus, The Platonick Poet. Alexander Severus the Roman Emperour pla∣ced his Picture together with the Image of Cice∣ro in the House of his Lares. Columella giveth him this Epithet, Sydereus vates, The Starry Po∣et. Scaliger calleth his Eneids, Altiloquentissima Eneis. Whensoever any of his Verses were reci∣ted in the Theater, the people would all rise up, and reverence him being present, as though he were Caesar Augustus: he was had in so great esteem at Rome, that whensoever he did but shew himself in publick, the people would cry out, Delitias Romae, Rome Drling, I will but add Scaligers report of him, and so pass unto the next; Vates suavissimus, Nitidissi∣mus, pulcherrimus, dulcissimus, politissimus; Inest in eo phrasis regia, & ipsius Apollinis ore digna, sic pu∣to loqui Deorum preceres in Conciliis Caelestibus, Non, si ipse Jupiter poeta fiat, melius loquatur. Most sweet, fair, splendid, polite Poet; There is in him a regall phrase, worthy of Apollo's Mouth, so I think the principall Gods speak in their heavenly Counsels, and if Jupiter himself were
become a Poet, he could not speak more sweet∣ly. Moreover this eminent Critick comparing him with Homer, saith thus, Virgilius Magister est, Homerus discipulus. Virgil is the Master, and Homer the Scholar. Homerus moles quidem est, sed rudis, & indigesta, Virgilius autem Deus, & melior Natura. Homer indeed is an heap, and that rude and indigested, but Virgil is as God, and the better nature. His death was deplo∣red by Cornelius Gallus amongst many others, in a Paper of Verses to Caesar Augustus. Cornelius Gallus. COrnelius Gallus was excellent for Elegies, born that very yeare, wherein the most learned of the Romans Terentius Varro died. He was of mean Fortune, but by the Favour of Octavianus Caesar, he was promoted to great dig∣nities: he governd Egypt after that it was made a Province by the Romans; being suspected to have been in Conspiracy against Augustus, he slew himself, as Dion and Marcellinus have re∣corded, and whereunto also that Verse of O∣vids doth relate. Sanguinis atque animae prodige Galle tuae.
He was Virgilii delitiae, Virgils Darling; as doth appeare by the fourth Book of his Geor∣gicks, wherein he much advanceth the worth of this Gallus: he was in love with Cytheris the free-woman of Volumnius, which disdaining him went after Antonius into France, whereup∣on Virgil comforted him, who in the tenth Ec∣log of his Buzolicks, calleth this same Cytheris, Ly∣coris. Dion writes, how that Proculeius meeting acci∣dentally with this Poet, clapt his hands forth∣with unto his Mouth, thereby signifying, that it was not safe either to speak, or breath, where that Gallus was in presence: so great indeed was his Insolency. There are some Verses im∣puted unto him, which are not after his strain, being neither suitable to his time, nor phrase; but they are presumed to be the invention of one Maximianus, a meer Juggler. So dear was this Poet to Virgil, that his fourth Book of Geor∣gicks, from the midst thereof, unto the end, only comprehendeth his praises. Diomedes spea∣king De elegia, joyns this Gallus with Tibullus, and Propertius. Quintilian mentioning him, calls him Poetam duriorem, A harder Poet.
Quintus Horatius Flaccus. QƲintus Horatius Flaccus of Venusium a Towne in Apulia, lived in the Reign of Caesar Au∣gustus, with whom he was in high esteem, and great credit, as also with his Patron Maecenas. He was born two years before the Conspiracy of Lucius Catiline. His Father was a Libertine, and Collector of the publick Loanes and Tax∣es: his Master was Orbilius of Beneventum, whom he stiles in his Poems, Plagosum, he went to A∣thens, and there studied Philosophy, chiefly ap∣proving of the Epicureans, as appears by that Ʋrbane Speech of his. Me pinguem & nitidum bene curata cute vises, Cum ridere voles Epicuri de grege porcum. He was much prone to Cholar, however very pleasing, gratefull, and officious to his friends: among the Poets he was very intimate with Tibullus, Quintilius, Varrus, Valgius, and Virgil: among the Nobles with Julius Florus, Maximus Lollius, and Maecenus, with whom he lived fa∣miliarly seven years, and upwards, as is mani∣fest by these following Verses. Septimus octavo propior jam fugerit annus, Ex quo Maecenas me caepit habere suorum In numero.
In the civill Broils of Rome, he took part with Brutus and Cassius; as Sidonius Apollinaris amongst many others, thus testifieth: Et tibi Flacce acies Bruti Cassi{que} secuto Carminis est autor, qui fuit & veniae. However Mecaenas restored him to his Princes Favor, and therby, to all his pristine Dignities. As touching the habit and proportion of this Poets Body, he was short and fat; whence he was called by Caesar, Homuncio, a man of low stature, or Dwarf, he names himself Latinum fi∣dicinem, The Latine Harper: In his Epods, he hath expressed himself an Imitator of the Cou∣rage, Numbers, and great Spirit of Archilochus; he was excellent at writing of Iambicks. Heinsius saith, that he performs much more, then he promiseth, for when we come unto him as to a Poet, we carry away upon our returne such Fruit, as speak him a Philosopher. He is Optimus vivendi autor, One that teacheth all that read him to live well: Though he be Ʋrbanus, Jocund, yet, which may seem strange, he is also gracious, serious, and grave. I will but recite that Charecter, the eminent Orator Quintilian is pleased to bestow upon him, and so proceed to the next. Lyricorum Horatius fere solus legi dignus, nam & insurgit ali∣quando, & plenus est jucunditatis, & gratiae, variis fi∣guris, & verbis felicissime audax. Horace of all the Lyrick Poets is almost only worthy to be read, for he swelleth sometimes, and is full of sweet∣ness and grace, being most happily bold with variety of Figures, and expressions.
He is very pleasant in his taxing of the Vices of the times, whence is that of Persius. Omne vafer vicium ridenti Flaccus amico Tangit, & admissus circum praecordia ludit, Callidus excusso populum suspendere naso. He died in the 57 of his age, though some others will have him to have reached 70. Publius Ovidius Naso. PƲblius Ovidius Naso of Sulmone, was born the same day with Albius Tibullus, that excellent Elegiographer, as some have testified: in his Childhood he was much addicted to Poetry, which his Father wisht him to decline, and to betake himself to the study of Oratory, that be∣ing the right way to get wealth: for which end, he was instructed in Rhetorick by Arellius Fus∣cus, and Porcius Latro, wherein he made no mean progress in very short time, as Annaeus Seneca hath declared. However at length he returned to his old study, whence he knew he might at∣tain singular fame and rest: He had no less then three Wives, the two first he put away, the one for naughtiness, the other for other causes, but the third, which was his Perilla, he adhered to, and dearly loved, whom he instructed in the Art of Poetry. He was intimate with many great Ones eminent both for Learning & Birth; by name Albius Tibullus, Corn. Severus, Sabinus, Sext. Pompeius, Graecinus, Flaccus, Messala, Macer, Maximus, and many more; with these he con∣versed most familiarly. Sueton saith, that he was greatly beloved of Julius Higinus, Augustus his Freeman, one that was eminent both for Wit, and Literature.
He wrote sundry Poems: In his Metamorpho∣sis, he imitated Parthenius the Chian Poet, who wrote in Greek upon the same Argument and Subject. This Poem of Ovids was so admired by the Grecian Wits, that they translated it in∣to their Mother Tongue. In his Elegies he was too lascivious, but for his heroick Epistles, the Criticks note, that they are fraught with ex∣cellent Elegancy, and Artifice. He was bani∣shed by Caesar unto Tomos in the Isle of Pontus; as for the cause of this his Relegation, Authors do differ about it. Sextus Aurelius is of opi∣nion, that it was for his Book of Loves, which for their lasciviousness did highly displease Augustus, but others affirm, that it was for committing Adultery with Julia, Caesars Daugh∣ter: of this Judgment was Sidonius Apollinaris, as these Verses insinuate. Nec te carmina per libidinosa Notum Naso tener, Tomos{que} missum: Quondam Caesareae nimis puellae Ficto carmine subditum Corinnae. Nay the poor Poet himself seems to acknow∣ledge this the cause. Lingua sile; non est ultra narrabile quicquam! Without question, or doubt this Julia was a notorious Strumpet, infamous for her burn∣ing
Lust, and frequent Adulteries; and there∣fore very likely it is, that she prostituted her body to this unhappy Poet. Et hinc causa malo∣rum. He is stiled the Prince of Elegiacks by Demp∣sterus, and so admired he was by all men, both in his own time, and since, that he is called, Non ingeniosus tantum, sed etiam ipsum ingenium. Not engenious only, but Ingenuity it self. Non Musarum sacerdos, sed ipsum Numen. Not the Priest of the Muses, but even their very Deity. Its the judgment of the Learned, That if the Latine Tongue were quite extinct, yet his Poems only remaining, there might be from them a very speedy restitution. Seneca saith of him, That he had been Poetarum ingeniosissimus, The most Ingenious of the Poets, if he had not reduced the acuteness of his Mind, and Wit, and Matter to Boyish Fancies. Barthius affirms, Quod opus ejus universum inge∣nium potius refert, quam curam. That his whole Work speaks more his Wit, then Care. Scali∣ger reporteth, Quod sibi pepercit, cum meliora mul∣to posset, That he spared himself too much, when he could have done much more. He was so dexterous in obliging those, with whom he conversed, that the barbarous Nations to whom he was confined, had him in great reverence, not being able to contain themselves from la∣mentation, when he died, he, and Titus Livius deceased both in one year.
Marcus Manilius. MArcus Manilius was an Astronomicall Po∣et, for he wrote Poems of Astronomy, and for that Treatise of his, he is compared to Atlas and Alcides, as the Verse hath expressed him. Manilius Altas Alter, & Alcides, qui capite astra tu∣lit. What a Poet, and of how great Wit this man was, we may discover out of the description of his Andromeda, which he hath adorned, and set out with incomparable Elocution. However Scaliger in his Castigations chargeth him with this folly, that he should undertake to write of those things, whereof he was wholly ignorant: The like is said by the Ancients of Nicander, and Aratus, how that they also as∣pired to treat of matters beyond their reach, and knowledge: This Manilius lived in Au∣gustus Caesars time, as appeareth by the dedica∣tion of his five Books unto him.
Albius Tibullus. ALbius Tibullus was born at Rome, being of Knightly Parentage, whose Wit was fa∣cile, and Visage comely, so that he drew many of the Nobles into Affection, and Admiration of him; he was much endeared to Messala Cor∣vinus, whom he calls, Sui studiosum, and whose Praises he celebrates in excellent Verse: he ac∣companied this his Patron and Friend into the Province of the Phaeacians, where fasting ill, he composed these two Verses, as a testimony of his Faith, and Fortune. Hic jacet immiti consumptus morte Ti∣bullus. Messalam terra dum sequitur{que} mari. He loved Horace, and Macer, those two admi∣rable Poets very intirely: He was very incli∣nable, and prone to love, and bodily plea∣sures, whence that Distck is so common; Ʋsset amatorem Nemesis asciva Tibullum, In tuta juvit, quem nihil esse omo. He wrote four Books of Elegies, for which he is reputed one of the chiefest of the Elegiogra∣phers. Josephus Scaliger accounts him, Inter tria lumina Poetices Romanae. One of the three Lights of the Roman Poetry; and Julius also thus limnes him; Tibullus omnium cultissimus, nec re∣dundans in elegia. Tibullus of all Poets the most adorned, no way redundant in his Elegy.
Petrus Crinitus speaking of his Books of Loves, saith thus of them, Facile probatur, quam elegans & candidum sit ejus carmen, ut ejusmodi calo∣ribus describendis latinos omnes videatur superasse, cum affectibus exprimendis, tum elegantia, & suavi∣tate ingenii. Its easily proved how elegant and candid his Verse is, that he seems in describing those heats, to have gone beyond all the Latine Poets, both for expressing the Affections, as also for Elegancy, and sweetness of wit. He died young, to the great grief of his Friend Naso; yet his Poetry will never die, according to that known Distick. Donec erunt ignes, arcusque Cupidinis arma: Discentur numeri culte Tibulle tui. Sextus Aurel. Propertius. SExtus Aurel. Propertius an Ʋmbrian, called himself the Roman Callimachus, because he was a notable Imitator of that Cyrenean Poet: he lost his Father when he was but young, e∣ven as it were a Child, whom Caesar Augustus caused to be slain, for his siding with Antonius at Perusia: his Son the Poet upon occasion of this sad Accident repaired unto Rome, and
there lived; where he soon procured favour with that noble Heroe Mecaenas, as also neer familiarity with Cornelius Gallus, both honou∣ring him for his Wit and Breeding. Ovid commemorates him as his speciall Friend in this ensuing Distick. Saepe suos solitus recitare Propertius ignes, Jure sodalitii qui mihi junctus erat. It seems that he had communicated unto him his burning Affections to the Maiden Hostia, which, not so well liking that Name, he would familiarly call Cynthia. Hence it is, that Sidonius Apollinaris reckon∣ing up each Poets Friend, calls Propertius his by the name of Cynthia. Meminisse debes quod saepe versum Corinna cum suo Nasone complevit, Lesbia cum Catullo, Cesenna cum Getulico, Argentaria cum Lucano, Cynthia cum Propertio, Delia cum Tibullo. As for his commendations, Justus Lipsius joynes him with Catullus, and Tibullus, and then calls them, Amorum Triumviros. Crinitus speaking of Callimachus Mimnernus, and Philetas, those Greek Poets, whom this Author imita∣ted, saith thus; Nam ut illi apud Graecos in elegia consensu omnium longe praestiterunt, ita Propertius apud Latinos eorum imitatione primus videtur quorun∣dam
consecutus. For as they among the Greeks by the consent of all men far excelled in Elegy, so Propertius amongst the Latines, by imitating those Greeks in the Judgment of some, hath out-stript many others. Quintilian after that he had highly commended Albius Tibullus, adds this to it, Non deesse tamen qui Propertium ma∣lint. That there were not wanting those that prefer Propertius. I'le let him pass with that of Barthius. Dul∣ciore eruditione & eruditiore dulcedine nemo scriptor est tota antiquitate ante Propertium, quem scripto∣rem, quo magis rimaberis, eo magis amabis, quae e∣nim primo intuitu abscuriora videbuntur, ea si penetra∣veris, omnium videbuntur naturali quadam venere gratiosissima. There is no Writer in all Anti∣quity to be preferred before Propertius for sweet Erudition, and erudite sweetness, which Wri∣ter the more narrowly you sift him, and the more deeply you dive into him, the more dear∣ly you will affect him: for indeed those very things which at the first sight seem most obscure if you will throughly search into them, you will in the end perceive them to be most gra∣tious. He had the Name of Nauta given to him, and the reason thereof Scaliger in his Castigations tels us: his death, for the manner and time of it, is not certain. There are some that say, he died at the age of one and forty.
Gratius. GRatius, a Latine Poet, Contemporary with Albius Tibullus, and Propertius wrote a Book in Hexameters, De venatione, Of hunting, he was so ingenious, and excellent at his Art, that, that incomparable Censor Scaliger ac∣knowledgeth in him the felicity of that age. He is esteemed next after Virgil, inferiour to none; As for his phrase of speech, Caspar Bar∣thius saies of it, that it is Castigata, & erudita, pressaque, & sibi semper aequalis, Corrected and erudite, and pressed, and alwaies equall unto it self. Dempsterus gives him this Encomium, That he is, Poeta cultus ac tersus, An adorned and neat Poet. Barthius was the first that vindica∣ted his Cynegeticon ex carcere squaloris, & situs: From the Corruptions and Errours wherewith it was depraved.
Lucius Annaeus Seneca. LƲcius Annaeus Seneca the Tragaedian, who of all Latine Writers in that kind is onely extant; and it is the Opinion of Learned He∣insius, that he onely wrote these four follow∣ing Tragedies, Hercules, Furens, Oedipus, Thy∣estes, and Agamemnon, and that the Philoso∣pher composed Hippolitus, Troas, and Medaea, the rest being written by severall distinct per∣sons, it being customary for Criticks to deale with Tragick Poets, as with other Writers, that is, to joyn together divers mens Works, and then to prefix such a Name as they think most convenient. This man was by Nation a Spaniard, borne at Corduba, Comtemporary with Pomponius se∣cundus, of whom Quintilian saith, that he af∣fected the same Studies this Poet did, as one that took great delight in composing of Trage∣dies: That Grammarian hath commended him both for his Sublimeness, and Gravity; In the composure of every Tragedy, he is sayd to follow those two eminent Ancients, Aeschy∣lus, and Euripides, as it is hinted unto us by Sidonius Apollinaris, in these following Ver∣ses:
Non quod Corduba praepotens alumnis Facundam ciet, hic putes legendum; Quorum unus colit hispidum Platonae, Incassum{que} suum monet Neronem: Orchestram quatit alter Euripidis Pictum faecibus Eschylum secutus. Scaliger equalleth him for stateliness, and Majesty, with any of the Greeks, and for clearness he prefers him far before Euripides; and Dempster stileth him, Tragaedum purum, & gravem, A Tragaedian pure, and grave. Aulus Persius Flaccus. AƲlus Persius Flaccus of Volaterris, a Towne in Etruria, was in great esteem when Do∣mitius Nero was Emperour, he was instructed in Grammaticall Learning by Rhemmius Palaemon, in Rhetorick by Virginius, and for his profici∣ency and growth in Philosophicall Literature, he most familiarly conversed with Annaeus Co∣runtus, whom he very gratefully acknowledg∣eth in one of his Satyrs, as appears by these en∣suing Verses.
Cum{que} iter ambiguum & vitae nescius error Deaucit trepidas ramosa in compita mentes, Me tibi supposui, teneros tususcipis an∣nos Socratico Cornute sinu. He imitated that excellent Satyrist Lucilius, who was the most dexterous of all the Poets to inveigh against the Vices of the Romans: some think that this Poets little Work was not ab∣solved, by reason of the Authors suddaine death, he living not above the Age of thirty. He was very invective against the naughtiness of Nero, whom under the person of Mias he laies open, and obnoxious to derision. Quintilian highly advanceth his smal Volume, Multum verae gloriae, quamvis uno libro Persius me∣ruit; Although Persius wrote one only Book, yet he hath merited thereby much of true glo∣ry. Whence also is that of the Epigrammatist Martial. Saepius in libro memoratur Persius uno, Quam levis in tota Marsus Amazonide.
Casaubon saith, that he is, Gravissimus morum Censor, & virtutum praeceptor fidissimus, A most grave Censurer of our Manners, and a most faithfull Master of the Vertues. Scaliger in his Poetices tells us, That his stile is Morosus, and that he endeavoured so to write, as that being read, none might be able to understand him, although now he is become sufficiently intel∣ligible. Gyraldus saith of him, that he is to be reck∣oned amongst the laudable Authors, notwith∣standing his obscurity and darkness, for though he be very intricate to some, according to that o Owen. Scripta tenebrosi lego, non intelligo Persi Lectores nimium negligit ille suos. Yet he is well enough apprehended, and under∣stood by those that are more Learned. Caius Pedo Albinovanus. CAius Pedo Albinovanus was an Epigramma∣tist, and flourished in the Reign of Nero, in his youth he studied Oratory, and was ac∣counted no mean Declamator, as may be ga∣thered from some words of Annaeus Seneca con∣cerning him. Ovid reckons this Pedo amongst those Poets, that were notable that way in his time, and Martial relates him to be one of the Authors, he imitated in his witty kind of Po∣etry.
Indeed, his Wit was Elegant, and Urbane, and for his dexterity in composing of happy Epigrams, he was had in great account. Quin∣tilian stiles him, Sublimem, & Altiloquum poetam. A sublime, and lofty Poet. Ovid, sydereum, starry; and Seneca, Fabulatorem elegantissimum, A most elegant Fabulator. Non indignum cognitio∣ne si vacet. Caspar Barthius likens him to the Poet Naso. Quem vulgo Pedonem Albinova∣num faciunt, non alius est Nasone ipso. He whom they call Pedo Albinovanus, is no other then Ovid himself. Pomponius Secundus. POmponius Secundus was of Noble and Illu∣strious Parentage, numbred amongst those Poets which were Tragicall, he flourisht when those excellent Orators Porcius Latro, Do∣mitius Afer, and Albusius Silo, were living at Rome. Quintilian writes, that this Author for exceld all those Poets, which in that kind of Verse he had ever seen; so transcendent was his Erudition, and Sublimity in the composure of his Poems, that he was stiled by all that read him, The Tragick Pindar. Pliny wrote two Books of the Life and Man∣ners of this Tragaedian, because he was indu∣ced thereunto, by the eminency of his Name,
and Vertues. He was much endeared to that renowned worthy Caesar Germanicus, whom he entertained with a sumpteous Supper. Pliny calls him, Civem, & vatem clarissimum, Where he speaks of the Monuments of the two Gracchi, Caius, and Tiberius. Maurus Terentianus a worthy Poet, mightily bemoans the loss of this mans Tragedies in a paper of well-compo∣sed Verses; of his Death Authors mention no∣thing. Aruntius Stella. ARuntius Stella was a Poet of great repute in Vespasians time; he was of Patavium: for Martial sayes, that the Region of Apenum was dignified and enobled with the Births of Livi∣us, Flaccus, and this Stella. Papinius mentions him in these his Verses, commending thereby the nobleness of his Descent. — Clarus de gente latina Est juvenis, quem patriciis majoribus ortum Nobilitas gavisa tulit, praesaga{que} formae Protinus e nostro posuit cognomina coelo.
He loved Violantilla a Neapolitan Maiden, and at length obtained her for his Wife, whom Martial calls Ianthis, a Greek Name. Amongst many Poems which this Poet writ, there were Elegies, and his Work De Asteride, but none so much cried up and had in admira∣tion, as that De Interitu Columbae, of the death of his Dove; which the Epigrammatist prefers before Catullus his Verses of Lesbia's Sparrow, as the Epigram declareth: Stellae delicium mei Columba Verona licet audiente dicam, Vicit maximi passerem Catulli. Statius in his Sylvis, acquaints us with the Dignities he was honoured with, who had been created Praetor, and after that Duumvir; on∣ly, for his admirall qualifications and Embel∣lishments: whereupon he was so high in that Poets Affections, that he could find none in Rome so worthy, to whom he might dedicate his Poems, as he. This Stella was of intimate acquaintance with Julius Secundus, and the Poet Martial: of his death I read not.
Decius Jun. Juvenalis. DEcius Jun. Juvenalis a Satyricall Poet of Aquinas, flourisht in the Reigns of Caesar Domitian, Nerva and Trajan: in these following Verses he congratulates the Emperour Ner∣va for favouring so much those of his profes∣sion. Et spes & ratio studiorum in Caesare tantum: Solus enim tristes hac tempestate Camae∣nas Respexit; Yet there are some, that think they do refer unto Domitian, because he greatly affected Po∣etry, as Suetonius and Tacitus have joyntly testi∣fied. He was instructed in Grammaticall Lear∣ning by Fronto, a Grammarian of great Name then in Rome, though others affirm that his Ma∣ster was Quintilian a Rhetor of as excellent En∣dowments and Abilities; his chief Friends were Volusius, and Corvinus, and also Martial, who in this Distick speaks his Intimacy with this Satyrist. Cum Juvenale meo, quae me committere tentas, Quid non audebis per fida lingualoqui.
He is called by Gifanius, Satyricorum haud dubie princeps, Without doubt the Prince of Satyrists, and is preferd by most of the Ancients before Horatius, and Persius, as one that had attained to the Perfections of them all; the salt, and bitterness of Lucilius, the Candor and Elegancy of Horace, and the Gravity of Aulus Persius. Its the same Authors commendation of him, Juvenalis Ardet, Instat, Jugulat. Juvenal burns, presseth, stabs. Barthius stiles him, Scriptorem eruditissimum, elegantissimum poetam, & censorum morum celeberrimum & acutissimum. A most learn∣ed Writer, a most elegant Poet, and a most free and sharp Censurer of Mens Manners. He is dignified by the Criticks, with the Ti∣tle of Ethicus the Moralist, being indeed com∣pared, and equald to the most flourishing Phi∣losophers by Sarisburiensis, Alanus, and other Philologues: Its Lipsius his observation of him; In Satyra nemo Idoneor ad mores corrigendos Juvenali: None more fit for correction of mens Manners then Juvenal. And it is also Ca∣saubons, Ʋbertate inventionis, copia exemplorum, tractandi dexteritate, praestat Juvenalis: Juvenal excels for plenty of Invention, abundance of Examples, and dexterity of handling.
Caius Valerius Flaccus. CAius Valerius Flaccus called Setinus, from the City Setia, in Campania, was an he∣roick Poet, and Countryman to Titus Livius, and Aruntius Stella. Martial stiles him Laris Antenorei alumnum. He wrote eight Books De Argonauticis, which he dedicated to Domitian, or as others will have it, to his Father Vespasian. He had written much more, if sudden death had not prevented. Quintilian speaks as one very sensible of it, in his Books to Marcellus Victo∣rius, wherein he sadly complains of so great a loss. Scaliger writes thus of him, Cujus cum esset in∣genium felix, judicium magnum, diligentia non vul∣garis, immatura morte praeventus acerbum poema suum nobis reliquit. Whose Wit when it was happy, Judgment solid, Diligence extraordinary, be∣ing prevented with an immature death, he left us a bitter Poem. The same Critick stiles him Omnium duriusculum. He expressed Apollonius Rhodius, not onely in the Argument of his Work, but also in the phrase and stile of all his Verses; he held friendly compliance and correspondence with those eminent Worthies of that time, namely, Secundus, Maternus, Stella, and Martial. The later of them counselled him to leave his Muses, and to follow the Forum, as it appears by this ensuing Epigram,
Omihi curarum precium non vile mearum, Flacce Antenore spes & alumne laris Pierios differ cantusque chorosque sororum Aes dabit ex istis nulla puella tibi. Quid tibi cum Cyrrha? quid cum Permessidos unda? Romanum propius divitiusque forum est. Illic aera sonant. I'le let him go with that of Barthius, Poeta nobilissimus & Romanae Musae genuinus: Sonus, spi∣ritus, eruditio, gravitas in eo sunt insignes. A most noble Poet, and genuine to the Roman Muse; Sound, Spirit, Learning, Gravity, are all transcendent in him. Silius Italicus. SIlius Italicus, was as some have reported, a Spaniard by Birth, called Italicus, from a noble City in Italy, whence the Family first sprang; he was an excellent Orator, endea∣vouring to express (and from which he fell not much short) the Eloquence of Marcus Ci∣cero: he was under some Cloud of disgrace in Neroes time, having been accused of some no∣table Crime to that infamous Emperor, but he behaved himself wondrous prudently under
Vitellius, and at last he found favour and speciall grace with Caesar Domitian: Martial reverenceth him with these Verses; Augusto pia thura, victimas{que} Pro nostro date Silio Camoenae. He imitated heroick Virgil, whose Wit and Majesty he greatly admied: he is called by one Vates Consularis, The Consular Poet. Ano∣ther saies, that he writ Verses with more care, then wit: he would often times recite his Po∣ems publickly, to discover thereby mens Judg∣ments of them. There is a Critick that speaks thus of him. Non Poeta, non Historicus, sed u∣trum{que} est, libripunicorum historicum volunt, dicendi character poetam. He is neither a Poet, nor Hi∣storian, but both; his Books of the Wars speak him an Historian, and his character of speech a Poet. The same Author saies, that he is not unlike to Euripides. Martial gives him this great commendation: Castalidum decus sororum, The Grace or Orna∣ment of the Muses. Dempster saith, Quod erat Orator verius, quam poeta, nimius, & interdum ridi∣culus Virgilii imitator. That he was more truly an Orator, then a Poet, and too much, nay, sometimes a ridiculous Imitator of Virgil. Pli∣ny informs us, that he died for want of necessa∣ries in his Country-house at Naples.
Marcus Annaeus Lucanus. MAarcus Annaeus Lucanus of Corduba, was the Nephew of Seneca, the Tragaedian, and Son of L. Annaeus Mela, he was instructed in Grammar by Palaemon, in Rhetorick by Vir∣ginius. His Condisciples were Saleius Bassus, and Aulus Persius, he was at first much favoured by Nero, but at length put to death by him, as being found guilty of Conspiracy against him. Martial describes his Birth-day in these Verses, and is invective against Nero for killing of him. Haec est illa dies, quae magni conscia partus Lucanum populis & tibi Polla dedit. Heu Nero crudelis, nullaque invisior umbra, Debuit hoc saltem non licuisse tibi. Farnaby that set out his Pharsalia with Notes, speaking of his River of Poetry, saith, that it doth not rush with a great noise (as Pliny hath written of the River Nius) but rather seemeth to flow like the calmest stream; his Acuteness is divine, his Spirit ardent, his Muse Masculine, and every expression high, cleer, and chaste. Quintilian Characteriseth him thus: Lucanus ardens, & concitatus, & sententiis claris∣simus, & ut ita dicam quod sentio, magis oratoribus, quam poetis annumerandus. Lucan is ardent, and incensed, and in Sentences most clear, and that I may speak as I think, rather to be registred a∣mong the Orators, then the Poets. Boethius also
describes him to be Familiaris philosophiae, Fami∣liar with Philosophy. His wife Polla was very learned, if Sidonius Apollinaris, and Papinius Sta∣tius may be credited. He wrote the Civil War which was between Julius Caesar, and Pompey, but was prevented of finishing it, by an immature and suddain death. Dempster saith of him, that he was not inferiour to Virgil, whom indeed he imitated. M. Valerius Martialis. M. Valerius Martialis was a Spaniard, and a most eminent Epigrammatist: he was borne at Bilbilis, no mean Towne of Celtiberia, which he himself is pleased in one of his Epi∣grams, to mention, Nec me tacebit Bilbilis. In his youth he came to Rome, that he might dedicate himself wholly to his studies, where finding an unfitness in his Genius for the way of the Forum, he applied his Fancy to the com∣posing of Epigrams, wherein indeed he did ex∣cell all others in the opinion of the Ancients. Pliny gives him the Character of an Ingenious and acute Poet, Qui plurimum in scribendo & salis haberet, & fellis, nec candoris minus, who in his writing discovered much Salt, and Gall, nor less Candor. Elius Verus, who was wondrous gracious with the Emperor Adrian, entertained
his wity Jests with much delight, and recrea∣tion, being ever now and then heard to call him his Virgilius. In the framing of his Epigrams he imitated those three facetious poets, Marsus, Pedo, and Getulicus, and whensoever he was blamed by any for his obsceness, he would excuse himself with this, That he did but that, which others had done before them, meaning those, to whose pattern he had conformed: He highly regar∣ded Licinius Calvus, and Catullus, for their Abili∣ties in his way of poetry. Caspar Barthius tells us, that he was called Cocus, because most of his Epigrams are conver∣sant about Meat, Drink, Cloathing, good Fel∣lowship, and such like. And Dempster gives him this Encomium. Ʋnus qui Epigrammatis genium videtur possedisse. Indeed his Genius was ever leading him to the composing of Epi∣grams: he returned in the end to his owne Country, and there died, whose death Pliny doth bewail in an Epistle to Cornelius Priscus. Publius Statius Papinius. PƲblius Statitus Papinius was the Son of Papi∣nius, by Birth a Neapolitan: he flourished under the Emperour Domitian, to whom he de∣dicated his Thebais, in which Poem of his, he followed the Poet Antimachus, who had mana∣ged the like Argument, and therein he had much assistance from his learned Father: next to
his Thebais, he composed his Achilleis, but di∣ed ere he could accomplish it, though some others have thought that Poem was perfected before his death, but since in part lost. As for his Sylvae, he was in doubt, whether he should publish those, because they had been ha∣stily, and as it were on a suddain heat compi∣led by him; yet Sidonius Apollinaris doth great∣ly praise them in these his Hendecasyllablis. Non quod Papinius tuus, meus{que} Inter Labdaicos sonat furores: Aut cum forte pedum minore rythmo Pingit gemmea prata sylvularum. The Emperor Domitian was so well affected to∣wards him, that he entertaind him with a mag∣nificent and royall Banquet: his Verse is so lofty, and Stile so sublime, that they named him by the name of Aquilinus, so saies Bar∣thius. Scaliger calls him Equum alatum, The winged or flying Horse, only upon this account of his mounting Language. He is preferd by the same Author before Renowned Homer, and al∣so in these following words compared with heroick Virgil. Non ullus veterum ac recentiorum propius ad Virgi∣lianm majestatem accedere valuit, etiam propinquior futuus, si tam prope esse voluisset.
None of the ancient, or latter Poets, were able to approach so neer Virgils Majesty as he, who indeed, if he would have assented, might have come neerer unto it, then he did. Lipsius giveth him these honourable Chara∣cters; Sublimis, ac celsus, magnus, & summus poe∣ta. And Dempster does assigne unto each Book its deserved praise. Eruditus in Sylvis, Learned in his Woods, Sublimis in Thebaide, Sublime in his Thebais, blandus in Achilleide, Pleasant in his Achilleis; He lived, untill he was very aged. Decius Ausonius. DEcius Ausonius by Nation a French-man, was the Son of Julius Ausonius a Physician, which Julius was of so great account with the Aquitanes, that they would compare him with any of the wise men: They have his saying frequently in their Mouthes, Beatum esse, non qui habet, quae cupit, sed qui non cupit, quae non habet. That he is happy, not that hath the things which he desireth, but that desireth not the things which he hath not. This mans Son the Epigrammatist was high in favour with Va∣lentinus and Valentinianus the Emperors, but most familiar with Gratianus Caesar, whom he tuto∣, by whose Affection and Countenance he
was advanced to consular Dignity. He was excellently well skild both in the Greek and Latine Tongues, wherefore he ex∣pressed the Greek Epigrams in most elegant and sweet Latine: amongst his speciall good Friends, he chiefly placed Tetradius Gallus, Pau∣linus the Poet, and Hesperius: neither was there less familiarity betwixt him, and Symmachus; who in his Epistles delivers his Judgment of this Authors Poems. Oratio alticis salibus as∣persa, & thymo odorata: Barthius would have us believe, that what we read in Ausonius, we may finde both in Lucilius, and Ennius, of whose Composures he was a great Admi∣rer, and Peruser. His Writings express him to have been a Christian; of his death we have nothing that is certain, some report, that he lived to the Age of ninety, but they mistake him for Julius his Father, who died very aged.
Oppianus. OPpianus a Poet of Cilicia, and of the Ci∣ty Anazarba, wrote five Books of Fisher, which he called Halieutica, and foure of Vena∣tion, wherein he hath shewn both Elegancy of expression, and inoffensiveness, or chastity of Verse: what he wrote of the Nature, and Ge∣nius of living Creatures, he dedicated to Anto∣ninus Bassianus Caracalla, with which Present the Emperor being highly pleased, wisht him in a way of recompense, to ask any thing, that he could like at his royall hands: The Poet forth with begged his Fathers return from ba∣nishment, which request of his was with much good will and approbation granted; and be∣sides, or over and above, the Emperor gave him for every Verse, Aureum staterum, whence, from that time forward, his Verses were cal∣led Aurea carmina, Golden Verses. Julius Scaliger thus writeth of him: Musarum alumnus prudentissimus, poeta candidis∣simus, atque magniloquentissimus, cui Graecorum ne∣minem ausis comparare, cujus unius spiritu Virgiliana divinitas repraesentata. The most prudent Scholar of the Muses, a Poet most candid, and magniloquent, to whom thou canst not compare any of the Greeks, one whose Spirit represents the diviness of Vir∣gil.
And Dempster also honours him with these following Characters; Suavis, Generosus, In∣comparabililis Poeta: A Sweet, a Generous, and an Incomparable Poet. Claudius Claudianus. CLaudius Claudianus an Aegyptian, though some would have him to be a Florentine, was had in great reverence by those two learn∣ed Emperors, Arcadius and Honorius, whom they honoured with a Statue, having this In∣scription engraved upon it; . And now if he had the mind of Virgil, and the Muse of Homer, of how great Fame then must we think that he was in the World? His Ge∣nius at first was much propense to Poetry, so that what I read in Crinitus of him, I cannot but assent unto: Ingenio excellenti fuit, maxime∣que apto ad carmen componendum, nam & assurgit feliciter, variisque figuris, ac sententiis mirifice dele∣ctat, ut videatur a natura ipsa instructus ad poeticam facultatem. He was of a most excellent Wit, and very apt to compose Verses, for he happily swelleth, and wonderously delighteth with variety of Figures, and Sentences, so that he
seems naturally instructed, and fitted for the Poeticall Faculty. Barthius hath afforded him two notable Cha∣racters: first he saith, that he is, Praecentor, & choragus poetarum panegyricorum, The prime Sin∣ger, and Ring-leader of the panegyricall Po∣ets: as also, Obeuntis jam eloquentiae supremus Ful∣gor. The last Lightning of fading Eloquence. Dempster tells us, that he is before all the Latines for plenty of matter, and amongst the Greeks only inferiour to Homer, for glory of Invention. He wrote foure Books of the Rape of Proserpine, but the fourth had not the suc∣cess, as to come unto our hands. Even S. Au∣stine hath commended the Wit, and Erudition of this Poet. Of his death I read not. Aurelius Prudentius. AƲrelius Prudentius was skilfull in the Law, and Consul of Messalia; and that he was honoured with Military Dignities, as well as Civill: his own Verses shew it, as they fol∣low. Froenis nobilium reximus urbium, Jus civile bonis reddidimus, reos Tandem terruimus; militiae gradu Evectum pietas principis extulit.
Sidonius Apollinaris no contemptible Author in reading, and observing the ancient Wri∣ters, when he comes to speak of this Poet Pru∣dentius, he does not fear to joyn him with Ho∣race: he acquired much praise especially from that Poem, wherein he commended their pa∣tience and constancy, that suffered Martyr∣dome for the Christian Faith. He was by the Ancients named Amaenus, be∣cause he surpassed all other Christian Poets in sweetness: Caspar Barthius tells us, Quod nemo divinius de Christianis rebus unquam scripsit, That no man ever wrote more divinely of Christian matters. And saith another of him, Ʋnius om∣nium inter poetas christianos, lectores suos pascere suffi∣ciet lautissime, sive pretiosissimas panis coelestis, h. e. verbi divini epulas esurias, sive efficacis eloqueniae condimenta requiras. He only of all Christian Poets is able to feed his Reader very plentifully, whether thou thirstest after the most pretious Dainties of the heavenly Word, or whether thou requirest the well pleasing Sawce of Elo∣quence. Erasmus highly commends him for his San∣ctimony, and sacred Learning, of whom he further saith, That he deserveth to be Regi∣stred in the Catalogue of the gravest Christian Doctors; he flourisht in the year of Christ 380. his Life was written by G. Fabritius.
Caius Sollius Sidonius Apollinaris. CAius Sollius Sidonius Apollinaris was a French-man, borne of honest Parents, and of an Illustrious Family: he was instructed in Grammaticall Learning by Flavius Nicetius an excellent Retorician, and by his industry and diligence he out-stript in Erudition all that were his Equals. He wrote many things both in Prose, and Verse, particularly nine Books of Epistles, wherein he imitated Plinius Secun∣dus, as he himselfe hath declared, in which Work of his, there is more of Wit, then of so∣lid Judgment; so that his praise springs ra∣ther from his Poems, then his Prose, wherein he hath shewn much Ingenuity, and as much Elegancy. He had the Name of Modestus for his good and modest carriage, and next unto Claudian he was accounted the best of the Poets. Petrarck speaketh thus of him, Sidonii tarditatem admira∣ri vix sufficio, I am scarce able enough to admire the slowness of Sidonius. Caussinus riseth higher in his praises: In Si∣donio Ingens, ut apparet ingenii vigor magis ob mul∣tas virtutes admirandus, quod praemortua facundia Ro∣mana haec scripserit, quam ob temporis vitia accusan∣dus videatur. There appears in Sidonius great vigour of Wit, who is rather to be admired for
his many Vertues, that he wrote those things, when the Roman Eloquence failed, then to be accused for the Vices of the times. Dempster saith, that he shews himself both in his Epistles, and Poems, Supra modum literatum, Transcendently learned: no wonder then, i e be said of his Work; Apollinare opus Musis, & Apolline dignum. He was one of the principall Senators in Gallia, and therefore called by one, Omnium praesulum scholastissimus, the most Scholiasticall of all the Prelates. Gregorius Turonensis affirmeth, that he married the Daughter of the Emperor Avi∣tus. Pontius Paulinus. POntius Paulinus was of Burdeaux in France, and nobly descended, he flourished when Gratian was Emperour: some thought him to have been the Nephew of Ausonius, because that Poet Complemented him with the Name of Son; he wrote a Poem in Hexameters, of those Kings collected by Suetonius, whence he is commended for that Work by Ausonius in these words: Collegisti in Epitomen tres libros Suetonii de regi∣bus tanta elegantia, solus ut videare consecutus, quod contra rerum naturam est, brevitas ut obscura non esset. Thou hast Epitomized Suetonius his three
Books of Kings so elegantly, that thou seemest alone to have obtained, what is contrary to the nature of things, that brevity might not be obscure, Scaliger dignifies him with this Title, Aqui∣tanorum procerum princeps, The chief of the Aqui∣tan Nobles. Another with a better Character, Vir vita, atque scriptis, ut veteres loquebantur, vere Apostolicus. A man for Life, and Writings, as the Ancients were wont to say, truly Aposto∣licall. So Barthius. And the same Critick speaketh further of him, to his great credit: Christianorum literis po∣eticis clarorum neminem Paullino praeponere possis. You cannot prefer any of the famous Christian Poets before this Paullinus. Et paulo post, it fol∣loweth, Quod si ipsos Dei praecones Apostolos lati∣nis numeris laudes domini pangere voluisse diceres, ta∣libus utique usuros fuisse confitereris. That if you should say that those Preachers of God the A∣postles, would set forth the praises of the Lord in Latine Verses, you would acknowledge, that they would use such as these. There was another Paullinus besides this, and a Poet also, whom some confound with this Author which hath been treated of, but they differ each from the other, both in profession of life, and ele∣gancy of Verse.
Dracontius. DRacontius a Spaniard, lived in the time of the Emperor Justinianus, being a Poet more commendable for his Sence, and Learn∣ing, then for his Eloquence; He composed an Hexameron of the Creation of the World in he∣roick Verse, set forth at Basill, together with the Works of the old Christian Poets. Barthius saith, That he speaks of matters so darkly, that he is thought scarcely to have understood himself. He is likened to Pruden∣tius. Consimiliter ut in Prudentio, sic in eo elegan∣tiarum flosculi, ceu purpurae quaedam infitae interlucent, ac scintillant. In like manner as in Prudentius, so also in him there do shine and sparkle Flow∣ers of Elegancies, like certain in woven Purples. FINIS.
Errata. P. 34. l. 6. r. transcendent, p. 37. l. 2. r. Antonines, p. 37. l. 25. r. Antoninus, p. 61. l. 10. r. And his, p. 64. l. 30. r. Lipsius, p. 76. l. 8. r. Sect. p. 93. l. 14. r. literarium, p. 106. l. 27. r. Pari, p. 107. l. 18. r. Pallasses, p. 108. l. 7, 8. r. Josephus Scaliger, p. 116. l. 16. r. melli∣tum, p. 120. l. 17. r. Thurios, p. 126. l. 4. r. by Barthius.
