m393 e403_2 99861165 113293
REASONS DELIVERED By the Right Honourable the Earle of MANCHESTER: FOR Nulling the forc'd VOTES, And a∣gainst the high and visible insolencies of those that forced the HOUSES. WITH A DECLARATION OF The House of Peeres acquitting themselves AND Other papers delivered at a Conference of both Houses, on Wednesday, August 18. 1647. ALSO An Ordinance of both Houses of Par∣liament, appointing a secret Committee for the sending for, and examining of Parties and Witnesses. Aug: 20th Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.
REASONS Delivered By the Right Honourable the Earle of MANCHESTER FOR Nulling the forc'd VOTES. AND Against the high and visible insolencies of those that forced the Houses. Die Mercurii August 18. 1647. AT a Conference of both Houses, the Right Honourable the Earle of Manche∣ster delivered from the Lords to the Com∣mons, these insuing particulars, That their Lordships had commanded
him to put them in minde, that August the 6th. Instant, the Lords sent a Message for their concurrence to an Ordinance making Null those Orders which passed July 26th. by force, set upon both Houses. And all other Orders, Votes, Ordinances, and pro∣ceedings, from thence untill the sixt of August following, by any pretence of Parliament, or power. II. That their Lordships had likewise com∣manded him, to put them in minde that they likewise sent to them two Declarations for their concurrence, One from the Gene∣rall his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army: The other from the Lords and Commons and the Speakers, who went to the Army for safety. Both which declared the proceedings of the Members in their ab∣sence to be forced, and invalid. III. That their Lordships had commanded him to acquaint them that they had received their Expedite, sent up by a Message this day, by some of their Members, (which
was for Nulling the forced Votes and Proceedings by a Repeale) And that their Lordships had Voted to lay it aside, and adhered to their former Votes. IV. That their Lordships had commanded him, to deliver to them Certain Reasons of the great dangers that are like to follow, if the Parliament be not Vindicated and right∣ed, by a speedy course herein. The Substance of which Reasons was thus: First, That if a speedy course be not taken here∣in, there is no provisions can be made for the safe∣ty of a free Parliament sitting, because in these things the Houses were forced in a most insolent and visible manner. Secondly, That the Parliament should bee hereby liable to doe whatsoever they shall further force them to hereafter in the like manner. Con∣trary to the freedome and priviledge of Parlia∣ments; And hereby they gaine the Authority of Parliament, to make good what they force. Thirdly, That whatsoever force shall be set upon the Parliament, to oppose their proceedings; and thereby force the Houses to Act what they
please; There can be no poer obtained to punish them for so great insolencies. V. That their Lordships had commanded him to deliver to them a Declaration, (where∣by their Lordships do declare, That they have used all possible meanes that the Houses of Parliament, may be righted and vindicated herein, against the insolent, and visible mutinings set upon them to force them and disturbe the proceedings of a fre Parliament, in which their Lordships doe acquit themselves, that they have done, what in the lyes to vindicate and right the Parliament here∣in. VI. That their Lordships have now passed an Ordinance for the making of the Votes null, passed on Monday July 26, and so on till Friday August 6. And declaring against the same, to which Ordinance they desire the spee∣dy concurrence of the Hous of Com∣mons,
Die Veneris 13 August, 1647. IT is Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament. As∣sembled, That the Earle of Denbigh Earle of Malgrave, Lord Grey of Warke, Lord Howard, Sir Arthur Ha∣zlerigge. Mr. Solliciter, Mr. Gurdon, Mr. Miles Corbet, Mr. Alderman Pennington, Mr. Ain, Mr. Humphry Edwards, and Collonel Ʋen, or any three of them be a sub-Committee of the Committee appointed by both Houses on Friday last: And that they have power to send for parties and witnesses, and to proceed (under se∣crecy) at all times when they thinke fit in preparing the examinations of
the businesses committed to the said Committee: And that they or any three of them may administer an oath unto any persons in such things as shall not render the parties criminall that are so sworne. Henry Elsyng Cler. Par. Dom. Comm. FINIS.
