M3101 E33_1 99860794 112919
NEWES FROM SOVTHAMPTON, OR The copie of a letter to Captain Thomas Harrison in London from Mr. Peter Murford, Serjeant Major to Colonell Norton, DISCOVERING A late Plot of the Cavaleering Hoptonians against the said towne of Southampton: But by the mercy of God (and the fidelity of the said Major) prevented. Also herein is related the distressed condition of that County as it now stands. Published according to Order. LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton in Popes-head Alley. 1644.
The Discovery of a new plot against the Town of Southampton by the CAVALIERS. SIR, YOur Letter is come to my hands, which I take kindly from you: I should desire to exchange lines oftner with you; I thank you for your newes. I had Let∣ters this day from my Lord Ad∣mirall for the Maria Pinace to ride before this Town. We are yet in safety (blessed be God) but daily braved by the enemy, yet hitherto they have not dared to fasten up∣on this Town: And I have observed, that they have never come before this place, or neere it, but we have still worsted them, wee have alwayes taken prisoners, Horses, Armes, wounded or slain some of them. On Thursday last we took six men and horse, whereof one was a Cornet. On Saturday we took two men, Horses and Armes, shot a Captain, who lies languishing at Ramsey, and wounded three men more. The Lord be still our defence and refuge, and give us thankfull hearts for his preservation over us. This poor County
of Hampshire having had its share of blood and misery in this sad tragedie of our Nation, that there is hardly left any thing for man or beast therein. I perceive you have received knowledge of a trea∣cherous practize for the delivery of this Town, but least you should be mis-informed therein, I will give you a briefe account thereof. Some few daies before Christide last, the Lord Hopton marched with his Ar∣my from Winchester, towards Southampton, with a pur∣pose to face it, (as wee were informed,) but he came not within two Miles thereof, to out face it, but mar∣ched to Redbridge, (the way into the new forrest) breake it down to hinder us of provision from thence after so horible an Act, he faced about and marched to his old quarters againe, without attempting any fur∣ther atchievement. The next day here arived a letter from one Mr. Ias∣per Cornelius som times an Aturney of this Towne, but run away before my coming hither for Malignan∣cy) directed to Mr R. Mason, a merchant of this town, intimating that this Cornelius was the day before with the Lord Hopton before this Town, and was the means of divertin the Lord Hoptons intent of attempting this place, and ells Mr. Mason hee had made choyce of him to deliver an inclosed letter to me with all se∣cresie, which I received (yet the said Cornelius was an unknown man to me,) by his Letter he insinuates that then was a fit time for mee to doe his Majesty good service, and that I was not the man I was formerly, meaning (as I conceived) that the government of this Towne was imposed upon my honoured friend Co∣lo ell Norton (which I long sued to be eased thereof) and by it he thought I was a discontented person, and
so fit to be wrought upon; but he was deceived, I be∣ing never better pleased then to bee eased of so great a burthen, which I had born long enough, (though it pleased his Excellencie to requite my ser∣vice with a more sutable command to my dispositi∣on, made me Serjeant Major to Colonell Norton, which pleases me farre better) after the receit of this letter, I instantly acquainted my Colonell and Master Major therewith, we all agreed I should shew a seem∣ing complying the better to bottome their designe, and to find out what malignant party they had made in this town. I forthwith gave him a copie of a cha∣racter to explain his minde more fully. To which he replied, That by the command of his superiours, hee did in the name of his Majesty and his countrey, and two Lords (which hee named) offer mee a thousand pounds in money, a present imployment of more va∣lue and honour then at present I had, his Majesties pardon under the great Seal, and his favour, if I would be a means to reduce the town of Hampton to his Ma∣jesty; I returned a seeming complying answer, and de∣manded the 1000 l. in hand, or the moity thereof, and assurance given me for the residue, the imployment named, and the pardon sent me; this performed, hee should soon see what I would say to it. In the interim my Colonell acquainted my L. Generall and Sir Will. Waller, with the offer made by Cornelius; wherein I continued the treaty to gain time, until Sir W. Waller had finished his businesse at Arundel, and drawn his Army this way, and then to have drawne the enemy hither in hope of gaining this place, whilst Sir William might have falen behind them in this place of advan∣tage, and so to have deceived such treacherous corrup∣ters.
I continued the Treaty untill I had his Majesties Signe Manuall for a pardon sent me, and afterwards the pardon it selfe; but I could get no money, but strong engagements of honour to performe with mee when the work desired was effected. I whiled out a moneths time with them to the exchange of eight let∣ters, Mr. Robert Mason being still the man they im∣ployed to bring their and receive my letters, whom they had bound to secresie by an oath, before I knew thereof, who brought me the copie thereof, hoping to have gained me to the like, saying he had no engage∣ment all this time on me, neither by protestation nor promise, to perform with them; and which I still de∣layed (which put the projectors to a jealousie that I was not reall to them) yet to draw them still on, I framed some offers, in the nature of Articles, for my selfe and this Towne (to which the Lord Hopton sub∣scribed, that upon his honour hee would performe them:) but I still pressed for the money, but could not obtain it, they fearing I would Craford them as Poole did; yet Mr. Mason offered me to become bound for it, which I accepted of: but before hee would per∣form, on Friday last was sennight he earnestly pressed me to declare my reality in the designe. I saw the man in a distracted extasie, by his over zealousnesse and rashnesse for them, having no assurance of mee, my bowels pittied him, his wife and many children, told him plainly I never intended to be a villaine and traytor, to betray a trust committed to mee, and the lives and goods of so many innocent people to bee made a prey to cruelty, and told him I have revealed it from the beginning to my Colonell.
Then he begged I would conceale his name; I tould him I could not, but in campassion of his condition gave him leave to goe to his house (being but three houses from mine,) in which time I went forthwith to acquaint my Colonell with what had happened be∣tween Mr. Mason and my selfe, wee concluded in∣stantly to sieze his person, and causcd all the gates to be secured; but yet he escaped from us and could not be found, although wee searched carefully for him, since wee heer he is at Winchester, and shall be prefer∣red, and imployed in matter of trust. In all the time of our treatie, I could not discover that he had any con∣federates of any Townsmen with him, but had under∣taken it, to carry it alone. But I was greived that I was conceived by the adverse part, to be a fit Instru∣ment for them. But now they have tryed me, I am confident, they will neuer doe the like, but to revenge themselves on me: But I will to all the world declare and maintaine my faithfullnesse to my Country and cause I have undertaken, and clear my unfained repu∣tation. Thus much I thought good to say unto you, that you may give a satisfactory testimony of that designe in my behalfe, if you heer it falsly reported. And I shall be readie to requite you in vindicating of truth, and acknowledge my selfe. Southampton Feb. 5. 1643. Your reall friend, Pet. Murford. FINIS.
