n46 e774_5 99866349 118620
MUTINY MAINTAINED: OR, SEDITION Made good from Its Unity, Knowledge, Wit, Government. BEING A DISCOURSE, directed to the ARMIES INFORMATION.
To the Ingenuous Souldiery. Masters, YOU are now in your Winter Quarters; I have there∣fore sent you this Pamphlet to warm you. Not that I intend to play at Blow-coals with you, you know that sport too well. Only, finding your Genius given to new Doctrines (many of you being Seekers) I thought a Paradox might not not be unwelcome, one allowes killing, another lying; such Treatises every foot come to your hands; sure then you will accept of this Piece; that smells much of your Match and Gunpowder, and concerns more your Strength, and your Trade. I have no Stratagem to take you, but reason; and if you exa∣mine the Discourse to the pith, not superficially, I doubt not but you will submit to him, that wishes you as he doth himself. N. N.
THey that have seen the Dancing Horse, how exactly he knows his Figures, and keeps Time to the Musick, as if a French Dancing Master had taught him. How he counts money, as if he had been a Cash keeper. How he scrapes, and makes legs, and kneels for the King, as if he begd his enjoyment, but for the State pre∣sently lyes down and groans: they all admire, and cry, This Horse shews tricks that youl'd believe the Beast were Ratio∣nal; which means no mor then this, That he truly hath not Reason, but resembles only him that hath. So Tacitus writes of the Legions in Germany mutining, That they would now be all on fire, and anon be all as quiet, with so great equality and constancy that youl'd believe they were well Govern'd, which is as much to say, That they seem'd govern'd, but in truth were not. Now I will endeavour to make it clear against the Histo∣rian, That Sedition, or let it be the Seditious multitude, is go∣vern'd perfectly by its own Nature, much more then any obe∣dient Army can be: Which I thus argue; Since Bodies compounded of distinct Members and Parts, such as are Cities, Armies or Clocks, hence come to boast of their Unity. How much more shall these accost and ap∣proach to true and proper Unity, that are made up of like Parts, and maintained in their Order from a like Principle? Now if you will examine the occasions and Unities of Se∣ditions, surely it will appear, and you must confess, That a Seditious body is better governed then another made up of divers parts. But because no less to the Civil then to the Military the name of Sedition is given, not to go from my Text whereof Tacitus speaks, I will confine my self only to the Military. This then as much as the name teaches, is nothing else, then a Separation of one part of the Army from the rest of the Body on purpose to obtain by force something from the the Commander. Now, if 'tis said of an obedient Army (and tis well said) That it is Governed, when upon the Word given, being put in order, it presently joyns Battel with the E∣nemy: Much more ought we to say it (if we compare one
with the other) of the Seditious. Let's come to the proof up∣on trace of some Maxims. The efficient cause of an Army may be entituled the Gene∣ral, for as Order is the soul or form of that Army, such Order comes produced from no other then the General, who like an Idaea contains it. A Seditious Body too hath a Commander that will excellently govern it, because it will yield most easily to be governed, being all of one mind like him they have cho∣sen; and much more, because their own good is the very same with the good of the Commander: A thing not ordinary betwixt the Army and the General. See Alexander conducting his Macedons through unknown, untamed and unpenetrable Coun∣tries; think you an equal profit accru'd to his Phalanges or Squadrons, as did to him? Surely no: He counted all their sufferings Little, because by them he became Great: his small Body valued it not, so he might obtain the great World. For all their hungers and thirsts the unhospitable Rocks found his Tent furnisht with exquisite Meats, and generous Wine to crown his goblets: whose bottoms being carved with the like Effigies of those conquered Kings he took in his Victo∣ries, he delighted still to drink them empty, more to tickle his Ambition then to quench his Thirst. No, twas not so with his Souldiers; they Dyed to Immortalize him, and sow∣ed the Plains with their own Limbs, that he might reap the Palms thence budding. One only was in Purple, for which a thousand wounded; one only Triumphing, for which a Thou∣sand Conquering. To Win only for him, they Lost not only their own, but themselves. Hence from not being the same, the good of the Comman∣der and the Souldiers, it arises, That though the final cause of him and them Unitely taken, may be called the very same, that is, the Victory; yet for all that, both the one and the others ta∣ken by themselves, are drawn by ends too much differing one from another; whence after is derived that discordance of Causes, which is contrary (as I said before) to the regulating of a thing which ought to be governed. I should lose the day in wearying the Army, if I would go to shew by examples how differing the motives of Souldiers are in fighting: not with the Commander only, but compar'd e∣ven
amongst themselves: Some brandish the Sword, not to win glory, but to gain gold. Others with an immoderate force weak∣ens all the interprize; and to make himself the only one among them, comes to divide them. Others, only make stand, and face the enemy, because he is too strong behind their back, or be∣cause they cannor flie, try to put him to slight. This man seeks not renown with his sword upon the Foe, but his revenge upon a particular Enemy. Some destine their lust to anothers wife, and for the plunder of a tender maid, value not the loss of the whole Baggage. Avarize, Zeal, Disdain, Fear, Am∣bition, Lust, Rage and Rashness, make a hundred factions of one Army. Else why do we read of Pompey for to animate his men, to run up and down, now comforting these with promises, then pricking them with reproof; now stirring up their hopes, then provoking their vigilance with the danger; sometimes enflaming their covetousness, with shewing the great booty in the adverss Camp; then awaking their compassion, by telling of the misery of their Country. Sure all this because he knew there must needs be diverse arguments to perswade the same action to many, that have divers ends in the working it. Now in a Mutiny the parts are all alike, as in a train of gun∣powder, if in a moment but one spark fall upon one corn, it sets fire on all, and runs to the very end, for no other cause, but that they are all alike. So the first will that flashes or gives fire in a Sedition, becomes at once the will to a thousand brests. Such is the consanguinity and kindred of Minds! And certain∣ly it must be so upon good reason, since the fear of the same Punishment, and the hopes of the same reward binds them in an undissolvable Tie. They will the same thing, because there lives but one heart in many breasts. But unity alone is not our argument, there are a number of other reasons speaking for us, as thus; Who sights, will he not govern himself the better against the eneny, the more that he hath a perfect Knowledg of that Enemy? Surely yes. Now by whom is he best known, by an Army in the day of Battel, or by this Seditious body in the Quarrel? The Army oft fights against people of contrary Climates and Customs, and knows not whether their Flights be for Feare or for Stratagem; whether their Charges be out of Election or Necessity; or
their preparations be in reality or appearance. Again, though the conditions and natures of the Souldier were cleerly known, yet on the other side how oft doth the way and nature of the Commander happen to be obscure, who, if he de∣serves that name, ought to order it so, that to his own shirt even his own thoughts must be concealed? It will happen then almost impossible for that Army to be well governed, when neither it, nor he that governs it, hath any knowledg of the enemies, or of their Captain. On the other side, the enemy of a mutinuous body is as it were alwayes the very same, which before the sedition was its Commander, that is to say, tis that, of whom by often and oft repeated proofs they know where are the strengths, where the defects; on what side they are most expos'd, or most impenetrable upon assaults of others, whether there be matter of surprize, or of force. So for the Commander they mutiny against; they know his courage by many tryals in charges, his suffering in sieges, his fortune in fights, and his discipline in his rigidness. Certainly, these that were well governed by him, are best of all taught to govern themselves against him: Especially, since mutinies happen for the most on that part of the Army, which the Commander knows best of all the rest, that is to say, that part which is compounded of old Souldiers, because they among all the rest are highly strong and ingenious, and well knowing to themselves of their abilities to pretend to great things, and to complain with much justice, not obtaining conditions, which is no less ne∣cessary in moving seditions, then useful to be known in after∣wards governing them, as tis fit. But to pass by the knowledg and courage of the Old Soul∣dier, who hath defied well nigh a thousand deaths to make his Commander glorious by his scars, give me leave for a witness of the third condition, which is Wit, to bring into the Field one Pretty proof hinted me by Tacitus, who tells, that Germanicus whilst he made the Pile and Conquest of France, hearing of the seditious rising in his Armies in Germany, swiftly in all hast marches thther to quiet them. At this suddain flash of his imperial look (which serenely lightning made them to love him whilst he terrify'd them)
the seditious troops with humbled and relenting browes gave great signals of their repentance; nevertheless, so soon as he was enterd the Tents, they set up a cry, and snatching by force his right hand, under a shew of kissing it, those de∣crepit Souldiers wrought so, that he must feel their empty and dissurnisht jawes with his own fingers. Cicero here with all his flame colours to figure out the motion of the affecti∣ons so stir'd up, cannot speak so much, nor so lively, as was said by these pale and trembling lips in this their silence, who not being able to bite the hands, they embowelled themselves into the marrow and midst of their Generals heart. And thus was heard the dumb to speak. When never shall it be granted, O good Germanicus, to repose, till our sepulcral ages obtain us our repose? Our jaws make witness what advances we are like to draw from so ma∣ny Wars, and shall it not be permitted us, after we have lost our bones, to lay up in safety the miserable relicks of our body? What necessity so hard forces wretched mortals to live amongst deaths, even until death? See now our stooping shoulders can bear no longer our weighty armes. See our dry hands, that infect our pikes with their palsie, can do no more then joyn themselves in putting up supplicant desires to thy mercy and compassion. Thus to be obstinate to command heavy shadowes, rather living bodies under thy banners, is nothing else but an ingenious ambition not to make bloody fights, no, though we miserably should be cut all in pieces. Ah, grant us the dominion of our life, at least, in a season when we are to lose it; secure that to us, when it can no longer secure thee. Is there no other death, but the Sword, possibly under the Romans? Thy Army will not be enerva∣ted, though it be not accompanyed with our falling age, which tires it self in following it. The body will be the stronger, if the wither'd Members be cut off for unprofitable. This our desire is the effect of a most happy Fortune, thy Partisan: She will not be expos'd to the long carreer of thy noble toils and enterprizes, which she foresees, unless first in the place of thy worn Souldiers, you sublitute and enroll fresh, young, and lusty.
Now lets believe, if Wit knows to arm so strongly the disarmed mouths of the seditious with a silent eloquence, for to gain the good will of their Captain; it will also know how to govern the right hand when there shall be an occasion to arm it for to arise fear in the Captain. To these mild and aged Mutineers, their General was their Glory, and their delight: But, had he been one hated by the seditious, or did they begin to loath and grow weary of the State that imploye; them (a State suppose declining too, which snatches and catches at all things as dying men do; or as those do that are about such; or be t a State in swadling cloathes, whose tender roots facilitates its removall) how fierce and bold would these have then been? You would quickly have seen their daring forehead backt with a well∣hung tongue, and their audacities seconded by this language, not making their Addresses to the Commander, but encourag∣ing one another: Thus, We, whose victorious Swords us'd oft to give life to others, lets now give breath to our selves. Once such was our love to the Cause, and liking to the Commander, that 'twas our weariness to be at rest, and yet we repos'd in wearying our selves; 'twas our love to be upon duty, and we were in pain and labour, if that we labour'd not; we have been hitherto amorously seditious to have ad every one the first place in dangers, and the last in repose, thus quarreling, to shew that love hath its civil Wars no less then hatred. But now the case is altered, and what thanks have we for all our la∣bours? we have been cajol'd, trapand, cheated, moulded, outed, displaced; fallacies and lyes are lookt upon as glorious arts, these are the State Stratagens, only they deserve not that name becaused used so often; we fight under Colours indeed, tis not substance; all promise, no performance: Where are our Arrears? must we that spend our lives for others rights be the first must be without our dues, and for our Conquests be made slaves in this to serve without pay? upon all designs how often have they promis'd us all that was behind, and must word be broke with us, who in honour ever keep it with an enemy? must they advance themselves by keeping us low? Our Master Mountebanks makes no more of us then Zan∣nies,
we are cut and run through, while they vent their chea∣ting Balsomes, and thus heal and salve their own poverties, pretending to cure the grievances of the People. But our Arreers! Fellow-souldiers! Mony is our life; we may well keep a life for that, for which there's I one but ventures to loose it. Mony! tis that that gives us strength in the day of Battel; this Balsomes our ghastly wounds, and stocks our ex∣haushed Veins with a better recruit then our own blood. Tis but honest then, and just for us tomutiny for that which makes all the World almost knaves; who shall call this sedition? tis but a nobler way of petitioning for right, which our Grandees and Republicans have as often countenanc'd, as their designs had occasions, tis they have taught us this abo∣minable way of cure, to owe health to a disease, and reco∣very to witcheraft. Come, the Camp's our common Pleas, and the Sword our Advocate; once Courts were held under Oakes, and we may as well keep them in the Field. Nor, need we fear, where the most are, all will be; in Lamps, the Oyl still runs to that place that is burnt, and spirits to the part aggrieved. Come, if we can't over come, we can't be overcome. But indeed a discontended Army can never want matter whereby to vent its passion, especially when they have a re∣solution to disband, and find their rewards not answerable to their service. Balaams dull Ass in his own defence became a Demostheres. Had then a seditious body but a trooping Jesuite for their mouth, that Spirit Legion, that enters into pay, with purpose to play the Divel in a State, how would his eloquence like Gunpowder set all on fire? how would his Rhetorick discover the unfortunateness of Souldiers, and the ungratefulness of those that imploy them; who can't be thankful enough, doth usually become unthankful; which is no better then a moral rebell. Besides, the Souldier they cannot love, because they fear him; for he that hath a Power to give, shews therein also a power to take away, which sa∣vours somewhat of that frightful word Superiority. But one may read a Souldiers destiny in the Heavens; wherein are Bears, Dog, Scorpion, Hydea, Goat (nay Calistus and Ariadne, who were not so honest as they should be) and be∣low their feet is valiant Achilles placed, and other Demi-Gods.
Sad fate, to see Beasts and Monsters above Men, and they that have ventured highest to be lowest set by. See the great Hanni∣bal at last by a factious Senate thrown into exile. Scipio too, fon being too much regarded, became to be ill lookt upon: He who had conquered Africk the mother of Monsters, at his return found greater Monsters in Rome, accusers that condemned him as guilty; of what? of that onely which makes Envy repining; and thus the great Commander banishes himself, changing his Sword into a Spade, his Horse into Oxen, his Trenches into Fur∣rows, his Victories into Harvests; from a Souldier he turns Husbandman: No heading an Army now like to the Plough-tail. This advantage hath a great Mind above a great Heart. Ungratefull State! the very Tanker-bearers have their sea∣sons when they bedeck their Conduits with Garlands and Boughs, in thanks of the Water they draw from them. The Ocean too renders the received waters of the Rivers unto the Earth in mists and Showers; and Kings by their Nobles return to the People all that they suckt from them: But Common-wealths-men, like those two Monsters Soylla and Chanybdis, the one breaks the ship and scatters the lading, and the other swallows all up. Or perhaps this is learnt from the greasie Dutch, who in his fro∣licks first drinks the Glass and breaks it. Thus they of old ado∣red the Images of the Gods, and cared not for the Artificers that made them; those Stones were honoured as Divine, and their Makers were trod upon as Stones. Or if it chance that the Interess does do honour the Souldier, tis but as the Heathen did their Goddess Fever, that he may not be their Enemy. Alas! the Souldiers interest is the least concerned, and the least lookt after, who are onely made use of as stirrops to advance the am∣bitious, and then they are thrown aside, or transported abroad like old Iron. They seek to him onely for themselves; for their own profit, not his good; just as we search for Physical Herbs, not to make much of them, (though much be made of them,) but onely to chop and bruise and squeeze them, and all the good juyce and virtue being drawn out, as Corisca speaks in Pastor fido, — they are straight to the Dunghil thrown, So when they have done with us, with us they have done. Great Mens palates run after new dishes, being soon cloy'd with the first. So the affections, which are the palate of the Soul,
in our Governours quickly loath and nauseate even that which foster'd, nourish'd, and gave brest to their Greatness. Nay, tis well if it stops here, since Nero scrupled not the murther of his Mother, that sought all ways to raise him. We know too, that nursing Fathers have had the like Fate, and some may fear that our mother Countrey will hardly scape their Anatomy. Thus you may see now a tongue can sound to Arms, and with its Oyl put an edge to the Sword, and make it look young again; so that a Commander dreads more the witty Souldier, then the strong one. But some one rising against this, will say, That Sedition is reckon'd among the evil and wicked things, which scarce ap∣pears how they conveniently should know to be governed, espe∣cially being one of those, whose nature is no other then confu∣sion, disturbance, immoderateness, in sum, all that which is di∣rectly opposite to Rule, Government and Order. Now admit∣ted, that Sedition be an evil thing; I answer, that of many things that are evil, because the end proposed is evil, yet it cannot for all be said, that they know not how to be rul d and govern'd, since they know fit and apposite means for obtaining this end. Pisistratus was wicked, and Caesar wicked in aspiring to the Ty∣ranny of their Countrey; yet in surmounting to the designed Post, none can deny, but that they knew most excellently how to govern themselves. On the other side, who looks on Cicero, who endeavouring all wayes with the Senate to throw the Gene∣ralship of the Army upon young Augustus, came to make him Monarch by the very same way, which he believ'd ought to have made him the renewer of the Republick; he, I say, may well affirm that he was a good man, but again he will subjoyn, that the good men are themselves sometimes governed unadvisedly. In like manner, I grant that Sedition sounds in its title Confusions, Quarrels, Revolutions; what then, shall not the Seditious know to be governed? This is false: And my Reason I will tell you, with an Example in my opinion most conducing. Sedition in an Army, is such a thing, just as a Fever uses to be in a mans body; for both are compounded of those bad humours, which are working and fermenting to give assault against Head and Heart: Certainly, who looks upon this poor Ague-man, sees nothing but discomposures, turbations and confusions, that are past representing. He flings a thousand ways his legs, his Arms,
his hands about his bed, as if he desired to fly, and to be rid of himself: His head goes to find his feet, and his feet rise where his head was; the fire makes him desire cold, and the cold makes him mad to run to the fire; he is weak, and his weakness forces him to marvellous violences; he rages, he languishes, he threa∣tens, he knows not what to say, and says more then he knows; he knows not what he sees, and sees not what's before his eyes; he is himself for his pain, and for feeling it, he is not himself. Who ever saw such a Babel? And yet these inward and sediti∣ous Humours, which make the Sick-man not to rule himself, do so wonderfully govern themselves in their assaults, that the Hip∣pocrates and Galens amazed cannot tell how these material and gross Humours should observe in their Paroxysmes and fits such exactness of days, and such proportions of progresses, which would be enough to spring from a rational power, working by counsel and election. Nay for comfort to the Seditious, some will say, That an Ague too most an end will have its course, in spight of all Doctours, and their Jesuites powder; besides, that sometimes 'tis Physick for a King. But here I find that Caesar is against me. How (says he) can it be ever true, that Mutinies (even in their greatest vigour) should be governed with good rule, since that flying cloud, so proudly towring to see to, will dissolve it self at the least breath; nay, at the first brow of the Majesty of their General, they le∣vel and lay down their swellings for the most part: And this their Calm is their Shipwrack. Where was there a more enraged Se∣dition, then when I returned out of Spain, which stirred up all my Armies Legions against me? Then with united and loud voices they required me to recompence with Money the Bloud they had lost, or to grant them liberty to keep that which was remaining. They were ambitious too, to shew, that in War the Head depends more from the Hands, then the Hands do from the Head. Perhaps my men had not all the good qualities of an excellent Seditious; yet, they were such old Souldiers, that their battels numbred all the Provinces of the West, and 'twas their nature ever rather to fight, then discourse; they would run into dangers with the same lookes that others came out of them; they were so stout, that I could see my Victories in their eyes, before ever a Sword drawn; they were of so much knowledge and wit too, that had I been less then I was, you might have seen
a glorious Army of all Commanders. And yet at the setled undaunt∣ed undauntedness onely of my look, at the generous fire of my anger, and at the giving them my scornfull leave to disband; as if my eyes had been the nerves of their hands, and the edge of their swords, as if I had been able to move them with my beck, they all in spight of their teeth, trembling and mute, ran into the Camp, and yielded themselves, and with one accord assured me, not onely their own hands to my fu∣ture enterprizes, but for a present punishment offered their own throats. Thus Bees with animosities enrag'd, cast but a little dust, they are straight asswag'd. And shall we now say, that that is well governed, which fals to ground so easily? that order is good, which in an instant is discomposed? that those Wills are regularly directed toward their end, which in a moment change boldness into fear, force into weak∣ness, and haughtiness and fierceness into pusilanimity? Though Cesar hath spoke as he Fought, Bravely and Galantly; yet I doubt not for all this fierce re-encounter but to keep the saddle: My reason this; To be easily changed from one estate into another, is not a sign that that was not well grounded at the first, which is now changed. 'Tis a well manag'd Horse on which the Cavalier with full carrear runs at the Ring; and yet but one light trip throws both him∣self and Ruler over and over. Nay the Facility, after that the Sedition is spent, and the Souldiers turn to the obedience of their Commander, proves most strongly, that it is best of all govern'd whilst it continues. For the Souldiers then Revolting are put in a violent estate, it being their Natural to be quiet and complyant under obedience of the Cap∣tain. Now 'tis very true, That things in a violent estate cannot hold long; yet therefore tis not true, That they cannot for that time they do hold be much better governed, then they would ever have been in their natural state. This arises from that Instinct which is implanted in e∣very thing, to desire self-conservation: whence the greater the dan∣gers are, the greater guard and wariness is awakened in him that is in peril; and thereupon the violent State, arming all its forces against the being of a thing, is the cause that for its own safety, Head and Hands, Action and Councel are laid together to effect all how it may be best governed. Thus in the Water which is not our Sphere, one governs his Feet and Arms with a finer rule of motion, when he swims, then when he passes along in the water. So the fellow that dances on the Ropes, he balances himself perfectly, that neither eye nor hand, nor any part shall leane one tittle beyond the Cock or Poise; but after he is come down to the ground, he forms his steps by chance,
and without any examination. And truly neither the one nor the other can stay in the Aire or Water long, so as upon the ground; yet one by his Swimming may arrive to what he intended to come to, and the Rope-dancer be a gainer by his perril. But whilest I consent that sedition is short, I hardly may be thought to tell truth (which is my scope) if I should overmuch enlarge my self to treat thereof; since the truth of a Writing consists in being conform'd to the nature of the thing whereof tis writ. Ile wind up therefore with this seasonable advice, That sedition cannot be counted such an evil thing, where the action may produce any good. A bad tree cannot put forth good fruit. If Rebellion be the Law of Nature, which may justi∣fie it self with a se defendendo; Mutiny sure then may virtuously de∣mand its dues or disbanding. He that bid the Souldier be content with his pay, did not bid him to be content without it. Nay, if Conscience were a Military term, suppose that should alter the mind, and make men see that horrid madness, which pluckt the Sun out of its Sphere, because some men had sore eyes. Where Sophistry and cheat hath made us go out of the way, tis lawfull to resume and go back to our first Argument, and leave off those errors, which others have made us guil∣ty of to conceal their own faults. The great Physitian retracted his er∣rors concerning the sutures of the head; and is it unjust for us to re∣cant those about the divisions, divorces, nay separation of the Head. For Truth and Justice every stone may be stirr'd: The curing of those that are bitten with Tarantulas, is to play so many tunes till they find the true one. That miserable disease, called Hydrophobia, where the par∣ty is tormented both with thirst, and fear of the water, his speedy cure is to be flung over head and ears in the water; such a sort of Physick would heal our madness. You know my meaning. Since Fogs and Mists are usual in the counsels of Providence; something may be sometimes undertaken, where there is little encouragement. Tis not a shame to be overcome, where tis a sin to overcome; nor is it unhandsome that any should be submitted to him, whom Law and Nature hath advanced a∣bove all. Consider but Jupiters complaint to Menippus, That men since the upstart and unknown Gods, they were disrelished with him, so that he who formerly could hardly open his eys for the great smoak of the noble Hecatombs, now without any honour left, did almost die with hunger. See but what noble blood runs up and down begging and for god saking it almost, and compassing the earth to and fro, that they eat, not (as the Itinerant Devil or Ministers so much proposed) that they may devour. If you have not then abjur'd your Reason and Con∣science,
and resolv'd also to rebel against the Light, you cannot but face about, and be as you were, returning again to your old Constituti∣on. When we depart from a wonted Custome, infallible Hippocrates tells us, our understanding is taken away. I do not here intend to be an Advocate of Monarchy; there is no such Magnetism in my Reason, as to be able to draw Abettors, or to warp your affections to a closing with that Government: Yet fince you know the vergency and incli∣nation of the Nation, whose heads are troubled because they want their Head, it cannot but be your interest to side with them. Thus like Her∣cules you may ascend Heaven by your slaughter: otherwise you are but licensed— to say Souldiers says all; and though you kill by Autho∣rity, yet you murder, because you do it for Gain and Pay msto, and make Religion but the Pander of your prey and plunder. Consider then but our late Governors: One with the sophistry of his tears, and arts of insinuations, cajold and cheated all parties. The others, what Marriots of mens Estates have they been? Their covetous hungers were like the eating Ulcers or sore legs that Beggars use to expose to us, which are usually the worse for our charity, or never the nearer mending. But what's become of these Legislators? You have pared off these Wens or Kings-evil of their Countrey, (for so Tully calls vile and inconsiderate men,) and this collection of Humours you have worthily discussed, because they would not draw to a head. As Job speaks, A storm hath hurled them out of their place: They were dri∣ven forth from among men, who cried after them as after a thief, and hist these Saltim-banks off of their Stage. Give me leave now to talk a little Scripture to you, who think you have the Monopoly of holiness, and count your selves of the sect of the Saints. You know how Asa was censured for relying upon the Physicians, when he should have applied himself to his Lord. So the Bloud-issue woman spent all upon them, and had spent more perhaps, if she had had more to spend; yet she could never be well untill she laid hold up∣on the Lord. No doubt these State-leeches that you so much idoll'd, cannot heal our distempers. These Excellentissims, whom ye ador'd and lookt on as the All-heal, the Altahest, and universal Medicine: these have been the bane, the poyson, and ruine of the Nation. A Parliament of late days being but Pandora's Box, issuing out our con∣fusions, and miseries, and woes. They are all Physicians of no value. Tis your true Lord that must be entertain'd and embraced, and he will remedy all; tis he alone that will heal the grievances of all, but those that have desir'd rather Esau's blessing to shake off the yoke.
For popular Government, let him that desires that form set it up first in his own family; there can be nothing but confusion therein, since the people understand not reason, and for authority and perswasions they dispise it; vox Populi vox Dei, was never understood of Isonomy or levelling. I think I speak no Riddles: yet I am not of that Church, whose Interest tis said desires most a King. I will not dispute that point, but I much suspect it: A Loyolist sure can never be Loyal, and they that have given them∣selves up to their conduct cannot wish cordially the Royal return. Confusions in the State is meat and drink to them, who Nero-like are well pleased to warm themselves at our ruins. Hence they de∣rive their name from Jesus, because they also came into the World not to send Peace, but the Sword; to set Kingdomes on fire, or to prolong the flames, not to extinguish and out them; whence per∣haps the foreseeing God-father christned their Founder Ignatius. Observe since so much of the Sea of Rome hath been powred in upon us, have not the Waters gone over our head, and struck it off too? what a design and destruction, and even abominable desola∣tion happened upon us? See what garboils and divisions they wrought in the State of Venice, where tis said too, that they divi∣ded the very Boys, not so much by their instructions, as their in∣struments. Think we to thrive better? Besides how can these design or work for the regal Restauration, who undoubtedly comes not in without his Clergy. That Clergy is the salt of the earth, and the throwing down this salt hath been the occasion of all our mis∣fortunes, and the reason too that the God of flies hath blown and tainted here all flesh almost with Heresies, Villanies, and Rebellion. But I have done: You have my Mite, which I hope may be as acceptable to you as Taxes: If the discourse hath any countenance of reason, look not you with a bad one upon it. I go not about to decoy you into your loss; my drift is your glory and your good, who since you have been counted their Journy-men and Hirelings, 'tis but just you should look out for the best Wages. Now to do good to give to Caesar what is his, and to do as you would be done unto; these are things by which you will gain most. Thus you may merit a Crown above, and the White Robe, which is bet∣ter far, then a Red oat. FINIS.
