o187 e91_3 99869129 155738
A LETTER OF Dangerous Consequence, From Sergeant Major Ogle, to Sir Ni∣cholas Crisp at Oxford. As it was Intercepted by Colonell Goodwin of the PARLIAMENTS Forces. Together with the Examination of the Messenger, in the Coller of whose Doublet the said Letter was found. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter and Examination be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for EDW: HUSBANDS, February 27. 1642.
A Letter from Sergeant Major Ogle to Sir Nicholas Crisp, as appears by the Examination (herewith printed) of the Messenger, in whose coller the Letter was found, who was intercepted by Co∣lonell Goodwyn; Sergeant Major Ogle likewise being examined before a Com∣mittee, confesseth the Letter to be all of his own hand, and by him sent to Sir Nicholas Crisp by the same Messenger, but affirms, that the Letter intends no∣thing else, but to desire a resolution from Sir Nicholas Crisp, touching some lands which he had offered him formerly to sell: And this is all he will yet confesse; and what appearance this has of truth, deducible from this Letter, let the Rea∣der judge.
A Letter of dangerous consequence from Sergeant Major Ogle, to Sir Nicho∣las Crisp at Oxford. Noble Sir, SInce your departure from hence, I writ you  Letter which I hope came to your hands: If I had knowne of your bosome-friends com∣ing to you, I should have sent, and imparted that which now I cannot: But since you have the conveniency and safety of Mr. Collewells coming hither, Pray let me receive a finall de∣termination, and hang no longer in suspence, whether any thing is to be done or no in that businesse we spoke. I want nothing but mo∣ney to effect it, but in case there be either a dif∣ficulty in the thing, or a dishke or dispute of me for the Actor, pray let me know; and in case therebe some reasons which I am ignorant of, to hinder what we spoke of, then M. Colwell can tell you somewhat I wished him to write to you, which upon the receit of money I shall bring along with me to you speedily. In a word Three thousand five hundred pound will serve
to effect that, which will be an extraordinary benefit and advantage, if not a finall happy conclusion to what we both desire, which mo∣ney if you will give Master Colwell order to fur∣nish me with, Ile give him that Land and Col∣lery which I spoke to you in security for the same; And speedily come to you well prepared when I shall take a full order for your satisfacti∣on: However pray let me know your positive determination, and of what account and recko∣ning (if any at all) I am there, which how bad or small soever it be, I would willingly repair by this, or some other notable vvay vvherein I might be entrusted: your candidnesse herein, I shall take for an extraordinary evidence of your friendship, vvhich till death I vvill requite by resting Your faithfull Friend to serve you, THEOPHILUS PHILOBRITANIS. THe nevves here is, that the Commons ye∣sterday carried up their Votes to the Lords, vvith reasons declaring their disassent from concurring vvith the Lords in a Cessation of
Armes and a Treaty: And that upon these rea∣sons the Commons had Voted the disbanding both Armies presently, and till that vvere done no Treaty upon the Propositions; which if his MAjESTY would assent unto, there should be a Treaty and a Cessation of Armes tovvards a disbanding. One particular circumstance I vvill acquaint you vvith in the carriage of this busi∣nesse, vvhich vvas remarkeable. After the Lords had voted a Cessation of Armes and a Treaty, the next morning they sent a Message to the Commons for a conference to acquaint them with their Votes. While the Messengers tarry∣ed for their Answer (which usually is very short, either they will; or they will send an Answer by Messengers of their owne) it was so ordered that Colonell Manwaring, Captain Har∣vey, Captain Titchburn, Captain Vnderwood, Captain Gore, and divers other Citizens, with Master Case, and Master Wodcocke and Bur∣roughs with other Ministers, came to the House of Commons, and desired to be heard, and to deliver some reasons they had in the behalfe of the City, against a cessation of Armes and a Treaty: Whereupon there was present reso∣lution to call them in: But a Debate of almost
an hour, vvhether they should be called in be∣fore the conference vvith Lords or no: Af∣ter severall Votes the House was divided, and by ten Voices carryed to call them in first, and so they had the preheminence of the Lords. When they were called in, Colonell Manwaring was their spokes-man, and tendered a paper conteyning the reasons: but they were com∣manded to withdraw, and after some debate the paper was receiv'd, and they remind thanks. You may judge by this what likelyhood there is on other end save by the sword. If it please God I come to you I shall more inlarge then I dare write. We hear his Majesty had made Sir Ralph Hopton Baron of Glasonbury, but he enjoy∣ed his honour a short space, for he and Six hundred men more of his are slain before Plunmouth. I have him that I sent to you upon the Exchange yet, and the rest you know of rea∣dy to do as I direct them. The God of Heaven direct us all aright, and settle the peace of this Church and Kingdom. Vale. Pray let me hear speedily from you.
The Examination of Henry Commins, Servant to Master Daniel Colwell, one of the searchers of the Custome-house London, taken before Colonell Good∣win and Colonell Bulstrode, the 16. of February, 1642. HE saith, that his Master went from his house in Bartholomew lane London, to Oxon, upon Friday last, with Sir Nicholas Crisps his Lady, and that Captain Ogle, dwelling over against Pallace-yard conduit West∣minster, sent by him a Letter to Sir Nicholas Crisp to Oxon: Which Letter the said Captain did, together with his Maids help sow up in the Coller of the Doublet of this Examinant, giving him a great charge to deliver the Letter carefully, and not to confesse from whom he had it: And there coming one to speak with Captain Ogle, whiles he was sowing in the Letter, he suddenly called this Examinant into his Closet, that he might not be discovered. And this inclosed Note, the Examinant said, was sent from Sir Nicholas Crisp his Servant, unto his Master. Henry Comens. FINIS.
