P2863 669.f.24[14] 99870372 163745
POOR JOHN: OR, A LENTEN DISH. BEING The Soliloquies of JOHN LAMBERT now Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON. HOw various and inconstant is the Wheel of Fortune all the world knows: And I have now found by wofull Experience. I could never perswade my self till now, but that I was born under a Regal Planet, notwithstanding the malignity of my Starrs was such, that in my Childehood I was possest with that Disease call'd the Kings evil; which was healed under God by the late King CHARLES: and how I rewarded him for his pains Who knows not? But I am not guilty alone of this abominable sin of Ingratitude, many thousands having offended in the like nature, though but few so deeply as my self; and Charles Fleetwood his gracious God-son may be plac'd in the first Rank also. I confess, my ambitions were boundless, and by reason of the fawning smiles of Fortune (whom I thought to have led by the nose like a dog in a string) my hopes were not mean. I thought my lot would have faln in as good ground as Olivers did, and was content he should King it as long as he lived, as knowing, that my turn was next: yet when I saw that he laboured to secure the Government to his son, and to settle it in his own line, I began to oppose him; which he perceiving quickly laid me aside, and for a long time I was no body; but I made a shift to start up again, and to scour off the rubbish of my former honour which had lain long a rusting, by the restauration of the Rump, and the Good Old Cause. Then I deemed my self a Protector in Esse, being in higher favour with the Rump then their snivelling Lieutenant-General Fleetwood, under whose wings I thought good to play my game a while. In short time I had a good occasion to make my self gracious in the eyes of my Rumpish Masters, and to advance my fame in the Opinion of the People, as well as Souldiery, by the foolish undertaking of Sr. George Booth, which hath rendred him infamous to Eternity; Most men concluding him wanting either in Judgment or Fidelity: what his fault was is best known to my self, but I list not now to speak of it. However I had a thousand pounds as a gratuity for that service, which was no more than a straw in my aspiring thoughts, yet I took it thankfully: Shortly after I gave my good Masters a Writ of ease, and cleans'd the house of 'em: For if I had not so served them, they would have quickly dispatched me: whereupon I set up a crew of mine own Creatures (the Committee of Safety) but they vanished, like Will of the wisp, and were blown away with one blast from the Rump: my self being first outwitted by Monk, and then forsaken by all my Souldiers, was forc'd to sneak home, and put my finger in a hole; and now I have got the Tower over my head, but e'relong I fear I shall go to Tiburn: Nevertheless in this day of my solitude, and affliction, I do cheer up my drooping Spirits, and add a little comfort to my sorrowfull minde with these and the like contemplations. I. I consider to my self the mutability of Fortune in her dispose of all transitory enjoyments, and how I may possibly be raised again after a downfall now, as well as formerly: And since the Rump had her Re-resurrection; Why may not I? II. I call to minde those many gracious promises of Dominion, Profit and Pleasure made unto me by my good Lord and best Mr. Belzebub, provided, I would continually persevere to serve him faithfully; the neglect whereof I heartily repent, as a main (if not the sole) cause of all these misfortunes fallen upon me, resolving to be doubly diligent for time to come. III. It is some comfort to me that I am not alone miserable, according to that saying, Solamen miseris, &c. For I hope if I be hang'd, Sr. Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Scot, John Hewson and others, will have so much good fellowship in them, as to hange with me. IV. I am much pleased with the exercise of my revenge on Sr. George Booth; for I did not onely put him to the run at Mid∣le-witch, but have forc't him out of his Lodging in the Tower. V. Since I have laid up all my Sacrilegious and Ʋnlawful Possessions (as we say) in Lavender, to supply my want of moneys in my Northern Expedition, it is not a little comfort to me to be maintain'd at the charge of the Common-wealth. VI. I can sleep quietly and securely here, being rid of those biting cares wherewith I was wont to be troubled by day, and my Ladies insatiable appetite at nights. VII. I Muse upon the fate of Roger Mortimer, who made his escape hence, and cros't the Thames without the help of other Oares then his own naked Armes: And who knows, but I, that resemble him so much in ambitious attempts, may tread the same steps, for the purchase of desired Liberty. VIII. The time being at hand, in which Providence hath design'd the Restauration of CHARLES STUART and his Family, it is matter of joy to me, to be cast down from the Pinacle of Honour by others, rather than to be an Object of his most Just Revenge. Lastly, It is my greatest Happiness, that whatever befals me here, and whatever Ignominious Death the Parliament may justly inflict upon me; yet my hope is to be so highly preferred in the other world, as to be placed next unto Oliver Cromwell, before Pride, Prideaux or Bradshaw, since I knew the time when I was second to none in England, but him alone. This (O mighty Lucifer) shall ever be the Humble Request and Prayer of thy most faithful, though now afflicted Servant, JOHN LAMBERT. Printed, For the Be and Edification of Afflicted Brethren.
