P3400 E1034_5 99867941 168917
Gods Working AND BRITTAINS WONDER. A SERMON CONGRATULATING The Most Happy Establishment of His Sacred MAJESTY CHARLS the II. On His THRONE. Presented to the Kings most Excellent Majtie. By a Person of Honor. By WIL. PRICE B. D. late Preacher of Covent-Garden, now to the Reformed English Church in Amsterdam. The stone which the builders refused is become the Head-stone of the Corner. Psal. 118.22. There was no King in Israel, and every man did what seemed good in his owne eyes. Judg. 17.6. Yea let him take all, Since my Lord the King is returned in peace. 2 Sam. 19.30. The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad. Psal. 126.6. London, Printed by W. Godbid for Peter Dring at the Sun in the Poultrey, next dore to the Rose Tavern. 1660.
CAROLO Secundo, nemini secundo. TO CHARLES the II. second to none. Primum laetitiae signum clamare, secundum Plaudere; vox ego sum, carmina bina manus. Triumphant joy cries, and applause demands: I am the voyce; these verses my two hands. To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTIE. May it please your Majesty, I Am so much a Christian, that I could not distrust those preci∣ous divine promises, that like filings of Gold, or dust of Dia∣monds,
are scattered in Holy writ; those soveraign cordials against fain∣ting fits of unbelief, (namely, that the patient expectation of the righ∣teous shall not perish for ever, Psal. 9.18. Prov. 10.28. and the rest:) yet I durst not hope to live to see those promises thus miraculously ac∣complished, to the amazement of all the world, and to the unspeak∣able joy of your MAJESTIES Loyal Subjects, among whom I have been ambitious to be reckoned, in the worst of times. Who would ever dis-believe that great and good God, whose words are deeds, whose promises are performances? Silence, admiration, astonishment, I confess are the best Rhetorick to expresse these ravishing providential dispen∣sations;
yet vouchsafe (Great Sir) to condescend so farre below your Royal Self, as to accept this lisping, stammering, but unfaigned congra∣tulating acclamation from a lame Mephibosheth, 2 Sam. 19.26. who wisheth he were able personally to attend our David, to present on his knee this Ave Caesar. My first thoughts designed for your MAJESTY an Art of memory, which lies ready by me, compos'd during my weakness, that the varie∣ty and novelty might divert or allay my pain, and the sad impressi∣ons, that the late Dogdays of A∣narchy and confusion in the pub∣lick wrought on me; but my second thoughts prompted to me, that an Art of Forgetfulness is now more seasonable then an Art of memo∣ry,
your Majesty being graciously pleased to offer an Act of Amnesty. And surely if any people under hea∣ven need it, we are they, though we least deserve it; So that your unmerited mercy may well be styled the kindness of God, (since men use not to shew such) as David asked after the survivors of Saul's houshold, 2 Sam. 9.3. that he might shew them the kindness of God. May your Crown, Royal Sir, that like your Saviours hath alass, too long been lined with thorns, flou∣rish on your head, and may your Scepter, like Aarons rod, bloome and blossome in Peace, Piety, and Righteousness, is, and shall be the dayly Prayer of Your Majesties most humble Subject WILLIAM PRICE.
Proverbs 24.21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King; and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruine of them both? Ezekiel 21.27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, till he come, whose right it is, and I will give it him. Micah 7.8. Rejoyce not against me, O mine enemy, though I fall, I shall rise again. Zechariah 1.15, 16. I was a little displeas'd, and they helped forward the affliction. Therefore, thus saith the Lord, I am re∣turned to Jerusalem with mercies.
Psalm 118.23. This is the Lords doing, it is marvellous in our eyes. OUr good God, knowing our collapsed na∣ture liable to be poysoned by a vain song, and an unhappy proverb, (beside many counterpoysons) hath by his gra∣cious providence, rais'd David, and So∣lomon to pen heavenly Psalms, and holy Proverbs, as antidotes against such malignity. The Psalms are like the High Priests breast plate, rich both in words and matter; pregnant with divi∣nity, morality, history, mystery. And such is the context that lies afore us, Ver. 22.23. The stone, which the builders refused, is become the head stone of the corner; This is the Lords doing, it is marvellous in our eyes. God's working, and Man's wonder, divide the Text between them: to subdivide it were to crumble it. I need no other Preface to invite attention, then the close of the Text; since we all love to view wonders. Let us first make a stand, and survey the wonder
of our Text in a short Paraphrase, and then ende∣vour to improve it in seasonable Observations, and Applications. May the Text prove as profitable, as it is seasonable. This] is the Lords doings. [This? that? Indeed what not? but [this] in an eminent sense. What [this] is, the foregoing verse informs us; The stone, which the builders refused, ver. 22. is become the head of the corner. Which words are historically mystical, and mystically historical. The History was verified in the Kingly Prophet David. The Mystery was accomplish'd in David's Son and Lord, our King, Priest, and Prophet Jesus Christ; to whom they are applied by S. Acts 4.11. Peter in his Sermon; This (saith he) is the stone, that ye builders refused. Let us briefly see how these words fit King David. History Da∣vid. He was a select, The stone. 2 Sam. 7.8. Homo qua∣dratus.  a precious, a firm stone, in Gods building; a square stone in all estates, which way so∣ever he was cast, he fell right: a stone trampled on by Sons of Belial; and he killed Goliah with a stone. Refused.Refused this stone was, as not fit to head, or bed well in the building, as architects use to speak, we have no part in David, cryed a mutinous, rebellious malecontent. This stone was hewen, 2 Sam. 20.1. and cut by homebred, and other foes, by Saul, Absalon, Achitophel, and many others, 1 Sam. 29.4. 2 Sam. 16.10. many ways; yet under all was he patient, as a stone, though not senseless, or stupid. Builders.By builders was he refused, that is, those that were esteemed, and thought themselves state-builders, though they by refusing this stone, took the next
way to demolish all; as he that but loofens a foun∣dation stone, endangers the whole fabrick. This very rejected stone David, in Gods due time, Psa. 78.70.71 which is ever the best time, became the head stone of the corner. The Head stone.The head of Gods own, and onely people; the head, whence under God, they derived civil life, sense, and motion; He being the light of their eyes the breath of their nostrils; as the Scripture speaks. 2 Sam. 5.1, 2, 3. The head is the glory; the guide of the whole body. To this headship Abigail prophecied he should arrive. 1 Sam. 15.17 Esa. 7.4. 1 Sam. 25.29, 30. All Authors style the supreme governour, head, The head stone, that covers, and protects from storms, or what ever might rot, loosen, or weaken the building. The head, and the foundation also; the greek name for K. Βασιλὲυς, imports the foundation of the People. Of the cor∣ner. The head stone of the (corner) a corner stone, uniting and strengthning the double wall of Church and State: He being custos utriusque tabulae, the kee∣per of both tables of Gods law. Psal. 115.9.10. Therefore the fifth commandement stands as the center of the Deca∣logue, Psa. 135.9.10. being as the joynt combining the duties Godward, and Manward. This is the History so remarkable in David's, the work to which God is so peculiarly intitled; striking the world with admiration The Mystery is fulfilled in Davids Son, and Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ. The Myste∣ry. The stone. Den. 2.34. Heb. 7.3.The stone, cut out without hands, prophesied of by Daniel; without hands; for as man, he had no father; as God, no mother. He is the stone, the
rock, whence all comforts flow. 1 Cor. 10.1, 4. The rock, whereon the Church is so firmly founded, that the gates, Matth. 16.18. (the power and the policy of Hell) shall not totally, or finally prevail against it. A stone laid by God himself, Esa. 28.15, 16. the Master-builder, in Sion. A li∣ving stone, 1 Pet. 2.5. and an enlivening stone. A stone whereon a Moses may rest his hands at prayer; and a Jacob, his head in the greatest distresses. Though a stone of offence to some through their own unbelief and disobedience. Refused. This stone was refused, and rejected, misused, cut, mangled, bruiz'd, broken, hewen, nail'd, hang'd, so mis-handled, that the vale of the Temple rent, the earth trembled, Zech. 3.9. Matth. 27.29. John 18.40. Psa. 53.3. 1 Pet. 2, 4.  the Sun hid himself at it. He was contemtibly cast aside, wretches cried, we will not have this man to reign over us; not him, but Barrabas: So refused he was, that a theif, a murtherer was pre∣ferred afore him. And refused by those then went for [Builders]Builders. John 7.48. & 11.49.50. by a Disciple, the High Priest, other rulers; which of the rulers value him? On a farfetch'd politick conceit of saving their nation by this feat, they utterly ruin'd it. They lopp'd of that branch, whereon they stood. They brought the guilt of that sacred invaluable blood on their own head, and their childrens, which lies heavy to this day. This is the stone, that was buried in a grave of stone: and a stone was rouled against it; Yet this stone, maugre the malice of men, and devils, Psa. 1.6. is become the head stone of the corner. Yet, yet, (that is, notwithstanding the Peoples rage, and the Grandees combination against him, and the builders spiteful rejection of him) yet (saith God) I have set him on my holy hill of Sion. ver. 6.
Head. He is become the head stone; the Head in all things to his body, the Church especially; Ephes. 1. end. She deriving from him spiritual life, sense, and motion, light, and influence. Besides he is head, and Lord of all; Col. 1.18. all is subdued under him, Men, Angels, Devils, Law, 1 Cor. 15.27. Death; his Jurisdiction is unlimited. Of the cor∣ner.Head of the Corner he is; uniting the second wall of male and female: of bond and free; of Graecian, and Barbarian, of Jew and Gentile, of dead and living.  Eph. 2.14.20, 21. Col. 3.11. And all this is said to happen in David's days, to denote the infallible certainty of Scripture pro∣mises. Indeed David and Esay, deserved the names of Evangelists, as Prophets; and their writings are Gospels, as well as Prophecies. The Lords doing. This, this] is said here to be The Lords doing, or from the Lord, as the Hebrew hath it. Supremus actus. The Lord of Lords is all action, ever doing, the father hitherto works. S. John 5.17. but in this he shewed himself an all-wise, all able artificer. Herein he manifested not onely his finger, but his hand, ver. 15. his right hand, his arm. All is from the Lord, both good, Jam. 1.17. Amos 3.6. 1 Kin. 12.24. and vindictive penal evil; even the rending of Solomons Kingdom in two; but this here was the issue not onely of his Almighty power, but also of his unspeakable mercy. Acti Egi∣mus. Isai. 10.5, 15.What ever were the instruments, they were acted by the Lord; He was the doer; they were but axes, rods, staves, pens in his hand. In our Eys. This work in the History, David and others lived to see, as in the mystery he by faith foresaw it. Wonderful. They saw it with admiration; it being indeed a
wonder; David owns it for such here, and else where and gratefully acknowledges it; 2 Sam. 7.18. He celebrates it in this song, and registers it for posterity, that it might never be buried in the grave of oblivion, but survive a lasting monument of Gods miraculous operation, and a fartherer, and quickner of our faith, hope, joy, comfort, and instruction. That we may so improve it, we shall gather these flowers, as it were, into nose∣gays, in a few observations, which I shall open, and prove generally, but apply joyntly, because I study brevity. Observations sprouting hence. Observe, That 1.  Though all good is from the Lord, yet some things are justly and rationally said by way of Emi∣nence, to be the Lords doing. Such namely, wherein more of God, and lesse of the creature appeareth, Exod. 8.19. then in the crowd of com∣mon Occurrences; so that Pharaoh, a Nebuchadnez∣zer can see, and say, oh the finger of God.Digitus Del. Dan. 2.47. & 3, 29. 1. When occurrences fall out above, or against the course of nature; as that fire shall descend from heaven; That it should rain brimstone, hell out of heaven,Gehennam de Coelo. as Salvian speaks. That a Virgin should bear a child. Esa. 7.14. That he that is the eternal word should become an infant, not able to speak a word, This is the Lords doing. Gen. 19.24. Luke 5.26. Rom. 1.16. Acts 2.41. Not to insist on Christs miracles. 2. When events puzzle, and put reason to a stand; as that a frail mans preaching shall convert souls, 3000 at a Sermon; That baptismal water, and Sa∣cramental
bread, and wine shall, nourish to eternall life: That a noyse of Rams hornes shall lay Jericho walls flat. This is the Lords doing. Josh. 6.20. Such works the Scripture calls new creations. Psal. 104.30. Jer. 32.22. 3. When matters happen beyond all humane hopes, and Expectation; Zech. 4.6. Psal. 126.2. Ezek. 37.3, 4, 5. as Judah's return from the Babylonish captivity. It was as a dream: It was pre∣figured by the enlivening of dead dry bones. Such are call'd sensible tokens that confound men. Psal. 86.17. Things above beliefe. Act. 13.41. 4. When against the stream of humane and de∣vilish designes and endevours, that is effected, that they studiously avoided: the will of God being ful∣filled by the fierce opposers of it. Thus Josephs un∣natural brethren intending to lay him low as the dust, Gen. 50.20. 1 Cor. 15.56. Heb. 2.14. 1 Joh. 3.8. unwittingly raised him to the highest pitch of honour: Satan, by hurrying Christ to death, paved a path to deaths death, and to his own greater con∣fusion. This is, and can be no other, then the Lords doing. These, and many more are Magnalia Dei, the great things of God, wherein he is pleased to make bare his arm, that is sometime covered from our eyes by the interposition of outward means. Such works wherein God may be even seen, and felt; Rom. 1.20. that extort confessions from very enemies, Acts 17.27. Psal. 64.9.72.18.109.27. that the Lord alone hath done them; they being advanced above the sphere, and reach of nature or reason. Observe, That 2.  The Lords hand appears in nothing more then
in his providential disposal of Kings, and Kingdoms. The book of Samuel, Dan. 4.32. the Kings, and Chronicles, be∣sides other historical monuments extant of the mi∣raculous turns, and changes in States, is a large com∣mentary on, and an undeniable proof of this great truth. It were too long to trace this Labyrinth or maze, Dan. 6.26. & 7.24, 25, 26, &c. in the Jewish, Assyrian, Median, Persian, Graecian, Roman, Brittish Monarchies. God is the King of Kings; His Son is a King; Kings are his Vicegerents on earth: Prov. 8.23. By him Kings reign; Them he is pleased to make master-wheel in religion and policy; and to order that his mercy or justice, should signally appear towards nations through them. Observe 3.  That God is much seen in righting the opprest, and raising the deprest. He sets refused stones at the head of the building. That is indeed his proper work, his master-piece, to step in, cúm dignus vin∣dice nodus; when a knot is worth untying. Because of the opprest, now will I rise, saith the Lord. Man's extremity is his opportunity. Psal. 12.5. Out of the mouths even of Babes and Sucklings will he create strength, because of the enemy, Psal. 8.2. and avenger. He is a refuge for the opprest. Psal. 9. v. 9.12.13.18. When he makes inquisition for blood, he forgets not the cry of the humble. He lifts us from the gates of death. He is known by his judgements. The poor sufferer shall not always be forgotten. Psa. 10.14, 18. Thou beholdest mischief and spite, to re∣quite it. Thou judgest the fatherless, and the op∣prest, that the man of the earth may no more op∣press.
The Psalms are full of such passages. Holy Scripture, and all Story largely exemplifies this com∣fortable truth. Observe 4. The lower just men are brought by men, the higher God exalts them. As a Ball, Percusse surgo. the harder cast to the earth, the higher it rebounds. David was cast aside as unfit for any place in the building; and God mounts him to the highest place. The lower the foundation, the higher the fabrick, ever. God brought Joseph from the bottome of a pit to be se∣cond man in Egypt. Psal. 105.17, 18, 21. Phil. 2.7, 8, 9. 1 Sam. 2.8, 9. Haud faci∣le emer∣gunt. Because Jesus Christ was deba∣sed to the lowest, therefore God exalted him to the highest; giving him a name above every name. It is God-like to do thus; for man uses to tread down the hedge, where it is lowest; to add misery to affli∣ction; to wound the wounded; to push at the de∣clining. Observe 5. Though all Gods works are remarkable, yet some are more stupendiously miraculous then others. He is seen, and with wonder in the Ant and Fly, but with amazement in the Behemoth, and Leviathan. Job 40.15. & 41.1, 2. There are miranda and miracula; wonders, and mi∣racles. Satan, and his slaves, (though he seem some∣times to be commanded by them, the more to infa∣tuate them) may work wonders, through Gods per∣mission, but those are but Legerdemain, 1 Thes. 2.9. juggling tricks compared with miracles, called by S. Paul, lying wonders. The Devil is Gods Ape, and Pharaohs
Magicians Moses his Apes in some strange things, . Nazian. but they were but juglers; and confined and out∣done by Moses in the miracle of lice. Exod. 8.18. Every wretch can refuse a stone, but to make it the head of the corner, is the Lords doing. Observe 6.  True Davids, men after Gods own heart cu∣riously observe, gratefully own, and duly admire Gods doings, and adore him in them. They cry, as if they would have heaven and earth eccho them, this is the Lords doing. The works of the Lord are great, sought out by all them, who have pleasure in them. Psal. 111.2. Psal. 118.1. to 5.14, 15.21, &c. 27, 28, 29. Read Psal. 18. & 104. & 105. & 106. & 136. & 143. He that with an observing eye peruseth this golden book of Psalms, may find now studiously and exactly the Psalmist surveys Gods great and gracious dispensations towards him, and others: how he varies his style; how he with orient colours ce∣lebrates them to the height. He summons all ranks of creatures, to make the Musick full. He cites na∣ture and art to assist. Sometimes he sits down by this banckless and bottomless sea, and admires, As Psal. 139.17, 18. O how great and numberless, are thy thoughts to me-ward! Psal. 116.12 they nonplus Arithmetick. What shall I render to the Lord? The like temper we find in other Saints, as Moses, Hannah, Asaph, Simeon, Zachary, and the blessed Virgin, in their hea∣venly compositions, in their songs memoriz'd in Holy Scripture. But I detain my self and others too long from the Application. Application.
1.  Let us hence see the vast difference between a good God, and evil men. They refuse, he rayses. They trample on those as the refuse, and off-scou∣ring of the world, (as S. Paul speaks) those whom God exalts. They count those, Heb. 11.38. as not worthy to live in the world, of whom the world is not worthy. 2. It followes by the rule of contraries, that if it be a divine work to right the wrong'd, and to set up a King, it is a devilish work to do wrong, and to re∣ject, and destroy a King. It is true, that God being pro∣voked not oftner by Kings sins then by the Peoples, (if rheumes destill from the head, it is commonly, because the Stomack vapour'd them upward) God, 2 Sam. 24.1. I say distresses Kings; yet this is his strange work; but to restore them is his genuine work, Isai. 11.4. Suum alie∣num. wherein he delights, and glories. Misericors de suo, savus de no∣stro, saith Tertullian. His mercy is innate, issuing out of himself naturally, but severity he borrows of us; as the Bee makes hony naturally, and stings onely, when provoked. I have found (saith God exulting, as if he had found a treasure) I have found David my servant, and annointed him; none shall harm him. God rayses readily, Hag. 2.22, 23. debases as it were with regret. 3. How unlike are they to David, who Either consider not the operation of Gods hands, or when his hand is lifted up will not see it; Isai. 5.12. so taken up they are with worldly vanities. Or undervalue Gods works, as if they were vul∣gar and ordinary. Some will admire nothing, Nil admirari prope res unica.Juven. If it be taken ill to despise the day of small Zach. 4.10.
things; it is unsufferable to slight the day of great things. Or who Sacrilegiously ascribe Occurrences, Either to blind fortune, (which S. Austin repented that he had named so oft.) Or to nature, Natura na∣turans, na∣turata. which is but Gods handmaid. Or to reason, which is but a ray, or beam of his. Or to fate, as if God were limited, or tyed. Or to second causes, to the wit, policy, counsels power of men. Or to their own prudence, Hab. 1.15, 16. art, or industry; called sacrificing to our own nets. Or who forget, with Israel, Gods marvellous works; Psa. 78.11.12. writing mercies in Sand or water. Such are, (which is the worst that can be said of men) ungrateful.Si ingra∣tum dixe∣ris omnia dixeris Sen. Mal. 2.2. Besides they dam up all sluces and inlets of mercy towards themselves. Ingratitude is is a drying, scorching wind; that blasts all enjoyments, and curses blessings, and brings them to a dead low ebb. God will not sow in such barren, thorny, unthankful grounds. O let us write after a better copy; let us learn of King David. To study, and curiously to survey the Lords doings, together with all the circumstances of per∣sons, time, place, manner, measure. To admire, and value them at their due rate, and proportion. To see, and adore his divine hand in all; that wheel moving in wheels of all affairs; Ezek. 1.16. a wheel in a wheel. To trumpet forth his praises, and celebrate his re∣verend name, and divine perfections.
It is true, that the Lord is infinitely above all praises. All Libanon cannot yield wood enough, nor are the cattel on a thousand hills sufficient for one sacrifice worthy him; yet since this is an angelical, and evangelical, and all the tribute that we poor wretches can return; Psal. 50.23. and such as God is plea∣sed to accept, if tendred in his Sons name, from a humble, upright soul, O let us not withhold this his due from him. We have seen, O Lord, Psal. 68.24. thy goings in thy San∣ctuary. We may dayly see the prints, and footsteps of his miraculous providence; and if ever, this day. Let us eccho David, this is the Lords doing, it is marvellous in our eyes; it dazles us; this is the day that the Lord hath made, and stamped for his own. vers. 24. Let us cry, grace, grace unto it; Zech. 4.7.8. Grace is all the te∣nure we hold by. Let gratitude ascend, that grace may still descend. Ascendat gratia, ut descendat gratia. This is like pouring water into a pump, that brings up more. But I cannot stand now to let my discourse loose, to launch into this Sea of thankfulness, All trea∣tises are full of it, onely our hearts and lives, alass, are too too empty of it. The hardest wall gratefully reflects back the Sunbeams; Eccles. 1.8. The eccho returns us our voyce again; The rivers pay tribute to the Sea; The most stubborn ground makes some return to the sower; Onely man is stupidly ungrateful, a sin to be bewail'd with tears of blood. But I must not dwell on generals. Particular application. My discourse hastens to the due celebration of the Lords marvellous acting in the fulfilling of this Text in our eys and ears this day.
Triumphant arches, Obelisks, Pyramids, are too mean expressions of this unparallel'd mercy to Great Brittain. Were an Angel to undertake the task of the de∣ciphering to the height this happy change, perhaps he would call for a supply of tongues. The pretious stone, our Gracious Soveraign, whom they, that would have been called builders of Church and Common-wealth, Haba. 2.12. refused, disdained, shut out — But I will not stain our joy with that sad relation. Let the guilty be sure that their sin will find them out. This stone is now become by actual fruition, as he was afore by undoubted right, the head stone of the corner, the supreme Head under Christ Jesus of the three corners of England, Scotland, and Ireland. All Sexes, Ages, qualities, embrace and welcome him with the highest joy, and humblest civil venera∣tion. All true-hearted English longed to see this day long; but the Sons of Zerviah were too mighty. This is the Lords doing, if ever work was, to stir up a precious remnant of worthy Patriots, to joyn as own man to cast of that unsufferable yoke of con∣fused Anarchy that we groaned under; and to re∣call the best of governments, Monarchy, and the best of Monarchs to his unquestionable right. That Lord of Lords, the heart-maker, and heart∣mover touched the hearts of all ranks to wish, to call for, and to endevour his Majesties restauration, and to clip the wings of those bastard English, and other Apocryphal Christians, that being levend for the most part with unsound Principles in religion, (to
say nothing of their malice implacable, and insatia∣ble thirst after power and possessions, usurped, and invaded by illegal shifts, and force) banded together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, against the King, and Kingly Government; As Jeroboam, and his apostate crew, fell at once from their God, and King. The Lord, (for ever magnified be his name) hath infatuated those Matchivillian Achitophels, and broken the snare that some unworthy Divines, Lawyers, Statists had hypocritically woven, to hold us entangled in a perpetual bondage. This is the Lords doing; let him have all the glory though those, whom he honoured to be instrumen∣tal to him in this Godlike work, merit from us ho∣nour, and lasting love. Now the blessing of him, who dwelt in the bush, and kept our burning bush from utter consuming, dwell on them and theirs, and recompence their reli∣gious, loyal endevours, manifold into their bosomes. But yet as the wisemen of the East, Matth. 2. though they gladly used the guidance of the star, yet they reserved their gold, and worship for the babe Jesus; so let us so reverence those worthies, as to adore the Lord who hath wrought this for us. It is a blessing to live to see this day; and it is marvellous in our eyes. Pity it should be sullied by such a Pen as mine, it deserving a quil plucked from an Angels wing. My admiration obstructs my expression. This serves but to awake better Pens to celebrate it. I can but with those in my Text, stand and admire.
And is it not admirable, that so sinful a nation should, even in a moment, when all hopes were well nigh dead, and buried, recover their King, their peace, their happiness, and that without effusion of blood? A bone is soon broken, but not soon set again. One Erostratus could fire, and destroy the Tem∣ple of Ephesus, that many ages could not rebuild; But we who have made made a hard shift to undo our selves in many years, are miraculously restored in the twinckling of an eye.Momento turbinis Par. What story can parallel ours? All Rhetorick is at a stand that would de∣scribe it. The tongue of men and Angels will find it a task to characterize it. No forreign aid invited, or accepted by his Ma∣jesty to imbroil us in a new war. God will not seem to be beholding to Kings or States, and, which adds to the wonder, when they that do wrong never for∣get; he who hath suffered it, is ready to forgive, and forget all. Let his Majesty, and his Dominions excuse this expression, I think it is an exaltation of his, and our joy and happiness, that we have some years suffered an eclipse. Never was King so passionately desired, or so welcome; as showers to the mowen grass, or chap∣ped ground. After a dead low ebb follow the highest spring tides. Spring is doubly welcome after a long hard winter. In northern climates some worship the returning Sun. That rain that makes flowers droop and hang their heads, when Sunbeams come, increa∣ses their vernancy, colour, and sent. Yet let not our admiration stupifie us, but raise us
to the highest pitch of love to our God, of faith in him for the future; (experience breeds hope,) Psal. 116.1. 2 Cor. 1 10. Rom. 5.4. of cor∣dial, oral, real gratitude to him, who hath done for us above what we could ask, or think; marvellous mercy should beget marvellous returns. Our zeal now for God, and his truth; our loyalty toward our dear and dread Soveraign, our confidence in our gracious never failing God, our piety, our charity, our studiousness of publick and christ an u∣nity and peace, our love of right and equity should be now more then ordinary; that they that admire at our state, may be also amazed at our admirable reformation, and glorifie God for us. Ezra 9.13, 14. After thou hast crown'd us, (O Lord) with such a deliverance as this, should we again return to our old Sins? To our images, or imaginations, to hypocrisie, to for∣mality, to lukewarmness, to carnal security, to besti∣al excess, to brutish lusts, to self-confidence, Englands sins. to neglect or despising of Gods ordinances and his ministers, to profanation of his name and his day, to discords, and heart-burning, to intestine mutinies, to eedless uncharitable jealousies and censures, to turn∣ing justice into wormwood by illegal judgments and proceedings, or into vineger by unnecessary delays? God forbid, If a bone be broken, it may be so set, hat it may prove stronger then it was, Rom. 12.1. but beware a second breaking. I beseech my Countrymen, by he mercies of God, that we may henceforth offer our selves a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable in a easonable service of him. And it is but reason. O et us not turn grace into wantonness. Let us not fight against God with his own weapons,
peace and plenty. We owe our selves to God afore by many obligations, he lays now a new tie upon us. To repay evil with evil, is carnal, to repay good with good, is humane, to repay evil with good, is divine; to repay good with evil is devilish. Happy we, if we improve this day of grace; but the most unhap∣py nation under the sun, if we neglect, or abuse so great salvation. Let us now onely contend to outgo each other in a holy thankfulness, and a religi∣ous conversation. Psal. 145.1.2, 3, 4, 7. Let us extol our God and bless his name for ever; Let us dayly praise him, and de∣clare his mighty acts from generation to generation; Psal. 147.2 Psal. 48.14. let us abundantly utter the memory of his goodness, and sing of his righteousness. It is pleasant and comely to praise him, Ephes. 20.21. who builds up Jerusalem, and gathers together the the outcoasts of Israel. Let us praise him in the heights, who exalts the horn of his people. Now unto him, who is able to do, (and hath done) exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, to him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end. Amen. Le cose di ciel sol colui vede, Chi serra gl' occhi, e crede. The works of heaven he best descries, Who doth believe, and shuts his eyes. FINIS.
