P3349 E738_18 99863250 115440
TYRANTS AND PROTECTORS Set forth In their Colours. OR, THE Difference between Good and Bad MAGISTRATES; In several Characters, Instances and Ex∣amples of both. PROV. 28. 15.As a roaring Lion and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the poor people. Chap. 16. 12.It is an abomination to Kings to commit wicked∣ness, for the Throne is established by Righteousness. By J. P. London, Printed for H. Cripps and L. Lloyd, and are to be sold at their shop in Popes-head Alley. 1654.
To the READER. Reader, A Tyrants Test, and a Protectors Pour∣traiture, are worthy thy contemplation in these froward times; in the one thou mayest read what thy condition had been through Gods most righteous se∣verity: had he not graciously inter∣posed in the other what thy condition is, and mayst ex∣pect to be through his meer mercy so interposing. Ty∣ranny makes Earth a hell, and a Tyrant is a Devil incarnate. Just Government makes Heaven on earth, and good Princes, Gods in the likeness of men. No
Government is hell broke loose, where all would rule, and none be ruled; every mans lust would be e∣very mans law; his wants measured by his will, and his deserts by his desires, which would render men Fu∣ries in flesh; and daily tormentors to themselves and others, and therefore any Government is better then none, Tyranny then Anarchy, but just Government banisheth the wicked from a Nation, (as it did the evil Angels out of Heaven) making the remaining Inhabitants to shout for joy; Here thou shalt find a Tyrant tryed, and a Protector pourtraitur'd, by plain Characters, brief instances, and examples of both, (which truly considered with our own concernments in both respects) would muzzle the mouths of our mutter∣ing murmurours, and render us more sensible of our present happinesse, and thankful for it; thou shalt not here find a censorious Condemnation of the long and short Parliaments, nor a flattering congratulati∣on of all publick transactions since their date; for although these be ad nos in respect of their events, yet are they supra nos in respect of our censures, this is my principle, this is my prayer, that where∣in men have been wise, and done worthily for their Countreys Liberties, and the Saints Interest, God would remember it, and never forget it; and that wherein they have been weak, and failed in their duty, being but flesh and blood, and men at best, though the best of men, God would forget it, & never remem∣ber it; the Demonstration of Tyranny, the Commendation of Magistracy, the characterizing of good and bad Magi∣strates, in their principles and practises, with the effects thereof to themselves, and their people, was the designe of
my heart, had the fact answered the fancy, and the pro∣duct the project. Reader, If thou beest a Son of Si∣on, and a Citizen of Jerusalem, which is from a∣bove, the peace that is within thy gates, and the pro∣sperity that is within thy palaces, must needs render thee sensible of thy felicity by thy freedom from ty∣ranny, and fruition of liberty by our present Go∣vernment, thankful for it, and fruitful under it, ex∣cept like Jessurun thou art waxen fat, and kickest up the heel, hast turned thy grace into wantonness, and thy table be made a snare unto thee; if thou beest one of them that have thus converted their fulness into folly, and their liberty into licentiousness, murmuring that Moses and Aaron (I mean) thy quondam pre∣servers are thy present Protectors, and hast forgotten the days of old, and the years of many generations, who hath sown that crop in tears, yea in blood, which thou now reapest in joy, if that liberty will not satisfie, the like whereof is not in all the world, that liberty the like whereof the generations that are past did never un∣derstand; that liberty, a greater then which thou knowest not how to desire (except it be to have power to ty∣rannize it over thy brethren dissenting from thee, as precious in the eyes of the Lord as thy self, and it may be more in the truth then thy self) not a Son of Belial suffered to molest thee, nor a dog to move his tongue against thee, If thou canst not in this ful∣ness sit down with content, who will pity thee if thou risest up, and fall? If thou wilt read and consider the difference between good and bad Magistrates, thou mayest see the misery which thy Fore-fathers felt, and our selves but lately feared under the one, and thy
present felicity, which our fore-fathers desired, and we now enjoy under the other, the due and spiritual effects of which vision upon all our hearts, through the Grace of our God in Jesus Christ, is the fer∣vent Prayer of Thy Friend, and Servant, J. P. ERRATA. Page 31. l. 32. for spoil you, read spoil him. p. 11. l. 34. for vio∣lendum, r. violandum. p. 12. l. 13. r. profuseness. p. 15. l. 32. for Asses r. Lasses. These, besides some others, which I pray thee correct with thy Pen.
A Tyrant, OR Homo Homini Demon. 1. TYranny is a Complication of Iniquity; whereby men (being Gods in Power) become Devils in practise, to terrifie and torture all that withstand them in their devilish dealings. A Tyrant is a Devil in heart, a Man in shape, a Lyon in power, a Bear in practise, affrighting his People with his rage, and roaring and tearing them limb-meal with his teeth and aons. The tendr merces of Tyrants are cruel: the Scripture calls them, roaring Lyon, evening Woles, that gnaw not the bones till the morning, Zeph. 3. 3. not satisfied so long as any thing is left, dealing by the people as the cruel Spaniards do by the In∣dians, of whom it is storied, that they shew them favour when they do not for their pleasure whip their nak bodies with oards, and dayly drop them with the at of uning acon: They cause the just to perish, and the wicked o flush quffig the tears of the oppressed, making mlody with their misry and musick with their signs. The oppressed Romans complaind to
Pompey, Nostra miseria tu es magnus, Thou ar become great by our miseries: like those Miscreants in Micah 3. 3. they at the flesh, and fly the skin, break the bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot: Like those American Canibals, who when they take a prisoner, feed upon him alive and by degrees, cutting off from his body now a meal and then a meal, which they roast be∣fore his eyes, fearing up the wounds with a firebrand to stanch the blood, to the unutterable aggravation of his horror and tor∣ment: Such a Lyon ampant was Nero, 2 Tim. 4 17. I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lyon; and the rest of those Monsters of mankind, the bloody Tyrants, Roms Emperors, in the primitive Persecutions; and their Romish Successors, the same in cruelty, though not in profession, extring complaints against them m the people of God in the voyce of the Prophet Jeremiah personating Sion, Jer. 51. 34. Nebuchadnzzar King of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a Dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath cast me out. It is said, that the Roman Tyrants in the first Persecutions did de∣stroy twenty seven millions of people, and that with such cruelties as were never heard of before. One mentions a cruel Tyrant, who to get monies of his miserable Subjects, used to send for them first to the Court (as Charls ultimus Angliae did use to send for the Citizens of London and others that refused to pay Ship monies, &c.) and if they did deny to pay according to his pleasure, he would first knock out one of their teth, and then another, until they did yield to pay the same; as Charls aforesaid by himself or Agnts did send persons that would not pay his ille∣gal and unjust demands to New-gate. 2. A Tyrants Regiment is without Righteousnes; he lives by Robbery with Authority, making his Will his Warrant, and his Lust his Law: He is not a Magistrate, but a Malefactor; not a Preserver, but a Persecutor of Law and Equity. Righteousness is a raiy in the Court of Tyrants (except un∣concerned in their own interest,) where golden Angels (especi∣ally if their name be Legion) are their sacred Oracles, from whose
mouth they receive, and so give sentence accordingly, be it right or wrong, to the wresting of Judgment: the Bribe prospereth which way soever it turneth; making even wise men mad by their unrighteous sentence: Their right hand is full of bribes, Psal. 26. 10. Solomon saith, such person trouble their own houses, Prov. 15. 27. fire their nests while they think to feather them: Fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery, Job 15. 34. It was an Oath taken by the very Heathen Judges, Audiam accu∣satorem & reum sine affctibus & personarum respectione, I will hear the Plaintiff and Difendant with an equal mind without affction or respect of persons. It is corded, that Olanes sat upon the fleyd skin of his father Slanes, naled by Chambises on the Tribunal. There are more thn whispers of very sad stories of the bribery and baseness of our lae English Court and the greatest therein, taking mony on both sides, and doing Justce on neither side; but, as I said before, ie consumes the tabernacles of bribery: winess the woful desolations of that wretched Fami∣ly; the Husband hunted out of the world by the hand of Justice, and driven from light to darkness, the Wife banished from the Land of her pleasures, the Children in their several dispersions in several places unwelcome to all, being a burthen to all. The Word of the Lord is tryed: The house of the wicked shall be over∣thrown, Prov. 14 11. Brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation, Job 18. 15. 3. He carries death at his tongues end, the peoples welfare is at his mer pleasure, where his word is there is power, and be his doings right or wrong who dares say unto him, What dost thou? Hi heart is hard, his hands are heavy, and wo be to him tha eels their stroke. He hath long arms, and can strike at a distance; he wants not a heart to conceive, a head to conive, nor hands to execute his bloody Commands: It is said, that Methridates with one Let∣ter did slay fourscore thousand Citizens of Rome; none must cross them in their devilish cruelty, except he will take a Bear by the tooth, or a Lyon by the beard. I dare not dispute, said a Phi∣losopher to Adrian the Emperor, with him that hath thirty Le∣gions
at his command, neque in eum scribere qui potest proscri∣bere nor write against him that can easily undo me: Against his word there must be no rising up, Prov 30. 31. They will ride without reins, until unhors'd with Haman, and their honour of all becomes the hatred and scorn of all: His wrath is as a roar∣ing Lyon, Prov. 19. 12. amazing al that are about them: as a late King of England, who (though he had more of the nature of a Fox then a Lon, yet) would make h Courtiers tremble with his sparkling countenance, fierce, fiery, furious and phenzy∣like cursing and swearing▪ Nebuchadnzzars rage against those three Worthies in Daniel, was hoter then his Oven (for he had destroyed them in his heart, when his Oven could not hurt them) for refusing to obey his idolatrous Commands: and Herod by the word of his mouh hath bloody Executioners to murther poor innocent childen in a barbarous manner. Now cursed be the anger of yrants, for it is fierce; and their wrath, for it is cruel; by means whereof they live undesired, they dye unla∣mented, as Nerva, Valentinian; yea their ruine is the rejoycing of the people, as was that of Nero. Cum mors crudelem rapuisst saeva Neronem Credibile est mulos Romam agitasse jocos. When the wicked perish, the City shouts for joy, Prov. 11. 11. Absolute Power tickes Tyrants; to destroy with a word, a nod, this is their glory. Caesar told Metllus, he could as easily destroy him as bid it to be done: And Caligula, speaking to his Con∣suls, I laugh (said he) to think that I can kill you with a nod of my head, and that this fair throat of my Wives shall be presently cut if I but speak the word▪ To have power to crucifie and power to save was Pilates pleasure and delight. 4. He makes his people tremble before him; he kills and saves, puts down and sets up in the haughtiness of his heart and pride of his power, persons and principles at his meer discretion. It is said of Nebuchadnezzar, that having a Kingdom, Ma∣jesty, glory and honour, in so much that all people, Nations and Languages feared and trembled before him, his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, that whom he would he slew,
and whom he would he kept alive, and whom he would he set up, and whom he would he put down: You may judg of their disposition by his own, and of his by his cruel decree against Da∣niel, who did him no wrong; like King like Courtiers, like Prince like Priest; for whom will they advance but either those that are their likes, or whom they hope to make their likes? When Princes are roaring Lions, Zeph. 3. 3. they that are advanced Judges are evening Wolves, vers. 3. The Prophets are light and treacherous, and the Priests do violence to the Law, vers. 4. What a cursed crew is here? He doth not scatter, but gather the wicked about him, for they love their image; Regis ad exem∣plum, &c. Hence it is that Kings Courts in Cities and Countries as they remove from place to place, are little other ways then a moving Hell on Earth, where the Elect of Satan, the most curs∣ing, swearing, blaspheming, lascivious, proud, wanton, effeminate, base and beastly persons, are gathered together, from all the Na∣tion, people and families of the whole Country, infecting all places where ever they come, rendring them (as it were) the very suburbs of Hell: Hence it was that where the Prince and the Prophet (Anglicè) the Kings and Bishops. Civil and Ecclesiastical Ty∣rants had their Seats and their Seas, the Cities, Towns, Countries were the most debauch'd parts of the whole Nation. 5. He will rule all, and be ruled by none; he throws away the bonds of Nature, Reason and Religion, and acts by his pride, pleasure and passion. No, not by God, Nature, Reason, Law: Exod. 5. 2. Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voyce, and let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go▪ Pride compasseth them about like a chain, violence covereth them as a garment, Psal. 73 6. Taking pleasure in their pride and cruelty, until their pride bring them low, Prov. 29. 23. Their greatness and gallantry makes them swell and look loftily: Is not this great Babel that I have built for the house of my Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honour of my Majesty? said proud Nebuchadnezzar: but God pluckt down his plumes, and
stain'd all his glory, and sent him to school amongst wilde beasts, that he might learn better manners then to vye it thus with the great God of Heaven & Earth. Sea the Rign and Ruine, the pride and punishment of Tyrus, Eze. 28. 27. because his heart was liftd up, he said, I am a God; but God threatened to darken his brgh∣ness, to shame his glory, and to bring him to the pit. I might in∣stance likewise in Herod, who glittering in his shining garb (as Josephus hath it) assuming the honour of God, was ungodded, yea unman'd by the basest of vermin. The time would fail to speak to Bnadad Rabshecha, Zenacherib. Antiochus, Nicanor, of Alexander the Great, of Nero, of Bajazet the great Turkish Emperor, with many others, whose pride, insolency and haughti∣ness brought the wheel o Gods wrath so exemplalry upon them, that they are made (some in sacred, and others in other Histories) perpetual monuments of Gods most fearful indignation; amongst whom may we not bring the late King of England of bleeding memory, whose stubbornness, resoluteness and unruleableness by Parliaments, Councels, or the wisest of his people, brought him to ruine, because they would not suffer him to command like a God without contradiction? He acted so like a Devil, murthr∣ing and massacring his people with fire and sword, until the wrath of the Lord broke out upon him, like a Lion from the thickes, devouring him by the hands of his own people, to the hrror and amazement of all the Princes round about: his Will was his Rea∣son, and his Reason his Will, and both his downfall. 6. His Commonwealth is a common woe, where his por Subjects as in a great Bridewell receive their work and their wages, their labour and their lashes, their stripes and stipends, as his meer discretion, and the will of his Beadles. Where a Tyrant rules, the Estates, Lives and Liberties of the People are not theirs, but his; not at theirs, but at his commands. Cato calls them, Fures publicos, pblqe Tieves; another, Latrones cum privilegio, Rbbs by authority; the very Scabs of a Nation: Isai. 5. 7. He looked for Judgment, but behold Op∣pression (or a Scab,) for Righteousness, but behold a Cry: Like that of the poor Subjects of Phalaris, whose delight it was to
see and hear their tortures and screeches: as John Maria Duke of Millane, who took pleasure to throw his people to be torn in pieces by fierce Mastives. With the Spaniard it is sin to enquire into Religion, and punishable by a perpetual cruel Inquisition: With the French it is crime enough in the poor Husbandman to wear good clothes of his own getting, eat good meat of his own breeding; it is meat for his Master and his Attendants, too good for him. The great Turk hath his Bow▪strings to strangle his Subjcts at their pleasure, whose commands must be obeyed, though they be to require whom he pleaseth to throw them∣selves headlong, and break them into pieces down steep Rocks and Clifts, lest a worse thing (if worse may be) should befall them. 7. In stead of punishing offences he arms Offenders, whereby he becomes the greatest Traytor, Murtherer and Thief, viola∣ting the greatest Trusts of the Liberties, Lives and Livelyhoods of the People. As God hath his good Angels to do his Will, viz. secure and defend, protect and preserve his people; and the Devil his evil Angels for contrary service: even so Tyrants, which are Satans first-born, have their Angels or Messengers, viz. whole Troops, Regiments, and Armies, to execute their cursed Commands: as Herod had his armed men sent out to destroy poor Innocents; all Histories recording the cruelty of Tyrants, mention their nu∣merous and armed Agents, their swift Mssengers and Executi∣oners of fury, who are commonly the scum, filth and froth of the Nation: hence it was, that when the late King set up his Stan∣dard against his Parliament and People, the vilest, basest, and worst of the Nation did flow in unto him, whereof God made a great Sacrifice unto his Justice and Indignation by their utter ruine and destruction. 8. He eats up the people like bread, and drinks their blood like sweet wine, commanding all as if he made all, though he mars all, making his Creators his creatures, his Makers his meat, his Lords his Loons.
All men naturally are born free, made at first to command, and not to obey; and so lived, until from the Spring of Adams trans∣gression they fell among themselves to do violence and wrong; and foreseeing that such courses must needs tend to common de∣struction, they agreed by common consent to bind each other from mutual injury; and because a mutual faith was not suffi∣cient unto mutual peace, therefore they ordained Authority by mutual consent, and betrusted some therewith to restrain by force and punishment the violation of common right, which Trustees were not so made to b their Lords and Masters, but Dpuies and Commissioners to execute that Justice, which else every man by the bnd of Nature and Covenant must have executed for himself and for another: and why any man should have lordship or authority over others but for this common end, is not ima∣ginable: Rulers were made by the people, not the people by them; they were made for the people, not the people for them; they are each particular mans Lord by their own consent for each mans peace, but they are servants to the whole for the good of all; no mans bound to the Ruler in any matter of common pre∣judice, but he i bound to them all in common preservation; the whole owe not their lives to any though never o great on Earth, the greatest oweth his lie to the whole, and is made great by God and man for service, and not for Lordship sake: whn such Trustees turn Tyrants, what are thy but th greaest Traytors? Is not Treason the betraying of just Trust? the greater the Tust, the greater the Treason, the worse the Taytor: What greater Trust then that of Governmen? which being once vounrly and plenarily betrayed, the people are ipso facto dischagd from their allgeance: The affimation, that the whol peope in one body is inferior to on single man who ever he be▪ is high Treaon against the Dignity of Mankind. It was the saying of a Heathn Kng, I rule not my people by Tyranny as if they were Barba∣rians, but am my self liable if I do unjustly to suffer justly: And Trajan the Emperor, giving a naked sword to one whom he made General of his Praetorian Forces, said, Take this drawn sword, to use for me, if I raign well; if not, to use it against me: But a Tyrant, what is he but carnivorum animal, a ravenous crea∣ture, a devourer of the people?
9. He makes no more conscience of killing men, then Moles, of burning their Houses, then Wasps nests, of destroying whole Families, then Litters of Rots. As Methridates did slay fourscore thousand Citizens of Rome: what need we instance the large volumes of cruel Tyrants? of their heading, hanging, burning, frying, roasting, scalding, wracking, cut∣ing, choppng, flaying, their poor innocent subjects at their pleasure, making pastime with their pains, & sports with their spoils; wit∣ness also he rapes, robberies, murthers, burning and destroying of so many thousand persons, Cities, Towns, and Families by the late Tyrant in England, Scotland, and Ireland, in his late bloody Wars, and Massacres, raised for the utter ruine of all those that in the least withstood his tyrannical principles, and usurpations. 10. He holds himself accountable to none, but God alone, though he believes no more God in the Heavens, then man in the moon, pretending most to that which his Soul most abhors, Religion and Righteousness, the Glory of God, and the good of the people, are most in his mouth, when his heart loaths them, and his conscience serves him to say, and unsay, to swear, and forswear, advance, and abase principles and persons, to satisfie his lusts. Tyrants know no God but themselves; Who is the Lord? said Pharaoh: Wo can deliver out of my hands? said Nebu∣chadnezzar. Alexander the Great commanded himself to be held a God, and Apelles pictured him with a thunder-bolt, Lyp∣sius with this posie, Jupiter asserui terram mihi; tu assere coelum, Let Jove take Heaven, so the Earth be min. With which pictures Alexander was so delighted, that he com∣manded that none should take his pictures, but Lypsius and Apelles; Caligula braved his god Jupiter, and threatned him, though at every clap of thunder, or flash of lightning, he would run hastily and hide himself under his bed like a wrigling worm. Tullius Hostilius said, That Religion did but ffeminate mens
minds, and unfit them for noble imployments, but one witnes∣eth that even this Roman King fained to himself two new gods, viz. Pavorem, & Pallorem, whom he carried about with him in hs own bosom, such wretches not fearing him that made all things, are sometimes affrighted with nothing; As Ahaz that trembled at the shaking of a leaf, and Manasseh who hid his head among thorns; and thence was taken and bound in setters, 2 Chron. 33. 11. A Tyrant wants not Parasites that say to him as one said to the Pope, Tu meritò in terris diceris esse Deus. Thou well deservest here to be stiled a god. How did the peopls-blow Herod with their flatteries? cry∣ing him up for a god, and God makes those worms to devour him; the voice of a Tyrants heart is like that of Ninive, I am and there is none besides me; or as Babylon, I will ascend unto Heaven, and set my Nest above the Stars. My rof receives me not, 'tis ayr I tread, At every step I feel my advanc'd head Knock out a Star in Heaven, —said Sejanus. Attilas King of Hunnes arrogantly vaunted that the Stars fell before him, that the Earth trembled at his presence: Caligula by certain Engines thundred and lightned as another Jupiter, I will ascn above the height of the clouds, I will be like the Most High, said the King of Babel: Cyrus caused this to be writ over his Sepulchre, I could do all things. But why then did he not pre∣serve himself from death? Zerxes was angry with the Mountains, Winds, Rivers, the Elements, if any of them crost him, as if they were men under his pay: At Hellespont he caused two millions of men to be wd over into Greece, where a suddain Tempest battering and bating his Boat, he caused the Sea to be stnck with three hundred stripes, and cst a pair of setters into it, to make it know to whom it was subject. I have heard of a story of an English King, or rather a King of England, of very late dayes, (a great Hunter, that was his worthy Character) who being at Newmarket for his pleasure sake, & hindered in his sport by a long
rain for many days together, with very little or no fair weather, began at last to be so really fretted thereat, that he was heard to say, That no King in the world was so little beholding to God Almighty as he, in that he should wait a whole month together for a day of fair weather for his recreation, and could not pro∣cure it, or words to the like wicked purpose, that one day fall∣ing fair, great joy was at Court, all his Troop of Courtiers mounting upon their hunting Horses, and he with them, and be∣ing about their game, the clouds frowned upon them, and at last a very great soaking shower of rain fell, at which the said Kg be∣ing in a mad fretting and frenzy fit, cryed out with cursing and sweating, that the world should be drowned, and therefore in a scorn rode up upon the brow of a Knap upon New-market Heath (if my memory fail me not in my information) where he said, Give me a Bible, I'le prove the world must be drown∣ed, crying out again and again, Why do you not give me a Bi∣ble? at last a Bible was brought him, when he had it in his hands, he opened it, and turned and tossed it, at last making a scornful mouth, he threw it over his left shoulder in derision, and so rod away. As for Promises, Vows, and Covenants, these are nothing with a Tyrant, he oftentimes promiseth in the word of a King, and thinks his heart unsworn, his solemn Oaths, Vows, and Co∣venants, Protestations, Imprecations, and Execrations, he slips as easily as Monkies do their Collers, making election of those only that serve his turn, and reprobates the rest; So a Tyrants Maxim is out of Lucian, Sceptrorum vis tota perit, si poedere just incipit. Scepters are vain that do on justice stand▪ That Principi nihil est injustum quod fructuosum, a Prince ought to account nothing unjust which is profitable▪ that it is lawful Regni causâ sceleratum esse, to do any wicked thing to procure absolute Soveraignty. Again, that Regni causa jus violendum esse, That all Laws may be violated to make way for Domination; That Ʋbi honesta tantum dominanti lic, praecario rgnatur, where it is warrantable for the Prince to do nothing but right and just things, he rules but by curtesie. Who can forget those manifold imprecations of the late King in se∣veral
cases together with his Promises, Vows, and Oaths, and his common breach of all, and the just Sentence of God from his own lips, so frequently upon him, and his, and the execution thereof in the sight of the world. 11. His Court is commonly the Center of wickedness, a Burrough of Beasts, a Den of Theeves, his Hll a Hell, his Chamber of Presence the very Synagogue of Satan, his Chair of State, the Throne of iniquity, where with his ranting r∣tinue, his cursing Courtiers, his cunning flatterers, his fine fools, his gaudy Grandees, he satiates himself in his filthy desires, and where loosness and licentiousness, glutony and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strive and envyings, blasphemies and beastliness, profusness, prophaneness, and all kind of wickedness do ran and reign cum Privilegio Re∣gio. Tyrants Courts are commonly the very Sourse of sin, the wel∣head, the spring of the wickedness of the Nation, from whence flows such bitter waters, as infect the whole Countrey, like Prince, like Priest, like Prophet, like people, like Court, like Countrey; the Chambers of Tyrants, what are they but the very Chappels of Venus? where their Beds, Pallets, Couches, are the very Altars whereon those abominable sacrifices of fil∣thiness are so abundantly offered; their Kitchins, Pantries, Cell∣ars, Butteries, are stuft and fill'd with the sacrifices of Bacchus, where men break their brains, as swine do their bellies with quaffing: It was said of Bonosus, the drunkn Emperour, that he was born non ut vivat, sed ut bibat, not to live, but to drink: and being overcome by Prbus, he hanged himself, up∣on whom it was jsted, that a anked hung there, and not a man. Darius King of Persia commanded this inscription to be set over his Sepulchre: I was able to hunt lustily, to drink wine soundly, to bear it out bravely. Solomon saith, Wine as raging, and Paul fily joyneth drunkards and railers together, 1 Cor. 6 9. being both commonly found in one person. And are not the Courts of Tyrants commonly filled wih such roar∣ing boyes as these? whose heads and hearts are overcharged
with surfeiting and drunkenness, what Governours are these like to make, who are so ungoverned? these jolly companions are (like locusts) all belly, where they bury their wits, their reason, their understanding; Nay, their throats are open Sepul∣chres, where their whole families are buried alive, digging their grave with their teeth; Hence it is, that so many Courtiers of the late Kng, having their hundreds and thousands by their pla∣ces, and preferments, whose glittering garbs in former days ren∣dered them like blazing Stars in the streets, drawing all eyes after them, are now creeping up and down with thin cheeks, and ragged raiments, and their poor families pining in penury, being buried before they were born, (I mean) through their Parents prouseness, neglecting to make due provision for their posterity: much meat, much malady: a glutton shall not want wo, luxu∣ry is attended with beggery: the Apostle joyns gluttony and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, as birds of a feather in one nest, or person; And where do these Ravens build so much, as in Kings Palaces, Est Venus in vinis, Whoredom is commonly ushered in with drunkenness, hence it is that the Whore hath a Cupn her hand, Revel. 17. 4. When Lot was drunk, he quickly staggered, reeled, stumbled, and ll into the Whores dich; where he so besoild himself, that his name will never be clean again. What provision (or catering) for the flesh, (as the word is Rom. 13. 13.) to fulfill the lusts thereof, is to be found in the Courts of Tyrants? I have heard of a great Duke  the late Kings days, whose mornings drink, de die in dim, was so tempered, and conditioned, that a Gentleman of London upon a certain morning vsiting the said Dukes Steward (being of his acquaintaince) the said Steward passed by with a cup in his hand, his friend asked him what e had there in the cup: the Steward replyed I have my Lords mornings draft: th Gen∣tleman desied he might taste it, which accordingly he did, ta∣king a little sup of it, the operation whereof was so, that he profest he had much to do to orbear incivilities upon every wo∣man that he met, being so strangely and unexpectedly over∣come therewith, that he lockt himself up within dors all that day, fearing least he should be overcome with foly. A blly ill∣ed with wine, or intxicing drinks, soamth ut filhiness,
said a Father: Wine is the milk of Venus, said another, by which a man being once overcome he is become a child, one without strength, a fool and no man, quia non ratione sed affectu rapitur, because he is not rul'd by reason, but affection, led about by the nose even of women: Thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel, said Tamar fitly to her libidinous brother Amnon, 2 Sam. 13. 13. What woful waste hath this sin made of the estates, persons, fa∣milies, bodies and souls of many of our late Courtiers? Corpus, opes, animam, famam, vim, lumina scortum Debilitat, perdit, necat; aufert, eripit orbat. Take the meaning hereof from the mouth of Solomon, Prov. 6. 26. By means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of bread, and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life. The Prodgal soon wasted his estate when he fell among harlots: The whorish woman, like the horseleech daughter, hath no other lan∣guage but Give, give: What pledg shall I give, said Sehem, Gen. 31. 12. Thy signet, thy bracelets, Gen. 37. 18. Ask what thou wilt, thou shalt have it, said Herod to hit Mnion. This sin de∣stroyeth Kings, said Solomon, Prov. 31. 3. It layd waste the con∣science even of David himself: The eyes of Courtiers (like Da∣vids) how oft were they gazing after Bathsheba's, looking to lust? Job would not look, that he might not think upon a maid: When the eyes are full of adultery they cannot cease to sin, saith Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Sampsons eyes first betrayd him to lust, and therefore they were first pul'd out, and he led away captive unto Gaza for gazing upon his Dalilah: By these loop-holes of lust and windows of wickedness (I mean the eyes) the Devil getteth into the very heart. One wittily upbraided a certain wanton, that he had not pupils, but punks in his eyes. A Philosopher observing one to have wanton eyes, said to him, that the difference was not much whether he committed wickedness with his upper or ne∣ther parts. Were not our late mincing Minions called Ladies of the Court (I speak not of them all) ordinarily attired on purpose to catch the eyes of their male companions, in so much as that it was hard to say, whether the greatest part of their bodies were clothed or naked? as if they made shambles of their shoulders, and merchandise of their flesh. I have heard of a Bishop invited to one of their houses to dinner, and observing the Ladies naked
back and brests, said to her to this purpose, Madam, it is time to shut up your shop-windows; upon which she presently cast a vail upon her neck and shoulders, and never was observed to ap∣pear so afterwards: Lust not after her beauty, neither let her take thee with her eye-lids, Prov. 6. 25. some render it, neque te capiat splendoribus suis, let not her glitterings gain thee, lest she ruines thee; Flagitium & flagellum sicut acus & filum: Mi∣sery succeeds iniquity, as the thred the needle; they are linked together with chains of Adamant. We need not mention the licentiousness and lusts of the persons and Courts of Augustus, Julius, Tiberius, Hlogabalus, Caligula, Commodus, Domician, Proculus, and others of the Roman Emperors, who as they ex∣ceeded in pomp, state and greatness, so this sin of wantonness and lasciviousness did reign amongst them; for almost all Princes or Courts of Princes in Christendom have been observed to indulge, if not even to court that wasting wickedness. I have heard of a Kings Court not far off, where it was said to be held a kind of a piece of gallantry, and a thing in fashion, for the Noble men (falsly so called) to know no difference between their own and their fellow-Courtiers Ladies, and the Ladies the like in respect of other men, and no great matter of offence to the hus∣band or wife that it should be known, because it was then the fashion; and that it too much favored of Puritanism to be con∣find within the bounds of Matrimony. May we not well remem∣ber the English Court Ladies paintings, their pachings, their crispings, their curlings, their caps and feathers, the cocking of their beavors, their stilletto's, their man-like apparel, their slasht sleeves, their jetting, their strutting, their leg making, with the rest of their antique apparel and postures? O how many families bodies and souls have perished by them? how did they rejoyce to do evil? it was their meat, drink and sport, to be merry with the Devil: Those light Asses are said by Solomon to flatter with their lips; their lips were nets, their hands bands, their words were coards to draw men as calves to the slaughter; Her house inclineth to death, Prov. 2. 18. Terence calleth harlots, Cruces; quia invenes macerant & affligant. It was said of Pope Paul the fourth as a by-word, Eum per eandem partem animam pro∣fudisse, per quam acceperat. Pope John the twelfth being taken
with an Adulteress, was stab'd to death by her husband. Alex∣ander the Great, and Otho the third, lost their lives by their lusts: Her paths are unto the dead, viz. where those hellsh Sodo∣mites are giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, shall suffer the vengeance of eternal fire: The harlot is a deep ditch, a narrow pit, Prov. 23. 27. and whoredom and wine and new wine taketh away the heart, Hosea 4. 11. that is, bereave a man of his noble principles of wisdom, know∣ledg, understanding: Hence Adulterers are said to be voyd of understanding, Prov. 6. 32. a wound and dishonor he gets; he sabs his name, his family, his conscience, his body, his soul; that sin renders men past feeling, Rom. 1. 28. of a dead and dedolent disposition, Ephes. 4. 18. 19. yea impudent and impenitent: Hence it is, that neither the strange woman, nor he that goeth unto her, return again, Prov. 2. 19. that is very rarely, if ever. Are not these the very characters of many of our late wanton Courtiers, men and women of dbaucht consciences and conversations, impu∣dent, impenitent, aring, mocking and sffing at all means of recovery, wasting their precious times in Plays, Pastimes, Masks, and such foolies, spending their wits and parts in Complements and Courtships, rising up in the morning wreaking from their beds of lusts, no sooner up but their lustful drinks are tempered for them, then to their powdering, trimming and tiring, then to their devotion to their bellies, I mean their gluttonous dinners; then to Black-fryers, or other places, to see Plays, to offer up their evening sacrifices to the Devil; then to their junkets and jollities, and then again to their beds of lusts, and thus they wheel'd about their time de die in diem: These wretched female wantons, what were they but, as one wittily said of the Italian women Mag∣pies at their doors, Goats in their gardens, Devils in their houses, Angels in the streets, and Syrens in their windows, where they sit in their whorish attire, as Solomon hath it, with their subtil heart, or as some render it, trussed up about the brests with their upper parts naked, Prov. 7. 10. Erat nudo collo, & pectore, corde tenus, &c. with their bare necks and brests; Nudato pudendo ut ad concubitum homines accenderat, which I forbear to eng∣glish; by means whereof how many men have been be witched? making them become voyd of understanding, even as brutes;
Nos animas etiam incarnavimus (said one,) as if their very souls, reason and consciences were even turned into a lump of flesh; though these seem pleasant a while, yet the end thereof is death: Lust blears the understanding, making men beleeve there is sweet sence in sinning but is it any other then as a man fast asleep, and in a sweet and pleasant dream on the top of a steep Rock or Clift, who starting suddenly for joy falls down and dasheth himself in pieces by his unexpected fall? These men and women will come at last (as some of them doubtless have upon their death-beds) to see and say, that not only this is vanity, but vexation of spirit: When this sin hath brought home its reward, a diseased body, a prplexed conscience, a distressed soul, then the guilty person cries out too late, filling the ayr with doleful cries: as one said, Totum vitae meae tempus perdidi quia perdite vixi, How have I lost the chief of my time, the flower of mine age, the strength of my body, the marrow of my bones, the vigor of my spirits, the whole of my estate, and eternal life for a few sinful pleasures and sensual delights? It is said of the Mole, how true I know not, that he begins to see when he is about to dye, and not before; Oculos incipit aprire moriendo, quos clausos habuit vivendo: Those mole-ey'd Minions may see too late their mise∣rable condition; their pleasure will be gone, their pain lasteth. Principium dulce est; sed finis amoris amarus, Laeta venire Venus, trist is abire solet. The pleasures of sin are but for a moment, like the crackling of thorns under a pot, much noise, lttle fire, much light, little heat, a blaze soon blasted, before the pots can feel the thorns: They, and their peasure are snacht away together; their Sun goes down at noon day. Mettals in the fire are most glaring when nearest melting: The fishes swim merrily down the streams of Jordan, but fall suddenly into the dead Sea, where presently they dye, and know Jordan no more. What's become of those gal∣lant Grandees, roaring Roisters, with their glittering Gils and mad Mates, the wanton Wagails of our English Courts, who fleared when they should have feared, and laughed when they should have lamented? how soon are they put out as the fire of thorns? Psal. 118. 12. Did not our English Courts swarm with these lustful Locusts almost in all Ages, and the chiefest therein
commonly chief in these sins? Edward the Fourth had his holy Whore (as he was used to call her) that came out of a Nunnery at his bck to satisfie his lust. May not large volumes be fil'd with the historical Narrations, and that according to truth, of the pride, gluttony, drunkenness, wantonness, luxury, lasciviousness of the Kings and Courts of this Nation in their constant succession one after another, until the hand of Vengeance did put a full stop hereunto by that fatal Blow at White-hall Gate, 1648. They are extinct, dead, and buried; and I wish such an immoveable stone may be layd upon the mouth of their Sepulchres by our present and successive Governors, that they may never rise again, that as their names, so their sin may rot and consume away; and the eyes of this English Nation may never behold such vanity at Court any more, where lasciviousness and luxury were accounted meer peccadilloes, not worthy repentance or remorse. 12. He commonly wades through blood to his bloody Throne, and having once scared his conscience by spilling the blood of a Father or Brother to attain the Crown, he can eat the flesh, and drink the blood of millions of his people to satisfie his lusts with∣out reluctance, and judgeth it his right to wrong whom he will. Tyrants are men of blood, fierce, fiery, furious spirits, cross, curst and cruel dispositions; the world is fill'd with volumes of their vilanies in this kind; all Ages and Countries without ex∣ception have wofully felt the truth hereof; in so much as if men had the use of their mental ears, as they have of their corporal, the cries of the thousands and ten thousands, millions and tens of millions of the slain and murthered by the hands of Tyrants would be so great, that they would hardly hear the living for the dd. The Turkish, Spanish, Roman, French, Scottish, English Histories, are they not stufft and cram'd with innumerable In∣stances of the cruelty of Tyrants, and their pleasure therein? No sight pleased Hannibal better then a ditch running over with mans blood. Chrls the nineth of France, Author of that bloody Msscre in France, looking upon the dead carkass of the Admi∣ral that stank by long keeping unburied, uttered this wretched saying, Quam suaviter olet cadaver inimici? How sweet is the
smell of an enemies carkass? And the Queen Mother of Scot∣land, beholding the dead bodies of her Protestant Subjects whom she had slain in Battel, said, that she never saw a finer piece of Tapistry in all her life. To spend time on this were to waste a candle before the Sun: Englands Chronicles, the Books of Mar∣tyrs, the late bloody Massacres and Wars in Ireland, England, Scotland, are fresh and bleeding evidences of the bloodiness of Tyrants. I shall not here speak of the death of Prince Henry, King James, the bloody Massacres of the Protestants in Ireland, by whose Commissions and Commands how cruelly and deceit∣fully they have been carried on: God hath made inquisition for blood, he hath remembered and not forgotten the complaint of the poor; he hath cut off Saul and his bloody house according to his word, Psal. 55. 23. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days: They are cut off before their time; their branches shall not be green, but shaken off as the unripe Grape from the Vine, and cast off as the flower of the Olive, Job 15. 32, 33. 13. Prerogative Pleaders are his Orthodox Preachers, that make his mouth their Oracle, his Dictates their Doctrines, all Scriptural Precepts of the Subjects duties the only Canonical, but the duty of Princes Apocryphal writings. Tyrants have their Chaplains according to their Religions, who rather preach from their Masters mouths then to their ears, and principle the people according to their humors to maintain their Prerogative: Hence we shall find in Scripture, that wicked Kings had their Priests and Prophets of their own tempers, who did always charm the people into base slavery by their base preachings: Zeph. 3. 3. When the Princes in Jerusalem were rearing Lions, and her Judges evening Wolves, her Prophets were treacherous, betraying the poor people by their cheating charmings into a stupid, ordid and silly subjection. Wicked Kings, Princes, Priests and Prophets are chain'd together, Jer. 2. 26. they commonly keep one Court and one Councel; and as they live together in sin, so perish together commonly in punish∣ment, Jer. 4 9. You may see how these wicked Priests and Pro∣phets
did cling together against Jeremiah, who protested against their flatteries and alsities, Jer. 26. 7, 8, 10, 11. See again their cursed Conederacy in doing evil in the sight of the Lord, Jer. 32. 32. Ahab had a mind to make War against Ramath Gilead, for the enlargement of his Territories; he had no sooner signified his royal pleasure herein, but his whole Kingdom of Priests and Prophets allarms the people to War, and promise them success in the Name of the Lord; yea one of them, viz. Zdekiah the son of Chenaanah, like an Ape, did imitate the custom of the Prophets of the Lord, and makes himself Iron horns, carries them unto the King, as if sent by a very special Commission, and tells him, Thus saith the Lord, With these horns shalt thou push the Syri∣ans, until thou hast consumd them; but you know they all told lyes in the Name of the Lord: and one Michaiah, that spake the truth, they buffeted and imprisoned: And was it not thus in Englands Courts during the Rule of Tyrants amongst us? No sooner had the late King a resolution to war with the Scots, his native Countrymen, but all the Pulpits from White-hall round the Nation did allarm the people to rise up with him, promising them success in the Name of the Lord. Were not those wicked Kings, Priests and Prophets of the English Nation link'd together as with chains of Adamant, in so much that if the one be de∣stroyed, the other must fall: hence grew that ominous Proverb, No Bishop no King, which fell out accordingly: How hath God destroyed those dens of Lions, those Magpyes nests, those black Ravens that deceived the people with their rough garments? I am no adversary to the lawful Ministry; and let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, and my pen drop from my wi∣thered right hand, rather then I should willingly speak or write against the Lords true Messengers; but meer pretenders of the Lords message, when they utter only visions of their own hearts, are the abomination of my Soul. 14. The greatness of his height causeth giddiness in his head, and at last his fall; Though his nests be amonge stars, the hand of Justice will reach him; and though he dwells in the clifts of the Rocks, yet thence will it fetch him out.
Pride is unsatisfied with preferment: ambitious Tyrants are still rising up above the top of their places, where they lose their footing, and perish by falling. Pride maketh a man drunk with his own conceits, ushereth in his own destruction, his Sails be∣ing greater then his Ship, his heart then his head, his projects then his pate, he is frequently overset, and at last, himself his house, his famly are overwhelm'd in misery: Pharaoh, Adoni∣bezeck, Agag, Nbuchadnezzer, Haman, Herod, with seve∣ral others, are experimental instances, and woful witnesses here∣of. Zerxes having covered the Seas with his Ships, was (by a just hand of God for his prodigious pride) forced to fly from Grecia in a poor fisher-boat, where (had not the Persians that wre with him cast themselves into the Sea, to save the life of their King) he had been devoured in the waves that regarded not his greatness. The same Snators that accompanied proud Sejanus to the Senate, conducted him the same day to prisor; they that were ready to kneel down to him as their God, did ere long drag him with contempt to the Goal. Sgismund King of Hungary, beholding the greatness of his Army, hearing of the Turks advance, scornfully said to this purpose, We need not fear the Turks, nor the falling of the Heavens upon us, for we are able with our spears and halberts, to held them up, if they should fall; who afterwards was shamefully beaten, and glad to fly away in a small boat to save his life. Bajaret the terrour of the world, how powerful was his pride, how dread∣ful his downfll, when coapt in a cage, carried up and down therein a a Monster of men to be seen of men, dasht out his own brains against the grates thereof. Pompe and Cesar strive for preheminence, and what ever was the pretended, yet the reall cause was, that the one could not endure a Superiour, nor the other an Equal. Catholick Monarchy is the white in the t, that Tyrants aim at: Non sufficit Orbis, is the Tyrants Motto; See their language, Genesis 11. 4. Let us build us a Tower, whose top may reach to the Heavens, and let us make us a Name. See the pride and the plague, the Majesty and the misery, the glory and grave of every Tyrant, elegantly set out by the Pro∣phet Isaiah, in his Chap. 14. 11. Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols, the worm is spread under
thee, and the worms cover thee; how art thou fallen from Hea∣ven, O Lucifer, Son of the Morning? how art thou cut down to the ground which did weaken the Nations? For thou hast said in thy heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God, I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the Most High, yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, &c. Their Exaltation often proves (like Hamans) the heightening of their Gallows, or Gibbet: as once a Danish Ptntate in this Nation, K. Knute, caused the head of a false person to be struck off, and set upon the highest part of the Tower of London, therein performing his promise to a Traytor in advancing him above any Lord in the Land. What got most of the Cesars by their tyranny? pride, glory, and hasty preferment: Nisi ut citius interficerentur, to be kill'd the sooner. What do they ordinarily but pursue their own destiny? As the Panther having a violent desire after the poysonful Achonite, (which men hang up above his reach) who leaps and skips and mounts to catch it, but cannot come at it, and at last he wearies himself, breaks, and kills himself, and so is taken. Aliena appe∣tendo propria amisit, was the inscription written in a Cup made of the Duke of Muscoviah's skul, taken by the Tartarian in battel, All covet, all lose: the whole history of the late King is approbatum est, of this truth. 15. To bring him to punishment is Gods will, and mans work; With God is no respect of persons, and in executing of justice the Prince and the Peasant must fare alike. A Tyrant betraying his trust, breaking his faith, destroying the end of his Power, Government, and Greatness, regarding nei∣ther the Law, nor common good, reigns only for himself, and his faction, and because his power is great, his will boundless, and exorbitant, committing wrongs, oppressions, murther, mas∣sacres, raps, adulteries, desolation and subversion of his good people, is to be seized upon, secured, and executed, as a com∣mon Enimy of his Countrey or People. It was the saying of an Heathen Poet, —Victima haud ulla amplior
potest magisque opima mactari Jovi, quam Rex iniquus— —There is no Sacrifice so rich, so fat, so pleasing unto God, as Tyrant slain.— To insist much upon this point, were but actum agere, so much having been lately written from able and learned pens up∣on occasion of the execution of the late King: Beuchanon hath several histories and instances of the Scottish Proceedings against their wicked Governours, in the year 1559. The Scotch Prote∣stants claiming promise of their Queen Regent for liberty of conscience, she replyed like a Tyrant, That promises were not to be claimed of Princes beyond what was profitable; where∣upon they told her to her face in Parliament, that then they did renounce their Allegiance, and so betook themselves to Arm. The holy Scriptures are clear for it, Numb. 35. 32. No satis∣faction shall be taken for the life of the murtherer, be he what he will be, high or low, rich or poor, King or Begger, the Scrip∣ture makes no distinction; if a murtherer, he must die for it: He which is guilty of death, shall surely be put to death. If God maketh no difference, who is that man that pretends himself a Minister of God, an Embassadour of Jesus Christ that dares so much prevaricate from his message, as to say, That Kings and Princes must be dispensed withall, and not called to an account, though they should shed the blood of their innocent people, so directly contrary to the very Letter of the Scripture. Nero was condemned to death by the Roman Senate, Tarquinius super∣bus deposed by the people of Rome, the Lacedemonians did or∣dinarily put their Princes to death for breaking their trusts, and offending the Laws of the Commonwealth: Eugenius the eighth, being the 62 King of Scotland, was put to death for his misgovernment: Cum nec amicorum, nec Sacerdotum ad∣monitionibus quicquam moveretur, post tertium rgni sui an∣num in Coetu procerum omnibus in ejus exitium consentientibus periit, socii scelerum & flagitiorum in crucem acti, & ipsi gratum populo spectaculum prebuere. When no admonitions of friends, Ministers, would serve turn for to reclaim him, they consul∣ted and agreed together to cut him off by the hand of justice in a
publick manner, and himself, and accomplices, were rendred ac∣ceptable spectacles of justice unto the people. When Rehoboam shall tread in the steps of his fathers unjust exactions, and upon the complaint and petition of his people for their just rights and priviledges, he shall refuse to hear them, to ease them, but tells them, I will add to my Fathers yoke, he chasised you with whips, but I will chastise you with Scorpions: Ten parts of 12. of his people cast him off, made war against him. What, said they, if this be the case, that we must be whipt and slasht by this proud Tyrant, and at his will, and the will of his cursed Courtiers, and his green-headed Grandees; Away with him, what portion have we in this Tyrant? To your tents, O Israel, Arm, arm, let him now look to himself, 1 King. 12. from the first to the twenty one ver. his grave Councellors told him plain∣ly, Vers. 7. If thou wilt be a Servant unto this people, and serve them, and speak good words to them, treat them kindly; they will be thy servants for ever. Where you may see (i.) that the King was made so to be their Servant, and not to Lord it over them. And secondly, That when Kings are Servants to the people, the people are thi ready and free, and willing servants, yea vassels unto them; Love will compel them: But when they perceive that they have no portion in him, he shall have as little in them: By how much the greater the person is that offnds, by so much the greater is his fault, by so much the greater his punish∣ment ought to be. And I believe that that late exemplary piece of justice at Whitehall. Gate upon the late Tyrant, was one of the attest, richest, and most acceptable Sacrifice that hath been of∣fered up unto the most righteous God that loveth righteousness in this Nation before that day: And that the zeal of our Judges in executing petty thieves, robbers, and murtherers at Tyburn, was but as the tything of Mint and Cummin, in comparison of that great thing of the Law then done. 16. His light shall be put out, his sparks shall not shine. Ter∣rors shall make him afraid on every side, & his own Counsel shall cast him down, his roots shall be dried up beneatlh, and above shall his branches be cut off: His remembrance shall perish from the Earth: and he shall have no name in the Street.
His triumph is but short, and his joy but for a moment, though his Excellency mount up unto the Heavens, and his Head reaches unto the Clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like his own dung, he shall flye away as a dream, and be chased as a vision of the night; the eye which saw him shall see him no more, neither shall his place any more behold him. Solomon saith, That a violent bloody▪ Tyrant shall flee to the pit, let no man slay him: Prov. 28. 17. Let no man mediate for him, lest he pay down as Ahab did, life for life, people for people. 1 King. 20. 42. When Tyrants perish, the righteous increase, Prov. 28. 28. They swarm like Bes in a Sun-shine day. When the wicked rise, good men skulk and hide their heads; as Moses fled from Pha∣raoh, David from Saul, Eliah from Ahab, Obadiah's Clients from Jezabel, Jeremiah from Jehoiakim, Joseph and the Child Jesus from Herod, &c. But wherein they dealproudly, God is above them, He seeth their day is coming, He sits in Heaven and scorneth these scorners. The Most High cuts off the Spirit of Princes, he is terrible unto these tyrannical Kings of the Earth, those scourges of the World. God so subdued Senache∣rib, as the Egyptians in memory of it did set up his Statue in the Temple of Vulcan, with this inscription: Let all that behold me, learn to fear God. Tyrants shall be sure sooner or later to meet with their match; The blood-thirsty man shall not live out half his dayes. God will at last appear to their fearful de∣struction, to be glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders of wrath and ruine upon bloody Pharaohs, he will tear out those bowels that are fill'd and stuft with the blood of the poor, and make inquisition for their blood; then will he remember, and not forget the complaint of the poor, he hath fulfill'd his threatnings against Tyrants in our eyes, and ed our Nation from those men of blood, that they may fall and fall in all the parts of the world and never rise up again, especially in our English Nation. That God would melt all Crowns, and Sep∣ters of the Potentates of the Earth, into a Crown & Septer for the Head, and hand of Jesus Christ, putting all Powrs and Au∣thorities under his feet, making our Government peace, and Exactors Righteousness, that violence be no more heard
of in our Land, nor desolation, nor destruction within ou Borders: Let all the people CRI IN HOPE, AMEN.
A Protector, OR Homo Homini Deus. JUst Government is Gods Ordinance for mans good; the form thereof, mans appointment with Gods ap∣probation; the end thereof, mans felicity and Gods glory: and, a just Governor is a Protector of both. The Institution of Government is of God, the Constitution of man, the Governors themselves of both, viz. Gods permission and mans election: JƲST GOVERNMENT IS GODS ORDINANCE; The Powers that be are ordained of God, Rom. 13. 1. Mans sin was the cause of his subjection to all mor∣tals, but Gods mercy did institute the same to preserve him from ruine by his own wickedness; had not man sinned, there had been a priorty, but not a soveraignty: there had been a reverence in the child to the father as the instrument of his production, but no subjection, because no justiciating power had been stablished, there being no need of it; the eternal Law written in every mans heart would have been every mans guide, had it not been for sin; sin ushered in subjection as a curse at the heels of it; Gen. 3. 16. Thy desire shall be to thy husband, he shall rule over thee; her disobedience expos'd her to subjection by Gods Ordinance. So∣veraignty and subjection are Gods appointment FOR MANS GOOD; He is the minister of God to thee for good, Rom. 134, Sociableness, or appetitus convivendi, is the impress of Nature:
and the reason thereof, mutual preservation and accommodation, which cannot be without Government: Sin hath brought sor∣row upon the world; Sin entered into the world in the van of a black and bloody Regiment, sorrows, pains, aches, hunger, thirt, shame, &c. with death through sin in the rear; Conscience of guilt brings fear of death: hence one end of society is preserva∣tion; and because men need security from misery and ruine by one another, therefore hath God appointed Government and Governors among themselves for the good of all, the form of which Government is let by God to their own discretion, who hath only confin'd them within the limits of this general rule, His GLORY and THEIR FELICITY: Forms of Government are no more perpetual then persons themselves; Necessity re∣quires Government, convenience forms: Were it not for Go∣vernment, the line and pale of every mans property would quickly be trodden down; mens boundless appetites would be their purveyors, and their wants would be measured by their wills: Confusion makes men desire order, and convenience the forms thereof: No Government is the worst Government; and where none rules, none will be ruled, but all quickly ruin'd: A∣narchy is the worst Tyranny; Better it is to be under the domi∣nions of the great Turk then the rabble rout: The forms of Go∣vernment are mans ordinance, so called by the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 14. No form being divine or natural in its rise or root, we find in Scripture several forms allowed by God, viz. Go∣vernments by Patriarchs, Generals, Judges, High Priests, and Kings: in other Histories we read of Governments by Popes, Monarchs absolute and conditionate, by Dukes, Senators, Consuls, Dictators, &c. which argues no one form above another to be jure divino, but that every or any form lawful, if conducing to THE PEOPLES FELICITY AND GODS GLORY: The power of Government wheresoever setled is fiduciary, and not inconditionate; and whilest their Trustees draw all their lines into this Center, Gods glory in the peoples welfare, they may walk securely upon the highest battlements of honour and dignity: but if their projects and practise be sole soveraignty, puff up with a vain opinion of puissance and grandure, though for a time they proceed and prosper, and say within themselves,
they shall see no sorrow, yet they shall find at last their buildings to totter, and the consequence tragical to themselves and Scep∣ters: for when the peoples Pilot proves a Pirate, not ruling, but ruining them, the hands and hearts of God and men will be swift Avengers of such perfidiousness: The Peoples protection is the end of Government; and therefore a just Governor is the Peo∣ples Protector; and what is he? what doth he? He really esteemeth the Publique Safety the chief So∣veraignty; that he is more the peoples, then the people his; that he was made for them, not they for him; that the State at large is the absolute chief, and the chief, so called, the States servant, which he judgeth his Crown, and not his Cross; his glory, and not his shame; carnal policy is not his study, but his peoples peace, his care and prayer. His head is full of publique principles, and his heart full of con∣science thereof; he studies the peoples right, and his own duty; he projects their protection, peace, and plenty, as the great ends of his Office; his design is not to multiply gold and silver, he desires not the peoples coyn with their curses; he well considers that though moneys be the sinews of War, yet the peoples affc∣tions are the joynts of peace: he renders himself unto the people matter of praise unto God for him, not of prayers unto God against him; he strives to be the peoples pleasure, not their plague: All cannot chuse but do well when thou ulest well, said the Senate to Severus the Emperor. Carnal policy, which some call King-craft, is not his study; that subtle trade, which com∣monly Kings and great persons drive in the world: Jeroboams Calves were set up by this artifice, 1 King. 12. When he had gotten the Crown (from Rehoboam) over the ten Tribes, he con∣sulted with himself how and which way he might fasten it upon his head, and he had his Polititians very nimble about hm d∣vise him herein; and forgetting how he got the C∣ver consulting with God for his establishment,  way to ease the people from their edious trav
to their annual Sacrifices, and sets up two golden Calves, and so keeps the people at home to serve God in their devised (call∣ed doubtless) Divine Service. And the Text notes, that the thing that steard him in his project, was not his defection in judgement touching the true Worship of God at Jerusalm: but verse 26, 27. His heart did misgive him, that if the people should go up to Jerusalem, (within Rehoboam's Territories) to offer sacrifice, they would turn again to their old King, the Power, the Polices, the Pulpits of Jerusalem, would reduce them to the old House and Family of Rehoboam again, but this policy of his was his ruine at last, as appears in the story. A good Prince takes heed of his own heart, and Councellers, and any undue way, to establish his greatness. A Christian Prince well considers true piety hath the promise of Exaltation, so his de∣clining it, will be his ejection, and therefore takes heed of warping against his judgement and conscience, of offering vio∣lence to his honest and pons principles, through the advice of Polititians to ingratiate himself with the people; he knows that the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and therefore it concerns him to look unto it: When Saul was first called to be King, he did realy with∣stand it, Veraciter se ex∣cusavit de honore regni. the burdn of Government, the meanness of his birth, parentage, and breeding came upon his heart, his personal unmeet∣ness and unfitness for so great dignities and honours reflcted upon his mind: but after he had once king'd it, and enjoyed the Honours, Manors, Glory, Retinne, and Revenues of the Crown, he could not bear it, to think that the Crown should now be alienated from his own Famly; he forgot his parentage, his pedegree, nothing but greatness and grandeur now in his eyes, and the Counsels God touching the translation of the Kingdom unto another Family, he could not brook i▪ He was little in his own eyes at first, but big enough at last, 1 Sam. 9. 21. compared with Chap. 15. ver. 17. As also 1 Sam. 18. 29. compared with 1 Sam. 20. 30, 31. Simplicity will preserve, carnal policy pollutes, and destroys. Solomon gives excellent counsel in this case, Prov. 15. 24. The way of life is Above to the wise, that he may depart from Hell beneath. True wisdom is from above, and it leads to
life, A Crown in the next world is a Crown indeed: this is but a Cross to it. Christian Policy makes a Christian Prince to esteem that low counsel only worth regarding that will make a man wise in the latter end, Prov. 19. 20. He thinks not here of an establishment, he minds his mortality, and 'tis his wisdom to be frequently (in meditation) at his own suneral, making every tombe his Teacher, every mounment, a Monitor, his bed, his grave, his sheets, his winding-sheets, Ʋt Somnus mortis, sic lectus imago Sepulchri. He considers his time fles, his glass runs. Joseph of Arimathea had his Spulcher in his Garden to season his delight: true wis∣dom provides for suturity: This will make the Evening of a man's days, as the day-breaking to everlasting Glory. It provides for him Malorum ademptionm bonorum adeptionm. Freedom from evil, fruition of good. I have read of the custom of some Countrys, that in the Coronation of their Kings, amongst other ceremonies, two grave stones were brought him by a Mason, who did use these words to him, Elige ab his Saxis ex quo invictissime Caesar ipse tibi tumulum me fabricare vel. Chuse, mighty Sir, under which of these stones, your purpose is ere long to lay your bones. He remembers that this is not his rest, but a rest remaineth to the people of God. He that is wise will be wise for himself, that is, for his Eternal interest, and takes hed of carnal crasinss in carnal de∣signes; his zeal for God, his wys, his people, his countrey, thse will advance good Rulers, and these will preserve him & therefore he knows no councel, no cunning, no craft, that is cos to these. It was a most prophane saying of a wretched Cardinal, viz. That he would not part with his part in Paris, for Paradise: He maks much of wise Councellers, but takes heed of cunning ones, he takes heed, lest any about him spoil you by policy, as the Apostle cautioned the Colossians against spoyling through philosophy, lest he being led away by their errour, all from their stedastness, simplicity, and integrity: carnal councl s are not of Gods Councl, they cannot understand his mind: Try the spirits, they will be soon found out. He takes hed upon whom he confers honours, relations,
family, consanguinity, meer policy, or outward respects, teer him not, in preferring men to honour and trust; he honours those whom God honours: Gods command to Moses in this case is to this purpose, Exod. 18. 21, 22. Thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating co∣vetousness, and place such over them to be Rulers of thousands, Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of fifties, Rulers of tens, &c. Men that are fit for places of Government should be drain'd from the dregs, sifted from the bran of the ordinary sort of people: This was Davids and Solomons practise; such Judges Jehosophat promoted, 2 Chron. 19. 6, 7. It was observed of the late Lord Ireton, both in England and in Ireland, (the very mention of whom melts the spirits of those that well knew him,) that he took notice of good men, and of those especially that were least solicitous after preferment, and ye most fit for it, and them he advanced and preferred before they ever knew of it. He dares not rule in the peoples ruine, nor advance himself in their downfall; his pattern in the Mount is the King of Righteousness, who though Lord of all, was ser∣vant unto all, and sacrificed himself for them, not them for him. His heart is set upon the peoples health, his thoughts upon their thriving; he rejoyceth, lamenteth, is pleas'd or pain'd, he lives and dyes with them. When Joseph was exalted, he was in the place of God unto the people. to preserve life, Gen. 50. 19. compared with Chap. 45. 5. He doth not burthen the people, but bears their burthens, as Moses and the seventy Elders, Numb. 11. 16. When the Israelites sell before their enemies, Ioshua their Prince, their Saviour. was as sensible as if his blood did run out of their veins, Iosh. 7. 6, 7. he took not away his peoples in∣heritance, but did cause them to inherit, Deut. 31. 7. He spoils not his people, but saves them out of the hands of them that spoileth them, Iudg. 2. 16. as those Judges did: He is their deli∣verer from oppressors, as Othniel was, Iudg. 3. 9. and Ehud, vers. 15. and Gideon, Iudg. 6. 14. He is Gods Love-token to the
people, as Moses, and Ioshua, and Chaleb, and Gideon, and Da∣vid, and Solomon, &c. Whereas Tyrants are given in wrath, Lev. 26. 17. He knows he is set upon a Hill, yea upon a Mountain, and cannot be hid. Heavenly bodies enlighten not their own orb only, but send forth their rays to them that are under them. Mo∣ses being in the Mount, convers'd with God, and his face did shine among the common people: His life i a one saith, Coelum quoddam lucidissimis virtutum stll exornatum, a very Hea∣ven, sparkling with variety of virtues as with so many bright stars: The peoples eyes are upon him, and his example will be their patten: Mobile mutatur semper cum Principe vulgus; Like Prince like people: Common people are like a flock of Cranes, as the first fly all follow▪ Princes are the peoples Looking∣glass; the Court and the City and the Country will dress them∣selves according to them: Men are more apt to be led by their eyes then their ears by pattern then precept: He considers Gods eyes are upon him, and so are the Devils; good men look upon him with joy, wicked men look upon him with fear; If he be a pious Prince, his tripping would be their tickling, his fall their feast: He considers his burthens are great, his cares are many, his business much, his agitations various, the solemn Oath of God is upon him; all these do argue that the requisites for Govern∣ment are not ordinary nor few. He waits upon God, and looks up unto him for wisdom and strength. The Mariners eye is upon the star, when his hand is on the stern; so is his: if he misteers, the whole is in danger. Sauls slaughter of the Gibeoni, 2 Sam. 21. 1. Davids lust, 2 Sam. 12. 10. his pride, 2 Sam. 24. 1. So∣lomons idolatry, 1 King. 1. 30, 31, 32. Iorams wickedness, 2 Chron. 21. 12 13. Achaz sins, 2 Chron. 28. 19. A rebellion, 1 King. 20. 42. brought misery to their people; these Pilots by their ill sterage did split their Vessels, and many of their people perished thereby. He judgeth his Honors relative, and therefore obliga∣tory; having once accepted the dignity of Government, he cheerfully submits to the burthens thereof.
He considers, That what he hath, (as Ruler) he hath it not from himself, and therefore not for himself; his honours are the fruit of his painful atchievements: which do not lessen, but lengthen, not ease, but increase his burdens, Fructus honos onris, fructus honoris onus. Labours bring honours, honours labours bring. It was the saying of Luther, that Politici & Ecclesiastici labores maximi sunt, Magistrates and Ministers have the great∣est burdens. Had we not businesses and cares, and ears above any private person, we should be equal to the gods, said Au∣gustus. Good rulers bear the peoples incumbrances, burthens, and strifes, Crowns have their cars with good Princes, their crosses, their scratches; the sense whereof they feel more at their hearts, then their Crowns on their heads. He rules by rule, and not by roat; the Word of God, the Laws of men consonant therewith, are his rules of ruling, and not his own lust, esteeming it his greater glory so to be ruled, that he might serve the whole, then otherwise to rule to serve Himself; Prerogative, Asser∣tors, and base Flatterers, he hates in his heart. He esteems himself more obliged to God, then the people, be∣cause he hath received more from God then they; he knows himself to be under the strickest Laws, not over the meanest ru∣lers, Under the Law were commanded by God to write the Copie of the Law of God in a Book, and the Jews say, that though the Kings Father left him a Book of the Law, yet was he to write a Book thereof with his own hands, which he was to carry with him whithersoever he went, from Deut. 17, 18, 19. And according to this is Gods saying to Joshuah, This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, Iosh. 1. 8. A good Ruler serves the Lord with reverence, Psal. 2. 11. He casts himself before him to do him reverence, Psal. 29. 1. And as for the Laws of men in their respective Territories, it was Platoes saying, That the Prince is not above Law, but the Law is a∣bove
the Prince; the Magistrate should be a speaking Law, a living Law, as exemplary in obedience to the Law, as he is emi∣nent in rule over all the people under the Law. It is most true, that the Chief Magistrate may do only that which is just, and most false, that all is just that he doth▪ Saul was as much bound not to hurt David, as David not to touch the Lords Anointed. To rule over the people by meer coactive power is beastly, not manly. A manly Prince would rule over the wills of men by their consent: A Lion, a Bear, a Wolf, rules over the weaker by meer power. A good ruler desires power directive, not co∣ercive, voluntary, not violent, by counsel, not command, by consent, not compulsion: he takes no pleasure to rule in his Commonwealth, as the Lion in the Forrest. A Protector truly so called, cannot think himself wiser then all, nor above all, but to the making and executing of Laws, to the Government of himself and people, he will have the consultation and determi∣nation of the wise amongst them: it is Gods Charactar of a Tyrant, 1 Sam. 8. 9, 10. To rule by meer power, to take the people under him, and make them his Horses, his Asses, his Slaves, and Vassals, minding altogether his own might, not the peoples right: but God's Charactar of a Protector is of another nature, Deut. 17, 20. viz. he is such an one whose heart is not lifted up above his brethren: he is a Fellow-Subject to the Laws, though the chief Executioner thereof; he takes no ad∣vantage from the Letter of the Law to gratifie himself, and grieve his people, (as the late Tyrant) and his Predecessors; he well considers that common Justice, Peace, and Safety are the great Ends of Rule and Rulers, that Laws themselves are no longer binding, but as relative to those great ends, that Religion, Reason, Nature▪ Grace, all do promote the publick Good: That the intent of Law is nothing less then the Princes roially in the peoples ruine, that the soul of the Law is preferrable above the shel, the life above the letter. Idm facit ac is qui legem trans∣greditur qui saeva verborum praerogativa fraudulenter con∣ira juris sententiam abutitur. He doth as bad as transgress the Law who fraudulently abuseth the rigid prerogative of words, contrary to the true intentional Sentence of the Law. He hath a piercing eye over pretended friends and flatterers, he knows
his house will be haunted with these, do what he can. Many will seek the Rulers favour, more then the favour of God, for there they hope to find themselves, he takes heed whom he trusts, and bless himself from his pretended friends, and prays with David to be delivered from lying lips, and a deceitful tongue, who will speak fair, congratulate his victories and happinesse, it may be present him with offerings and gifts: But as one said, Timeo Danaos & dona ferentes. And saith another, Munera magna quidem misit, sed misit in hamo; Et piscatorem piscis amare potest? When their words are as smooth as oyl, there is war in their hearts: It is something under his fifth rib which they aim at in their Courtships and Complements; though they bring milk and honey in their Lordly dsh, yet he takes heed of security and sleep at such a time; for they watch their opportunity to make use of their nail and hammer; they are like Cur-dogs that would suck out blood by licking, and in the end destroy without biting. A Squire being sent out of Spain to poyson Queen Eli∣zabeth, anoynted the pummel of her Saddel with poyson in a secret manner, as if he had been doing somewhat else, crying out with a loud voice, God save the Queen. When Gifford, Hodgson, and others, had set Savage on work to kill the said Queen; They first set ou a book to perswade the English Ca∣tholicks to attempt nothing against her, Caveatur osculum Is∣carioticum: The kisses of Judas are dangerous, he takes heed of poyson in a golden Cup: Jesuits at this day kisse and kill together familiarly officiosè occidunt, as one said of false Phy∣sicians, Esocietate Iesu fuit qui Iesum tradidit: His Familiar that ae bread with him at his table: When the kisse was nigh, the swords and staves were not far off: he knows that men that are most glosing are frequently closing with him for mis∣chief, Joab, Iudas, Absolom, Ahitophel, are most dangerous in their kisses: there are kissing Cut-throats, who can be affable to their enemies, and disguise their hatred in commendations, while they privily lay their snares, men Italienated that can sa∣lute with mortal imbracements, and clapse in those arms which they hope to embrew in their dearest blood, like unto Hacket hanged in Queen Elizabeths time, who imbracing his honest
Schoolmaster, bit off his nose, and did eat it down before his face: Of all persons he makes not flatterers of his Councel. Augustus complained when Varus was dead, that now he had none left that would deal faithfully and plainly with him: he bewares of confidence in unfaithful men, who will prove like the Brooks of Temah, Job 6. 17. which swell'd in rain, and fail'd in droughts; they will be like Egypt to Israel, broken reeds, whereon if he leans, they will not only fail him, but pierce and destroy him: Iulius Caesar was killed in the very Councel-Chamber by such flattering Councellers, A pluribus amicis quam inimicis, by most of his pretended friends: The French Proverb, When the Spaniard comes to parl of a peace, then double bolt the door; and the Hollanders in former dayes would make no conditions with them, because they well knew their Machiavilian Heresie: Fides tamdiu servanda est quamdiu expediat. I shall say no more to this, but to pray that God would preserve our faith∣ful Rulers from unfaithful men. A Christian Prince studies Princely principles, not Machivilian policies, and well remembers that he is Gods Servant, though his Servants Lord, and that he is bound to keep them free. He well knows that goodnesse is the way to greatnesse, and grace to glory, that righteousness and peace through Gods Ordinance are linked together with chains of Adamant, that when his ways please the Lord, he need not fear his friends or foes, that the Throne is established by righteousnesse, ruined by wrongs, that though wickedness may build his house for a time, yet a wo from God will destroy the foundation, Ier. 22. 13. That Heavens friendship is his greatest security, that true piety is the best policy, to attain and maintain his power and dig∣nity: The Saints just liberty is his study, and men of persecu∣ting principles he cannot bear. Men that judg themselves bound in conscience to punish others that are not of their judgment and conscience; men that are not very ambitious that others should know as much as themselves,
and yet very zealous to have them punished, because they know not as much as themselves: iron-hearted men; like that Tyrant that would cast the men of his displeasure upon an Iron bed, and if any were longer then the bed, he would have them cut off by so much the shorter, and if any were shorter, he should be stretcht out unto that length: These persons had rather that people should dissemble their opinions, then own their own. The men of my meaning are very discernable; they are such as pretend them∣selves Embassadors for Christ, and that with great majesty and authority imposing upon all men in the name of the Lord, and yet in the face of all men neglecting, nay despising his great Com∣mandment of Loving the Brethren. It is known to God, and my conscience, and all men that know me, know, that I am no adver∣sary to the publique Ministry, but a cordial Assertor of their sacred Office according to the utmost of my poor abilities against Op∣posers; well considering that though they may differ amongst themselves in the explication of some of the terms of their Em∣bassy; as also, that though they work not Miracles as the Apo∣stles did to confirm their doctrine, which two particulars are the greatest pretended Arguments impleading their Function, yet they agree in the grand import of their Masters message, viz. the grace of God bringing Salvation by Jesus Christ, and teach∣ing men to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live godly, righteously and soberly in this present evil world; which is the sum of the Gospel; and that this having been already con∣firmed by Miracles from Heaven in the first establishment thereof in the world, needs no more Miracles for its confirmation▪ (those doctrines only wanting Miracles for their credit that are extra-Scriptural, pretended revelations, strong perswasions and impres∣sions upon mens hearts, having no greater authority then their own fancies, visions born in their own brain, carryed on with fury, violence, pride and passion, and most importunely prest upon the consciences of men in the Name of the Lord without any Scripture.) I say, these considered with the like, I am no enemy to the publque Ministry, and do heartily congratulate good Ma∣gistrates favour towards godly Ministers, and the present course and hopeful endeavors of our present Rulers in seeking ou able and fit men to preach the Gospel in the Commonwealth; I wish
them prosperity in the name of the Lord: But the men of my meaning in my humble Caution, are easily known by some or all of these Characters. First, Men that will be of the Kings Religion, be he of what Religion he will, and are clamorous against all that cannot wea∣ther-cock it like themselves; men that are not Okes, but Ors, warping and winding this way or that way as the hand of their bountiful Patrons and Benefactors will wreath them; as of old, like Prince like Priest, Ezek. 22. 27. Men may easily discern their dawbing with untempered morter. The Court in former days never wanted these black Parasites; they are known by their flattering titles they give, trying if they can trade by exchanging flatteries for favours. 2. They mind earthly things; Watch them, you will see the center of their circumference (be the circle never so great) will be themselves and families, places, profits, preferments, gratui∣ties, these are sweet Venison after hunting; pluralities, non∣residence, neglecting Gods flock by other persons, are little bet∣ter then the unpardonable sins, but plusquam pluralities can down with themselves without straining, and the silver bell that hath the greatest sound is the fairest call for their so doing, and the still voyce of God speaking to their consciences is not heard through the noise thereof: their happiness is not so much to be envyed as their unhappiness to be pitied; neither is the season∣able attendance of good men of this tribe about our present Rulers and families in the least impleaded in these lines, nor their bounty or favour towards them, provided their attendance be not with the great neglect of those grand duties incumbent up∣on them by the Word of God, by Covenant and Conscience, and that they improve their interest, opportunities and advan∣tages with them for the Common Peace of all their Bre∣thren in the faith, however differing in opinion from them∣selves. Thirdly, The men (of my meaning) of persecuting of princi∣ples for conscience sake, are always found defaming, vilifying and reproaching their dissenting brethren unto the Rulers, by cloathing their opinions with ugly names, as dangerous, dismal, and dreadful things (taking advantage from their impossibility
through their much business to examine the truth, and to make their own eyes their judges in the case, to save them a labour by telling them in their own manner, what men hold, and how dangerous those things be, never informing (either through their own ignorance or malice) in what sence, with what cautions, limitations, and restrictions, they maintain, or deny, and upon what grounds and arguments, they assert their judgements, it is no hard thought to suppose; (for there is reason enough) that there are men of worth, learning, excellency, and holiness, whose names and reputations suffer shipwrack by the men of this Charactr, when any knotty, painful, and laborious business, (pertinent to their function) in times of straits, appear necessary to be done; the men of their quarrel are then in esteem, but when the cloud is over, and the work is done, and the Sun shines again, they have then done with them, they are shut up again in darkness under their black reproaches and scandals, and if they have but the liberty of their private Confines, Societies, and Companies, it is reward sufficient, if not too much for all their labours; like the subtle Ape that took the Spaniels foot to reach the chesnut out of the fie, and then eats the kernel, and gts him gone, leaving the burnt Spaniel to seek out a plaister: Well, the other world will make up all. A wise Prince cannot but judge such disingenuity much unworthy their function, and hs fa∣vour. Fourthly, Men of persecuting principles for conscience sake, are frequently known by this charactar, viz. They bring their opinions to the Scriptures, and fetch them not thence, and pre∣fer their id est, before the Scriptum est, their interpretation be∣fore the Text. Men that Caedem Scripturarum faciuut, as one saith, that murther the Scriptures, yea that torture and torment them, like Amboyna Tyrants, to make them confess, and own such things, as were never in their meaning. The Scribes and Pharisees preferred their traditional interpretations before the Text, and could not bear any exposition, though never so sound against their false glosses, though never so rotten, and that upon this ground, it is the general received opinion, and orthodox doctrine of all the Rabbies, Doctors and Fathers: Non tam ovum vo simile, One egge is not so like another as those then;
and these in our dayes. Did they prefer their false glsses before the true Text? so do these. Were they more zealous of their tra∣ditional doctrines, then of the Letter of the Scriptures? so are these. Were they fiery Adversaries to mn differing from them, though more learned, more holy, more serviceable to God and the world, then themselves? so are these. Did they stir up the people against Dssenters from them? so do these. Did they bring forth their raylings instead of reasons? so do these. Did they strive to insnare, and catch at words and expressions with∣out respect to the sence and meaning of good men, to make them obnoxious to men in authority? so do these. Did they falsely misrepresent them to men in place and rule? so do these. A wise Prince will beware of these men that dig for evil against their brethren, to defame them, that the ruler may disfavour them. It is Solomons character of an ungodly man, to dig up evil, and whose lip are as burning fire, who sow strife, sepa∣rate chief friends, men that will pick up, dig out all that may be, and more then truth to injurie the men of their controversie. When the Manichees could not answer Austins arguments, they hit him in the teeth with his youthful follies, whereunto his reply was only this, Quae vos reprehenditis ego damnavi, What you discommend in me, I have long since condemned: and the ma∣licious Papists did the like to Beza, reprinting his wit-wanton Poems on purpose to dispe him, and objecting his former mis∣carriages whereof he had repented, he replied to one that did twit him in the teeth with it, Hic homo invidet mihi gratiam Christi, This man enies me the grace of Jesus Christ: And thus Miriam and Aaron, Num. 12. 1. being retted that God should declare his Counsels to Moses only, and that he should have the repu∣tation of it, and not they, had nothing to object against him, but an old matter of several years date, viz. his marrying with an Aethiopian: I shall say no more about these men, but wish all good rulers may never be troubled with such as these: White-Hall formerly was very rarely without them; their A∣phorisms and Maxims, are dangerous. It was of old, No Bi∣shop, no King: which was more ominous then necessary, and the end of it was to engage the King to assert the Bishops, and to assist them in their tyranny and executing their cruel censures
by his civil Sword. We have other saying of the same sence, and for the same end, though in other expressions: viz. That the Sword of the Magistracy and the Sword of the Ministry must go together: which is a truth in a singular, but not vulgar sence; or (if you please) in an English, not Scottish sence, that is, to protect, (not punish) the people of God for keeping a good conscience. That Magistratus est custos, & conservator utriusque tabulae, A true saying in a qualified sence, though many times very ill applied: The Papists made Lutherans, and Cal∣venists, the Bishops; Brownists, and Separatists, the Presbyteri∣ans; Sectaries, and Hereticks; there are still that succeed them in their ill trade, and are about an evil work, viz. making wick∣ed Anabaptists, Blasphemers, Arminians, Socinians, Pelagians, and I know not what of those whom the Spirit of God through grace by the belief of the Gospel hath made the blessed servants of the most High God, Kings, and Princes, and Parliaments have been dasht in pieces at this stone by too much complyance with the men of this Character. And the Christian care of our late Rulers, and present Protector, and caution of them hitherto hath opened the mouths of many Saints of different apprehensi∣ons, agreeing together as one man, with one heart and lip, in prayers and prayses to God for them and him: and I wish with all my soul, and that for the peace and happiness of my Country, that that Spirit, Judgment, and Conscience of theirs, and of him, in this respect may be redoubled upon his Successours. His loftiness in place provokes loveliness in practise, the more high the more humble, and like the Sun above he comforts and cherisheth those that are under him. His greatness doth better him, and not betray him into pride, and vanity, his HIGHNESS is his peoples happiness, he is like an Angel of God amongst them to protect and defend them, not as a Lion among beasts to terrifie and torment them, he is their glory, and not their grie, their songs and not their sighs; When the righteous are in authority the people rejoyce, Prov. 29. 2. because he is a mercy, and not a mischief unto them.
His great project is rather to be beloved then feared of the people, and by doing every man right, and no man wrong, he sets up his Throne in every mans heart. It is noted by the Indians in America, that the Chri∣stians God is a good God, who doth good, but their God (who is the Devil) they count good when he doth them no hurt, and therefore they serve him not in love, but in fear: The Lord reigns making the earth to rejoyce thereby; and so should Princes be the triumph, and not the terrour of their Territories. His greatness provokes his goodness to commensure herewith in the middest of his glory; he remembers his shame, and the deep sense of his own demerits keeps him humble under popular Applause, knowing that his receipts are great, his talents many, his accounts proportiona∣ble, he is always reckoning of his reckoning day: Pride, passsion, and wilfulness, incident to greatness, are his constant caution. His heighth humbles him, and his humility exalts him, his sense of his emptiness draws his heart after God for fulness. Pride brings a Tyrant low, but honour upholds the humble in spirit, Sequitur superbos ultor, à tergo Deus, Vengeance follows the proud man at the heels; the judgment of God upon Pharaoh, Adonibezck, Agag, Haman, Hrod, &c. are much in his heart, his religion teaches him to be pure, peaceable, gentle, easie to be entreated, he (like Christ) seeks not his own glory, and there∣fore God seeks it, and keeps it for him, John 18. 30. He con∣tends not for himself, and therefore is God for him; under per∣sonal injuries he sits down with content, but publick wrongs rouze him up to contend; his heart is hunted out of his earthly holds, he sees the uncertainty of earthly glory, the vanity, the non-entity of outward pomp, their impotency to help in the evil day, their impossibility to stretch to Eternity: That outward greatness is but a conceited wall, Prov. 18. 11. He well considers that God humbles the haughty, lifts up the lowly, as the lower
the Ebbe, the higher the Tide; so his humiliation shall not ex∣ceed his exaltation, he looks not so much upon his fine feathers, as his foul feet, which is ballace to his bottom, and prevents the danger of his Broad-Sails, in the swelling and Surging Seas of outward pomp and greatness, he blusheth (not blesseth himself) under popular applauses; prayse do more press him, thn please him, and gate upon him then gratifie him; the higher his head is before men, the lower his heart before God, he does wor∣thily in Euphrata, and therefore is he famous in Bethlehm: his same attends his vertue, as the shadow the body, he hath no tongue to praise himself: Haec ego fci proves men no bet∣ter then Faeces, (saith Luther.) Self-brags shews mens drgs and dross, not their valour and vetue. Laus proprio sordescit in ore, he that commnds himself, vomits out of his own mouth his own shame, nauciating the stacks of standers by: Moses glory was not known to himself, but to those that beheld him, his face did shine, but he knew it not, his ears (are not tickled but) tingle, when he hears men speak of his worth and wor∣thiness. When an elegant Speech was made in the commendation of Charls the fifth, by a great person, rehersing his noble and famous acts: the Emperour modestly replyes; That he accepted of the Oration, because it did admonish him not so much what he had been, as what he ought to be. He remembers what he was when he sees what he is. It is stoied of Agathcles, who of a Potters son, became King in Scicily; that he would ever be served in earthen vessels; and of one Willigis, Bishop of Mentz, being a Wheel-wrights▪ Son, that he caused wheels to be hanged up ad down the walls from his Palace with these words over them in Capital Letters, Willigis, Willigis recole unde Venris, Mind thy beginning. It was good counsel given by Placilla the Empress to her Husband Theodosius: Remem∣ber Sir, what you were laely, and what you are now, this will make you mindful of your duty, and give God the glory: A man as good, as great, considers what he must be, as well as what he was, and is, he makes account of his accounts, and is frequently reckoning his reckonings; his Masters Redde ratio∣nm is much in his mind, his receipts are in his eyes, and his account current in his heart, and his quietus est, is the first∣born
of his desires, his even reckonings make long friendship between God and him, he is often casting up his books, lest his books should cast him up at last, which makes him diligen, watchful, humble and low in his own thoughts, the noise of the feet of them that buried his Predecessours, is much in his ears, he has the sound of his own passing bell, and in his thoughts goes to his own Funeral; he considers that as he hath had a time to be born, so he will have a time to die, and that he is every day drawing on, towards his drawing on: that his last day stands, but all the rest runs, that the mortal Sythe is Master of the royal Scepter, and that it mows down as well the Lilies of the Crown, as the Crown of the Lilies; he remembers that though his Palace be built of hewen stone, yet his life is immu∣red within mud-walls in a clay cottage, and earthly taberna∣cle, that his foundation is the dust ready to be shattered and scattered with every blast, that he is but terra friabilis, crum∣bling, loose earth: Pride, passion, and self-will, are his constant caution. First, Pride, he that saith he hath no pride, cannot want it, this made a devil of an Angel, and threw him down from his Throne with a vengeance. God resisteth a proud person, (as in battail-array,) It is God's resoluion (not) to tan (all glory but) the pride of all glory, and bring into contempt all the proud, (though) honorable of the Earth, Isai. 23. 8. He hath his day for the proud and lofty; for every one that is lifted up, he shall be brought low, his loty looks shall be humbled, and the Lord alone shall be exled, he pulleth down the proud, and lifteth up the lowly: He doth carefully cautelously, yea very curiously look to himself, let his valour, his victories, his greatness, his Highner, his Armies, his Navies, the crowchings of his enemies, the applications of the great Princes of other Nations, his great houses, his revenues, his atendance do steal in upon him, b∣leagure his heart, seize it and take it before he is aware, and car∣ry him into captiviy under pride and vanity, and bring him to ruine without remedy; he well remembers that by humility, and the fear of the Lord▪ are riches, and honour, and life, Prov. 22. 4. When pride cometh in, shame cometh on, but while he is humble, God is at his right hand, so that he shall not fall, if he
grows proud, he will know him at a distance, yea afar off. And therfore he studies God, who pulleth down and setteth up whom he pleaseh, whose are all Kingdoms, Power, and Glory; and he studies himself, his dust and ashes, his heart, his lip, his life in∣firmities, he watcheth and prayeth against pride and vanity, which will make him humble and happy. Secondly, His own Passion is his own pain and sorrow: Commonly Princes think they may be passionate by priviledg and peevish by prerogative. Moses was an excellent General, an eminent Governor, and his meekness did add much to his me∣rit: Anger is little better then a short Devil, and he that gives way to it, gives place to him. He that is big with wrath, breeds contention, and brings forth transgression in abundance: A fu∣rious man is a man master'd by furies, and (as the Persian Kings to their Concubines) is a slave to a slave. Anger may rush into the heart of wise men, but it resteth and roosteth only in the bo∣som of fools: The hasty man never wants woe. One counselled Augustus to determine nothing rashly when he was angry, but that he should first repeat the Greek Alphabet: Ambrose taught Theodosius in that case to repeat the Lords Prayer. He that is slow to anger is of great understanding, but he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly. 'Tis true, it's good to be angry, and not to sin, but then a man must be angry at nothing but sin, and not as it is an offence to man, but to God, nor yet so angry as to be unfit for prayer: Moses was angry at the Israelites golden Calf, but could pray for them; Christ at the unbelief of the Pharisees, but was grieved for the hardness of their hearts. Right anger is a very tender vertue, and such as by reason of mans unskilfulness may be easily corrupted, and made dangerous. The Spirit of Prayer, Meditation, Communion with God, and the spirit of frowardness, will never mingle: the Spirit of Prophecy came not upon Elisha until his heat was over; and his anger was charm∣ed by the musick of a Minstrel, 2 King. 3. 15. A froward heart shall depart from God, a meek and quiet spirit is of great price with him. God deals above the thundering, tempestuous, and blustering clouds, and meets with men in the cool of the day, speaking and appearing in the still voice. He that is slow to anger is better then the mighty. Uruly passions (saith one) are
those Turks with whom we must ever make war: those Spa∣niards, with whom who ever made peace, gained nothing but repentance; a deadly fewd must be between good Princes and their lusts, which war in their members, fighting against their souls. A passionate person, though he be not drunk, yet is he not his own man: It's a shame for a Prince to have his lusts his lords, and his vices his vanquishers; He that ruleth his spirit, is better then he that taketh a City, Vince animos iramque tuam qui caetera vincis, Victory over himself yeilds him greater glory, richer spoyls, then all other victories: Here to overcome will is his glory, to be overcome his shame. Thirdly, Self-will is not his will, knowing that Sic volo, sic jubeo, &c. is the Tyrants Charactar, and very incident to men in power, and their will is frequently their wo. King Charls was a probatum est of this. Josiah one of the most famous Kings recorded in the Book of God, for piety and goodness, yet he never consulting the Prophets, resolutely would go to war con∣trary to counsel, which cost him his life, 2 Chron. 35. 22. to the great loss and lamentation of all his good people: Consilii satis est in me mihi, is the saying of Solomons fool, in whose eyes his own ways is right, Prov. 12. 15. But he that hearkneth to coun∣sel is wise. A person suspecting his own judgement, and taking advise of wiser then himself, seldom miscarries. A wo is pro∣nounced to that Land whose King is a Child, that is, weak, wil∣ful, and uncounselable; as Rehoboam, who was a child at forty years old, whose father was a man at twelve; for age is no just measure of wisdom: Solomon the wise chose him an excellent Councel of State, whom Rehoboam refused to hear, being as wilful as his father wise, being heady, high-minded, he lost ten Tribes by his wilful and churlish breath. It was said of old, Romani sedendo vincunt, Wisdom is better then strength, prudence ex∣celleth puissance, and counsel courage, which made Agamem∣non set such a price upon Ʋlysses: Where no counsel is the people fall, but in the multitude of Counsellers, (truly so called) there is safety; It is not titles, but truths; not the name of counsels, and counsellers, but the proper natures of them, that will bless him, and the people under him. It is reported of Xerxes,
that in his expedition against Greece, he called his Princes toge∣ther, but gave them neither freedom of speech, or councel, lest I should seem (said he) to follow mine own counsel I have assembled you, but do you remember, that it becomes you rather to obey, then to advise. To have a wise Councel that must not advise, or a weak Councel that cannot ad∣vise, is much the same in the sigh of God, and wise men: for a Prince to resolve to follow the advice of his Councel, and yet to command them to give no counsel but what he tells them, he will follow, i, as if one should promise to maintain me so long as I live, provided I live no longer then he will maintain me. He hath weighty Affairs in his head, in his heart, on his hand; therefore all his purposes are established by wise Coun∣sel, which makes his proceedings neither unconstant, nor un∣comfortable: Deliberandum est diu quod statuendum est semel. He considers long re he resolves upon any weighty enterprise, A Christian Prince first of all, and above all adviseth with God, Wo be to the rebellious children, that take counsel but not of me, Isai. 30. 1. David had able Counselles about him, but his chiefest were Gods testimonies. Psal. 119. 24. Thy testimo∣nies are my delight and my Counsellers. Princes have had their Remembrancers, Moniters, Councellers, as Themistocls, his A∣naxagores, Alexander his Aristotle, Scipio his Panaetius and Polybbius; but it is reported of Scipio Africanus that it was his custome before day to go in Cellam Jovis, and there to stay quasi consultans de Republica Jove, advising with God about his Commonwealth: David in all his straits asked counsel of the Lord: With good ADVICE make war, said Solomon. Great matters require great advice: The Souldiers rule is, Non sequi non sugere bellum: neither to follow after war, nor to fly from it: and it is the Christians Motto: Nc temere nc timidè. He well understands his slippery standing, that he is a man in nature, though a God in Name; that the end of all is alike to all, though no mans dan∣ger like to his: That heighth of place endangers down∣fall,
that the pinacle of preferment is a dreadfull poynt, which causeth his caution in all his steerage. He considers that his honours are attended with dangers, his Crown with cares, he knows that to keep and maintain the love of God, and the peoples good will cost him study, for it, requires skill, That the Rulers duty is not soon learnt, that his work is great, his strength is small, his dangers many, his busi∣ness curious, his head, his heart, his hand, with much diligence are all imployed. He is the poor means Patron, the widows Husband, the Orphans Father, the good mans pleasure, the bad mans terrour, affable in speech, facile in access, amiable in countenance, respecting no mans person, but every mans cause, thereby he becomes the desire of all. The Work of the Ruler is to judge the poor, that's his duty, and his establishment. James the fourth of Scotland, was for this called The poor mans King. Help, O King, said the poor woman to Jehoram. If thou wilt not hear and right me, why doest thou take upon thee to be King? said the poor woman to Philip King of Macedony: It is a mercy to have Judges. Mo∣do audeant quae sentiunt. So that they have courage to do what they judge fit to be done. A just Ruler is (as one saith of a just Law) a heart without affection, an eye without last, a mind without passion, a treasury which keepeth for every one what he hath, and distributeth to every one what he should have. Such a Prince shall sit firm on his Throne, the hearts of his people wil be his Life-Guard, and God his Protection, such an one is like God, the poor mans refuge in the time of trouble, in him the Fatherless find mercy, and he will cause the widows heart to sing for joy, if her cause be just, his conscience pleads it with him, he regards not the greatness of her adversaris, but th goodness of her cause; he is no secret accepter of persons, Job 13. 10. he hears causes without prejudicial impiety, and judi∣ciously examines them without sinister obliquity: and sincerely
determins them without sinful partiality. It was said of Cato, that he was one A quo nemo unquam rem injustam petere au∣debat, So just as no man durst make any unjust request unto him. He esteemeth royalty without righteousness, as emi∣nent dishonour, guilded putrifaction, glorious baseness, riches, retinue, splendor, and greatness, no better then meer Pageantry, shews and shadows of Nobleness, which causeth his vigilancy over his own heart, and his own family. Righteousness is the way to rices, goodness makes men glori∣ous. It was said by one of Constantine the Great, Bonus Deus Constantinum magnum tantis trrenis implevit muneribus quanta optare nullus auderet, The good Lord heaped so much outward happiness upon (his faithful Servant) Constantine the Great, as no man ever durst to have wished more; his glory (like Sarah's beauty) consisteth in the hidden man, 1 Pet. 3. 4. He knows that Dignitas in indigno est ornamentum in luto, That a jewel of gold in a swines nout, is as comely as gay clothes upon vile persons, painted Sepulchres. Solomons wisdom ren∣dred him more honourable then all his glittering and golden glo∣ry: the justice, wisdom, righteousness of a pious Prince, these are Ornaments of grace, and Crowns of glory, Prov. 4. 8, 9. Riches, honours, delights, pleasures, life, length of days, seed, and posterity, are all entailed upon piety and holiness; outward pomp, greatness and glory suck out the goodness of the heart, (as the Ivy from the Oak) except there be curious caution; What are they but insufficient and unsatisfactory, often provo∣cations to vice, and hinderancs of vertue? The Order of nature is inverted, when vile men are exalted, Psal. 12. 8. It is a foul incongruity, and of very evil consequence, vile persons are loathsom, though veild with velvets, and the children of Satan though in Sattin. He hath great vigilancy over his own family; he sees who they are, and what they are: every officer, every servant he keeps, is of his own choyce or approbation: He cannot rule well
in the Church, much less in the Nation, that ruleth not his own house well: He bewares of an Achitophel, a Doeg, an Haman. It was said of a Prince of Germany, That esset alu si esset apud alios, He would be another man, were he with other men. He takes heed who gets the royalty o his ear, lest he doth with him what he list. David would not know, i. e. own a wicked person, Psal. 101. 4. and vers. 7. He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house, he that telleth lyes shall not tarry in my sight; An hypocrite, an Ismaelite shall not dwell wih him: He takes heed of proud servants; knowing that men will be apt to mistake him in them, and think they read him in them. A wicked person in his family is as an Achan in the Army, a Jonas in the Ship. 'Tis his honour and wisdom to be loved and feared of his family; which he will never be, except they be wise and honest: He that delicately bringeth up his servant, shall have him become son at the length, Prov. 29. 21. Solomon himself (that sometimes knew better how to give good counsel then to take it) entertains Jeroboam, gave him great power in his house, admitted him into so much familiarity, that he let loose the bridle of domestical discipline unto him, in so much that he took state upon him as a young Master in the house, and soon after turn'd Traytor: See the like in Abner, Ishbosheths servant, who grew so haughty, that he must not be spoken to; and so Zimri, whom his Lord and Master Elah, 1 King. 16. 11. advanced Captain over half of his charets, being thus like a beg∣ger set on horsebck, ides without reins to the ruine of his Ma∣ster and whole house: Asperius nihil est humili dum surgit in altum. It is with a Ruler in respect of evil servants, as with a creature called Millipeda, the more feet it hath the flower it goeth: cor∣rupt servants hinder the course of Justice; this reflects upon their Lords. His frowns are upon evil, and his favors upon wise servants, which is Solomons counsel, Prov. 14. 3. as was Pha∣raohs towards Joseph, Darius towards Daniel, Henry the Eght towards Cromwell, who for his wisdom and faithfulness he raised from a mean person (son to a Blacksmith) to be Master of his Jewel-house, Baron of Okeham in Rutland-shire, then Knight of the Garter, Earl of Essex, Lord great Chamberlain, and at last
his Vicar General. A wise servant may have rule over a son with∣out dishonor to the father, and discredit to the son. Amongst his servants some may be wiser, some better, some more in Gods favour then others: He lets such have rule over his houshold by his commission, and suffers not the bambles to domineer over the Cedas. The leity, luxury, idleness, wantonness of the quon∣dam Court at White-hall, together with their concomitants, were none of the last onns of their destruction. It is observed by one, that among all the servants, pleasures and delights which So∣lomon had, he got him no fool or Jester, which formerly Princes could not be without in this Nation, no not when they should be most serious. It is recorded of Henry the third King of France, that in a solemn Pcession at Paris he could not be without his Jestr, who walking between the King and the Cardinal, made mirth to them both: Was not here sweet devotion? The truth is, eir religious actions were all in jest, their wicked in earnest: I hope no such vile and vicious persons will be ever found more in our English Courts. He is the joy of the just, the delight of their souls, the breath of their nostrils: He lives beloved, he dyes desired, is buried with lamentations, his generation is blessed, and his name is had in everlasting remembrance. The Death of Josiah struck the heart of Israel and Judah, making their eyes as fountains of tears, and their mourning so grat, that it grew to a Proverb, The mourning of Hadadri∣mon in the valley of Megiddon, Zach. 12. 11. His memory shall be blessed, his name shall be heir to his life, and hs poste∣rity shall enjoy the fruit of his vertue, His children are blessed after him, Prov. 20. 7. His righteousness is inherited by his po∣sterity, and laid up in everlasting remembrance, and his trans∣lation shall be unto an incorruptible Crown of Glory, which is undefiled and fadeth not away, with the whole Family of God, and the Spirits of just men made perfect, where he shall receive a prepared Kingdom, and dwell among those Mansions, shining as the Sun in the Firmament, for ever, and ever. FINIS.
