p4251 e149_3 99872222 156712
AN ABSTRACT OF Certain Depositions, By vertue of His MAjESTIES Commission, taken upon Oath, Concerning the Traiterous intention of the Rebels in Ireland, in rejecting the Government of His Majestie, in ha∣ving a King of their own: And who that King should be. With an Extract of a Letter from Rome, 4. Jan. 1641. Published by His Majesties Command. Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of JOHN BILL. 1642.
C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
An Abstract of the Depositions by vertue of His Majesties Commission, taken upon Oath, concerning the traiterous intention of the Rebels, in rejecting the Government of His Majestie, in having a King of their own: And who this King should be. GEorge Cook of Lissignie,Cavan 71. Jan. 22. 1641. inter coe∣tera, deposeth, that one Tirlagh O Gowne, alias Smith, a Popish Priest, said, That the Papists would have their Churches, Lands, and Kingdom to themselves from the English, and be no more slaves to the English, as they had been, or else they would lose their lives. Richard Colley, of the Parish of Kinnallie,Ferma∣nagh 90. Febr. 2. 1641. in∣ter coet. deposeth, that Bryan O Cormacke of Dristernan, and other Rebels said, They would never submit to any English man. Thomas Magill, Clerk, inter coet. deposeth,Lowth 4. Febr. 21. 1641. that Collogh, Mac Brian, Mac Mahowne, and severall other Rebells, said, That they would not be subject to any Parliaments in England, and that they would have none to Govern o∣ver them, but a born Irish man.
Matthew Browne of Clonisse,Monag∣han 36. March 24 1641. Gent. inter coet. deposeth, that he heard Peter Bath say, That they looked to have the King to put out the words Defender of the faith; for none was su∣pream of the Church, and Defender of the Faith, but the Pope. Richard Whitton of Kilvane,Wickloe 8 Jan. 11. 1641. inter coet. de∣poseth, that Luke Birne of Kilvane said, He would have their Religion flourish, no thanks to the King. Edward Deaselye,Wickloe 39. Feb. 5. 1641. inter coet. deposeth, That Luke Toole and Luke Birne offered a Passe to this Examinant, which they said, would be better then the Kings Passe. Thomas Taylor of Kilmore,Cavan. 47. Jan. 12. 1641. inter coet. depo∣seth, that he heard Mulmore O Kely say, That if the said Deponent would deny the King, he should speed as they did. William Wright of Culmonyn,Queenes 31. April 12. 1642. inter coet. de∣poseth, that John Good of Clonaysawne, and Dermot Mac Phelmi said, That they hoped to have all Protestants hanged within one fort∣night, and he that did protect them too. Richard Knowles of Newtowne,Ferma∣nagh 60. 10 Ian. 1641. inter coet. de∣poseth, that Rory Magwite, Richard Nugent, Donogh Magwire, by whose means he was robbed, some of the said Robbers said, That they had a King of their own in Ireland. Nicholas Michaell of Farnam,Cavan, 57. Ian 15. inter coet. de∣poseth, that he heard the parties that robbed him say, They had an Irish King amongst them, and they regarded not King Charles, the King of England.
Robert Barton of Newtowne, inter coet.Fermanagh 41. Jan. 5. depo∣seth, that some of the Rebels said, They had a new King, and had Commission from him for what they did. Thomas Middlebrooke, inter coet.Ferma∣nagh 18. 4. Jan. deposeth, that about the 26. of October last past, he heard one Cahell Boy Mac Demot of Killrout say, That within one fortnight they should have a new King of Ireland crowned, one of the O Neales, or words to that effect. Avis Brashaw, inter coet. deposeth,Ferma∣nagh 19.4. Jan. That she heard the abovesaid Cahall Boy say the same, or words to that effect. Alice Tibbs, inter coet. deposeth,Ferma∣nagh 20. 4. Jan. That she heard the abovesaid Cahall Boy say the same, or words to that effect. Alice Champin, the relict of Arthur Champin,Ferma∣nagh 27. 14. April inter coet. deposeth, that she heard the Rebelli∣ous Irish say, That Sir Phellomy Roe of Neale should be King of Ireland, and that they would give a great sum of Money, on condition they had our gracious King Charles his head. Elizabeth Gough, inter coet. deposeth,Cavan. 85. 8. Febr. That Cahir O Kelay, and Thomas Mac-Encorr said, They purposed to have a King of their own, and that Sir Phelmi O Neale should be he. John Gregg of Clovenedan, inter coet.Ardmagh 3. 7. Jan. 1641. depo∣seth, that Captain Shane O Neale, stiled, Sir Phelmi O Neale His Majestie. Martha Culme, inter coet. deposeth,Monag∣han 21. 14. Febr. that one Art. Mac Patrick, Mac Toole Boy, Mac Mahowne, speaking to her in Irish, she desired him to de∣liver
himself in English, for she understood not Irish: Who answered her in English, That such as spoke in English, should pay ten shil∣lings to the King: And the Deponent deman∣ding of him, What King. He answered, What King but the Earl of Tyrone. Hugh Culme, inter coet.Monaghan. 16.25. Jan. deposeth, that he was credibly told that Art. Mac Mahowne said, That they that spoke English should pay ten shillings to the King: The party to whom it was spoken, desiring to know what King. His answer was, What King but the Earl of Tyrone. Anne Gill,Ferma∣nagh. 69.29. Jan. inter coet. deposeth, that Rory Magwire in the presence of this Deponent, and a great many of her Neighbours, gave forth, That it was to no purpose for them to flee to Dublin for succour, for Dublin was taken by the Lord Magwire, who was to be King of Ireland. Roger Puttock, John Sterne, Jo. Wat∣son, Wil. Aldrich, Henry Brereton, William Hitchcock, Randall Adams.
An Extract of a Letter written 4. January. 1641. From Isidores Colledge in Rome, by Bonaventure O Connye, to Feylmi Roe O Neill in Ireland. THe holy Father and his two Ne∣phewes, Cardinall Anthony Bar∣barinus Protector of Ireland, and Cardinall Francis Barbarinus, who hath all the power here in such matters as concern the Pope, have heard of the War and Confederation which you make for your Religion and Libertie: And truly I cannot expresse the greatnesse of the Joy (no wonder) which they conceive thence, in such manner, that if they had received Letters, or if you had sent an Agent unto them to expresse your Will or Designes, you should want no help for your better proceedings. Wherefore I would have
you to send some able man, with a Declaration of your Grievances in form of Law. Be sure to have a great heart, and make some chief head among you, but reserve the Crown for Con his side the Neills. Remember the old sla∣verie wherein you have lived of long time, and the destruction which will generally come upon you, except you get the upper hand: You will prevail, if you joyn together as you ought, God send it. I would advize every chiefe Officer among you to have a Secretarie along with him to write a Diurnall of your passages, and over∣throws, which your Enemies receive; which will redound much to your Glory. Spoil not the countrey for fear of Famine. I will not fail to write according as I shall hear from you. We would send unto you a Bull, after the form of the Bull which Hugh Mac-Baron got, if we had recei∣ved your Letters. If the Church do well they will turn over the Election of Prelates there to the Nobilitie, and will give them Authoritie in that point. FINIS.
