R46 43077574 151662
A MEDITATION For the Thirtieth day of January, THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE Murther and Martyrdom OF K. CHARLS the I. The best of Kings, of Husbands, of Fathers, and of Men, who was decolated on that day, Anno 1648. and in the Four and twentieth year of His Sacred Majesties most Gracious Reign. Cain rose up against Abel his Brother, and slew him. Gen. 4. 8. HArd hearted Nature! That being yet so young, should bring forth so cruel a Monster? A Brother to kill a Brother, and that for no other quarrel, but for his Righteousness, because his deeds were good, and Cains evil; what malignity did our first Parents fall, distil into all the succeeding Race? Yet being question'd by the voice of Heaven, Cain, desperately evill as he was, was not so impudently shameless as to own, though not so ingenu∣ous, as to confess the fact; but why should we remember Cain with so black a Character? Cain, a Saint may seem, compared with the Sons of Belial, whom this latter age hath produced; we have seen (as this day England direful Tragedy; England, that most dismally hath committed Felony upon her self, and with her own bloody hands, cut off her own Royal head: Oh, 'tis a sad judgement, that upon the defect of our prayers, and the omission of our obedience, is fallen upon us, a judgment accompanied with such lamentable consequences, occasioned by so deplorable an action, so fatal a blow, as no hand can write the story of it, for trembling; or if it could, no eye were able to read for weeping; no tongue is able to speake it's greife, for stammering and titubations; or if it should, no ear were able to hear it, for glowing: Nay, we have seen that that is so far from being communicable to posterity in any credible relation, that we our selves, can hardly believe our selves, to to have seen a most gracious, glorious King, setled in his Fathers Throne, by the Laws of God and of the Land, confirmed in his Regal Power, by the Oathes of Allegiance, taken by his very enemies, in the issue of a sharp tedious War, after the expence of many thousands of Noble, Generous, Loyal, Protestant Christians lives, in his just defence, to be at length, by the power of a rebellious, treacherous crew of his own Subjects, (and many of them his false-hearted, houshold Servants,) born, and bred▪ and grown rich under his happy Government, (and by his liberal hand) brought to a solemn tryal, under pretence of Law, formally arraign'd for his life & adjudged by those that were his professed foes (and without being heard) as a Tyrant, Traytor, Murtherer and a publique Enemy to be put to death, by the severing his Head from his Body; and that this sentence should be executed, by the force of the Souldiery, on a Scaffold erected before his own Court? In the midst of Populous London and Westminster; in the face of the Sun at noon day, God, Angels, Men, looking on; and to pass through his Banqueting-house, his house of State and Pleasure, to this Mount-Calvary; and as a Lamb, before the Shearers not to open his mouth? Oh the Heavens! I dare not enter into too serious a consideration of this unheard off, unparalel'd fact, lest I drown my senses in the Abysse of in∣comprehensible sorrow; the whole world abroad stands amazed at it, England onely being under the stroke, remaines stupidly insensible of her own, both fin and misery: The earth indeed at this day, was not felt to quake, but all mens hearts, (not more hard then the Adamant) trembled: The graves indeed did not open to let forth their dead, but many tender-hearted, amongst the living, with grief dyed, and went to their graves: The vales of our Temples indeed were not rent, but our material Temples themselves, in this the head of our Church on earth, were vertually destroyed in his Majesties Dominions: More, I cannot tell more, on this sad Theam; I dare not so much as think, lest I thinking, dye: Much less do I know what to do, (for since the Creation of the World, the like hath not been seen) but mine eyes, dear God, are towards thee. EJACULATION. Lord! How long wilt thou be angry? shall thy jealousie burn like fire for ever? If this be done to the green and fruitful tree, what shall become of the drie and withered? If a gracious King, whom thou hast made so neer thy self, escape not thy hand of temporal punishment, what may a rebellious, a monstrously sinful People expect? But in Judgment thou hast promised to remember mercy, have mercy then I humbly pray thee, upon the remnant of thy People, preserve us under the shadow of thy wings, until this Ty∣ranny be over-past, and establish over us if it be thy holy will CHARLES the Second, the undoubted Son and Heire of his fathers Vertues and Crowns, that Kings again according to thy own ordinance, may be Nursing Fathers, and Queens Nursing Mothers is this our Israel, that Religion, Law, Liberty, Property, Commerce, Love, and Ʋnity, may return againe to our bleeding and fainting Nations, and all this for thy Sons sake, our Saviour Jesus Christ, Amen, Amen. Written and wept by M. de R. of the Middle-Temple. Exq. 3. Printed in the Year. 1660.
