R796 E107_7 99871562 123974
A Relation of a terrible Monster taken by a Fisherman neere Wollage, July the 15. 1642. and is now to be seen in Kings street, Westminster. The shape whereof is like a Toad, and may be called a Toad-fish; But that which makes it a Monster, is, that it hath hands with fingers like a man, and is chested like a man. Being neere five foot long, and three foot over, the thicknesse of an ordinary man. The following Discourse will describe him more particularly. Whereunto is added, A Relation of a bloudy Encounter be∣twixt the Lord Faulconbridge and Sir John Hotham, wherein the Duke of Richmond is hurt, and the Lord Faulconbridge taken prisoner. With some other Misselanies of memory both by sea and land, with some Forreigne Occurrences. LONDON, Printed for Nath: Butter. 1642.
A Relation of a terrible Monster called a Toad-fish, &c. GOD sheweth his wonders in the deep, (saith the royall Prophet) but those wonders are never with our wonder, when once they leave their wonted stations, and come (upon what message God knows) to visit us in an unknowne world: their shapes being as miraculous to us, as our element unnaturall unto them. But to the purpose. Friday morning, July 15. between 4. and 5. of the clock in the morning, a lit∣tle above Wollage, one Thomas West, casting his net upon the comming in of the tide, for Salmon; upon the draw∣ing in of the net, (whose weight and difficulty in drag∣ging portended to him good tidings) on a sudden he found a strange alteration: he sees in the net a Fiend, not a Fish; at the least a Monster, not an ordinary crea∣ture. Had not his companion had a better resolution, he would rather have been rid of his net, then troubled with his guest, so deeply was he struck with the odious shape of it. I now proceed to its shape and dimensions. It is by the vote of divers Gentlemen of great quality that went to see it, such a monstrous creature as scarce can be beleeved ever to have been seen: this morning brought alive into Glove-Alley in Kings street. It is cal∣led a Toad-fish, and with good reason; for the head and eyes, when it lyes upon its belly, doe perfectly resemble a Toad. But here lyes the wonder, turne him up, or but a little raise his head, and you shall behold the perfect breast and chest of a man: nay you may evidently tell
as many ribs, both short and long, as are in a man, and of the same joynture and feature; and two as perfect hands as any man whatsoever. By which it is evident that he swims upright, beating the water with his hands, as we all know how the Toad marcheth with his snowt up∣wards. His mouth very broad, with three ranks of sharp teeth; whereby it is probable that it is a devouring, ra∣venous, and prey-booting fish; yet is its mouth the ve∣ry embleme of a Toad, as likewise its eyes. A Butchers wife comming in hastily to see it, and hearing at the first that there was a strange fish to be seene, and being upon it in the stable where it lay before she was aware, thrust∣ing in among others, started from it with a shreek, cry∣ing, Oh the devill in the shape of a great fish, swounded, and was faine to be carryed out. The dimensions of the fish are these: He is in length well-nigh five foot, in breadth a yard over, having on each side two huge fins, in likenesse much like a Thornback, his taile a foot in length, as it were all of Whale-bone. Now the comming up of this monster into the fresh river, and so nigh the shore, is more then remarkable, (never any of this strange kinde ever having beene seene by any age before:) For Plinie, the Naturallist, although he confesseth that there is no creature or ver∣mine upon the earth, but hath its like in the seas, and that there is a Toad-fish, yet this Author averreth, that that fish never commeth neare the shore, but is con∣stantly in the depth of the Ocean, as is the Sharke, the Flaile-fish, and others of that noxious kinde, and that he never saw or heard of any taken upon any Coast save one, which was in the yeare that Nero (that never-sufficiently detested Tyrant) was borne in, of which he hath this note, that Monstrum praecessit monstro: and plain∣ly
divined that its arrivall was ominous, as indeed all Histories doe with constant consent maintain & write, that all unusuall births either in men or bruit creatures, in sea or upon land, especially out of their seasons, have ever been the fore-runners and sad harbingers of great commotions and tumults in States and Kingdomes, if not mournfull Heraulds of utter desolation: Witnesse the Heifer calving of a Lambe upon the Altar in Jeru∣salem, (mentioned by Josephus) some halfe a yeare be∣fore the dismall sacking, firing, and finall subversion of that beautifull & renowned City by Vespasian. A mares foling of a colt with two heads at Vitellius (that beast) his entrance into the Romane Empire, who did much mischiefs in his wicked raigne. A Whales comming ashoare at Diepe, a little before Francis the first was taken prisoner at the bataile of Pavia by Charles the fift, Em∣perour of Germanie, and King of Spaine. These unnaturall accidentss though dumbe, do not∣withstanding speake the supernaturall intentions and purposes of the Divine powers, chiefely when they meete just at that time when distractions, jars, and distempers are a foote in a Common-weale or King∣come: Messengers of Justice they were ever accoun∣ted; nay, they have without missing ever proved them∣selves to be the same. God in his mercie grant that this ugly monster may not for our sins prove the like to us, seeing the divers sins which are by divers Divines comprised in the nature of a toade, raigne, and have their swinge in our Nation. It is further observed by those that professe skill in Prognostication, that of how much the monster is of feature or fashion, hatefull and odious, so much it portends danger the more dreadfull and universall; God defend their observati∣on
may not hold in us, but surely a creature (if a crea∣ture we may call it, though truly it goeth something against the haire, considering its detestible ugly shape) I say a creature more displeasing, and at which hu∣mane blood may rise, I never saw with my eye, nor desire to see againe. LORD we beseech thee turne thy back upon our sinnes, and thy favourable aspect upon our miseries, very likely with more haste then good speede to light upon us. Unite (good God) Head and Members, King and Parliament, encrease their loyall affections to him, his royall approbation to them and their proceedings, whence may proceede in our time His Majesties content and all our securities, and let all true-hearted, plaine-dealing, and plaine-meaning Subjects say Amen.
Divers Occurrences from HULL and other places taken July. 15th. 1642. FROM Hull is reported this present Friday at West∣minster, that the King intending to build a Sconce or Halfe-moone neere Hull, to the intent to keepe aide from them either of men or moneyes, in the side of Lin∣colnshire, he committed the charge of that enterprize to my Lo: Falconbridge: the same Lo: proceeding with all diligence in raising the Halfe-moone to make batteries upon it, and placing his Ordnance against it, my Lord Rich being in his company, on Tuesday night a Scotch Knight and Captaine, with 500. men and foure field pieces, issued out of Hull, set upon my Lo: of Falconbridge, who received him very stoutly, and maintained a long and hot skirmish, three houres, in which my Lord Duke of Richmond fighting very vali∣antly is wounded; my Lord forced them to retreat and quit his workes; but being more valiant then ad∣vised, pursued so far that he had his horse shot under him, and by that meanes was taken prisoner and carri∣ed into Hull: The King sent from Beverley more aid to the Halfe-moone, so that for such a piece it is ve∣ry strong. His Majesty is very sorry at the wounding of the Duke, and said openly, that they had drawne his owne blood already. This morning went 200. Volunteeres all armed through Lincolnes-Inne-fields, having red and yellow fethers, and ribbonds in their hats, and went directly to the water-side to take shipping for Hull this very day.
God send my Lord of Holland, and his associate, well with their message, that they may deliver it unto the Kings content, but these are but bad signes of it, di∣vers were slaine and hurt of both sides in this attempt and defence spoken of, but no number named. London, July 16. 1642. RIchard Nevill Esquire, of Billingbeare, Gentleman in Ordinary of his Majesties Privy Chamber, was sent with an hundred gallant Horse, Tuesday, July the 12. unto the aid and assistance of Master Henry Hastings, High Sheriffe of Leicester shire. The Earle of Warwicke hath sent againe unto the House, earnestly desiring them to consider in what case he stands in as touching monies and victuals; his souldiers and sea-men daily complaining of their wants in both: and as touching victuals, his Majestie hath given expresse command unto all his victuallers at Chattam, and elsewhere, to send in none of any sort or quantity soever, upon paine of his high displeasure, and ther perill. Newes from Forreine parts, July 16. THe Swedes have lately taken from Piccolomini 8000. pounds worth of Gunpowder, abundance of souldiers coats, and other provision; in which he hath lost many men. Likewise the Emperour is fled from Vienna. All Austria (his heredi∣tary countrey) is revolted from him, and Hungary likewise. FINIS.
