S2755 S2756 669.f.6[90] 99869563 162850
Severall Considerations presented to the serious View of the severall Companies of this Ho∣nourable City, this day assembled for the choyce of Magistrates, and other Officers. Read, Consider, Prosecute. Gentlemen, THere are but twenty six Aldermen in this City, and at least fourteen of them enjoy great places of profit, conferred upon them by the Ruling party of Lords and Commons, and Army Grandees. And for this end only, namely, that they may preserve their interest in the Citty, and by the said Aldermens power and prevalency, in respect of their authority, and Relation, may have the bet∣ter oportunity to enslave you, and make pou serviceable to the carrying on their designes, namely, the per∣petuation of their own power, though to the utter ruine of the King and Kingdome. The men engaged by such places of profit, are Alderman Woolaston, Gibs, Foulke, Andrews, Avery, Edmunds Cullum, &c. The inconveniences that come upon the City hereby, are many, but in particular as followeth. 1. By this meanes the very Rule by which this City is governed, is no other then the will of those great Ruling men, by whom these Pentionary Aldermen are acted: They not daring to promote or countenance any thing, unlesse it be sutable to the pleasure of their great Masters whom they serve, and by whose power they gain such great Revenues. 2. By this means All Taxes are continued upon us, for the countenance and assured assistance of these men in such great power amongst us (who they know will improve their utmost interest to enforce the people to obey what they command, because they themselves are thereby advantaged) giveth encourage∣ment to the said ruling Faction of Grandees to heap Taxes upon the City, as renewed and redoubled Ex∣cises, Assessments, &c. 3. By this means you are deprived of the liberty of free Choyce of your Magistrates, being suffered to choose none but such as these Aldermen, (being the major part) shall think fit, (most Courts of Aldermen consisting of the greatest number of them) it being all the work they do for their great pensions, namely to employ all their time and power to preserve the Interest of the said ruling Faction in the City. 4. By this means you have nothing in agitation of publique concernment but it meets great opposition in all Councels; and not only so, but it is made known also to the said Ruling Party, and if by them disliked, presently their power is interposed, to hinder the said actings, and you thereby made liable to Delinquency by vertue of their displeasure, which is a sufficient crime now adays to destroy any man, witness the late impeachment of the Aldermen, &c. 5. It is the most unreasonable thing in the world, that Magistrates should have the receiving and dis∣posing of the publike Treasure, for it doth not only serve as an inducement to corrupt tfiem, and make them servants to the corrupt wills of those men, by whose power they enjoy those places of profit, but also, gives them an opertunity to abuse and cheat the people; for if he that hath a sword in his hand may have the dis∣posing of the publike Treasure, he may be his own Carver, (as some of them have been) and who shall dare to call him to an account? These Premises considered. The only remedy against all these evils, and many more too large here to be inserted, is To cause all the said Aldermen so employed to do one of these things, 1. Either lay aside these their offices and places, and wholly apply themselves to the work for which they were made Aldermen, or 2. To lay off their Gowns, and tye themselves only to their offices, and let other men (not so ingaged) be chosen to supply those places, upon whose good or evil improvement, the well or ill being of this City chiefly depends. This will make you free, conduce to a settlement, and be an universal good to all parties and interests, therefore while it is called to day, prosecute it peaceably and unanimously, and expect a blessing. Farewel.
