S3890 669.f.24[51] 99870488 163782
Sir Tho. Soame vindicated By a Vote of the late Parliament, of March 12. 1659. for the discharging of two former Votes of June 1. 1649. With a recital of the said Votes so discharged. For the information of the people concerning the pretended Crimes occasioning the same. WHereas there was published in print the 12 of March 1659. a Vote concerning the discharging a Vote against Sir Tho. Soame Knight, the substance of which Vote being unknown to most; wherefore nothing being expressed therein, and being generally conceived that some great Crime is contained therein, which occasioned those Votes, in regard the punishment thereby inflicted was so great and heavy; therefore it is thought very necessary, as well for information of others, as for Sir Thomas his just vindication, to make a true relation thereof, by publishing the three Votes together, as in the Journal of the House doth appear, Book numb. 15. fol. 1090, and 1091. viz. Mr. Alderman Pennington reports from the Lord Maior and Aldermen, their proceedings in the proclaiming of the Act for abolishing the Kingly Office; That Sir Tho. Soame being in Town, did not attend. Die Jovis 31 May. Resolved, That Sir Thomas Soame be commanded by the Sergeant of this House to attend to morrow, to answer his offence in not publishing the Act by Order of this House. Die Veneris, June 1. 1649. The House being informed that Sir Tho. Soame did attend at the Door according to the Or∣der of the House, he was called in; and being come to the Bar, Mr. Speaker, by the command of the House, demanded of him several Questions, viz. Whether he was not made acquainted with the Order of the House, whereby the Aldermen were to attend the Lord Maior and Sheriffs at the proclaiming of the Act entituled, An Act for abolishing the Kingly Office; did acknow∣ledge that he had notice of it on Tuesday; and acknowledged the Lord Maior gave him notice the same should be done the next day, and that he had a Letter from the Lord Maior to require his attendance on that service; and acknowledged that he was not there on that day; and gave the Reasons why he was not there; and the main Reason being, that it was against the Judge∣ment and Conscience, because it was contrary to many Oaths of Allegiance that he had taken: Resolved, &c. That Sir Tho. Soame be discharged from being a Member of this House during this Parliament. Resolved, &c. That Thomas Soame be discharged from being an Alderman of the City of London, and from bearing any Office of Trust that he now holdeth in the Commonwealth. Upon Mr. Prynnes Report, March 12. 1659 Ordered, That the Votes touching Sir Tho. Soame of the first of June 1649. be and are hereby discharged, and that they be also obliterated. Whereupon he stands restored to his right place of Aldermanship as well as Membership to all intents and purposes, and is made capable of bearing any Office of Trust he ever held in the Commonwealth. Lex, Lux, London. Printed to London, by James Cottrel. 1660.
