S412 E179_9 99872993 125440
BLOVDY NEVVES FROM IRELAND, OR The barbarous Crueltie BY the Papists used in that KINGDOME. By putting men to the svvord, deflovvring Women, and dragging them up and downe the Streets, and cruelly murdering them, and thrusting their Speeres through their little Infants before their eyes, and carrying them up and downe on Pike-points, in great reproach, and hanging Mens quarters on their Gates in the Street, at Armagh, Logall, at the Fort of Lease, and divers other Places in Ireland. As also, the Bloudy Acts of Lord Mack-queere their Rig-leader, and Cousin to that Arch-Rebell Mack-queere Generall to Tyron, in the time of Queene Elizabeth of never dying memory. Related by James Salmon lately come from thence, who hath lived there with his wife and children, these 10 yeeres last past, and now to escape the Bloud-thirsty Rebels, made an escape away by night, who is here resident in this City, Decemb. the 1. 1641. London, Printed for Marke Rookes, and are to be sold in Grubstreet, nee to the Flying Horse, 1641.
FIrst, the reason of the unprovidednesse of the Protestants in Ireland, to defend themselves against the Rebels. THe Lord Deputy Wentworth (in his life-time) disarmed the subjects there. There was a Proclamation set forth by him at the Parliament in Ireland: that neither English nor Irish, should either sell or keepe in their houses any powder, upon the losse of goods and life; neither any Armes whatsoever: save onely what was allowed, and to be had with leave from the Kings Store-house in Dublin, pretending thereby to keepe the Natives under, and to prevent such mischiefes as might arise, if they were not thus curbed, and kept downe. By this meanes, the Protestants could not have a∣ny provision for defence; for powder they could not have, without danger of life, and goods as aforesaid: onely except they could procure a Licence from Sir Iohn Burlacie, and after great friends and trouble, they could have but 5 pound of powder at the most, and that at two shillings a pound. So that whereas the English formerly had Armes, shot and powder, to defend their houses, lives, and estates: now it being taken from them, and they left naked, it proves thus the ruine of the poore Protestants there.
2 The cause of their sudden rising. The cause or their sudden rising, as it is supposed by the English inhabited in Ireland, was by their ta∣king exception at a Petition drawne by some reve∣rend Ministers in Ireland, presented to the Parlia∣ment in England, to this effect. That in every parish where there is a protestant Minister, there is likewise a popish priest, which is very true, and more then that, there is also in every parish a Fryer, a Monk, and an Abbot: besides, with many more in severall Abbies, doe resigne three or fourescore in a Fryers house. Also, in every Diocesse whereas the King hath a Bishop, so hath the pope also another: which hath caused this lamentable effect there, that whatsoever the King doth command, the popish Clergy doe for∣bid, the consideration whereof made a worthy Iudge there, not long since to say (Iudge Cresey by name) this is quoth he a miserable case, desiring the Gentlemen of the Gran-jury to present that grievance. It is also reported in Ireland, that there is fifty two thousand pounds a yeare, that goeth out of Ireland to the Pope: that is 1000-l. a weeke, a great summe of money, and of dangerous consequence.
3 The first rising of the Rebels. The first rising was in the County of Farmanar, the Lord Maquare being the chiefe Agent in their Rebellion, who lived about 13 miles from Beltur bit Northward, toward Eniskillen, which Lord Maquare is since taken, and now prisoner in the Castle at Dublin, he is of the bloud of that great Traytor, Ma∣quere the Generall of Terhones Army, that great Rebell to Queene Elizabeth. The first morning which vvas of their rising, was suspected from the words of one Daniell Caton of Mountragh, which was to this effect: that the times were better when the strongest men had most, and that he (being a great Irish papist) did hope to see it so againe ere long: whereupon he was examined by Mr. Vlmstid, Minister of the said Mountragh, and Justice of peace for the County, and by him com∣mitted to prison, till the next Sizes: at which time he was censured to stand in the pillory, which he did at the Fortilesse in the Market place, vvhich hee would not confesse any thing: onely vvhat vvas ga∣thered upon comectures. Another, one Dono Glay vvas hanged, dravvne, and quartered, at Bandon bridge, for saying that the Crovvne of Ireland vvas too good for the King of England, or to that effect. And novv have the Rebels camped themselves, ri∣sing in rebellion, to doe vvhat they can to ruine the Protestants in that Kingdome.
They rose in the night, and marched towards Bel∣turbit with a running Camp, which Town they took and also the Ldie Buters Castle, where she and her child en were; but (by the providece of God) made an escape, and got away. Mr. Rodes the Minister with some other also mde an escape, and fled into a wood neare the said Castle and there hid themselves, and the rest of the English remaining in the towne, were forced to yeeld it up to the Rebels. Others of the Rebels marched to Armagh the same night: for they are a running Camp scattered up and (owne the Country, which Towne they prefently tooke, and burned the same night also, which was a Towne full of rich Marchants, both English and Scottish, whom they murdered in a most cruell and bloudy manner, with their wives and children: first deflowring many of the women, then cruelly mur∣dering them, and pulling them about the street by the haire of the head, and dashing their childrens brains out against the posts and stones in the street, and tos∣sing their children upon their pikes, and so running with them from place to place, saying, that those were the pigs of the English soves. In like manner have they dealt with the Inhabitants at Logall, a town five mile from the said Armagh, an English Planta∣tion. 4 The continuance of the Rebels cruelty. The Bishop of Kildare is in great danger, against whom they threaten with great words, that they will make him, and all the rest of the puritan Dogs (as they call them) to leave rayling against their holy
Father the Pope in their pulpits, as they doe. This running Campe of Rebels doe scatter them∣selves up and downe the Country, murdering the English in great cruelty: not onely the Protestants, but even the very papists also in many places. In which rage & cruelty of theirs, when they have most bloodily slain divers good Protestants of worth, they have hanged them up upon the Gates in great dis∣daine, and driving others out of their estates, which is the least injury they use to any where they come. 5. The cruell usage of Mr. John Treadwell, at Kildmurrey. There came some of the Rebels to the house of one Mr. Treadwill of Kildmurrey in the night, who broke in violently unto him, and would have killed all that were in the house, but that one of their own company called Bryan of Demshie, a base son to the Earle of Claumelero, that he had by his own daugh∣ter, by whose perswasion, the rest of the rebels were perswaded not to kill them, but yet they were very cruell to him; for they tooke him, and stript him naked, and bound his hands behind him, & so set him upon a little narrow bridge, or rather a post crosse a brooke, where they left him; till it pleased God he was afterwards relieved: and it pleased God, that some of them were taken, and Bryan of Demshie is now in prison at the Fortinesse. But Mr. Treadwell was faine to remove to Dub∣lin, who dare not adventure to live in Kildmurrey during this their rebellion, which God in his good time grant to cease. FINIS.
