s4447b 45578449 172365
A SOLEMN LEAGUE AND COVENANT, FOR REFORMATION; AND Defence of Religion, the Honour and Happiness of the KING, and the Peace & Safetie of the three Kingdoms. OF SCOTLAND, ENGLAND, & IRELAND. Ier. 50.5. Come; let vs joyn our selues to the Lord in a perpetuall Covenant, that shall not bee forgotten. Prov. 25.5. Take away the wicked from before the King: and his Throne shall bee established in righteousness. 2. Chron. 15.15. And all Judah rejoyced at he Oath: for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought Him with their whole desyre; and Hee was found of them: and the LORD gaue them rest round about. ABERDENE, Imprinted by Edw: Raban: And are to bee sold at his Shop, at the end of the Broadgate. 1643.
Sess. XIV. AUGUST. 17. 1643. The Generall Assemblies Approbation of the draught of the League and COVENANT presented to them. THE Assemblie having recomended vnto a Com∣mittee, appointed by them to joyn with the Committee of the Honourable Convention of E∣states, and the Commissioners of the Honourable Houses of the Parliament of England, for brin∣ging the Kingdoms, to a more near conjunction and Union, receaved from the aforesayd Committees, the Covenant after-mentioned, as the result of their consultations: And having taken the same, as a mat∣ter of so publick concernment, and of so deep impor∣tance doth require, vnto their gravest consideration, Did with all their hearts, and with the beginnings of the feelings of that joy which they did fynd in so great measure vpon the renovation of the National Covenant of this Kirk and Kingdome, All with one voice approue and embrace the same, as the most po∣werfull
mean, by the Blessing of GOD, for settling and preserving the true Protestant Religion, with per∣fect Peace in his Majesties Dominions, and propaga∣ting the same to other Nations, and for establishing his Majesties Throne, to all Ages and Generations. And therefore, with their best affections recommend the same to the Honourable Convention of Estates; that beeing examined and approved by them, it may bee sent with all diligence, to the Kingdom of England; That beeing receaved and approven there, the same may bee with publick humiliation, and all Religious and answerable solemnitie, sworn and subscribed by all true Professours of the Reformed Religion, and all his Majesties good Subjects in both Kingdoms. A. Johnston. The Convention of Estates their Ap∣probation of the draught of the League and COVENANT afore∣said, 17. AUGUST. 1643. THE Noblemen, Commissioners of Shyres and Borrowes now conveaned, having receaved the Covenant aboue∣mentioned from their Committee, as the result of their Consultations with a Committee of the Generall Assemblie, and the Commissioners from both Houses of the Parliament
of England; And having taken that Covenant vnto their gravest consideration, Did with all their hearts and great expressions of joy and vnanimitie approue and embrace the same, as the most powerfull mean, by the Blessing of GOD, for settling and preserving the true Protestant Religion, with a perfect Peace in all his Majesties Dominions, and propagating the same to other Nations, and for establishing his Maje∣sties Throne to all ages. And beeing verie confident that their Brethren in the Kingdom of England, will heartilie receaue and approue the same: Therefore, according to the earnest recommendation of that Ve∣nerable Assemblie of this Kirk now met, thinks it most necessarie for the good ends aforesaid; that it bee sent into that Kingdom with all diligence, That beeing re∣ceaved and approved by their Brethren there, the same may bee with all Religious Solemnities sworn, and subscribed by all true Professours of the Reformed Religion, and all his Majesties good Subjects in both Kingdoms. Arch: Primerose, Cler. com. EDINBURGH, 11 OctoB. 1643. Ordinance for the solemn receaving, swearing, and suscribing of the League and Covenant. THE Commissioners of the Generall Assemblie, having receaved from their Brethren sent vnto the Kingdom of England, the solemn League
and COVENANT vnder-written, as it was approven by the Honourable Houses of the PAR∣LIAMENT of ENGLAND, and the Assem∣blie of Divines in that Kingdom, and solemnlie sworn and subscribed there. After due examination thereof, did all in one voice most heartilie receaue and embrace the same, as agreeing with the draught, vnanimouslie and chearfullie approven and embraced by the late Generall Assemblie, and Convention of Estates. As the most powerfull mean by the Blessing of GOD, for settling and presetving the true Protestant Religion, with perfect Peace in his Majesties Dominions, and propagating the same to other Nations, and for esta∣blishing his Majesties Throne, to all ages and genera∣tions: And therefore, according to the power given to them by the sayd Assemblie, Ordain this solemn Leauge and Covenant to bee with publick humiliation, and all Religious solemnities receaved, sworn, and subscribed by all Ministers and Professours within this Kirk: And, that this may bee vniversallie performed, It is also ordayned that this League and Covenant bee foorthwith printed, & that the printed Copies, bound with some clean sheets of paper, bee sent vnto the Mi∣nisterie, And that everie Minister vpon the first Lords Day, after the same shall come to his hands, reade and explain it, & by exhortation prepare the People to the swearing and subscribing thereof solemnlie, the Lords Day next immediatlie following. And it is farther Ordained, that Presbyteries take account of the per∣formance heereof in their severall bounds; and that they proceed with the Censures of the Kirk, against all
such as shall refuse, or shift to swear and subscribe this League and Covenant, as enemies to the preservation and propagation of Religion, And that they notifie their names, and make particular report of their own diligence heereintill, to this Commission, or their Mo∣derator, or Clerk to bee delivered to them. And the Commissioners think it verie convenient, for good example, and the better encouragement of others; that this Covenant bee solemnlie sworn, and subscribed by themselues now present, before the Congregation, in the East Kirk vpon Fryday next, the 13 of this instant, after Sermon, and exhortation to bee made by Master Robert Dowglas, Moderator; And that the Commis∣sioners of the Convention of Estates now in Town, and the Commissioners from the Parliament of Eng∣land, and the Divines of that Kingdom heere present, bee earnestlie desyred to joyne with them in this so∣lemn and Religious Action. A. Ker. At Edinburgh, the 12 of October, 1643. THE Commissioners of the Conven∣tion of Estates, having receaved from the Commissioners of the Generall Assemblie, the solemn League and Covenant vnder-written approven and solemnlie sworn and subscribed,
in the kingdom of England. And having taken the same to their serious consideration, do vnanimouslie and chearfullie receave, & embrace it, as agreeing with that draught, approven by the late Convention of Estates, and Generall Assemblie. And therefore, ordains the same to bee with all Religious solemnities sworn and subscribed by all his Majesties Subjects of this King∣dome: And that vnder the pain to such as shall post∣pone or refuse, to bee esteemed and punished as enemies to Religion, his Majesties Honor, & Peace of thir King∣doms; And to haue their goods and rents confiscate for the use of the publick, and that they shall not bruik nor enjoy any benefite, place nor office within this King∣dome. And als ordains all Sheriffs, Stuarts, and others his Majesties Magistrates to Burgh and Land, and Committees in the severall Shires, To bee assisting to Ministers & Presbyteries, in procuring reall obedience here-vnto. And that with all diligence they make re∣port to the Committee of Estates, of the names of all such persons, as shall postpone or refuse, to the effect course may bee taken with them as aforesaid. And that they may bee cited to answer to the next Parliament, as enemies to Religion, King and Kingdomes, and to receaue what further punishment his Majestie and Par∣liament shall inflict vpon them. And further ordains thir presents to bee printed with the former Act of the Estates, and published at the Market Crosses of the head Burrowes of this Kingdome; Wherethrough none pretend ignorance of the same. Arch: Primerose, Cler. Com.
A SOLENM LEAGUE AND COVENANT, For REFORMATION, And Defence of Religion, The Honour & Happiness of the King, and the Peace and Safetie of the three Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland. WEE, Noblemen, Ba∣rons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burges, Ministers of the Gospell, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of Scot∣land, England, and Ireland, by the Providence of GOD, living vn∣der one King; and beeing of one reformed Religion; Having before our eyes the Glorie of GOD, and the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord & Saviour Iesus Christ, the Honour and Happiness of the Kings
Majestie, and his Posteritie, and the true publicke Li∣bertie, Safetie, and Peace of the Kingdomes; wherein everie ones private condition is included; And calling to mynd the treacherous and bloodie Plots, conspira∣cies, attempts, and practices of the enemies of GOD, against the true Religion, and Professours thereof in all places, especiallie in these three Kingdomes ever since the Reformation of Religion, & how much their rage, power and presumption are of late, and at this tyme increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable state of the Church and Kingdome of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and Kingdome of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdome of Scotland are present & publick testimonies; Wee haue now at last (after other means of Supplicaton, Remon∣strance, Protestations and Sufferings) for the preser∣vation of our selves and our Religion from vtter ruine and destruction, according to the commendable pra∣ctice of these Kingdomes in former times, and the ex∣ample of GODS people, in other Nations, After mature deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutuall and solemne League and Covenant; Wherein wee all subscribe, and each one of vs for him∣self, with our hands lifted vp to the most high GOD do Swear: I. THat wee shall sincerelie, reallie, and constantlie through the Grace of GOD, endevour in our severall places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scot∣land in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Govern∣ment, against our common Enemies, The Reforma∣tion
of Religion in the Kingdomes of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Govern∣ment, according to the Word of GOD, and the ex∣ample of the best Reformed Churches; And shall en∣deavour to bring the Churches of GOD in the three Kingdomes, to the nearest conjunction and Uniformi∣tie in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of Church-government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That wee and our posteritie after vs, may as Brethren, liue in Faith and Loue, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of vs. 2. That wee shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavour the Extirpation of poperie, prelacie (that is, Church Governement, by Arch-bishops, Bishops, their Chancellours, and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Arch-deacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierar∣chy) Superstition, Heresie, Schism, Prophanenesse, and whatsoever shall bee found to bee contrarie to sound Doctrine, & the power of Godlinesse; Lest wee pertake in other mens sinns, & thereby bee in danger to receaue of their plagues; And that the Lord may bee one, and his Name one in the three Kingdomes. 3. Wee shall with the same sinceritie, realitie, & con∣stancie, in our severall vocations endeavour with our estates and liues mutuallie to preserue the Rights and Priviledges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdomes, And to preserue and defend the Kings Majesties Person and Authority, in the preservation and defence of the true Religion, and Liberties of the
Kingdomes; That the world may bear witnesse with our consciences of our Loyaltie, and that wee haue no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesties just power and greatnesse. 4. Wee shal also with all faithfulnesse endeavour the discoverie of al such as haue been, or shal bee Incendia∣ries, Malignants, or evil instruments, by hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one of the Kingdomes from another, or ma∣king any faction, or parties amongst the people contra∣rie to this League and Covenant, That they may bee brought to publick triall, and receaue condign punish∣ment, as the degree of their offences shall require or de∣serue, or the supream Iudicatories of both Kingdomes respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge convenient. 5. And whereas the happinesse of a blessed Peace between these Kingdomes, denyed in former tymes to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of GOD granted vnto vs, and hath been latelie concluded, and setled by both Parliaments, Wee shall each one of vs, according to our place & interest, endeavour that they may remain conjoyned in a firm Peace and Union to all Posteritie, And that Iustice may bee done vpon the wilfull Opposers thereof, in manner expressed in the precedent Article. 6. Wee shall also according to our places & callings in this Common cause of Religion, Libertie, and Peace of the Kingdomes, assist and defend all those that en∣ter
into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and persuing thereof: And shall not suffer our selues di∣rectlie or indirectlie by whatsoever combination, per∣swasion or terrour, to bee divided and withdrawn from this blessed Union and conjunction, whither to make defection to the contrarie part, or to giue our selues to a detestable indifferencie, or neutralitie in this cause, which so much concerneth the glorie of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honour of the King; But shall all the dayes of our liues zealouslie and constantlie conti∣nue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power, against all Lets and Im∣pediments whatsoever; And, what wee are not able our selues to suppresse or overcome, wee shall reveale and make known, that it may bee timelie prevented or re∣moved: All which wee shall do as in the sight of GOD. And, because these Kingdomes are guiltie of manie sinnes, and provocations against GOD, & his Son Iesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and dangers, the fruits thereof, Wee professe & declare be∣fore GOD and the world, our vnfeygned desyre to bee humbled for our own sins, & for the sins of these King∣doms: especiallie, that wee haue not, as wee ought, va∣lued the inesteemable benefit of the Gospell, that wee haue not laboured for the Puritie and power thereof: and that wee haue not endeavoured to receaue Christ in our hearts; nor to walk worthie of him in our lyues, which are the causes of other sinnes and transgressions so much abounding amongst vs. And our true and vn∣feygned purpose, desyre, and endeavour for our selues, and all others vnder our power and charge, both in pu∣blick
and in privitie in all dueties wee ow to GOD and Man, to amend our lyues, and each man to go be∣fore another in the example of a reall Reformation: That the LORD may turn away his wrath, and heavie indignation, and establish these Churches and King∣doms, in Trueth and Peace. And this COVENANT wee make in the presence of ALL-MIGHTIE GOD, the Searcher of all hearts; with a true intention to perform the same; As wee shall answer at that Great Day, when the secrets of all hearts shall bee disclosed; Most humblie beseeching the LORD, to strengthen vs by His Holie Spirit, for this end; And to bless our desyres, and proceedings, with such success, as may bee deliverance and safetie to his People, and encow∣ragement to other Christian Churches groaning vn∣der, or in danger of the yoak of Antichristian Tyran∣nie, to joyn in the same, or lyke Association and Co∣venant; To the Glorie of GOD, the inlargement of the Kingdome of IESUS CHRIST, and the Peace and Tranquillitie of Christian Kingdoms, and Com∣mon Wealths. FINIS.
