S5972 669.f.3[63] 99868702 160621
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE THE Kings Entertainment at Yorke: As it was related by John Strickland, the 22. of March, 1641. who came out of Yorke, on Saturday last at nine of the Clocke. THat his Majesty came into Yorke upon Friday, March the eighteenth, betweene foure and five of the Clocke in the afternoone, with the Prince his Highnesse, and two other yong tall Noblemen in the Coach with him; whom upon enquirie, the said Iohn Strickland was informed to be the Palsgrave, and the Duke of Lenox: That the Lord Mayor of Yorke with the Aldermen, and Sir Thomas Widrington, Recorder, met with his Majestie, some mile and halfe out of Towne; where His Majestie was received with all cheerefulnesse and hearty Welcome of all the City, by the expression of the said Recorder: Who in the Name of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of Yorke, made a very Patheticall Oration to His Majestie: Assuring him that the Citie was at his Arrivall, transported with two great and contrary Passions, Ioy and Sorrow. Ioy, For His Majesties happy Arivall, and lustre amongst them, whose presence, with the approach of the Sunne, made a double Spring in Yorke: As the Sunne in Plants, So His Majestie in the hearts of all his loyall Subjects. Sorrow, For that his Majestie had removed so farre from his Parliament, and Grand Counsell (as they had iust cause to feare) in some discontent. He farther with great boldnesse and vehemencie of Speech, desired his Ma∣jestie to hearken unto, and condescend unto his Peeres and Commons now Assembled in Parliament: Adventuring plainely to tell His Majestie, that he thought in his Conscience, That they would resolve upon nothing, but what should be to the good of His Majestie, and the Common-wealth, and dropped some teares in the delivery of those words. His Majestie was observed by the beholders, to shew no pleasing Countenance at those words, nor gave no answer at all. The Lord Mayor by Order, bare the Sword before his Majestie, through the Citie, unto his Pallace; But a ve∣ry small company were with His Majestie, as the said Iohn affirmeth: he telling but some nine and thirty Gentle∣men, and seventeene of his Guard in Coates. About eight or nine of the Clocke that very night, came in my Lord of Newcastle with two Coaches more: Which Lord, the morrow after, being Saturday, went out of this City againe, between five and sixe of the Clock in the morning: It was in Yorke reported toward Hull; but whether it be so for certaine, Iohn Strickland cannot, nor dares not affirme. Thursday before His Majestie came in, and that it was knowne for certaine, that Hee was comming, Sir Iohn Haughtham, Governour of Hull, sent a servant of his, one Master Edward Adkins, unto the Lord Mayor with this Message: Viz: That he was given to understand, that His Majesty was either there, or would be there very short∣ly, viz. at Yorke: but if His Majestie had any intent to passe further, and come to Hull, which hee hoped that His Majesty would not (the world in these distracted times being very apt unto Iealousies and suspitions) he de∣sired the Lord Major to inform His Majestie, how that he had a very speciall Charge sent to him from both Houses, on Monday, March the fourteenth, not to suffer His Majestie to enter, but with a small Company, some thirtie at most; And that the very same Command was directed unto the high Sheriffe of the County. The said Iohn Strickland further affirmeth, that at his comming out of Yorke; Vpon the way he met great con∣course of Gentlemen, very well habited, all on Horsebacke, and most of them young Gallants, repairing to∣ward Yorke: And that there was very great talke, and some feares about my Lord of Newcastle, and that one of his Footmen, had like to have beene imprisoned, for speaking strange words in the behalfe of the Irish, he himself being an Irishman. Iohn Strickland his marke X. London, Printed for Nath: Butter, 1641:
