t2168 e549_4 99864945 117178
THE Triall and Examination Of the Lord Major of LONDON ON Munday last, being the second of this instant Aprill, 1649. at the Bar of the House of COMMONS WITH His Lordships Speech, concerning the Kingly Office; AND The Censure, Resolution, and Votes of the Parliament, touch∣ing his contempt, their fining of him 2000. li. His Body to be committed prisoner to the Tower of London, and to be degraded of Mayoralty. ALSO, The Princes Message and Proposals to the Parliament of Scot∣land, in answer to the Letter sent by their Commissioners; and the Resolution of the Estates at Edenburgh, con∣cerning his Highnesse, to be sent to the Par∣liament of England. Likewise the proclaiming of a new Act, thē rising of 5000 Gourdons in the North, and their surrounding of Lieut. Gen. Lesley, and the Parliaments forces, and declaring for CHARLES the second. London, Printed for R. Williamson, 1649.
The Tryall and Examination of the Lord Major of Lon∣don, at the Bar of the House of Commons, on Munday last, with his Speech concer∣ning Kingly Government. THe Lord Major of the City of London, be∣ing summoned by the Parl. of England to attend that honorable House, for his contempt, in disobeying the Orders of Parliament, and neglecting and resing to proclaim the Act for abolishing the kingly office in England and Ireland, within the said City; in order whereunto, his Lordship was brought to the Barre of the House of Commons; and after some Queries pro∣posed, concerning his non-performance thereof, He re∣plyed, That according to the Oath of Allegeance which he had taken, he could not (in Conscience) proclaim the said Act for the abolishing of the Kingly Office, and Govern∣ment of Kingship, declaring. That the businesse was onely proper for the Sheriff of the City. And being remanded from the Bar, the House voted as followeth: Resolved by the Commons of England assembled in Parl. That the Lord Major of the City of London, for his contempt in disobeying the Orders of Parl. bee fined
2000. l. Resolved, &c. That he be committed prisoner to the Tower of London for two months, and be degra∣ded of Mayralty. Resolved, &c. That an Order be forth∣with drawn up, and immediatly sent to the Common-councell of the said city, requiring and impowring them to elect a new Major with all speed; and in or∣der thereunto, the severall companies within the said city are required to meet (this day) for the election thereof. A new Declaration from the parl. of Scotland. Sir, The Committee of Estates conveened at Eden∣burgh, begin to wave and deviate from their former Resolutions for the investing of Charles the second, & are now resolved to assume the power of a free Stae, their proposals to their young King taking no effect; for upon the representing of the same by their commis¦sioners. His Highnesse was pleased to return this an∣swer, viz. That he was not (as yet) satisfied in consci∣ence touching the lawfulnesse of the covenant, & their Uniformity of presbytery, and therfore could not give them a positive answer, touching his present signing & entring into covenant, desiring further respite of time to consult thereon. 2 That he gives the parl. of Scot∣land many thanks for their Offers and Loyalty to assist and protect him, and for their fidelity and cordial affe∣ctions towards the preservation of Soveraignty, in ac∣knowledging him their true and lawfull King by un∣doubtfull Succession; but withall desires, that they will take the advice of him and his Councel, in reference to Religion, Crown and kingdoms; to the end, that both he and they, may (with stability of mind) six their Reso∣lutions upon a Rock of unmoveable principles. The Estates conveened having received this message, voted
it unsatisfactory, and that 10000 Horse and Foot should be forthwith put into a posture, for a conjun∣ction with England, offensive or defensive against all opposition to either Nations, from abroad or at home and have nominated and made choise of commissioners to be expedited to the parliament of England with a message, for the faciliating of this work, and intimating unto them the transaction of affairs in this Nation. For so soon as they understood their young Kings resolu∣tion, that he was determined for Ireland, they begin u∣niversally to decline their first engagement, and have caused an Edict or Act to be proclaimed at the Mar∣ket Crosse, exhibiting all persons whatsoever from a∣cting, abetting, or contriving any thing tending to the inthroning of Charles Stuart the second, untill such time that he shall give full satisfac∣tion in matters of Religion, and other publike affairs, tending to the safty and preservation of this Kirk and Kingdom; insomuch, that the Royal parsy are much discontented thereat, & upon the proclaiming thereof, assembled together, fell upon the Bayliffs, and other magistrates of the city, killed and wounded many, crying out, God blesse King Charles the second. But by the speedy coming in of the trayned Bands, the adverse party were routed, and ma∣ny of them apprehended, and committed to safe custo∣dy. But from the North we have received a strong al∣larum, which is, that 5000 Gourdons have Bodied, & have surrounded Lieu. Gen. Lesley, and that 2000 more are come in to their assistance, commanded by the L. Oglesby, declare for Charles the second. The Lieu. Gen. is in very great straights, but the Committee of Estates are sending 6000 Horse and Foot to relieve him; you will hear of sudden action. Edenburgh 28. Martii, 1649.
Sir, The Prince is very numerous in shipping, the Lord Hopton with 20 Sayle of ships, lies floting up and downe the West Ridings; insomuch that no ships can passe nor escape his fury; For, few days since, a Fleet of Marchants sayling towards the Lands-End, were set upon by the Lord Hoptons Squadron, who coming within shot of them gave them a broad side; but were answered with the like volley from them a∣gain; insomuch, that they came to a hot dispute, the fight continuing many hours, and after the exchange of severall tokens from the Sons of Mars, the L. Hopton held off, refusing to fight any longer, and steered to∣wards the Isle of Scilley; the famous ship called the Cul∣pepper, & about 6 more, chased them about 2 leagues, sunk three of them, the rest escaped: in this fight many were slain and wounded on both sides, and one of the Marchants ships sunk also, above 100 Mariners sacrifi∣cing their lives in this engagement. The fight beings en∣ded, the Marchants Fleet hoysted sayl, & steerd toward the Lands-End; which being done, the Lord Hopton put to Sea again, and (being thirsty of revenge) after few hours sayl, he espyed a prey, who with fury and rage made towards them, gave them a broad side, surroun∣ded them (although 8 in number) insomuch that three of them were close beset, and severall times ready to board; but by their undanted courage and gallantry repulsed them, disputed the Onset, and were in a good way to have got safe from them, but a supply of more shipping coming afterwards from Scilley, joyned with the first Squadron, who by their great potency and strength overpowred them, boarded the ships, seized on all the goods and marchandize, tying every man back to back, shutting them under Decks, and carryed them prisoners to the Isle of Scilley, where they now
remain under the barbarous restraint of Sir George Carteret, the Governour; God in his due time restore them to liberty, and grant them patience, in this their time of affliction. If speedy and timely supplies of shipping be not hast∣ned forth, it is to be feared, they will become sole ma∣sters of the Brittish Seas. Since their taking of the late prize, they have met with another Bristoll ship, richly laden with cloth, which the Lord Hopton hath distri∣buted amongst the sea men and souldiers. He is now sayled towards Milford Haven▪ but by the way, hee struck in at a Creek neer Pendennis, where he landed many of his men for the fetching in of provision, and other accommodation; but before they could facili∣ate and accomplish their Design, the Parliaments For∣ces at Pendennis having notice thereof, a considerable party of Horse and Foot were forthwith commanded out, who hastned to welcome their coming in, and en∣deavoured to get between them and the water, for the intercepting of their passage, but through the maligni∣ty of the Cornish men their design was almost fru∣strated; for after few hours march they were disco∣vered, and the Enemy in a posture to receive them, who upon their neer approach saluted each other with the tokens of Mars, and after a hot conflict the Hoptoni∣ans retreated within command of their Ships, our men pursued, kiled 19. wounded many, and made good their retreat with the losse of 7 men. Their Ordnance did much retard our pursuit, by which meanes most of them got safe aboard having many Boats in readi∣nesse to receive them; otherwise few of them had e∣scaed: some of the Land souldiers deserted them at their coming ashore, who say, That the Lord Hopton is commander in chief of that Squadron, and of all the
Land forces thereunto belonging, and that his Colours, (or Ensigns) are yelow, with black bulets in the midst, and on the top thereof, this Motto written in Chara∣cters of Gold, For Charles the second. Bristol 29 Martii, 1649. A new Declaration concerning Lieu. col. Lilburn. The Commons of England assembled in parliament doth declare, That the Authors, Contrivers, and Fra∣mers of the late paper, entituled, The second part of Englands new Chains, &c. are guilty of high treason, & shall be proceeded against as traytors; and that all per∣sons whatsoever that shall joyn with, or adhere there∣unto, and hereafter voluntarily ayd or assist the Au∣thors, Framers, and Contrivers of the aforesaid paper, in the prosecution thereof, shall be esteemed as tray∣tors to the Commonwealth, and be proceeded against accordingly. Lieut. col. Lilburn (since his confinement to the To∣wer) hath had a conference with some members of the Army, and hath declared many propheticall ex∣pressions, in relation to their proceedings, saying, that they are in the wrong way, and that his forwardnesse and zeal proceeded from no design, or particular inte∣rest, but reall intentions of publike good to the Na∣tion. Imprimatur T. JENNINGS FINIS.
