U129 E138_1 99860234 156513
THE COPIE OF A LETTER Sent from Pope Ʋrban the 8. unto the King of France, Jan. 28. 1641. Brought unto the said King, by the Bishop of Salerno the Popes Nuntio. Wherein he informes the King, that he under∣stands by his Nuntio lately returned out of England. what and how great persecutions and pres∣sures the Catholiques suffer, since, the sit∣ting of the Parliament there. Whence he taketh occasion to exhort and incite the King to the same measure towards his Hugonets in France. Also strongly perswading him to an Inclination unto peace with the Crowne of Spaine. And for the assisting of the Catholiques in Ireland. Translated out of the Latine Copie, by J. S. London, Printed for Iohn Thomas, 1641.
Urban the eight, by the Divine Providence Pope of Rome, Bishop of Bishops, and servant of the servants of God. To the most Christian King LEVVIS the 13.th, By the grace of God King of France, and Navarre, our thrice beloved Sonne in Jesus Christ, and the Faith Catholick; Greeting and Benediction Apostolicke. WHereas we are given to understand Ian. 13. by the relation of Count Russete Nuntio of our Sea Appostolique, unto MARIA HEN∣NERETTA, dearest Sister unto your Majesty and Queene unto Charles, King of great Brittaine, what, and how great miseries our Catholiques, living in England have endured since the Scottish Jnvasion, and convening of the Par∣liament there holden, how cruelly and barbarously persons in Order and sacred Ecclesiasticks, how opprobiously and unworthily the Layicks have beene handled, theyr under∣going Racks, tortures, Gallowes, Gibbers, quartering of their members (yea notwithstanding that some of thom were eight∣tie yeares old, ruffering Jmprisonment, reproaches, losse of Honours, confiscation of Goods, bereaving of their Children, sequestration of Reuenues, alienation of Lands, counted meere dung and the off-scowring of their Country, and that for no other reason but that they have testified to the World in the two late Northerne expeditions, Fidelitie not to be paralel'd. Obedience not to be blamed towards their King, to the great impairing (at least) if not to the utter decay of their estates.
And seeing that by things there already enacted as farther to be enacted, it may evidently appeare how not onely ominous, that contagious quag of Heritieks is unto the undoubted Catholique Roman Fayth, but also to the established State and setled Govern∣ment, of Haereditary Kings and Monarchs, not only contrary but pestifferous, where once they have got the upper hand and gained the masterie, we would that your Christian Majesty should be most seriously ad∣monished, that yee may with mature care and season∣able prevention foresee those distempers which are a∣foote with your neighbouring Prince, that King Charles and great Brittan's disasters, may prove unto your Majesties instructions, and when it is likely that the nefarious deeds of the Heriticks which now carrie all before, them in England, are knowne unto your Majesty then to us, as who are nigher, and that yee have the deformed notoriousnesse of them as it were drawne in a Table before you; hereupon wee councell your Majesty to consider what so nearely concernes you, that millions of Heritickes lurke and harbour in your Dominions, we wish we knew not, who have the same mind, the same opinion of you and your beliefe, and had they but strength, what they approve in the English they would exploit themselves, let your Majesty take heed yee foster not a Viper in your bosome, whose feeblenesse is yet the cause it doth no mischiefe, not its disposition, when they shall find themselves able they do not domineere but rage, neither contemne they the Crowne but trample it, wee adjure your Majesty by all that is sacred, by the sweet cognomination of the most Christian King
first granted to the Kings of France, for their famous defence of Catholique, and chastising Heriticks (and derived unto your Majestie, as in the same sence, so to be no other wayes injoyed) by all your rather to be admired, then credulous Heroyick Acts, and glorious enterprizes, with the which he that led Captivity Captive hath crowned you with Lillies, by the o∣bedience you owe unto St Peter, filiall recognizance to us, diligence in advancing the Catholique fayth, which your Majesty swore at your sacred Coronation and annointing, by all the foresaid, wee beseech your Majestie, that not only yee would endeavour the sup∣pression and abatement of the Heritiques that nestle in your Realme, but their totall ruine and ex∣tirpation, which thing wee more earnestly request of your Majestie, by how much wee desire the flourish∣ing of your Monarchie, your Scepter and Magnifi∣cence, the fayth Apostoliques prehemenence; when did more lustre atend your Crowne, then after the surprizall of the Rotchell Heritiques Denne, when your Authoritie greater or more enlarged, then upon the disabling those Rebels of Montauban, what stops the free current of Catholique faith, whol∣some and fresh streames through France, but this cho∣king fenne of Heresie: Let it be taken away there∣fore not onely bow and twig: but both stock with strings be rooted up, least by their Commission the sincere flocke of Catholicks may be drawne into con∣sent of the putred and ulcered Cattell, and seeing that it may shame us, that those malevolent should labour more the devastation and laying wast of Christs bles∣sed body, then we its propagation, that your Majestie
may the sooner not suppresse or diminish, but wholly blot out and extinguish that Contagion, let your Ma∣jesty under most heavy paines strictly forbid not one∣ly the publike convent in Churches of that heriticall Conspiracy, but all private exercise and use of this se∣ditious Leaven, even within private walls, let fit Offi∣cers be set over that charge, and let them taste of their owne sawce, as they use your Catholiques, so you must handle them, your Majesty being a Member of that body they thus persecute, let them perceive that in the ancient Catholique Roman faith, distance of place, diversity of Nations lesseneth not our simpathy in the cause, nor affection to the afflicted, put the Mini∣sters of your Hugonets to death when your Catholique Priests are hanged on Gibbers, what reason is there that their beardlesse impudent Bablers should range so vnbridled throughout France, unpunished? when your poore Religious more ancient then able (a thing odi∣ous to Barbarians) have vndergone the raking out of their bowels, let others vndergoe Fines of Crownes, confiscation of goods, losse of Office, banishment out of the Realme, depriving of their children, losse of Vote in Courts bands, imprisonment, that it may ap∣peare to all the world that your Majesty hath as much power over your Hugonets, what others have over their Catholiques, and that your Majesties e∣steeme is neverthelesse of them for other, notorious debasing of them, neither let your Majesty desist be∣fore you have either vanquished your owne Hugonets, or purchased some ease for the English Catholiques; Being certified by the Agent of the Irish, that they burdened with heavy pressures, threatned by the
now sitting Parliament with heavier, as who are ut∣terly debarred the free use of the Roman Catholique Religion, put out of their houses, Lands, Honours, and when they would have submitted, denyed Pardon; we entreat your Majesty that you would by your Am∣bassadour sollicite the cause of the distressed Nation, with the King of great Brittaine, and that you would put that King in mind of the Rouchellers, whose no∣torious raysing of Armes, and Rebellion, yea, pardo∣ned at the intercession of that King, granting them also all their former Priviledges and Liberties as your Majesty writ unto us by your Ambassador Mounsieur du Fresne. Anno Dom. 1628. But if your Majesty shall perceive, that you can prevaile nothing by that Mediation: We exhort your Majesty, as is our duty to vndertake the defence and Protection of that Nation in all Ages, so constantly obedient vnto the Roman Catholique Religion, which defence will well become the Arms of the most Chri∣stian King; We farther desire so your Christian Ma∣jesty to send Grave and temperate Ambassadours vn∣to us to Bononia, for the conclusion of that so much wished for, and heartily longed after peace betwixt the Christian, and the Catholique Crownes, let both your Majesties thinke on peace, doe yee both desire it, let each in something depart from his right, give yee way on both parties, and the Spirit of peace shall accord you, and the happie agreement of these two Glorious Crownes, shall crowne my old Age, and rejoyce all Catholique Regions, When we shall see two great Princes having bin so long at such Mortall dissention, at length to the vnspeakeable Joy of all, to
fall at vnitie, and two the very Eldest Sonnes of the Catholique faith professing betwixt themselves a Ca∣tholique consent to employ their Armes onely against Heretiques, and Ethnickes. Which we cease not day and night to begge on our knees in the blessed Sacrifice of the Masse of God Al∣mighty of our Blessed Mother of God, and of him that being God became man, of the Blessed Apostle of our faith St. Peter, and of all Saints. Given under the Seale of the Fisherman. Ian. 28. Anno Salutis, 1641. And of our Popedome the nineteenth Subscribed, Rancone, S, R, E, P, S. FINIS.
