W131 669.f.11[52] 99869361 162701
Strange and true Newes of an Ocean of Flies dropping out of a Cloud, upon the Towne of Bodnam in Cornwall. To the Tune of Cheevy Chase. When Kings have lost their Reignes and Power, Then Clouds upon us judgements showre. SOme talke of battailes in the aire, And Comets in the skies, But now wee▪ll tell a tale more rare, Of great and monstrous flies. In Cornwall this strange sight was seen, At Bodman Towne by name, Which will be iustified still By a Lawyer of great fame. At mid-day▪ when the skie was cleare, A thick cloud did arise, Which failing downe upon the earth, Dissolved into flies. The hell-bred Cloud did look so big, So black and did so loure, It could not rest untill her Panch Those flies all out did poure. They in such mighty numbers fell Upon the green grasse ground, And did so cover all the earth, That nought else could be found. Their numbers did increase so fast, Almost a whole houres space, That they a foot and more were seen, To cover all that place. No grasse, nor flowers for the time, Were seen for to appeare, The like was not in England knowne, God knowes this many a yeare. Their bodys green, their wings were white As it appeares most true, By Letters sent from Bodnam Towne, By those we never knew. These flies as soon as they were borne Fell dead upon the ground; And to say truth▪ they lay so thick, The like was never found. Which made the people all to muse, To see that gastly sight, Which did continue on the ground All that whole day and night. The second Part, To the same Tune. SO when the Lord was pleas'd to frowne, And shew his powerfull hand He rained Frogs and Lice upon All the Aegyptian land. All which was for their sinnes so great, So wicked, fowle and dire, They did deserve the iudgement iust Of Brimstone and of fire. And yet they never did rebell Against their King and Crowne▪ Nor had such vices in their streets As hath our London Towne, Who hath maintain'd this bloudy warre Against a Cause so iust; And have destroyd their gracious Prince For to maintaine their lust. Wherefore repent you Citizens, And take you warning all▪ Lest that the Heavens in discontent In Thunder on you fall. In Lice and Locusts Wormes and Frogs, In Raine in Haile and Stormes▪ In Lightning Plague and Pestilence, In Poxes and in Hornes. Now if these Plagues you will prevent, Which will your corne destroy, See that you presently repent, And sing Vive le Roy. God grant us Peace, which will not be Unlesse our gracious King Enjoy his rights and dignities, His Queen and every thing. God send Sir Thomas Fairfax right, And send us our Areares, And bring the King to Towne againe Sans jealousies and feares. T. W. FINIS. Printed in the Yeare of Miracles. 1647.
