W2885 669.f.5[48] 99869595 160761
A Coppy of Mr, HENRY VVILMOTS Letter to M. WILLIAM CROFTS at the Hague, intercepted at Sea by one of the Ships in His Majesties service, and sent up to the Lord Admirall, and was delivered to the Commons by the Lords at a conference of both Houses. AMongst other Evidences of the disposition and designes of those in credit about the KING and QUEENE, a Letter was intercepted at Sea by one of the Ships now in His Majesties service, and sent up to the Lord Ad∣mirall, was delivered to the Commons, by the Lords, at a Conference of both Houses, which was dated the two and twentieth of June, from Yorke, written by M. Henry Wilmot, one of those who were privy to the conspi∣racy of M. Jermin and others, about bringing up the Army the last yeere; and directed to M. William Crofts a servant of the Queene's. By this Letter it appeares, that they have had often conferences of dividing the estates of the Parliament-men, and that this is the use they intend to make of the Forces raised by His Majesty: And that they are growne so bold upon His protection as to vilisie and deride the Parliament, and not onely to contemne their summons, but shamefully to abuse their Messenger with violence and scorn. Which Letter followeth in these words. For Mr. CROFTS at the Hague. Deare WILL, BY these last Letters to the Queene, you will finde a great alteration of businesse here; the King, that very lately appeared almost aban∣doned by all His Subjects, is now become the Favourite of the Kingdome; yet I beleeve His Enemies are not so neglected as not to be able to raise an Army to oppose Him: and indeed here lies the jest, for they will be followed just enough to forfeit their e∣states, which I have heard you often say, were better bestowed on some of us. Yesterday there came a Messenger from the House, who had Order, (and did raise the power of the County) to entreat Bartley, Ashburnham, and my selfe; to come to speake to the House; but the King gave the Messenger a short Answer, and an Officer or two gave him a short Cudgell, so he is returned to London (a fine Gentleman) with his Arme in a Scarfe. Deare Will, preserve me in your good o∣pinion, for I assure you I am, Your most affectionate humble servant, H. WILMOT. Iune 22. Yorke 1642. Pray if M. Jermin be with you, present my most humble service to him. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed by E. G. for E. Husbands and Iohn Franke. 1642.
