W3134 669.f.17[78] 99870570 163326
Wit and Folly in a-maze. OR Come try your Wits here; I'le lay a Pot in half an hour you read it not In its true sence, as t'ought to be, Then lay a wager, stake, and see. had both lent my askt my lost my and a to my of my and my Of neither thought I store; and took his word ther-fore: and nought but words I got: for sue him I would not. I MONEY FRIEND At length with so got I If I had I'de keep my came my but my and a and my wch pleasd me wondrous well away quite from me fell: as I have had before, and play the Fool no more. Hereunto is added the Coppy of a Letter written from a Young man in the Country, to a Boon Com∣panion in the City, concerning a mourning Cloak. And his Conceited Answer thereunto. Sir, WHen you came to my Fathers House in the Country, you took away a mourning Cloak; I know no reason I have to give you a Cloak, wherefore I pray Sir restore me the Cloak, or Come meet me if you dare, mark me what I say, I say come meet me. But be advis'd what you do, for as yet I am not resolved of place where nor Time. when; till such time, I hope you will be plea∣sed to be quiet; for why should Thee and I fall ot? indeed I do verily protest I mean to try for the Cloak: Peradventure you will say I promis'd to give you a Cloak; I confess I did; but I care not for that, I deny it now: wherefore once more I say restore me the Cloak, and again I say send me the Cloak; so shall I rest and remain Your loving Friend, (if by me advised) If not, look in the margent and tremble. N. N. HIS ANSWER. I Pray Sir let it not be spoke, that from your word you should revoke, Forbear to spend your Coin in smoak, And give me leave to keep the Cloak. Your Father I did bury in the Cloak. And after I made merry in the Cloak, And then I cros'd a Ferry in the Cloak, And yet I am not weary of the Cloak. I've drank many cup of Ale in the Cloak, I've told many merry Tale in the Cloak. I've walkt both hill and dale in the Cloak, And yet I ne're made sale of the Cloak. I've drank many cup of Beer it'h Cloak, I've eaten very good cheer in the Cloak, I brought up your Fathers reer in the Cloak And shed many woful tear in the Cloak. You say you mean to try for the Cloak, I scorn totell a ly for the Cloak, I hope I shall not dy for the Cloak, I pray Sir do not cry for the Cloak. You say youl make me smart for the Cloak I do not care a fart for the Cloak, I le study the Black Art in the Cloak, Before that I will part with the Cloak. I pray good Sir forbear the Cloak. I know that you can spare the Cloak, For I will rather tear the Cloak Than see another wear the Cloak. Your loving friend till death me choak If you'l but let me keep the Cloak. B. B. LONDON, Printed for I. Moxon, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Signe of Atlas, by St. Michiels Church in Corn-hill. 1654.
