W3332 669.f.16[30] 99870132 163186
The Womens Petition, To the Right Honorable, his Excellency, the most Noble and Victorious Lord General CROMWELL. The humble Petition of many thousands of the poor enslaved, oppressed and distressed Men and Women in this Land, who by these their subscribed Representators, most humbly complaining, Shew, THat the Norman Yoke of Bondage and Oppression is still continued upon this Nation, by the impious, oppressive, delatory, and most chargeable practise of the Law, and destructive Imprison∣ment of Men and VVomen for Debt, in the several prisons, Goals, Counters, holes and Dunge∣ons of Cruelty in this Land. That prisons are none other then Sanctuaries and places of Freedom to all unconscionable, rich, obstinate, and wilful Debtors; and most cruel Slaughter-houses to all poor Debtors, that have nothing left to pay their Creditors, or to Fee Lawyers and Goalers. That the two Acts set forth for release of poor Debtors not worth five pounds, are of little or no benefit to any hitherto; but rather are become a snare to all that have reaped any benefit by them. That the present intricate, delatory, chargeable, oppressive, endless practise of the Law, is become an abettor, en∣couragement and prop to all Oppressors and Defrauders, and an Egyptian reed and discouragement to most men; but in especial to all the poor: who thereby are utterly disabled and disheartned from suing for their Debts, Rights, and Inheritances, violently held from them by the rich and mighty: And if at any time (by the Law) their Debts and Rights are seemingly recovered, yet then their able Debtors have freedom (by the Law, and strength of their purses) to vacate Judgements, to Arrest and Imprison their poor Creditors upon false and fained Actions (for many yeers) thereby enforcing some of them to compound with them at their own rates; others of them to perish miserably in Goals, and so to lose both their-Debts and Lives; whereby their VVives and Children are exposed to unexpressi∣ble misery; besides the many other unexpressible oppressions daylie practised by the Rich and Mighty, on poor and simple hearted Men and VVomen in this Land, by Sons of Belial. What shall we say? Our hope is even departed, and our expectation of Freedom (the fruits of our bloud shed, and expence of our estates) is removed far away; yea, the hope of our Liberty is cut off like a Weavers thrumb. We have for many yeers (but in especial since 1647.) chattered like Cranes, and mourned like Doves; yea, with many sighs and tears have we presented our several complaints against God's and our enemies; but are hitherto so far from gaining redress, as that our eyes behold them still exalted to bear Rule over us; and thus for felicity, we reap bitter grief; for freedom, slavery; for true judgement, justice and mercy, injustice tyrannie and oppression; because the Head of Tyrannie being cut off in 1648 (was expected to dy, and be dead) still liveth in and by his ordain∣ed members of Injustice and Oppression; and the Norman Laws of the Oppressors still bear Dominion over us. Thus are we covered with VVrath, and persecuted, oppressed and destroyed by Cruelty: These our enemies have opened their mouths wide against us; fear and the snare of slavery hath taken hold of us; unless Your Excellency (into whose hand the sword is put for that very end and purpose) as a faithful Joshua in the zeal of Nehemiah, stand up for us in the gap, and make up the breach; by cag don the strong holds of Injustice, Tyrannie, and Oppression; and building up the righteous Lovers of true Judgemn, uce and Mercy. So , Then shall this great Nation have cause to  God in You, and praise God for You their great and faithful Captain, and Deliverer from Oppression and Slavery; and shall esteem Your Name and Memory (as alrea∣dy bound for the manifold deliverances the Lord hath wrought by You for us, in especial that at Worcester, never to be forgotten as a most precious Balsome poued forth on all the Land; whose odoriferous perfume and blessed operation extends it self to the expelling of the poysonous maladies of Injustice▪ Tyrannie, and Oppression; and to the advance of God's glory in true Judgement, Justice, and Mercy, and Restoration of this Nations fundamental Laws, Rights and Liberties. The premisses piously considered, and for that the other weighty affairs of this Land will not permit the speedy accomplishment of these particulars (by Your Excellency) as Your petitioners humbly conceive, in gaining a new Representative; from which Lawyers, and all ill affected persons to be excluded. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray, That in the mean time there may be such a course established, as that the Poor may by some easie and speedy way reap the fruit of Justice, and that their Persons may be acquitted from continual vexatious and destructive Arrests and Imprisonment; by such a way as Your Excellency (in that portion of Wisdom assigned You) shall think meet. In expectation whereof, Your Petitioners and Subscribers do in all humility remain, and for the ac∣complishment whereof, Your Excellencies most humbly and faithfully devoted Servants and Handmaids shall ever pray. &c. E. Bassfield, E. Cole. THis Petition was presented on Monday the 27th of October, 1651. by K. Frese, D. Trinhale,
