B2490 13400750 42406
THE WHOLE BOOK OF PSALMS, Collected into English Metre, BY THOMAS STERNHOLD, JOHN HOPKINS, AND OTHERS, Conferred with the Hebrew: Set forth and allowed to be sung in all Churches, of all the people together, before and after Morning and Evening Prayer, and also before and after Sermons; and moreover in private houses, for their godly solace and comfort, laying apart all ungodly Songs and Ballads, which tend one∣ly to the nourishing of vice, and corrupting of youth. James 5. If any be afflicted, let him pray: and if any be merry, let him sing Psalms. Colossians 3. Let the word of God dwell plenteously in you, in all wisdom, teaching and exhorting one another in Psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing unto the Lord in your hearts. ALMA MATER CANTA∣BRIGIA HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA printer's device of Cambridge University Press ¶ Printed by John Field, Printer to the University of CAMBRIDGE; Anno Dom. M.DC.LX.VI. CƲM PRIVILEGIO.
Veni Creator. COme holy Ghost, eternal God, proceeding from above, Both from the Father and the Son, the God of peace and love. t our minds, and into us, thy heavenly grace inspire: That in all truth and godliness e may have true desire. Thou art the very comforter all wo and distress: The heavenly gift of God most high, which no tongue can express: e fountain and the lively spring of joy celestial: The fire so bright, the love so clear, d unction spiritual. Thou in thy gifts art manifold, thereby Christs church doth stand: ithful hearts writing thy law, e finger of Gods hand. ding to thy promise made, u givest speech of grace: through thy help the praise of God y stand in every place. Ghost, into our wits d down thy heavenly light: our hearts with fervent love, serve God day and night. gth and ablish all our weakness, eeble and so frail: neither flesh, the world, nor devil unst us do prevail. ack our enemies far from us, grant us to obtain in our hearts with God and man, out grudge of disdain. grant, O Lord, that thou being leader and our guide, y eschew the snares of sin, from thee never slide. such plentie of thy grace, od Lord, grant we thee pray, thou may'st be our comforter e last dreadful day. strife and distention, Lord, dissolve the bands; ake the knots of peace and love ghout all Christian lands. t us, O Lord, through thee to know Father most of might: of his dear beloved Son ay attain the fight: that with perfect saith also ay acknowledge thee, Spirit of them both alway, God in persons three. nd praise be to the Father, to the Son equal, the holy Spirit also, God coeternal. pray we that the onely Son safe his Spirit to send that do profess his name, the worlds last end. The humble suit of a sinner. M. Lord of whom I do depend, behold my careful heart: then thy will and pleasure is, se me of my smart. seest my sorrows what they are, grief is known to thee: cere is none that can remove, ke the same from me; ly thou whose aid I crave, se mercy still is prest all those that come to thee ccour and for rest. thou seest my restless eyes, ars and grievous groan; unto my suit. O Lord. is well my plaint and moan. hath so inclosed me, past me about, m now renediless, cy help not out. ral man cannot release, gate this pain: thy Christ, my Lord and God, my sins was slain. bloudy wounds are yet to see, gh not with mortal eye: thy saints behold them all, I trust shall I. sin doth hinder me a while, thou shalt see it good I shall enjoy the sight of him, and see his wounds and bloud. And as thine angels and thy saints do now behold the same: So trust I to possess that place, with them to praise thy name. But whil'st I live here in this vale where sinners do frequent, Assist me ever with thy grace, my sins still t lament. Lest that I tread the sinners trace, and give them my consent To dwell with them in wickedness, whereto nature is bent. Onely thy grace must be my stay, lest that I fall down flat: And being down, then of my self cannot recover that. Wherefore this is yet once again my suit and my request, To grant me pardon for my sin, that I in thee may rest. Then shall my heart and tongue also be instruments of praise, And in thy Church and house of Saints sing psalms to thee always. Venite exultemus. Psal. xcv. O Come and let us now rejoyce, And sing unto the Lord, And to our onely Saviour Also with one accord. O let us come before his face With inward reverence, Confessing all our former sins, And that with diligence. To thank him for his benefits Always distributing: Wherefore to him right joyfully In psalms now let us sing. And that because that God alone Is Lord magnificent, And eke above all other gods A King omnipotent. His people doth not he forsake At any time or tide: And in his hands are all the coasts, Of all the world so wide. And with his loving countenance He looketh every where, And doth behold the tops of all The mountains far and near. The sea and all that is therein Are his, for he them made: And eke his hand hath fashioned The earth which doth not fade. O come therefore and worship him, And down before him fall: And let us kneel before the Lord, The which hath made us all. He is our God, our Lord, and King, And we his people are, His flock and sheep of his pasture, Of whom he taketh care. This day if ye will hear his voice, Then harden not your heart, As in the bitter murmuring, When ye were in desert. Which thing was of their negligence Committed in the time Of trouble in the wilderness, A great and grievous crime. Whereas your fathers tempted me And try'd me every way: They proved me, and saw my works, What I could do or say. These fourty years I have been griev'd With this same generation: And evermore I said, they err'd In their imagination: Wherewith their hearts were sore cumbred Long time and many days: Wherefore I said, Assuredly They have not known my ways. To whom I in my anger swore, That they should not be blest, Nor see my joy celestial, Nor enter in my rest. Gloria Patri. All laud and praise, be to thee, Lord, O that of might art most, To God the Father, and the Son, And to the holy Ghost. As it in the beginning was For ever heretofore, And is now at this present time, And shall be evermore. The song of S. Ambrose, called Te Deum. WE praise thee, God, we knowledge thee the onely Lord to be; And as eternal Father, all the earth doth worship thee. To thee all Angels cry, the heavens and all the powers therein: To thee Cherub and Seraphin to cry they do not sin, O holy, holy, holy Lord, of Sabaoth Lord the God; Through heaven & earth thy praise is spread and glory all abroad. Th' Apostles glorious company yeeld praises unto thee: The prophets goodly fellowship praise thee continually. The noble and victorious host of Martyrs sound thy praise: The holy Church throughout the world doth knowledge thee always. Father of endless Majesty they do acknowledge thee: Thy Christ thine honourable, true, and onely Son to be, The holy Ghost the comforter. Of glory thou art King, O Christ, and of the Father art the Son everlasting. When sinful mans decay in hand thou tookest to restore, To be in clos'd in virgins womb thou diddest not abhor. When thou hadst overcome of death the sharp and cruel might, Thou heavens kingdom didst set ope to each believing wight. In glory of the Father thou dost it on Gods right hand: We trust that thou shalt come our Judge our cause to understand. Lord, help thy servants whom thou hast bought with thy precious bloud, And in eternal glory set them with thy Saints so good. O Lord, do thou thy people save, bless thine inheritance: Lord, govern them, and, Lord, do thou for ever them advance. We magnifie thee day by day, and world without an end Adore thy holy name: O Lord, vouchsafe us to defend From sin this day: have mercy, Lord, have mercy on us all: And on us, as we trust in thee, Lord, let thy mercy fall. O Lord, I have reposed all my confidence in thee: Put to confounding shame therefore Lord, let me never be. The Song of the three Children. O All ye works of God the Lord, bless ye the Lord, Praise him and magnifie him for ever. O ye the Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the starry heavens high, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye waters above the skie, bless ye the Lord, &c. O all ye powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the shining Sun and Moon, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the glistring Stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the Showres and dropping Dew, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the blowing Winds of God, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the Fire and warming Heat, bless ye the Lord, &c. Ye Winter and the Summer-tide, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the Dews and binding Frosts, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the Frost and chilling Cold, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye congealed Ice and Snow, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the Nights and lightsome Days, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the Darkness and the Light, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the Lightnings and the Clouds, bless ye the Lord, &c. O  the earth eke bless the Lord, yea bless the Lord, &c. O ye the Mountains and the Hills, bless ye the Lord, &c. O all ye green things on the earth bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the ever-springing Wells, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the Seas, and eke the Flouds, bless ye the Lord, &c. Whales, and all that in waters move, bless ye the Lord, &c. O all ye flying Fowls of th' air, bless ye the Lord, &c. O all ye Beasts and Cattel eke, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the Children of mankinde, bless ye the Lord, &c. Let Israel eke bless the Lord, yea bless the Lord, &c. O ye the priests of God the Lord, bless ye the Lord, &c. O ye the servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, &c. Ye Spirits and Souls of righteous men, bless ye the Lord, &c. Ye Holy and ye Meek of heart, bless ye the Lord, &c. O Ananias, bless the Lord, bless thou the Lord, &c. O Azarias, bless the Lord, bless thou the Lord, &c. And Misael, eke bless the Lord, bless thou the Lord, &c. The song of Zacharias, called Benedictus. THe onely Lord of Israel Be praised evermore: For through his visitation And mercy kept in store, His people now he hath redeem'd, That long have been in thrall: And spread abroad his saving health Upon his servants all. In Davids house his servant true, According to his minde, And also his anointed King, As we in Scripture finde. As by his holy Prophets all, Oft-times he did declare, The which were since the world began, His ways for to prepare. That we might be delivered From those that make debate, Our enemies, and from the hands Of all that do us hate. The mercy which he promised Our fathers to fulfil, And think upon his Covenant made According to his will. And also to perform the Oath Which he before had sworn To Abraham our father dear, For us that were forlorn: That he would give himself for us, And us from bondage bring Out of the hands of all our foes, To serve our heavenly King: And that without all manner fear, And eke in righteousness: And also for to lead our lives In sted fast holiness. And thou, O Childe, which now art born And of the Lord elect, Shalt be the Prophet of the High'st, His ways for to direct. For thou shalt go before his face For to prepare his ways, And also for to teach his will And pleasure all thy days. To give them knowledge how that their Salvation is near: And that remission of their sins Is through his mercy mere. Whereby the day-spring from on high. Is come us for to visit, And those for to illuminate Which do in darkness sit. To lighten those that shadowed be With death, and eke opprest: And also for to guide our feet The way to peace and rest. The Song of blessed Mary, called Magnificat. MY soul doth magnifie the Lord, My spirit eke evermore Rejoyceth in the Lord my God, Which is my Saviour. And why? because he did regard, And gave respect unto So base estate of his handmaid, And let the mighty go.
For now behold all nations And generations all, From this time forth for evermore Shall me right blessed call: Because he hath me magnified, Which is the Lord of might; Whose name be ever sanctified, And praised day and night. For with his mercy and his grace All men he doth inflame, Throughout all generations To such as fear his name. He shewed strength with his great arm, And made the proud to start, With all imaginations That they beat in their heart. He hath put down the mighty ones From their supernal feat, And did exalt the meek in heart, As he hath thought it meet. The hungry he replenished With all things that were good, And through his power he made the rich Oft-times to want their food. And calling to rememberance His mercy every deal, Hath holpen up assistantly His servant Israel: According to his promise made To Abraham before, And to his seed successively, To stand for evermore. The song of Simeon, called Nunc dimittis. O Lord, because my hearts desire Hath wished long to see My onely Lord and Saviour, Thy Son before I die: The joy and health of all mankinde, Desired long before, Which now is come into the world, Of mercy bringing store: Thou sufferest thy servant now In peace for to depart, According to thy holy Word, Which lighteneth my heart. Because mine eyes which thou hast made To give my body light, Have now beheld thy saving health, Which is the Lord of might. Whom thou mercifully hast set, Of thine abundant grace, In open sight and visible Before all peoples face, The Gentiles to illuminate, And Satan overquel, And eke to be the glory of Thy people Israel, The Symbol or Creed of Athanasius, called Quicunque vult. WHat man soever he be that salvation will attain, The Catholick belief he must before all things retain. Which faith unless he wholly keep, and undefiledly, Without all doubt eternally he shall be sure to die. The Catholick belles is this, that God we worship one In Trinity, and Trinity in Unity alone: So as we neither do confound the persons of the three, Nor yet the substance whole of one in sunder parted be, One Person of the father is, another of the Son, Another Person proper of the holy Ghost alone. Of Father, Son, and holy Ghost, but one the Godhead is: Like Glory, coeternal eke The Majesty likewise. Such as the Father is, such is the Son in each degree: And such also we do beleeve the holy Ghost to be. Uncreate is the father, and uncreate is the Son, The holy Ghost uncreate, so uncreate is each one. Incomprehensible Father is, incomprehensible Son, And comprehensible also is the holy Ghost of none. The Father is eternal, and the Son eternal so, And in like sort eternal is the holy Ghost also, And yet though we beleeve that each of thse eternal be: Yet there but one Eternal is, and not Eternals three. As ne incomprehensible we, he yet uncreate three, But one incomprehensible, one uncreate hold to be. Almighty so the Father is, the Son Almighty so, And in like sort Almighty is the holy Ghost also. And albeit that every one of these Almighty be; Yet there but one Almighty is, And not Almighties three. The Father God is, God the Son, God holy Ghost also: Yet are there not three Gods in all, but one God, and no mo. So likewise Lord the Father is, and Lord also the Son, And Lord the holy Ghost: yet are there not three Lords, but one. For as we are compell'd to grant by Christian verity, Each of the persons by himself both God and Lord to be: So Catholick religion forbiddeth us alway, That either Gods be three, or that there Lords be three, to say. Of none the Father is, ne made, ne create, nor begot: The Son is of the Father, not create, ne made, but got: The holy Ghost is of them both, the Father and the Son; Ne made, ne create, nor begot, but doth proceed alone. So we one Father hold, not three, one Son also, not three, One holy Ghost alone, and not three holy Ghosts to be. None in this Trinity before nor after other is: Ne greater any then the rest, ne lesser be likewise. But every one among themselves of all the Persons three, Together coeternal all, and all coequal be, So Unity in Trinity, as said it is before, And Trinity in Unity in all things we adore. Therefore what man soever that salvation will attain, This faith touching the Trinity of force he must retain. And needful to eternal life it is, that every wight Of the incarnating of Christ our Lord beleeve aright. For this the right faith is, that we beleeve and eke do know, That Christ our Lord the Son of God is God and man also: God of his Fathers substance got before the world began, And of his Mothers substance born in world a very man. Both perfect God and perfect Man in one, one Jesus Christ: That doth of reasonable soul and humane flesh subsist. Touching his Godhead, equal with his Father God is he: Touching his Manhood, lower then his father in degree. Who though he be both very God and very man also, Yet is he but one Christ alone, and is not persons two. One, not by turning of Godhead into the flesh of man; But by taking manhood to God, this being one began. All one, not by confounding of the substance into one; But onely by the Unity that is of one Person. For as the reasonable soul and flesh but one man is: So in one Person God and Man is but one Christ likewise. Who suffered for to save us all, to hell he did descend: The third day rose again from death, to heaven he did ascend. He sits at the right hand of God th'Almighty Father there: From thence to judge the quick and dead again he shall appear. At whose return all men shall rise with bodies new restor'd, And of their own works they shall give account unto the Lord. And they into eternal life shall go that have done well: Who have done ill, shall go into eternal fire to dwell. This is the Catholick belief: who doth not faithfully Beleeve the same, without all doubt he saved cannot be. To Father, Son, and holy Ghost, all glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore. The Lamentation of a sinner. O Lord, turn not away thy face From him that lies prostrate, Lamenting sore his sinful life Before thy mercy gate. Which gate thou openest wide to those That do lament their sin. Shut not that gate against me, Lord, But let me enter in. And call me not to mine account How I have lived here: For then I know right well, O Lord, How vile I shall appear. I need not to confess my life, I am sure thou canst tell: What I have been, and what I am, I know thou know'st it well. O Lord, thou know'st what things be past, And eke the things that be: Thou know'st also what is to come, Nothing is hid from thee. Before the heavens and earth were made, Thou know'st what things were then, As all things else that have been since Among the sons of men. And can the things that I have done Be hidden from thee then? Nay, nay, thou know'st them all, O Lord, Where they were done, and when. Wherefore with tears I come to thee To beg and to intreat, Even as the child that hath done ill, And feareth to be beat. So come I to thy mercy gate, Where mercy doth abound, Requiring mercy for my sin, To heal my deadly wound. O Lord, I need not to repeat What I do beg or crave: Thou know'st, O Lord, before I ask The thing that I would have. Mercy, good Lord, mercy I ask, This is the total sum: For mercy, Lord, is all my suit, Lord, let thy mercy come. The Lords Prayer, or Pater noster. OUr father which in heaven art, Lord. Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, even as the same In heaven is. Give us, O Lord, our daily bread this day. As we forgive our debters, so forgive our debts we pray. Into temptation lead us not, from evil make us free. For kingdom, power, and glory thine, both now and ever be. The X Commandments. Audi Israel. Exod. 20. HEark Israel, and what I say give heed to understand; I am the Lord thy God that brought thee out of Egypt land, Even from the house wherein thou didst in thraldom live a slave. None other gods at all, before my presence shalt thou have. No manner graven image shalt thou make at all to thee; Nor any figure like by thee shall counterfeited be, Of any thing in heaven above, nor in the earth below, Nor in the waters beneath the earth: to them thou shalt no: bow, Nor shalt them serve: the Lord thy God, a jealous God am I, That punish parents faults unto the third and fourth degree, Upon their children that me hate: and mercy do display To thousands of such as me love, and my precepts obey. The Name thou of the Lord thy God in vain shalt never use: For him that takes his Name in vain the Lord will not excuse. Remember that thou holy keep the sacred sabbath day: Six days thou labour shalt and do Thy needful works alway. The seventh day is set by the Lord thy God to rest upon; No work then shalt thou do in it, ne thou, nor yet thy son, Thy daughter, servant, nor thy maid, thine ox, nor yet thine ass, Nor stranger that within thy gates hath his abiding-place: For in six dayes God heaven and earth, and all therein did make, And after those his rest he did upon the seventh day take. Wherefore he blest the day that he for resting did ordain, And sacred to himself alone appointed to remain. Yeeld honour to thy Parents, that prolong'd thy days may be Upon the land the which the Lord thy God hath given thee. Thou shalt not murder. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steal. Nor witness false against thy neighbour be. Thou shalt not covet house that to thy neighbour doth belong: Ne covet shalt in having of his wife to do him wrong, Nor his man-servant, nor his maid, nor ox, nor ass, of his, Nor any other thing that to thy neighbour proper is. The complaint of a Sinner. WHere righteousness doth say, Lord, for my sinful part, In wrath thou shouldst me pay Vengeance for my desert: I can it not deny, But needs I must confess How that continually Thy laws I do transgress, But if it be thy will With sinners to contend, Then all thy flock shall spill, And be lost without end. For who lives here so right, That rightly he can say, He sins not in thy sight Full oft and every day? Full oft, &c. The Scripture plain tells me, The righteous man offendeth Seven times a day to thee, Whereon thy wrath dependeth: So that the righteous man Doth walk in no such path, But he falls now and then In danger of thy wrath, In danger, &c. Then sith the case so stands, That even the man right wife Falls oft in sinful hands, Whereby thy wrath mayrise; Lord, I that am unjust, And righteousness none have, Whereto then shall I trust My sinful soul to save, My sinful, &c. But truly to that post Whereto I cleave and shall, Which is thy mercy most? Lord, let thy mercy fall, And mitigate thy mood, Or else we perish all. The price of this thy bloud, Wherein mercy I call, Wherein, &c. The Scripture doth declare No drop of bloud in thee, But that thou didst not spare To shed each drop for me. Now let those drops most sweet So moist my heart so dry, That I with sin replete, May live, and sin may die, May live, &c.
That being mortified This sin of mine in me, I may be sanctified By grace of thine in thee: So that I never fall Into such mortal sin, That my sos infernal Rejoyce my death therein, Rejoyce my, &c. But vouchsafe me to keep From those infernal foes, And from that lake so deep, Whereas no mercy grows. And I shall sing the songs Consirmd with the just, That unto thee belongs Which art my onely trust, Which art, &c. The PSALMS of DAVID in metre. Beatus vir. Psal. i. T. S. THe man is blest that hath not bent to wicked reade his ear: Nor led his life as sinners do, nor sat in scorners chair. But in the law of God the Lord doth set his whole delight: And in that law doth exercise himself both day and night. He shall be like the tree that grows fast by the rivers side, Which bringeth forth most pleasant fruit in her due time and tide. Whose leaf shall never fade nor fall, but flourish still and stand: Even so all things shall prosper well, that this man takes in hand. So shall not the ungodly men, they shall be nothing so: But as the dust which from the earth the wind drives to and fro. Therefore shall not the wicked men in judgement stand upright: Nor yet the sinners with the just shall come in place or sight. For why? the way of godly men unto the Lord is known: And eke the way of wicked men shall quite be overthrown. Quare fremuerunt. Psal. ii. T. S. WHy did the Gentiles tumults raise? what rage was in their brain? Why did the Jewisn people muse, feeing all is but vain? The kings and rulers of the earth conspire and are all bent Against the Lord and Christ his Son, which he among us sent. Shall we be bound to them? say they; let all their bonds be broke: And of their doctrine and their law let us reject the yoke. But he that in the heaven dwells, their doings will deride: And make them all as mocking-stocks throughout the world so wide. For in his wrath the Lord will say to them upon a day: And in his fury trouble them, and then the Lord will say, I have anointed him my King upon my holy hill: I will therefore, Lord, preach thy law, and eke declare thy will. For in this wise the Lord himself did say to me I wot, Thou art my dear and onely Son, to day I thee begot. All people I will give to thee, as heirs at thy request: The ends and coasts of all the earth by thee shall be possest. Thou shalt them bruise even with a mace, as men under foot trod: And as the potters sherds, shalt break them with an iron rod. Now ye, O kings and rulers all, be wise therefore and learn'd, By whom the matters of the world be judged and discern'd. See that ye serve the Lord above in trembling and in fear: See that with reverence ye rejoyce to him in like manner. See that ye kiss and eke embrace his blessed Son, I say, Left in his wrath ye suddenly perish in the mid-way. If once his wrath never so small shall kindle in his breast: O then all they that trust in Christ shall happy be and blest. Domine, quid. Psal. iii. T. S. O Lord, how are my foes increast, which vex me more and more? They kill my heart when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou, O Lord, art my defence, when I am hard bestead: My worship and mine honour both, and thou hold'st up my head. Then with my voice upon the Lord I did both call and cry: And he out of his holy hill did hear me by and by. I laid me down, and quietly I slept, and rose again: For why? I know assuredly the Lord will me sustain. If ten thousand had hemm'd me in, I could not be afraid: For thou art still my Lord and God, my Saviour and mine aid. Rise up therefore, save me, my God, for now to thee I call: For thou hast broke the cheeks and teeth of these wicked men all. Salvation onely doth belong to thee, O Lord above: Thou dost bestow upon thy folk thy blessing and thy love. Cum invocarem. Psal. iv. T. S. O God that art my righteousness, Lord, hear me when I call: Thou hast set me at liberty, when I was bound and thrall. Have mery, Lord, therefore on me, and grant me my request: For unto thee uncessantly to cry I will not rest. O mortal men, how long will ye my glory thus despise? Why wander ye in vanity, and follow after lies? Know ye that good and godly men the Lord doth take and chuse: And when to him I make my plaint, he doth me not refuse. Sin not but stand in aw therefore, examine well your heart: And in your chamber quietly see you your selves convert. Offer to God the sacrifice of righteousness, I say: And look that in the living Lord you put your trust alway. The greater sort crave worldly goods and riches do embrace: But, Lord, grant us thy countenance, thy savour and thy grace. For thou thereby shalt make my heart more joyful and more glad, Then they that of their corn and wine full great increase have had. In peace therefore lie down will I, taking my rest and sleep: For thou onely wilt me, O Lord, alone in safety keep. Verba ma auribus. Psal. v. T. S. IN cline thine ears unto my words, O Lord, my plaint consider: And hear my voice, my King, my God, to thee I make my prayer. Hear me betime. Lord, tarry not, for I will have respect, My prayer early in the morn to thee for to direct. And I will trust through patience in thee my God alone: Thou art not pleas'd with wickedness, and ill with thee dwells none. And in thy sight shall never stand these furious fools, O Lord: Vain workers of iniquity thou hast always abhor'd. The liars and the slatterers, thou shalt destroy them than: And God will hate the bloud-thirsty, and the deceitful man. Therefore will I come to thin house, trusting upon thy grace: And reverently will worship thee toward thine holy place. Lord, lead me in thy righteousness, for to confound my soes: And eke the way that I shall walk before my face disclose. For in their mouths there is no truth, their heart is soul and vain: Their throat an open sepulchre, their tongues do glose and fain. Destroy their false conspiracies, that they may come to nought: Subvert them in their heaps of sin, which have rebellion wrought. But those that put their trust in thee, let them be glad always, And render thanks for thy defence, and give thy name the praise. For thou with favour wilt increase, the just and righteous still: And with thy grace, as with a shield, defend him from all ill. Domine, ne in furore. Psal. vi. T. S. LOrd, in thy wrath reprove me not, though I deserve thine ire: No yet correct me in thy rage, O Lord, I thee desire. For I am weak, therefore, O Lord, Of mercy me forbear: And heal me, Lord; for why? thou know'st my bones do quake for fear. My soul is troubled very sore, and vexed vehemently: But, Lord, how long wilt thou delay to cure my misery? Lord, turn thee to thy wonted grace, my silly soul up take: O save me, not for my deserts, but for thy mercies sake. For why? no man among the dead remembreth thee one whit: Or who shall worship thee, O Lord, in the infernal pit? So grievous is my plaint and moan, that I wax wondrous saint: All the night long I wash my bed with tears of my complaint. My sight is dim, and waxeth old with anguish of my heart, For sear of those that be my foes and would my soul subvert. But now away from me, all ye that work iniquity: For why? the Lord hath heard the voice of my complaint and cry. He heard not onely the request and prayer of my heart; But it received at my hands, and took it in good part. And now my foes that vexed me, the Lord will soon defame: And suddenly confound them all, to their rebuke and shame. Domine Deus meus, Psal. vii. T. S. O Lord my God, I put my trust and confidence in thee: Save me from them that me pursue, and eke deliver me. Lest like a lion he me tear and rend in pieces small, While there is none to succour me and rid me out of thrall. O Lord my God, if I have done the thing that is not right, Or else it I be found in fault, or guilty in thy sight: Or to my friend rewarded ill, or left him in distress, Which me pursu'd most cruelly, and hated me causless: Then let my foes pursue my soul, and eke my life down thrust Unto the earth, and also lay mine honour in the dust. Start up, O Lord, now in thy wrath, and put my foes to pain: Perform the kingdom promised to me which wrong sustain. Then shall great nations come to thee, and know thee by this thing, If thou declare, for love of them, thy self as Lord and King. And as thou art of all men Judge, O Lord, ow judge thou me According to my righteousness and mine integrity. The second part. Lord, cease the hate of wicked men, and be the just mans guide: By whom the secrets of all hearts are searched and descri'd. I take my help to come of God, in all my pain and smart, That doth preserve all those that be of pure and perfect heart. The just man and the wicked both God judgeth by his power: So that he feels his might hand even every day and hour. Except he change his minde, I die; for even as he should smite, He whets his sword, his bowe he bends, aiming where he may hit: And doth prepare his mortal darts, his arrows keen and sharp, For them that do me persecute, whiles he doth mischief warp. But lo, though he in travail be of his devilish forecast, And of his mischief once conceiv'd; yet brings forth nought at last. He digs a ditch and delves it deep, in hope to hurt his brother: But he shall fall into the pit that he dig'd up for other. Thus wrong returneth to the hurt of him in whom it bred, And all the mischief that he wrought shall sall upon his head. I will give thanks to God therefore that judgeth righteously, And with my song will praise the name of him that is most high. Domine Deus noster. Psal. viii. T. S. O God our Lord, how wonderful are thy works every where, Whose fame surmounts in dignity above the heavens clear! Even by the mouth of sucking babes thou wilt confound they foes: For in those babes thy might is seen: thy graces they disclose. And when I see the heavens high, the works of thine own hand; The Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars, in order as they stand: What thing is man, Lord think I then, that thou dost him remember? Or what is mans posterity, that thou dost it consider? For thou hast made him little less then Angels in degree: And thou hast crowned him also with glory and dignity. Thou hast prefer'd him to be lord, of all thy works of wonder: And at his feet hast set all things, that he should keep them under: As sheep, and neat, and all beasts else, that in the fields do feed: Fowls of the air, fish in the sea, and all that therein breed. Therefore must I say once again, O God that art our Lord. How famous and how wonderful are thy works through the world! Confitebor tibi, Domine. Psal. ix. T. S. WIth heart and mouth unto the Lord will I sing laud and praise: And speak of all thy wondrous works, and them declare always. I will be glad and much rejoyce in thee, O God most high: And make my songs extol thy name above the starry skie. For that my foes are driven back and turned unto flight: They fall down flat, and are destroy'd by thy great power and might. Thou hast revenged all my wrong, my grief and all my grudge: Thou dost with justice hear my cause, most like a righteous Judge. Thou dost rebuke the heathen folk, and wicked so confound,
That afterward the memory of them cannot be found. My foes thou hast made good dispatch, and all their towns destroy'd: Thou hast their fame with them defac'd, through all the world so wide. Know thou that he which is above for evermore shall reign, And in the seat of equity true judgement will maintain. With justice he will keep and guide the world and every wight: And so will yeeld with equity to every man his right. He is protectour of the poor what time they be opprest: He is mall adversity their refuge and their rest. And they that know thy holy name, therefore shall trust in thee: For thou forsakest not their suit in their necessity. The second part. Sing psalms therefore unto the Lord that dwells on Sion hill: Publish among all nations his noble acts and will. For he is mindful of the bloud of those that be opprest: For getting not th' afflicted heart that seeks to him for rest. Have mercy, Lord, on me poor wretch, whole enemies still remain, Which from the gates of death are wont, to raise me up again. In Sion that I might set forth thy praise with heart and voice, And that in thy salvation, Lord, my soul might still rejoyce. The heathen stick fast in the pit that they themselves prepar'd, And in the net that they did set their own feet fast are snar'd. God shews his judgements, which were good for every man to mark, When as you see the wicked man ly trapt in his own wark. The wicked and deceitful men go down to hell for ever, And all the people of the world, that will not God remember. But sure the Lord will not forget the poor mans grief and pain: The patient people never look for help of God in vain. O Lord arise, lest men prevail that he of wordly might: And set the heathen solk receive their judgement in thy sight. Lord, strike such terrour, fear, and dread, into the hearts of them, That they may know assuredly they be but mottal men. Ʋt quid, Domine. Psal. x. T. S. WHat is the cause that thou, O Lord, art now so far from thine, And keepest close thy countenance from us this troublous time? The poor do perish by the proud, and wicked men, desire: Let them be taken in the craft that they themselves conspire. For in the lust of his own heart th' ungodly doth delight: So doth the wicked praise himself, and doth the Lord dspight. He is so proud, that right and wrong he setteth all apart: Nay, nay, there is no God, saith he, for thus he thinks in heart. Because his ways do prosper still, he doth thy laws neglect, And with a blast doth puff against such as would him correct. Tush, tush, saith he, I have no dread, lest mine estate should change. And why? for all adversity to him is very strange. His mouth is full of cursedness, of fraud, deceit, and guile: Under his tongue doth mischief sit, and travel all the while. He lieth hid in ways and holes to slay the innocent: Against the poor that pass him by his cruel eyes are bent. And like a lion privily lies lurking in his den, If he may snare them in his net, to spoil poor simple men. And for the nonce full craftily he croucheth down, I say: So are great heaps of poor men made by his strong power his prey. The second part. Tush, God forgetteth this, saith he, therefore I may be bold: His countenance is cast aside, he doth it not behold. Arise, O Lord, O God, in whom the poor mans hope doth rest: Lift up thy hand, forget not, Lord, the poor that be opprest. What blasphemy is this to thee, Lord, dost thou not abhor it, To hear the wicked in their heart say, Tush, thou car'st not for it? But thou seest all their wickedness, and well dost understand That friendless and poor fatherless are left into thy hand. Of wicked and malicious men then break the power for ever, That they with their iniquity may perish altogether. The Lord shall reign for evermore as King and God alone, And he will chase the heathen folk out of the land each one. Thou hear'st, O Lord, the poor mens plaint their prayers and request: Their hearts thou wilt confirm, until thine ears to hear be prest: To judge the poor and fatherless, and help them to their right; That they may be no more opprest by men of worldly might. In Domino consido. Psal. xi. T. S. I Trust in God, how dare ye then say thus my soul until, Flie hence as fast as any fowl, and hide you in your hill? Behold the wicked bend their bowes, and make their arrows prest To shoot in secret, and to hurt the sound and harmless breast. Of worldly hope all stays were shrunk, and clearly brought to nought: Alas, the just and righteous man, what evil hath he wrought? But he that in his Temple is most holy and most high, And in the heavens hath his seat of royal majesty, The poor and simple mans estate considereth in his minde, And searcheth out full narrowly the manners of mankinde; And with a cheerful countenance the righteous man will use: But in his heart he doth abhor all such as mischief muse; And on the sinners casteth snares as thick as any rain, Fire and brimstone, and whirlwinds thick, appointed for their pain. Ye see then how a righteous God doth righteousness embrace, And to the just and upright men shews forth his pleasant face. Salvum me fas. Psal. xii. T. S. HEy, Lord, for good and godly men do perish and decay: And saith and truth from worldly men is parted clean away. Whoso doth with his neighbour talk, his talk is all but vain: For every man bethinketh how to flatter, lie, and feign. But flattering and deceitful lips, and tongues that be so stout To speak proud words and make great brags, The Lord soon cuts them out. For they say still, We will prevail, our tongues shall us extol: Our tongues are ours, we ought to speak; what Lord shall us control? But for the great complaint and cry of poor and men opprest, Arise will I now, saith the Lord, and them restore to rest. Gods word is like to silver pure, that front the earth is trid, And hath no les thou seven times in fie b purifid. Now sith thy promise is to help. Lord, keep thy promise then: And save us now and evermore from this ill kinde of men. For now the wicked world is full of mischiefs manifold, When vanity with worldly men so highly is extoll'd. Ʋsquequo, Domine. Psal. xiii. T. S. HOw long wilt thou forget me, Lord, shall I ne're be remembred? How long wilt thou thy visage hide, as though thou wert offended? In heart and minde how long shall I with care tormented be? How long eke shall my deadly foes thus triumph over me? Behold me now, my Lord my God, and hear me fore opprest, Lighten mine eyes, left that I sleep as one by death possest: Lest that mine enemie say to me, behold I do prevail: Lest they also that hate my soul, rejoyce to see me quail. But from thy mercy and goodness my hope shall never start: In thy relef and saving health right glad shall be my heart. I will give thanks unto the Lord, and praises to him fing: Because he hath heard my request, and granted my wishing. Dixit insipiens. Psal. xiiii. T. S. THere is no God, as foolish men affirm in their mad mood: Their drifts are all corrupt and vain, not one of them doth good. The Lord beheld from heaven high the whole race of mankinde, And saw not one that sought indeed the living God to finde. They went all wide and were corrupt, and truly there was none That in the world did any good, I say, there was not one. Is all their judgement so far lost, that all work mischief still, Eating my people even as bread, not one to seek Gods will? When they thus rage, then suddenly great fear on them shall fall: For God doth love the righteous men, and will maintain them all. Ye mock the doings of the poor, to their reproach and shame: Because they put their trust in God, and call upon his name. But who shall give thy people health, and when wilt thou fulfil Thy promise made to Israel from out of Sion hill? Even when thou shalt restore again such as were captive led, Then Jacob shall therein rejoyce, and Israel shall be glad. Domine, quis. Psal. xv. T. S. O Lord, within thy tabernacle who shall inhabit still? Or whom wilt thou receive to dwell in thy most holy hill? The man whose life is uncorrupt, whose works are just and streight: Whose heart doth think the very truth, whose tongue speaks no deceit. Nor to his neighbour doth none ill in body, goods▪ or name, Nor willingly doth move false tales, which might empair the same. That in his heart regardeth not malicious wicked men: But those that love and fear the Lord he maketh much of them. His oath and all his promises that keepeth faithfully, Although he make his covenant so that he doth lose thereby. That putteth not to usury his money and his coyn, Ne for to hut the innocent doth bribe, or else purloyn. Whoso doth all things as you see that here is to he done. Shall never perish in th world, nor in the world to com. Conserva me. Psal. xvi. T. S. LOrd, keep me; for I trust in thee, and do confess indeed Thou art my God, and of my goods, O Lord, thou hast no need. I give my goods unto the saints that in the world do dwell, And namely to the faithful flock in vertue that excel. They shall heap sorrows on their heads, which run as they were mad, To offer to the idol-gods: alas, it is too bad. As for their bloudy sacrifice and offerings of that sort, I will not touch, nor yet thereof my lips shall make report. For why? the Lord the portion is of mine inheritance: And thou art he that dost maintain my rent, my lot, my chance. The place wherein my lot did fall, in beauty did excel: Mine heritage assign'd to me doth please me wondrous well. I thank the Lord that caused me to understand the right: For by his means my secret thoughts do teach me every night. I set the Lord still in my sight, and trust him over all: For he doth stand on my right hand, Therefore I shall not fall. Wherefore my heart and tongue also do both rejoyce together: My flesh and body rest in hope, when I this thing consider. Thou wilt not leave my soul in grave, for, Lord, thou lovest me: Nor yet wilt give thy holy One corruption for to see. But wilt me teach the way to life; for all treasure and store Of perfect joy are in thy face, and power for evermore. Exaudi Domine. Psal. xvii. T. S. O Lord, give ear to my just cause, attend when I complain: And hear the prayer that I put forth with lips that do not feign. And let the judgement of my cause proceed always from thee: And let thine eyes behold and clear this my simplicitie. Thou hast well tri'd me in the night, and yet couldst nothing finde That I have spoken with my tongue that was not in my minde. As for the works of wicked men and paths perverse and ill, For love of thy most holy name, I have refrained still. Then in thy paths that be most pure stay me, Lord, and preserve: That from the way wherein I walk my steps may never swerve. For I do call to thee, O Lord, surely thou wilt me aid: Then hear my prayer, and weigh right wel the words that I have said. O thou the Saviour of all them that put their trust in thee, Declare thy strength on them that spurn against thy majesty. O keep me as thou wouldest keep the apple of thine eye: And under covert of thy wings defend me secretly. The second part. From wicked men that trouble me and daily me annoy, And from my foes that go about my soul for to destroy: Which wallow in their worldly wealth so full and cke so fat, That in their pride they do not spare to speak they care not what. They lie in wait where I should pass, with craft me to confound: And muing mischief in their minds, to cast me to the ground. Much like a lion greedily that would his prey embrace: Or lurking like a lions whelp wthin some secret place. Up Lord in hast, prevent my foe, and cast him at thy feet: Save then my soul from the ill man, and with the sword him luit. Deliver me, Lord, by thy power out of these tyrants hands▪
Which now so long time reigned have, and kept us in their bands. I mean from worldly men, to whom all worldly goods are rife, That have no hope nor part of joy but in this present life. Thou of thy store their bellies fill'st with pleasure to their minde: Their children have enough, and leave to theirs the rest behinde. But I shall with pure conscience behold thy gracious face: So when I wake, I shall be full of thine image and grace. Diligam te, Dom. Psal. xviii. T. S. O God my strength and fortitude, of force I must love thee: Thou art my castle and desence in my necessitie. My God, my rock in whom I trust, the worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler, and my shield, the horn of all my health. When I sing laud unto the Lord most worthy to be served, Then from my foes I am right sure, that I shall be preserved. The pangs of death did compass me, and bound me every where: The flowing waves of wickedness did put me in great fear. The slie and subtil snares of hell were round about me set: ed for my death there was prepar'd a deadly trapping net. I thus beset with pain and grief, did pray to God for grace; d he forthwith did hear my plaint ut of his holy place. Such is his power that in his wrath e made the earth to quake, o, the foundation of the mount of Basan for to shake. And from his nostrils came a smoke, then kindled was his ire: d from his mouth came kindled coals of hot consuming fire. The Lord descended from above, and bowed the heavens high; d underneath his feet he cast the darkness of the skie. On cherubs and on cherubims full royally he rode: on the wings of all the winds came flying all abroad. The second part. And like a den most dark he made his hid and secret place: th waters black and aery clouds environed he was. But when the presence of his face in brightness shall appear, n clouds consume, and in their stead come hail and coals of fire. The fiery darts and thunderbolts disperse them here and there: with his often lightenings he puts them in great fear. Lord, at thy wrath and threatenings, and at thy chiding chear, e springs and the foundations of all the world appear. And from above the Lord sent down to fetch me from below, pluckt me out of waters great, that would me over flow. And me delivered from my foes that would have made me thrall: , from such foes as were too strong for me to deal withall. They did prevent me to oppress in time of my great grief: yet the Lord was my defence, my succour and relief. He brought me forth in open place, whereas I might be free, d kept me safe, because he had a favour unto me. And as I was an innocent, so did he me regard, d to the cleanness of my hands he gave me my reward: For that I walked in his ways, and in his paths have trod, have not wavered wickedly against my Lord and God. The third part. But evermore I have respect to his law and decree: His statutes and commandements I cast not out from me. But pure and clean, and uncorrupt appear'd before his face, And did refrain from wickedness and sin in any case. The Lord therefore will me reward as I have done aright, And to the cleanness of my hands appearing in his sight. For, Lord, with him that holy is wilt thou be holy too, And with the good and vertuous men right vertuously wilt do: And to the loving and elect thy love thou wilt reserve: And thou wilt use the wicked men as wicked men deserve. For thou dost save the simple folk in trouble when they lie, And dost bring down the countenance of them that look full high. The Lord will light my candle so that it shall shine full bright: The Lord my God will make also my darkness to be light. For by thy help an host of men discomnt, Lord, I shall: By thee I scale and overleap the strength of any wall. Unspotted are the ways of God, his word is purely tri'd: He is a sure defence to such as in his faith abide. For who is God except the Lord? for other there is none: Or else who is omnipotent, saving our God alone? The fourth part. The God that girdeth me with strength, is he that I do mean, That all the ways wherein I walk did evermore keep clean. That made my feet like to the harts in swiftness of my pace, And for my surety brought me forth into an open place. He did in order put my hands to battel and to fight: To break in sunder bars of brass he gave my arms the might. Thou teachest me thy saving health, thy right hand is my tower: Thy love and familiarity doth still increase my power. And under me thou makest plain the way where I should walk, So that my feet shall never slip, nor stumble at a balk. And fiercely I pursue and take my foes that me annoy'd: And from the field do not return till they be all destroy'd. So I suppress and wound my foes, that they can rise no more: For at my feet they fall down flat, I strike them all so sore. For thou dost gird me with thy strength to war in such a wise, That they be all scattred abroad that up against me rise. Lord, thou hast put into my hands my mortal enemies yoke: And all my foes thou dost divide in sunder with thy stroke. They call'd for help, but none gave ear, nor holp them with relief: Yea, to the Lord they call'd for help, yet heard he not their grief. The fifth part. And still like dust before the wind I drive them under seet, And sweep them out like filthy clay that sticketh in the street. Thou keep'st me from seditious folk, that still in strife are led: And thou dost of the heathen folk appoint me to be head. A people strange to me unknown, and yet they shall me serve: And at the first obey my word, whereas mine own will swerve. I shall be irksome to mine own, they will not see my light: But wander wide out of the way, and hide them out of fight, But blessed be the living Lord, most worthy of all praise. That is my rock and saving health; praised be he always. For God it is that gave me power, revenged for to be, And with his holy word subdu'd the people unto me. And from my foe delivered me, and set me higher then those That cruel and ungodly were, and up against me rose. And for this cause, O Lord my God, to thee give thanks I shall, And sing out praises to thy Name among the Gentiles all. That gavest great prosperity unto the king, I say, To David thine anointed king, and to his seed for ay. Coeli enarrant. Psal. xix. T. S. THe heavens and the firmament do wondrously declare The glory of God omnipotent, his works and what they are. The wondrous works of God appear by every days success: The nights likewise which their race run, the self-same thing express. There is no language, tongue, orspeech, where their sound is not heard, In all the earth and coasts thereof their knowledge is confer'd. In them the Lord made for the sun a place of great renown, Who like a bridegroom ready trimm'd doth from his chamber come. And as a valiant champion, who for to get a prize, With joy doth haste to take in hand some noble enterprise. And all the skie from end to end he compasseth about: Nothing can hide it from his heat, but he will finde it out. How perfect is the law of God, how is his covenant sure, Converting souls, and making wise the simple and obscure! Just are the Lords commandements, and glad both heart and minde: His precept's pure, and giveth light to eyes that be full blinde. The fear of God is excellent, and doth endure for ever: The judgements of the Lord are true and righteous altogether; And more to be embrac'd alway then fined gold, I say: The honey and the honey-combe are not so sweet as they. By them thy servant is forewarn'd to have God in regard: And in performance of the same there shall be great reward. But, Lord, what earthly man doth know the errours of his life? Then cleanse me from my secret sins, which are in me most rife. And keep me that presumptuous sins prevail not over me: And so shall I be innocent, and great offences flee. Accept my mouth and eke my heart, my words and thoughts each one: For my Redeemer and my strength, O Lord, thou art alone. Exaudiat te Dominus. Psal. xx. T. S. IN trouble and adversity the Lord God hear thee still, The majesty of Jacobs God defend thee from all ill; And send thee from his holy place his help at every need, And so in Sion stablish thee and make thee strong indeed. Remembring well the sacrifice that now to him is done: And so receive right thankfully thy burnt off rings each one. According to thy hearts desire the Lord grant unto thee, And all thy counsel and device full well per form may he. We shall rejoyce when thou us sav'st, and our banners display Unto the Lord, which thy requests ful filled hath alway. The Lord will his anointed save, I know well by his grace, And send him help by his right hand out of his holy place. In chariots some put confidence, and some in horses trust: But we remember God our Lord, that keepeth promise just. They fall down flat, but we do rise, and stand up stedfastly. Now save and help us, Lord and King, on thee when we do cry. Domine, in virtute. Psal. xxi. T. S. O Lord, how joyful is the king in thy strength and thy power! How vehemently doth he rejoyce in thee his Saviour! For thou hast given unto him his godly hearts desire: To him nothing thou hast deny'd of that he did require. Thou didst prevent him with thy gift and blessings manifold, And thou hast set upon his head a crown of perfect gold. And when he asked life of thee, thereof thou mad'st him sure, To have long life, yea such a life as ever shall endure. Great is his glory by thy help, thy benefit and aid: Great worship and great honour both thou hast upon him laid. Thou wilt give him felicity that never shall decay, And with thy cheerful countenance wilt comfort him alway. For why? the king doth strongly trust, in God for to prevail: Wherefore his goodness and his grace will not that he shall quail. But let thine enemies feel thy force, and those that thee withstand: Finde out thy foes, and let them feel the power of thy right hand. And like an oven burn them, Lord, in fiery flame and fume: Thine anger shall destroy them all, and fire shall them consume. And thou shalt root out of the earth their fruit that should in crease: And from the number of thy folk their seed shall end and cease. For why? much mischief did they muse against thy holy Name: Yet did they fail, and had no power for to perform the same. But as a mark thou shalt them set in a most open place, And charge thy bowe-strings readily against thine enemies face. Be thou exalted, Lord, therefore in thy strength every hour: So shall we sing right solemnly, praising thy might and power. Deus, Deus meus. Psal. xxii. T. S. O God my God, wherefore dost thou forsake me utterly. And helpest not when I do make my great complaint and cry? To thee my God even all day long I do both cry and call: I cease not all the night, and yet thou hearest not at all. Even thou that in thy sanctuary and holy place dost dwell, Thou art the comfort and the joy, and glory of Israel: And he in whom our fathers old had all their hope for ever: And when they put their trust in thee, thou didst them ay deliver. They were delivered ever when they called on thy Name: And for the faith they had in thee they were not put to shame. But I am now become a worm more like then any man: An outcast whom the people scorn with all the spight they can. All men despise as they behold me walking on the way: They grin, they mow, they nod their heads, and on this wise they say, This man did glory in the Lord; his favour and his love, Let him redeem and help him now, his power if he will prove. But, Lord, out of my mothers womb I came by thy request: Thou didst preserve me still in hope, while I did suck her breast.
I was committed from my birth with thee to have aode: Since I was in my mothers womb, thou hast been e're my God. The second part. Then, Lord, depart not now from me in this my present grief, Since I have none to be my help, my succoar and relief. So many bulls do compass me that be full strong of had: Yea bulls so fat as though they had in Basan field been fed. They gape upon me greedily, as though they would me flay: Much like a lion roaring out, and ramping for his prey. But I drop down like water shed, my joynts in sunder break, My heart doth in my body melt like wax against the heat. And like a potsherd dith my strength, my tongue it cleaveta fast Unto my jaws, and I am brought to dust of death at last. And many dogs do compass me, and wicked coansel eke Conspire against me cursedly; they pierce my hands and feet. I was tormented, so that I might all my bones have told: Yet still upon me they do look, and still they me behold. My garments they divided eke in parts among them all: And for my coat they did cast lots to whom it might befal. Therefore, I pray thee, be not far from me at my great need: But rather, fith thou art my strength, to help me, Lord, make speed. And from the sword, Lord, save my soul by thy might and thy power: And keep my soul thy darling dear, from dogs that would devour. And from the lions mouth, that would me all in sunder shiver, And from the horns of Unicorns, Lord, safely me deliver. Then shall I to my brethren all thy majesty record: And in thy church shall praise the name of thee the living Lord. The third part. All ye that fear him praise the Lord, thou Jacob honour him: And all ye seed of Israel with reverence worship him. For he despiseth not the poor, he tuneth not awrie His countenance when they do call, but granteth to their crie. Among the folk that fear the Lord I will therefore proclaim Thy praise, and keep my promise made for setting forth thy Name. The poor shall eat and be suffic'd, and those that do their deaver To know the Lord, shall praise his Name, their hearts shall live for ever. All coasts of th' earth shall praise the Lord and turn to him for grace: The heathen folk shall worship him before his blessed face. The kingdom of the heathen folk the Lord shall have therefore: And he shall be their Governour and king for evermore. The rich men of his goodly gists shall feed and taste also: And in his presence worship him and bow their knees full low. And all that shall go down to dust, of life by him shall taste: My seed shall serve and praise the Lord while any world shall last. My seed shall plainly shew to them that shall be born hereafter, His justice and his righteousness, and all his works of wonder. Dominus regit me. Psal. xxiii. W. W. THe Lord is onely my support, and he that doth me feed: How can I then lack anything whereof I stand in need? He doth me fold in cotes most safe the tender grass fast by: And after drives me to the streams which run most pleasantly. And when I feel my self near lost, then doth he me nome take, Conducting me in his right paths even for his own Names sake. And though I were even at deaths door, yet would I fear none ill: For with thy rod and shepherds crook I am comforted still. Thou hast my table richly deckt in despight of my foe: Thou hast my head with balm refresht, my cup doth overflow. And finally while breath doth loft, thy grace shall me defend: And in the house of God will I my life for ever spend. Another of the same, by T. S. MY shepherd is the living Lord, nothing therefore I need; In pastures fair with waters calm he sets me forth to feed. He did convert and glad my soul, and brought my mind in frame To walk in paths of righteousness, for his most holy Name. Yea, though I walk in vale of death, yet will I fear none ill: Thy rod, thy staff doth comfort me, and thou art with me still. And in the presence of my foes my table thou shalt spread: Thou shalt, O Lord, fill full my cup, and eke anoint my head. Through all my life thy favour is so frankly shew'd to me, That in thy house for evermore my dwelling-place shall be. Domini est terra. Psal. xxiv. J. H. THe earth is all the Lords, with all her store and furniture: Yea, his is all the world, and all that therein doth endure. For he hath fastly founded it above the seas to stand; And laid alow the liquid flouds, to flow beneath the land. For who is he, O Lord, that shall ascend into thy hill, Or pass into thy holy place, there to continue still? Whose hands are harmless, and whose heart no spot there doth defile: His soul not set on vanity, who hath not sworn to guile, Him that is such a one, the Lord shall place in blissful plight, And God his God and Saviour shall yeeld to him his right. This is the brood of travellers, in seeking of his grace: As Jacob did the Israelite, in that time of his race. Ye princes ope your gates, stand ope the everlasting gate: For there shall enter in thereby the king of glorious state. Who is the king of glorious state? the strong and mighty Lord, The mighty Lord in battel stout, and trial of the sword. Ye princes ope your gates, stand ope the everlasting gate: For there shall enter in thereby the king of glorious state. Who is the king of glorious state? the Lord of hosts it is: The kingdom and the royalty of glorious state is his. Ad te, Domine. Psal. xxv. T. S. I Lift my heart to thee, my God and guide most just: Now suffer me to take no shame, for in thee do I trust. Let not my foes rejoyce, nor make a scorn of me: And let them not be overthrown that put their trust in thee. But shame shall them befal which harm them wrongfully: Therefore thy paths and thy right ways unto me, Lord, descry. Direct me in thy truth, and teach me, I thee pray: Thou art my God and Saviour, on thee I wait alway. Thy mercies manifold I pray thee, Lord, remember,? And eke thy pity plentiful, for they have been for ever. Remember not the faults and frailty of my youth: Remember not how ignorant I have been of thy truth. Nor after my deserts let me thy mercy finde: But of thine own benignity Lord have me in thy minde. His mercy is full sweet, his truth a perfect guide: Therefore the Lord will sinners teach, and such as go aside. The humble he will teach his precepts for to keep: He will direct in all his ways the lowly and the meek. For all the ways of God are truth and mercy oth, To them that keep his testament the witness of his troth. The second part. Now for thy holy name, O Lord, I thee intreat To grant me pardon for my sin, for it is wondrous great. Whoso doth fear the Lord, the Lord will him direct To lead his life in such a way as he doth best accept. "12" 12 His soul shall evermore in goodness dwell and stand; His seed and his posterity inherit shall the land. All those that fear the Lord know his secret intent: And unto them he doth declare his will and testament. Mine eyes and eke my heart to him I will advance, That pluckt my feet out of the snare of sin and ignorance. With mercy me behold, to thee I make my mone: For I am poor and desolate, and comfortless alone. The troubles of my heart are multipli'd indeed: Bring me out of this misery, necessity and need. Behold my poverty, mine anguish and my pain: Remit my sin and mine offence, and make me clean again. O Lord, behold my foes, how they do still increase, Pursuing me with deadly hate, that lain would live in peace. Preserve and keep my soul. and eke deliver me: And let me not be overthrown, because I trust in thee. Let my simple pureness me from mine enemies shend: Because I look as one of thine, that thou shoudst me defend. Deliver, Lord, thy folk, and lend them some relief, I mean thy chosen Israel, from all their pain and grief. Judica me, Domine. Psal. xxvi. T. S. LOrd, be my Judge, and thou shalt see my paths be right and plain: I trust in God, and hope that he will strength me to remain. Prove me, my God, I thee desire my ways to search and try: As men do prove their gold with fire, my reins and heart espy. Thy goodness said before my face I durst behold always: For of thy truth I tread the trace, and will do all my days. I do not lust to haunt or use with men whose deeds are vain: To come in house I do refuse with the deceitful train. I much abhor the wicked sort, their deeds I do despise: I do not once to them resort that hurtful things devise. My hands I wash, and do proceed in works to walk upright: Then to thine altar I make speed, to offer there in sight. That I may speak and preach the pralse that doth belong to thee, And so declare how wondrous ways thou hast been good to me. O God, the house I love most dear, to me it doth excel: I have delight and would be near whereas thy grace doth dwell. O shut not up my soul with them in fin that take their fill; Nor yet my life among those men that seek much bloud to spill. Whose hands are heapt with craft and guile, their lives thereof are full: And their right hand with wrench and wile for bribes doth pluck and pull. But I in righteousness intend my time and days to serve: Have mercy, Lord, and me defend, so that I do not swerve. My foot is stay'd for all assays, it standeth well and right: Wherefore to God will I give praise in all the peoples sight. Dominus illuminatio. Psal. xxvii. J. H. THe Lord is both my health and light, shall man make me dismad? Sith God doth give me strength and might, why should I be afraid? While that my foes with all their strength begin with me to brall, And think to eat me up, at length themselves have caught the fall. Though they in camp against me lie, my heart is not afraid: In battel pight if they will try, I trust in God for aid. One thing of God I do require, that he will not deny: For which I pray, and will desire till he to me apply: That I within his holy place my life throughout may dwell, To see the beauty of his face, and view his temple well. In time of dread he shall me hide within his place most pure, And keep me secret by his side, as on a rock most sure. At length I know the Lords good grace shall make me strong and stout, My foes to foil and clean deface, that compass me about. Therefore within his house will I give sacrifice of praise: With psalms and songs I will apply to laud the Lord always. The second part. Lord, hear the voice of my request, for which to thee I call: Have mercy, Lord, on me opprest, and send me help withall. My heart doth knowledge unto thee, I sue to have thy grace: Then seek my face, say'st thou to me; Lord I will seek thy face. In wrath turn not thy face away, nor suffer me to slide: Thou art my help still to this day, be still my God and guide. My parents both their son forsook, and cast me off at large: And then the Lord himself yet took of me the care and charge. Teach me, O Lord, the way to thee, and lead me on forth right, For fear of such as watch for me, to trap me if they might. Do not betake me to the will of them that be my foes: For they surmise against me still false witness to depose. My heart would faint, but that in me this hope is fixed fast, The Lord Gods good grace shall I see in life that ay shall last. Trust still in God whose whole thou ar his will abide thou must, And he shall ease and strength thy heart, if thou in him do trust. Ad te, Dom. lamabo. Psal. xxviii. T. S. THou art, O Lord, my strength and stay, the succour which I crave: Neglect me not, lest I be like to them that go to grave. The voice of thy suppliant hear, that unto thee doth cry,
When I lift up my hands unto thy holy ark most high. Repute me not among the sort of wicked and pervert, That speak right fair unto their friends, and think full ill in heart. According to their handy-work, as they deserve indeed, And after their inventions let them receive their meed. For they regard nothing Gods works, his law, ne yet his lore: Therefore will he them and their seed destroy for evermore. To render thanks unto the Lord how great a cause have I, My voice, my prayer, and my complaint that heard so willingly! He is my shield and fortitude, my buckler in distress: My hope, my help, my hearts relief, my song shall him confess. He is our strength and our defence, our enemies to resist: The health and the salvation of his elect by Christ. Thy people and thine heritage, Lord, bless, guide, and preserve: Increase them, Lord, and rule their hearts, that they may never swerve. Afferte Domino. Psal. xxix. T. S. Give to the Lord, ye potentates, ye rulers of the world, Give ye all praise, honour, and strength unto the living Lord. Give glory to his holy Name, and honour him alone: Worship him in his majesty within his holy throne. His voice doth rule the watersall, even as himself doth please: He doth prepare the thunder-claps, and governs all the seas. The voice of God is of great force, and wondrous excellent: It is most mighty in effect, and most magnificent. The voice of God doth rend and break The cedar-trees so long; The cedar-trees of Lebanon, Which are most high and strong: And makes them leap like as a calf, or else the unicorn, Not onely trees, but mountains great Whereon the trees are born. His voice divides the flames of fire, and shakes the wilderness: It makes the desert quake for fear, that called is Cades. It makes the hinds for fear to calve, and makes the coverts plain: Then in his temple every man his glory doth proclaim. The Lord was set above the flouds, ruling the raging sea: So shall he reign as Lord and king for ever and for ay. The Lord will give his people power in vertue to increase: The Lord will bless his chosen flock with everlasting peace. Exaltabo te, Domine. Psal. xxx. J. H. ALl laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord, I give to thee, Which didst not make my foes rejoyce, but hast exalted me. O Lord my God, to thee I cri'd in all my pain and grief: Thou gay'st an ear, and didst provide to ease me with relief. Of thy good will thou hast call'd back my soul from hell to save: Thou didst revive when strength did lack, and kept'st me from the grave. Sing praise, ye saints, that prove and see the goodness of the Lord: In memory of his majestie rejoyce with one accord. For why? his anger but a space doth last, and slack again: But in his favour and his grace always doth life remain. Though gripes of grief and pangs full sore shall lodge with us all night, The Lord to joy shall us restore before the day be light. When I enjoy'd the world at will, thus would I boast and say, Tush, I am sure to feel none ill, this wealth shall not decay. For thou, O Lord, of thy good grace hadst sent me strength and aid: But when thou turn'dst away thy face, my minde was sore dismaid. Wherefore again yet did I cry to thee, O Lord of might: My God with plaints I did apply, and pray'd both day and night. What gain is in my bloud, said I, if death destroy my days? Doth dust declare thy majesty, or yet thy truth doth praise? Wherefore my God some pity take, O Lord, I thee desire: Do not this simple soul forsake of help, I thee require. Then didst thou turn my grief and wo into a cheerful voice: The mourning-weed thou took'st me fro, and mad'st me to rejoyce. Wherefore my soul uncessantly shall sing unto thy praise: My Lord my God, to thee will I give laud and thanks always. In te, Domine. Psal. xxxi. J. H. O Lord, I put my trust in thee, let nothing work me shame: As thou art just, deliver me, and let me quit from blame. Hear me, O Lord, and that anon, to help me make good speed: Be thou my rock and house of stone, my fence in time of need. For why? as stones thy strength is tri'd, thou art my sort and tower: For thy Names sake be thou my guide, and lead me in thy power. Pluck thou my feet out of the snare which they for me have laid: Thou art my strength, and all my care is for thy might and aid. Into thy hands, Lord, I commit my spirit which is thy due: For why? thou hast redeemed it, O Lord my God most true. I hate such folk as will not part from things to be abhor'd: When they on trifles set their heart, my trust is in the Lord. For I will in thy mercy joy, I see it doth excel: Thou seest when ought would me annoy, and know'st my soul full well. Thou hast not left me in their hand that would me overcharge: But thou hast set me out of band, to walk abroad at large. The second part. Great grief, O Lord, doth me assail, some pity on me take: Mine eyes wax dim, my sight doth fail, my womb for wo doth ake. My life is worn with grief and pain, my years in wo are past, My strength is gone, and through disdain my bones corrupt and waste. Among my foes I am a scorn, my friends are all dismaid: My neighbours and my kinsmen born to see me are afraid. As men once dead are out of minde, so am I now forgot: As small effect in me they finde as in a broken pot. I heard the brags of all the rout, their threats my minde did fray; How they conspir'd and went about to take my life away. But, Lord, I trust in thee for aid not to be overtrod: For I confess and still have said, thou art my Lord and God. The length of all my life and age, O Lord, is in thy hand: Defend me from the wrath and rage of them that me withstand. To me thy servant, Lord, express and shew thy joyful face: And save me, Lord, for thy goodness, thy mercy and thy grace. The third part. Lord, let me not be put to blame, for that on thee I call: But let the wicked bear the shame, and in the grave to fall, O Lord, make dumb their lips outright, which are addict to lies, And cruelly with pride and spight against the just devise. O how great good hast thou in store laid up full safe for them, That fear and trust in thee therefore, before the sons of men! Thy presence shall them fence and guide from all proud brags and wrongs: Within thy place thou shalt them hide from all the strife of tongues. Thanks to the Lord that hath declar'd on me his grace so far, Me to defend with watch and ward, as in a town of war. Thus did I say both day and night, when I was sore opprest, Lo, I was clean cast out of sight, Yet heard'st thou my request, Ye saints love ye the Lord, I say, the faithful he doth guide: And to the proud he doth repay according to their pride. Be strong, and God shall stay your heart, be hold and have a lust: For sure the Lord will take your part, sith ye on him do trust. Beati quorum. Psal. xxxii. T. S. THe man is blest whose wickedness the Lord hath clean remitted: And he whose sin and wickedness is hid and also covered. And blest is he to whom the Lord imputeth not his sin: Which in his heart hath hid no guile, nor fraud is found therein. For whil'st that I kept close my fin in silence and constraint, My bones did wear and waste away with daily mone and plaint. For night and day thy hand on me so grievous was and smart, That all my bloud and humours moist to driness did convert. I did therefore confess my fault, and all my sins discover: Then thou, O Lord, didst me forgive, and all my sins pass over. The humble man shall pray therefore, and seek thee in due time: So that the flouds of waters great shall have no power on him. When trouble and adversity do compass me about, Thou art my resuge and my joy, and thou dost rid me out. Come hither, and I will thee teach how thou shalt walk aright: I will thee guide as I myself have learn'd by proof and sight. Be not so rude and ignorant as is the horse and mule, Whose mouth without a rain or bit from harm thou canst not rule. The wicked man shall manifold sorrows and griefs sustain: But unto him that trusts in God his goodness shall remain. Be merry therefore in the Lord, ye just lift up your voice: And ye of pure and perfect heart, be glad and eke rejoyce. Exultate justi. Psal. xxxiii. J. H. YE righteous in the Lord rejoyce; it is a seemly sight, That upright men with thankful voice should praise the Lord of might. Praise ye the Lord with harp and song, in psalms and pleasant things: With lute and instrument among that soundeth with ten strings. Sing to the Lord a song most new, with courage give him praise: For why? his word is ever true, his works and all his ways. To judgement, equity, and right he hath a great good will: And with his gifts he doth delight the earth throughout to fill. For by the word of God alone the heavens all were wrought: Their hosts and powers every one his breath to pass hath brought. The waters great gathered hath he on heaps within the shore: And hid them in the depth to be, as in an house of store. All men on earth both least and most, fear God and keep his law: Ye that inhabit in each coast, dread him and stand in aw. What he commanded wrought it was at once with present speed: What he doth will is brought to pass with full effect indeed. The counsels of the nations rude the Lord doth bring to nought: He doth defeat the multitude of their device and thought. But his decrees continue still, they never slack nor swage: The motions of his minde and will take place in every age. The second part. And blest are they to whom the Lord as God and guide is known: Whom he doth choose of mere accord to take them as his own. The Lord from heaven cast his sight on men mortal by birth: Considering from his feat of might the dwellers of the earth. The Lord, I say, whose hand hath wrought mans heart, and doth it frame: For he alone doth know the thought and working of the same. A king that trusteth in his host shall nought prevail at length: The man that of his might doth boast shall fall for all his strength. The troups of horsmen eke shall fail▪ their sturdy steeds shall sterve: The strength of horse shall not prevail the rider to preserve. But lo, the eyes of God intend and watch to aid the just: With such as fear him to offend, and on his goodness trust: That he of death and great distress may set their souls from dread: And if that dearth their land oppress, in hunger them to feed. Wherefore our soul doth whole depend on God our strength and stay: He is our shield us to defend, and drive all darts away. Our soul in God hath joy and game, rejoycing in his might: For why? in his most holy Name we hope and much delight. Therefore let thy goodness, O Lord, still present with us be: As we always with one accord do onely trust in thee. Benedicam Dom. Psal. xxxiv. T. S. I Will give laud and honour both unto the Lord always, And eke my mouth for evermore shall speak unto his praise. I do delight to laud the Lord in soul and eke in voice: That humble men and mortifi'd may hear, and so rejoyce, Therefore see that ye magnifie with me the living Lord, And let us now exalt his Name together with one accord. For I my self besought the Lord, he answered me again, And me delivered incontinent from all my fear and pain. Whoso they be that him behold, shall see his light most clear: Their countenance shall not be dash, they need it not to fear. This filly wretch for some relief unto the Lord did call; Who did him hear without delay, and rid him out of thrall. The angel of the Lord doth pitch his tents in every place, To save all such as fear the Lord, that nothing them deface. Taste and consider well therefore that God is good and just: O happy man that maketh him his onely stay and trust! Fear ye the Lord, ye holy oner, above all earthly thing: For they that fear the living Lord, are sure to lack nothing, The lions shall be hunger-bit, and pin'd with famine much: But as for them that fear the Lord, no lack shall be to such.
The second part. Come near therefore, my children dear, and to my words give ear: I shall you teach the perfect way, how ye the Lord should fear. Who is the man that would live long, and lead ablessed life? See thou refrain thy tongue and lips from all deceit and strife. Turn back thy face from doing ill, and do the godly deed: Enquire for peace and quietness, and follow it with speed. For why? the eyes of God above upon the just are bent: His ears likewise do hear the plaint of the poor innocent. But he doth frown and bend his brows upon the wicked train: And cuts away the memory that should of them remain. But when the just do call and cry, the Lord doth hear them so, That out of pain and misery forthwith he lets them go. The Lord is kinde and strait at hand to such as be contrite: He saves also the sorrowful, the poor and meek in sprite. Full many be the miseries that righteous men do suffer: But out of all adversities the Lord doth them deliver. The Lord doth so preserve and keep his very bones alway, That not so much as one of them doth perish or decay. The sin shall slay the wicked man, which he himself hath wrought: And such as hae the righteous man, shall soon be brought to nought. But they that fear the living, Lord, the Lord doth save them sound: And who that put their trust in him, nothing shall them confound. Judica me, Domine. Psal. xxxv. J. H. LOrd, plead my cause against my soes, confound their force and might: ight on my part against all those that seek with me to fight. Lay hand upon the spear and shield, thy self in armour dress: tand up for me, and fight the field, to help me from distress. Gird on thy sword, and stop the way, mine enemies to withstand: That thou unto my soul mayst say, Lo I thy help at hand. Confound them with rebuke and blame, that seek my soul to spill: et them turn back and flee with shame, that think to work me ill. Let them disperse and flee abroad, as wind doth drive the dust: nd that the angel of our God their might away may thrust. Let all their ways be void of light, and slippery like to fall: d send thine angel with thy might, to persecute them all. For why? without my fault they have in secret set their grin: d for no cause have digg'd a cave to take my soul therein. When they think least and have no care, O Lord, destroythem all: t them be trapt in their own snare, and in their mischief fall. And let my soul, my heart and voice, In God have joy and wealth: at in the Lord I may rejoyce, nd in his saving health. And then my bones shall speak and say, y parts shall all agree: Lord, though they do seem full gay, what man is like to thee? The second part. Thou dost defend the weak from them that are both stout and strong: rid the poor from wicked men, that spoil and do them wrong. My cruel foes against me rise to witness things untrue: to accuse me they devise of things I never knew. Where I to them did ow good will, they quit me with disdain: That they should pay my good with ill, my soul doth sore complain. When they were sick I mourn'd there∣fore and clad my self in sack: With fasting I did saint full sore, to pray I was not slack. As they had been my brethren dear, I did my self behave: As one that maketh woful chear about his mothers grave. But they at my disease did joy, and gather on a rout: Yea, abject slaves at me did toy, with mocks and checks full stout. The belly-gods and flattering train, that all good things deride, At me do grin with great disdain, and pluck their mouthes alide. Lord, when wilt thou amend this gear? why dost thou stay and pause? O rid my soul mine onely dear, out of these lions claws. And then will I give thanks to thee before the church always: And where most of the people be, there will I shew thy praise. Let not my foes prevail on me, which hate me for no fault: Nor yet to wink or turn their eye, that causless me assault. The third part. Of peace no word they think or say, their talk is all untrue: They still consult and would betray all those that peace ensue. With open mouth they run at me, they gape, they laugh, they fleer: Well, well, say they, our eye doth see the thing that we desire. But, Lord, thou seest what ways they take, cease not this gear to mend: Be not far off, nor me forsake, as men that sail their friend. Awake, arise, and stir abroad. defend me in my right: Revenge my cause, my Lord, my God, and aid me with thy might. According to thy righteousness, my Lord God, set me free: And let them not their pride express, nor triumph over me. Let not their hearts rejoyce and cry, There, there, this gear goes trim: Nor give them cause to say on high, We have our will on him. Confound them with rebuke and shame, that joy when I do mourn: And pay them home with spight and blame, that brag at me with scorn. Let them be glad and eke rejoyce, which love mine upright way: And they all times with heart and voice shall praise the Lord, and say, Great is the Lord, and doth excell, for why? he doth delight To see his servants prosper well; that is his pleasant sight. Wherefore my tongue I will apply thy righteousness to praise: Unto the Lord my God will I sing laud and praise alwaies. Dixit injustus. Psal. xxxvi. J. H. THe wicked with his works unjust doth thus perswade his heart, That of the Lord he hath no trust; his sear is set apart. Yet doth he joy in his estate, to walk as he began, So long till he deserve the hate of God and eke of man. His words are wicked, vile, and naught, his tongue no truth doth tell: Yet at no hand will he be taught which way he may do well. When he should sleep, then doth he muse his mischiefs to fulfill: No wicked ways doth he refuse, nor nothing, that is ill. But, Lord, thy goodness doth ascend above the heavens high: So doth thy truth it self extend unto the cloudy sky. Much more then hills so high and steep, thy justice is exprest: Thy judgement's like to seas most deep, thou sa'st both man and beast, Thy mercy is above all things, O God, it doth excell: In trust whereof, as in thy wings, the sons of men shall dwell. Within thy house they shall be ed with plenty at their will: Of all delights they shall be sped, and take thereof their fill. For why? the well of life so pure doth ever flow from thee, And in thy light we are full sure the lasting light to see. From such as thee desire to know let not thy grace depart: Thy righteousness declare and show to men of upright heart. Let not the proud on me prevail. O Lord, of thy good grace: Nor let the wicked me assail, to throw me out of place. But they in their device shall fall that wicked works maintain: They shall be overthrown withall, and never rise again. Noli amulari. Psal. xxxvii. W. W. GRudge not to see the wicked men in wealth to flourish still: Nor yet envy such as to ill have bent and set their will. For as green grass and flourishing herbs are cut and wither away: So shall their great prosperity soon pass, fade, and decay. Trust thou therefore in God alone, to do well give thy minde: So shalt thou have the land as thine, and there sure food shalt finde. In God set all thy hearts delight, Or else canst wish in all the world, thou need'st it not to crave. Cast both thy self and thine affairs, on God with perfect trust, And thou shalt see with patience th' effect both sure and just. Thy perfect life and godly name he will clear as the light: So that the sun even at noon-day shall not shine half so bright. Be still therefore, and stedfastly, on God see thou wait then, Not shrinking for the prosperous state of lewd and wicked men. Shake of despight, envy, and hate, at least in any wise: Their wicked steps avoid and flee, and follow not their guise. For every wicked man will God destroy, both more and less: But such as trust in him are sure the land for to possess. Whatch but a while, and thou shalt see no more the wicked train, No not so much as house or place where once he did remain. The second part. But merciful and humble men enjoy shall sea and land: In rest and peace they shall rejoyce, for nought shall them withstand. The lewd men and malicious against the just conspire: They gnash their teeth at him, as men which do his bane desire. But while that lewd men thus do think, the Lord laughs them to scorn: For why? he sees their term approach, when they shall sigh and mourn. The wicked have their sword out drawn, their bowe eke have they bent, To overthrow and kill the poor, as he the right way went. But the same sword shall pierce their heart which was to kill the just: Likewise the bowe shall break to shivers, wherein they put their trust. Doubtless the just mans poor estate is better a great deal more Then all these lewd and wicked mens rich pomp and heaped store. For be their power never so strong, God will it overthrow: Where contrary he doth preserve the humble men and low. He sees by his great providence the good mens trade and way: And will give them inheritance which never shall decay. They shall not be discouraged, when some are hard bested: When others shall be hunger-bit, they shall be clad and ed. For whosoever wicked is, and enemy to the Lord, Shall quail, yea melt even as lambs grease, or smoke that flies abroad. The third part. Behold, the wicked borrows much, and never pays again: Whereas the just by liberal gifts makes many glad and sain. For they whom God doth bless, shall hare the land for heritage: And they whom he doth curie, likewise shall perish in his rage. The Lord the just mans ways doth guide, and gives him good success: To everything he takes in hand he sendeth good address. Though that he fall, yet is he sure not utterly to quail: Because the Lord stretcheth out his hand at need, and doth not fail. I have been young, and now am old, yet did I never see The just man left, nor yet his seed to beg for miserie. But gives always most liberally, and sends whereas is need: His children and posterity receive of God their meed. Flee vice therefore and wickedness, and vertue do embrace: So God shall grant thee long to have on earth a dwelling-place. For God so loveth equity, and shews to his such grace, That he preserveth them alway, but 'stroys the wicked race. Whereas the good and godly men inherit shall the land, Having as lords all things therein in their own power and hand. The just mans mouth shall ever speak of matters wise and high: His tongue doth talk to edifie, with truth and equity. For in his heart the law of God his law doth still abide: So that where ever he goes or walks, his foot can never slide. The wicked like a ravening wolf the just man doth beset, By all means seeking him to kill, if he fall in his net. The fourth part. Though he should fall into his hands, yet God would succour send: Though men against him sentence give, God would him yet defend. Wait thou on God and keep his way, he shall preservethee then The earth to rule, and thou shalt see destroy'd these wicked men. The wicked have I seen most strong, and plac'd in high degree. Flourishing in all wealth and store, as doth the laurel-tree. But suddenly he past away, and lo, he was quite gone: Then I him sought, but could not fide the place where dwelt such one. Mark and behold the perfect man, how God doth him increase: For the just man shall have at length great joy with rest and peace. As for transgressours, wo to them, destroy'd they shall all be: God will cut off their budding race, and rich posteritie. But the salvation of the just doth come from God above, Who in their trouble sends them aid, of his mere grace and love. God doth them help, save, and delivet from lowd men and unjust: And still will save them whil'st that they in him do put their trust. Domine, ne. Psal. xxxviii. J. H. PUt me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thy provoked ire: Ne in thy heavy wrath, O Lord, correct me I desire. Thine arrows do stick fast in me, thy hand doth press me sore: And in my flesh no health at all appeareth any more,
And all this is by reason of thy wrath that I am in: Nor any rest is in my bones by reason of my sin. For lo, my wicked doings, Lord, above my head are gone: A greater load then I can bear, they lie me sore upon. My wounds stink and are festred se, as lothsome is to see: Which all through mine own foolishness betideth unto me. And I in careful wise am brought in trouble and distress: That I go wailing all the day in doleful heaviness. My loyns are fill'd with sore disease, my flesh hath no whole part: I feeble am and broken sore, I roar for grief of heart: Thou know'st, Lord, my desire, my grones fail, are open in thy sight: My heart doth pant, my strength doth mine eyes have lost their light. My lovers and my wonted friends stand looking on my wo: And eke my kinsmen far away are me departed fro. They that did seek my life, laid snares, and they that sought the way To do me hurt, spake lies, and thought on mischief all the day. The second part. But as a deaf man I became, that cannot hear at all: And as one dumb, that opens not his mouth to speak withall. For all my confidence, O Lord, is wholly set on thee: O Lord, thou Lord that art my God, thou shalt give ear to me. This did I crave, that they my foes triemph not over me: when my foot did slip, then they did joy my fall to see. And truly I poor wretch am set in place a woful wight: And eke my grievous heaviness is ever in my sight. For while that I my wickedness in humble wise confess; And while I for my sinful deeds my sorrows do express: My foes do still remain alive, and mighty are also: d they that hate me wrongfully, in number hugely grow. They stand against me that my good with evil do repay: because that good and honest things I do ensue alway. Forsake me not, O Lord my God, be thou not far away: a Haste me to help, my Lord, my God, my safety and my stay. Dixi. Custodiam. Psal. xxxix. J. H. Said, I will look to my ways, for fear I should go wrong; I will take heed all times that I offend not with my tongue. As with a bit I will keep fast my mouth with force and might, ot once to whisper all the while the wicked are in sight. I held my tongue and spake no word, but kept me close and still: , from good talk I did refrain, but sore against my will. My heart waxt hot within my breast, with musing, thought, and doubt, Which did increase and stir the fire: at last these words burst out; Lord, number out my life and days which yet I have not past, that I may be certifi'd how long my life shall last. Lord, thou hast pointed out my life in length much like a span: e age is nothing unto thee, so vain is every man. Man walketh like a shade, and doth in vain himself If annoy getting goods, and cannot tell who shall the same enjoy. Now, Lord, fith things this wise do frame, what help do I desire? Of truth my help doth hang on thee, I nothing else require. The second part. From all the sins that I have done, Lord, quit me out of hand, And make me not a scorn to fools that nothing understand. I was as dumb, and to complain no trouble might me move: Because I knew it was thy work, my patience for to prove. Lord, take from me thy scourge & plague, I can them not withstand: I faint and pine away for fear of thy most heavy hand. When thou for sin dost man rebuke, he waxeth wo and wan, As doth a cloth that moths have fret, so vain a thing is man. Lord, hear my suit and give good heed, regard my tears that fall: I sojourn like a stranger here, as did my fathers all. O spare a little, give me space my strength for to restore, Before I go away from hence, and shall be seen no more. Expectant expectavi. Psal. xl. J. H. I Waited long and sought the Lord. and patiently did bear: At length to me he did accord my voice and cry to hear. He pluckt me from the lake so deep out of the mire and clay: And on a rock he set my feet, and he did guide my way. To me he taught a psalm of praise, which I must shew abroad, And sing new songs of thanks alwaies unto the Lord our God. When all the folk these things shall fee, as people much afraid, Then they unto the Lord will flee, and trust upon his aid. O blest is he whose hope and heart doth in the Lord remain, That with the proud doth take no part, nor such as lie and fain. For, Lord my God, thy wondrous deeds in greatness far do pass, Thy favour towards us exceeds all things that ever was. When I intend and do devise thy works abroad to show, To such a reckoning they do rise, thereof no end I know. Burnt-offrings thou delight'st not in, I know thy whole desire: With sacrifice to purge his sin thou dost no man require. Meat-offerings and sacrifice thou wouldst not have at all: But thou, O Lord, hast open made mine ears to hear withall. But then said I, Behold and look, I come a mean to be: For in the volume of thy book thus is it said of me, That I, O God, should do thy minde, which thing doth like me well: For in my heart thy law I finde last placed there to dwell. Thy justice and thy righteousness in great resorts I tell: Behold, my tongue no time doth cease, O Lord, thou know'st full well. The second part. I have not hid within my brest thy goodness as by stealth: But I declare and have exprest thy truth and saving health. I kept not close thy loving minde, that no man should it know: The trust that in thy truth I finde, to all the Church I show. Thy tender mercy, Lord, from me withdraw thou not away: But let thy love and veritie preserve me still for ay. For I with mischiefs many a one am sore beset about: My sins increase, and so come on, I cannot spie them out. For why? in number they exceed the hairs upon my head: My heart doth faint for very dread, that I am almost dead. With speed send help and set me free, O Lord, I thee require: Make haste with aid to succour me, O Lord, at my desire. Let them sustain rebuke and shame that seek my soul to spill: Drive back my foes, and them defame that wish and would me ill. For their ill feats do them descry that would deface my name: Always at me they rail and cry, Fie on him, fie for shame. Let them in thee have joy and wealth that seek to thee alwaies: That those that love thy saving health may say, To God be praise. But as for me, I am but poor, opprest and brought full low: Yet thou, O Lord, wilt me restore to health, full well I know. For why? thou art my hope and trust, my refuge, help and stay: Wherefore my God, as thou art just, with me no time delay. Beatus qui intelligit. Psal. xli. T. S. THe man is blest that careful is the needy to consider: For in the season perilous the Lord will him deliver. The Lord will make him safe and sound, and happy in the land: And he will not deliver him into his enemies hand. And in his bed when he lies sick, the Lord will him restore: And thou, O Lord, wilt turn to health his sickness and his sore. Then in my sickness thus said I, Have mercy, Lord, on me, And heal my soul which is full wo that I offended thee. Mine enemies wisht me ill in heart, and thus of me did say, When shall he die, that all his name may vanish quite away? And when they come to visit me, they ask if I do well: But in their hearts mischief they hatch, and to their mates it tell. They bite their lips and whisper so, as though they would me charm, And cast their fetches how to trap me with some mortal harm. Some grievous sin hath brought him to this sickness, say they plain: He is so low that without doubt rise can he not again. The man also that I did trust, with me did use deceit: Who at my table ate my bread, the same for me laid wait. Have mercy, Lord, on me therefore, and let me be preserv'd: That I may render unto them the things they have deserv'd. By this I know assuredly to be belov'd of thee, When that mine enemies have no cause to triumph over me. But in my right thou hast me kept, and maintained alway: And in thy presence place assign'd where I shall dwell for ay. The Lord the God of Israel he praised evermore: Even so be it, Lord, will I say, even so be it therefore. Quomadmodum. Psal. xlii. J. H. LIke as the hart doth breathe and bray the well-springs to obtain; So doth my soul desire alway with thee, Lord, to remain. My soul doth thirst, and would draw near the living God of might: Oh when shall I come and appear in presence of his sight! The tears all times are my repast, which from mine eyes do slide: When wicked men cry out so fast, Where now is God thy guide? Alas, what grief is it to think what freedom once I had! Therefore my soul as at pits brink most heavy is and fad. When I did march in good aray, furnished with my train, Unto the temple was our way, with songs and hearts most fain. My soul, why art thou sad alwaies, and fret'st thus in my brest? Trust still in God; for him to praise I hold it ever best. By him I have succour at need against all pain and grief: He is my God, which with all speed will haste to send relief. And thus my soul within me, Lord, doth faint to think upon The land of Jordan, and record the little hill Hermon. The second part. One grief another in doth call. as clouds burst out their voice: The flouds of evil that do fall, run over me with noise. Yet I by day felt his goodness and help at all assayes: Likewise by night I did not cease the living God to praise. I am perswaded thus to say to him with pure pretence, O Lord, thou art my guide and stay, my rock and sure defence. Why do I then in pensiveness hanging the head thus walk, While that mine enemies me oppress, and vex me with their talk? For why? they pierce my inward parts with pangs to be abhor'd, When they cry out with stubborn hearts, where is thy God, thy Lord? So soon why dost thou faint and quail, my soul with pain opprest? With thoughts why dost thy self assail so sore within my brest? Trust in the Lord thy God always, and thou the time shalt see To give him thanks with laud and praise for health restor'd to thee. Judica me, Domine. Psal. xliii. T. S. JUdge and revenge my cause, O Lord, from them that evil be: From wicked and deceitful men, O Lord, deliver me. For of my strength thou art the God, why put'st thou me thee fro? And why walk I so heavily oppressed with my foe? Send out thy light, and eke thy truth, and lead me with thy grace, Which may conduct me to thy hill, and to thy dwelling-place. Then shall I to the altar go of God my joy and chear: And on my harp give thanks to thee, O God, my God most dear. Why art thou then so sad, my soul, and fret'st thus in my brest? Still trust in God; for him to praise I hold it always best. By him I have deliverance against all pain and grief: He is my God which doth alway at need send me relief. Deus auribus. Psal. xliv. T. S. OUr ears have heard our fathers tell, and reverently record The wondrous works that thou hast done in older time, O Lord. How thou didst cast the Gentiles out, and stroyd'st them with strong hand: Planting our fathers in their place, and gav'st to them their land. They conquered not by sword not strength the land of thy behest: But by thy hand, thy arm, and grace; because thou lov'dst them best. Thou art my King, O God, that holp Jacob in sundry wise. Led with thy power, we threw down such as did against us rise. I trusted not in bowe nor sword, they could not save me sound: Thou kept'st us from our enemies rage, thou dist our foes confound. And still we boast of thee our God, and praise thy holy name; Yet now thou go'st not with our host, but leavest us to shame. Thou mad'st us flee before our foes, and so were overtrod: Our enemies robb'd and spoil'd our goods, when we were sperst abroad. Thou hast us given to our foes, as sheep for to be slain: Amongst the heathen every where scattred we do remain. Thy people thou hast sold like slaves, and as a thing of nought: For profit none thou hadst thereby, no gain at all was sought.
And to our neighbours thou hast made of us a laughing stock: And those that round about us dwell, at us do grin and mock. The second part. Thus we serve for none other use, but for a common talk: They mock, they scorn, they nod their heads where ere they go or walk. I am asham'd continually, to hear these wicked men: Yea so I blush, that all my face with red is covered then. For why? we hear such slandrous words, such false reports and lies; That death it is to see their wrongs, their threatnings and their cries. For all this we forgot not thee, nor yet thy covenant brake: We turn not back our hearts from thee, nor yet thy paths forsake. Yet thou hast trod us down to dust, where dens of dragons be, And covered us with shade of death, and great adversitie. If we had our Gods Name forgot, and help of idols sought, Would not God then have tri'd this out? for he doth know our thought. Nay, nay, for thy Names sake, O Lord, always are we slain thus: As sheep unto the shambles sent, right so they deal with us. Up Lord, why sleepest thou? awake, and leave us not for all: Why hidest thou thy countenance, and dost forget our thrall? For down to dust our soul is brought, and we now at last cast: Our belly, like as it were glu'd, unto the ground cleaves fast. Rise up therefore for our defence, and help us, Lord, at need: We thee beseech for thy goodness, to rescue us with speed. Eructavit. Psal. xlv. J. H. MY heart doth take in hand some godly song to sing: The praise that I shall shew therein pertaineth to the king. My tongue shall be as quick his honour to indite, As is the pen of any scribe that useth fast to write. O fairest of all men. thy speech is pleasant pure: For God hath blessed thee with gifts for ever to endure. About thee gird thy sword, O prince of might elect: With honour, glory, and renown thy person pure is deckt. Go forth with godly speed, with meekness, truth and right: And thy right hand shall thee instruct in works of dreadful might. Thine arrows sharp and keen their hearts so sore shall sting: That sulk shall fall and kneel to thee, yea all thy foes, O king. Thy royal seat, O Lord; for ever shall remain: Because the sceptre of thy realm doth righteousness maintain, Because thou lov'st the right, and dost the ill detest, God; even thy God hath 'nointed thee with joy above the rest. With myrrh and savours sweet thy clothes are all bespread: When thou dost from thy palace pass, therein to make thee glad, Kings daughters do attend in fine and rich aray: At thy right hand the queen doth stand in gold and garments gay. The second part. O daughter, take good heed, incline and give good ear: Thou must forget thy kindred all, and fathers house most dear, Then shall the king desire thy beauty fair and trim: For why? he is the Lord thy God, and thou must worship him, The daughters then of Tyre, with gifts full rich to see, And all the wealthy of the land shall make their suit to thee. The daughter of the king is glorious to behold: Within her closet she doth sit all deckt in beaten gold. In robes well wrought with needle, and many a pleasant thing: With virgins fair on her to wait, she cometh to the king. Thus are they brought with joy and mirth on every side, Into the palace of the king, and there they do abide. In stead of parents left, (O queen, the case so stands) Thou shalt have sons whom thou mayst st as princes in all lands. Wherefore thy holy Name all ages shall record: The people shall give thanks to thee for evermore, O Lord. Deus noster. Psal. xlvi. J. H. THe Lord is our defence and aid, the strength whereby we stand: When we with wo are much dismay'd, he is our help at hand. Though th' earth remove, we will not fear, though hills so high and steep Be thrust and hurled here and there, within the sea so deep. No, though the waves do rage so sore that all the banks it spills: And though it overflow the shore, and beat down mighty hills. For one fair floud doth send abroad his pleasant streams apace, To fresh the city of our God, and wash his holy place. In midst of her the Lord doth dwell, she can no whit decay: All things against her that rebell the Lord will truly slay. The heathen folk, the kingdoms fear, the people make a noise: The earth doth melt and not appear, when God puts forth his voice. The Lord of hosts doth take our part, to us he hath an eie: Our hope of health with all our heart on Jacobs God doth lie. Come here and see with minde & thought the working of our God: What wonders he himself hath wrought in all the world abroad. By him all wars are husht and gone, which countreys did conspire: Their bowes he brake and spears each one, their chariots burnt with fire. Leave off therefore (saith he) and know I am a God most stout, Among the heathen high and low, and all the earth throughout. The Lord of hosts doth us defend, he is our strength and tower: On Jacobs God we do depend, and on his might and power. Omnes gentes. Psal. xlvii. J. H. YE people all with one accord clap hands and eke rejoyce: Be glad and sing unto the Lord with sweet and pleasant voice. For high the Lord and dreadful is, with wonders manifold: A mighty King he is truly, in all the earth extoll'd, The people shall he make to be unto our bondage thrall: And underneath our feet the shall the nations make to fall. For us the heritage he chose which we possess alone, The flourishing worship of Jacob his welbeloved one. Our God ascended up on high with joy and pleasant noise: The Lord goes up above the skie with trumpets loyal voice. Sing praises to our God, sing praise, sing praises to our King: For God is King of all the earth; all skilful praises sing. God on the heathen reigns and fits upon his holy throne: The princes of the people have them joyned every one To Abrahams people: for our God, which is exalted high, As with a buckler doth defend the earth continually. Magnus Dominus. Psal. xlviii. J. H. GReat is the Lord, and with great praise to be advanced still Within the city of our God, upon his holy hill. Mount Sion is a pleasant place, it gladdeth all the land: The city of the mighty King on her north-side doth stand. Within the palaces thereof God is a refuge known: For so, the kings are gathered, and together they are gone. But when they did behold it so, they wondred, and they were Astonied much, and suddenly were driven back with fear. Great terrour there on them did fall, for very wo they cry, As doth a woman when she shall go travail by and by. As thou with eastern wind the ships upon the sea dost break, So they were stroy'd: and even as we heard our fathers speak; So in the city of the Lord we saw as it was told, Yea, in the city which our God for ever will uphold. O Lord, we wait and do attend on thy good help and grace: For which we do all times attend within thy holy place. O Lord, according to thy Name for ever is thy praise: And thy right hand, O Lord, is full of righteousness always. Let, for thy judgements, Sion mount fulfilled be with joys: And eke of Judah grant, O Lord, the daughters to rejoyce. Go walk about all Sion hill, yea, round about her go; And tell the towers that thereupon are builded on a row. And mark ye well her bulwarks all, behold her towers there: That ye may tell thereof to them that after shall be here. For this God is our God, our God for evermore is he: Yea, and unto the death also our Guider shall he be. Audite bee omnes. Psal. xlix. J. H. ALI people hearken and give ear to that that I shall tell: Both high and low, both rich and poor that in the world do dwell. For why? my mouth shall make discourse of many things right wise: In understanding shall mine heart his study exercise. I will encline mine ear to know the parable so dark: And open all my doubtful speech in metre on my harp, Why should I fear affliction, or any careful toyl: Or else my foes which at my heels are prest my lise to spoil? For as for such as riches have, wherein their trust is most; And they which of their treasures great themselves do brag and boast; There is not one of them that can his brothers death redeem, Or that can give a price to God sufficient for him. It is too great a price to pay, none can thereto attain: Or that he might his life prolong, or not in grave remain. They see wise men, as well as fools, subject unto deaths bands: And being dead, strangers possess their goods, their rents, their lands. Their care is to build houses fair, and so determine sure To make their name right great on earth for ever to endure. Yet shall noman always enjoy high honour, wealth, and rest; But shall at length taste of deaths cup, as well as the brute beast. The second part. And though they try their foolish thoughts to be most lewd and vain: Their children yet approve their talk, and in like sin remain. As sheep into the fold are brought, so shall they into grave: Death shall them eat, and in that day the just shall lordship have. Their image and their royal port shall fade and quite decay, When as from house to pit they pass with wo and well-away. But God will surely preserve me from death and endless pain: Because he will of his good grace my soul receive again. If any man wax wondrous rich, fear not, I say, therefore: Although the glory of his house increaseth more and more. For when he dies, of all these things nothing shall he receive: His glory will not follow him, his pomp will take her leave. Yet in this life he takes himself the happiest under sun: And others likewise flatter him, saying, All is well done. And presuppose he live as long as did his fathers old; Yet must he needs at length give place, and be brought to deaths fold. Thus man to honour God hath brought▪ yet doth he not consider: But like brute beasts so doth he live, which turn to dust and powder. Deus deorum. Psal. l. W. W. THe mighty God, th' eternal hath thus spoke, And all the world he will call and provoke: Even from the east, and so forth to the west. From towards Sion, which place he liketh best, God will appear in beauty most excellent: Our God will come before long time bespent. Devouring fire shall go before his face; A great tempest shall round about him trace. Then shall he call the earth and heavens bright, To judge his folk with equity and right: Saying, Go to▪ and now my saints assemble: My pact they keep, their gifts do not dissemble. The heavens shall declare his righteousness: For God is Judge of all things more and less. Hear, my people, for I will now reveal; List, Israel, I will thee nought conceal. Thy God, thy God am I, and will not blame thee For giving not all manner offerings to me, I have no need to take of thee at all Goats of thy fold, or cast out of thy stall: For all the beasts are mine within the woods: On thousand hills cattel are mine own goods. I know for mine all birds that are on mountains: All beasts are mine which haunt the fields and fountains. Hungry if I were, I would not thee it tell; For all is mine that in the world doth dwell. Eat I the flesh of great bulls or bullocks? Or drink the bloud of goats, or of the flocks? Offer to God praise and hearty thanksgiving, And pay thy vows unto God everliving. Call upon me when troubled thou shalt be: Then will I help, and thou shalt honour me.
To the wicked thus saith th' eternal God, Why dost thou preach my laws and hests abroad: Seeing thou hast them with thy mouth abused, And hat'st to be by discipline reformed? My words, I say, thou dost reject and hate. If that thou see a thief, as with thy mate, Thou runn'st with him, and so your prey do seek; And art all one with bauds and ruffians eke. Thou giv'st thy self to backbite and to slander: And how thy tongue deceives it is a wonder. Thou sitt'st musing thy brother how to blame, And how to put thy mothers son to shame. These things thou didst, and whil'st I held my tongue, Thou didst me judge, because I staid so long, Like to thy self: yet though I keep long silence, Once shalt thou feel of thy wrongs just recompence. Consider this, ye that forget the Lord, And fear not when he threatneth with his word: Lest without help I spoil you as a prey. But he that thanks offereth, praiseth me ay, ith the Lord God: and he that walks this trace, I will him teach Gods saving healtht' embrace. Another of the same, by J.H. THe God of gods, the Lord, hath call'd the earth by name: From whence the sun doth rise, unto the setting of the same. From Sion his fair place, his glory bright and clear, The perfect beauty of his grace, from thence it did appear. Our God shall come in haste, to speak he shall not doubt: Before him shall the fire waste, and tempest round about. The heavens from on high, the earth below likewise He will call forth to judge and try, his folk he doth devise. Bring forth my saints, saith he, my faithful flock so dear: Which are in band and league with me, my law to love and fear. And when these things are tri'd, the heavens shall record, That God is just; and all must bide the judgement of the Lord. . My people, O give heed, Israel to thee I cry: I am thy God, thy help at need, thou canst it not deny. I do not say to thee thy sacrifice is slack: Thou offerest daily unto me much more then I do lack. Think'st thou that I do need thy cattel young or old? Or else so much desire to feed on goats out of thy fold? Nay; all the beasts are mine, in woods that eat their fills: And thousands more of neat and kine, that run-wilde on the hills. The second part. The birds that build on high, in hills and out of sight: And beasts that in the fields do lie, are subject to my might. Then though I hungred sore, what need I ought of thine, Sith that the earth with her great store, and all therein is mine? To bulls flesh have I minde to eat it dost thou think? Or such a sweetness do I finde the bloud of goats to drink? Give to the Lord his praise, with thanks to him apply: And see thou pay thy vows always unto the God mòst high. Then seek and call to me, when ought would work thee blame: And I will sure deliver thee, that thou mayst praise my Name. But to the wicked train, which talk of God each day, And yet their works are foul and vain, to them the Lord will say, With what a face dar'st thou my word once speak or name? Why doth thy talk my law allow, thy deeds deny the same? Whereas for to amend thy life thou art so slack: My word the which thou dost pretend, is cast behinde thy back. The third part. When thou a thief dost see by theft to live in wealth, With him thou runn'st and dost agree likewise to thrive by stealth. When thou dost them behold that wives and maids defile, Thou lik'st it well, and waxest bold to use that life most vise. Thy lips thou dost apply to slander and defame: Thy tongue is taught to craft and lie, and still doth use the same. Thou studiest to revile thy friends to thee so near: With slander thou wouldst needs defile thy mothers son most dear. Hereat while I do wink, as though I did not see, Thou goest on still, and so dost think that I am like to thee. But sure I will not let to strike, when I begin: Thy faults in order I will set, and open all thy sin. Mark this I you require, that have not God in minde: Lest when I plague you in mine ire, your help be far to finde. He that doth give to me the sacrifice of praise, Doth please me well, and he shall see to walk in godly ways. Miserere mei. Psal. li. W. W. O Lord, consider my distress, and now with speed some pity take: My sins deface, my faults redress, good Lord, for thy great mercies sake. Wash me, O Lord, and make me clean from this unjust and sinful act, And purifie yet once again my hainous crime and bloudy fact. Remorse and sorrow do constrain me to acknowledge mine excess: My sin alas doth still remain before my face without release. For thee alone I have offended, committing evil in thy sight: And if I were therefore condemned./ yet were thy judgements just and right. It is too manifest alas that first I was conceiv'd in sin: Yea, of my mother so born was, and yet vile wretch remain therein. Also behold, Lord, thou dost love the inward truth of a pure heart: Therefore thy wisdom from above thou hast reveal'd me to convert. If thou with hyssop purge this blot, I shall be cleaner then the glass: And if thou wash away my spot, the snow in whiteness shall I pass. Therefore, O Lord, such joy me send, that inwardly I may finde grace, And that my strength may now amend which thou hast swag'd for my trespass, Turn back thy face and frowning ire, for I have felt enough thy hand: And purge my sins, I thee desire, which do in number pass the sand. Make new my heart within my brest, and frame it to thy holy will: Thy constant Spirit in me let rest, which may these raging enemies kill. The second part. Cast me not, Lord, out from thy face, but speedily my torments end: Take not from me thy Spirit of grace, which may from dangers me defend. Restore me to those joys again which I was wont in thee to finde: And let me thy free Spirit retain, which unto thee may stir my minde. Thus when I shall thy mercies know, I shall instruct others therein: And men that are likewise brought low, by mine example shall flee sin. O God, that of my health art Lord, forgive me this my bloudy vice: My heart and tongue shall then accord to sing thy mercies and justice. Touch thou my lips, my tongue untie, O Lord, which art the onely key: And then my mouth shall testifie thy wondrous works, and praise alway. And as for outward sacrifice, I would have offered many a one: But thou esteem'st them of no price, and therein pleasure tak'st thou none. The heavy heart, the minde opprest, O Lord, thou never dost reject: And, to speak truth, it is the best, and of all sacrifice th' effect. Lord, unto Sion turn thy face, pour out thy mercies on thy hill, And on Jerusalem thy grace, build up the walls, and love it still. Thou shalt accept then our offrings of peace and righteousness, I say: Yea, calves and many other things upon thine altar will we lay. Another of the same, by J.H. HAve mercy on me, Lord, after thy great abounding grace: After thy mercies multitude do thou my sins deface. Yea wash me more from mine offence, and cleanse me from my sin: For I do know my faults, and still my sin is in mine eyn. Against thee, thee alone I have offended in this case: And evil have I done before the presence of thy sace: That in the things that thou hast done upright thou mayst be tri'd, And eke in judging, that the doom may pass upon thy side. Behold, in wickedness my kinde and shape I did receive: And lo my sinful mother eke in sin did me conceive. But lo, the truth in inward parts is pleasant unto thee; And secrets of thy wisdom thou revealed hast to me. With hyssop, Lord, besprinkle me, I shall be cleansed so: Yea, wash thou me; and so I shall be whiter then the snow. Of joy and gladness make thou me to hear the pleasant voice: That so the bruised bones which thou hast broken may rejoyce. From the beholding of my sins, Lord, turn away thy face: And all my deeds of wickedness do utterly deface. O God, create in me a heart unspotted in thy sight: And eke within my bowels, Lord, renew a stable sprite. Ne cast me from thy sight, nor take thy holy Spirit away: The comfort of thy saving health give me again, I pray. With thy free Spirit establish me, and I will teach therefore Sinners thy ways, and wicked shall be turned to thy lore. The second part. O God that art God of my health, from bloud deliver me: That praises of thy righteousness my tongue may sing to thee. My lips that yet fast closed be, do thou, O Lord, unloose: The praises of thy majestie my mouth shall so disclose. I would have offred sacrifice, it that had pleased thee: But pleased with burnt-offerings I know thou wilt not be. A troubled spirit is sacrifice delightful in Gods eyes: A broken and an humble heart, God, thou wilt not despise, In thy good will deal gently, Lord, to Sion, and withal Grant that of thy Jerusalem uprear'd may be the wall. Burnt-offrings, gifts, and sacrifice of justice in that day Thou shalt accept, and calves they shall upon thine altar lay. Quid gloriaris. Psal. lii. J. H. WHy dost thou, tyrant, boast abroad thy wicked works to praise? Dost thou not know there is a God, whose merties last always? Why doth thy minde yet still devise such wicked wiles to warp? Thy tongue untrue in forging lies, is like a rafour sharp. On mischief why set'st thou thy minde, and wilt not walk upright? Thou hast more lust false tales to finde then bring the truth to light. Thou dost delight in fraud and guile, in mischief, bloud, and wrong: Thy lips have learn'd the flattering style, O false deceitful tongue. Therefore shall God for ay confound▪ and pluck thee from thy place, Thy seed root out from off the ground, and so shall thee deface. The just when they behold thy fall, with fear will praise the Lord, And in reproach of thee withall cry out with one accord, Behold the man that would not take the Lord for his defence: But of his goods his god did make, and trust his corrupt sense. But I as olive fresh and green shall spring and spread abroad: For why? my trust all times hath been upon the living God. For this therefore will I give praise to thee with heart and voice: I will set forth thy Name always, wherein thy faints rejoyce. Dixit insipiens. Psal. liii. T. S. THe foolish man in that which he within his heart hath said, That there is any God at all hath utterly denaid. They are corrupt, and they also a hainous work have wrought: Among them all there is not one of good that worketh ought. The Lord look'd down on sons of men, from heaven all abroad, To see if any were that would be wise and seek for God. They are all gone out of the way, they are corrupted all: There is not one doth any good, there is not one at all. Do not all wicked workers know. that they do feed upon My people, as they feed on bread? the Lord they call not on. Even there they were afraid, and stood with trembling all dismaid; Whereas there was no cause at all why they should be afraid. For God his bones that thee besieg'd hath scaured all abroad: Thou hast confounded them, for they rejected are of God. O Lord, give thou thy people health, and thou, O Lord, fulfill Thy promise made to Israel from out of Sion hill. When God his people shall restore that erst was captive led, Then Jacob shall therein rejoyce, and Israel shall be glad. Deus, in nomine. Psal. liv. J. H. GOd, save me for thy holy Name, and for thy goodness sake: Unto the strength, Lord, of the same I do my cause betake. Regard, O Lord, and give an ear to me when I do pray: Bow down thy self to me, and hear the words that I do say. For strangers up against me rise, and tyrants vex me still, Which have not God before their eyes: they seek my soul to spill. But so, my God doth give me aid, the Lord is straight at hand: With them by whom my soul is staid. The Lord doth ever stand.
With plagues repay again all those for me that lie in wait: And in thy truth destroy my foes with their own snare and bait. An offering of free heart and will then I to thee shall make, And praise thy Name; for therein still great comfort I do take. O Lord, at length do set me free from them that craft conspire: And now mine eye with joy doth see on them my hearts desire. Exaudi, Deus. Psal. lv. J. H. O God, give ear and do apply to hear me when I pray: And when to thee I call and cry, hide not thy self away. Take heed to me, grant my request, and answer me again: With plaints I pray full sore opprest, great grief doth me constrain. Because my foes with threats and cries oppress me through despight: And so the wicked sort likewise to vex me have delight. For they in counsel do conspire to charge me with some ill: So in their hasty wrath and ire they do pursue me still. My heart doth faint for want of breath, it panteth in my brest: The terrours and the dread of death do work me much unrest. Such dreadful fear on me doth fall, that I therewith do quake: Such horour whelmeth me withall, that I no shift can make. But I did say, Who will give me the swift and pleasant wings Of some fair dove, that I may flee, and rest me from these things? Lo then I would go far away, to flie I would not cease: And I would hide my self, and stay in some great wilderness. I would be gone in all the haste, and not abide behinde: That I were quit and overpast these blasts of boistrous winde. Divide them, Lord, and from them pull their devilish double tongue: For I have spi'd their city full of rapine, strife, and wrong. Which things both night and day throughout, do close her as a wall: In midst of her is mischief stout, and sorrow eke withall. Her inward parts are wicked plain, her deeds are much too vile: And in her streets there doth remain all crafty fraud and guile. The second part. If that my foes did seek my shame, I might it well abide: From open enemies check and blame some where I could me hide: But thou it was my fellow dear, which friendship didst pretend, And didst my secret counsel hear, as my familiar friend. With whom I had delight to talk in secret and abroad, And we together oft did walk within the house of God. Let death in haste upon them fall, and send them quick to hell: For mischief reigneth in the hall and parlour where they dwell. But I unto my God will cry, to him for help I flee: The Lord will help me by and by, and he will succour me. At morning, noon, and evening-tide unto the Lord I pray: When I so instantly have cri'd, he doth not say me nay. To peace he shall restore me yet, though war be now at hand: Although the number be full great that would against me stand. The Lord that first and last doth reign, both now and evermore, Will hear when I to him complain, and punish them full sore. For sure there is no hope that they to turn will once accord: For why? they will not God obey, nor yet do fear the Lord. Upon their friends they laid their hands which were in covenant knit: Of friendship to neglect the bands they pass or care no whit. While they have war within their hearts, as butter are their words: Although their words were smooth as oyl, they cut as sharp as swords. Cast thou thy care upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: For in no wise will he accord the just in thrall to see. But God shall cast them deep in pit that thirst for bloud always: He will no guileful man permit to live out half his days. Though such be quite destroy'd & gone, in thee, O Lord, I trust: I shall depend thy grace upon, with all my heart and lust. Miserere mei. Psal. lvi. J. H. HAve mercy, Lord, on me, I pray, for man would me devour: He fighteth with me day by day, and troubleth me each hour. Mine enemies daily enterprise to swallow me outright: To fight against me many rise, O thou most high of might. When they would make me most afraid with boasts and brags of pride: I trust in thee alone for aid, by thee I will abide. Gods promise I do minde and praise, O Lord, I stick to thee: I do not care at all assays what flesh can do to me. What things I either did or spake, they wrest them at their will: And all the counsel that they take is how to work me ill. They all consent themselves to hide, close watch for me to lay: They spie my paths, and snares have ti'd to take my life away. Shall they thus scape on mischief set? thou God on them wilt frown: For in his wrath he doth not let to throw whole kingdoms down. Thou seest how oft they made me flee, and on my tears dost look: Reserve them in a glass by thee, and write them in thy book. When I do call upon thy Name, my foes away do start: I well perceive it by the same, that God doth take my part. I glory in the word of God, to praise it I accord: With joy I will declare abroad the promise of the Lord. I trust in God, and yet I say, as I before began, The Lord he is my help and stay, I do not care for man. I will perform with heart so free to God my vows always: And I, O Lord, all times to thee will offer thanks and praise. My soul from death thou dost defend, and keep'st my feet upright: That I before thee may ascend with such as live in light. Miserere mei. Psal. lvii. J. H. TAke pity for thy promise sake, have mercy, Lord, on me: For why? my soul doth her betake unto the help of thee. Within the shadow of thy wings I set my self full fast, Till mischief, malice, and like things be gone and overpast. I call upon the God most high, to whom I stick and stand: I mean the God that will stand by the cause I have in hand. From heaven he hath sent his aid, to save me from their spight, That to devour me have affaid, his mercy, truth, and might. I lead my life with lions fell, all set on wrath and ire: And with such wicked men I dwell, that fet like flames of fire. Their teeth are spears and arrows long as sharp as I have seen: They wound & cut with their quick tongue like swords and weapons keen. Set up and shew thy self, O God, above the heavens bright: Exalt thy praise on earth abroad, thy majesty and might. They lay their net and do prepare a privy cave and pit▪ Wherein they think my soul to snare, but they are faln in it. My heart is set to laud the Lord, in him to joy always: My heart, I say, doth well accord to sing his laud and praise. Awake, my joy, awake, I say, my lute, my harp, and string: For I my self before the day will rise, rejoyce, and sing. Among the people I will tell the goodness of my God, And shew his praise that doth excell, in heathen lands abroad. His mercy doth extend as far as heavens all are high: His truth as high as any star that shineth in the skie. Set forth and shew thy self, O God, above the heavens bright: Extol thy praise on earth abroad, thy majesty and might. Si vere, utique. Psal. lviii. J. H. YE rulers that are put in trust to judge of wrong and right, Be all your judgements true and just, not knowing meed or might? Nay, in your hearts ye mark and muse in mischief to consent. And where ye should true justice use, your hands to bribes are bent. The wicked sort from their birth-day have erred on this wise: And from their mothers womb alway have used craft and lies. In them the poison and the breath of serpents do appear: Yea, like the adder that is deaf, and fast doth stop her ear, Because she will not hear the voice of one that charmeth well: No though he were the chief of choice, and did therein excell. O God, break thou their teeth at once within their mouths throughout: The tusks that in their great jaw-bones like lions whelps hang out. Let them consume away and waste, as waters run forth right: The shafts that they do shoot in haste, let them be broke in flight: As snails do waste within the shell, and unto slime do run: As one before his time that fell, and never saw the sun. Before the thorns that now are young, to bushes big shall grow: The storms of anger waxing strong shall take them ere they know. The just shall joy, it doth them good that God doth vengeance take: And they shall wash their feet in bloud of them that him forsake. Then shall the world shew forth & tell, that good men have reward: And that a God on earth doth dwell, that justice doth regard. Eripe me. Psal. lix. J. H. SEnd aid and save me from my foes, O Lord, I pray to thee: Defend and keep me from all those that rise and strive with me. O Lord, preserve me from those men, whose doings are not good: And set me sure and safe from them that thirst still after bloud. For lo, they wait my soul to take, they rage against me still: Yea, for no fault that I did make, I never did them ill. They run and do themselves prepare, when I no whit offend: Arise and save me from their snare, and see what they intend. O Lord of hosts of Israel, arise and strike all lands: And pity none that do rebel, and in their mischiefs stands. At night they stir and seek about, as hounds they howl and grin: And all the city clean throughout, from place to place they run. They speak of me with mouth alway, but in their lips are swords: They 'greed my death, and then would say, What? none doth hear our words. But, Lord, thou hast their ways espi'd, and laught thereat apace: The heathen folk thou dost deride, and mock them to their face. The strength that doth our foes withstand, O Lord, doth come from thee: My God he is my help at hand, a fort of fence to me. The Lord to me doth shew his grace in great abundance still: That I may see my foes in case such as my heart doth will. The second part. Destroy them not at once, O Lord, left it from minde do fall: But with thy strength drive them abroad, and so consume them all. For their ill words and truthless tongue confound them in their pride: Their wicked oaths with lies and wrong, let all the world deride. Consume them in thy wrath, O Lord, that nought of them remain: That men may know throughout the world that Jacobs God doth reign. At evening they return apace, as dogs they grin and cry: Throughout the streets in every place they run about and spy. They seek about for meat, I say, but let them not be fed: Not finde a house wherein they may be hold to put their head. But I will shew thy strength abroad, thy goodness I will praise: For thou art my defence and God at need in all assays. Thou art my strength, thou hast me staid; O Lord, I sing to thee: Thou art my fort, my fence, and aid, a loving God to me. Deus, repulisti. Psal. lx. J. H. O Lord, thou didst us clean forsake, and scattredst us abroad: Such great displeasure thou didst take; return to us, O God. Thy might did move the land so sore, that it in sunder brake: The hurt thereof, O Lord, restore, for it doth bow and quake. With heavy chance thou plaguest thus the people that are thine: And thou hast given unto us a drink of deadly wine. But yet to such as fear thy Name a banner thou didst shew: That they might triumph in the same, because thy word is true. So that thy might may keep and save thy folk that favour thee: That they thy help at hand may have, O Lord, grant this to me. The Lord did speak from his own place, this was his joyful tale, I will divide Sichem by pace, and mete out Succoths vale. Gilead is given to my hand, Manasses mine beside: Ephraim the strength of all my land, my law doth Judah guide. In Moah I will wash my feet, over Edom throw my shoe: And thou Palestine ought it to seek for favour me unto. But who will bring me at this tide unto the city strong? Or who to Edom will me guide, so that I go not wrong? Wilt thou not God, which didst forsake thy folk, their land and coasts? Our wars in hand thou wouldst not take, nor walk among our hosts. Give aid, O Lord, and us relieve from them that us disdain: The help that hosts of men can give, it is but all in vain. But through our God we shall have might to take great things in hand: He will tread down and ut to flight all those that us withstand. Exaudi, Deus. Psal. lxi. J. H. REgard, O Lord, for I complain, and make my suit to thee:
Let not my words return in vain, but give an ear to me. From out the coasts and utmost parts of all the earth abroad, In grief and anguish of my heart I cry to thee, O God. Upon the rock of thy great power my woful minde repose: Thou art my hope, my fort and tower, my fence against my foes. Within thy tent I lust to dwell, for ever to endure: Under thy wings I know right well I shall be safe and sure. The Lord doth my desire regard, and doth fulfil the same: With godly gifts will he reward all those that fear his Name. The king shall he in health maintain, and so prolong his days: That he from age to age shall reign, for evermore always. That he may have a dwelling-place before the Lord for ay; O et thy mercy, truth, and grace, defend him from decay. Then shall I sing for ever still with praise unto thy Name: all my vows I may fulfil, and daily pay the same. Nonne Deo. Psal. lxii. J. H. MY soul to God shall give good heed, and him alone attend: why? my health and hope to speed doth whole on him depend. For he alone is my defence, my rock, my health, and aid: is my stay, that no pretence all make me much dismaid. O wicked folk, how long will ye e craft? sure ye must fall: as a rotten hedge ye be, and like a tottring wall. Whom God doth love, ye seek always to put him to the worse: ove to lie, with mouth ye praise, and yet your heart doth curse. Yet still mysoul doth whole depend, on God my chief desire: all ill feats me to defend, none but him I require. He is my rock, my fort and tower, my health is of his grace: doth support me, that no power can move me out of place. God is my glory and my health, my souls desire and lust: frt, my strength, my stay, my wealth, God is my onely trust. Oh, have your trust in him alway, folk, with one accord: out your hearts to him, and say, our trust is in the Lord. The sons of men deceitful are, on balance but a sleight: things most vain do them compare, r they can keep no weight: Trust not in wrong, robb'ry, nor stealth, let vain delights be gone: ough goods well got flow in with wealth let not your hearts thereon. The Lord long since one thing did tell, which here to minde I call: spake it oft, I heard it well, That God alone doth all. And that thou, Lord, art good and kinde, thy mercy doth exceed: that all sorts with thee shall finde according to their deed. Deus, Deus meus. Psal. lxiii. T. S. O God my God, I watch betime to come to thee in haste: why? my soul and body both do thirst of thee to taste. in this barren wilderness where waters there are none, flesh is parcht for thought of thee, or thee I wish alone. That I might see yet once again glory, strength, and might, as wont it to behold a thin thy temple bright. Fr why? thy mercies fa surmount ts life and wretched days: ips therefore shall give to thee e honour, laud and praise. And whil'st I live, I will not fail worship thee alway: And in thy name I shall lift up my hands when I do pray. My soul is fill'd as with marrow, which is both fat and sweet: My mouth therefore shall sing such songs as are for thee most meet, When as in bed I think on thee, and eke all the night-tide; For under covert of thy wings, thou art my joyful guide. My soul doth surely stick to thee, thy right hand is my power: And those that seek my soul to stroy, them death shall soon devour. The sword shall them devour each one, their carcases shall feed The hungry foxes which do run their prey to seek at need. The king and all men shall rejoyce, that do profess Gods word: For liars mouths shall then be stopt, which have the truth disturb'd. Exaudi, Deus. Psal. lxiv. J. H. O Lord, unto my voice give ear, with plaint when I do pray: And rid my life and soul from fear of foes that threat to slay. Defend me from that sort of men which in deceit do lurk: And from the frowning face of them that all ill seats do work. Who whet their tongues, as we have seen men whet and sharp their swords: They shoot abroad their arrows keen, I mean most bitter words. With privy sleights shoot they their shaft, the upright man to hit: The just unwares to strike by craft, they care or fear no whit. A wicked work they have decreed, in counsel thus they cry, To use deceit let us not dread, what? who can it espy? What way to hurt they talk and muse all times within their heart: They all consult what feats to use, each doth invent his part. But yet all this shall not prevail; when they think least upon, God with his dart shall sure assail and wound them every one. Their crafts and their ill tongues withall shall work themselves such blame, That they which then behold their fall, shall wonder at the same. Then all that see shall know right well that God the thing hath wrought, And praise his witty works, and tell what he to pas hath brought. Yet shall the just in God rejoyce, still trusting in his might: So shall they joy with minde and voice, whose hearts are pure and right. Te decet hymnus. Psal. lxv. J. H. THy praise alone, O Lord, doth reign in Sion thine own hill: Their vows to thee they do maintain, and their behests fulfil. For that thou dost their prayers hear, and dost thereto agree: The people all both far and near with trust shall come to thee. Our wicked life so far exceeds, that we shall fall therein: But, Lord, forgive our great misdeeds, and purge us from our sin. The man is blest whom thou dost choose within thy courts to dwell: Thy house and temple he shall use, with pleasures that excel. Of thy great justice hear us, God, our health of thee doth rise: The hope of all the earth abroad, and the sea coasts likewise. With strength thou art beset about, and compast with thy power: Thou mak'st the mountains strong and stout to stand in every shower. The swelling seas thou dost asswage, and make their streams full still: Thou dost restrain the peoples rage, and rule them at thy will. The folk that dwell full far on earth shall dread thy signs to see, Which morn and even in great mirth do pass with praise to thee. When that the earth is chapt and dry, and thirsteth more and more, Then with thy drops thou dost apply, and much increase her store. The floud of God doth overflow, and so doth cause to spring The seed and corn which men do sow, for he doth guide the thing. With wet thou dost her furrows fill, whereby her clods do fall: Thy drops on her thou dost distill, and bless her fruit withall. Thou deck'st the earth of thy good grace with fair and pleasant crop: Thy clouds distil their dew apace, great plenty they do drop: Whereby the desert shall begin full great increase to bring: The little hills shall joy therein, much fruit in them shall spring. In places plain the flocks shall feed, and cover all the earth: The vails with corn shall so exceed, that men shall sing for mirth. Jubilate Deo. Psal. lxvi. T. S. YE men on earth in God rejoyce, with praise set forth his Name: Extol his might with heart and voice, give glory to the same. How wonderful, O Lord, say ye, in all thy works thou art! Thy foes for sear shall seek to thee full sore against their heart. All men that dwell the earth throughout, shall praise the Name of God: The laud thereof the world about is shew'd and set abroad. All folk come forth, behold and see what things the Lord hath wrought! Mark well the wondrous works that he for man to pass hath brought. He laid the sea like heaps on high, therein a way they had On scot to pass both fair and dry, whereof their hearts were glad. His might doth rule the world alway, his eyes all things behold: All such as would him disobey, by him shall be controll'd. Ye people, give unto our God due laud and thanks always: With joyful voice declare abroad, and sing unto his praise: Which doth endue our soul with life, and it preserve withall: He stays our feet, so that no strife can make us slip or fall. The Lord doth prove our deeds with fire, if that they will abide: As workmen do when they desire to have their metals tri'd. Although thou suffer us so long in prison to be cast, And there with chains and fetters strong to lie in bondage fast. The second part. Although, I say, thou suffer men on us to ride and reign: Though we through fire and water run, of very grief and pain: Yet sure thou dost of thy good grace dispose it to the best: And bring us out into a place, to live in wealth and rest. Unto thy house resort will I to offer and to pray, And there I will my self apply my vows to thee to pay: The vows that with my mouth I pake in all my grief and smart; The vows, I say, which I did make in dolour of my heart. Burnt-offrings I will give to thee of oxen sat and rams: Yea, this my sacrifice shall be of bullocks, goats, and lambs. Come forth and hearken here full soon, all ye that fear the Lord: What he for my poor soul hath done to you I will record. Full oft I call to minde his grace, this mouth to him doth cry: And thou my tongue make speed apace to praise him by and by. But if I feel my heart within in wicked works rejoyce: Or if I have delight to sin, God will not hear my voice. But surely God my voice hath heard, and what I do require: My prayer he doth well regard, and granteth my desire. All praise to him that hath not put nor cast me out of minde: Nor yet his mercy from me shut, which I do ever finde. Deus miscreatur. Psal. lxvii. J. H. HAve mercy on us, Lord, and grant to us thy grace: To shew to us do thou accord the brightness of thy face; That all the earth may know the way to godly wealth: And all the nations on a row may see thy saving health. Let all the world, O God, give praise unto thy Name: O let the people all abroad extoll and laud the same. Throughout the world so wide let all rejoyce with mirth: For thou with truth and right dost guide the nations of the earth. Let all the world, O God, give praise unto thy Name: O let the people all abroad extoll and laud the same. Then shall the earth increase, great store of fruit shall fall; And then our God the God of pace shall bless us eke withal. God shall us bless, I say, and then both far and near, The folk throughout the earth alway of him shall stand in fear. Exurgat Deus. Psal. lxviii. T. S. LEt God arise, and then his foes will turn themselves to flight: His enemies then will run abroad, and scatter out of sight. And as the fire doth melt the wa, and wind blows smoke away: So in the presence of the Lord, the wicked shall decay. But righteous men before the Lord shall heartily rejoyce: They shall be glad and merry all, and cheerful in their voice. Sing praise, sing praise unto the Lord, who rideth on the sky: Extol the Name of Jah our God, and him do magnify. The same is he that is above within his holy place: That Father is of fatherless, and Judge of widows case. Houses he gives and issue both unto the comfortless: He bringeth bondmen out of thrall, and rebels to distress. When thou didst march before thy folk th'Egyptians from among, And brought'st them through the wilder∣ness, which was both wide and long: The earth did quake, the rain pour'd down heard were great claps of thunder: The mount Sinai shook in such sort, as it would break in sunder. Thine heritage with drop, of rain abundantly was washt: And if so be it barren waxt, by thee it was refresht. Thy chosen flock doth there remain, Thou hast prepar'd that place: And for the poor thou dost provide of thine especial grace. The second part. God will give women causes just to magnify his Name, When as his people triumphs make, and purchase bruit and same. For puissant kings for all their power, shall flee and take the soil; And women which remain at home shall help to part the spoil. And though ye were as black as pots, your hue shall pass the dove, Whose wings and feathers seem to have silver and gold above▪ When in this land God shall triumph o're kings both high and low: Then shall it be like Salmon hill, as white as any snow. Though Basan be a fruitful hill, and in height others pass: Yet Sion Gods most holy hill, doth far excel in grace. Why brag ye thus ye hills most high, and leap for pride together?
The hill of Sion God doth love, and there will dwell for ever. Gods army is two millions of warriours good and strong: The Lord also in Sinai is present them among. Thou didst (O Lord) ascend on high, and captives led'st them all, Which in times past thy chosen flock in bondage kept and thrall. Thou mad'st them tribute for to pay; and such as did repine Thou didst subdue, that they might dwell in thy temple divine. Now praised be the Lord, for that he pours on us such grace: From day to day he is the God of our health and solace. The third part. He is the God from whom alone salvation cometh plain: He is the God by whom we scape all dangers, death, and pain. Thus God will wound his enemies head, and break the hairy scalp Of those that in their wickedness continually do walk. From Basan will I bring, said he, my people and my sheep: And all mine own, as I have done, from dangers of the deep. And make them dip their seet in bloud of those that hate my Name: And dogs shall have their tongues em∣brew'd with licking of the same. All men may see how thou, O God, thine enemies dost deface: And how thou goest as God and King into thine holy place. The singers go before with joy, the minstrels follow after: And in the midst the damsels play with timbrel and with taber. Now in the congregation, O Israel, praise the Lord: And Jacobs whole posterity, give thanks with one accord. Their chief was little Benjamin, but Judah made their host, With Zabulon and Nephthalim, which dwelt about their coast. As God hath given power to thee, so Lord make firm and sure, The thing that thou hast wrought in us, for ever to endure. And in thy temple gifts will we give unto thee, O Lord, For thine unto Jerusalem sure promise made by word. The fourth part. Yea, and strange kings to us subdu'd shall do like in those days: I mean, to thee they shall present their gifts of laud and praise. He shall destroy the spear-mens ranks, the calves and bulls of might: And cause them tribute pay, and daunt all such as love to sight. Then shall the lords of Egypt come, and presents with them bring: The Moors most black shall stretch their hands unto their Lord and King. Therefore ye kingdoms of the earth, give praise unto the Lord: Sing psalms to God with one consent, thereto let all accord. Who though he ride and ever hath above the heavens bright: Yet by the fearful thunder-claps men may well know his might. Therefore the strength of Israel ascribe to God on high, Whose might and power doth far extend above the cloudy sky. O God thy holiness and power is dread for evermore: The God of Israel gives us strength, praised be God therefore. Salvum me fac. Psal. lxix. J. H. SAve me, O God, and that with speed, the waters flow full fast: So nigh my soul do they proceed, that I am sore agast. I stick full deep in mire and clay, Whereas I feel no ground: fall into such flouds, I say, that I am like be drown'd. With crying oft I faint and quail, my throat is hoarse and dry: With looking up my sight doth fail, for help to God on high. My foes that guiltless do oppress my soul, with hate are led: In number sure they are no less then hairs are on my head. Though for no cause they vex me fore they prosper and are glad: They do compel me to restore the things I never had. What I have done for want of wit, thou, Lord, all times canst tell: And all the faults that I commit to thee are known full well. O God of hosts, defend and stay all those that trust in thee: Let no man doubt or shrink away for ought that chanceth me. It is for thee and for thy sake that I do bear this blame: In spite of thee they would me make to hide my face for shame. My mothers sons, my brethren all forsake me on a row: And as a stranger they me call, my face they will not know. Unto thy house such zeal I bear, that it doth pine me much: Their checks and taunts at thee to hear, my very heart doth grutch. The second part. Though I do fast, my flesh to chast, Yea, if I weep and mone: Yet in my teeth this gear is cast, they pass not thereupon. If I for grief and pain of heart in sack cloth use to walk, Then they anon will it pervert, thereof they jest and talk. Both high and low, and all the throng that sit within the gate, They have me ever in their tongue; of me they talk and prate. The drunkards which in wine delight, it is their chief pastime, To seek which way to work me spite; of me they sing and rhyme. But thee the while, O Lord, I pray, that when it pleaseth thee, For thy great truth thou wilt alway send down thine aid to me. Pluck thou my feet out of the mire, from drowning do me keep: From such as ow me wrath and ire, and from the waters deep. Lest with the waves I should be drown'd and depth my soul devour, And that the pit should me confound, and shut me in her power. O Lord of hosts, to me give ear, as thou art good and kinde: And as thy mercy is most dear, Lord, have me in thy minde. And do not from thy servant hide nor turn thy face away: I am opprest on every side, in haste give ear, I say. O Lord, unto my soul draw nigh, the same with aid repose: Because of their great tyranny, acquit me from my soes. The third part. That I abide rebuke and shame thou know'st and thou canst tell: For those that seek and work the same, thou seest them all full well. When they with brags do break my heart, I seek for help anon: But finde no friends to ease my smart, to comfort me not one. But in my meat they gave me gall, too cruel for to think: And gave me in my thirst withall strong vineger to drink. Lord, turn their table to a snare to take themselves therein: And when they think full well to sate, then trap them in the gin. And let their eyes be dark and blinde, that they may nothing see: Bow down their backs, and do them binde, in thraldom for to be. Pour out thy wrath as hot as fire, that it on them may fall: Let thy displeasure in thine ire take hold upon them all. As deserts dry their house disgrace, their off spring eke expel: That none thereof possess their place. nor in their tents do dwell. If thou dost strike the man to tame, on him they lay full sore: And if that thou do wound the same, they seek to hurt him more. Then let them heap up mischief still, (sith they are all pervert) That of thy favour and good will they never have a part. And rase them clean out of thy book of life, of hope, of trust: That for their names they never look in number of the just. The fourth part. Though I, O Lord, with wo and grief have been full sore oppress: Thy help shall give me such relief, that all shall be redrest. That I may give thy Name the praise, and shew it with a song: I will extol the same always with hearty thanks among. Which is more pleasant unto thee, (such minde thy grace hath born) Then either ox or calf can be, that hath both hoof and horn. When simple folk do this behold, it shall rejoyce them sure: All ye that seek the Lord, behold, your life for ay shall dure. For why? the Lord of hosts doth hear the poor when they complain: His prisoners are to him full dear, he doth them not disdain. Wherefore the sky and earth below, the sea, with floud and stream; His praise they shall declare and show, with all that live in them. For sure our God will Sion save, and Juda's cities build: Much folk possession there shall have, her streets shall all be fill'd. His servants seed shall keep the same all ages out of minde: And there all they that love his Name, a dwelling-place shall finde. Deus in adjutorium. Psal. lxx. J. H. O God, to me take heed, Of help I thee require: O Lord of hosts, with haste and speed help, help, I thee desire. With shame confound them all that seek my soul to spill: Rebuke them back with blame to fall that think and wish me ill. Confound them that apply and seek to work me shame: And at my harm do laugh, and cry, So, so, there goes the game. But let them joyful be in thee with joy and wealth, Which onely trust and seek to thee, and to thy saving health: That they may say always in mirth and one accord, All glory, honour, laud and praise be given to thee, O Lord. But I am weak and poor, come, Lord, thine aid I lack: Thou art my stay and help, therefore make speed, and be not slack. In te, Domine. Psal, lxxi. J. H. MY Lord my God, in all distress my hope is whole in thee: Then let no shame my foul oppress, nor once take hold on me. As thou art just, defend me, Lord, and rid me out of dread: Give ear, and to my suit accord, and send me help at need. Be thou my rock, to whom I may for aid all times resort: Thy promise is to helpalway, thou art my sence and fort. Save me, my God, from wicked men, and from their strength and power: From folk unjust, and eke from them that cruelly devour. Thou art the stay wherein I trust, thou, Lord of hosts, art he: Yea, from my youth I had a lust still to depend on thee. Thou hast me kept even from my birth, and I through thee was born: Wherefore I will thee praise with mirth, both evening and at morn. As to a monster seldom seen, much solk about me throng: But thou art now, and still hast been my fence and aid so strong. Wherefore my mouth no time shall lack thy glory and thy praise: And eke my tongue shall not be slack to honour thee always. Refuse me not, O Lord, I say, when age my limbs doth take: And when my strength doth waste away, do not my soul forsake. Among themselves my foes enquire to take me through deceit: And they against me do conspire, that for my soul laid wait. The second part. Lay hand and take him now, they said, For God from him is gone: Dispatch him quite, for to his aid (I wis) there cometh none. Do not absent thy self away, O Lord, when need shall be: But that in time of grief thou may in haste give help to me. With shame confound and overthrow all those that seek my life: Oppress them with rebuke also, that fain would work me strife. But I will patiently abide thy help at all assays: Still more and more, each time and tide, I will set forth thy praise. My mouth thy justice shall record, that daily help doth send: But of thy benefits, O Lord, I know no count nor end. Yet will I go and seek forth one, with thy good help, O God, The saving health of thee alone to shew and set abroad. For of my youth thou took'st the care, and dost instruct me still: Therefore thy wonders to declare I have great minde and will. And as in youth from wanton rage thou didst me keep and stay: For sake me not unto mine age, and till my head be gray: The third part. That I thy strength and might may show to them that now be here: And that our seed thy power may know hereafter many a year. O Lord, thy justice doth exceed thy doings all may see: Thy works are wonderful indeed, oh who is like to thee! Thou mad'st me feel affliction sore, and yet thou didst me save: Yea, thou didst help and me restore, and took'st me from the grave. And thou mine honour dost increase, my dignity maintain: Yea, thou dost make all grief to cease, and comfort'st me again. Therefore thy faithfulness to praise I will with viol sing: My harp shall sound thy praise always, O Israels holy King. My mouth will joy with pleasant voice when I shall sing to thee: And eke my soul will much rejoyce, for thou hast made me free. My tongue thy uprightness shall sound, and speak it daily still: For grief and shame do them confound that seek to work me ill. Deus, judicium. Psal. lxxii. J. H. LOrd, give thy judgements to the king, therein instrut him well: And with his son that princely thing, Lord, let thy justice dwell. That he may govern uprightly, and rule thy folk aright: And so defend through equity the poor that have no might. And let the mountains that are high unto thy folk give peace: And eke let little hills apply, in justiceto increase. That he may help the weak and poor with aid, and make them strong: And eke destroy for evermore all those that do them wrong. And then from age to age shall they regard and fear thy might: So long as sun doth shine by day, or else the moon by night.
Lord, make the king unto the just like rain to fields new mown: And like to drops that lay the dust, and fresh the land new sown. The just shall flourish in his time, and all shall be at peace, Until the moon shall leave to prime, waste, change, and to increase. He shall be lord of sea and land, from shore to shore throughout: And from the flouds within the land, through all the earth about. The people that in deserts dwell shall kneed to him full thick: And all his enemies that rebel the earth and dust shall lick. The lords of all the isles thereby great gifts to him shall bring: The kings of Saba and Araby give many a costly thing. The second part. All kings shall seek with one accord in his good grace to stand: And all the people of the world shall serve him at his hand. For he the needy sort doth save that unto him do call: And eke the simple folk that have no help of man at all. He taketh pity on the poor that are with need opprest: He doth preserve them evermore, and bring their souls to rest. He shall redeem their lives from dread, from fraud, from wrong, from might: And eke the bloud that they shall bleed is precious in his sight. But he shall live, and they shall bring to him of Saba's gold: He shall be honour'd as a king, and daily be extoll'd. The mighty mountains of his land of corn shall bear such throng, That it like cedar-trees shall stand in Libanus full long. Their cities eke full well shall speed, the fruits thereof shall pass: In plenty it shall far exceed, and spring as green as grass. For ever they shall praise his name, while that the sun is light: And think them happy through the same, all folk shall bless his might. Praise ye the Lord of hosts, and sing to Israels God each one: For he doth every wondrous thing, yea, he himself alone. And blessed be his holy Name all times eternally: That all the earth may praise the same, amen, amen, say I. Quam bonus Deus. Psal. lxxiii. T. S. HOw ever it be, yet God is good and kinde to Israel: And to all such as safely keep their conscience pure and well. Yet sike a fool I almost slipt, my feet began to slide: And ere I wist, even at a pinch my steps awry 'gan glide. for when I saw such foolish men, I grudg'd and did disdain That wicked men all things should have without turmoil or pain. They never suffer pangs nor grief, as if death should them smite: Their bodies are both stout and strong, and ever in good plight: And free from all adversity when other men be shent: And with the rest they take no part of plague or punishment. Therefore presumption doth embrace their necks as doth a chain: And are even wrapt as in a robe, with rapine and disdain. They are so fed that even for fat their eyes oft times out start: And as for worldly goods they have more then can wish their heart. Their life is most licentious, boasting much of the wrong Which they have done to simple men, and ever pride among. The heavens and the living Lord they spare not to blaspheme: And prate they do of worldly things, no wight they do esteem. The people of God oft-times turn back to see their prosperous state: And almost drink the self-same cup, and follow the same rate. The second part. How can it be that God, say they, should know or understand These worldly things, sith wicked men be lords of sea and land? For we may see how wicked men in riches still increase, Rewarded well with worldly goods, and live in rest and peace. Then why do I from wickedness my fantasie refrain, And wash my hands with innocents, and cleanse my heart in vain? And suffer scourges every day; as subject to all blame: And every morning from my youth sustain rebuke and shame? And I had almost said as they, misliking mine estate: But that I should thy children judge as folk unfortunate. Then I bethought me how I might this matter understand: But yet the labour was too great for me to take in hand: Until the time I went into thine holy place, and then I understood right perfectly the end of all these men. And namely, how thou settest them upon a slippery place: And at thy pleasure and thy will thou dost them all deface. Then all men muse at that strange sight, to see how suddenly They are destroy'd, dispatcht, consum'd, and dead so horribly. Much like a dream when one awakes, so shall their wealth decay: Their famous names in all mens sight shall ebb and pass away. The third part. Yet thus my heart was grieved then, my minde was much opprest: So fond was I and ignorant, and in this point a beast. Yet nevertheless by my right hand thou hold'st me always fast: And with thy counsel dost me guide to glory at the last. What thing is there that I can wish but thee in heaven above? And in the earth there is nothing like thee that I can love. My flesh and eke my heart doth fail, but God doth fail me never: For of my health God is the strength, my portion eke for ever. And lo, all such as thee forsake thou shalt destroy each one: And those that trust in any thing saving in thee alone. Therefore will I draw near to God, and ever with him dwell: In God alone I put my trust, thy wonders I will tell. Ʋtquid, Deus. Psal. lxxiv. J. H. WHy art thou, Lord, so long from us in all this danger deep? Why doth thine anger kindle thus at thine own pasture-sheep? Lord, call the people to thy thought which have been thine so long, The which thou hast redeem'd and brought from bondage sore and strong. Have minde therefore and think upon, remember it full well, Thy pleasant place, thy mount Sion, where thou wast wont to dwell. Lift up thy feet and come in haste, and all thy foes deface: Which now at pleasure rob and waste within thy holy place. Amid thy congregations all Thine enemies roar, O God: They set as signs on every wall their banners splaid abroad. As men with axes hew down trees that on the hills do grow: So shine the bills and swords of these within thy temple now. The cieling saw'd, the carved boards, the goodly graven stones, With axes, hammers, bills, and swords they beat them down at once. Thy places they consume with flame, and eke in all this toil The house appointed to thy Name they rase down to the soil. And thus they say within their heart, Dispatch them out of hand: Then burnt they up in every part Gods houses through the land. Yet thou no signe of help dost send, our prophets all are gone: To tell when this our plague shall end among us there is none. When wilt thou, Lord, once end this shame, and cease thine enemies strong? Shall they always blaspheme thy Name, and rail on thee so long? Why dost thou draw thy hand aback, and hide it in thy lap? Oh pluck it out, and be not slack to give thy foes a rap. The second part. O God, thou art our King and Lord, and evermore hast been: Yea, thy good grace throughout the world for our good help hath seen. The seas that are so deep and dead, thy might did make them dry: And thou didst break the serpents head, that he therein did die. Yea, thou didst break the heads so great of whales that are so fell: And gav'st them to the folk to eat that in the deserts dwell. Thou mad'st a spring with streams to rise from rock both hard and high: And eke thy hand hath made likewise deep rivers to be dry. Both day and eke the night are thine, by thee they were begun: Thou sett'st to serve us with their shine, the light and eke the sun. Thou didst appoint the ends and coasts of all the earth about: Both summer-heats, and winter-frosts, thy hand hath found them out. Think on, O Lord, no time forget thy foes that thee defame: And how the foolish folk are set to rail upon thy Name. O let no cruel beasts devour thy turtle that is true: Forget not always in thy power the poor that much do rue. Regard thy covenant, and behold, thy foes possess the land: All sad and dark, forworn and old our realm as now doth stand. Let not the simple go away, nor yet return with shame: But let the poor and needy ay give praise unto thy Name. Rise, Lord, let be by thee maintain'd the cause that is thine own: Remember how that thou blasphem'd art by the foolish one. The voice forget not of thy foes, for the presumption high Is more and more in creast of those that hate thee spitefully. Confitebimur tibi. Psal. lxxv. J. H. UNto thee, God, will we give thanks, we will give thanks to thee: Sith thy Name is so near, declare thy wondrous works will we. I will uprightly judge when get convenient time I may: The earth is weak, and all therein, but I her pillars stay. I did to the mad people say, Deal not so furiously; And unto the ungodly ones, Set not your horns on high: I said unto them, Set not up your raised horns on high; And see that you do with stiff neck not speak presumptuously. For neither from the eastern parts, nor from the western side, Nor from forsaken wilderness, promotion doth proceed. For why? the Lord our God he is the righteous Judge alone: He putteth down the one, and sets another in the throne. For why? a cup of mighty wine is in the hand of God: And all the mighty wine therein himself doth pour abroad. As for the lees and filthy dregs that do remain of it, The wicked of the earth shall drink and suck them every whit. But I will talk of God, I say, of Jacobs God therefore: And will not cease to celebrate his praise for evermore. In sunder break the horns of all ungodly men will I: But then the horns of righteous men shall be exalted high. Gloria patri. To Father, Son, and holy Ghost all glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore. In Judea. Psal. lxxvi. J. H. TO all that now in Jewry dwell the Lord is clearly known: His Name is great in Israel, a people of his own. At Salem he his tents hath pight, to tarry there a space: In Sion eke he hath delight to make his dwelling-place. And there he brake both shaft and bowe, the sword, the spear, and shield: And brake the ray to overthrow in battel on the field. Thou art more worthy honour, Lord, more might in thee doth lie, Then in the strongest of the world, that rob on mountains high. But now the proud are spoil'd through thee, and they are faln on sleep: Through men of war no help can he, themselves they could not keep. At thy rebuke, O Jacobs God, when thou didst them reprove: As half on sleep their chariots stood, no hors-men once did move. For thou art dreadful, Lord, indeed, what man the courage hath To bide thy sight, and doth not dread when thou art in thy wrath? When thou dost make thy judgments heard from heaven throught the ground, Then all the earth full sore afraid in silence shall be found. And that when thou, O God, dost stand in judgement for to speak, To save th'afflicted of the land, on earth that are full weak. The fury that in man doth reign shall turn unto thy praise: Hereafter, Lord, do thou restrain their wrath and threats always. Make vows and pay them to our God, ye folk that nigh him be: Bring gifts all ye that dwell abroad, for dreadful sure is he. For he doth take both life and might from princes great of birth: And full of terrour is his sight to all the kings on earth. Voce mea, Psal. lxxvii. J. H. I With my voice to God do cry, with heart and hearty cheer: My voice to God I lift on high, and he my suit doth hear. In time of grief I sought to God, by night no rest I took: But stretcht my hands to him abroad, my soul comfort forsook. When I to think on God intend, my trouble then is more: I spake, but could not make an end, my breath was stopt so sore. Thou hold'st mine eyes always from rest, that I always awake: With fear I am so sore opprest, my speech doth me forsake. The days of old in minde I cast, and oft did think upon The times and ages that are past full many years agone. By night my songs I call to minde, once made thy praise to show: And with my heart much talle I finde, my spirits do search to know. Will God, said I, at once for all cast off his people thus, So that henceforth no time he shall be friendly unto us?
What? is his goodness clean decay'd for ever and a day? Or is his promise now delay'd, and doth his truth decay? And will the Lord our God forget his mercies manifold? Or shall his wrath increase so hot, his mercies to withhold? At last I said, My weakness is the cause of this mistrust: Gods mighty hand can help all this, and change it when he lust. The second part. I will regard and think upon the working of the Lord: Of all his wonders past and gone I gladly will record. Yea, all his works I will declare, and what he did devise: To tell his facts I will not spare, and eke his counsel wise. Thy works, O Lord, are all upright, and holy all abroad: What one hath strength to match the might of thee, O Lord our God? Thou art a God that dost forth show thy wonders every hour: And so dost make the people know thy vertue and thy power. And thine own folk thou dost defend with strength and stretched arm, The sons of Jacob that descend, and Josephs seed from harm. The waters, Lord, perceived thee, the waters saw thee well: And they for fear away did flee, the depths on trembling fell. The clouds that were both thick and black, did rain full plenteously: The thunder in the air did crack, thy shasts abroad did fly. Thy thunder in the air was heard, thy lightnings from above With flashes great made men afraid, the earth did quake and move. Thy ways within the sea do ly, thy paths in waters deep: Yet none can there thy steps espy, nor know thy paths to keep. 0 Thou ledd'st thy folk upon the land as sheep on every side: Through Moses and through Aarons hand thou didst them safely guide. Attendite populi. Psal. lxxviii. J. H. ATtend my people to my law, and to my words incline: My mouth shall speak strange parables, and sentences divine: Which we our selves have heard and learn'd even of our fathers old; d which for our instruction our fathers have us told. Because we should not keep it close from them that should come after: Who should Gods power to their race praise and all his works of wonder. To Jacob he commandment gave How Israel should live, illing our fathers should the same unto their children give. That they and their posterity that were not sprung up tho, ould have the knowledge of the law, and teach their seed also. That they might have the better hope in God that is above: d not forget to keep his laws and his precepts in love. Not being as their fathers were, rebelling in Gods sight: d would not frame their wicked hearts to know their God aright. How went the people of Ephraim their neighbours for to spoil: oting their darts the day of war, and yet they took the foil? For why? they did not keep with God the covenant that was made, yet would walk or lead their lives according to his trade: But put into oblivion his counsel and his will, d all his works most magnifick, which he decred still. The second part. What wonders to our forefathers did he himself disclose In Egypt land within the field that call'd is Thaneos? He did divide and cut the sea, that they might pass at once: And made the waters stand as still as doth an heap of stones. He led them secret in a cloud by day when it was bright; And in the night when dark it was, with fire he gave them light. He brake the rocks in wilderness, and gave the people drink: As plentiful as when the deeps do flow up to the brink. He drew out rivers out of rocks that were both dry and hard, Of such abundance, that no flouds to them may be compar'd. Yet for all this against the Lord their sin they did increase: And stirred him that is most high to wrath iw wilderness. They tempted God within theirhearts, like people of mistrust: Requiring such a kinde of meat as served to their lust: Saying with murmuration in their unfaithfulness, What? can this God prepare for us a feast in wilderness. Behold, he strake the stony rock, and flouds forthwith did flow: But can he now give to his folk both bread and flesh also? When God heard this, he waxed wroth with Jacob and his seed: So did his indignation on Israel proceed. The third part. Because they did not faithfully beleeve, and hope that he Could always help and succour them in their necessitie. Wherefore he did command the clouds, forthwith they brake in sunder. And rain'd down manna for them to eat, a food of mickle wonder. When earthly men with angels food were fed at their request, He bade the east-wind blow away, and brought in the south-west. He rain'd down flesh as thick as dust, and fowl as thick as sand: Which he did cast amid the place where all their tents did stand. Then did they eat exceedingly, and all men had their fills; Yet more and more they did desire to serve their lusts and wills. But as the meat was in their mouths, his wrath upon them fell, And slew the flower of all their youth, and choice of Israel. Yet fell they to their wonted sin, and still they did him grieve: For all the wonders that he wrought, they would him not believe. Their days therefore he shortened, and made their honour vain: Their years did waste and pass away with terrour and with pain. But ever when he plagued them, they sought him by and by, Remembring that he was their strength their help, and God most high. Though in their mouths they did but glose and flatter with the Lord: And with their tongues and in their hearts dissembled every word. The fourth part. For why? their hearts were nothing bent to him nor to his trade: Nor yet to keep or to perform the covenant that was made. Yet was he still so merciful, when they deserv'd tody, That he forgave them their misdeeds, and would not them destroy. Yea, many a time he turn'd his wrath, and did himself advise: And would not suffer all his whole displeasure to arise. Considering that they were but flesh, and even as a wind That passeth away, and cannot well return by his own kinde. How oftentimes in wilderness did they the Lord provoke! How did they move and stir the Lord to plague them with his stroke! Yet did they turn again to fin, and tempted God estloon, Prescribing to the holy Lord what things they would have done. Not thinking of his hand and power, nor of the day when he Delivered them out of the hands of the fierce enemie: Nor how he wrought his miracles (as they themselves beheld) In Egypt, and the wonders that he did in Zoan field. Nor how he turned by his power their waters into bloud: That no man might receive his drink at river nor at floud. Nor how he sent them swarms of flies, which did them sore annoy: And fill'd their countrey full of frogs, which did their land destroy. The fifth part. Nor how he did commit their fruits unto the caterpiller: And all the labour of their hands he gave to the grashopper. With hailstones he destroy'd their vines, so that they were all lost: And not so much as wilde fig-trees, but he consum'd with frost. And yet with hailstones once again the Lord their cattel smote, And all their flocks and herds likewise with thunder-bolts full hot. He cast upon them in his ire and in his fury strong, Displeasure, wrath, and evil spirits, to trouble them among. Then to his wrath he made a way, and spared not the least: But gave unto the pestilence the man and eke the beast. He strake also the first-born all that up in Egypt came: And all the chief of men and beasts within the tents of Ham. But as for all his own dear folk, he did preserve and keep: And carried them through wilderness, even like a flock of sheep. Without all fear both safe and sound he brought them out of thrall: Whereas their foes with rage of seas were overwhelmed all. And brought them out into the coasts of his own holy land, Even to the mount which he had got by his strong arm and hand. And there cast out the heathen folk, and did their land divide: And in their tents he set the tribes of Israel to abide. Yet sor all this, their God most high they stirr'd and tempted still, And would not keep his testament, nor yet obey his will. But as their fathers turned back, even so they went astray, Much like a bowe that would not bend, but slip and start away. The sixth part. And griev'd him with their hill-altars, with offrings and with fire: And with their idols vehemently provoked him to ire. Therewith his wrath began again to kindle in his brest: The naughtiness of Israel he did so much detest. Then he forsook the tabernacle of Silo, where he was Right conversant with earthly men, even at his dwelling-place. Then suffered he his might and power in bondage for to stand, And gave the honour of his ark into his enemies hand. And did commit them to the sword, wroth with his heritage: Their young men were devour'd with fire, maids had no marriage. And with the sword the priests also did perish every one: And not a widow lest alive their death for to bemone. And then the Lord began to wake like one that slept a time, And like a valiant man of war refreshed after wine. With emerods in the hinder parts he strake his enemies all: And put them then unto a shame that was perpetual. Then he the tent and tabernacle of Joseph did refuse: As for the tribe of Ephraim, he would in no wise chuse: But chose the tribe of Jehuda, whereas he thought to dwell: Even the noble mount Sion, which he did love so well. Whereas he did his temple build both sumptuously and sure, Like as the earth which he hath made for ever to endure. Then chose he David him to serve, his people for to keep; Whom he took up and brought away even from the folds of sheep. As he did follow th'ews with young, the Lord did him advance To feed his people Israel and his inheritance. Thus David with a faithful heart his flock and charge did seed, And prudently with all his power did govern them indeed. Deus, venerunt. Psal. lxxix. J. H. O God, the Gentiles do invade thine heritage to spoil: Jerusalem an heap is made, thy temple they defile. The bodies of thy saints most dear abroad to birds they cast: The flesh of them that do thee fear, the beasts devour and waste. Their bloud throughout Jerusalem as water spilt they have: So that there is not one of them to lay their dead in grave. Thus are we made a laughing-stock almost the world throughout: The enemies at us jest and mock which dwell our coasts about. Wilt thou, O Lord, thus in thine ire against us ever fume, And shew thy wrath as hot as fire, thy folk for to consume? Upon those people pour the same, which did thee never know: All realms which call not on thy Name, consume and overthrow. For they have got the upper hand, and Jacobs seed destroy'd: His habitation and his land they have left waste and void. Bear not in minde our former faults, with speed some pity show: And aid us, Lord, in all assaults, for we are weak and low, The second part. O God that giv'st all health and gracey on us declare the same: Weigh not our works, our sins deface, for honour of thy Name. Why shall the wicked still alway, to us as people dumb, In thy reproach rejoyce, and say, Where is their God become? Require, O Lord, as thou seest good, before our eyes in sight, Of all these folk thy servants bloud which they spilt in despight. Receive into thy sight in haste the clamours, grief, and wrong Of such as are in prison cast, sustaining irons strong. Thy force and strength to celebrate, Lord, set them out of band Which unto death are destinate, and in their enemies hand. The nations which have been so bold as to blaspheme thy Name. Into their laps with seven fold repay again the same. So we thy flock and pasture-sheep will praise thee evermore, And teach all ages for to keep for thee like praise in store. Qui regis Israel. Psal. lxxx. J. H. THou Herd that Israel dost keep, give ear and take good heed:
Which leadest Joseph like a sheep, and dost him watch and feed. Thou Lord, I say, whose seat is set on cherubims most bright, Shew forth thy self and do not let, send down thy beams of light. Before Ephraim and Benjamin, Manasses eke likewise, To shew thy power do thou begin; come help us, Lord, arise. Direct our hearts unto thy grace, convert us, Lord, to thee: Shew us the brightness of thy face, and then full safe are we. Lord God of hosts of Israel. how long wilt thou (I say) Against thy folk in anger swell, and wilt not hear them pray? Thou dost them feed with sorrows deep, their bread with tears they eat, And drink the tears that they do weep, in measure full and great. Thou hast us made a very strife to those that dwell about: And that our foes do love a life, they laugh and jest it out. O take us, Lord, unto thy grace, convert our hearts to thee: Shew forth to us thy joyful face, and we full sate shall be. From Egypt where it grew not well thou brought'st a vine full dear: The heathen folk thou didst expell, and thou didst plant it there. Thou didst prepare for it a place, and set her roots full fast: That it did grow and spring apace, and fill'd the land at last. The second part. The hills were covered round about With shade that from it came, And eke the cedars strong and stout, with branches of the same. Why then didst thou her walls destroy? her hedge pluckt up thou hast: That all the folk that pass thereby thy vine may spoil and waste. The boar out of the wood so wilde doth dig and root it out: The furious beasts out of the field devour it all about. O Lord of hosts, return again, from heaven look betime: behold, and with thy help sustain this poor vineyard of thine. Thy plant, I say, thine Israel, whom thy right hand hath set: The same which thou didst love so well, O Lord, do not forget. They lop and cut it down apace, they burn it eke with fire: d through the frowning of thy face we perish in thine ire. Let thy right hand be with them now whom thou hast kept so long: d with the Son of man whom thou to thee hast made so strong. And so when thou hast set us free, and saved us from shame: Then will we never fall from thee, but call upon thy Name. O Lord of hosts, through thy good grace convert us unto thee: behold us with a pleasant face, and then full safe are we. Deo exultate. Psal. lxxxi. J. H. BE light and glad, in God rejoyce, which is our strength and stay: be joyful, and lift up your voice to Jacobs God, I say. Prepare your instruments most meet, some joyful psalm to sing: strike up with harp and lute so sweet, on every pleasant string. Blow as it were in the new-moon, with trumpets of the best: As it is used to be done at any solemn feast. For this is unto Israel a statute and a trade: law that must be kept full well, which Jacobs God hath made. This clause with Joseph was decreed when he from Egypt came, That as a witness all his feed should still observe the same. When God. I say, had so prepar'd to bring him from that land: Whereas the speech which he had heard he did not understand. I from his shoulders took (saith he) the burden clean away: And from the furnace quit him free from burning brick of clay. When thou in grief didst cry and call, I holp thee by and by: And I did answer thee withal in thunder secretly. Yea, at the waters of discord I did thee tempt and prove: Whereas the goodness of the Lord with mutt'ring thou didst move. Hear, O my folk, O Israel, and I assure it thee: Regard and mark my words full well, if thou wilt cleave to me. The second part. Thou shalt no god in thee reserve of any land abroad: Nor in no wise to bow or serve a strange or forein god. I am the Lord thy God, and I from Egypt set thee free: Then ask of me abundantly, and I will give it thee. And yet my people would not hear my voice when that I spake: Nor Israel would not obey, but did me quite forsake. Then did I leave them to their will, in hardness of their heart: To walk in their own counsels still, themselves they might pervert. O that my people would have heard the words that I did say: And eke that Israel would regard to walk within my way! How soon would I confound their foes, and bring them down full low: And turn my hand upon all those that would them overthrow! And they that at the Lord do rage, as slaves should seek him till: But of his folk the time and age should flourish ever still. I would have fed them with the crop and finest of the wheat: And made the rock with honey drop, that they their fills should eat. Deus stetit. Psal. lxxxii. J. H. AMid the preass with men of might the Lord himself doth stand, To plead the cause of truth and right, with judges of the land. How long, said he, will you proceed false judgement to award, And have respect for love of meed the wicked to regard? Whereas of due you should defend the fatherless and weak, And when the poor man doth contend, in judgement justly speak. If ye be wise, defend the cause of poor men in their right: And rid the needy from the claws of tyrants force and might. But nothing will they know or learn, in vain to them I talk: They will not see or ought discern, but still in darkness walk. For lo, even now the time is come that all things fall to nought: And likewise laws both all and some for gain are sold and bought. I had decreed it in my sight as gods to take you all: And children to the most of might for love I did you call. But not withstanding ye shall die as men, and so decay: O tyrants, I shall you destroy, and pluck you quite away. Up Lord, and let thy strength be known, and judge the world with might: For why? all nations are thine own to take them as thy right. Deus quid. Psal. lxxxiii. J. H. DO not, O God, refrain thy tongue, in filence do not stay: Withhold not, Lord, thy self fo long, and make no more delay. For why? behold thy foes, and see how they do rage and cry: And those that bear an hate to thee hold up their heads on high, Against thy folk they use deceit, and crast'ly they enquire: For thine elect to lie in wait their counsel doth conspire. Come on, say they, let us expel and pluck these solk away: So that the name of Israel may utterly decay. They all conspire within their heart how they may thee withstand: Against the Lord to take a part they are in league and band. The tents of all the Edomites, the Ismaelites also: The Hagarenes and Moabites, with divers other mo. Gebal with Ammon, and likewise doth Amalek conspire: The Philistines against thee rise, with them that dwell at Tyre. And Assur eke is well appaid with them in league to be: And doth become a sence and aid to Lots posteritie. As thou didst to the Midianites, so serve them, Lord, each one: As to Siser, and to Jabin. beside the brook Kison. Whom thou in Endor didst destroy, and waste them through thy might: That they like dung on earth did lie, and that in open fight. The second part. Make them now and their lords appear like Zeb and Oreb than: As Zebah and Zalmana were, the kings of Midian; Which said, Let us throughout the land in all the coasts abroad, Possess and take into our hand the fair houses of God. Turn them, O God, with storms as fast as wheels that have no stay: Or like the chaff which men do cast with winds to flie away. Like as the fire with rage and fume the mighty forests spills; And as the flame doth quite consume the mountains and the hills: So let the tempest of thy wrath upon their necks be laid; And of thy stormy wind and showre, Lord, make them all afraid. Lord, bring them all, I thee desire, to such rebuke and shame, That it may cause them to enquire, and learn to seek thy Name. And let them evermore daily to shame and slander fall: And in rebuke and obloquie to perish eke withall. That they may know and feel full well that thou art called Lord: And that alone thou dost excell, and reign throughout the world. Quam dilecta. Psal. lxxxiv. J. H. HOw pleasant is thy dwelling-place, O Lord of hosts, to me! The tabernacles of thy grace how pleasant (Lord) they be! My soul doth long full sore to go into thy courts abroad: My heart doth lust, my flesh also, in thee the living God. The sparrows finde a room to rest, and save themselves from wrong, And eke the swallow hath a nest wherein to keep her young. These birds full nigh thine altar may have place to fit and fing: O Lord of hosts, thou art, I say. my God and eke my King. O they be blessed that may dwell within thy house always: For they all times thy facts do tell, and ever give thee praise. Yea, happy sure likewise are they, whose stay and strength thou art: Which to thy house do minde the way, and seek it in their heart. As they go through the vale of tears, they dig up fountains still; That as a spring it all appears, and thou their pits dost fill. From strength to strength they walk full fast, no faintness there shall be: And so the God of gods at last in Sion they do see. O Lord of hosts, to me give heed, and hear when I do pray: And let it through thine ears proceed, O Jacobs God, I say. O Lord our shield, of thy good grace regard, and so draw near: Regard, I say, behold the face of thine anointed dear. For why? within thy courts one day is better to abide, Then other-where to keep or stay a thousand days beside. Much rather would I keep a door within the house of God, Then in the tents of wickedness to settle mine abode. For God the Lord, light and defence. will grace and worship give: And no good thing will he withhold from them that purely live. O Lord of hosts, that man is blest and happy sure is he. That is perswaded in his brest to trust all times in thee. Benedixisti. Psal. lxxxv. J. H. THou hast been merciful indeed, O Lord, unto thy land: For thou restoredst Jacobs seed from thraldom out of band. The wicked ways that they were in, thou didst them clean remit: And thou didst hide thy peoples sin, full close thou coveredst it. Thine anger eke thou didst asswage, that all thy wrath was gone: And so didst turn thee from thy rage, with them to be at one. O God our health, do now convert thy people unto thee: Put all thy wrath from us apart, and angry cease to be. Why, shall thine anger never and, but still proceed on us? And shall thy wrath it self extend upon all ages thus? Wilt thou not rather turn therefore and quicken us, that we And all thy folk may evermore be glad and joy in thee? O Lord, on us do thou declare thy goodness to our wealth: Shew forth to us, and do not spare, thine aid and saving health. I will heark what God faith, for he speaks to his people peace, And to his saints, that never they return to foolishness. For why? his help is still at hand to such as do him fear: Whereby great glory in our land shall dwell and flourish there. For truth and mercy there shall meet, in one to take their place: And peace shall justice with kiss greet, and there they shall embrace. As truth from earth shall spring apace, and flourish pleasantly: So righteousness shall shew her face, and look from heaven high. Yea, God himself doth take in hand to give us each good thing: And through the coasts of all the land the earth her fruit shall bring. Before his face shall justice go much like a guide or stay: He shall direct his steps also, and keep them in the way. Inclina, Domine. Psal. lxxxvi. J. H. LOrd, bow thine ear to my request, and hear me by and by: With grievous pain and grief opprest, full poor and weak am I. Preserve my soul, because my ways and doings holy be: And save thy servant, O my Lord, that puts his trust in thee. Thy mercy, Lord, on me express, defend me eke withall: For through the day I do not cease on thee to cry and call. Comfort, O Lord, thy servants soul that now with pain is pin'd▪ For unto thee, Lord, I extol and lift my soul and minde. For thou art good and bountiful, thy gifts of grace are free: And eke thy mercy plentiful to all that call on thee,
O Lord, likewise when I do pray, regard and give an ear: Mark well the words that I do say, and all my prayers hear. In time when trouble doth me move, to thee I do complain: For why? I know and well do prove thou answerest me again. Among the gods, O Lord, is none with thee to be compar'd: And none can do as thou a lone, the like hath not been heard. The second part. The Gentiles and the people all which thou didst make and frame, Before thy face on knees shall fall and glorify my Name. For why? thou art so much of might, all power is thine own: Thou workest wonders still in sight, for thou art God a lone, O teach me, Lord, thy way, and I shall in thy truth proceed: O joyn my heart to thee so nigh that I thy Name may dread. To thee my God will I give praise with all my heart, O Lord: And glorify thy Name always for ever through the world. For why? thy mercy shew'd to me is great, and doth excell: Thou set'st my soul at liberty out from the lower hell. O Lord, the proud against me rise, and heaps of men of might: They seek my soul, and in no wise will have thee in their sight. Thou, Lord, art merciful and meek, full slack and slow to wrath: Thy goodness is full great, and eke thy truth no measure hath. O turn to me, and mercy grant, thy strength to me apply: O help and save thine own servant, thy hand-maids son am I. On me some signe of favour show, that all my soes may see And be asham'd, because, Lord, thou dost help and comfort me. Fundamenta. Psal. lxxxvii. J. H. THat city shall full well endure, her ground-work still doth stay Upon the holy hills full sure, it can no time decay. God-boves the gates of Sion best, his grace doth there abide: He loves them more then all the rest of Jacobs tent beside. Full glorious things reported be in Sion, and abroad: Great things, I say, are said of thee, thou city of our God. On Rahab I will cast an eye, and bear in minde the same: And Babylon shall eke apply and learn to know my Name. Lo, Palestine and Tyre also, with Ethiope likewise, A people old, full long ago were born, and there did rise. Of Sion they shall say abroad, That divers men of fame Have there sprung up, and the high God hath founded fast the same. In their records to them it shall through Gods device appear, Of Sion, that the chief of all had his beginning there. The trumpeters with such as sing, there in great plenty be: My fountains and my pleasant springs are compastall in thee. Domin Deus. Psal. lxxxviii. J. H. LOrd God of health, the hope and stay thou art alone to me: I call and cry throughout the day and all the night to thee. O let my prayer soon ascend unto thy sight on high: Incline thine ear, O Lord, attend and hearken to my cry. For why? with wo my heart is fill'd, and doth in trouble dwell: My life and breath almost doth yeeld, and draweth nigh to hell. I am esteem'd as one of them that in the pit do fall: And made as one among those men that have no strength at all. As one among the dead, and free from things that here remain: It were more ease for me to be with them the which are slain: As those that lie in grave, I say, whom thou hast clean forgot: The which thy hand hath cut away, and thou regard'st them not. Yea, like to one shut up full sure within the lower pit, In places dark and all obscure, and in the depth of it. Thine anger and thy wrath likewise full sore on me doth ly: And all thy storms against me rise, my soul to vex and try. Thou putt'st my friends sar off from me, and mak'st them hate me sore: I am shut up in prison fast, and can come forth no more. My sight doth fail through grief and wo, I call to thee, O God: Throughout the day my hands also to thee I stretch abroad. The second part. Dost thou unto the dead declare thy wondrous works of fame? Shall dead to life again repair, and praise thee for the same? Or shall thy loving kindness, Lord, be preached in the grave? Or shall with them that are destroy'd thy truth her honour have? Shall they that lie in dark full low of all thy wonders wot? Or there shall they thy justice know where all things are forgot? But I, O Lord, to thee always do cry and call apace: My prayer eke ere it be day shall come before thy face. Why dost thou, Lord, abhor my soul, in grief that seeketh thee? And now, O Lord, why dost thou hide thy face away from me? I am afflict, as dying still from youth this many a year: The terrours which do vex me ill with troubled minde I bear. The furies of thy wrathful rage full sore upon me fall: Thy terrours eke do not asswage, but me oppress withal. All day they compass me about, as water at the tide: And all at once with streams full stout beset me on each side. Thou settest far from me friends and lovers every one: Yea, and mine old acquaintance all out of my sight are gone. Misericordias. Psal. lxxxix. J. H. TO sing the mercies of the Lord my tongue shall never spare: And with my mouth from age to age thy truth I will declare. For I have said, That mercy shall for evermore remain: In that thou dost the heavens stay, thy truth appeareth plain. To mine elect, saith God, I made a covenant and behest: My servant David to perswade, I swore and did protest: Thy feed for ever I will stay, and stablish it full fast: And still uphold thy throne alway from age to age to last. The heavens shew with joy and mirth thy wondrous worke, O Lord: Thy saints within thy Church on earth thy saith and truth record. Who with the Lord is equal then in all the clouds abroad? Among the sons of all the gods, what one is like our God? God in assembly of the saints is greatly to be dread: And over all that dwell about in terrour to be had. Lord God of hosts, in all the world what one is like to thee? On every side, most mighty Lord, thy truth is seen to be. The raging sea by thine advice thou ruest at thy will: And when the waves thereof arise, thou mak'st them calm and still. And Egypt, Lord, thou hast subdu'd, and thou hast it destroy'd: Yea, thou thy toes with mghty arm hast scatt'red all abroad. The second part. The heavens are thine and still have been likewise the earth and land: The world and all that is therein thou foundedst wth tay hand. Both north and south, with east and west thy self didst make and frame: Both Tabor mount, and eke Hermon, rejoyce and praise thy Name. Thine arm is strong and full of power, all might therein doth lie: The strength of thy right hand each hour thou listest up on high. In righteousness and equity thou hast thy seat and place: Mercy and truth are still with thee, and go before thy face. That folk is blest that knows aright thy present power, O God: For in the favour of thy sight they walk full safe abroad. For in thy Name throughout the day they joy and much rejoyce: And through thy righteousness have they a pleasant fame and noise. For why? their glory, strength, and aid in thee alone doth fie: Thy goodness eke that hath us staid, shall lift our horn on high. Our strength that doth defend us well the Lord to us doth bring: The holy one of Israel, he is our guide and king. Sometimes thy will unto thy saints in visions thou didst show: And thus then didst thou say to them, thy minde to make them know; A man of might I have erect, your king and guide to be: And set him up whom I elect among the folk to me. The third part. My servant David I appoint, whom I have searched out: And with my holy oyl anoint him king of all the rout. For why? my hand is ready still with him for to remain: And with mine arm also I will him strengthen and sustain. The enemie shall not him oppress, they shall him not devour: Ne yet the sons of wickedness on him shall have no power: His foes likewise I will destroy before his face in fight: And those that hate him I will plague, and strike them with my might. My truth and mercy eke withall shall still upon him lie: And in my Name his horn eke shall be listed up on high. His kingdom I will set to be upon the sea and land: And eke the running flouds shall he embrace with his right hand. He shall depend with all his heart on me, and thus shall say, My Father and my God thou art, my rock of health and stay. As my first-born I will him take of all on earth that springs: His might and honour I will make above all earthly kings. My mercy shall be with him still, as I my self have told: My faithful covenant to fulfil my mercy I will hold. And eke his seed I will sustain for ever strong and sure: So that his seat shall still remain while heaven doth endure. The fourth part. If that his sons for sake my law, and so begin to swerve: And of my judgements have none aw, nor will not them observe: Or if they do not use aright my statutes to them made, And set all my commandments light, and will not keep my trade: Then with the rod will I begin their doings to amend: And so with scourging for their sin, if that they do offend. My mercy yet and my goodness I will not take him fro: Nor handle him with craftiness, and so my truth forgo. But sure my covenant I will hold. with all that I have spoke: No word the which my lips have told shall alter or be broke. Once sware I by my holiness, and that perform will I: With David I shall keep promise, to him I will not lie. His seed for evermore shall reign, and eke his throne of might: As doth the sun, it shall remain for ever in my fight. And as the moon within thesky for ever standeth fast A faithful witness from on high, so shall his kingdom last. But now, O Lord, thou dost reject, and now thou changest cheer: Yea, thou art wroth with thine elect, thine own anointe dear. The covenant with thy servant made, Lord, thou hast quite undone: And down upon the ground also hast cast his royal crown. The fifth part. Thou pluck'st his hedges up with might, his walls thou dost confound: Thou beatest eke his bulwarks down, and break'st them to the ground. That he is sore destroy'd and torn of comers by throughout: And so is made a mock and scorn to all that dwell about. Thou their right hand hast lifted up that him so sore annoy: And all his foes that him devour, lo, thou hast made to joy. His swords edge thou dost take away, that should his foes withstand: To him in war no victory thou giv'st, nor upper hand. His glory thou dost also waste, his throne, his joy, his mirth By thee is overthrown, and cast full low upon the earth. Thou hast cut off and made full short his youth and lusty days: And rais'd of him an ill report with shame and great dispraise. How long away from me, O Lord, for ever wilt thou turn? And shall thine anger still alway as fire consume and burn? O call to minde, remember then, my time consumeth fast: Why hast thou made the sons of men as things in vain to waste? What man is he that liveth here, and death shall never see? Or from the hand of hell his soul shall he deliver free? Where is, O Lord, thine own goodness so oft declar'd beforn, Which by thy truth and uprightness to David thou hast sworn? The great rebukes to minde I call that on thy servants lie: The railings of the people all born in my breast have I, Wherewith, O Lord, thine enemies blasphemed have thy Name: The steps of thine anointed one they cease not to defame. All praise to thee, O Lord of hosts, both now and eke for ay: Through sky and earth, and all the coasts, Amen, amen, I say. Domine, refugium. Psal. xc. J. H. THou, Lord, hast been our sure defence, our place of ease and rest In all times past, yea so long since as cannot be exprest. Ere there was made mountain or hl the earth and world abroad: From age to age, and always still for ever thou art God. Thou grindest man through grief and pain to dust or clay, and then,
And then thou say'st again, Return again ye sons of men. The lasting of a thousand years, what is it in thy sight? As yesterday it doth appear, or as a watch by night. So soon as thou dost scatter them, then is their life and trade All as asleep, and like the grass whose beauty soon doth fade: Which in ye morning shines full bright, but fadeth by and by: And is cut down ere it be night, all with'red, dead, and dry. For through thine anger we consume, our might is much decay'd: And of thy fervent wrath and sume we are full sore afraid. The wicked works that we have wrought thou sett'st before thine eye: Our privy faults, yea, eke our thoughts thy countenance doth spie. For through thy wrath our days do waste, thereof doth nought remain: Our year consume as words or blasts, and are not call'd again. Our time is threescore years and ten that we do live on mold: If one see fourscore, surely then we count him wondrous old. The second part. Yet of this time the strength and chief the which we count upon, Is nothing else but painful grief, and we as blasts are gone. Who once doth know what strength is there, what might thine anger hath? Or in his heart who doth thee fear according to thy wrath? Instruct us, Lord, to know and try how long our days remain: That then we may our hearts apply true wisdom to attain. Return, O Lord, how long wilt thou forth on in wrath proceed? Shew favour to thy servants now, and help them at their need. Refresh us with thy mercy soon, and then our joy shall be All times so long as life doth last, in heart rejoyce will we. As thou hast plagued us before, now also make us glad: And for the years wherein full sore affliction we have had. O let thy work and power appear, and on thy servants light: And shew unto thy children dear thy glory and thy might. Lord, let thy grace and glory stand on us thy servants thus: Confirm the works we take in hand, Lord, prosper them to us. Qui habitat. Psal. xci. J. H. HE that within the secret place of God most high doth dwell: In shadow of the Mightiest grace at rest shall keep him well. Thou art my hope and my strong hold, I to the Lord will say, My God is he, in him will I my whole affiance stay. He shall defend thee from the snare the which the hunter laid: And from the deadly plague and care whereof thou art afraid: And with his wings shall cover thee and keep thee safely there: His faith and truth thy fence shall be, as sure as shield and spear. So that thou shalt not need, I say, to fear or be affright Of all the shafts that flie by day, nor terrours of the night: Nor of the plague that privily doth walk in dark so fast: Nor yet of that which doth destroy and at noon-day doth waste. Yea, at thy side as thou dost stand a thousand dead shall be: Ten thousand eke at thy right hand, and yet shalt thou be free. But thou shalt see it for thy part, thine eyes shall well regard, That even like to their desert the wicked have reward. For why? O Lord, I onely lust to stay my hope on thee: And in the Righ'st I put my trust, my sure defence is he. Thou shalt not need none ill to fear, with thee it shall not mell: Nor yet the plague shall once come near the house where thou dost dwell. For why? unto his angels all with charge commanded he, That still in all thy ways they shall preserve and prosper thee: And in their hands shall bear thee up, still waiting thee upon: So that thy foot shall never chance to spurn at any stone. Upon the lions thou shalt go, the adder fell and long: And tread upon the lions young, with dragons stout and strong. For he that trusteth unto me, I will dispatch him quite: And him defend, because that he doth know my Name aright. When he for help on me doth cry, an answer I will give: And from his grief take him will I in glory for to live. With length of years and days of wealth I will fulfill his time: The goodness of my saving health I will declare to him. Bonumest. Psal. xcii. J. H. IT is a thing both good and meet to praise the highest Lord: And to thy Name, O thou most High, to sing with one accord: To shew the kindness of the Lord, betime ere day be light: And eke declare his truth abroad when it doth draw to night. Upon ten-stringed instruments, on lute and harp so sweet: With all the mirth you can invent of instruments most meet. For thou hast made me to rejoyce in things so wrought by thee: And I have joy in heart and voice thy handy-works to see. O Lord, how glorious and how great are all thy works so stout! So deeply are thy counsels set that none can try them out. The man unwise hath not the wit, this gear to pass to bring: And all such sools are nothing fit to understand this thing. When so the wicked at their will as grass do spring full fast, They when they flourish in their ill for ever shall be waste. But thou art mighty, Lord most high, yea thou dost reign therefore In every time eternally, both now and evermore. For why? O Lord, behold and see, behold thy foes, I say, How all that work iniquity shall perish and decay. But thou, like as an unicorn, shalt list mine horn on high: With fresh and new prepared oyl thine ointed king am I: And of my foes before mine eyes shall see the fall and shame: Of all that up against me rise, mine ears shall hear the same. The just shall flourish up on high, as date-trees bud and blow: And as the cedars multiply in Libanus that grow. For they are planted in the place and dwelling of our God: Within his courts they spring apace, and flourish all abroad. And in their age much fruit shall bring both fat and well beseen: And pleasantly both bud and spring with boughs and branches green. To shew that God is good and just, and upright in his will: He is my rock, my hope, and trust, in him there is none ill. Dominus regnavit. Psal. xciii. J. H. THe Lord as King a lost doth reign, with glory goodly dight: And he to shew his strength and main, hath girt himself with might. The Lord likewise the earth hath made and shaped it so sure, No might can make it move or fade; at stay it doth endure. Ere that the world was made or wrought, thy seat was set before: Beyond all time that can be thought, thou hast been evermore. The flouds, O Lord, the flouds do rise, they roar and make a noise: The flouds (I say) did enterprise, and listed up their voice. Yea, though the storms arise in fight, though seas do rage and swell: The Lord is strong and more of might, for he on high doth dwell. And look what promise he doth make his houshold to defend: For just and true they shall it take, all times without an end. Deus ultionum. Psal. xciv. J. H. O Lord, thou dost revenge all wrong, that office 'longs to thee: Sith vengeance doth to thee belong, declare that all may see. Set forth thy self, for thou of right the earth dost judge and guide: Reward the proud and men of might according to their pride. How long shall wicked men bear sway with lifting up their voice? How long shall wicked men, I say, thus triumph and rejoyce? How long shall they with brags burst out and proudly prate their fill? Shall they rejoyce that be so stout, whose works are ever ill? Thy flock, O Lord, thine heritage they spoil and vex full sore: Against thy people they do rage still daily more and more. The widows which are comfortless, and strangers they destroy: They slay the children fatherless, and none doth put them by. And when they take these things in hand, this talk they have of thee, Can Jacobs God this understand? tush no, he cannot see. O folk unwise and people rude, some knowledge now discern: Ye fools among the multitude, at length begin to learn. The Lord which made the ear of man, he needs of right must hear: He made the eye, all things must then before his sight appear. The Lord doth all the world correct, and make them understand: Shall he not then your deeds detect? how can ye scape his hand? The second part. The Lord doth know ye thoughts of man, his heart he seeth full plain: The Lord (I say) mans thoughts doth scan, and findeth them but vain. But, Lord, that man is happy sure whom thou dost keep in aw. And through correction dost procure to teach him in thy law. Whereby he shall in quiet rest in time of trouble sit: When wicked men shall be supprest, and fall into the pit. For sure the Lord will not refuse his people for to take: His heritage whom he did chuse he will no time forsake. Until that judgement be decreed to justice to convert: That all may follow her with speed that are of upright heart. But who upon my part shall stand against the cursed train? Or who shall rid me from their hand that wicked works maintain? Except the Lord had been mine aid, mine enemies to repell: My soul and life had now been laid almost as low as hell. When I did say, My foot did slide, I now am like to fall: Thy goodness, Lord, did so provide to stay me up withall. When with my self I mused much, and could no comfort finde: Then, Lord, thy goodness did me touch, and that did ease my minde. Wilt thou inhaunt thy self, and draw with wicked men to sit: Which with pretence in stead of law much mischief do commit? For they consult against the life of righteous men and good: And in their counsels they are rise to shed the guiltless bloud. But yet the Lord he is to me a strong defence, or lock: He is my God, to him I flee, he is my strength and rock. And he shall cause their mischiefs all themselves for to annoy: And in their malice they shall fall, our God shall them destroy. Venite exultemus. Psal. xcv. J. H. O Come let us lift up our voice and sing unto the Lord: In him our rock of health rejoyce let us with one accord. Yea, let us come before his face to give him thanks and praise: In singing psalms unto his grace let us be glad always. For why? the Lord he is no doubt a great and mighty God, A King above all gods throughout, in all the world abroad. The secrets of the earth so deep, and corners of the land, The tops of hills that are so steep, he hath them in his hand. The sea and waters all are his, for he the same hath wrought: The earth and all that therein is his hand hath made of nought. Come let us bow and praise the Lord. before him let us fall: And kneel to him with one accord the which hath made us all. For why? he is the Lord our God, for us he doth provide: We are his flock, he doth us feed; his sheep, and he our Guide. To day if ye his voice will hear, then harden not your heart: As ye with grudging many a year provok'd me in desert. Whereas your fathers tempted me, my power for to prove: My wondrous works when they did see, yet still they would me move. Twice twenty years they did me grieve, and I to them did say, They err in heart, and not believe, they have not known my way. Wherefore I sware when that my wrath was kindled in my brest, That they should never tread the path to enter in my rest. Contate Domino. Psal. xcvi. J. H. SIng ye with praise unto the Lord new songs with joy and mirth: Sing unto him with one accord, all people on the earth. Yea, sing unto the Lord, I say, praise ye his holy Name: Declare and shew from day to day salvation by the same. Among the heathen eke declare his honour round about: To shew his wonders do not spare in all the world throughout. For why? the Lord is much of might. and worthy praise alway: And he is to be dread of right above all gods, I say. For all the gods of heathen folk are idols that will fade: But yet our God he is the Lord that hath the heavens made. All praise and honour eke do dwell for ay before his face: Both power and might likewise excell within his holy place. Ascribe unto the Lord alway, ye people of the world, All might and worship eke, I say, ascribe unto the Lord. Ascribe unto the Lord also the glory of his Name: And eke into his courts do go with gifts unto the same, The second part. Fall down and worship ye the Lord. within his temple bright:
Let all the people of the world be fearful at his sight. Tell all the world. Be not agast, the Lord doth reign above: Yea, he hath set the earth so fast, that it can never move: And that it is the Lord alone that rules with princely might, To judge the nations everyone with equity and right. The heavens shall great joy begin, the earth eke shall rejoyce: The sea with all that is therein shall shout and make a noise. The field shall joy, and every thing that springeth on the earth: The wood and every tree shall sing with gladness and with mirth, Before the presence of the Lord, and coming of his might: When he shall justly judge the world, and rule his folk with right. Dominus regnavit. Psal. xcvii. J. H. THe Lord doth reign, whereat the earth may joy with pleasant voice: And eke the isles with joyful mirth may triumph and rejoyce. Both clouds and darkness eke do swell, and round about him beat: Yea, right and justice ever dwell and bide about his seat. Yea, fire and heat at once do run, and go before his face: Which shall his foes and enemies burn abroad in every place. His lightnings eke full bright did blaze, and to the world appear: Whereat the earth did look and gaze with dread and deadly fear. The hills like wax did melt in sight and presence of the Lord: They sled before that Rulers might, which guideth all the world. The heavens eke declare and show his justice forth abroad, That all the world may see and know the glory of our God. Confusion sure shall come to such as worship idols vain: And eke to those that glory much dumb pictures to maintain. For all the idols of the world, which they as gods do call, hall feel the power of the Lord, and down to him shall fall. With joy shall Sion hear this thing, and Juda shall rejoyce: or at thy judgements they shall sing, and make a pleasant noise. That thou, O Lord, art set on high in all the earth abroad: nd art exalted wondrously above each other god. All ye that love the Lord do this, hate all things that are ill: or he doth keep the souls of his from such as would them spill. And light doth spring up to the just, with pleasure for his part: reat joy with gladness, mirth and lust, to them of upright heart. Ye righteous in the Lord rejoyce, his holiness proclaim: thankful eke with heart and voice, and mindful of the same. Cantate Domino. Psal. xcviii. J. H. Sing ye now unto the Lord a new and pleasant long: he hath wrought throughout the world his wonders great and strong. With his right hand full worthily he doth his foes devour, d get himself the victory with his own arm and power. The Lord doth make the people know his saving health and might: e Lord doth eke his justice show in all the heathens sight. His grace and truth to Israel in minde he doth record: at all the earth hath seen right well the goodness of the Lord. e glad in him with joyful voice, all people of the earth: ethanks to God, sing and rejoyce to him with joy and mirth. Upon the harp unto him sing. give thanks to him with psalms: Rejoyce before the Lord our King with trumpets and with shalms. Yea, let the sea with all therein for joy both roar and swell: The earth likewise let it begin, with all that therein dwell: And let the flouds rejoyce their fills, and clap their hands apace: And eke the mountains and the hills, before the Lord his face. For he shall come to judge and try the world and every wight: And rule the people mightily with justice and with right. Dominus regnavit. Psal. xcix. J. H. THe Lord doth reign, although at it the people rage full sore: Yea, he on cherubims doth sit, though all the world do roar. The Lord that doth in Sion dwell is high and wondrous great: Above all folk he doth excell, and he aloft is set. Let all men praise thy mighty Name, for it is fearful sure: And let them magnifie the same, that holy is and pure. The princely power of our King doth love judgement and right: Thou rightly rulest everything in Jacob through thy might. To praise the Lord our God devise, all honour to him do: Before his footstool worship him, for he is holy too. Moses, Aaron, and Samuel as priests on him did call: When they did pray he heard them well, and gave them answer all. Within the cloud to them he spake, then did they labour still To keep such saws as he did make, and pointed them untill. O Lord our God, thou didst them hear, and answeredst them again: Thy mercy did on them appear, their deeds didst not maintain. O laud and praise our God and Lord within his holy hill: For why? our God throughout the world is holy ever still. Jubilate Deo. Psal. c. J. H. ALl people that on earth do dwell, sing to the Lord with chearful voice: Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell: come ye before him and rejoyce. The Lord ye know is God indeed, without our aid he did us make: We are his flock, he doth us feed; and for his sheep he doth us take. O enter then his gates with praise, approach with joy his courts unto: Praise, laud, and bless his Name always; for it is seemly so to do. For why? the Lord our God is good, his mercy is for ever sure: His truth at all times firmly stood, and shall from age to age endure. Another of the same, by J. H. IN God the Lord be glad and light, praise him throughout the earth: Serve him, and come before his sight with singing and with mirth. Know that the Lord our God he is, he did us make and keep, Not we our selves: for we are his own flock and pasture-sheep, O go into his gates always, give thanks within the same: Within his courts set forth his praise, and laud his holy Name. For why? the goodness of the Lord for evermore doth reign: From age to age throughout the world his truth doth still remain. Misericordiam. Psal. ci. N. I Mercy will and judgement sing, O Lord God, unto thee: And wisely do in perfect way, until thou come to me: And in the midst of my house walk in pureness of my sprite: And I no kinde of wicked thing will set before my sight. I hate their works that fall away, it shall not cleave to me: From me shall part the froward heart, none evil will I see. Him will I stroy that slandereth his neighbour privily: The lofty heart I cannot hear, nor him that looketh high. Mine eyes shall be on them, within the land that faithful be: In perfect way who walketh, shall be servant unto me. I will no guileful person have within my house to dwell: And in my presence he shall not remain that lies doth tell. Betimes I will destroy even all the wicked of the land: That I may from Gods city cut the wicked workers hand. Domine, exaudi. Psal. cii. N. O Hear my prayer, Lord, and let my cry come unto thee: In time of trouble do not hide thy face away from me. Incline thine ear to me, make haste to hear me when I call: For as the smoke doth fade, so do my days consume and fall. And as an hearth my bones are burnt, my heart is smitten dead, And withers like the grass, that I forget to eat my bread. By reason of my groaning voice my bones cleave to my skin: As pelicane in wilderness, such case now am I in. And as an owl in desert is, so, I am such an one: I watch, and as a sparrow on the house-top am alone. Lo, daily in reproachful wise mine enemies do me scorn: And they that do against me rage, against me they have sworn. Surely with ashes as with bread, my hunger I have fill'd: And mingled have my drink with tears that from mine eyes have still'd. Because of thy displeasure, Lord, thy wrath and thy disdain: For thou hast listed me aloft, and cast me down again. The days wherein I pass my life, are like the fleeting shade: And I am with'red like the grass that soon away doth fade. But thou, O Lord, for ever dost remain in steady place: And thy remembrance ever doth abide from race to race. The second part. Thou wilt arise, and mercy thou to Sion wilt extend: The time of mercy, now the time foreset is come to end. For even in the stones thereof thy servants do delight: And on the dust thereof they have compassion in their sprite. Then shall the heathen people fear the Lords most holy Name: And all the kings on earth shall dread thy glory and thy fame. Then when the Lord the mighty God again shall Sion rear: And then when he most nobly in his glory shall appear. To prayer of the desolate when he himself shall bend: When he shall not disdain unto their prayers to attend. This shall be written for the age that after shall succeed: The people yet uncreated the Lords renown shall spread. For he from his high sanctuary hath looked down below: And out of heaven hath the Lord beheld the earth also. That of the mourning captive he might hear the woful crie: And that he might deliver those that damned are to die. That they in Sion may declare the Lords most holy Name: And in Jerusalem set forth the praises of the same: Then when the people of the land and kingdoms with accord Shall be assembled for to do their service to the Lord. The third part. My former force of strength he hath abated in the way: And shorter he did out my days, thus I therefore did say, My God, in midst of all my days; now take me not away: Thy years endure eternally, from age to age for ay. Thou the foundations of the earth before all times hast laid: And Lord, the heavens are the work which thine own hands have made, Yea, they shall perish and decay, but thou shalt tarry still: And they shall all in time wax old even as a garment will. Thou as a garment shalt them change, and changed shall they be: But thou dost still abide the same, thy years do never flee. The children of thy servants shall continually endure: And in thy sight their happy seed for ever shall stand sure. Benedic anima. Psal. ciii. T. S. MY soul, give laud unto the Lord, my spirit shall do the same: And all the secrets of my heart, praise ye his holy Name. Give thanks to God for all his gifts, shew not thy self unkinde: And suffer not his benefits to slip out of thy minde. That gave thee pardon for thy faults, and thee restor'd again, For all thy weak and frail disease, and heal'd thee of thy pain. That did redeem thy life from death, from which thou couldst not flee: His mercy and compassion both he did extend to thee. That fill'd with goodness thy desire, and did prolong thy youth: Like as the eagle casts her bill, whereby her age renew'th. The Lord with justice doth repay all such as be opprest: So that their sufferings and their wrongs are turned to the best. His ways and his commandements to Moses he did show: His counsels and his valiant acts the Israelites did know. The Lord is kinde and merciful when sinners do him grieve: The slowest to conceive a wrath, and readiest to forgive. He chides not us continually, though we be full of strife: Nor keeps our faults in memory, For all our sinful life: Nor yet according to our sins the Lord doth us regard: Nor after our iniquities he doth us not reward. But as the space is wondrous great 'twixt earth and heaven above: So is his goodness much more large to them that do him love. God doth remove our sins from us, and our offences all, As far as is the sun-rising full distant from his fall. The second part. And look what pity parents dear unto their children bear: Like pity beareth God to such as worship him in fear. The Lord that made us, knows ourshape, our mould and fashion just: How weak and frail our nature is, and how we be but dust. And how the time of mortal men is like the with 'ring hay: Or like the flower right fair in field, that fades full soon away. Whose gloss and beauty stormy winds do utterly disgrace: And make that after their assaults such blossoms have no place. But yet the goodness of the Lord with his shall ever stand: Their childrens children do receive his righteousness at hand.
I mean, which keep his covenant with all their whole desire: And not forget to do the thing that he doth them require. The heavens high are made the seat And footstool of the Lord: And by his power imperial he governs all the world. Ye angels which are great in power, praise ye and bless the Lord: Which to obey and do his will immediately accord. Ye noble hosts and ministers, cease not to laud him still: Which ready are to execute his pleasure and his will. Yea, all his works in every place, praise ye his holy Name: My heart, my minde, and eke my soul, praise ye also the same. Benedic, anima mea. Psal. civ. W. K. MY soul, praise the Lord, speak good of his Name: O Lord our great God, how dost thou appear? So passing in glory, that great is thy fame. Honour and majesty in thee shine most clear. With light, as a robe, thou hast thee beclad, Whereby all the earth thy greatness may see: The heavens in such sort thou also hast spread, That it to a curtain compared may be. His chamber-beams lie in the clouds full sure, Which as his chariots, are made him to bear: nd there with much swiftness his course doth endure, on the wings riding of winds in the air. He maketh his spirits as heralds to go: d lightnings to serve we see also prest: is will to accomplish they run to and fro, To save or consume things, as seemeth him best. He groundeth the earth so firmly and fast, That it once to move none shall have such power. The deep a fair covering for it made thou hast: Which by his own nature the hills would devour. But at thy rebuke the waters do flee: so give due place thy word to obey. thy voice of thunder so fearful they be, That in their great raging they haste soon away. The mountains full high they then up ascend: thou do but speak, thy word they fulfill. So likewise the valleys most quickly descend, here thou them appointest remain they do still. Their bounds thou hast set how far they shall run; So that in their rage not that pass they can: God hath appointed they shall not return The earth to destroy more, which made was for man. The second part. He sendeth the springs to strong streams or lakes, Which run do full swift among the huge hills: Where both the wilde asses their thirst oft-times slakes, Ad beasts of the mountains thereof drink their fills. By these pleasant springs of fountains full fair, The fowls of the air abide shall and dwell: Who moved by nature to hop here and there, Among the green branches their songs shall excell. The mountains to moist the clouds he doth use: The earth with his works is wholly replete. So as the brute cattel he doth not refuse: But grass doth provide them, and herb for mans meat. Yea, bread, wine, and oyl, he made for mans sake, His face to refresh, and heart to make strong. The cedars of Liban this great Lord did make: Which trees he doth nourish that grow up so long: In these may birds build and make there their nests: In fir-trees the storks remain and abide. The high hills are succours for wilde goats to rest: And eke the rock stony for conies to hide. The moon then is set her seasons to run: The days from the nights thereby to discern. And by the descending also of the sun, The cold from heat alway thereby we do learn. When darkness doth come by Gods will and power, Then creep forth do all the beasts of the wood. The lions range roaring their prey to devour: But yet it is thou, Lord, which givest them food. As soon as the sun is up, they retire: To couch in their dens then are they full fain: That man to his work may, as right doth require, Till night come and call him to take rest again. The third part. How sundry, O Lord, are all thy works found! With wisdom full great they are indeed wrought: So that the whole world of thy praise doth sound: And as for thy riches, they pass all mens thought. So is the great sea, which large is and broad, Where things that creep swarm, and beasts of each sort. There both mighty ships sail, and some lie at rode: The whale huge and monstrous there also doth sport. All things on thee wait, thou dost them relieve: And thou in due time full well dost them feed. Now when it doth please thee the same for to give, They gather full gladly those things which they need. Thou openest thine hand, and they finde such grace, That they with good things are filled we see. But sore are they troubled if thou turn thy face: For if thou their breath take, vile dust then they be. Again, when thy Spirit from thee doth proceed All things to appoint, and what shall ensue: Then are they created as thou hast decreed: And dost by thy goodness the dry earth renew. The praise of the Lord for ever shall last, Who may in his works by right well rejoyce. His look can the earth make to tremble full fast, And likewise the mountains to smoke at his voice. To this Lord and God sing will I always: So long as I live, my God praise will I. Then am I most certain my words shall him please: I will rejoyce in him, to him will I cry. The sinners, O Lord, consume in thine ire: And eke the perverse, them root out with shame: But as for my soul now, let it still desire, And say with the faithful, Praise ye the Lords Name, Confitemini Dom. Psal. cv. N. GIve praises unto God the Lord, and call upon his Name: Among the people eke declare his works to spread his fame. Sing ye unto the Lord, I say, and sing unto him praise: And talk of all his wondrous works that he hath wrought always. In honour of his holy Name rejoyce with one accord: And let the heart also rejoyce of them that seek the Lord. Seek ye the Lord, and seek the strength of his eternal might: And seek his face continually, and presence of his sight. The wondrous works which he hath done keep still in mindful heart: Ne let the judgements of his mouth out of your minde depart: Ye that of faithful Abraham his servant are the feed: Ye his elect, the children that of Jacob do proceed. For he, he onely is, I say, the mighty Lord our God: And his most rightful judgements are through all the earth abroad. His promise and his covenant which he hath made to his, He hath remembred evermore to thousands of degrees. The second part. The covenant which he hath made with Abraham long ago, And faithful oath which he hath sworn to Isaac also: And did confirm the same for law, that Jacob should obey; And for eternal covenant to Israel for ay. When thus he said, Lo, I to you all Canaan land will give, The lot of your inheritance, wherein your seed shall live. Although the number at that time did very small appear: Yea. very small, and in the land they then but strangers were. While yet they walkt from land to land without a sure abode: And while from sundry kingdoms they did wander all abroad. And wrong at no oppressours hands he suffered them to take: But even the great and mighty kings, reproved for their sake. And thus he said, Touch ye not those that mine anointed be: Ne do the prophets. my harm that do pertain to me. He call'd a dearth upon the land, of bread he stroy'd the store: But he against the time of need had sent a man before: The third part. Even Joseph which had once been sold to live a slave in wo: Whose feet they hurt in stocks, whose soul the irons pierc'd also. Until the time came when his cause was known apparently, The mighty word of God the Lord his faultless truth did try. The king sent and delivered him from prison where he was: The ruler of the people then did freely let him pass. And over all his house he made him lord to bear the sway: And of his substance made him have the rule and all the stay. That he might to his will instruct the princes of the land: And wisdoms lore his ancient men might cause to understand. Then into the Egyptian land came Israel also: And Jacob in the land of Ham did live a stranger tho. His people he exceedingly in number made to flow: And over all their enemies in strength he made them grow. Whose heart he turn'd, that they with hate his people did entreat: And did his servants wrongfully abuse with false deceit. The fourth part. His faithful servant Moses then, and Aaron whom he chose, He did command to go to them, his message to disclose. The wondrous message of his signs among them he did show: And wonders in the land of Ham then did they work also. Darkness he sent and made it dark in stead of brighter day: And unto his commission they did not disobey. He turn'd their waters into bloud. he did their fishes slay: Their land brought frogs even in the place where their king Pharaoh lay. He spake, and at his voice there came great swarms of noysom flies: And all the quarters of the land were fill'd with crawling lice. He gave them cold and stony hail in stead of milder rain: And fiery flames within their land he sent unto their pain. He smote their vines, and all their trees whereon their figs did grow: And all the trees within their coasts down did he overthrow. He spake, then caterpillers did and grashoppers abound: Which are the grass in all their land, and fruit of all their ground. The fifth part. The first-begotten in their land eke deadly did he smite: Yea, the beginning and first-fruit of all their strength and might. With gold and silver he them brought from Egypt land to pass: And in the number of their tribes no feeble one there was. Egypt was glad and joyful then when they did thence depart: For terrour and the fear of them was faln upon their heart. To shroud them from the parching heat, a cloud he did display: And fire he sent to give them light when night had hid the day. They asked, and he caused quails to rain at their request: And fully with the bread of heaven their hunger he represt. He opened the stony rock, and waters gushed out: And eke the dry and parched ground like rivers ran about. For of his holy covenant ay mindful was he tho: Which to his servant Abraham he plighted long ago. He brought his people forth with mirth, and his elect with joy. Out of the cruel land where they had liv'd in great annoy. And of the heathen men he gave to them the fruitful lands: The labours of the people eke they took into their hands. That they his holy statutes might observe for evermore, And faithfully obey his laws: praise ye the Lord therefore. Confitemini Domino. Psal. cvi. N. PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good, his mercy dures for ay:
Who can express his noble acts, or all his praise display? They blessed are that judgement keep. and justly do alway. With favour of thy people, Lord, remember me, I pray: And with thy saving health (O Lord) vouchsafe to visit me: That I the great felicity of thine elect may see: And with thy peoples joy I may a joyful minde possess; And may with thine in heritance a glorying heart express. Both we and eke our fathers all have finned every one: We have committed wickedness, and lewdly we have done. The wonders great which thou (O Lord) hast done in Egypt land, Our fathers though they saw them all, yet did not understand: Nor they thy mercies multitude did keep in thank ful minde: But at the sea, yea the Red sea, rebelled most unkinde. Nevertheless he saved them for honour of his Name: That he might make his power known, and spread abroad his fame. The Red sea he did then rebuke, and forthwith it was dri'd: And as in wilderness, so through the deep he did them guide. He sav'd them from the cruel hand of their despiteful foe, And from the enemies hand he did deliver them also. The second part. The waters their oppressours whel'd, not one was lestalive: Then they beleev'd his word, and praise in song they did him give. But by and by unthankfully his works they clean forgat: And for his counsel and his will they did neglect to wait; But lusted in the wilderness with fond and greedy lust; And in the desert tempted God, the stay of all their trust. And then their wanton minds desire he suffred them to have: But wasting leanness therewithal into their souls he gave. Then when they lodged in their tents, at Moses they did grutch: Aron the holy of the Lord so did they envy much. Therefore the earth did open wide, and Dathan did devour: And all Abirams company did cover in that hour. In their assembly kindled was the hot consuming fire: And wasting flame did then burn up the wicked in his ire. Upon the hill of Horeb they an idol-calf did frame: And there the molten image they did worship of the same. Into the likeness of a calf which feedeth on the grass Thus they their glory turn'd, and all their honour did deface. And God their onely Saviour unkindly they forgot; Which many great and mighty things in Egypt land had wrought: The third part. And in the land of Ham for them most wondrous works had done, And by the Red sea dreadful things performed long agone. Therefore for their so shewing them forgetful and unkinde, To bring destruction on them all he purpos'd in his minde: Had not his chosen Moses stood before him in the break, To turn his wrath, lest he on them with slaughter should him wreak. " They did despise the pleasant land that he behight to give: Yea, and the words that he had spoke they did no whit believe. " But in their tents with grudging heart they wickedly repin'd, Nor to the voice of God the Lord they gave an hearkning minde. Therefore against them lifted he his strong revenging hand, Them to destroy in wilderness ere they should see the land: And to destroy their seed among the nations with his rod. And through the countreys of the world to scatter them abroad. To Baal-peor then they did adjoyn themselves also. And ate the offerings of the dead; so they forsook him tho. Thus with their own inventions his wrath they didprovoke: And in his sore enkindled wrath the plague upon them broke. But Phinehas stood  with zeal the sinners vile to ay: And judgement he did execute. and then the plague did stay. The fourth part. It was imputed unto him for righteousness that day: And from thenceforth so counted i from race to race, I say. At waters eke of Meribuh they did him angry make: Yea, so far forth, that Moses was then punisht for their sake▪ Because they vext his spirit so sore, that in impatient heat His lips spake unadvisedly, his fervour was so great. Nor as the Lord commanded them, they slew the people tho: But were among the heathen mixt, and learn'd their works also: And did their idols serve, which were their ruine and decay: To fiends their sons and daughters they did offer up and slay. Yea, with unkindly murdring knife the guiltless bloud they spilt: Yea, their own sons and daughters bloud without all cause of guilt; Whom they to Canaan idols then offred with wicked hand: And so with bloud of innocent defiled was the land. Thus were they stained with the works of their own filthy way: And with their own inventions, a whoring they did stray. Therefore against his people was the Lords wrath kindled sore: And even his own inheritance he did abhor therefore. Into the hands of heathen men he gave them for a prey▪ And made their foes their lords, whom they were forced to obey. The fifth part. Yea, and their hateful enemies opprest them in the land, And they were humbly made to stoop as subjects to their hand. Full oftentimes from thrall had he delivered them before: But with their counsels they to wrath provok'd him evermore. Therefore they by their wickedness were brought full low to lie: Yet when he saw them in distress, he hearkned to their crie. He call'd to minde his covenant which he to them had swore: And by his mercies multitude repented him therefore. And favour he them made to finde before the fight of those That led them captive from their land, when erst they were their foes. Save us, O Lord, that art our God, save us, O Lord, we pray: And from among the heathen folk, Lord, gather us away. That we may spread the noble praise of thy most holy Name: That we may glory in thy praise and sounding of thy fame. The Lord the God of Israel be blest for evermore: Let all the people say, Amen, praise ye the Lord therefore. Confitemini Dom. Psal. cvii. W. K. GIve thanks unto the Lord our God, for gracious is he: And that his mercy hath no end all mortal men may see. Such as the Lord redeemed hath with thanks shall praise his Name: And shew how they from foes were freed, and how he wrought the same. He gath'red them forth of the lands that lay so sar about: From east to west, from north to south his hand did finde them out. They wandred in the wildernes and strayed from the way: And found no city where to dwell. that serve might for their stay. Whose thirst and hunger was so great in these deserts so void: That saintness did them sore assault, and eke their souls annoy'd. Then did they cry in their distress unto the Lord for aid: Who did remove their troublous state, according as they pray'd. And by that way which was most right he led them like a guide: That they might to a city go, and there also abide. Let men therefore before the Lord confess his goodness then: And shew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. For he the empty soul sustain'd, whom thirst had made to saint: The hungry soul with goodness fed, and did them eke acquaint. Such as do dwell in darkness deep, where they on death do wait: Fast bound to taste such troublous storm as iron chains do threat. The second part. For that against the Lords own words they sought so to rebel: Esteeming light his counsels high, which do so far excel. But when he humbled them full low, they then fell down with grief: And none was found so much to help, whereby to get relief. Then did they cry in their distress unto the Lord for aid: Who did remove their troublous state, according as they pray'd. For he from darkness out them brought, and from deaths dreadful shade: Bursting with force the iron bands which them before did lade. Let men therefore before the Lord confess his kindness then: And shew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. For he threw down the gates of brass, and brake them with strong hand: The iron bars he smote in two, nothing could him withstand. The foolish folk great plagues do seel, and cannot from them wend: But heap on more to those they have, because they do offend. Their soul so much did lothe all meat, that none they could abide: Whereby death had them almost caught, as they full truly tri'd. Then did they cry in their distress unto the Lord for aid: Who did remove their troublous-state, according as they pray'd. For then he sent to them his word, which health did soon restore: And brought them from those dangers deep wherein they were before. The third part. Let men therefore before the Lord confess his kindness then: And shew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. And let them offer sacrifice with thanks, and also fear: And speak of all his wondrous works with glad and joyful cheer. Such as in ships and brittle barks into the seas descend, Their merchandise through fearful flouds to compass and to end: Those men are forced to behold the Lords works what they be: And in the dangerous deep, the same most marvellous they see. For at his word the stormy wind ariseth in a rage, And stirreth up the surges so. Then are they lifted up so high, the clouds they seem to gain: And plunging down the depth until, their souls consume with pain. And like a drunkard, to and fro now here now there they reel, As men with fear of wit berest, or had of sense no feel. Then did they cry in their distress unto the Lord for aid: Who did remove their troublous state, according as they pray'd. For with his word the Lord doth make the sturdy storms to cease: So that the great waves from their rag are brought torest and peace. Then are men glad when rest is come, which they so much did crave: And are by him in haven brought▪ which they so fain would have. The third part. Let men therefore before the Lord confess his kindness then: And shew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. Let them in presence of the folk with prae extol his Name: And where the elders do convent, there let them do the same. For running flouds to dry deserts he doth oft change and turn: And drieth up as it were dust the springing well and bourn. A fruitful land with pleasures dect full barren doth he make: When on their sins that dwell therein he doth just vengeance take. Again the wilderness sull rude he maketh fruit to bear: With pleasant springs of waters clear, though none before were there. Wherein such hungry souls are set as he doth freely chuse: That they a city may them build to dwell in for their use. That they may sow their Pleasant land, and vineyards also plant, To yeeld them fruits of such increase, as none may seem to want. They multiply exceedingly, the Lord doth bless them so: Who doth also the brute beasts make by numbers great to grow. But when the faithful are low brought by the oppressours stout, And minish do through many plagues that compass them about: Then doth he princes bring to shame which did them sore oppress, And likewise caused them to err within the wilderness. But yet the poor he raiseth up out of his troubles deep: And oft-times doth his train augment▪ much like a flock of sheep. The righteous shall behold this sight. and also much rejoyce: Whereas the wicked and perverse with grief shall stop their voice. But who is wise, that now full well he may these things record? For certainly such shall perceive the kindness of the Lord. Paratum cor. Psal. cviii. J. H. O God, my heart prepared is, and eke my tongue is so: I will advance my voice in long, and giving praise also. Awake my viol and my harp sweet melody to make: And in the morning I my self right early will awake. By me among the people, Lord, still praised shalt thou be: And I among the heathen folk will sing. O Lord, to thee. Because thy mercy, Lord, is great above the heavens high: And eke thy truth doth reach the clouds within the Josty skie. Above the starry heavens high exalt thy felt, O God,
And, Lord, display upon the earth thy glory all abroad. That thy dearly beloved may he set at libertie: Help, O my God, with thy right hand, and hearken unto me. God in his holiness hath spoke, wherefore my joys abound: Sichem I will divide, and mere the vale of Succoth-ground. And Gilead shall be mine own, Manasses mine shall be: My head-strength, Ephraim; and law shall Judah give for me. Moab my washpot, and my shoe on Edom will I throw: Upon the land of Palestine in triumph will I go. Who shall into the city strong be guide to conduct me? Or how, by whom to Edom land conveyed shall I be? Is it not thou, O Lord, which late hadst us forsaken quite? And thou, O Lord, which with our hosts didst not go forth to fight? Give us, O Lord, thy saving aid when troubles do assail: For all the help of man is vain, and can no whit avail. Through God we shall do valiant acts and worthy of renown: He shall suodue our enemies, yea, he shall tread them down. Deus, laudem tuam. Psal. cix. N. IN speechless silence do nor hold, O God, thy tongue always: O God, even thou, I say, that art the God of all my praise. The wicked and the guileful mouth on me disclosed be: And they with false and lying tongues have spoken unto me. They did beset me round about with words of hateful spight: Without all cause of my desert against me they did light. For my good will they were my foes, but then 'gan I to pray: My good with ill, my friendliness with hate they did repay. Set thou the wicked over him, to have the upper hand: It his right hand eke suffer thou his hateful foe to stand. When he is judged, let him then condemned be therein: And let the prayer that he makes be turned into sin. Few be his days, his charge also let thou another take: His children let be fatherless, his wife a widow make. Let his off-spring be vagabonds, to beg and seek their bread: Wandring out of the wasted place where erst they have been fed. Let covetous extortioners catch all his goods and store: And let the stranger spoil the fruit of all his toil before. Let there be none to pity him, let there be none at all That on his children fatherless will let their mercy fall. The second part. And so let his posterity for ever be destroy'd; Their name out blotted in the age that after shall succeed. Let not his fathers wickedness from Gods remembrance fall: And let not thou his mothers sin be done away at all. But in the presence of the Lord let them remain for ay: That from the earth their memory he may cut clean away. Sith mercy he forgot to shew, but did pursue with spight The troubled man, and sought to slay the woful-hearted wight. Ash-did cursing love, it shall betide unto him so: And as he did not blessing love, it shall be far him fro: As he with cursing clad himself, so it like water shall Into his bowels, and like oyl into his bones befal. As garment let it be to him, to cover him foray: And as a girdle wherewith he shall girded be alway. Lo, let the same be from the Lord the guerdon of my foe: Yea, and of those that evil speak against my soul also. But thou, O Lord, that art my God, deal thou, I say, with me After thy Name deliver me; for good thy mercies he. Because in depth of great distress I needy am and poor: And eke within my pained breast my heart is wounded sore. The third part. Even so do I depart away, as doth declining shade: And as the grashoper, so I am shaken off, and sade. With falling long from needful food enfeebled are my knees: And all her fatness hath my flesh enforced been to leese. And I also a vile reproach to thu am made to be: And they that did upon me look did shake their heads at me. But thou, O Lord, tht art my God, none aid and succour be: According to thy mercy, Lord, save and deliver me. And they shall know thereby, that this (Lord) is thy mighty hand: And that thou, thou hast done it, Lord, so shall they understand. Although they curse with spite, yet thou shalt bless with loving voice: They shall aris and come to shame; thy servant shall rejoyce. Let them be clothed all with shame, that enemies are to me: And with confusion as a cloke eke covered let them be. But greatly I will with my mouth give thanks unto the Lord: And I among the multitude his praises will record. For he with help at his right hand will stand the poor man by, To save him from the man that would condemn his soul to die. Dixit Dominus. Psal. cx. N. THe Lord did say unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, Till I have made thy foes a stool whereon thy feet shall stand. The Lord shall out of Sion send the sceptre of thy might: Amid thy mortal foes be thou the Ruler in their sight. And in the day on which thy reign and power they shall see: Then hereby free-will-offerings shall the peep offer thee. Yea, with an holy worshipping then shall they offer all: Thy births dew is the dew that doth from womb of morning fall. The Lord hath sworn, and never will repent what he doth say: By th' order of Melchisedech thou art a Priest for ay. The Lord thy God, on thy right hand that standeth for thy stay, Shall wound for thee the stately kings upon his wrathful day. The heathen he shall judge, and fill the place with bodies dead: And over divers countreys shall in sunder smite the head. And he shall drink out of the brook tat rnnth in the way: Wherefore he shall lift up on high his royal head that day. Confitebor tibi. Psal. cxi. N. WIth heat do accord To ra and laud the Lord, In presence of the just. For great his works are found, To srh them such are bound As do him love and trust. Hs works are glorious, Also his righteousness It doth endure for ever. His wondrous works he would, We still remember should, his mercy faileth never. Such as to him love bear, A portion full fair He hath up for them laid: For this they shall well finde, He will them have in minde, And keep them as he said. For he did not disdain His works to shew them plain, By lightnings and by thunders: When he the neathens land Did give into their hand, Where they beheld his wonders. Of all his works ensu'th Both judgement, right, and truth, Whereto his statutes tend: They are decreed sure For ever to endure. Which equity doth end. Redemption he gave Hs people for to save: And hath also required, His promise not to fail, But always to prevail: His holy Name be feared. Whoso with heart full fain True wisdom would attain, The Lord fear and obey: Such as his laws do keep Shall knowledge have full deep, His praise shall last for ay. Featus vir. Psal. cxii. W. K. THe man is blest that God doth fear, And that his law doth love indeed: His seed on earth God will uprear, And less such as from him proceed. His house with good he will fulfil, His righteousness endure shall still. Unto the righteous doth arise In trouble joy, in darkness light. Compassion is in his eyes, And mercy always in his sight. Yea, pity moveth such to lend, He doth by judgement things expend. And surely such shall never fail, For in remembrance had is he: No tidings ill can make him quail Who in the Lord sure hope doth see. His heart is firm, his fear is past, For he shall see his foes down cast. He did well for the poor provide, His righteousness shall still remain: And his estate with praise abide, Though that the wicked man disdain. Yea, gnash his teeth thereat shall he, And so consume his state to see. Laudate pueri. Psal. cxiii. W. K. YE children which do serve the Lord, Praise ye his Name with one accord. Yea, blessed be always his Name, Who from the rising of the sun, Till it return where it begun, Is to be praised with great fame. The Lord all people doth surmount; As for his glory we may count, Above the heavens high to be. With God the Lord who may compare, Whose dwellings in the heavens are? Of such great power and force is he. He doth abase himself, we know, Things to behold both here below, And also in heaven above. The needy out of dust to draw, And eke the poor which help none saw, His onely mercy did him move. And so him set in high degree With princes of great dignitie, That rule his people with great same. The barren he doth make to bear, And with great joy her fruit to rear: Therefore praise ye his holy Name. Inexitu Israel. Psal. cxiv. W. W. WHen Israel by Gods address from Pharaohs land was bent: And Jacobs house the strangers left, and in the same train went: In Judah God his glory shewd, his oliness most bright: So did the Israelites declare his kingdom, power, and might. The sea it saw, and suddenly as all amazd did fle The roaring streams of Jordans floud recoyled backwadly. As rams afraid, the mountains skipt, their strength did them forsake: And as the filly trembling lambs, their tops did beat and shake. What ail'd the sea, as allamaz'd, so suddenly to flee? Ye rolling waves of Jordans floud, why ran ye backwardly? Why shook ye hills, as rams afraid? why did your strength so shake? Why did your tops, as trembling lambs, for fear quiver and quake? O earth, confess thy sovereign Lord, and dread his mighty hand: Before the face of Jacobs God fear ye both sea and land. I mean the God, which from hard rocks doth cause main flouds appear: And from the stony flint doth cause gush out the fountains clear. Non nobis, Domine. Psal. cxv. N. NOt unto us, Lord, not to us, but to thy Name give praise, Both for thy mercy and thy truth that are in thee always. Why shall the heathen soorners say, Where is their God become? Our God in heaven is, and what he will, that hath he done. Their idols silver are and gold, works of mens hands they be: They have a mouth, and do not speak; and eyes, and do not see: And they have ears joyn'd to their heads, and do not hear at all: And notes eke they formed have, and do not smell withal. And hands they have, and handle not; and feet, and do not go: A throat they have, yet through the same they make no sound to blow. Those that make them are like to them, and those whose trust they be. O Israel, trust in the Lord, their help and shield is he. O Aarons house, trust in the Lord, their help and shield is he: Trust ye the Lord that fear the Lord, their help and shield is he. The Lord hath mindful been of us, and will us bless also: On Israel and on Aarons house his blessings he will show. Them that be fearers of the Lord, the Lord will bless them all: Even he will bless them everyone, the great and eke the small. To you (I say) the living Lord will multiply his grace: To you and to the children that shall follow of your race. Ye are the blessed of the Lord, even of the Lord, I say: Which both the heaven and the earth hath made and set in stay. The heavens, yea, the heavens high belong unto the Lord: The earth unto the sons of men he gave of free accord. They that be dead do not with praise set forth the Lords renown: Nor any that into the place of silence do go down. But we will praise the Lord our God from henceforth and for ay: Sound ye the praises of the Lord; praise ye the Lord I say. Dilexi quoniam. Psal. cxvi. N. I Love the Lord, because my voice and prayer heard hath he: When in my days I call'd on him, he bow'd his ear to me. Even when the snares of cruel death about beset me round: When pains of hell me caught, and when I wo and sorrow found: Upon the Name of God my Lord then did I call, and say, Deliver thou my soul, O Lord, I do thee humbly pray. The Lord is very merciful, and just he is also: And in our God compassion doth plentifully flow. The Lord in safety doth preserve all those that simple be: I was in woful misery, and he delivered me.
And now my soul, sith thou art sfe, return unto thy rest: For largely, lo, the Lord to thee his bounty hath exprest. Because thou hast delivered my soul from deadly thrall: My moistned eyes from mournful tears, my sliding feet from fall: Before the Lord I in the land of life will walk therefore: I did beleeve, therefore I spake, for I was troubled sore. The second part. I said in my distress and fear, That all men hars be: What shall I pay the Lord for all his benefits to me? The wholsom cup of saving health I thankfully will take: And on the Lords Name I will call when I my prayer make. I to the Lord will pay the vows that I to him behight: Yea, even at this present time in all his peoples sight. Right dear and precious in his sight the Lord doth ay esteem The death of all his holy ones, what ever men do deem, Thy servant, Lord, thy servant, lo, I do myself confess, Son of thy hand-maid: thou hast broke the bonds of my distress. And I will offer up to thee a sacrifice of praise: And I will call upon the Name of God the Lord always. I to the Lord will pay the vows that I have him behight, Yea, even at this present time in all his peoples sight. Yea, in the courts of Gods own house, and in the midst of thee, O thou Jerusalem, I say; wherefore the Lord praise ye. Laudate Dominum. Psal. cxvii. N. O All ye nations of the world, praise ye the Lord always: And all ye people every where set forth his noble praise. For great his kindness is to us, his truth endures for ay: Wherefore praise ye the Lord our God, praise ye the Lord, I say. Confitemini. Psal. cxviii. N. O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gracious is he: Because his mercy doth endure for ever towards thee. Let Israel confess and say, His mercy dures for ay: Now let the house of Aaron say, His mercy dures for ay: Let all that fear the Lord our God even now confess and say, The mercy of the Lord our God endureth still for ay. In trouble and in heaviness unto the Lord I cri'd: Which lovingly heard me at large, my suit was not deni'd. The Lord himself is on my side, I will not stand in doubt, Nor fear what man can do to me, when God stands me about. The Lord doth take my part with them that help to succour me: Therefore I shall see my desire upon mine enemie. Better it is to trust in God then in mans mortal seed: Or to put confidence in kings or princes in our need. 0 All nations have inclosed me, and compassed me round: But in the Name of God shall I mine enemies confound. 1 They kept me in on every side, they kept me in, I say: But in the Lords most mighty Name I shall work their decay. 2 They came about me all like bees, but yet in the Lords Name quencht their thorns that were on fire, and will destroy the same. The second part. Thou hast with force thrust sore at me that I indeed might fall: But through the Lord I found such help that they were vanquisht all. The Lord is my defence and strength, my joy, my mirth, my song: He is become for me indeed a Saviour most strong. The right hand of the Lord our God doth bring to pass great things: He causeth voice of joy and health in righteous mens dwellings. The right hand of the Lord doth bring most mighty things to pass: His hand hath the preeminence, his force is as it was. I shall not die, but ever live to utter and declare The Lord his might and wondrous power, his works, and what they are. The Lord himself hath chastened and hath corrected me: But hath not given me over yet to death, as ye may see. Set open unto me the gates of truth and righteousness: That I may enter into them the Lords praise to express. This is the gate even of the Lord, which shall not so be shut, But good and righteous men alway shall enter into it. The third part. I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, because thou hast heard me, And art become most lovingly a Saviour unto me. The stone which ere this time among the builders was refused, Is now become the corner-stone, and chiefly to be used. This was the mighty work of God, this was the Lords own fact: And it is marvellous to behold with eyes that noble act. This is the joyful day indeed, which God himself hath wrought: Let us be glad and joy therein in heart, in minde, in thought. Now help us, Lord, and prosper us, we wish with one accord: Blessed is he that comes to us in the Name of the Lord. God is the Lord that shews us light, binde ye therefore with cord Your sacrifice to the altar, and give thanks to the Lord. Thou art my God, I will confess, and render thanks to thee: Thou art my God, and I will praise thy mercy towards me. O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gracious is he: Because his mercy doth endure for ever towards me. Beati immaculati. Psal. cxix. W. W. BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in minde and heart: Whose lives and conversations from Gods laws never start. Blessed are they that give themselves his statutes to observe: Seeking the Lord with all their heart, and never from him swerve. Doubtless such men go not astray nor do no wicked thing, Which stedfastly walk in his way without any wandring. It is thy will and commandment, that with attentive heed Thy noble and divine precepts we learn and keep indeed. O would to God it might thee please my ways so to address, That I might both in heart and voice thy laws keep and confess! So should no shame my life attaint, whil'st I thus set mine eyes, And bend my minde always to muse on thy sacred decrees. Then will I praise with upright heart, and magnify thy Name, When I shall learn thy judgements just, and likewise prove the same. And wholly will I give my self to keep thy laws most right: Forsake me not for ever, Lord, but shew thy grace and might, BETH. The second part. By what means may a young man best his life learn to amend? If that he mark and keep thy word, and therein his time spend. Unfeignedly I have thee sought, and thus seeking abide: O never suffer me, O Lord, from thy precepts to slide. Within my heart and secret thoughts thy words I have hid still: That I might not at any time offend thy godly will. We magnify thy Name, O Lord, and praise thee evermore: Thy statutes of most worthy fame, O Lord, teach me therefore. My lips have never ceast to preach, and publish day and night The judgements all which did proceed from thy mouth full of might. Thy testimonies and thy ways please me no less indeed Then all the treasures of the earth, which worldlings make their meed. Of thy precepts I will still muse, and thereto frame my talk: As at a mark, so will I aim thy ways how I may walk. My onely joy shall be so fixt, and on thy laws so set: That nothing can me so far blinde, that I thy words forget. GIMEL. The third part. Grant to thy servant now such grace as may my life prolong: Thy holy word them will I keep both in my heart and tongue. Mine eyes which were dim and shut up, so open and make bright: That of thy law and marvellous works I may have the clear sight. I am a stranger in this earth, wandring now here now there: Thy word to me therefore disclose my footsteps for to clear. My soul is ravisht with desire, and never is at rest: But seeks to know thy judgements high, and what may please thee best. The proud men and malicious thou hast destroy'd each one: And cursed are such as do not thy hests attend upon. Lord, turn from me rebuke and shame which wicked men conspire: For I have kept thy covenants with zeal as hot as fire. The princes great in counsel sat, and did against me speak: But then thy servant thought how he thy statutes might not break. For why? thy covenants are my joy, and my hearts great solace: They serve in stead of counsellours my matters for to pass. DALETH. The fourth part. I am, alas, as brought to grave, and almost turn'd to dust: Restore therefore my life again, as thy promise is just. My ways when I acknowledged, with mercy thou didst hear: Hear now eftsoon, and me instruct thy laws to love and fear. Teach me once throughly for to know thy precepts and thy lore: Thy works then will I meditate, and lay them up in store. My soul I feel so sore opprest, that it melteth for grief: According to thy word therefore haste, Lord, to send relief. From lying and deceitful lips let thy grace me defend: And that I may learn thee to love, thy holy law me send. The way of truth both straight and sure I have chosen and found: I set thy judgements me before, which keep me safe and sound. Since then, O Lord, I forc'd my self thy covenants to embrace: Let me therefore have no rebuke nor check in any case. Then will I run with joyful cheet where thy word doth me call: When thou hast set my heart at large. and rid me out of thrall. HE. The fifth part. Instruct me, Lord, in the right trade of thy statutes divine: And it to keep even to the end my heart will I incline. Grant me the knowledge of thy law, and I shall it obey: With heart and minde and all my might I will it keep, I say. In the right paths of thy precepts guide me, Lord, I require: None other pleasure do I wish, nor greater thing desire. Incline my heart thy laws to keep, and covenants to embrace: And from all filthy avarice, Lord, shield me with thy grace. from vain desires and worldly lusts turn back mine eyes and sight: Give me the spirit of life and power to walk thy ways aright. confirm thy gracious promise, Lord, which thou hast made to me, Which am thy servant, and do love and fear nothing but thee. Reproach and shame which I so fear, from me, O Lord, expel: For thou dost judge with equity, and therein dost excel. Behold, my hearts desire is bent thy laws to keep for ay: Lord, strengthen me so with thy grace that it perform I may. VAƲ. The sixth part. Thy mercies great and manifold let me obtain, O Lord: Thy saving health let me enjoy, according to thy word. So shall I stop the slandrous mouths of lewd men and unjust: For in thy faithful promises stands my comfort and trust. The word of truth within my mouth let ever still be prest: For in thy judgements wonderful my hope doth stand and rest. And whil'st that breath within my breast doth natural life preserve, Yea, till this world shall be dissolv'd, thy law will I observe. So walk will I as set at large, and made free from all dread; Because I sought how for to keep thy precepts and thy read. Thy noble acts I will describe, as things of most great fame: Even before kings I will them blaze, and shrink no whit for shame. I will rejoyce then to obey thy worthy hests and will: Which evermore I have lov'd best, and so will love them still. My hands I will lift to thy laws which I have dearly sought: And practise thy commandments in will, in deed, in thought. ZAIN. The seventh part. Thy promise which thou mad'st to me thy servant, Lord, remember: For therein have I put my trust and confidence for ever. It is my comfort and my joy when troubles me assail: For were my life not by thy word, my life would soon me fail. The proud and such as God contemn still made of me a scorn: Yet would I not thy law forsake, as he that were forlorn: But call'd to minde, Lord, thy great works shew'd to our fathers old: Whereby I felt the joy surmount my grief an hundred-fold. But yet, alas, for fear I quake, seeing how wicked men Thy law forsook, and did procure thy judgements who knows when?
And as for me, I fram'd my songs thy statutes to exalt, When I among the strangers dwelt, and thoughts 'gan me assault. I thought upon thy Name, O Lord, by night when others sleep: As for thy law also I kept, and ever will it keep. This grace I did obtain, because thy covenants sweet and dear I did embrace, and also keep with reverence and with tear. HETH. The eighth part. O God which art my part and lot, my comfort and my stay, I have decreed and promised thy laws to keep alway. Mine earnest heart did humbly sue in presence of thy face: As thou therefore hast promised, Lord, grant me of thy grace. My life I have examined, and tri'd my secret heart: Which to thy statutes caused me my feet straight to convert. I did not stay nor linger long. as they that slothful are: But hastily thy laws to keep I did my self prepare. The cruel bands of wicked men have made of me their prey: Yet would I not thy law forget, nor from thee go astray. Thy righteous judgements towards me so great are and so high: That even at midnight will I rise thy Name to magnify. Companion am I to all them which fear thee in their heart: And never will for love nor dread from thy commandments start. Thy mercies, Lord, most plenteously do all the world fulfil: O teach me how I may obey thy statutes and thy will. TETH. The ninth part. According to thy promise, Lord, so hast thou with me dealt: For of thy grace in sundry sorts have I thy servant felt. Teach me to judge always aright, and give me knowledge sure: For certainly beleeve I do that thy precepts are pure. Ere thou didst touch me with thy rod, I err'd and went astray: But now I keep thy holy word, and make it all my stay. Thou art both good and gracious, and giv'st most liberally: Thine ordinances how to keep therefore, O Lord, teach me. The proud and wicked men have forg'd against me many a lie: Yet thy commandments still observe with all my heart will I. Their hearts are swoln with worldly wealth, as grease so are they fat: But in thy law do I delight, and nothing seek but that. O happy time, may I well say, when thou didst me correct: For as a guide to learn thy laws thy rod did me direct. So that to me thy word and law is dearer manifold Then thousands great of silver and gold, or ought that can be told. JOD. The tenth part. Seeing thy hands have made me, Lord, to be thy creature: Grant knowledge likewise how to learn to put thy laws in ure. So they that fear thee shall rejoyce when ever they me see: Because I have learn'd by thy word to put my trust in thee. When with thy rods the world is plagu'd I kno the cause is just: So when thou dost correct me, Lord, the cause just needs be must. Now of thy goodness I thee pray some comfort to me send: As thou to me thy servant hett, so from all ill me shend. Thy tender mercies pour on me, and I shall surely live: For joy and consolation both thy law to me doth give. Confound the proud, whose false pre∣tense is me for to destroy: But as for me, thy hests to know, I will my self employ. Whoso with reverence do thee fear, to me let them retire: And such as do thy covenants know, and them alone desire. My heart without all wavering let on thy laws be bent: That no confusion come to me, whereby I should be shent. CAPH. The eleventh part. My soul doth sain, and ceaseth not thy saving health to crave: And for thy words sake still I trust my hearts desire to have. Mine eyes do fail with looking for thy word, and thus I say, Oh when wilt thou me comfort, Lord? Why dost thou thus delay? As a skin-bottle in the smoke, so am I parcht and dri'd: Yet will I not out of my heart let thy commandments slide. Alas how long shall I yet live before I see the hour, That on my foes which me torment, thy vengeance thou wilt pour? Presumptuous men have digged pits, thinking to make me sure: Thus contrary against thy law, my hurt they do procure. But thy commandments are all true, and causless they me grieve: To thee therefore I do complain, that thou might'st me relieve. Almost they had me clean destroy'd, and brought me quite to ground: Yet by thy statutes I abode, and therein succour found. Restore me, Lord, again to life, for thy mercies excel: And lo shall I thy covenants keep till death my life expel. LAMED. The twelfth part. In heaven, Lord, where thou dost dwell, thy word is stablisht sure: And shall for all eternity fast graven there endure. From age to age thy truth abides, as doth the earth witness: Whose ground-work thou hast laid so sure as no tongue can express. Even to this day we may well see how all things persevere According to thine ordinance, for all things thee revere. Had it not been that in thy law my soul had comfort sought, Long time ere now in my distress I had been brought to nought. Therefore will I thy precepts ay in memory keep fast: By them thou hast my life restor'd when I was at last cast. No wight to me can title make▪ for I am onely thine: Save me therefore, for to thy laws mine ears and heart incline. The wicked men do seek my bane, and thereto lie in wait: But I the while considered thy noble works and great. I see nothing in this wide world at length which hath not end: But thy commandments and thy word beyond all end extend. MEM. The thirteenth part. What great desire and servent love do I bear to thy law! All the day long my whole device is onely on thy saw. Thy word hath taught me sar to pass my foes in policy: For still I hold it as a thing of most excellency. My teachers which did me instruct, in knowledge I excell: Because I do thy covenants keep, and them to others tell, In wisdom I do pass also the ancient men indeed: And all because to keep thy laws I held it ay best reed, My feet I have refrained eke from every evil way, Because that I continually thy word might keep, I say. I have not swerv'd from ty judgements nor yet shrunk any dell: For why? thou hast me taught thereby to live godly and well. O Lord, how sweet unto my taste finde I thy words alway! Doubt less no honey in my mouth feel ought so sweet I may. Thy laws have me such wisdom learn'd, that utterly I hate All wicked and ungodly ways. in every kinde or rate. NƲN. The fourteenth part. Even as a lantern to my feet, so doth thy word shine bright: And to my paths where-ere I go it is a flaming light. I have both sworn, and will perform most certainly doubtless, That I will keep thy judgements just, and them in life express. Affliction hath me sore opprest, and brought me to deaths door: O Lord, as thou hast promised, so me to life restore, The offrings which with heart and voice most frankly I thee give, Accept; and teach me how I may after thy judgements live. My soul is ay so in my hand, that dangers me assail: Yet do I not thy law forget, nor it to keep will fail. Although the wicked laid their nets to catch me at a bay, Yet did I not from thy precepts once swerve or go astray. Thy law I have so claim'd alway as mine own heritage: And why? for therein I delight, and set my whole courage. For ever more I have been bent thy statutes to fulfil: Even so likewise unto the end I will continue still. SAMECH. The fifteenth part. The crafty thoughts and double hearts I do always detest: But as for thy law and precepts, I love them ever best. Thou art my did and secret place, my shield of strong defence: Therefore have I thy promises look for with patience. Go to therefore ye wicked men, depart from me anon, For the commandments will I keep of God my Lord alone, As thou hast promis'd so perform, that death me not assail: Nor let my hope abuse me so, that through distrust I quail. Uphold me, and I shall be safe for ought they do or say: And in thy statutes pleasure take will I both night and day. Thou hast trod such under thy feet as do thy statutes break: For nought avails their subtilty, their counsel is but weak. Like dross thou casts the wicked out where-ere they go or dwell: Therefore can I as thy statutes love nothing half so well. My flesh, alas, is taken with fear, as though it were benumm'd: For when I see thy judgements straight I am as one aston'd. AIN. The sixteenth part. I do the thing that lawful is, and give to all men right: Resigne me not to them that would oppress me with their might. But for thy servant surety be in that thing that is good: That proud men give me not the foil, which rage as they were wood. Mine eyes with waiting are now blinde, thy health so much I crave: And eke thy righteous promise, Lord, whereby thou wilt me save. Entreat thy servant lovingly, and favour to him show: Thy statutes of most excellency teach me also to know. Thy humble servant, Lord, I am, grant me to understand How by thy statutes I may know best what to take in hand. It is now time, Lord, to begin, for truth is quite decai'd: Thy law likewise they have transgrest, and none aganst them said. This is the cause wherefore I love thy laws better then gold, Or jewels fine which are esteem'd most costly to be sold. I thought thy precepts all most just, and so them laid in store: All crafty and malicious ways I do abhor therefore. PE. The seventeenth part. Thy covenants are most wonderful. and full ofthings profound: My soul therefore doth keep them sure, when they are tri'd and sound. When men first enter into thy word they finde a light most clear: And very idiots understand when they it read or hear. For joy I have both gap'd and breath'd to know thy commandment: That I might guide my self thereby, I sought what thing it meant. With mercy and compassion, Lord, behold me from above, As thou art wont to behold such as thy Name fear and love. Direct my footsteps by thy word, that I thy will may know: And never let iniquity thy servant overthrow. From slandrous tongues and deadly harms preserve and keep me sure: Thy precepts then will I observe, and put them eke inure. Thy countenance which doth surmount the sun in his bright hue, Let shine on me, and by thy law teach me what to eschew. Out of mine eyes great flouds gush out of dreary tears and fell, When I behold how wicked men thy laws keep never a dell. ZADE. The eighteenth part. In every point, Lord, thou art just, the wicked though they grudge: And when thou dost sentence pronounce, thou art a righteous Judge. To render right, and flee from guile, are two chief points most high: And such as thou hast in thy law commanded us straitly. With zeal and wrath I am consum'd and even pin'd away, Too see my foes thy word forget, for ought that I do may. So pure and perfect is thy word, as any heart can deem: And I thy servant nothing more do love or yet esteem. And though I be nothing set by, as one of base degree: Yet do I not thy laws forget, nor shrink away from thee. Thy righteousness, Lord, is most just, for ever to endure: Also thy law is truth it self, most constant and most pure. Trouble and grief have seis'd on me, and brought me wondrous low; Yet do I still of thy precepts delight to hear and know. The righteousness of thy judgements doth last for evermore: Then teach them me, for even in them my life lies up in store. KOPH. The nineteenth part. With fervent heart I call'd and cri'd, nowan swer me, O Lord: That thy commandments to observe I may fully accord. To thee, my God, I make my suit with most humble request: Save me therefore, and I will keep thy precepts and thy hests. To thee I cry even in the morn before the day wax light: Because that I have in thy word my confidence whole plight.
Mine eyes prevent the watch by night, and ere they call I wake: That by devising on thy word I might some comfort take. Incline thine ears to hear my voice, and pity on me take: As thou wat wont, so judge me Lord, lest life should me forsake. My foes draw near, and do procure my death maliciously, Which from thy law are far gone back, and stray'd from it lewdly. Therefore, O Lord, approach thou near, for need doth so require: For all thy precepts true they are, then help I thee desire. But thy commandments have I learn'd not now but long ago, That they remain for evermore, thou hast them grounded so. RESH. The twentieth part. My trouble and affliction consider and behold: Deliver me, for of thy law I ever take fast hold. Defend my good and righteous cause, with speed some succour send: From death, as thou hast promised, Lord, keep me and defend. As for the wicked, far they are from having health and grace: Whereby they might thy statutes know they enter not the trace. Great are thy mercies, Lord, I grant, what tongue can them attain? And as thou hast me judg'd ere now, so let me life obtain. Though many men did trouble me, and persecute me sore: Yet from thy laws I never shrunk, nor went: wry therefore. And truth it is, for grief I die when I these traitours see: Because they keep no whit thy word, nor yet seek to know thee. Behold, for I do love thy laws with heart most glad and fain: As thou art good and gracious, Lord, restore my life again. What thy word doth decree must be, and so it hath been ever: Thy righteous judgements are also most true, and decay never. SCHIN. The one and twentieth part. Princes have sought by cruelty causless to make me crouch: But all in vain; for of thy word the fear did my heart touch. And certainly even of thy word I was more merry and glad. Then he that of rich spoils and prey great store and plenty had. As for all lies and falsities, I hate most and detest: For why? thy holy law do I above all things love best. Seven times a day I praise the Lord, singing with heart and voice: Thy righteous acts and wonderful so cause me to rejoyce. Great peace and rest shall all such have as do thy statutes love: No danger shall their quiet state empair or once remove. My onely health and comfort, Lord, I look for at thy hand: And therefore have I done those things which thou didst me command. Thy laws have been mine exercise, which my soul most desir'd: So much to them my love was bent, that nought else I requir'd. Thy statutes and commandements I kept (thou know'st) aright: For all the things that I have done are present in thy sight. TAƲ. The two and twentieth part. O Lord, let my complaint and cry before thy face appear: And as thou hast me promise made, so teach me thee to fear Mine humble supplication toward thee let finde access: And grant me, Lord, deliverance, for so is thy promise. Then shall my lips thy praises speak after most ample sort: When thou thy statutes hast me taught, wherein stands my comfort. My tongue shall ling and preach thy word, and on this wise say shall, Gods famous acts and noble laws are just and perfect all. Stretch out thy hand, I thee beseech, and speedily me save: For thy commandments to observe chosen. O Lord, I have. Of thee alone, Lord, I crave health, for other I know none: And in thy law and nothing else I do delight alone. Grant me therefore long days to live thy Name to magnifie: And of thy judgements merciful let me the favour crie. For I was lost and went astray much like a wandring sheep: Oh seek me, for I have not fail'd thy commandments to keep. Ad Dominum. Psal. cxx. T. S. IN trouble and in thrall Unto the Lord I call, And he doth me comfort. Deliver me, I say, From liars lips alway, And tongues of false report. What vantage, or what thing, Gett'st thou thus for to sting, Thou false and flatt'ring liar? Thy tongue doth hurt, I ween, No less then arrows keen, Or hot consuming fire. Alas! too long I flack Within these tents so black, Which Kedars are by name, By whom the flock elect And all of Isaacs sect Are put to open shame. With them that peace did hate I came a peace to make, And set a quiet life: But when my tale was told, Causles I was controll'd By them that would have strife. Levavi oculos. Psal. cxxi. W. W. I Lift mine eyes to Sion hill, From whence I do attend That succour God me send The mighty God me succour will, Which heaven and earth framed, And all things therein named. Thy foot from slip he will preserve, And will thee safely keep, For he will never sleep. Lo he that doth Israel conserve No sleep at all can him catch, But his eyes shall ever watch. The Lord is thy warrant alway, The Lord eke doth thee cover As at thy right hand ever: The sun shall not thee parch by day, Nor the moon not half so bright Shall with cold hurt thee by night. The Lord will keep thee from distress, And will thy life sure save: And thou shalt also have In all thy business good success. Where-ever thou goest in or out, God will thy things bring about. Letatus sum. Psal. cxxii. W. K. I Did in heart rejoyce To hear the peoples voice, In offering so willingly: For let us up, say they, And in the Lords house pray: Thus spake the folk full lovingly. Our feet that wandred wide Shall in thy gates abide, O thou Jerusalem full fair, Which art so seemly set Much like a city neat. The like whereof is not elsewhere. The tribes with one accord, The tribes of God the Lord Are thither bent their way to take: So God before did tell That there his Israel Their prayers should together make. For there are thrones erect, And that for this respect, To set forth justice orderly: Which thrones right to maintain To Davids house pertain, His folk to judge accordingly. To pray let us not cease For Jerusalems pace, Thy friends God prosper mightily: Peace be thy walls about, And prosper thee throughout Thy palaces continually. I wish thy prosperous state For my poor brethrens sake, That comfort have by means of thee. Gods house doth me allure Thy walth for to procure So much always as lies in me. Ad te levavi Psal. cxxiii. T. S. O Lord that heaven dost possess, I lift mine eyes to thee: Even as the servant lifteth his, his masters hands to see. As hand-maids watch their mistress hand some grace for to atchieve: So we behold the Lord our God, till he do us forgive. Lord, grant us thy compassion, and mercy in thy sight: For we are fill'd and overcome with hatred and despight. Our minds be stuft with great rebuke, the rich and worldly wise Do make of us their mocking-stocks. the proud do us despise. Nisi quia Dom. Psal. cxxiv. W. W. NOw Israel may say, and that truly, If that the Lord had not our cause maintain'd; If that the Lord had not our right sustain'd, When all the world against us furiously Made their uproars, and said we should all die: Now long ago they had devour'd us all, And swallow'd quick, for ought that we could deem: Such was their rage, as we might well esteem. And as the flouds with mighty force do fall: So had they now our lives even brought to thrall. The raging streams, most proud in roaring noise, Had long ago o'rewhelm'd us in the deep: But lov'd be God which doth us safely keep From bloudy teeth, and their most cruel voice, Which as a prey to eat us would rejoyce, Even as a bird out of the fowlers grin Escapes away, right so it fares with us: Broke are their nets, and we have scaped thus. God that made heaven and earth is our help then: His Name hath sav'd us from these wicked men. Qui confidunt. Psal. cxxv. W. K. SUch as in God the Lord do trust, As mount Sion shall firmly stand, And be removed at no hand. The Lord will count them right and just: So that they shall be sure For ever to endure. As mighty mountains huge and great Jerusalem about do close: So will the Lord do unto those Who on his godly will do wait: Such are to him so dear, They never need to fear. For though the righteous try doth he By making wicked men his rod, Lest they through grief forsake their God; It shall not as their lot still be. Give, Lord, to us thy light, Whose hearts are true and right. But as for such as turn aside By crooked ways which they out sought, The Lord will surely bring to nought; With workers vile they shall abide: But peace with Israel For evermore shall dwell, Another of the same, by R. W. THose that do put their confidence Upon the Lord our God onely, And flee to him for their defence In all their need and misery: Their faith is sure still to endure, Grounded on Christ the corner-stone, Mov'd with none ill, but standeth full Stedfast like to the mount Sion. And as about Jerusalem The mighty hills do it compass. So that no enemies come to them To hurt that town in any case: So God indeed in every need His faithful people doth defend, Standing them by assuredly From this time forth world without end. Right wise and good is our Lord God, And will not suffer certainly The sinners and ungodlies rod To tarry upon his family: Lest they also from God should go. Falling to sin and wickedness. O Lord, defend world without end Thy Christian flock through thy goodness. O Lord, do good to Christians all That stedfast in thy word abide: Such as willingly from God fall, And to false doctrine daily slide, Such will the Lord scatter abroad With hypocrites thrown down to hell, God will them send pains without end: But, Lord, grant peace to Israel. Glory to God the Father of might, And to the Son our Saviour, And to the holy Ghost, whose light Shine in our hearts, and us succour: That the right way from day to day We may walk, and him glorifie: With heates desire all that are here Worship the Lord, and say, Amen. In convertendo. Psal. cxxvi. W. W. WHen that the Lord again his Sion had forth brought From bondage great, and also servitude extreme; His work was such as did surmount mans heart & thought: So that we were much like to them that use to dream, Our mouths were with laughter filled then, And eke our tongues did shew us joyful men. The heathen folk were forced then this to confess, How that the Lord for them also great things had done. But much more we, and therefore can confess no less: Wherefore to joy we have good cause as we begun. O Lord, go forth, thou canst our bondage end: As to deserts the flowing rivers send. Full true it is that they which sow in tears indeed, A time will come when they shall reap in mirth and joy. They went and wept in bearing of their precious seed, For that their foes full often times did them annoy: But their return with joy they shall sure see, Their sheaves home bring, and not empaired be. Nisi Dom. Psal. cxxvii. W. W. EXcept the Lord the house doth make, And thereunto doth set his hand: What men do build it cannot stand. Likewise in vain men undertake Cities and holds to watch and ward, Except the Lord be their safeguard. Though ye rise early in the morn, And so at night go late to bed, Feeding full hardly with brown bread, Yet were your labour lost and worn: But they whom God doth love and keep, Receive all things with quiet sleep. Therefore mark well when-ever you see That men have heirs t' enjoy their land, It is the gift of Gods own hand: For God himself doth multiply Of his great liberality The blessing of posterity. And when the children come to age They grow in strength and activeness, In person and in comeliness:
So that a shaft shot with courage Of one that hath a most strong arm, Flies not so swift, nor doth like harm. Oh well is he that hath his quiver Furnisht with such artillerie: For when in peril he shall be, Such one shall never shake nor shiver, When that he pleads before the judge Against his foes that bear him grudge. Beati omnes. Psal. cxxviii. T. S. BLessed art thou that fearest God. and walkest in his way: For of thy labour thou shalt eat, happy art thou, I say. Like fruitful vines on thy house side so doth thy wife spring out: Thy children stand like olive-plants thy table round about. Thus art thou blest that fearest God, and he shall let thee see, The promised Jerusalem and her felicitie. Thou shalt thy childrens children see, to thy great joys increase: And likewise grace on Israel, prosperity and peace. Sape expugnaverunt. Psal. cxxix. N. OFt they (now Israel may say) me from my youth assail'd: Oft they assail'd me from my youth, yet never they prevail'd. Upon my back the plowers plow'd, and furrows long did cast: The righteous Lord hath cut the cords of wicked foes at last. They that hate me shall be asham'd, and turned back also: And made as grass upon the house, which with reth ere it grow: Whereof the mower cannot finde enough to fill his hand: Nor can he fill his lap, that goeth to glean upon the land. Nor passers by pray God on them to let his blessing fall: Nor say, We bless you in the Name of God the Lord at all. De profundis. Psal. cxxx. W. W. LOrd, to thee I make my moan when dangers me oppress: I call, I sigh, plain, and groan, trusting to fide release Hear now, O Lord my request, for it is full due time: And let thine ears ay be prest unto this prayer mine. O Lord our God, if thou weigh our sins and them peruse: Who shall then escape, and say, I can my self excuse? But, Lord, thou art merciful, and turn'st to us thy grace, That we with hearts most careful should fear before thy face. In God I put my whole trust, my soul waits on his will: For his promise is most just, and I hope therein still. My soul to God hath regard, wishing for him alway More then they that watch and ward to see the dawning day. Let Israel then boldly in the Lord put his trust: He is that God of mercy that his deliver must. For he it is that must save Israel from his sin, And all such as surely have their confidence in him. Domine, non est. Psal. cxxxi. M. O Lord, I am not puft in minde, I have no scornful eye: I do not exercise myself in things that be too high. But as the childe that weaned is even from his mothers brest: So have I, Lord, behav'd my self in silence and in rest. O Israel, trust in the Lord, let him be all thy stay, From this time forth for evermore, from age to age, I say. Memento, Dom. Psal. cxxxii. M. REmember Davids troubles, Lord, how to the Lord he swore, And vow'd a vow to Jacobs God, to keep for evermore: I will not come within my house, nor climb up to my bed, Nor let my temples take their rest, nor the eyes in my head, Till I have found out for the Lord a place to sit thereon: An house for Jacobs God to be an habitation. We heard of it at Ephrata, there did we hear this sound▪ And in the fields and forests there these voices first were found. We will assay, and go in now his tabernacle there, Before his footstool to fall down, and worship him in fear. Arise, O Lord, arise, I say, into thy resting-place: Both thou and the ark of thy strength, the presence of thy grace. Let all thy priests be clothed, Lord, with truth and righeousness: Let all thy saints and holy men sing all with joyfulness. And for thy servant Davids sake, refuse not Lord, I say, The face of thine anointed, Lord, nor turn thy face away. The second part. The Lord to David swore in truth, and will not shrink from it, Saying, The fruit of thy body upon thy seat shall sit. And if thy sons my covenant keep, that I shall learn each one: Then shall their sons for ever sit upon thy princely throne. The Lord himself hath chose Sion, and loves therein to dwell, Saying, This is my resting-place, I love and like it well. And I will bless with great increase her victuals every where: And I will satisfie with bread the needy that be there. Yea, I will deck and clothe her priests with my salvation: And all her saints shall sing for joy of my protection. There will I surely make the horn of David for to bud: For there I have ordain'd for mine a lantern bright and good. As for his enemies I will clothe with shame for evermore: But I will cause his crown to shine more fresh then heretofore. Ecce quam. Psal. cxxxiii. W. W. O How happy a thing it is, and joyful for to see, Brethren together fast to hold the band of amity! It calls to minde that sweet perfume, and that costly ointment, Which on the sacrificers head by Gods precept was spent. It wet not Aarons head alone, but drencht his beard throughout, And finally it did run down his rich attire about. And as the lower ground doth drink the dew of Hermon hill, And Sion with his silver drops the fields with fruit doth fill: Even so the Lord doth pour on them his blessings manifold, Whose hearts and minds without all guile this knot do keep and hold. Ecce nunc. Psal. cxxxiv. W. W. BEhold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord, Which in his house by night do watch: praise him with one accord. Lift up your hands on high unto his holy place, And give the Lord his praises due, his benefits embrace. For why? the Lord who did both earth and heaven frame, Doth Sion bless, and will conserve for evermore the same. Laudate nomen. Psal. cxxxv. N. O Praise the Lord, praise him, praise him, praise him with one accord: O praise him still all ye that be the servants of the Lord▪ O praise him ye that stand and be in the house of the Lord: Ye of his court, and of his house praise him with one accord. Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, sing praises to his Name: It is a comely and good thing always to do the same For why? the Lord hath chose Jacob his very own ye see: So hath he chosen Israel his treasure for to he. For this I know and am right sure, the Lord is very great: He is indeed above all gods most easie to intreat. For whatsoever pleased him all that full well he wrought: In heaven, in earth, and in the sea, which he hath made of nought. He lifts up clouds even from the earth, he makes lightnings and rain, He bringeth forth the winds also, he made nothing in vain. He smote the first-born of each thing in Egypt that took rest: He spared there no living thing, the man nor yet the beast. He hath in thee shew'd wonders great, O Egypt void of vaunts, On Pharaoh thy cursed king, and his severe servants. He smote then many nations, and did great acts and things: He slew the great and mightiest and chiefest of their kings. Sehon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Basan: He slew also the kingdoms all that were of Canaan: And gave their land to Israel, an heritage we see, To Israel his own people, an heritage to be. The second part. Thy Name, O Lord, shall still endure, and thy memorial Throughout all generations that are or ever shall. The Lord will surely now avenge his people all indeed: And to his servants he will shew favour in time of need. The idols of the heathen are made in all the coasts and lands; Of silver and of gold they be, the work even of mens hands. They have their mouthes, and cannot speak, and eyes that have no sight: They have eke ears, and hear nothing, their mouthes be breathless quite. Wherefore all they are like to them that so do set them forth: And likewise those that trust in them, or think they be ought worth. O all ye house of Israel, see that ye praise the Lord: And ye that be of Aarons house, praise him with one accord. And ye that be of Levi's house, praise ye likewise the Lord: And ye that stand in aw of him, praise him with one accord. And out of Sion sound his praise, the great praise of the Lord Which dwelleth in Jerusalem: praise him with one accord. Confitemini Dom. Psal. cxxxvi. N. PRraise ye the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. Give praise unto the God of gods, for his mercy endureth for ever. Give praise unto the Lord of lords, for his mercy endureth for ever. Which onely doth great wondrous works, for his mercy endureth for ever. Which by his wisdom made the heavens, for his mercy endureth for ever. Which on the waters stretch the earth, for his mercy endureth for ever. Which made great lights to shine abroad, for his mercy endureth for ever. As sun to rule the lightsom day, for his mercy, &c. The moon and stars to guide the night, for his mercy, &c. Which smote Egypt with their first-born, for his mercy, &c. And Israel brought out from thence, for his mercy, &c. With mighty hand and stretched arm, for his mercy, &c. Which cut the Red sea in two parts, for his mercy, &c. And Israel made pass there-through, for his mercy, &c. And drowned Pharaoh and his host, for his mercy, &c. Through wilderness his people led, for his mercy, &c. He which did smite great noble kings, for his mercy, &c. And which hath slain the mighty kings, for his mercy, &c. As Sehon king of Amorites, for his mercy, &c. And Og the king of Basan land, for his mercy, &c. And gave their land for heritage, for his mercy, &c. Even to his servant Israel, for his mercy, &c. Rememberng us in base estate, for his mercy, &c. And from oppressours rescued us, for his mercy, &c. Which giveth food unto all flesh, for his mercy, &c. Praise ye the Lord of heaven above, for his mercy endureth for ever. Give thanks unto the Lord of lords, for his mercy endureth for ever. Another of the same, by T. C. O Laud the Lord benigne, Whose mercies last for ay: Give thanks and praises sing To God of gods, I say. For certainly His mercies dure Both firm and sure Eternally. The Lord of lords praise ye, Whose mercies ay do dure: Great wonders onely he Doth work by his great power, For certainly, &c. Which God omnipotent By his great wisdom high The heavenly firmament Did frame as we may see. For certainly, &c. Yea, he the heavy charge Of all the earth did stretch: And on the waters large The same he did out reach. For certainly, &c. Great lights he made to be; For why? his love is ay: Such as the sun we see, To rule the lightsom day. For certainly, &c. And eke the moon so clear Which shineth in our sight, And stars that do appear. To guide the darksom night. For certainly, &c. With grievous plagues and sore All Egypt smote he than: The first-born less and more He slew of beast and man. For certainly, &c. And from amidst their land His Israel forth brought: Which he with mighty hand And stretched arm hath wrought. For certainly, &c. The sea he cut in two, Which stood up like a wall: And made through it to go His chosen children all. For certainly, &c. But there he whelmed then The proud king Pharaoh With his huge host of men, And chariots eke also. For certainly, &c. Who led through wilderness His people safe and sound: And for his love endless Great kings he brought to ground. For certainly, &c. And slew with puissant hand Kings mighty and of fame: As of Amorites land Sehon the king by name. For certainly, &c.
And Og (the giant large) Of Basan king also: Whose land for heritage He gave his people tho. For certainly, &c. Even unto Israel His servant dear, I say, He gave the same to dwell, And there abide for ay. For certainly, &c. To minde he did us call In our most base degree: And from oppressours all In safety set us free. For certainly, &c. All flesh in earth abroad With food he doth fulfill: Wherefore of heaven the God To laud be it your will. For certainly, &c. Super fumina. Psal. cxxxvii. W. W. WHen as we sat in Babylon the rivers round about, And in remembrance of Sion the tears for grief burst out: We hang'd our harps and instruments the willow-trees upon: For in that place men for their use had planted many a one. Then they to whom we prisoners were, said to us tauntingly, Now let us hear your Hebrew songs, and pleasant melody. Alas! said we, who can once frame his sorrowful heart to sing The praises of our loving God, thus under a strange king? But yet if I Jerusalem out of my heart let slide: Then let my singers quite forget the warbling harp to guide. And let my tongue within my mouth be ty'd for ever fast, If that I joy before I see thy full deliverance past. Therefore, O Lord, remember now the cursed noise and cry That Edoms sons against us made, when they ras'd our city. Remember, Lord, their cruel words, when as with one accord They cry'd, On, sack, and rase their walls, in despight of their Lord. Even so shalt thou, O Babylon, at length to dust be brought: And happy shall that man be call'd, that our revenge hath wrought. Yea, blessed shall that man be call'd, that takes thy children young To dash their bones against hard stones that lie the streets among. Confitebor tibi. Psal. cxxxviii. N. THee will I praise with my whole heart, my Lord my God, always: Even in the presence of the gods I will advance thy praise. Toward thy holy temple I will look and worship thee: And praised in my thankful mouth thy holy Name shall be. Even for thy loving kindness sake, and for thy truth withall. For thou thy Name hast by thy word advanced over all. When I did call thou heardest me, and thou hast made also The power of increased strength within my soul to grow. Yea, all the kings on earth, they shall give praise to thee, O Lord: For they of thy most holy mouth have heard the mighty word. They of the ways of God the Lord in singing shall entreat: Because the glory of the Lord it is exceeding great. The Lord is high, and yet he doth behold the lowly sprite: But he (contemning) knows afar the proud and lofty wight. Although in midst of trouble I do walk, yet shall I stand Renewed by thee: O my Lord, thou wilt stretch out thy hand Upon the wrath of all my foes, and saved shall I be By thy right hand: the Lord God will perform his work to me. Thy mercy, Lord, endures for ay, Lord, do me not forsake: Forsake me not that am the work which thine own hand did make. Domine, probasti. Psal. cxxxix. N. O Lord, thou hast me try'd and known, my sitting thou dost know And ring eke, my thoughts afar thou understand'st also. My paths, yea, and my lying down thou compassest always: And by familiar custom art acquainted with my ways. No word is in my tongue, O Lord, but known it is to thee: Thou me behinde hold'st and before, thou lay'st thine hand on me. Too wonderful above my reach, Lord, is thy cunning skill: It is so high that I the same cannot attain untill. From sight of thy all-seeing Spirit, Lord, whither shall I go? Or whither shall I flee away thy presence to scape fro? To heaven if I mount aloft, lo, thou art present there: In hell if I lie down below, even there thou dost appear. Yea, let me take the morning wings, and let me go and bide Even there where are the farthest parts, where flowing sea doth slide: Yea, even thither also shall thy reaching hand me guide; And thy right hand shall hold me fast, and make me to abide. Yea, if I say, The darkness shall yet shroud me from thy sight: Lo, even also the darkest night about me shall be light. Yea, darkness hideth not from thee, but night doth shine as day: To thee the darkness and the light are both alike alway. The second part. For thou possessed hast my reins, and thou hast covered me, When I within my mothers womb enclosed was by thee. Thee will I praise, made fearfully and wondrously I am: Thy works are marvellous, right well my soul doth know the same. My bones they are not hid from thee, although in secret place I have been made, and in the earth beneath I shaped was. When I was formless, then thine eye saw me: for in thy book Were written all, nought was before that after fashion took. The thoughts therefore of thee, O God, how dear are they to me! And of them all how passing great the endless number be! If I should count them, lo, their sum more then the land I see: And whensoever I awake yet am I still with thee. The wicked and the bloudy men O that thou wouldest slay! Even those, O God, to whom, Depart, depart from me, I say. Even those of thee, O Lord my God, that speak full wickedly: Those that are lifted up in vain, being enemies to thee. Hate I not them that hate thee, Lord, and that in earnest wise? Contend I not against them all against thee that arise? I hate them with unfeigned hate, even as my utter foes. Try me, O God, and know my heart, my thoughts prove and disclose. Consider, Lord, if wickedness in me there any be: And in thy way, O God my Guide, forever lead thou me. Eripe me. Psal. cxl. N. LOrd, save me from the evil man, and from the cruel wight: And from all those which evil do imagine in their sprite. Which make on me continual war, their tongues lo they have whet Like serpents; underneath their lips is adders poison set, Keep me, O Lord, from wicked hands, preserve me to abide Free from the cruel man, that means to cause my steps to slide. The proud have laid a snare for me, and they have spread a net With cords in my path-way, and grins for me eke have they set. Therefore I said unto the Lord. Thou art my God alone: Hear me, O Lord, O hear the voice wherewith I pray and mone. O Lord my God, thou onely art the strength that saveth me: My head in day of battel hath been covered still by thee. Let not. O Lord, the wicked have the end of his desire: Perform not his ill thoughts, left he with pride be set on fire. Of them that compass me about, the chiefest of them all, Lord, let the mischief of their lips upon themselves befall. Let coals fall on them, let him cast them in consuming flame, And in deep pits; so as they may not rise out of the same. For no backbiter shall on earth be set in stable plight: And evil to destruction still shall hunt the cruel wight. I know the Lord th' afflicted will revenge, and judge the poor: The just shall praise thy Name: just shall dwell with thee evermore. Domine, clamavi. Psal. cxli. N. O Lord, upon thee do I call, Lord, haste thee unto me: And hearken, Lord, unto my voice when I do cry to thee. As incense let my prayers be directed in thine eyes: And the uplifting of my hands as evening sacrifice. My Lord, for guiding of my mouth set thou a watch before: And also of my moving lips, O Lord, keep thou the door. That I should wicked works commit incline thou not my heart: With ill men of their delicates, Lord, let me eat no part. But let the righteous smite me, Lord, for that is good for me: Let him reprove me, and the same a precious oyl shall be. Such smiting shall not break my head, the time shall shortly fall When I shall in their misery make prayers for them all. Then when in stony places down their judges shall be cast: Then shall they hear my words, for then they have a pleasant taste. Our bones about the graves mouth lo, scatt'red are they found: As he that heweth wood, or he that diggeth up the ground. But, O my Lord my God, mine eyes do look up unto thee: In thee is all my trust, let not my soul forsaken be. Which they have laid to catch me in, Lord, keep me from the snare, And from the subtil grins of them that wicked workers are. The wicked into their own nets together let them fall: While I do by thy help escape the danger of them all. Voce mea. Psal. cxlii. N. BEfore the Lord God with my voice I did send out my cry: And with my strained voice unto the Lord God prayed I. My meditation in his sight to pour I did not spare: And in the presence of the Lord my trouble did declare. Although perplexed was my spirit, my path was known to thee: In way where I did walk a snare they slily laid for me. I look'd and view'd on my right hand, but none there would me know: All refuge sailed me, and for my soul none cared tho. Then cry'd I, Lord, to thee, and said. My hope thou onely art: Thou in the land of living art my portion and my part. Heark to my cry, for I am brought full low, deliver me From them that do me persecute, for me too strong they be. That I may praise thy Name, my soul from prison, Lord, bring out: When thou art good to me, the just shall press me round about. Domine, exaudi. Psal. cxliii. N. LOrd, hear my prayer, heark the plaint that I do make to thee: Lord, in thy native truth and in thy justice answer me. In judgement with thy servant, Lord, O enter not at all: For justifi'd be in thy sight not one that liveth shall. The enemy hath pursu'd my soul, my life to ground hath thrown: And laid me in the dark, like them that dead are long agone. Within me in perplexity was mine accumbred sprite: And in me was my troubled heart amazed and affright. Yet I record time past, in all thy works I meditate: Yea, in thy works I meditate that thy hands have create. To thee, O Lord my God, lo I do stretch my craving hands: My soul desireth after thee, as do the thirsty lands. Hear me with speed, my spirit doth fail, hide not thy face me fro: Else shall I be like them that down into the pit do go. Let me thy loving kindness in the morning hear and know: For in thee is my trust, shew me the way where I shall go. For I lift up my soul to thee, O Lord, deliver me From all mine enemies: for I have hidden me with thee. Teach me to do thy will, for thou, thou art my God, I say, Let thy good Spirit unto the land of mercy me convey. For thy Names sake with quickning grace alive do thou me make: And out of trouble bring my soul even for thy justice sake. And for thy mercy slay my foes, O Lord, destroy them all That do oppress my soul, for I thy servant am and shall. Benedictus Dom. Psal. cxliv. N. BLest be the Lord my strength, that doth instruct my hands to fight: The Lord that doth my fingers frame to battel by his might. He is my goodness, sort, and tower, deliverer and shield: In him I trust; my people he subdues to me to yeeld. O Lord, what thing is man, that him thou holdest so in price? Or son of man, that upon him thou thinkest in such wise? Man is but like to vanity, so pass his days to end As fleeting shade. Bow down, O Lord, the heavens, and descend. The mountains touch, and they shall smoke; cast forth thy lightning flame, And scatter them: thine arrows shoot, consume them with the same. Send down thine hand even from above, O Lord, deliver me: Take me from waters great, from hand of strangers make me free. Whose subtil mouth of vanity and fondness doth entreat: And their right hand is a right hand of falshood and deceit. A new song will I sing, O God, and singing will I be On viol and on instrument ten-stringed unto thee. Even he it is that onely gives deliverance to kings: Unto his servant David help from hurtful sword be brings.
From strangers hand me save and shield, whose mouths talks vanity: And their right hand is a right hand of guie and subtilty. That our sons may be as the plants whom growing youth doth rear: Our daughters as carv'd corner-stones, like to a palace fair: Our garners full, and plenty may with sundry sorts be found: Our sheep bring thousands, in our streets ten thousands may abound. Our oxen be to labour strong, that none do us invade: There be no goings out, nor cries within our streets be made. The people blessed are that with such blessings are so stor'd: Yea, blessed all the people are whose God is God the Lord. Exaltabo te. Psal. cxlv. N. THee will I laud, my God and King, and bless thy Name for ay: For ever will I praise thy Name, and bless thee day by day. Great is the Lord, most worthy praise, his greatness none can reach: From race to race they shall thy works praise, and thy power preach. I of thy glorious majesty the beauty will record: And meditate upon thy works most wonderful, O Lord. And they shall of thy power, and of thy fearful acts declare: And I to publish all abroad thy greatness will not spare. And they into the mention shall break of thy goodness great: And I aloud thy righteousness in singing shall repeat. The Lord our God is gracious, and merciful also: Of great abounding mercy, and to anger he is slow: Yea, good to all; and all his works his mercy doth exceed: Lo, all thy works do praise thee, Lord, and do thy honour spread. Thy saints do bless thee, and they do thy kingdoms glory show: And blaze thy power, to cause the sons of men thy power to know; The second part. And of his mighty kingdom eke to spread the glorious praise. Thy kingdom, Lord, a kingdom is that doth endure always: And thy dominion through each age endures without decay. The Lord upholdeth them that fall, their sliding he doth stay. The eyes of all do wait on thee: thou dost them all relieve: And thou to each sufficing food in season due dost give. Thou openest thy plenteous hand, and bounteously dost fill All things what soever do live, with gifts of thy good will. The Lord is just in all his ways, his works are holy all. Near all he is that call on him, in truth that on him call. He the desires which they require that fear him will fulfill: And he will hear them when they cry, and save them all he will. The Lord preserves all those, to him that bear a loving heart: But he them all that wicked are will utterly subvert. My thankful mouth shall gladly speak the praises of the Lord: All flesh to praise his holy Name for ever shall accord. Lauda, anima. Psal. cxlvi. J. H. MY soul, praise thou the Lord always, my God I will confess: While breath and life prolong my days, my tongue no time shall cease. Trust not in worldly princes then, though they abound in wealth: Nor in the sons of mortal men, in whom there is no health. For why? their breath doth soon depart, to earth anon they fall: And then the counsels of their heart decay and perish all. O happy is that man, I say, whom Jacobs God doth aid, And he whose hope doth not decay, but on the Lord is staid. Which made the earth and waters deep, the heavens high withall: Which doth his word and promise keep in truth, and ever shall. With right always doth he proceed for such as suffer wrong: The poor and hungry he doth feed, and loose the fetters strong. The Lord doth send the blinde their sight, the lame to limbs restore: The Lord, I say, doth love the right and just man evermore. He doth defend the fatherless, and stranger sad in heart, And quit the widow from distress, and ill mens ways subvert. Thy Lord and God eternally, O Sion, still shall reign, In time of all posterity for ever to remain. Laudate Dominum. Psal. cxlvii. N. PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good unto our God to sing: For it is pleasant, and to praise it is a comely thing. The Lord his own Jerusalem he buildeth up alone: And the disperst of Israel doth gather into one. He heals the broken in their heart, their sores up doth he binde: He counts the number of the stars, and names them in their kinde. Great is the Lord, great is his power, his wisdom infinite. The Lord relieves the meek, and throws to ground the wicked wight. Sing unto God the Lord with praise, unto the Lord rejoyce: And to our God upon the harp advance your singing voice. He covers heaven with clouds, and for the earth prepareth rain: And on the mountains he doth make the grass to grow again. He gives to beasts their food, and to young ravens when they cry. His pleasure not in strength of horse nor in mans legs doth ly: But in all those that fear the Lord the Lord hath his delight, And such as do attend upon his mercies shining light. The second part. O praise the Lord, Jerusalem, thy God, O Sion, praise: For he the bars hath forged strong, wherewith thy gates he stays. Thy children he hath blest in thee, and in thy borders he Doth settle peace, and with the flour of wheat he filleth thee. And his commandement upon the earth he sendeth out: And eke his word with speedy course doth swiftly run about. He giveth snow like wooll, hoar-frost like ashes he doth spread: Like morsels casts his ice, thereof the cold who can abide? He sendeth forth his mightyword, and melteth them again: His wind he makes to blow, and then the waters flow amain. The doctrine of his holy word to Jacob he doth show: His statutes and his judgements he gives Israel to know. With every nation hath he not so dealt, nor have they known His secret judgements; ye therefore praise ye the Lord alone. Laudate Dominum. Psal. cxlviii. J. H. GIve laud unto the Lord, From heaven that is so high: Praise him in deed and word, Above the starry skie. And also ye, His angels all, Armies royall, Praise him with glee. Praise him both moon and sun, Which are so clear and bright: The same of you be done, Ye glistring stars of light: And eke no less, Ye heavens fair, And clouds of the air, His laud express. For at his word they were All formed as we see: At his voice did appear All things in their degree, Which he set fast; To them he made A law and trade For ay to last. Extol and praise Gods Name On earth ye dragons fell: All deeps do ye the same, For it becomes ye well. Him magnifie, Fire, hail, ice, snow, And storms that blow At his decree. The hills and mountains all, And trees that fruitful are, The cedars great and tall His worthy praise declare, Beasts and cattel, Yea birds flying, And worms creeping, That on earth dwell. All kings both more and less With all their pompous train, Princes and all judges That in the world remain, Exalt his Name. Young men and maids, Old men and babes, Do ye the same. For his Name shall we prove To be most excellent. Whose praise is far above The earth and firmament. For sure he shall Exalt with bliss The horn of his, And help them all. His saints all shall forth tell His praise and worthiness, The children of Israel Each one both more and less: And also they That with good will His words fulfil, And him obey. Cantate Domino. Psal. cxlix. N. SIng ye unto the Lord our God a new rejoycing song: And let the praise of him be heard his holy saints among. Let Israel rejoyce in him that made him of nothing: And let the seed of Sion eke be joyful in their King. Let them sound praise with voice of fu unto his holy Name: And with the timbrel and the harp sing praises of the same. For why? the Lord his pleasure all hath in his people set: And by deliverance he will raise the meek to glory great. With glory and with honour now let all his saints rejoyce: And now aloud upon their beds advance their singing voice. And in their mouths let be the acts of God the mighty Lord: And in their hands eke let them bear a double-edged sword: To plague the heathen, and correct the people with their hands: To binde their stately kings in chains, their lords in iron hands: To execute on them the doom that written is before. This honour all his saints shall have, praise ye the Lord therefore. Laudate dominum. Psal. cl. N. YEeld unto God the mighty Lord praise in his sanctuary: And praise him in the firmament, that shews his power on high. Advance his Name, and praise him in his mighty acts always: According to his excellencie of greatness give him praise. His praises with the princely noise of sounding trumpets blow: Praise him upon the viol, and upon the harp also. Praise him with timbrel and with flute, organs and virginals: With sounding cymbals praise ye him, praise him with loud cymbals. What ever hath the benefit of breathing, praise the Lord: To praise the Name of God the Lord agree with one accord. The end of the Psalms.
A song to be sung before morn∣ing prayer. T B. PRraise ye the Lord, ye Gentiles all, Which hath brought you into his light: O praise him all people mortal. as it is most worthy and right. For he is full determined on us to pour out his mercy: And the Lords truth be ye assur'd abideth perpetually. Glory be to God the Father, and to Jesus Christ his true Son, With th'holy Ghost in like manner, now and at every season. A song to be sung before evening prayer. BEhold now give heed, such as be the Lords servants faithful and true: Come praise the Lord every degree, with such sons as to him are due. O ye that stand in the Lords house, even in our own God, mansion, Praise ye the Lord so bounteous: which worketh our salvation. List up your hands in his holy place, yea, and that in the time of night: Praise ye the Lord which gives all grace, for he is a Lord of great might. Then shall the Lord out of Sion, which made heaven & earth by his power Give to you and your nation his blessing, mercy, and favour. Glory be to God the Father, &c. The ten Commandments of God. Exod. 20. W W. ATtend my people and give ear, Of ferly things I will thee tell: See that my words in minde thou bear, And to my precepts listen well. I am thy sovereign Lord and God, Which have thee brought from careful thral And eke reclaim'd from Pharaohs rod: Make thee no gods on them to call: Nor fashioned form of any thing In heaven or earth to worship it: For I thy God by revenging With grievous plagues this in will smite. Take not in vain Gods holy Name, Abuse it not after thy will: For so thou might'st soon purchase blame, And in his wrath he would thee spill. The Lord from work ye seventh day ceast, And brought all things to perfect end: So thou and thine that day take rest, That to Gods hefts ye may attend. Unto thy parents honour give, As Gods commandments do intend: That thou long days and good mayst live In earth where God a place doth lend. Beware of murder and cruel hate. All filthy fornication fear. See thou steal not in any rate. False witness against no man bear. Thy neighbours house wish not to have, His wife, or ought that he calls mine: His field, his ox, his ass, his slave, Or anything which is not thine. A Prayer. The Spirit of grace grant us, O Lord, To keep these laws our hearts restore: And cause us all with one accord To magnifie thy Name therefore. For of our selves no strength we have To keep these laws after thy will: Thy might therefore, O Christ, we crave, That we in thee may them fulfil. Lord, for thy Names sake grant us this, Thou art our strength, O Saviour Christ: Of thee to speed how should we miss, In whom our treasure doth consist? To thee for evermore be praise, With the Father in each respect, And with the holy Spirit always, The Comforter of thine elect. The Lords Prayer. D. Cox. OUr Father which in heaven art. And mak'st us all one brotherhood, To call upon thee with one heart, Our heavenly Father and our God: Grant we pray not with lips alone, But with our hearts deep sigh and grone. Thy blessed Name be sanctifi'd, Thy holy word might us inflame, In holy life for to abide To magnifie thy holy Name. From all errours defend and keep The little flock of thy poor sheep. Thy kingdom come even at this hour, And henceforth everlastingly: Thine holy Ghost into us pour, With all his gifts most plenteously. From Satans rage and filthy band Defend us with thy mighty hand. Thy will be done with diligence, Like as in heaven in earth also: In trouble grant us patience, Thee to obey in wealth and wo. Let not flesh, bloud, or any ill, Prevail against thy holy will. Give us this day our daily bread, And all other good gifts of thine: Keep us from war, and from bloudshed, Also from sickness, dearth, and pine: That we may live in quietness, Without all greedy carefulness. Forgive us our offences all, Relieve our careful conscience; As we forgive both great and small Which unto us have done offence. Prepare us, Lord, for to serve thee In perfect love and unitie. O Lord, into temptation Lead us not; when the fiend doth rage, To withstand his invasion Give power and strength to every age. Arm and make strong thy feeble host With faith, and with the holy Ghost. O Lord, from evil deliver us, The days and times are dangerous: From everlasting death save us, And in our last need comfort us: A blessed end to us bequeath, Into thy hands our souls receive. For thou, O Lord, art King of kings, And thou hast power over all: Thy glory shineth in all things, In the wide world universal. Amen, let it be done, O Lord, That we have pray'd with one accord. The twelve Articles of the Christian Faith. ALl my belief and confidence is in the Lord of might; The Father which all things hath made, the day and eke the night: The heavens and the firmament, and also many a star: The earth and all that is therein, which pass mans reason far. And in like manner I beleeve in Christ our Lord his Son, Coequal with the Deity, and man in flesh and bone: Con ceived by the holy Ghost, his word doth me assure: And of his mother Mary born, yet she a virgin pure. Because mankinde to Satan was for sin in bond and thrall: He came and offered up himself to death, to save us all. And suffering most grievous pain, then Pilate being judge, Was crucified on the cross, and thereat did not grudge. And so he died in the flesh, but quickned in the sprite: His body then was buried, as is our use and rite. His soul did after this descend into the lower parts: A dread unto the wicked sprites, but joy to faithful hearts. And in the third day of his death he rose to life again, To th' end he might be glorifi'd, out of all grief and pain. Ascending to the heavens high, to fit in glory still On Gods right hand his Father dear, according to his will; Until the day of judgement come, when he shall come again With angels power (yet of that day we all be uncertain) To judge all people righteously, whom he hath dearly bought: The living and the dead also, which he hath made of nought. And in the holy Spirit of God, my faith to satisfie, The third person in Trinitie beleeve I stedfastly: The holy and catholick Church that Gods word doth maintain, And holy Scripture doth allow, which Satan doth disdain. And also I do trust to have by Jesus Christ his death Release and pardon of my sins, and that onely by faith: What time all flesh shall rise again before the Lord of might; And see him with their bodily eyes, which now do give them light. And then shall Christ our Saviour the sheep and goats divide, And give life everlastingly to those whom he hath tri'd: Within his realm celestial in glory for to rest, With all his holy company of saints and angels blest; Which serve the Lord omnipotent obediently each hour: To whom be all dominion and praise for evermore. A prayer to the holy Ghost, to be sung before the Sermon. COme holy Spirit the God of might, Comforter of us all: Teach us to know thy word aright, that we do never fall. O holy Ghost, visit our coast, defend us with thy shield: Against all sin and wickedness, Lord, help us win the field. Lord, keep our King and his counsel, and give them will and might To persevere in thy Gospel, which can put sin to flight. O Lord, that giv'st thy holy word, send preachers plenteously: That in the same we may accord, and therein live and die. O holy Spirit, direct aright the preachers of thy word, That thou by them mayst cut down sin as it were with a sword. Depart not from thy pastours pure, but aid them at their need: Which break to us the bread of life, whereon our souls do feed. O blessed Spirit of truth keep us in peace and unity, Keep us from sects and errours all, and from all papistry. Convert all those that are our foes, and bring them to thy light: That they and we may well agree, and praise thee day and night. O Lord, increase our saith in us, and love so to abound; That man and wife be void of strife, and neighbours about us round. In our time give thy peace, O Lord, to nations far and nigh: And teach them all thy holy word, that we may sing to thee. All glory to the Trinity that is of mighties most: The living Father, and the Son, and eke the holy Ghost. As it hath been in all the time that hath been heretofore: As it is now, and so shall be henceforth for evermore. Da pacem, Domine. GIve peace in these our days, O Lord, Great dangers are now at hand: Thine enemies with one accord Christs Name in every land Seek to deface, Root out and rase Thy true right worship indeed. Be thou the stay, Lord, we thee pray. Thou help'st alone in all need. Give us that peace that we do lack Through misbelief and ill life: Thy word to offer thou dost not slack, Which we unkindly gain-strive. With fire and sword This healthful word Some persecute and oppress: Some with the mouth Confess the truth Without sincere godliness. Give peace, and us thy Spirit down send, With grief and repentance true Do pierce our hearts, our lives to amend And by faith in Christ renew: That fear and dread, War and bloudshed, Through thy sweet mercy and grace, May from us slide: Thy truth may bide, And shine in every place. The Lamentation. O Lord, in thee is all my trust, give ear unto my woful cry: Refuse me not that am unjust, but bowing down thy heavenly eye, Behold how I do still lament my ins wherein I do offend: O Lord, for them shall I be shent, sith thee to please I do intend? No, no; not so thy will is bent to deal with sinners in thine ire: But when in heart they shall repent, thou grant'st with speed their just desire, To thee therefore still shall I cry, to wash away my sinful crime: Thy bloud, O Lord, is not yet dry but that it may help me in time. Haste thee, O Lord, haste thee, I say, to pour on me thy gifts of grace, That when this life shall flit away in heaven with thee I may have place: Where thou dost reign eternally with God which once did down thee send, Where angels sing continually: to thee be praise world without end. A Thanksgiving after the receiving of the Lords Supper. THe Lord be thanked for his gifts and mercies evermore That he doth shew unto his saints: to him be laud therefore. Our tongues cannot so praise the Lord as he doth right deserve: Our hearts cannot of him so think as he doth us preserve. His benefits they be so great to us that be but sin, That at our hands for recompence there is no hope to win. O sinful flesh, that thou shouldst have such mercies of the Lord! Thou dost deserve most worthily of him to be abhorr'd. Nought else but sin and wretchedness doth rest within our earts: And stubbornly against the Lord we daily play our parts. The sun above in firmament that is to us a light, Doth shew it self more clear and pure then we be in his sight. The heavens above and all therein more holy are then we: They serve the Lord in their estate, each one in his degree. They do not strive for mastership, nor slack their office set: But serve the Lord and do his will, hate is to them no let. Also the earth and all therein of God it is in aw, It doth observe the formers will, by skilful natures law. The sea and all that is therein doth bend when God doth beck: The spirits beneath do tremble all, and fear his wrathful check. But we (alas!) o whom all these were made them for to rule, Do not so know or love the Lord as doth the ox or mule A law he gave for us to know, what was his holy will He would us good, but we would not avoid the thing is ill. Not one of us that seeketh out the Lord of life to please:
Nor doth the thing that might us lead to Christ and quiet ease. Thus are we all his enemies, we can it not deny: And he again of his good will would not that we should dy. Therefore when remedy was none to bring us unto life, The Son of God our flesh he took to end our mortal strife. And all the law of God the Lord he did it full obey: And for our sins upon the cross his bloud our debts did pay. And that we should not yet forget what good he to us wrought, A signe he left our eyes to tell that he our bodies bought. In bread and wine here visible unto thine eyes and taste, His mercies great thou mayst record if that his Spirit thou hast. As once the corn did live and grow, and was cut down with lithe, And threshed out with many stripes, out from his husk to drive; And as the mill with violence did tear it out so small, And made it like to earthly dust, not sparing it at all; And as the oven with fire hot did close it up with heat, And all this done that I have said, that it should be our meat: So was the Lord in his ripe age cut down by cruel death: His soul he gave in torments great, and yeelded up his breath. Because that he to us might be an everlasting bread, With much reproach and troubles great on earth his life he led. And as the grapes in pleasant time are pressed very sore, And plucked down when they be ripe, and let to grow no more; Because the juyce that in them is as comfortable drink We might receive, and joyful be when sorrows make us shrink: So Christ his bloud out pressed was with nails and eke with spear: The juyce thereof doth save all those that rightly do him fear. And as the corns by unity into one loaf are knit: So is the Lord and his whole Church, though he in heaven sit. As many grapes make but one wine, so should we be but one—. In faith and love in Christ above, and unto Christ alone: Leading a life without all strife, in quiet rest and peace: From envy and from malice both our hearts and tongues to cease. Which if we do, then shall we shew that we his chosen be: By faith in him to lead a life as always willed he. And that we may so do indeed, God send us all his grace: Then after death we shall be sure with him to have a place. R. W. PReserve us, Lord, by thy dear word; From Turk and Pope defend us Lord: Which both would thrust out of his throne Our Lord Jesus Christ thy dear Son. Lord Jesus Christ, shew forth thy might, That thou art Lord of lords by right: Thy poor afflicted flock defend, That we may praise thee without end. God holy Ghost our Comforter, Be our patron, help, and succour: Give us one minde and perfect peace, All gifts of grace in us increase. Thou living God in persons three, Thy name be prais'd in unitie: In all our need so us defend, That we may praise thee without end. FINIS. PRAYERS. A form of prayer to be used in private houses every morning and evening. Morning prayer. ALmighty God and most merci∣ful Father, we do not present our selves here before thy Ma∣jesty, trusting in our own me∣rits or worthiness, but in thy manifold mercies, which hast promised to hear our prayers, and grant our requests which we shall make to thee in the name of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who also hath commanded us to assem∣ble ourselves together in his name, with full assurance that he will not onely be amongst us, but also be our Mediatour and Advocate towards thy Majesty, that we may obtain all things which shall seem expedient to thy blessed will, for our necessities. Therefore we beseech thee, most merciful Father, to turn thy loving countenance towards us, and impute not unto us our manifold sins and offences, whereby we justly deserve thy wrath and sharp punishment, but ra∣ther receive us to thy mercy, for Jesus Christs sake, accepting his death and passion as a just recompence for all our offences, in whom thou art well pleased, and through whom thou canst not be offended with us. And seeing that of thy great mercies we have quietly pas∣sed this night: grant (O heavenly Fa∣ther) that we may bestow this day whol∣ly in thy service, so that all our thoughts, words, and deeds may redound to the glory of thy great name, and good ex∣ample to all men, who seeing our good works may glorify thee our heavenly Father. And forasmuch as of thy mere favour and love thou hast not onely created us to thine own similitude and likeness, but also hast chosen us to be heirs with thy dear Son Jesus Christ, of that im∣mortal kingdom which thou preparedst for us from the beginning of the world; we beseech thee to increase our faith and knowledge, and to lighten our hearts with thy holy Spirit, that we may in the mean time live in godly conversation and integrity of life, knowing that ido∣laters, adulterers, covetous men, con∣tentious persons, drunkards, gluttons, and such like, shall not inherit the king∣dom of God. And because thou hast commanded us to pray one for another, we do not onely make request, O Lord, for our selves, and for them that thou hast already called to the true understanding of thy heavenly will, but for all people and nations of the world; who as they know by thy won∣derful works that thou art God over all,  they may be instructed by thy holy Spirit to beleeve in thee their onely Sa∣viour and Redeemer. But forasmuch as they cannot beleeve except they hear, nor cannot hear but by preaching, and none can preach except they be sent: therefore, O Lord, raise up faith∣ful distributers of thy mysteries, who setting apart all worldly respects, may both in their life and doctrine onely seek thy glory. Contrarily, confound Satan and Antichrist, with all hirelings, whom thou hast already cast off into a reprobate sense, that they may not by sects, schisms, heresies and errours, disquiet thy little flock. And because, O Lord, we be fallen into the latter days and dangerous times, wherein igno∣rance hath gotten the upper hand, and Satan by his ministers seeketh by all means to quench the light of thy gospel; we beseech thee to maintain thy cause against those ravening wolves, and strengthen all thy servants whom they keep in prison and bondage. Let not thy long-suffering be an occasion either to increase their tyranny, or to discou∣rage thy children: neither yet let our sins and wickedness be an hinderance to thy mercies, but with speed, O Lord, con∣sider these great miseries. For thy peo∣ple Israel many times by their sins provoked thine anger, and thou pu∣nishedst them by thy just judgement: yet though their sins were never so grievous, if they once returned from their iniqui∣ty, thou receivedst them to mercy. We therefore, most wretched sinners, bewail our manifold sins, and earnestly repent us of our former wickedness, and ungodly behaviour towards thee: and whereas we cannot of our selves purchase thy pardon, yet we humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christs sake, to shew thy mercies upon us, & receive us again to thy favour. Grant us, dear Father, these our requests, and all other things necessary for us and thy whole Church, according to thy promise in Jesus Christ our Lord: In whose name we beseech thee as he hath taught us, saying, Our Father which art, &c. Evening prayer. O Lord God, Father everlasting, and full of pity, we acknowledge and confess that we be not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much less to present our selves before thy Majesty, with con∣fidence that thou wilt hear our prayers, and grant our requests, if we consider our own deservings; for our consciences do accuse us, and our sins do witness against us and we know that thou art an upright Judge, which dost not justify the sinners and wicked men, but punishest the faults of all such as transgress thy command∣ments: yet, most merciful Father, since it hath pleased thee to command us to call on thee in all our troubles and ad∣versities, promising even then to help us, when we feel our selves as it were swallowed up of death and desperation; we utterly renounce all worldly confi∣dence, and the to thy sovereign bounty as our onely stay and refuge: beseech∣ing thee not to call to remembrance our manifold sins and wickedness, where∣by we continually provoke thy wrath and indignation against us; neither our neg∣ligence and unkindness, which have nei∣ther worthily esteemed, nor in our lives sufficiently expressed the sweet comfort of thy gospel revealed unto us: but rather to accept the obedience and death of thy Son Jesus Christ, who by offering up his body in sacrifice once for all, hath made a sufficient recompence for all our sins. Have mercy therefore upon us, O Lord, and forgive us our offences. Teach us by thy holy Spirit that we may rightly weigh them, and earnestly re∣pent us for the same. And so much the rather, O Lord, because that the repro∣bate and such as thou hast forsaken can∣not praise thee, nor call upon thy name; but the repenting heart, the sorrowful minde, the conscience oppressed, hun∣gring and thirsting for thy grace, shall ever set forth thy praise and glory. And albeit we be but worms and dust, yet thou art our Creatour, and we be the work of thy hands; yea, thou art our Father, and we thy children; thou art our Shepherd, and we thy flock; thou art our Redeemer, and we thy people whom thou hast bought; thou art our God, and we thine inheritance. Correct us not therefore in thine anger, O Lord, neither according to our deserts punish us, but mercifully chastise us with a fatherly affection, that all the world may know, that at what time so ever a sinner doth repent him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, thou wilt put away all his wickedness out of thy remembrance, as thou hast promi∣sed by thy holy prophet. Finally, forasmuch as it hath pleased thee to make the night for man to rest in, as thou hast ordained him the day to travail in; grant, O dear Father, that we may so take our bodily rest, that our souls may continually watch for the time that our Lord Jesus Christ shall ap∣pear for our deliverance out of this mor∣tal life: and in the mean season that we not overcome by any fantasies, dreams, or other temptations, may fully set our minds upon thee, love thee, fear thee, and rest in thee: furthermore, that our sleep be not excessive or overmuch, after the insatiable desires of the flesh, but onely sufficient to content our weak nature, that we may be the better dispo∣sed to live in all godly conversation, to the glory of thy most holy name, and the profit of our brethren. So be it. A godly prayer to be said at all times. HOnour and praise be given to thee, O Lord God almighty, most dear Father of heaven, for all thy mercies and loving kindness shewed unto us, in that it hath pleased thy gracious good∣ness, freely and of thine own accord, to elect and choose us to salvation, before the beginning of the world; and even like continual thanks be given to thee for creating us after thine own image, for redeeming us with the precious bloud of thy dear Son when we were ut∣terly lost, for sanctifying us with thy ho∣ly Spirit in the revelation and know∣ledge of thy holy word, for helping and succouring us in all our needs and ne∣cessities, for saving us from all dangers of body and soul, for comforting us so fatherly in all our tribulations and perse∣cutions, for sparing us so long and giving us so large a time of repentance. These benefits, O most merciful Father, like as we acknowledge to have received them of thy onely goodness; even so we beseech thee for thy dear Son Jesus Christs sake, grant us always thy holy Spirit, that we may continually grow in thankfulness towards thee, to be led in all truth, and comforted in all our adver∣sities. O Lord, strengthen our faith, kin∣dle it more in ferventness and love to∣wards thee, and our neighbours for thy sake. Suffer us not, most dear Father, to receive thy word any more in vain: but grant us always the assistance of thy grace and holy Spirit, that in heart, word and deed we may sanctify and do worship to thy name, help to amplify and in∣crease thy kingdom, and whatsoever thou sendest, we may be heartily well content with thy good pleasure and will. Let us not lack the thing, O Father, without the which we cannot serve thee; but bless thou so all the works of our hands, that we may have sufficient, and not be chargeable, but rather helpful to others. Be merciful, O Lord, to our offences; and seeing our debt is great which thou hast forgiven us in Jesus Christ, make us to love thee and our neighbours so much ye more. Be thou our Father, our captain and defender in all temptations, hold thou us by thy merciful hand, that we may be delivered from all inconveniences, and end our lives in the sanctifying and honouring of thy holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord and onely Saviour. So be it. Let thy mighty hand and out-stretched arm, O Lord, be still our defence; thy mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son, our salvation; thy true and holy word, our instruction; thy grace and holy Spirit, our comfort and consolation, unto the end and in the end. So be it. O Lord, increase our faith. A confession for all estates and times. O Eternal God and most merciful Fa∣ther, we confess and acknowledge here before thy divine Majesty, that we are miserable sinners, conceived and born in sin and iniquity, so that in us there is no goodness. For the flesh ever∣more rebelleth against the spirit, where∣by we continually transgress thy holy precepts and commandments, and so purchase to our selves through thy just judgement, death and damnation. Not∣withstanding, O heavenly Father, foras∣much as we are displeased with our selves for the sins ye we have committed
against thee, and do unfeignedly repent us of the same, we most humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christs sake to shew thy mercy upon us, to forgive us all our sins, and increase thy holy Spirit in us, that we acknowledging from the bottom of our hearts our own unrighteousness, may from henceforth not onely mortifie our sinful lusts and affections, but also bring forth such fruits as may be agreeable to thy most blessed will, not for the wor∣thiness thereof, but for the merits of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ our one∣ly Saviour, whom thou hast already gi∣ven an oblation and offering for our sins, and for whose sake we are certain∣ly perswaded that thou wilt deny us no∣thing that we shall ask in his name, ac∣cording to thy will; for thy Spirit doth assure our consciences that thou art our merciful Father, and so lovest us thy children through him, that nothing is able to remove thy heavenly grace and favour from us. To thee therefore, O Fa∣ther, with thy Son, and the holy Ghost, be all honour and glory world without end. Amen. A prayer to be said before a man begin his work. O Lord God most merciful Father and Saviour, seeing it hath pleased thee to command us to travail, that we may relieve our need; we beseech thee of thy grace so to bless our labours, that thy blessing may extend unto us, with∣out the which we are not able to conti∣nue; and that this great favour may be a witness unto us of thy bountifulness and assistance, so that thereby we may know the fatherly care that thou hast over us. Moreover, O Lord, we beseech thee, that thou wouldst strengthen us with thy holy Spirit, that we may faith∣fully travail in our estate and vocation, without fraud or deceit; and that we may endeavour our selves to follow thy holy ordinance, rather then to seek to satisfie our greedy affections, or desire to gain. And if it please thee, O Lord to prosper our labour, give us a minde also to help them that have need, according to that ability that thou of thy mercy shalt give us. And knowing that all good things come of thee, grant that we may humble our selves to our neigh∣bours, and not by any means lift up our selves above them which have not recei∣ved so liberal a portion as thou of thy mercy hast given unto us. And if it please thee to try and exercise us by greater poverty and need then our flesh would desire, that thou wouldst yet, O Lord, grant us grace to know that thou wilt nourish us continually through thy bountiful liberality, that we be not so tempted that we fall into distrust, but that we may patiently wait till thou fill us, not onely with corporal graces and benefits, but chiefly with thy hea∣venly and spiritual treasures, to the in∣tent that we may always have more am∣ple occasion to give thee thanks, and so wholly to rest upon thy mercies. Hear s, O Lord of mercy, through Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord and Saviour. Amen. A prayer for the whole estate of Christs Church. ALmighty God and most merciful Fa∣ther, we humbly submit our selves and fall down before thy divine Majesty, beseeching thee from the bottom of our hearts, that the seed of thy word now sown amongst us, may take such deep root, that neither the burning heat of persecution cause it to wither, neither the thorny cares of this life choke it; but that as seed sown in good ground, it may bring forth thirty, sixty, and an hundre-fold, as thy heavenly wisdom hath appointed. And because we have need continually to crave many things at thy hands, we humbly beseech thee, O heavenly Father, to grant us thy holy Spirit to direct our petitions, that they may proceed from such a fervent minde, as may be agreeable to thy most blessed will. And seeing that our infirmity is able to do nothing without thy help, and that thou art not ignorant with how ma∣ny and great temptations we poor wretches are on every side inclosed and compassed; let thy strength, O Lord, su∣stain our weakness, that we being de∣fended with the force of thy grace, may be safely preserved against all assaults of Satan, who goeth about continually like a roaring lion seeking to devour us. In∣crease our faith, O merciful Father, that we do not swerve at any time from thy heavenly word; but augment in us hope and love, with a careful keeping of all thy commandments, that no hardness of heart, no hypocrisie, no concupiscence of the eyes, nor inticements of the world, do draw us away from thy obedience. And seeing we live now in these most perilous times, let thy fatherly provi∣dence defend us against the violence of our enemies, which do seek by all means to oppress thy truth. Furthermore, forasmuch as by thy ho∣ly Apostle we be taught to make our prayers and supplications for all men; we pray not onely for our selves here present, but beseech thee also, to reduce all such as be yet ignorant, from the mi∣serable captivity of blindness and errour, to the pure understanding and know∣ledge of thy heavenly truth, that we all with one consent, and unity of minde, may worship thee our onely God and Saviour: and that all pastours, shep∣herds and ministers, to whom thou hast committed the dispensation of thy holy word and charge of thy chosen people, may both in their life and doctrine be found faithful, setting onely before their eyes thy glory; and that by them all poor sheep which wander and go astray, may be gathered and brought home to thy fold. Moreover, because the hearts of all rulers are in thy hands, we be∣seech thee to direct and govern the hearts of all kings, princes, and magi∣strates, to whom thou hast committed the sword. Especially, O Lord, according to our bounden duty, we beseech thee to maintain and increase the honourable estate of the Kings majesty, and all his most noble counsellers and magistrates, with all the spiritual pastours and mini∣sters, and all the whole body of this common-weal. Let thy fatherly favour so preserve them, and thy holy Spirit so govern their hearts, that they may in such sort execute their office, that thy religion may be purely maintained, manners reformed, and sin punished, ac∣cording to the precise rule of thy holy word. And for that we be all members of the mystical body of Jesus Christ, we make our requests unto thee, O heaven∣ly Father, for all such as are afflicted with any kinde of cross or tribulation, as war, plague, famine, sickness, poverty, im∣prisonment, persecution, banishment, or any other kinde of thy rods, whether it be calamity of body, or vexation of minde; that it would please thee to give them patience and constancy, till thou send them full deliverance out of all their troubles. Root out from hence, O Lord, all ravening wolves, which to fill their bellies seek to destroy thy flock. And shew thy great mercies upon those our brethren in other countreys, which are persecuted, cast into prison, and daily condemned for the testimony of thy truth: and although they be utterly de∣stitute of all mans aid, yet let thy sweet comfort never depart from them; but so inflame their hearts with thy holy Spirit, that they may boldly and cheerfully abide such trial, as thy good wisdom shall appoint; so that at length, as well by their death as by their life, the kingdom of thy dear Son Jesus Christ may in∣crease and shine through all the world. In whose name we make our humble pe∣titions unto thee as he hath taught us: Our Father which art, &c. The confession of the Christian Faith. I Beleeve and confess my Lord God, eternal, infinite, unmeasurable, in∣comprehensible, and invisible, one in substance, and three in person, Father, Son, and holy Ghost: who by his almigh∣ty power and wisdom, hath not onely of nothing created heaven and earth, and all things therein contained, and man after his own image, that he might in him be glorified; but also by his father∣ly providence governeth, maintaineth, and preserveth the same according to the purpose of his will. I beleeve also and confess Jesus Christ the onely Saviour and Messias: who be∣ing equal with God, made himself of no reputation, but took on him the shape of a servant, and became man, in all things like unto us except sin, to assure us of mercy and forgiveness. For when through our father Adams transgression, we were become children of perdition, there was no means to bring us from the yoke of sin and damnation, but onely Je∣sus Christ our Lord; who giving us that by grace, which was his by nature, made us through faith the children of God: Who when the fulness of time was come, was conceived by the power of the holy Ghost, born of the virgin Mary ac∣cording to the flesh, and preached in earth the Gospel of salvation: till at length by tyranny of the priests, he was guiltless condemned under Pontius Pi∣late then President of Jewry, and most slanderously hanged on the cross be∣tween two theeves, as a notorious tres∣passer; where taking upon him the pu∣nishment of our sins, he delivered us from the curse of the law. And forasmuch as he being onely God could not feel death, neither being onely man could overcome death; he joyned both toge∣ther, and suffered his humanity to be pu∣nished with most cruel death, feeling in himself the anger and severe judgement of God, even as he had been in extreme torments of hell, and therefore cried with a loud voice, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Thus of his mer∣cy without compulsion, he offered up himself as the onely sacrifice to purge the sins of all the world: So that all other sacrifices for sin are blasphemous, and derogate from the sufficiency here∣of. Which death albeit it did sufficient∣ly reconcile us to God, yet the Scri∣ptures commonly do attribute our rege∣neration to his resurrection. For as by rising again from the grave the third day, he conquered death; even so the vi∣ctory of our faith standeth in his resur∣rection: and therefore without the one we cannot feel the benefits of the other. For as by his death sin was taken away, so our righteousness was restored by his resurrection. And because he would ac∣complish all things, and take possession for us in his kingdom, he ascended into heaven to enlarge the same kingdom by the abundant power of his Spirit, by whom we are most assured of his conti∣nual intercession towards God the Fa∣ther for us. And although he be in hea∣ven as touching his corporal presence, where the Father hath now set him at his right hand, committing unto him the administration of all things, as well in heaven above, as in the earth beneath; yet is he present with us his members, even to the end of the world, in pre∣serving and governing us with his effe∣ctual power and grace: Who, when all things are fulfilled which God hath spo∣ken by ye mouth of all his prophets since the world began, will come in the same visible form in the which he ascended, with an unspeakable majesty▪ power, and company, to separate the lambs from the goats, the elect from the reprobate: so that none whether he be alive then, or dead before, shall escape his judgement. Moreover, I beleeve and confess the holy Ghost, God equal with the Father and the Son; who regenerateth and san∣ctifieth us, ruleth and guideth us unto all truth, perswading most assuredly in our consciences, that we be the children of God, brethren to Jesus Christ, and fel∣low heirs with him of life everlasting. Yet notwithstanding it is not suffici∣ent to beleeve that God is omnipotent and merciful, that Christ hath made sa∣tisfaction, or that the holy Ghost hath his power and effect, except we do apply the same benefits to us which are Gods elect. I beleeve therefore and confess one holy Church; which (as members of Jesus Christ the onely Head thereof) consent in faith, hope and charity, using the gifts of God, whether they be temporal or spi∣ritual, to the profit and furtherance of the same. Which Church is not seen to mans eye, but onely known to God: who of the lost sons of Adam, hath ordained some as vessels of wrath to damnation, and hath chosen others as vessels of his mercy to be saved; the which in due time he calleth to integrity of life, and godly conversation, to make them a glorious Church in himself. But that Church which is visible and seen to the eye, hath three tokens and marks whereby it may be known. First, the word of God con∣tained in the old and new Testament: Which as it is above the authority of the same Church, and onely sufficient to in∣struct us in all things concerning salva∣tion; so is it left for all degrees of men, to read and understand. For without this word, neither Church, Council, nor De∣cree can establish any point touching sal∣vation. The second is the holy Sacra∣ments, to wit, of Baptism, and the Lords Supper. Which Sacraments Christ hath left unto us as holy signs and leals of his promises. For as by Baptism once recei∣ved, is signified, that we (as well in∣fants, as others of age and discretion) being strangers from God by original sin, are received into his family and con∣gregation, with full assurance, that al∣though this root of sin lie hid in us, yet to the elect it shall not be imputed: so the Supper declareth, that God as a most provident Father, doth not onely feed our bodies, but also spiritually nourisheth our souls with the graces and benefits of Jesus Christ, which the Scripture cal∣leth eating of his flesh, and drinking of his bloud. Neither must we in the admi∣nistration of these Sacraments follow mans fantasie; but as Christ himself hath ordained, so must they be ministred, and by such as by ordinary vocation are thereunto called. Therefore whosoever reserveth and worshippeth these Sacra∣ments, or contrariwise contemneth them in time and place, procureth to himself damnation. The third mark of this Church is Ecclesiastical Discipline; which standeth in admonition, and cor∣rection of faults. The final end whereof is excommunication by the consent of the Church determined, if the offender be obstinate. And besides this Ecclesi∣astical Discipline, I acknowledge to be∣long to this Church a politick magi∣strate, who ministreth to every man ju∣stice, defending the good, and punishing the evil; to whom we must render honour and obedience in all things which are not contrary to the word of God. And as Moses, Ezechias, Josias, and other good rulers purged the Church of God from superstition and idolatry: so the defence of Christs Church appertaineth to Chri∣stian magistrates, against all idolaters and hereticks, as Papists, Anabaptists, with such like limbs of Antichrist, to root out all doctrine of devils and men; as the mass, purgatory, limbus patrum, prayers to saints, and for the dead, free-will, distinction of meats, apparel and days, vows of single life, presence at idol-service, mans merits, with such like, which draw us from the society of Christs Church wherein standeth onely remission of sins, purchased by Christs bloud to all them that beleeve, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, and lead us to a vain confidence in creatures, and trust in our own imaginations. The punish∣ment whereof although God oftentimes deferreth in this life, yet after the gene∣ral resurrection, when our souls and bo∣dies shall rise again to immortality, they shall be damned to unquenchable fire: and then we which have forsaken all mens wisdom to cleave unto Christ, shall hear the joyful voice, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world; and so shall go triumphing with him in body and soul to remain everlastingly in glory, where we shall see God face to face, and shall no more need to instruct one another; we shall all know him from the highest to the lowest. To whom with the Son and the holy Ghost, be all praise, honour, and glory, now and ever. So be it, FINIS.
A Table for the whole Number of Psalms, and also in what leaf you may finde every of them. Psalm. A Folio. 30 ALl laud and praise 7 49 All people 10 78 Attend my people 16 82 Amid the preass 17 100 All people that 20   B   81 BE light and glad 17 119 Blessed are they 24 128 Blessed art thou 27 134 Behold and have 27 142 Before the Lord 28 144 Blest be the Lord 28   D   83 DO not, O God. 17   E   127 EXcept the Lord 26   G   29 GIve to the Lord 7 37 Grudge not to see 8 48 Great is the Lord 10 54 God save me for 11 105 Give praises unto 21 107 Give thanks unto 22 148 Give laud unto 29   H   12 HElp, Lord, for 4 13 How long will 4 51 Have mercy on me 11 56 Have mercy, Lord, 12 67 Have mercy on us 13 73 How ever it be 15 84 How pleasant is 17 91 He that within 19   I   5 INcline thine ears 3 11 I trust in God 4 20 In trouble and 5 25 I lift my heart 6 34 I will give laud 7 39 I said, I will 9 40 I waited long 9 43 Judge and revenge 9 77 I with my voice 15 92 It is a thing 19 100 In God the Lord 20 101 I mercy will and 20 109 In speechless 23 116 I love the Lord 23 120 In trouble and in 26 121 I lift mine eyes 26 122 I did in heart 26   L   6 LOrd, in thy 3 16 Lord, keep 4 26 Lord, be my Judge 6 35 Lord, plead my 8 42 Like as the hart 9 68 Let God arise 13 72 Lord, give thy 14 86 Lord, bow thine 17 88 Lord God of 18 30 Lord, to thee 27 140 Lord, save me 28 143 Lord, hear my 28   M   23 MY shepherd is 6 45 My heart doth 10 62 My soul to God 13 71 My Lord my God, 14 103 My soul, give laud 20 104 My soul, praise the 21 146 My soul, praise thou 29   N   115 NOt unto us 23 124 Now Israel 26   O   3 O Lord, how are 3 4 O God that art 3 7 O Lord my God, 3 8 O God our Lord, 3 15 O Lord, within thy 4 17 O Lord, give eat 4 18 O God, my strength 5 21 O Lord, how joyful 5 22 O God my God, 5 31 O Lord, I put my 7 Psalm.   Folio. 44 Our ears have heard 9 51 O Lord, consider 11 55 O God, give ear 12 60 O Lord, thou didst 12 63 O God my God, 13 64 O Lord, unto my 13 70 O God, to me 14 79 O God, the Gentiles 16 94 O Lord, thou dost 19 95 O come let us 19 98 O sing ye now 20 102 O hear my prayer 20 108 O God, my heart 22 117 O all ye national 24 118 O give ye thanks 24 123 O Lord that 26 129 Oft they (now 27 131 O Lord, I am not 27 133 O how happy a thing 27 135 O praise the Lord, 27 136 O laud the Lord 27 139 O Lord, thou hast 28 141 O Lord, upon thee 28   P   38 PUt me not to 8 106 Praise ye the Lord 21 136 Praise ye the Lord, 27 147 Praise ye the Lord, 29   R   61 REgard, O Lord, 12 132 Remember Davids 27   S   59 SEnd aid and save me 12 69 Save me, O God, 14 96 Sing ye with praise 19 125 Such as in God 26 149 Sing ye unto 29   T   1 THe man is blest that hath 3 14 There is no God 4 19 The heavens and 5 23 The Lord is onely 6 24 The earth is all 6 27 The Lord is both 6 28 Thou art, O Lord, 6 32 The man is blest 7 36 The wicked with 8 41 The man is blest that careful 9 46 The Lord is our 10 50 The mighty God 10 50 The God of gods 11 53 The foolish man: 11 57 Take pity for thy 12 65 Thy praise alone: 13 76 To all that now in 15 80 Thou Herd that 16 85 Thou hast been 17 87 That city shall 18 89 To sing the mercies 18 90 Thou, Lord, hast been 18 93 The Lord as King doth 19 97 The Lord doth reign, 20 99 The Lord doth reign, 20 110 The Lord did say 23 112 The man is blest 23 125 Those that do put 26 138 Thee will I praise 28 145 Thee will I laud, 29   U   75 UNto thee, God, 15   W   2 WHy did the Gentiles 3 9 With heart and 3 10 What is the cause 4 52 Why dost thou, tyrant 11 74 Why art thou, Lord, 1 111 With heart I do 23 114 When Israel by 23 126 When that the Lord 26 137 When as we sat 28   Y   33 YE righteous in 7 47 Ye people all with 10 53 Ye rulers that 12 66 Ye men on earth 13 113 Ye children which 23 150 Yeeld unto God 29 Thee ye shall have in the beginning of the psalms. VEni Creater Spiritus The humble suit of a sinner. Venite exulteius Te Deum laudamus The song of the three children. Penedictus Magnificat anima mea Nune dimittis Quicunque vult The lamentation of a sinner. The Pater noster The ten Commandments. The complaint of a sinner, These ye shall have after the end of the psalms. PRaise ye the Lord, ye Gentiles Behold now give good heed Attend my people The Lords prayer. The Creed. A prayer to the holy Ghost. Da pacem. O Lord, in thee is all my A Thanksgiving. Preserve us Lord. FINIS.
