B2179A 51784370 174796
And the Lord Said, Write the Vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that He may Run, that read∣eth it, for the Vision is for an Ap∣pointed Time, &c. Heb. 2.2.3.The Testimony of T. Beverley according to Scripture Prophecy, concerning the Kingdom of Christ near Approoching, Summ'd up in these Following Positions. Position 1. A Truly Ʋniversal, Monarchy, or Kingdom from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the Ends of the Earth, even the Dominion under the whole Heaven is decreed by God to our Lord Jesus Christ, at the End of the Fourth, viz. the Roman Monarchy, yet in Being in the Papacy, in Order to Prepare for His Glorious Kingdom of a 1000 Years, in the New Heaven, and the New Earth, never to end, but to be deliver'd up to God All in All. Posit. 2. The Time of this Kingdom succeeding, may be known by due search of the Scripture, and its Prophesies; God ha∣ving Given therein a Line of Time, drawn throughout all Ages, either by its own History, or by its Prophecy; and because the Last Times are most notable, and of Greatest Concern to be known; and Given in Mystical, and Prophetical Delineations; The Line of Time drawn over those latter Times, is supported by Coincident, or Collatteral Lines, with such Evident Characters of Relation and Agreement, that no several Joynts of a Tube can be more known by any Marks, or fitness of their Commissures one with Another. Posit. 3. By such Search, There are several Great Reasons of Assurance, that the Time is 1697. for the Succession of that Kingdom: But that which may most easily Run into General Observation, is, That 1697 is the 180th Year from the Reforma∣tion, which Reformation could not have been with so known a Retrenchment of the Papal Kingdom, but after the manner of Christ's Rising on the Morning of the Third day, call'd yet Three days; when Time, Times, and Half a Time are Sworn by Christ to it, if the Half Time had not been Entred; which Half Time compared with Time and Times; (Time, Times, and Half Time being just equal unto 1260 Days for Years.) can be but an 180 Years; Seeing then the Apostasie of the Christian Church, hath in all Protestant Judgment stood so near 1260 Years, as by the Prophecy It ought to stand, and that the most Recorded Time of the Reformation Beginning, was 1517. The 180th from it must be 1697; And seeing, as soon as ever Papal Times cease, the King∣dom of Christ according to a Great Harmony of Scriptures, must succeed; The Succession of that Kingdom must be at 1697. Who can but lay All this together! It fairly Conspires, That the American New World, Such a one Most Re∣markably Branded Here∣sie in the deep Time of the Apostasie, by Pope Zechary. Anno 745. and the Magellanic Sea were so lately before the Reformation discovered; that according to that Landscaph of the Reformation, Revel. 10. Jesus Christ making his Entry, as we speak, and Claim of his Kingdom might set his Right Foot on the Sea, and his Left Foot on the Earth of a Larger, and Greater World, then had been Known before; and might with his Hand Lifted up to Heaven, Swear; That there should be no more Time, but the Half Time Running out; The Time of the Kingdom succeeding to prepare for its Glory, and then his Kingdom in Full Glory Brings in Time of a New date, as every New Kingdom does, and this is such Time, as never was before. Posit. 4. The Papal Kingdom having a Greater Interest in Half Time, though as of a Kingdom Retrench'd, then Christ in Regard of hi Oath for Half Time also, would Assume in it; So many of the Kings of the Christian Name, call'd the Ten Kongs, did upon so Great an Invitation to Recall their Power from the Beast, as the Reformation was; by a Joynt deliberate Act, as it were a Second Act with One con∣sent, Decree to Give their Kingdom still to the Beast, mention'd therefore a Second Time, and with this peculiar Remark on that Second Mention, untill the Words of God should be Fulfill'd in the Half Time also. Rev. 17.17. Seeing then this Second Act had its date from 1517, and that so many Kings and States could not have gone off, except It had been the Half Time entred, and that None of them shall Continue Longer with Him, then till the Words of God are Fulfilld in that Half Time also; How certain is it, There must be so Great a Change at 1697, the Half Times End, which so plainly Appears to be 97! On the same Account, The Reformation cannot be perfect, but in it will be Found Remains of the Apostasie, and this on the Account of the Oath of Christ for Half Time also; The Thunders therefore in that Foremention'd Landscaph▪ that open'd the Reformation so far, as we find it, were Seal'd; That it should proceed no further, but a far Greater Reformation be Expected at the End of Half Time, viz. 97. which will then certainly come to pass, wherein All Remains of Antichristianism will be purg'd off. Posit. 5. Those Two Scriptures urg'd so much against Search into Prophetic Times, Mark 13.32. Of that Day and Hour Knoweth no Man, &c. and Acts 1.7. It is not for you to Know the Times, and the Seasons, which the Father hath set in his own Power, may according to the Best, and most Agreed Rules for Interpreting Scripture, be demonstratively clear'd, to Intend no such Foreprizal, seeing so many Scriptures make plain the Abundant Communication of the Knowledge of Times from God to Christ, and from Christ to his Servants, especially in the Revelation, God Gave to Him to shew to His Servants; So that That Scripture stands Immutably Firm against all Cavill Rev. 1.3. Blessed is He that Readeth, and They that Hear the words of his Prophecy, most especially, now the Time is so near at Hand. Posit. 6. The Turkish Tyranny, being a Judgment on purpose designed, and set out in Prophecy, as a Jugdment on the Antichristian Apostasie, It cannot pass off either according to the nature of the Thing, or according to the Representation of Prophecy, till the Time Allowed to the Antichristian Apostasie be Ended, and that Remov'd. Posit. 7. The First Great Dawn of the Great Change, that will be at the Succession of the Kingdom of Christ, will be seen in the Suffering Reformed Churches, lying among the yet Continuing Popish Powers; wherein the Vaudois and the French Protestants, being the most Eminent, the Dealings of God towards Them, are especially to be Eyed according to the nearness of the present Time, to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to be waited for as the Great Signal of it; And it is now every day to be expected, and to be prayed for with all Fervent Prayer, as the effect of this next Summers Action, and our Prince's Appearance in it. Posit. 8. The Desolations on the Jewish People and State, are decreed, till the End of the War against Christ and his Kingdom, first by the Roman Pagan, and then by the Roman Antichristian Empire: As therefore the word War is made use of by Daniel, c 9.26. as the Bound∣ing of Jewish Desolations; So the word War is us'd by the Spirit of God as its own word, which It Kept in Memory in the Revelation, con∣cerning the Pagan Empire, Rev. 12.7. and concerning the Antichristian Empire; The word War is Three Times us'd, c. 11.7. c. 13. 7 c. 17.14. Now when the Kingdom of Christ is in Succession, the War will End, and so There is a Great Assurance, The Jews will be Call'd by the Preaching the Everlasting Gospel. Posit. 9. For the Preaching the Everlsting Gospel, (by which the Great Atchievments of the Kingdom of Christ will be obtain'd;) There will be a Pouring out of the Spirit, as in the Apostles days, and with a much more Perfect Universality, which shall first Bring forth the Full Orb'd Light, styled the  of the Gentile Churches, that have been so long under an  or Eclipse, and so shall Hasten in the Jews; Even All Israel, and make them Ready for the First Resurrection; For Their Full Light, or , much more then their  or Eclipse, or so long Diminution shall be the Riches of the World, and that Life from the Dead of the first Resurrection. Rom. 11.18. Posit. 10. The Cessation of the Extraordinary and Miraculous Gifts of the Holy Spirit, hath been in Permission of, and during the State of the Apostasie; For the Fullness of the Spirit is even Essential to the Glory of Redemption, and to the Kingdom of Messiah. Acts 2.17. Isa. 59.21. Posit. 11. As a Specimen of the Line of Time, drawn over the Last Times; I Affirm, that after that Great Vision of Ezekiel's Temple and City, and the Throne of God in it; There is that Grand Line of the 2300 Evens. Morns. in Daniel, as the Line of all Time, to the Kingdom of Christ from the End of the Babylonish Captivity, and the Entrance of Cyrus's Decree to Restore it; From Litte∣ral to Mystical Babylon Fal∣ling. c. 8. which is in the after Visions of Daniel, and of the Revelation, Parcelld out into lesser Lines; and all, and every one Engraven with Notes of the Temple, Sanctuary, or Dayly Sacrifice, to Indent with Ezekiels Vision, viz, 75 Y. With Great Beauty 75 Y. at first prepare for the Litteral. 75 at last pre∣pare for the New Jerusalem. as may by Computation be Found, for the Word going forth according to the Commandment of the God of Israel, by Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, Kings of Persia, Ezra 6.14. From thence 490 in the 70 Weeks Express, till the Anointing the Holiest by the Spirit, pour'd out on Christ without Measure; and then on his Apostles, and Christians as the Spiritual Temple, Dan. 9.24. Ephes. 2.21. Represented Rev. c. 4. From thence to the Temple, Measur'd and Shut up, with its Worshippers, and the Outward Court cast out, and Trodden under Foot of the Gentiles, Rev. 11.1. &c. and so the Dayly Sacrifice Taken away, as may be Computed 400 Y. From thence during the Abomi∣nation of the Apostasie, making Desolate to the Temple, seen on Mount Zion by the Followers of the Lamb in the Time of the 7th Trumpet, 1260 Express Years; From thence to the Temple open'd, and the Tabernacle of Testimony more Fully seen, (c. 15.5.8.) 30 Express Years making the 1260 1290. as Dan. 12. when the Temple was filled with Smoak from the Glory of the Lord, and his Power, during the Pouring out of the Vials, so that none could enter, v. 8. From thence to God and the Lamb, Bringing down their Tabernacle to be with Men, c. 21. v. 3. v. 22. and being the Temple of the New Jeru∣salem 45 Express Y. making the 1290 1335, when All the Servants of God shall stand in their Lots, Dan. 12.13. as the Kings and Priests of the New Jerusalem, and Ezekiel's Visional Throne, Ezek. 43.7. Even the Throne of God, and of the Lamb are in it, Rev. 22 3. All which make the 2300 Evens Morns. of Years to the Great Sabbatism, So from the Temple are the Two Voices, It is done, It is done. Rev. 16.17. c. 21.6. Posit. 12. There is no Parcel, or Collatteral Line of These 2300 Evens. Morns. but is under Express Prophetical Number, except the 75 of the Word going forth before the 70 Weeks, and the 400 from the 70 Weeks ending, unto the Churches going into the Wilderness upon the Apostasie Beginning. Now if the 400 Y. can be any way Ascertain'd, the 75 before the Weeks must needs be Ascertain'd also; because all the other parts but these Two being numbred, if the Certain Number of the 400 be fix'd, There can be no more then 75 at the first; Now therefore besides many Reasons of Essential Intimacy to the Prophecy of the Revelation, and to History, Assuring this Time was just 400 Y. as is elsewhere Fully Argued; It hath pleas'd God to bring to my mind this Great Observation. The only Prophetical, and Mystical Time God gave to his Church before the Babylonish Captivity, when All Time was drawing up into Prophecy, was the 400 Years, Given to Abra∣ham till His Posterities going out of AEgypt into the Wilderness, and the 40 Days for Years in the Wilderness; Between which 400 Years, and the 400 Years to the Christian Churches, Going into the Wilderness, and its being in the Wilderness, There are so many Admirable Agreements that must needs perswade, One was Intended for the other as a Type. 1. The 400 Y. were Given to Abraham on the Covenant Renewed by Sacrifice, so to the Christian Church, 400 Y. at the Covenant on Greatest Sacrifice Confirmed by Christ and his Apostles. Gen. 15.13. Dan. 9.27. 2. The first 400 Y. Reach'd to Pharaoh, as a Dragon, Essaying to destroy Israel, God's First born, by Killing the Male Children; so the Pagan Emperour Thought to devour the Imperial Manly Child Jesus Christ, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Revel. 12.2. &c. 3. When the Church of Israel went out from under Pharoah, It Immediately pass'd into the Wilderness; The Christian Church was no sooner Fully Free from the Pagan Persecution, but it went into the Wilderness, as the Revelations sets out, c. 12. 4. God carried Israel in∣to the Wilderness, as on Eagles Wings. The Christian Church was carried into a Retired State by a special Care of God to be Nourish'd in its place. 5. The Wilderness State was a State of Apostasie; So the Apostasie of Antichrist covered the General Christian Profession, and the True Church was Hid, as in a Wilderness. 6. There were Days for Years in the Wilderness; so in the Christian Church, the 1260 Days are Days for Years, and the 42 Months are Months of Years. 7. There were 42 Encampings, As it were Months. as the excellent Mr. Mede long ago observ'd, and They are Numb. 33, strictly reckon'd, and there are 42 Months of the Gentiles, As it were Mansions.and of the Beast Complicated into one. 8. As the Israelites provoking God by their Apostasie, caus'd their Long Stay in the Wilderness, so the Apostolizing Eastern, and Western Roman Empires VVings carried the Christian Church so far into the Wilderness. 9. As Israel was Fed with Manna, so the Christian True Church was Fed with Hidden Manna during the Apostasie. 10. As it had a Balam then to Seduce it, so had the Christian Church in its Wilderness State, Rev. 2.14.17. 11. As the Israelites had divine Protection as a Pillar of Cloud on the Tabernacle, that made the 42 Mansions As it were Months. or Delays to Canaan before spoken of: So the Christian Glory is under a divine Reserve, till the End of the Apostasie secur'd from All Enemies to its Future State, during the 42 Months of delay.As it were Mansions. 12. As the Cloud was a Night, and darkness to the AEgyptians, and Light to the Israelites. Exod. 14.20. So Spiritual Egypt is in a Dark Foul Place as in a Night, Accounted by Time of the Moon, or 42 M. but the True Israelitish Christian Church had, as the Appearance of Fire to Guide all its Motions: Saints Time is therefore accounted by the Day 1260 D. although in Sackcloth, because of the Apostasie. 13. As the Israelites moves to∣wards Canaan, were by divine direction by the Cloud taken off: so the Moves of All the Witnesses of Christ against Idolatry, Image-worship, Superstition was by that Dark Cloud of the Apostasie taken off from Them: so in the Enemies of Images, the Waldenses, John Hus, Jerome of Prague, Wickliff, the Bohemians, the Reformation, which was indeed like that small part of the Tribes, Reuben, Gad, the Half Tribe of Manasseh before the Rest, Possessing part of the Promised Lands, but still to be in Arms, as the Protestant Churches ought to be,Bind up the Testimony, seal the Law among my Disciples, and I will wait, &c. Isa. 8.16.17. &c. and not to Take Rest, Grandieur and splendor to Themselves till the Full Reformation, least that sin Find them out, as Numb. 32.23. 14. The End of the Wilderness was the Promised Land by Joshuah or Jesus: so the True Jesus and his Kingdom shall be the End of the Wilderness-state of the Christian Church. From All this I Conclude, That there being other most Substantial Proof, This Parallel is a very Assuring Illustration, that the Time from the 70 W. ended to the Church of Christ, going into the Wilderness, or being out of sight during the Apostasie, was just 400 Y. ending at 437, and so It must come out of the Wilderness 1697. after the 1260 Days for Years, and the 42 Months of Years Ended, and so is most certainly to be Expected; For 1260 Years from 437, must Terminate in 1697. The TESTIMONY is FINISH'D.
