c6778 99887668 183290
The Crafty MAID's APPROBATION: Wherein she shews either Black or Brown, 'Tis Mony makes them straight go down; When pretty Girls that Gold has none, Their fortune is still to lie alone. DRaw near to me young Girls so fine, Whose means and portion's like to mine: If you'll but hear what I have pen'd, 'Twill make you smile before I end: I once had Sweet-hearts fair and young, Tho' now from me he's fled and gone; But I'll tell you a very good reason why, 'Twas Mony did part my Love and I. When first to me a wooing h came, He id desire to know my name; I told him my portion it was but small, He said he valued none at all: So that my favour he could win, He valued nothing else a pin; But now he's gone and I knw not why, 'Twas mony, &c. Yet for three years his love stood fast, And he vow'd for ever it should last: But when my Friends spoke of the same, Then he was for another Dame; Except so much mony they'd give me, No Wif for him I must not be: His words he clearly did deny, So mony did part my Love and I. Thus Maids may see, so may I too, It is for mony young Men wooe: A great deal of love they will pretend, But mark what falls out in the end; When they find your portions are but small, Like to a snake from you they'll crawl; And to another straight they'll hye, So mony did part, &c. If I had a head like a horse, Or a body as thick as a mill-post; So bags came but tumbling in, Then my favour every Fool wou'd win; Or was I long snouted like a sow, Or else crook-backt like our fine cow: Have at her then, these Boys would cry, She's mony enough, and what care I. Young Men don't blush, you know 'tis true, For let her name be Mary or Sue; Tho' she was blabber-lipt, also blear-ey'd, Yet mony all those faults will hide; Nay, where she the nastist dingiest Slut, That a Man durst not after her crack a nut; Had she but mony, house, or land, I'm sure she would not stick long a hand. Yet we whose portions are but small, Let us not be dismaid at all: Neither let us grieve, lament, nor swound, For beauty's worth a thousand pound Hang't, though my first true Love be gone, I've the same face for another Man; And i'll prove honest till I dye, Though mony did part, &c. If two young Men talk of a Wench, As they do sit on an Ale-bench; She's a Good-huswife, the one replyes; But has she mony? the other cries: If she has none she's not for me, Give me the cash, hang huswifery, I love to finger that, for why, 'Tis mony did part, &c. By this young Girls may plainly see, How deceitful these young Men be; They'll search a Maid from top to toe, Till all her secrets they do know; Then if her means don't please his mind, He quickly can turn like the wind: I must have a Wife with more, he'll cry, So mony, &c. Such affection did that young Man bear, That he often called me his Dear: Such vows and oaths he made, 'tis known, But now he doth them quite disown: But since he's gone, sing farewel he, I'll slight him more than he does me; I'll ne'r lament, nor weep, nor cry, Though mony did part, &c. I am full glad we parted in truth, For since I hear he's a cross-grain'd Youth; But had he prov'd true, though ne'r so bare, In wealth or woe i'd dare a re; But now i'm free, i'll let that slide, And ne'r think more to be a Bride: There's nothing like to liberty, Since mony did part, &c. Thus have I told young Maidens all, How the weakest go to the wall; But she that is full and her purse well strung, She shall have Sweet-hearts come ding dong: It's no matter for breeding or sence, So she has but cash, he'll have the Wench; Black or brown, he looks not o' t' dye, 'Twas mony did part my Love and I. Licens'd and Enter'd according to Order. Printed by and for W. O. A. M. and sold by C. Bates. at the Bible and Sun in Pye-corner.
