C820A R232633 53981612 180143
Read, Try, Judge, And Speak as You Find. At the Black Ball and Old Lilly's Head, next Door to the Feather shops that are within Black-Friers Gate-way, which is over against Lud∣gate Church, just by Ludgate in London (through God's Mercy to do good) now liveth J. CASE, who succeeds in the room of Mr. Tho. Saffold lately deceased, who is an Approved and Licensed Physician, and Student in Astrology. Of Him The Sick may have Advice for Nothing. AND good Medicines Cheap, if so they please,For the publick good by Mrs. Elizab. Archer, who keeps a Turners shop in Church-street, near the Church at Greenwich in Kent, are to be sold Saffold's Pills and Elixir within mentioned, with plain Directions in Print how to use them to Cure as aforesaid. For to Cure any Curable Disease It's Saffold's Pills, much better than the rest, Deservedly have gain'd the Name of Best. In Curing by the Cause, quite purging out Of Scurvy, French-Pox, Agues, Stone and Got. The Head, Stomach, Belly, and the Reins, they Will cleanse and cure, while you may work or play. His Pills have often, to their Maker's Praise, Cur'd in all Weathers, yea, in the Dog-Days. In short, no Purging Medcine is made, can Cure more Diseases in Man or Woman. Than his cheap Pills, but Three Shillings the Box, A sure Cure for the Running Reins and POX. Each Box contains Thirty-six Pills I'm sure As good as e're were made, Scurvy to Cure. The half Box Eighteen Pills for Eighteen Pence, Though 'tis too cheap in any Man's own Sense. With a pleasant Liquor or Elixir for the same, at half a Crown the Bottle, which cureth all heat of Urine, and pain in making Water. Also the Scurvy, Dropsie, Agues, Stone and Gout (if Curable) as well as the Disease too much in fashion. Lastly, He Calculateth Nativities very exactly, and resolveth all manner of lawful Questions according to the Rules of Astrology, and more than 25 Years Experience. Licensed by Authority, according to Law. SOme Envious Men being griev'd may say, What need Bills thus still be given away? Answer, New People come to London every day. Believing Solomons Advice is right, I will do what I do with all my might. Also unless an English Proverb lies, Practice brings Experience and makes Wise. Experimental Knowledge I protest, In Lawful Arts and Science is the best, ead of Finis, I shall end with Rest.
