D1532 99887095 183301
Directions for Damosels, OR The Maidens advice, in an answer to the Young-mens Counseller. You that a kind good Husband lack Let me with you prevail, To choose a Brown or curious Black, These colours never fail. Tune of, All Trades. This may be Printed, R.P. O Now I have counsell'd young-men what Wives they have reason to choose; I tell the young Damsels again, what Husbands they ought to refuse Beware of fair men that can joke, with every Wind they can wave, And will your kind spirits provoke, and make you an absolute Slave. But as for the Brown and the Black, they both have a notable smack: Young Women may find them loving and kind, they'l give them whatever they lack. Ne'r marry one with a wey Beard, He is of the fumbling Crew; Of such I have often times heard, they little or nothing can do; And therefore, I pray now take heed, all Wey-Beards forever refrain; For when you are married indeed, 'tis never the near to complain. But as for the Brown, &c, The Sandy Complexion are Sots, and given to anger and strife, Who ever has such to their lots, they need no more plague in their life. From Ale-house to Ale-house they'l trudge, and make their Wives take all the care, Too often they make them their Drudge, of Sandy Complexion beware. But as for the Brown and the Black, they both have a notable smack: Young-women may find them loving & kind, The Flaxen, tho' ne'r so compleat, and by the young Damosels ador'd, Yet are they as full of deceit, as all the whole World can afford. They'l flatter, dissemble, and lie, poor innocent Girls to betray; And if to their will you comply, they'l pack up their Awls and away. But as for the Brown and the Black, they both have a notable smack: What promise they make they'l never forsake, they scorn to be found to flie back. Beware of the Yellow curl'd locks, such men are both wanton and wild; They'l play with the fine Holland Smocks, and get the young Lasses with Child: For pleasure abroad they will Roam, and lay the young Females along, Yet they'l do but little at home. what Woman can bear with this wrong. But as for the Brown and the Black, they both have a notable smack: Young-women may find them loving and kind, they'l give them whatever they lack. The Swarthy I cannot forget; and now to give them their desert, They have neither Beauty nor Wit, nor any commendable part: And therefore Remember the word, take no such lad sorrowful soul; They say they have need of a Bird, that will give a Groat for an Owl. But as for the Brown, &c. Beware of the head that is Grey, old-men they will jealousie breed, And think that the wanton you play, altho' you be honest indeed, He's chilly and cold in his blood, and never a Tooth in his Iaw; He'l do a young Wife no more good than tickle her Tale with a Straw. But as for the Brown, &c. The Flaxen and Grey I forbid, with Sandy, for bad is the best: But now I am come to the Red, which is seven times worse than the rest, He's full of ill humours, therefore he stinks, let him do what he can, As Ramish as any old Bore: what Woman can love such a Man. But as for the Brown &c. Young-men that are freckled and fair, are commonly given to lies: But black men and brown I declare, are known to be vertuous and wise, They hate for to wrangle and brawl, they honor and nourish their Wives, And never will wrong them at all, But love them as dear as their lives. Stand up for the Brown, &c. Young Damsels of e'ry degree, Whose Beauty does Batchelors charm, Come buy this New Ditty of me, good counsel can do you no harm; Tho' formerly you have bought many: this may keep your days free from strife, And then it will be the best Penny as e're you laid out in your life. Then Hey for the Brown and the Black, they both have a notable smack: Young Women may find them loving and kin they'l give them whatever they lack. Printed for I Deacon, at the Angel in Guiltspur-street, without Newgate.
