D1701 99884485 183313
The Distressed Damsels; OR, A lefull Ditty of a sorrowfull Assembly of young Maidens that were met together near Thames-street, to bewail the Loss of their Loves which were lately press'd away to Sea. To the Tune of an Orange. Licensed according to Order. My sweet Sister Sue, ah! what  shado? I I fain wou'd be married but know notl to who; or why, I protest, the young Men are Prest, nd my Sweetheart Robin is gone with the rest For a Seaman. Then Susan reply'd there's many beside, That Fortune this Summer will surely divide; Each sudden surprize will cause Lasses cries, While Tears they do trickle like Rain from the Skies, For our Sweethearts, There's Bess at the Bell you know her full well, A sorrowful story to me she did tell, That Thomas her Dear, was Prest she did hear, And then the poor Creature did tremble for fear He should leave her. In Thames-street of late, young pretty-fac,d Kate Had lost her dear sweeting, the Bricklayer her Mate; He was prest away but yet the next day They freed him, then Kate she did lovingly say. My sweet Johnny. In the open Street her John she did meet, And gave him a thousand soft Kisses so sweet, With stroaking his Chin, she welcom'd him in, For Ioy she was fit to leap out of her Skin, For her Johnny. There's Doll at the Swan, her true Love is gone, Poor Heart she with sorrow doth sigh and take on; Yet all is in vain, he is gone to the Main, She fears that he ne'er will return home again, To embrace her. There's Bridget & Joan 'tis very well known, Of Fourteen young Sweethearts they have not left one But all Prest on Board for to stand by the Sword, And this do's much Sorrow and Trouble afford, At the Parting. If Pressing goes on, there wont be a Man To please a young Lass, let her do what she can, For they will be scarce here in a short space, Then we shall be all in a sorrowful case, To be Married. Two Twelvemonths ago, sweet Sister you The Batchelors then we could bring to our Nay, at our Command, they stood Cap in But now they grow scarcy all over the Land, We must prize them. Young Nancy and Ned last week they were And within an hour of going to Bed, Iust in all their Pride he was Prest from he Before he had dallied one Night with his B Want it Pitty? To leave his delight, and Beauty so bright, Before he had ever enjoy'd her one Night; But what shall we say? he was Prest away, Now you that have Husbands adore them I They are Jewels. Last year I declare, young Maids was cho But now they grow wonderful plenty I sw All over the Town they walk up and down, I reckon you may have a Score for a Crown By Midsummer. Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I.  I. Back.
