D2899 99886648 181397
THE DUTCH GAZETTE: OR, The Sheet of Wild-Fire, that Fired the DUTCH FLEET. I'Le tell ye not of Etna's Flames, nor Troy's, That long agoe has fill'd the World with noise: Nor of Romances, nor of Histories, Done Ages long before, whose Obsequies Were sung by Laureate Pens; that which I tell, The Storyes of the World can't parallel. Rupert I sing, Duke Albemarle, and Homes, And of the rest, that sent those to their homes, Whose Pride and Envy, Hell it self ('twas such) Can't match, would you know who I mean, the Dutch. Who had a Hundred sixty Ships, and more, Of Merchant-men, lay sleeping on their Shore, And never dreamt of danger, till we came, And took them napping; Ask but Amsterdam, Who stood Spectators there, and saw their Sayles Transform'd to Sheets of Wildfire, and those Gales That use to swell and spread abroad their 'tire, Serve now as Bellows to set all on fire. For Guinnae some, others for Russia bound, Scarce one worth less than Fifteen thousand Pound. Did you ne'r see the Winged Troop, that flies From Flower to Flower, until their laden thighes Force a retreat? Did you ne'r see them strive, Which should goe richest laden to his Hive? Just so each Souldier, in a plnteous measure, Has made his Cabb'n, a Cabinet of Treasure. Silks, Hollands, Silver-spoons, Plate, Cloth of Gold, All had their choice to take what e're they would. These are the Dutch, that did but th' other day Make Bonefires o're their Land for Victorie,— But never thought of seeing This by Sea.— Where Helm and Rudder, Top, Top-sayl, and all, Within few hours to Dust and Ashes fall. Had but Will. Lilly seen this Blazing Comet, I'le lay my life it had portended Somewhat Of strange event, as he'd have made appear In his Prognostication for next Year. They'l block the Seas up, why then so they shall, No fitter Heads than theirs to do't withall; Where they may lay'um together, and counsel take, How many Bonefires they had best to make. Now will I loose the Pinion of my Quill, And dictate to my Muse a Word at will; That Fame it self, that Herauld (and not I) Shall shew the Blazon of our Victory. At which the World distracted stands with fear, And won't believe but that the Gods were there. Great MONK so thundered, that 'twas hard to say Whether 'twas He, or Fate, that got the Day. Smith sent such Thunderbolts as ne'r were madey By Vulcan, since he first wrought of his Trade; Who gaz'd, but durst not come within a Shot, For fear his other Legg had gone to Pott. 'Twas Smith, whose Sword so often quench'd in Blood, Return'd so hard, as not to be withstood.: Steel to the Hilt; this Proverb has he got, He ne'r strikes stroke until the Iron's hot. Had Goffe, Ben. Johnson, or had Shakespear been— Spectators there, such Acts they should have seen,— As they ne'r acted in an English Scean:— These fought with Blows, they only clash'd in Words; They fought with Foyls, but these with naked Swords. Here should they've seen an angry Sea their Stage, Cover'd with rolling Billows, Foam and Rage; Now sunk to Hell, anon with Pride so high, As if it gave defiance to the Skie. There should they've seen retiring Rooms of VVar, Such Rooms as farr excells Romes Theater: A Ghastful Scean, not Thebes, but Thetis VVomb, VVherein the Actors did themselves intomb. Here dives a Corps, there struggles one half dead; Here sinks a Trunk cut shorter by the Head; Here one 'twixt hope and fear thinks 'tis a dream; And there another strives against the stream; Here dive a hundred Dutch into their Graves; There dye as many 'mbracing of the VVaves; Here one turmoyls, and there another strives, Yet scarce two in a hundred save their lives. Such Musick as they had, had but Troy known, 'Twould quickly 've made the Grecians fled their Town. Had poor Ʋlysses heard but one broad-side, 'T had made him quake, and been afraid to ride The Grecian Horse, his wood'n Bucephalus Had been transform'd into a Pegasus. Had Monk but Thunder'd at proud Babels VVall, Babels proud Battlements had got a fall: Had th' Great Collossus stood where he discharges, He'd veyl'd his Bonnet to our Boanarges. Th' Aegyptian Pyramid (whose massie Tower, The Jawes of Time could never yet devour) VVhen he discharges, its proud Marbles must Lay down their palsey Heads within the Dust. Great Conquerours, could I your Worth indite, The World unworthy were of what I'de wtite. Your steely Souldiers too, I dare but name, For fear I over-charge the Trump of Fame, That caus'd the World proverbially to say, THEY fought like Englishmen, and wonn the Day. Return, Great Conquerours, live Men of Mirrour, Englands chief Glory, but the Dutches Terrour. VVho have a Tromp too, but the VVorld's to blame, If e're they take Him for the Trump of Fame. Finis. Licensed Aug. 20. Roger L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed by T. Leach, in Shooe-Lane, 1666.
