E456 99890196 182568
AN ELEGY Upon Marsh's one of the two Publick Sworn Informers against Protestant Religious meetings in the City of London, who lately dyed very miserably in the Prison of the Counter. Ultor a Tergo Deus. Go set Scotch Bag-Pipes to the briskest Notes, But let the Singing men rend all their Throats, Hang Tyburn round with Blocks, and let Ketch Squeeze His Eyes to Tears, having thus lost his Fees; My self (like a young Widdow) fain would Cry, But like her too, I know not how, nor why; Must get an Onion quickly, or else Woe Some Irish Poet for Alla-la-loo; Oh Hone! Oh Hone! tell us what didst thou ail Thus to trappan thy self into a Jail? Thou hadst a stout Protection and its said A lumping Pension for good service paid: Some Bribes thou got'st, and many a penalty Was due we trow, and why then wouldst thou dye? Thy Cloven-footed Masters work's not done, Thou shouldst have ruin'd thousands ere thou'dst gone. Thou shouldst have made each Nonconformist bow, And left them all as Poor as thou wert now; Then mounted on State with solemn pride, Thou mightst to Hell in guilded Chariot ride: Been Pluto's Vice-Roy, and preferred more Than Judas, or thy Brethren all before. But now alas! thou scare canst get i'th end To be the Groom o'th Close stool Chamber to the Fiend; But tis in vain thus to Expostulate, For poor Informers warrant's out of date; The Man of Gath is fal'n that did so stickle, And swore to confound each Conventicle; Grim death hath by a Seizure snatcht him hence, For to receive his Dear-earn'd Recompence: Follow the Scent, and from the Stygian Lake, Fit Junk for such a wretched Subject take; Black as his Trade let every Line appear, And each Ear Tingle his sad Fate shall hear, Not that I am of that Presumptious fry, whose sawcy fingers Pick-lock Destiny, Who snatch Fates book, and furiously transpose To Judgements all misfortunes of their Foes; Vertue may be unhappy, and sometimes Success here waits upon the worst of crimes, It is another Day, a clearer Light Must set all these seeming disorders right; Yet must we grant that Heaven does now and then Visibly punish Irreligious Men, And against none Its Arrows oftner fly Than these sworn Enemies to Piety, A Persecuting Spirit never yet But in a Cloud of shame and sorrow set; Just God! how equal are thy punishments Thus blasting base Designs with sad Events; Though Crafty in self woven Nets is wrapt And in the Pit he digg'd for others, trapt; Hark how the Ravens and the Screech-Owls cries. With frightful Ecchoes Chaunt his obsequies. Whether he's gone now Dead I shal not say But whilst alive he took the broader way If Pythagorean Tenets are not flams He's grown a Wolf by this, and worries Lambs. An Epitaph. Stay Reader! and Piss here, for it is said Under this Dirt there's an Informer laid, If Heaven be pleas'd when Mortals cease from sin And Hell be pleas'd when Villains enter in, If Earth be pleas'd when it entombs a Knave, Sure all are pleas'd, for Marsh's in his Grave. Printed in the Year 1675,
