H14 99887825 183480
A Merry new song wherein you may view The drinking Healths of a Ioviall Crew, To 'thappie Return of the Figure of Two The tune is, Ragged and torn and true. I Have béene a Traveller long, and séen the conditions of all, I sée how each other they wrong, and the weakest still goes to the wall: And here Ile begin to relate, the crosse condition of those, That hinder our happy state, and now are turned our Foes. Here's a health to the Figure of two, to the rest of the issue renown'd, Wee'l bid all our sorrows adieu, when the Figure of two shall be crown'd. I crossed the Ocean of late. and there I did méet with a crosse, But having a pretty estate, I never lamented my losse, I never lamented my harmes, and yet I was wondrous sad, I found all the Land up in Armes, and I thought all the folk had bin mad, Kind Country-men, how fell you out, I left you all quiet and still, But things are now brought so about; you nothing but Plunder and Kill: Some doe seeme seemingly holy, and would be Reformers of men, But wisdome doth laugh at their folly, and sayes, they'l be Children agen, Here's a Health, &c. But woe to the Figure of one, King Solomon telleth us so, But he shall be wronged by none that hath two strings to his Bow. How I love this Figure of two, among all the Figures that be, Ile moke it appeare unto you, if that you will listen to me, Here's a Health to the Figure of two, to the rest of the Issue Renown'd, Wee'l bid all our Sorrowes adieu
OBseeve when the weather is cold, I weare a Cap on my head, But wish, if I may be so bold the Figure of two in my bed. Two in my bed I doe crave, and that is my selfe and my Mate, But pray doe not think I would have two great large hornes on my pate. Here's a Health to the Figure of two, to the rest of the Issue Renown'd, Wee'l bid all our Sorrowes adue when the Figure of two shall be Crown'd, Since Nature hath given two hands, but when they are foule I might scorne them, Yet people thus much understands two fine white gloves will adorn them: Two féet for to be are up my body, no more had the Knight of the Sun, But people would thinke me a noddy if two shooes I would not put on. Here's a Health to the Figure of two, to the rest of the Issue Renown'd, Wee'l bid all our Sorrowes adieu when the Figure of two shall be Crown'd The Figure of two is a thing that we cannot well live without, No more then without a good King, though we be never so stout: And this we may well understand. if ever our Troubles should cease, Two needfull things in the Land is a King, and a Iustice of Peace. Here's a Health to the Figure of two, to the rest of the Issue Renown'd, Wee'l bid all our Sorrowes adieu when the Figure of two shall be Crown'd. And now for to draw to an end, I wish a good happie conclusion, The State would so much stand our friend to end this unhappie Confusion: The which might be done in a trice, in giving of Ceasar his due, If we were so honest and wise, to thinke on the Figure of two. Here's a Health to the Figure of two, to the rest of the Issue Renown'd, Wee'l bid all our Sorrowes adieu when the Figure of tow shall be Crown'd If any desire to know this Riddle I now will unfold, It is a Man wrapped in woe, whose Father is wrapped in mould: So now to conclude my Song, I mention him so much the rather, Because he hath suff'red some wrong; and beares up the name of his Father. Here's a Health to the Figure of two, to the rest of the Issue Renown'd, Wee'l bid all our Sorrowes adieu when the Figure of two shall be Crown'd.
