h491b 99887531 182264
The credit of Yorkeshire, or the Glory of the North, Or, A new way to pay the Malt man. To the Tune of the right Glory of the West. OF late I heard a dity, was sung in Town and City. And it was cald the Glory of the West; of a pretty Cavelier, That song was made as I do hear; and in my conceit it proved a pretty jest, But it you please to list a while, This Dity sure will make you smile, Wherein I will declare the same, of a gallant Northern Dame; Whose vertuous life, her constant love and worth, makes me intitle her the Glory of the North, Her hushand kept a Tavern and a noted Cavelier, for being in Pomfret Castle it cost his purse full dear. All the Gentry far and neare, resorted to this Cavelier. Some for love of him and others for his wife. Although content to all she gave, Yet so she would her credit save; her husband had no cause of jealousy nor strife. All sorts of Sexes thither came, for to view this comly Dame, And some in zeale would try her skill, to obtaine their wanton will, Bt it they were uncivell, shed cast them forth this jear, I pray hands of sir, touch not a Cavelier. though Caveleers are poore yet honest will bee And play our games so fairely we care not who do sée. Looke what sive so ere you be, you're welcome here bée sure quoth she, And such content as my house can afford you shall have at your command, But ide have you understand, I shun your company & if you were a Lord If you seeke to wrong my Name, or my credit do defame By your base uncivelty, then I shun your company; For if you seeke to wrong my honour o, be sure I then must take you for my husbands foe Comming or going a kisse i'le not deny, but otherwise tis troblesome and I doe it defie. Thus her vertues and her fame, had gaind her such an honest Name, Most of all that Country that lived both far and near, that no Inne wheresoere they went, Could give the Gentry such content. as they could have with this Northern Caveleer. Thus her credit's long set forth, she's cald the glory of the North, For being such a vertuous wife, and leading such a civill life. But yet it cost her husbands purss full dear; for being in Pomfret Castell was prov'd a Caveleer It cost his wife all the money shee could gaine her husbands liberty and freedome to obtaine. All the meanes that shee could make, it being for her husbands sake, Shée thought it not too much that she did do, when her husband shee had gaind, And his freedome had obtain'd, thus was her love so constant firm & true, Which brought them then in debt full sore, and chiefly on the Maltmans score, Who did on them no pity take, but thought a prize on him to make, Or on his wife; now marke this jest I pray, the man af last was deceived in his play, Her husband then in prison straight he cast, but this silly Malt-man did pay for't at last.
The second part, To the same tune. HIs wife then hearing of the same, unto the Malt-man straight shée came, And did desire him some course that he would take, that her husband might be freed, Quoth hee, swéete heart it is agreed, if that you'l consent to the bargain I wil make, So straight hee whisper'd in her eare, and told her that shee need not feare, For her husband hee would free, if to him shee would agree. That is quoth he to lodge with me one night I meane to keepe it secret and your courtesie requite, Your husband cannot know nor of it understand, grant but this request Love, & her's my heart & hand. Thus relating of his minde, she thought shee'd fit him in his kind, And out of prison her husband she would bring; to any motion i'le now consent, This knave, it séemes I must content, and nothing else will please him unlesse it be that thing. Quoth shee my wits i'le worke about, but sure i'le bring my husband out, And yet my credit I will save, but make of him a silly knave, Perhaps he thinks to make of mee his whore, but such a trick ile show him shall pay a Maltmans score, And teach such knaves more wit, when once they heare, how this Maltman was served by an honest Caveleer. Then to this Maltman shée replid, good sir your suit is not denied, But which way I pray shall my husband sir be fréed? quoth he, wéet heart I mean to make, A free acquittance for thy sake, grant but my request & it is done with spéed. Then come at such a night quoth she, and drink a pint of wine with me, Then to my Chamber you shall goe, none of my servants shall it know. This bargin being made, shee to the prison went, and there she told her husband all her full intent, Quoth she swéet heart come out with your kéeper such a night Come up unto my Chamber love and there clame your right. The time being come the Maltman went, and thought to give this wife content: Then to her chamber hee straight way was conveyd, the quittance in his hand he brought, To reade it then shee him besought; but full little thought hee poore foole hée was betraid, With her he then began to play▪ but shee desired him for to stay; Ide have you go to bed quoth shee, if that yu meane to sport with mée, And such content ere long to you i'le give, just cause youl have to think on me as long as you live He then puts off his cloths and into bed did go, this prity soule undrest her to but now begins his woe Her husband straight began to call quoth shée we are undone now all; The Maltman hearing that began to sigh for feare, quoth he where shall I go to hide? Here in this Chest quoth shée abide, for there is nothing in it but such cloths I weare. Then in he went, but little thought he to his shame should out be brought. Her husband straight came to the doore, what are you going to bed you whore, When I'm in prison cast and money want to spend, my kéeper here wants money & is my speciall friend. Alas you know sweet heart that I have none quoth shee, i'le search al these coffers here, but i'le find some saith he. Shée opened all about the Rome, but that which was the Maltmans Tomb. Come open this quoth hee, for here the treasure lies, sweet heart quoth shée rapy rest content. If this you see I shall be shent. the Maltman hearing this the teares ran downe his thighs. Before this Chest he opened▪ the Maltman lay like one stark dead. Quoth he here is a spirit here, but with my sword I will him reare. Kéeper saith he, here is mine enemy, and i'le be revenged upon him by & by, If that you'l spare my life sweet sir, I humbly pray, from all your debts i'le clear you sir untill this present day He then releast him of his debt, this Sparke was out of Prison let, And well contented to i'le warrant he was beside, tis thought the Maltman dearly payd, Because he had the Chest berayed. how happy is that man hath such an honest Bride Neere Pomfret doth this couple dwell, in London rode tis known full well, The Maltmans friends did me intreate, none of their Names I should relate. But to conclude and make an end my Song, consider of this jest you'l say the Maltman had wro When Caveliers are poor, they by their wits must but let them still be honest like this Northern Ca Chales Hamond London, Printed or Richard Burton at the Horse-shoo in Smithfield 169
