L3131A 53299192 179934
The French King's NEW DECLARATION, In Favour of the Troopers, Dragoons and Soldiers, that having Deserted His Majesties Forces before the First of January last, shall come and List them∣selves again, and serve for Six years Successively. The French King being extreamly alarm'd at the great and continual Desertion of his Troops; and tho' the extream Poverty of his Country does force many to be Soldiers, yet fearing want of Men, since like Rats they abandon the falling House, he has publish'd the following Declaration, for the inviting them to return. HIS Majesty being well inform'd that the Amnesty which he had granted by his Ordonnances of the Twenty eighth of January, and of the Ninth of April last, to the Troopers, Dragoons and Soldiers, which having Deserted his Troops before the First day of the said Month of January, should return and List themselves therein again, has occa∣sion'd a vast Number to return into his Service; and promising himself, that by Proroguing still the Time, which he had granted for the receiving the Benefit of enjoying the said Amnesty or Pardon, such as are in far distant Countries, and that have not been able to repair into the Kingdom within the time Prescribed, might avail themselves thereof and return into his Service. His Majesty has Pro∣rogued, and does Prorogue, until the end of the present Year, the Term he had granted by His Ordon∣nance of the Ninth of April last, to the Troopers, Dragoons, and Soldiers that Deserted his Troops before the First day of the said Month of January last, for the Listing themselves thereunder again. For which purpose it is His Majesties Will and Pleasure, that such of the said Troopers, Dra∣goons, and Soldiers, who having Deserted his Troops, as well French as Forreigners, before the said First day of the Month of January last, shall come and List themselves again before the First of January next, in the manner Prescribed by the said Ordonnance of the said Twenty eighth day of January last, and shall then serve for Six years successively, shall enjoy the Pardon and Amnesty granted in the said Ordonnances; and as fully and to all Intents as if they had return'd into his Troops by the Terms mention'd by the same. His Majesty Willing and Requiring, That in all other Respects, the said Ordonnances of the Twenty eighth of January and Ninth of April last, be executed according to their Form and Tenour. His Majesty Wills and Commands the Governours, and his Lieutenant Generals in his Provinces and Armies, Intendants and Commissaries appointed in the same; Particular Governours of His Cities and Places; Bayliffs, Seneschals, Provosts, Judges, and their Lieutenants; as also to the Colonel of His Light Cavalry, Colonel-General of His Dra∣goons, Colonels Maitres de Camp of His Troops, as well of Cavalry and Dragoons, as of French Infantry and Foreigners, and to the Commissaries of War, appointed for the Conduct and Policy of His Troops, and at the Residence of his Places, to be assisting each within his District to the Observation of the present Ordonnance, which His Majesty will have Published at the Head of the Bodies and Companies of the said Troops, and affix'd upon the Frontiers, and in all such Places as occasion shall require, that so none may pretend Cause of Ignorance. Given at Versailles the 3d Day of August, 1689. Sign'd LOWIS and Lower, LE TELLIER. LICENSED, August 27. 1689. J. F. LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Black Bull in the Old-Baily. 1689.
