L3220 99887426 182132
An Excellent New SONG, CALLED, The Ruined Virgin, OR, The Hard-hearted Young-man. To an Excellent new Play-house Tune. With Allowance. I. YOu pretty Maidens all I pray give Ear, Unto my Downfall which I declare, Of Parentage I am Near to a Gentleman, As some now witness can the date of Year. II. At fourteen years of Age with griefs I tell, Many a young man fair loved me well, I being Childish young, Believ'd a flatt'ring tongue, And fix'd my mind upon a brisk young man. III. He said if I would not yield with him to dwell, He would go hang himself what e're befell, He rung and tore his hair, And wickedly did swear, His sword should end the care before me then. IV. I hearing what he said grieved me sore, I took him for my Friend not for my Foe, Young man, said I, forbear, I pray let go your hair, I'll ease you of your care, and be your Bride. V. O how he Jumpt for joy before me then, My love and only joy happies the man, He kindly me embrac'd, And hung about my Waste, And then my love I plac'd on this young man. VI. For two months space & more he Courted me Day by Day, Night by Night he set by me, He let me take no rest I must sleep on his Breast, And then my Love I plac'd on this young man. VII. The appointed day was set we were to wed, But first of all he stole my maiden-head, My Parents did not know, I lov'd this young man so, Which prov'd my overthrow, ruin'd me quite VIII. When I with Child did prove & him had told, He call'd me twenty Whores brafen and bold I know you not, says he, Therefore be gone from me, This prov'd my misery, his love was cold. IX. I was asham'd to stay where I was known, For straight away I went from my own home, I wander'd up and down From Sea-port town to town, Till in travel I fell down in the high-way. X. Then taken up I were by women kind, whose friendship they did show nature did bind Delivered then I were Of two fine Babies fair, which caused me much care bewarn'd by me. Printed for, and Sold by Charles Barnet;
