M240 99887835 183492
A Mad MARRIAGE; Or, The Female Fancy of Debtford. Being an Account of one Margaret a Carpenters Wife, (who to salve up the Credit of a servant named Mary, who had been dabling with Ch Parsons a Seaman, who soon after left her and went to Sea) dressed her self in Mans Cloaths and was Married to the said Mary to prevent the shame of a crackt Maiden-head. To the Tune of, Moggies Jealousie. YOu Lasses of London attend me, whilst I a true Project shall tell, Which lately was acted in Debtford, and known by the Neighbourhood well: Such things were ne'r heard of before, as will by my ditty be shown, Nor Womens inventions to more like to this will for ever be known. A Maiden whose name it was Mary, at the Sign of the Kings-Head did dwell, Who lately we hear did miscarry, for her belly began for to swell: Her Mistris soon smelt out the matter, and took her to task for the same, When after some fullen denyals she freely confessed her shame. And said that Ch Parsons a Seaman, had been with her something too bold, Who Courted and promis'd her Marriage, and by consent rummidg'd her hald: And how he had left her dejected, and unto the Indies was gone And she by her Mistris neglected, who gave her no ease to her moan. She therefore repair'd to the Mother, of him that had trust up her Wem And pray'd her to look up some Linnen, to swaddle the Bantling in: Her Son she protested was Father, and married they were in the Church, But since he is gone to the Indies, and leaveth me here in the Lurch.
THe Old woman hereat amazed, to find a new Daughter in-Law, Desir'd to know when they marry'd, whereby her affections to draw: And also the Certificate she then did desire to see, For if that you tell a false Story, you lodge not your Bastard with me. These words did so nettle our Mary she could not what to devise, She saw the Old women was careful and would not be put off with lyes: She on the Rack stretch'd her invention, and unto a Neighbour did go, And opened all her intention, and pray'd her some favour to show. Says she Neighbour Marget, assist me, and hear this my pittiful case, I know that you may much befriend me, and smother my woful disgrace: If you in Mans habit will dress ye, and take up Ch Parsons his name, We then in the Church will be married and neither of us shall have blame. The Carpenters wife soon consented, a Suit of her Husbands she got The Wedding-day also appointed, when she was to act in the Plot: To Saint Georges Church they repaired, and thereof the Clerk did inform, Who soon had procured the Parson, that they might be married that morn. So soon as these Females were wedded, the Clerk he was called aside, Then Margaret whisper'd unto him, and said she had wronged the Bride: By dabling with her before hand and therefoe the Certificate, Abundance of kindness you'l do me, if that you will it Antedate. What is it that money won't do, soon answered was the request, Then homeward they straight way did go, a great deal of my they exprest: The Mother of Parsons was joyed, a Daughter-in-Law for to find The Certificate being produced, the Mother was loving and kind. Providing all things that were needful, her Grand-child when't came to receive, And thought her self blest in her Daughter, and did all her stories believe: Till on a time Marget and Mary with some other Neighbours did meet, Carrousing full Bumpers of Brandy, themselves did discover the Cheat. The which being noised through Debtford. the Parson soon of it did hear, Who straightway acquainted the Iustice and caused them both to appear: Who having examin'd the matter, and found in 'um nothing but lies, He unto the Round-House did send 'unt to remain there till the next Assize. Printed for I. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street, without Newgate.
