M2378 99887238 183476
Modesty Amazed; Or, The Dorset-shire Damosel importunate with her Mother to know Rogers meaning in Wooing. In which she is fully satisfied by her Mother; together with Rogers love and loyalty. To an Excellent New Tune, much in request. This may be Printed, R. P. OH Mother! Roger with his kisses, almost stops my breath I vow, Why does he gripe my hand to pieces and yet he says he loves me too: Tell me Mother, pray now do, pray now do, pray now do, Tell me mother, pray now do, Pray now, pray now, pray now do, What Roger means when he does so, for ne'r stir, I long to know. Nor yet besides he will not let me, settle to my wheel and spin But upon his knee will set me, mother when you an't within, Tell me mother, &c. Although I vow he does provoke me, yet he will not once forbear, But most tenderly did stroak me, till he makes me blush I swear: Tell me Mother, pray now do, pray now do, pray now do, Tell me mother, pray now do, Pray now, pray now, pray now do, What Roger means when he does so, for ne'r stir, I long to know.
Thus whilst he talks of pure affection, Roger on my breast he leans, Mother give me your direction, for I know not what he means: Tell me mother, &c. And what he said concerning Wooing now I clearly have forgot, Yet he fain would have been doing something but I know not what: Tell me mother, &c. Although I am both coy and fickle, yet he calls me his delight, And my sides he does so tickle, that he makes me laugh out-right: Tell me mother, pray now do, pray now do, pray now do; Tell me mother, pray now do, Pray now, pray now, pray now do, What Roger means when he does so, for ne'r stir I long to know. The Mothers direction to her Daughter; Together with Rogers Loyalty. Dear Daughter that you mayn't mis∣carry, Rogers courage never cool. Till you marry make him tarry, pray now take your mothers rule: My dear Daughter, pray now then, pray now then, pray now then, Maids are too much slighted when, They have yielded to Young-men, For they can flatter, cog and lye, and all their promises deny. But if his love be so intire, when the Nuptial Bands are ty'd, You may yield to his desire, being made his lawful Bride: If you cannot this obtain, this obtain, this obtain, Then his company refrain, With your Scorn and high disdain, For should you grant him his delight, then Daughter you are ruin'd quite. But Roger he was something near them in a corner mighty mute, Where he chanc'd to over hear them, while they were in this dispute: Notwithstanding what he heard, what he heard, what he heard, For a while he ne'r appear d, But at last the case he clear'd, And told them that he did suppose, they did not think him one of those. Now when her Mother found him loyal, by his honest fair intent, Then there needed no denyal, soon she gave her free consent, That her Daughter should be wed, should be wed, should be wed, To his lawful bridal bed, All her fears was fully fled; Then many Damsels fair and gay, did come to celebrate the day. FINIS. Printed for I. Deacon at the Angel in Guiltspur-street without Newgate. You are desired to beware of a false Counterfeit Song in imitation of this true Copy, which is only Printed for I. Deacon, at the Angel in Guiltspur-streets.
