M1850 99887232 183494
THE MERRY BAG-PIPES: The Pleasant Pastime betwixt a Jolly Shepherd and a Country Damsel, on a Mid-Summers-Day in the Morning. To the Tune of, March Boys, &c. Licensed according to Order. A Shepherd sat him under a Thorn, he pull'd out his Pipe and began for to play, It was on a Mid-Summer-day in the morn, for honour of that holy-day: I Dirty he did Chant along, goes to the Tune of Cater-Bordee, And this was the burthen of his Song, if thou wilt Pipe Lad, I'll Dance to thee, To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee, &c. And whilst this Harmony he did make, a Country Damsel from the Town, I Basket on her Arm she had, a gathering Rushes on the Doin: Her Bongrace was of wended Straw, from the Sun's hot Beams her Face is free And thus she began when she him saw, if thou wilt Pipe Lad, I'll Dance to thee, &c. Then he pull'd out his Pipe and began to sound, whilst tempting on her Bark the lay, But when his quivering note she found, how sweetly then this Lass could play: She stop'd all jumps and the reveal'd, she kept all time with harmony, And looking on him, sighing said, if thou wilt Pipe Lad, I'll dance to thee, To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee, &c. She never so much as blusht at all, the Musick was so charming sweet, But e'er and anon to him she'd call, and bid him be active, turn and meet: As thou art a bonny Shepherd's Swain, I am a Lass am come to wooe thee. To play me another double strain, and doubt not but I will Dance to thee, To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee, &c. Altho' I am but a silly Maid, who ne'r was brought up at Dancing-School, But yet to the Iig that thou hast plaid, you find that I can keep time and rule: Now see that you keep your stops aright, for Shepherd I am resolv'd to view thee, And play me the Damsel's chief Delight, then never doubt but I'll Dance to thee, To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee, &c. The Shepherd again did tune his Pipe, and plaid her a Lesson loud and shrill, The Damsel his Face did often wipe, with many a thank for his good will: And said I was ne'r so pleas'd before, and this is the first time that I knew thee, Come play me this very Iigg once more, and never doubt but I'll Dance to thee, To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee, &c. The Shepherd he said, as I am a Man, I have kept playing from Morning till Noon, Thou know'st I am do no more then I can, my Pipe is clearly out of Tune: To ruine a Shepherd I'll not seek, said the, for why should I undo thee, I can some again to the Down next week, and thou shalt Pipe and I'll dance to thee, To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee. FINIS. Printed for C. Batas next door to the Crown-Lavern in West-Smithfield.
