N1181 99887840 183502
No Love, no Life. OR, Damon Comforted in Distress. You that are adorn'd with Beauty, do not thus your Love disdain; Count not it to be their duty, for to Languish thus in pain. To the Tune of, Tender hearts of London City. DAmon in the shades was walking, With fair Phillis he was talking, their discourse was terms of Love, He was kind, as you shall find, and ever more did faithfull prove. In his arms he did imbrace her, Vowing he wou'd ne'r disgrace her, but would still maintain, the praise Of the creature, whose sweet feature, was the Glory of his days The Womans Reply. Young men they will seem most grateful When their hearts are most deceitful, thus they draw Maids in a snare, And deceive them, thus they leave them, fill their hearts with grief and care. Oh my Love I am more Loyal, Phillis do but make a tryal, I will ever constant be, The heart of mine is surely thine, I Love none in the world but thee. The Womans second Reply. How many maidens thus have died, When their Lovers have them denied, this we find of lae is true, Then with tears, and frights, and fears, they sighing bid the world adieu. To escape from him she strives, Of his joys he was deprived, grieving at her hye disdain, He was vexed and perplexed, yet he call'd her back again. She regarded not his passion, Leaving him in desparation, till sweet Cupid with his Bow, Sent a Dart which pierc'd her heart, and said it must and shall be so. When she found that she was wounded, She with sighs and sorrows Sounded then again she did revive, She confessed, she was blessed, with the sweetest man alive. Here I sigh, lament, and languish, Now can I endure this anguish, I am in a Sea of woe, This sad tryal, my denyal, proves my fatal overthrow. With what language did he greet me, And with smiles he did intreat me, yet I still did him deny, My disdain increase my pain, I for love shall surely dye. All her sorrows thus he heared, Then he presently appeared, she to him with comfort smil'd, Then with Kisses their sweet Blisses, all their sorrows did beguil'd. Thus their hearts were both united, She with him was much delighted, thus their troubles had an end, Sorrow ceased, Love increased, Cupid surely was their friend. FINIS. Printed for J. Deacon in Guilt-spur-Street.
