N88 99887851 183509
The Naked-Truth: OR, A New Song without a Lye Tune of, Old Simon the King: Or, The Character of sundry Trades and Callings. THo' Trading we find in the City, and many more places, is bad, Yet here I will sing a fine Ditty, we'd as good he merry as sad: Of several Trades I will treat, and will with the Butcher begin, With what kind of Trade shall he meet, if he has neither Careass nor Skin; All you that are now in this Throng, I reckon to do you no wrong, Believe me, I pray, by yea and by nay, there is not a lye in this Song. A Weaver without Loom or Shuttle, like one out of use, may lye by, A Tinker without any Mettal, no woman will ever imploy: A Cobler without St. Hugh's bones, he cannot mend Old, or make New, A Pavier without any Stones. Oh, what is he able to do? All you that are now in this Throng, &c. A Man that is quite Moneyless, thro' Crowds he in safety may pass, A Cook that hath no meet to Dress, he need not stand making of Sawce. A Taylor without o're a Yard, his bodkin, goose, thimble and sheers, You'll find that he is as much Marr'd, as if he had lost both his Ears: All you that are now, &c. A Fisher-man without a Net, you know he can catch but a few, But yet his good wife she will fret, when ever she wants of her due: The jolly brisk Baker is one, to whom the young Lasses do troule, So that he so clearly undone, if he had not a Rusling-Pole: All you that are now, &c. The Miller's for taking to task, the Mistress or Gillian the Maid, The Cooper without Hoops or Cask, he cannot well follow his Trade: The Poet without e're a Muse, can never make Sonnets compleat, A Foot-man without Pumps or Shoes, will certainly blister his feet: All you that are now, &c. A Scrivener without Ink or Pen, his hands and his Letters can't write, A Captain that lost all his men, will have but small stomach to fight: The man that shall marry for Gold, and brings home a Shrew to his bed, Both Morning, Noon, Night she will scold and still have a Foise in her head, All you that are now, &c. The Chimney-Sweeper pray don't sco, for if he hath Shackles and Poles, He'll call to the Maids each-morn, to scoure and cleanse their black holes: That man that is naked indeed, he is not like Taylors, and those, For tho' he has ne're so much need, he is not for pawning his Cloaths: All you that are now, &c. A Gallant that has a good Coat, 'twill help him out at a dead lift, A Sculler that has ne'r a boat, he fears not Running a Drift: Some Sharpers a Calling does use, 'tis Robbing Rich Men of their store, But he that has nothing to loose, he needs not a watch at his door. All you that are now, &c. I ne'r was brought up for to Lye, and therefore I tell you the truth, My ballads I'd have you to buy, they're fit for Diversion of Youth: My Pocket with Cole to encrease, let every young-man and maid, Now lay out a penny a piece, and then I shall have a good trade. All you that are now in this Throng, I'll do you no manner of wrong, Believe me, I pray, by yea and by nay, there is not a lye in this Song. FINIS.
