O418A 53299206 179946
A Copy of Admiral RUSSEL's LETTER to the Earl of NOTTINGHAM. Published by Authority. YEsterday about Three in the Morning, Cape-Barfleur bearing S. W. and b. S. distance Seven Leagues, my Scouts made the Signal for feeling the Ene∣my, the Wind Westerly: The French bore down to me, and at 11. Engaged me, but at some distance: We continued Fighting till half an hour past Five in the Evening, at which time the Enemy Towed away with all their Boats, and we af∣ter them: It was Calm all Day; about Six there was a fresh Engagement to the, Westward of me, which I supposed to be the Blew: It continued Calm all Night: I can give no particular Account of Things; but that the French were beaten, and I am now Steering away for Conquet-Road, having a fresh Gale Easterly but extream Foggy; I suppose that is the place they design for: If it please GOD to send us a little Clear VVeather, I doubt not but we shal destroy their whole Fleet: I saw in the Night Three or Four Ships blow up, but I Know not what they are: So soon as I am able to give you a more particular Relation, I will not be wanting. May 20. 1692. Cape-Barfleur, S. W. distance Seven Leagues. Some Particulars of another Letter from the Fleet. YEsterday in the Gray of the Morning we made the French Fleet in a Line of Battle, about two Leagues to VVindward, they having the Weather-Gage, bore down very boldly and close upon us: At 11. exactly we Engaged; the Engagement was very hot, and continued so till near Four in the Afternoon, at which time the French Fleet bore away: Then the Wind was as before, at W. b. S. and W. S. W. Veering about to N. b. E. and N. N. E. Sir Clouesly Shovel, and Sir John Ashby having the VVeather-Gage, fell on, and maintained the Engagement till near 10. at Night, the French all that time bearing away, and the English pursuing them: What Damage is done on either side is not yet known, some Ships were seen in Flames about Nine at Night, but it is not discovered what they were. Portsmouth, May 20. SInce this Account the Mary Galley is come to Spithead from Admiral Russel, whom he left at Eight this Morning, about 15. Leagues S. and by W. from the Isle of Wight; He saw both the French Admirals Seconds sink, and many Ships on Fire, and that for two Leagues together the Sea was full of Wrecks of Ships, but doth not know of the loss of any of their Their Majesties Ships or Commanders. This Morning when he came away, the French were running, and ours in pursuit of them; and about Ten a Clock he heard them Engaged again, and heard the Guns till One, when the Wind sprung up at S. and S. and by W. Printed at Edinburgh, and Re-printed at Glasgow, 1692.
