r2103 99887445 182152
The Royal BALL: As it was perform'd in Masquerade by Two Seamen. Being the Subjects Hearty-VVish for the good success of the KING and Fleet. To an Excellent New Tune, Sung at Court. Licensed according to Order. I. Since all the World's in Arms, And full of loud Allarms; Let Englands Subjects Sing The Praises of her KING, Who Conquers where he goes, And Triumphs o're his Foes; Then let us all Proclaim Great King William's lasting Fame II. No Nation is so Blest; With such a Prince possest, Whose Care does never cease, That we may live in Peace. How Happy might we be, Could Subjects but agree? Then let us all Proclaim Great King VVilliam's lasting Fame. III. To him our Lives we owe, For him these we'll bestow: No Forreign-Force we'll fear, But Fight for England here. Proud France let us pull down, And shake that Tottering-Crown, And let us all Proclaim Great King VVilliam's lasting Fame. IV. Let SEAMEN in the Fleet, Make all the French retreat. Make Mounsteur flee apace, And fear the English Face. Our Warlike-Lads know how To make the French-Men bow. Then let us all Proclaim Great King VVilliam's lasting Fame. V. Our NAVY on the Seas, (While we are safe at ease) In Bullets and in Flame, Will raise the English-Name. Our Valour France shall know, By their own overthrow. Then let us all Proclaim Great King VVilliam's lasting Fame. VI. How many were the Plots Of all the Papish-Sots, To Ruine great and small, To take our Lives, and all. Yet these we still enjoy, Which they sought to destroy. Then let us all Proclaim Great King VVilliam's lasting Fame. VII. The King does undertake Great Dangers for our sake: Himself in Person goes To Vanquish Englands Foes, That we may live all here, Securely, void of fear. Then let us all Proclaim Great King VVilliam's lasting Fame. VIII. Let Trumpets every where, To sound his Praise, prepare. Let Subjects Valiant be, And Loyal, and agree: With one Consent and Voice, In him alone Rejoyce; And let us all Proclaim Great King VVilliam's lasting Fame. IX. Our Wishes let us send, That Heaven may him defend; Our Armies too, and Fleet, That they the French defeat; That we may Praise and Sing The Triumphs of our KING: And may always proclaim Great King VVilliam's lasting-Fame. FINIS. Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. Blace, and I. Back.
