s1102 53981711 180334
I7 R HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ACT for Setling the Orders in the Parliament-House. At Edinburgh the 13. of May 1662. Years. JT is appointed that all Members of Parliament do precisely keep the Diets of Parliament, under the pains following, viz. Each Nobleman and Bishop, for each Diets absence without leave, twelve pounds Scots: Each Baron six pounds Scots: And each Burges three pounds Scots: and that they pay the just half of their Penalties for each Diet they come in sero, after the Calling of the Rolls of Parliament. That none be admitted to stay in Parliament, but the ordinary Members of Parliament, viz. The Arch-bishops and Bishops, Noblemen, Officers of State, Commissioners from Shires and Burrows, and the Clerk of Register, Deputs and servants imployed by him, to serve in the House; And besides these, Admittance is allowed to the eldest Sons, and appearand Heirs-male of Noble∣men, to the Senators of the Colledge of Justice, to the Knight Marshal, to the Ushers, to the Lyon, to the Justice-deputs, to the Kings Sollicitor, one Servant allowed to the Lord Chancellor, two to the Constable, two to the Marshal, and one to the Advocat. And it is ordered, That none presume to sit upon the Benshes, save the Nobility and Clergy; That the Officers of State sit upon the steps of the Throne; That the Commissioners of Shires and Burrows sit on the Forms appointed for them; That Noblemens eldest Sons, and appearnd Heirs foresaid, sit on the lower Benshes of the Throne; That the Lords of Session sit at an Table, which is to stand betwixt the Throne and the Commissioners from Burrows: And that none presume to sit at the Clerks Table, save the Clerk-register, and the Deputs and Servants to be imployed by him in the Service of the House: That any other persons allowed ac∣cess, shall sit at the far end of the Seats appointed for Commissioners from Shires and Burrows. And it is appointed, that the Knight Marshal and the Macers be careful as they will be answerable upon their peril; That thir Orders be obeyed, and that they exact twenty shilling Sterling from every person who shall be found within the House, and are not Members, nor admitted as aforesaid, besides their Removal, and Imprisonment at the second fault, and thir Penalties with the former, to be Collected by the Macers, and depositate in the hands of  to be disposed upon by the Order of the House. That after the House is set, none offer to stand, nor walk, or keep private Discourses one with another, that none go forth except in cases of necessity, and that they forthwith return, nor any persons suffered to stay at the Articles, save Members of Parliament. That in all Debates of the House, no person offer to interrupt another, nor direct his Discourse to any but the Lord Chancellor or President; that all Reflections be forborn; and that no man offer at one Diet, and in one Business, to speak oftner then twice at most, except in such Cases, where leave shall be first asked, and given by His Majesty, or His Commissioner. That no Member of Parliament leave the House, until the Meeting be by His Majesty, or His Commissioner Adjourned. Edinburgh, April 28. 1685. THE Act of Parliament aforesaid, May 13: 1662. For Ordering the House in time of Parliament, being read, His Ma∣jesties High Commissioner, and the Estates of Parliament, Ordains the same to be Printed, and affixed on the Wall of the Parliament-House; that it may be duly observed, with these Additions. That the Clerks of Council, the Clerk of the Justice Court, and the Sheriff-deputs of Edinburgh-Shire, are allowed to stay in the House the time of sitting of Parliament.
