s1763_VARIANT 53299280 180012
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Discharging the Importation of Forraign Victual. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defen∣ders of the Faith, to Our Lovits,  Macers of Our Privy Council, Mes∣sengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch as the Importing and bringing from Forraign Countreys, any Wheat, Bear, Barley, Oats, Meal, or Malt, into this Kingdom, is highly prejudicial to the Native Product thereof, and to the Trade upon the growth of the same, and gives occasion to the unwarrantable Exporting of much Money forth of this Realm: For preventing whereof, and obviating the inconveniencies that follow thereupon, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby strictly Prohibite and Discharge all Per∣sons whatsoever, to Import or bring by Sea or Land into this Kingdom, or any of the Ports, Harbours, Towns, or Places thereof, any sort or quan∣tity of the Victual above-mentioned, without licence had from Our saids Lords for that effect, under the pain of Confiscation of the said Victual; the one half thereof to the person or persons, who shall make discovery of, and seiz upon the same, and the other half thereof, with the Ships, Barques, or Boats, wherein the same shall be Imported: To Our Thesaurie, for Our use; and other punishments to be inflicted upon them, conform to the Acts of Parliament made thereanent; and Ordains all Our Collectors, Surveyers, and Waiters within this Kingdom, at the respective Ports, Harbours, and Places where they serve, to see this Act punctually observed, as they will be answe∣rable at their highest perril; with certification to such as shall be found ne∣gligent therein, they shall incur the loss of their respective Offices. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straitly, and Command that incon∣tinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and whole other Mercat-Crosses of the Royal Burrows, and Sea-Ports within this Kingdom, and thereat make Publick Intimation of Our pleasure in the premisses, to the effect none may pretend ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Sixth day of January,and of Our Reign the Second Year,1691. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, Anno DOM. 1691.
