S1921 52612334 179637
CR HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A Proclamation, For setling of the Staple-port at Campvere. CHARLES, by the Grace or GOD, King of Scot∣land, England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To Our Lovits,  Macers, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs, in that part conjunctly and seve∣rally, specially constitute, Greeting: Whereas upon occasion of the unsetled condition of the SCOTS Staple in the Low-countreys; The Merchants of this Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland have for diverse years past, suffered great prejudice, intheir Trade and Comerce to those Provinces. And be∣ing graciously inclined to countenance all fair and just means, for setling of the said Staple: We therefore gave full power and commissios to Our Resi∣dent and Conservator of the priviledges granted to Our Subjects of Scot∣land in the Low-countreys; to treat with any Town or place most conve∣nient and advantagions for the Merchants and Trade of this Our King∣dom: So the Articles agreed by him with the Commissoners of the prince of Orange, and Deputies of the town of Campvere, for the re-set∣ling of the Scots Staple-court within the said town, are approven by Us: Whereupon the said Staple court is removed from Dort to the town of Campvere. And to the end this Our Royal pleasure, may be made known to all Our loving Subjects of this Our Ancient Kingdom, We with ad∣vice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do Ordain pablick Proclama∣tion to be made thereof at the usual places of this Our Kingdom; that no person may pretend ignorance, but duely obey Our Royal pleasure herein, as they will answer at their peril. And further, We, wish advice foresaid, Do declare that the ancient standing Acts of Parliament made by Our Royal Progenitors, in favour of the Staple-court, and the Conservator, are in full force and strength. And further, We Ordain the Royal Burroughs in their meetings to make strick Acts, that the Staple may be duely observed, which We with advice foresaid, Declare to be binding upon all Our Subjects whatsoever trading to, or residing within any town, or place of the united Provinces. And We ordain thir presents to be Printed and published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other Royal Burghs and Sea-ports needful, that none may pretend ignorance therof. Given at Edinburgh, the eleventh day of October, One thousand six hundred and seventy six years, And of Our Reign the 28 year. Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii. God save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, printer to His most Sacred Majesty: Anno DOM. 1676.
