S1969A 52612444 179641
A PROCLAMATION PROROGATING THE ACTS of PARLIAMENT AGAINST CONVENTICLES. And Separation from the publick Meetings of DIVINE WORSHIP. CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Brittain, France, and Ire∣land, Defender of the Faith, To Our Lovits  Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch as, the fifth Act of the second Session of Our second Parliament, intituled, Act against Conventicles, and the seventh Act of that same session of Parliament, intitu∣led, Act against Separation and Withdrawing from the Publick Meetings of Divine VVor∣ship, Were appointed to endure only for the space of three Years, unless VVe should think fit to con∣tinue them longer. And having considered a posterior Act of Parliament, past upon the fourth day of September, one thousand six hundred seventy and two years, whereby the saids two Acts of Parlia∣ment were appointed to endure for the space of other three years after the expiring of the first three, and longer as VVe should be Pleased to appoint. And finding it now necessary for Our Service, that the saids Acts be continued for three years further; And that the same remain in force ay and while VVe declare Our further pleasure thereanent; Therefore VVe, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Councill, do prorogate and continue the saids Acts of Parliament for other three years and fur∣ther, during Our Pleasure; And do ordain the same to continue in full force ay and while We de∣clare Our further pleasure; thereanent. OUR WILL is herefore, and VVe charge you, that in∣continently thir Our letters seen ye pass, to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needfull; and thereat in Our Name and Authority make open Publication of Our Royal Pleasure in the premisses that none may pretend ignorance thereof. The which to do VVe commit to you conjunctly and seve∣rally, Our full power by these Our Letters, delivering them by you duely execute and indorsed again to the Bearer. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixth day of August one thousand six hundred seventy and five years, and of Our Reigne, the twenty seventh year. Th. Hay, Cl. Sti Concilii. God save the King. EDINBURGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent MAJESTY. Anno 1675.
