S2668 99885228 182638
OR AN ELOGIUM Consecreated to the Right Honourable Sir Robert Viner Lord Mayor of the most Ancient and most Flourishing EMPORIUM of the World the Honourable City LONDON For this Prsent Year 1694 GReat Wise, and Pollitick, to you it is, The Lord of Albions rich Metropolis: To you, our matchless Parents Eldest Son And you, great Senators, of this new Rome from Apollo's lofty Mount am sent With Bayes to Crown your civill Government: From whose more wise than Greek, or Roman Souls, Laws Stand prescrib'd to the Remotest poles. In each of you, this day, seems to take rest A Solous Soul, and deep Lycurgus Brest, Comprising in your Sage Election, The Epitome of their perfection; In framing which, Nature, and Prudence both Combin'd, his better Genius to set forth This Jubely (by an excess of Joy Transported) to Reiterate, this day Our Antient Citty, Just and unanimous, Doth consecrate her self, to you, her Spouse, Commanding me, in verse to entertaine You, and your Senatorial-Scarlet traine. Behold, her Houshold Gods presented stand, At every door ready at your command, And richest Chariots (as in Triumph) croud, Whilst Streets are fill'd with acclamations lowd. Se how the Silver-Flooded Thames delghts To Ty you in; Proud of her glorious freights, Swell's and grows bigge: whilst, in a greatful traine; Each Vessl ploughs her fresh and curled Maine. Here fiery Mars, breaths from his Iron lungs In thundring Tones, smart Sulphur-uttering Songs; There from his Brasty, thin, and warbling Throate, A softer straine, and more melodious Note. The Western-Minster first, by their command, Saint Martin next, then Clement in the Stand: Southern Saint Mary, on the other side, And Dunston by the Temple; as you glide, All, with a lowd but pleasant Musick Note Ring in your welcome Golden-Stemmed Boat. And when arriv'd, Repleat with aged paine, Decrepid Paul, tinkles his portick straine, Troubled that younger Steeples should out-vy Him, in their Lowd and lofty Harmony Yet Phoenix like, i'th ruines of his fire, (The only relique of that Heavenly Ire) Hatch'd your Zeal, he hopes in better shape From older Obsequies new birth to take. Old aged Father Lud, next leads you on To eat you in his Cituation: Gear Carles his Monument amaz'd to see, And Lumbards Temple, lately built by thee: Whole multitudes on each side crowd the way. To view their Father; and observe his day; Not much unlike to that Elated glory, Read in the Roman, or Athenian Story; Who, when the Body politique, made choice Of Emperours; clean'd to the publick voice, And by that universall acclamation Establish'd Governours to rule each Nation; Justice presents you with het ballance Blind: But justly equall as your upright mind: And whilst, severity, to temperate With her and sweet Harmony, you moderate, In mercifull, and yet in even Zeale, VVith this, you strike the stroake, with that, you heale Diviter your peerles piety The sober Citizens, your Charity, The Court, and Camp, by you have favour had The good a Crown, their Just reward the bad, Your prudent wisdome bears an equal share VVith Fortitude: when Judge of all you are: For this gives courage, whilst the other stands Firme in resolving to dispence commands. Here Crowning Vertue, there correcting Vice, You, in this bounty, in that Auarice, Check, and encourage; with an open hand, Feeding the needy which before you stand, So are your laws by prudence fortifi'd. By Mercy, Zeal, and Justice magnifi'd: In Vertuous Vigilancy limitless, In Charity, and bounty Fathomless, Go on, Great Prator then, thus qualifi'd VVith morall Vertues, and thus ratifi'd VVith Reasons laws: Go on undaunted, stout: And steer this Citty's helme your Course throughout: Live, whilst your Monuments to Church, and King In mortall stand: may after Ages sing Your glorious deeds: and Poets more divine (Fill'd with the Juice that flow's from your rich Vine) Whole Volumes write, and deck with Golden veine Of their rich Verse, and Silver Muses straine, That when cold Fate shall close your mortall Eyes, And Angells guard your Soul to Paradise, Bright Albiones chronicles with matchless fame M'Embalme th'Story, of your Immortall Name. Sic vaticinatur appreaturque Poeta And your Lordships most Humble and most Obedient Servant E. S i e. Elkanah Settle.
