S5306 49521005 174227
The State of the CASE BETWEEN DENMARK and SWEDEN. IN the Year of our Lord, 1654. on the 15th day of September, a League of Amity and Friendship was concluded, and afterwards on both sides ratified, between the King and Kingdom of Denmark on the one part, and the Lord Protector and Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, &c. on the other part, whereof this is the first Article. Article I. Quod ab hoc die erit firma, integra & sincéra Amicitia, Pax & Confaederatio, tam Mari quam Terrâ, & Aquis dul∣cibus, inter Regem Regnum{que} Daniae & Norvegiae, & Protectorem & Rempublicam Angliae, Scotiae & Hiberniae nec non Dominia, Regiones ac Civitates sub utriusque ditione positas, Populumque, Incolas & Subditos alterutrius, cujuscun{que} gradus & dignitatis fuerint; ita ut neutra pars, Populusve aut subditi alterutrius, neque per se, neque per alios, directè vel indirectè quicquam agat, vel quantum in se est, agi permittat in damnum aut praejudicium alterius, verùm altera alteram bonis officiis adjuvabit atque alterius rem & commodum pro virili promovebit. That is to say, That from this day shall be a firm, entire and sincere Amity, Peace and Confederacy, as well by Sea, as Land and fresh Waters, between the King and Kingdom of Denmark and Norway, and the Protector and Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, together with the Dominions, Countreys and Cities in the Jurisdiction of either; as also between the People, Inhabitants and Subjects of both, of what Degree or Dignity soever; so as neither Part, People, or Sub∣jects of either, neither by themselves, nor others, directly or indirectly may do any thing, nor as much as in them lies, may suffer to be done, to the Damage or Prejudice of the other; but that the one shall aid the other by all good offices, and shall advance the Welfare and Profit of the other to his utmost Power. Printed here in London at the star in St Pauls Churchyard.Three Yeers after this League thus made, that is to say, in the Yeer 1657. after the Danes had received many great and notorious Wrongs and Injuries from the King and Kingdome of Sweden, and being further threatned by them to be worse dealt with, as may be seen more at large in the Danish Manifest, called Jus feciale Ar∣matae Daniae: They betook themselves to their Arms. But this Warre being ended through the Mediation of England and France, and the Peace concluded at Rotshilt in February last, was Signed by the Publick Ministers of the most Christian King, and his late Highness the Lord Protector, who thereby became Sureties for the same, as is more fully set forth in a Relation of the Affairs between the two Northern Kings, Printed in this City about a Moneth since.To be sold at the sign of the ship in St Pauls Churchyard. This Peace the King of Sweden kept, till he had got into his hands four or five Provinces, wherein were many Strong∣holds, and had received other Advantages granted to him by the said Treaty of Peace; but being bound by the same to quit all the Territories of the King of Danmark, in which at that time his Army lay quartered, in stead of Marching away, he Marched back again into the Isle of Zealand, besieged the Castle of Cronenburg and took it, laid also Siege to Coppen∣haguen, which although it succeeded not, yet he threatneth to besiege again; and he should have no better Success than he had before, he endeavoureth to engage us in his Quarrel, and by the help of our Navy to make himself Master of the three Northern Kingdoms, as he is already of the Baltick-Sea, and the Ports thereof. In the beginning of this second Inuasion, the King of Denmark, made full account, that the Most-Christian King of France, and his late Highness the Lord Protector, were bound in Honour, to see the contents of that Treaty of Peace, whereof they were Mediators and Sureties, as well performed on the Swedish side, as he had done on his, and implored their Aide to that purpose: but finding no Relief from England (whether the indisposition of his Highness, or some∣thing else was the cause) he sought for Aide from such of his Neighbours, as had tenderness enough, not to see a King and all his Royall Progenie unjustly oppressed: amongst those Friends and Neighbours were the States Generall of the United Provinces, who were bound to defend Him by a defensive League, concluded between them and that King in the Year 1649. But before they came to put in execution what they were obliedged to do, they endeavoured to satisfie his Highness, concerning the justice and necessity thereof, and to demonstrate to him the inconveniencies, that would arise to the Commonwealth of England it self, if the King of Sweden should become sole Master of all those parts; and more∣over manifested their desire, that his Highness would be pleased to cooperate with them, for the composing of those diffe∣rences, which were grown to that height, between the two Northern Kings: and his said Highness being deceased, they continued to use the same instance with this present Lord Protector, declaring, that they intended nothing, but what might be equally to the good and profit of this Nation, as well as of their Own, in any Liberty or Priviledge of Trade and Na∣vigation, not desiring the least advantage to their own Subjects more then to us, although their endeavours to preserve those Liberties had already been expensive to them, both in Blood and Treasure. From these precedent considerations, we may propose these following Queries. I. Whether the Commonwealth of England, &c. can in conscience break their Pulick Faith and Treaty with Denmark, without any cause given ? II. Whether the said Commonwealth be not bound in Honour, to see the Treaty of Peace between the two Northern Kings, whereof his late Highness was Mediator and Surety, performed on both sides; obliedging him, who hath violated the Treaty, to give due reparation, for the dammage received by the party injured ? III. Whether it be for the Interest of the English, in their Trade and Navigation to the Baltick Sea, that all the Eastland Com∣modities, be in the power of one Prince, who either may withhold them, or raise thereupon any arbitrary Tolls and Customs, though never so excessive ? IV. Whether it be very safe for this Commonwealth, that one Prince should be the sole Dominator of all the North; and whether England hath not reason to fear the same Inconveniencies from thence, which it has felt heretofore, when those three Kingdoms had but one King, and he still to contest with those Vandalick Cities, which now are in the King of Swedens power. V. Whether the Offers and Desires of the States Generall; that we would joyn with them to the composing of those Differences between the two Northern Kings, by way of Mediation, be not rather to be accepted, then that we should involve our selves in an unjust and dangerous Warre, wherein a Victory may prove of worse consequence to our own Countrey, then an overthrow ? VI. Or whether Conscience, Honour, our Trade and Navigation, and our Fleet, yea the safety of the State, ought to be set at stake, to gratisie the French, our Friends at present; who doubtless for one of these two reasons, endeavours to engage us in this over-hasty Warre, against both our Interests and our Allies; either that they may thereby advance and enlarge their Conquest upon the German Empire, and make themselves Masters of all Flanders, this Campagna; or rather that they may set all Protestant Prin∣ces and States at variance, then make Peace with Spain, and so at last Extirpate the Protestant Religion, having first weakned the Defenders thereof by their own Arms ? FINIS.
