T2738 99887317 182028
True Love Vnvail'd, Or, The Coy Lady Over-come at last. This lively Gallant having time and leisure, Did Court the Lady to Injoy his pleasure; But she seemed coy, and would not moved be, Unto his loving suit for to agree: Till at the length, Love pleading without fee, She did resign up all immediately. To a Rare New Tune, or, The French Minnim. With Allowance. DOwn in a Valley where Nymphs are a playing, and she Young Shepherds are tending their Sheep, Carefully keeping their Flocks without Straying, after Dream in a slumbring sleep: I spy'd two Lovers just at their first meeting, who seemed fearful Least they should be seen, Kindly Imbracing, and lovely greeting, as hand, in hand, they past over the green. A proper young Stripling the Youth he was truely, clad in laich Clothing most seemly to see, Though he was troubled with passions unruly, Ruddy Complexion'd, and Comely was he: Of fine Carriage, and loving Behaviour, scarce such another thee was to be found; One that in Love was not subject to waver, though the blind Archer had given him a Wound. The Maid she was bonny, of beauty most bright; and like to Diana was cloathed in green; He needs must be frozen that could not delight, In such a Girls Company for to be seen: With Amorous Glances she lookt on her Lover, yet she did modestly blush the same time, Which made him more willing his mind to discover, fearing his silence was counted a crime. Now my own Dearest, since 'tis our good fortune, here for to meet at this time, in this place, Let me no longer thy Favour importune, but let us freely and kindly imbrace: Cupid will smile, and Dame Venus look chearful, for to behold us in love to agree, Therefore my Honey thou need'st not be fearful, but no this Hillock come sit down by me. Oh! quoth the Maiden, and blusht at the motion, there may be danger in coming too nigh, Love though 'tis sweet, may be termed a potion, bitter inth' end, though it's fair to the eye; Therefore excuse me I fear to be taken, least at the last I be left in the urch, For many a Girl hath been before forsaken, being just ready to go to the Church.
The second Part, To the same Tune. Be not so fearful my dear but sit by me, for why unto thee I vow and protest, I cannot live if thou seem to deny me, since of all others I fancy thee best: Make no delay, for in Love it is adious, at thy comman'd I will ever remain, Seeing the time, and the place are comodious, who from such pleasant delight can refrain? Thy pritty body so neat and so slender, hath Captivated my heart and my eye, That love, for love, you are bound for to render, take pitty on me or else I shall dye: Do not delight to be cruel and froward, for by this kiss I will ever be thine; He that fair Lady wins, must be no Coward, make no demur but agree to be mine. O (quoth the Virgin) how I am devided, being o'recome by your person and charms; Honour must yield, when by love it is guided, now could I freely flye into thy arms: For to be real, my love and affection, hath made me onely at thy own command: Cupid hath brought my heart into subjection, I can no longer your Batteries withstand. Then (quoth her Lover) since we are concluded, let us resolve to make use of our time, We will no longer by fears be deluded but take delight, whilst our love is in prime: For when old age doth come, feeble and crazy, then to our pleasures we must bid adieu; Therefore in youth let us never be Lazy, for the time past we can never renew. Into a pleasant Grove then they retired, where none could see them their loves to molest, She being free to do what he desired, under a Mirtle they sat down to rest: Where they did pass away time at their pleasure, yeilding each other, true joy and content; And afterwards they walk home at their leisure, having no cause of their time to repent. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, neer the Hos∣pital-gate, in West-smith-field.
