T3544 99887431 182137
The two Unhappy Lovers; Being a Wealthy Merchant who broke his heart for Love, and the Mercers Beautiful Daughter, who after his Death, Poysoned her¦self in dispair. Tune of, If Love's a sweet Passion. Licensed According to Order. I. IN London there lived a Beautiful Maid, Only Daughter unto a Rich Mercer by Trade, VVho had left to her Portion full three thousand pound, Thus both Riches and beauty in her did abound; But the Pride of her insolent heart soar'd above All the graces of Beauty, and blasted her Love. II. As through the fair City she blazed her fame, For to Court her, a Merchant and Shop-keeper came Nay, a wealthy young Squire, and Curnol likewise, Each indeavour'd to gain this Rich Beautiful prize, But their proffered Services prov'd but in vain, For she frown'd, and returned the Darts of disdain. III. I'll have no Mechanick Shop-keeper, she cry'd, Nor shall any poor Souldier e're Ive by my side; No, nor Merchant, who ventures his stock on the Seas She return'd them such insolent answers as these; But the wealthy young Squire she fancy'd we hear, VVhose Estate was some five or six thousand a year. IV. The Noble brave Curnol he valu'd her not, And the Shop-keeper straight ways her beauty forgot; But the wounded young Merchant he languishing cry'd, Have I lov'd her! yet must I be clearly deny'd? O go tell her, except she some pitty will take, That her Languishing Lover must dye for her sake. V. She soon was inform'd of her languishing Love, Yet no manner of pitty this Damsel could move; But she laugh'd in derision and thus did reply, I'll not hinder the Youth, if he's willing to dye; For no Merchant my Person shall ever imbrace, While a Rich noble Gallant young Squire's in place. VI. So soon as her Answer was brought to his Ear, He reply'd with a Sigh and a Sorrowful tear, I am ruin'd by Beauty, my Glory is fled, In the dark silent Grave I will now lay my Head Thus he straitway departed, and left her to know, Many days of sad sorrow for slighting him so. VII. The Squire whom she did so dearly adore, He rejected her Charms, and came near her no more, This beginning of sorrow she presently found, For the Arrows of Cupid had given the VVound, And did cause her in passionate sorrow to cry, There is none in the world more unhappy than I. VIII. My true Love the Merchant I sent to the Grave, VVhen it lay in my absolute power to save His dear innocent Life; nay, I kill'd him with grief, And deny'd him so much as one glance of relief; Therefore now to my passionate sorrow I find, I am justly rewarded, and serv'd in my kind. IX. After my true love to the Grave let me go, For here's nothing but torment and trouble I know, With which my poor sorrowful Soul is opprest, Let this Potion of Poyson now end the contest, Then she took up the draught, and did trembling cry, I am coming my Love, for thy sake I will dye. FINIS. Printed for: I. Conyers, at the Anchor and Bible near St. Peter's Church in Corn-Hill.
