W226A 49521024 174242
Thomas Waites Case, A Condemned Prisoner in the Tower. THat He was much dissatisfied with the Armies proceedings, in Imprisoning divers Members of Parliament, in the year, 1648. That he went down soon after to his own house, 80 miles distant from London, and came not up again untill he was summoned several times, under pain of Sequestration and Expulsion, and did not come up untill the day before that horrid sentence was given a∣gainst the King, and then knew not what it was that he was command∣ed to come up for. That he was none of the Contrivers, or Law-makers, for setting up that Unwarrantable Court, for Tryal of the King, but was absent all the while. That he never knew himself to be one of that Court, untill his name was called, at which he was amazed. That he was trapan'd by Cromwell and Ireton to come out of the House, and then forced by them into the Court, and when the King desired to be heard by his Lords and Commons in the Pain∣ted-Chamber, He, with some others desired he might be heard, which caused the Court to withdraw into the Court of Wards; then Cromwel rebuked those that were the occasion of it with many reproa∣ches, which made all men silent, seeing it was to no purpose to speak, whereupon he returned no more into the Court, but stayed behind in the Croud. That he signed not the warrant for Execution, nor any writing tend∣ing thereunto until after that horrid fact was committed, but some time after was forced by Cromwel to sign a writing with others (not knowing what was contained in it) saying we should not slip out so, and from that time to his death, he looked upon him with an evil eye. That he never bought any of the Kings Lands or Goods, only a finall Fee-Farm rent that he paid out of his own Lands. That he was put out of all Authority by Cromwel, for assisting the Kings Friends, in helping them to their just dues, and being serviceable to them. That he was a great Sufferer under Cromwel, for opposing his Tyranny. That he nearly escaped Decimation, for offering himself to be bound for some of his Countrymen, that were Decimated. That he would not suffer any of the Kings Friends to be Imprisoned, or their houses searched, in the year 1659. when he was in power. That he never took the Oath of Abjuration against his now Majesty, but alwaies opposed it in his Station, and glad he was at the restauration of his Majesty. That he came in upon the Proclamation.
