104 99885017 182838
The nevv PROJECTOR; OR The Priviledged CHEAT: Who when Men do come to receive Satisfaction, Doth answer them all, I have got a PROTECTION. I Am a Projector that alwaies have thriv'd by Sideing with every Faction; I have to the bottom of Villianie div'd, and fitted my selfe for all Actions; In every Corner my Springes I have set, At Tennis, and Tables, and Billiards I Bet. I Shuffle, and run into every Mans Debt: But now I have got a Protection. Since Sixteen hundred forty and two, In the time of our first Distraction, When paltrie People had nothing to do, but Quarrell, and fall into Fraction; The Caveliers Party I envyed most, My Sanctified Zeal was as hot as a Toast, We Fought for Religion untill it was lost: But now I have got a Protection. I Canted in Scripture, I Taught in a Tub, and gave them Divine Direction: The Organ I turn'd into Dub, a dub, dub, like a Babe of the new Election, I reacht at All, and every Thing That would my own Advancement bring. I aim'd at the Bishop, and Shot at the King: But now I have got a Protection. I Preach'd, and Protested, I Plundred & Pray'd, and gave all the People Direction; Who ever did Trust me, I alwaies Betray'd by civil and subtle Inspection. When Oliver pull'd the Long Parliament down And set up the signe of the Red-nose and Crown, I frighted the Caveliers dead with a frown; Yet I have got a Protection. But Oliver dyed, and I was to seeke, My spirits did suffer dejection: I made my Address to his simple Son Dick, A Prince of a frollick complexion; A Man that lov'd Wine, and was given to Mirth But had a small portion of politick Worth; So down of a suddain dropt Richard the fourth: And now he doth want a Protection. The Commitee of Safety I knew would not last, It was of such cursed Confection; The Weather I saw was so much over-cast, That I lookt for a Scottish Projection: My fears come upon me, I sweat and I stunk, And stagger'd in Judgement, like one that was drunk, Then in came Pollitick Generall Monck, And put me quite by my protection. I smelt (by his drumming) that something was coming, to purge all the Air of infection. The Bonfires and Ringing, did usher the King in, which alter'd the Zealots complexion; Thought I; the Kings Party will be very strong And therefore jle turn and be for him ding dong, For I by my subtlety ere it be long, shall get me a cheating protection I mounted my Jennet to bring in the King and rejoyc'd at his Resurrection, My voice was well pitch'd, and my Hat I did fling, in token and signe of Subjection; I Capor'd, I Ranted, I Tipled for joy. I call'd them all Roundheads that hindred my way, I cast up my Cap, and cry'd Vive-le-Roy, for which I have got a Protection. I made a discovery of all that I knew, who formerly were of my Faction: I got me to Court, and in favour I grew, 'mongst men of my own Complexion; With Dice, Drink, and Drabb, I did swagger and roar, And though I did cry Yea and Nay before, Yet Damn me, Confound me, and Sink me I swore, for then I had got a Protction. My Debts were advanc'd to a terrible height, which brought me so much in Subjection, I should have been prest to death with their weight, if I had not used projection: Cheapside and Paternoster-Row, My crafty delusions do very well know; For most of the Shops have my hand to show. but now I have got a Protection. The Draper, the Butcher, the Brewer and Baker, are sensible of my Exaction, The Presbyter, Brownists, and Seeker and Quaker, are waiting for satisfaction: But when in the streets they me espy, They'l take an order with me they cry, I swagger, and tell 'em all, damn me they lye for now I have got a Protection. You Merchants and Citizens that do live high and are of a good Extraction, Beware how you credit such Gamesters as I. for Cheating is our Complexion: The Court, and the City, and Countrey may rue, The unfortunate season that ever they knew, Such knaves as my self (give the Divel his due) that Cousen men with a Protection. London, Printed for William Gilbertson at the Bible in Giltspur-street.
