A665A R172108 [ocm]61296817 180424
ADVICE To those who never Receiv'd the SACRAMENT: OR, THE True PENITENT INSTRUCTED, Before, At, and After The Receiving the Lord's Supper. WITH Meditations suited to the several parts of that solemn Ordinance, particularly with respect to Easter, Whitsuntide and Christmass. The Whole written in a different Method from any thing published on this Subject. By a Person of Honour. LONDON, Printed, Sold by E. Whitlock near Statio∣ners-Hall, 1697.
THE PREFACE. WHatever Apologies the World may ex∣pect for Books of another Nature, I think they ought not to be gratified in Books of this, for whatever tends to regu∣late our conversation, and advance a happi∣ness in another World when our hopes fail us here, is sufficient to recommend it self. Its unaccountable, that since Religion, in spight of all designs to undermine and make it look lit∣tle, asserts its own Authority and make men confess its beauties, that they should be such fools as not to be charm'd by them. Since Atheism and Infi∣delity are become meer Name, and Men are obliged to own a Being, which they have the Impudence to disobey: It may become a Question, Whether they had not better have continued in their Opinion that there was no God, if there were ever any such, than pretend to own a Be∣ing, and pay so little respect to it: How Men came to distrust the God who made them, or not carefully observe him whom they own to be the Maker of the World, are things equally un∣accountable; that Man, who is endued with Reason, and capable to convince himself, that he is not of himself, and that whatever was the Cause of him, must have a Cause, or that that
Cause must be Eternal, and the Maker of all things, who is forced from Natural Principles, and common Arguments, to allow a first Cause, and that he cou'd not have had this Knowledge if this Cause, had not revealed it self: That the same reason, which inclines him to take any thing for truth of which he han't demonstration, or to give credit to any thing, obliges him to believe the Account of God, of Religion, and Himself, which is delivered in the Scriptures, and for the truth of which there is the best Testimony in the world. For their Antiquity, there is nothing so ancient, and for their Credit, they have the general Con∣sent of all Ages, Jewish and Christian. So that if they be true, we ought to give our entire As∣sent to all that is declared, and they testifie of One whom God was to send to redeem this sin∣ful World: For Man fell from what he was created, and stood in need of an Attonement; that this Person in the fulness of time was ma∣nifested to the World, being conceived by the Spi∣rit of God, and born of a Virgin; that he wrought Miracles; taught us an exact Rule of Faith and Obedience, and then laid down his life as a Ransom for all that should believe on him; that after his death, he raised himself from the dead, and in the sight of his Disciples ascended into Heaven, and there remains, till he shall come to judge the World: That he appointed Apostles, and gave them power to make Bishops, Priests and Deacons, that by such an Order of Men, the Laws which he Commanded might be taught to us, and the Rites of that Religion which he
planted, duly performed. Of this we are infal∣libly assured, and though we have the witness of Men, yet the witness of God is greater, and he that can no more deceive than be deceived, has positively confirmed. We have had a constant suc∣cession of men in the Priestly Office, even to this time, what then is the cause of our Dissensions, of our Unbelief and Misbelief, but that they who polluted our Manners, wou'd betray our Faith, and make us altogether uncapable of those Bles∣sings which these Scriptures promise us to en∣joy; why such industry to bear down Revealed Religion, but that Men hate the light which wou'd expose their Deeds that are Evil. Why are they so laborious to defame that Doctrine which has increased against Opposition, and the malice of Hell, and will be preserved to the end of the World: 'Tis impossible to know a God reconciled without revelation, and  has revealed himself it must be by some o∣dy, and is there any that they can prefer to our Saviour, who has the witness of the Father and the Holy Ghost concerning him. He was pro∣phesy'd of 3000 Years before, and exactly answer∣ed the Character of him that was to come: What Excuse then can Men have for their Obstinacy, who pretend to own a God, and yet won't be∣lieve the words of his Mouth? Is there any Law, any Precept, any Character misbecoming the Dignity and Wisdom of the Son of God? Has our Saviour said any thing to be the Will of his Father which is not rational, and most becoming the Almighty Governor of Hea∣ven and Earth? If not, Why shou'd the hearts
of the Sons of Men be lifted up, and dispise the D ctates of this preacher of Righteousness? If they own a God, can they serve him in a more acceptable manner? Can they propose better Rules of Conversation, be govern'd by better Laws, be better Men than the Scripture can make them? If there is nothing in the Scrip∣ture misbecoming an infinite Wisdom, and they declare to us the Will of God, which is, that we shou'd believe and obey his Son, why shou'd we refuse to serve him, as he himself thinks fit? So little reason has the Deist for his Opinion, that 'tis impossible to establish it, unless we destroy that by which we came to know there is a God, which no Man cou'd have done without Origi∣nal Impressions upon his Soul, or explicit Reve∣lation. So that it is to live unaccountably, to believe they know not why, but do what seems Good in their own Eyes, and every man to wor∣ship a Being which he reveals to himself, which being impossible is to live in the possession of ab∣surd Principles, and which are not answerable to the common Reason of Mankind. But these are not the only Persons who are pre∣judicial to Religion, for that suffers like our selves, most by those who pretend to be our Friends; the Wisdom of God so far condescended to our weakness, as to make himself known in a won∣derful manner. When our first Parents fell, sin entred into the World, and Death by sin, for in them all Men were made sinners; if our Pa∣rents transgressed, we must derive a contagion from their Loins, for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, and if we are conceived and
born in Sin, what is Man that he should be clean or he that is born of a Woman, that he should be Righteous: God saw this, and knew our insuf∣ficiency, that we should incline to Evil, and cou'd have no merit to attone his Justice, for what cou'd the Sons of Violence offer that was clean, or Man, miserable Man, propose to re∣store himself to the favour of God. But God was pleased to propose a sacrifice, to take away the sins of the World, and this he declared as soon as Man had sin'd, and continued to inculeate this Goodness in the minds of Men by his Prophets, who continually declare the mercy of God which should appear to bring Salvation; this is what Abraham believed, and 'twas imputed unto him for Righteousness, for he saw the Day, and was Glad: This was it that was typifyed by the Ceremonies of the Law, that every time they Sacrificed and Worshipped in the Temple, they might have something to put them in mind of their Messia, whom they expected, and who was called the Wonderful Counsel, or the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; that his Office was to visit and redeem his People. Thus did God prepare the way for his Son, that we might reverence him, and though his Dignity was thus great, yet he was to be rejected and dispised by Men, smitten of God, that the Chastisement of our Peace might be upon him, and by his Stripes we might be Healed. This indeed was wonderfull, and what proved a stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the Gentiles, and what they who in this Age continue to deny the
Lord who bought them, think very Ridiculous: But however merry these Gentlemen of that Per∣swasion are with the price of their Salvation. I believe it would startle them to have it seri∣ously put to them, whether they renounce the me∣rits of that Cross which they dispise, or the Name into which they were Baptized; we are certain it can be no jesting matter, if the Scriptures don't err concerning Him, for they tell us, he died for our sins, and rose again for our justification, and that without him, we have no life in us; that he is our Advocate, and was made a propitiation for our Sins, and yet that he was from Eternity; for he came down from Heaven, and was in the Beginning, and was with God, and was God, and yet became Flesh, and dwelt among us, that even in this State, he was worthy of Divine Honour, by virtue of that Union in him, of the Divine and Humane Nature that he was Alpha and Omega; that in the beginning he laid the Foundations of the Earth, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy; therefore let us take heed to the things which we have heard, least at any time we let them slip, and then, How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? And who then can deny that this Jesus, as the Scriptures explain it, is God manifest in the Flesh, to whom be Glory for ever. And yet there are a sort of Men, who set up themselves in contradiction to this Myste∣ry of Godliness, and fancy by searching, they can find out the Almighty to perfection, who pride themselves in Reason, and think it a disparage∣ment for any thing to be above their Knowledge.
They are so refin'd in their Notions, that they can see no difference between a thing, being a∣bove their reason, and being contrary to it: They are so great Masters, that not to understand a thing, or its being repugnant in its self are the same thing, for with them all is Non-scence and contradiction, which they don't comprehend; when at the same time they can't give an account of themselves, and yet would be thought to under∣stand every thing else. The Scripture more per∣ticularly is their Talent, and if we can believe them, there is nothing like a Mystery in it, but they can easily comprehend all, or as easily de∣ny: That our Saviour was conceived by the Ho∣ly Ghost, and Born of a Virgin is possitive in the Scriptures, but what they never yet made easie to our conceptions, but in such a manner as gives the lie to the Prediction, and wretchedly perverts the Sense of the Scripture, by leaving it more perplex'd and above our reach than 'tis of it self. That he was the express Image of the Fa∣ther, and therefore to him every Knee should bow, that all Power in Heaven and Earth was given unto him, and therefore if we do not believe in him shall be Damn'd. That he came out from God, and that he and the Father are one, and therefore is able to hear our Prayers, and has promised if we ask of him he will give us, and yet that took upon him the form of a Servant, is what God has Testified, and what he thought was not too much for our sake, though in him∣self he thought it not Robery to be equal with God, and of this there are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Ho∣ly
Ghost, and that these three are one; and in∣to this truth are we commanded to be Baptized, for 'twas his will that all Nations should be Taught and Baptised in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; these are all infallible Truths, whether they understand them or not, if they cannot, then there are Mysteries, and what they must believe without knowing any more than that God with whom all things are possible has said it, and if we would be saved must be∣lieve, that we have all sin'd and stand in need of a Saviour, is what our Reason and Scripture informs us; the Person and Dignity of this Sa∣viour, the Scripture possitively asserts, and if that be true, he could not be less than God that undertook our Redemption, and that had those peculiar attributes belonging to him; but how he the God-head and Man-hood was united in him, is not what his Wisdom has thought fit to reveal, and what our finite understanding is not capable of, and what is not necessary to our Sal∣vation that we should know, but believe: So that the Controversie seems to be this, whether God can oblige us to believe what we can't comprehend? And whether he has not obliged us already to a Faith which must be obedient to his word, till they can prove to our reason, that either of these are untrue or impossible? Let it suffice us to h ld fast the Faith in which we are bred up, and only believe as much as God has been pleased to reveal, and have regard to what the Scripture say concerning him, through whom are are to have everlasting Life. Thus much is certain, and what I think to be an unanswer∣able
Argument, and a just account of the Chri∣stian Belief, which a Great Divine of our Church has lately offer'd. That the Foundation of the Doctrine of the Trinity is this; First, That there can be but one God; Secondly, That there is nothing in God, but what is God; Thirdly, That there can be no composition in the Deity with any such positive real Being distinct from the Deity it self. But the Church finding in Scripture mention of three to whom distinctly the God-head be∣longs, expressed these three by the Name of Persons, and stated their Personallity up∣on three distinct Modes of subsistance al∣lotted to one and the same God-head, and these also distinguished from one another by three distinct Relations. And now what designs these Traducers of the Lord of Glory can intend, by puzelling themselves and every Body else with their pretentions to more Reason than God has given them, I can't imagine, unless under the disguise of Charity to our Reason, they would subvert our Religion, and by pretending to bring the sublime Truths of God's Word to our understanding, they would Ridicule the hidden things of God, and so open a way for Atheism and Insidellity, by denying first that there is any thing which our reason can't comprehend, and then that there is nothing in the Scripture, but what can easily be understood. This is to make our Reason, not the Scripture a rule of Salvation, and when once our sense is to judge of these Divine Truths, all of them that we can give a Mathematical Account of,
must be rejected: And yet that there are such truths of which they can have no Idea is certain, and after all, they must own, that either they are not to be understood, and yet believed, or else that they are Non-sence and contradiction, which is an impudence they dare not publickly own, and what would be fatal to their designs; for the Socinian needs only appear in his proper Colour, to make him abhor'd and rejected by all, and lookt upon as an Enemy to God, Religion and the common sence of Mankind. But there is yet another sort, who pretend an Obedience to the Gospel of Christ, and yet make that easie rule of Salvation so confused and perplex'd, that either they dare not, or cannot give an account of their Faith. Their principles, if they have any, are as unaccountable to them∣selves as to the World, and they agree in nothing so much as to oppose the plain sense of the Scrip∣ture; that Baptism and the Lord's Supper are positive Institutions, the one to be perform'd by Water in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and the other by Bread and Wine, in remembrance of our Saviour's Death and Sufferings, are as plainly and positively commanded, as any one thing in the Scripture. That the Apostles and primitive Christians made it their Practise, is capable of the same proof as the Scriptures themselves; they went a∣bout Preaching the Lord Jesus, and Baptising all that believed in his Name, and the condition of Salvation in those days, was Faith, Repen∣tance and Baptism; that to strengthen People
in their Faith, they meet on the first day in the Week to break Bread, and St. Paul is very care∣ful to instruct our Behaviour, that we might receive the Bread of the Lord worthily. Yet notwithstanding this, as if an aukerd Gravity, and sullenness of Behaviour were to pass for Authority, they pretend by a New Light to another understanding of the Scripture, and impudently prevert that Sense which the Chri∣stian Church for 1600 Years and more submit∣ted too. So unwilling are they to go to Heaven in the steps of their Fathers, that they prefer eve∣ry wild Enthusiastick Notion to the written Word of God, and so fearful of following the Examples of Tradition that each Man sets up for a Rule to himself; they have no Priests as well as no Sacraments, no settled constitution of a Church, and are so little observers of St. Paul's Command, to do all things with Decen∣cy and Order, as if he did not speak it by the Spirit, but to gratifie his own Superstition; they live as if the Gospel was all Privilege, and no Duty, are Enemies to a form in Divine Worship, and in spight of the Scripture which commands Women to be in silence, will needs have them for Speakers among them; thus do they play at cross purposes with the Word of God, and by their Obstinancy and Fantasticalness, make it of none effect. But there is an Argument against them, which they never thought fit to answer, and till they can, must be thought Enemies to the Gospel of Christ: An Ordinance once enjoyn'd and never repeal'd, is still in force; but Baptism
by Water was once enjoyn'd, but never repeal'd: Ergo, and so of the Lord's Supper, and what ever else is accounted an Ordinance in the Church of God, and all that lies upon us to prove, is, That what we assert is an Ordinance, and was enjoyn'd by lawful Authority; and this is what the Scriptures prove themselves, and what has been strengthen'd by the Arguments and Practise of the Church down to this day. So that if there is any such thing as Unbelievers, false Teach∣ers, and denyers of the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, we may find them in this wretched Sect of pretenders to Christianity. But now among these who have no knowledge of the Truth, or hold it in Unrighteousness, or put Godliness into a Form to draw the ridi∣cule and scorn of the World, its no wonder to meet with them Debauch'd, or fill'd with Pride, Conceit and Devillishness, or Deceitful, trusting in themselves Hypocrites, turning the truth of God into a lie. But that we who are Born in a Nation, where the true Religion is Established by Law, and have all the Advantages which God can give us to make us Happy. Our Church teaching us the form of sound Words once deli∣ver'd to the Saints, and makes the Word of God her Rule of Faith, the Example of the Apostles and Primitive Fathers her Guide, and her constitution such as Decency directs, that we in the midst of such assistances should fail of the end of Creation, and in the spight of God's Grace and Mercy, deprive our selves of ever∣lasting Happiness, by living in Disobedience to this Church, in contradiction to the word of God,
and in defiance of what our reason tells us is both our interest and duty. Whence is this hard∣ness of heart, that Men forget they were Bap∣tised, and live as if they never heard of Religi∣on? Let us all put the Question to our selves, and see whether one Reason of this Stupidity and Wickedness is not from our Neglect, in the Edu∣cation of those committed to our Charge. We are dedicated to God and Religion as soon as Born, according to the command of our Saviour; but since most of us are borought to the Church, when through our tender Years we are not capable to judge nor perform what is requi∣red of us. The Church according to an Ancient Prescription has appointed Sureties in our behalf; they solemnly Engage for us till we come to an Age that we are able to take care of our selves. Whence is it then, that notwithstanding this Prudent care of the Church, so few are bred up to those Pious Rules prescribed in our Baptism, and how many less when they come to Age, think themselves bound to perform what was vow'd in their Names. Do they who are God-fathers perform their part? Do they endeavor early to instruct their Children, and inform them to what advantages they are Born, that they promised by them who are their Sureties to perform their duty to God and their Neighbour; that now they are able, they are to be accountable for their own Actions, and take upon them that Solemn Engagement to Fight un∣der Christ's Banner, and to resist the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. Thus much is certainly incumbent upon such as under∣take
for Infants at least, that they put the Pa∣rents in mind to do it for them, so that there is no such difficulty that should discourage any from so charitable a Work, but there is danger for those who take it upon them with no design, but to comply with the custom, but not to inform them of good and Evil; and, Oh, how happy should we be, if when we first come to the knowledge of Good and Evil, that we could so persue the Good, that God may not deny us the privilege of tasting of the Tree of Life also. Do they who are Parents perform their part by confirming the Advice of the God-fathers to their Children, in adding both their Precept and Example. The Church has appointed God-fa∣thers to be as Monitors, but 'tis they that will be accountable for the mismanagement of their Children, for they have a constant Eye over them, and their Authority last as long as their lives, and if thro' their Negligence, their Children are lost, their Blood will be required at their hands. 'Twas a severe Judgment upon Old Eli, for not main∣taining the right of a Parent in the correction of his Sons, tho' he was not altogether silent at their wickedness, but mild in his reproof, and yet God removed from him the Priest-hood for ever. But how many are there that don't say so much as he did? My Sons, ye do not well to make the Lords's People to Transgress, but are rather en∣couraging them in their Vices, or silent at their Wickedness. Good God, that Men should desire Children to make them miserable! Surely it concerns us as much as it did the Jews, to bring them up in the fear and Nature of the
Lord. Why should we be cautious in our Admoni∣tions, when 'tis our Duty, and their Interest, to hear and to obey, and we have this for our Encourage∣ment, if they are disobedient, the Laws of the Land are ready to our assistance in the punishment of Wick∣edness and Vice, and we have this Negative Pow∣er, to restrain them from being very bad, if we can't make them very Good. We are born into a World full of Temptations and Miseries, and tho' God has pronounced it good, as the work of his hands, yet we are so prone to do amiss, that we scarce arrive to the power of acting, but we incline to pervert that Blessing, and make that our Curse, which was design'd our Happiness. 'Tis the Goodness and Mercy of God that we are crea∣ted with a power to Will, and he has placed in us such an inclination to good, as may be infinitly im∣proved by getting in us the upper-hand of Evil, and a power to overcome the subtilties of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; let us then make use of this Power which God has given us, and they who are Young, look up to God to preserve their Innocence; and they who are so unhappy as to have been over taken by the Enemy of Mankind, let them now at length call their ways to remembrance, and turn their face unto God's Testimonies; to this end, let them according to the Direction of a great Man: First, Consider what they have done amiss, Secondly, What is fitting for them now to do. Thirdly, If they do it not, what the end of their neglect will be. This Examination consists in a review of their past life, as to their Actions, all that they have left un∣done,
as well as done; as to their Faith, whatever they disbelieved that is true, or believed that is a∣miss; and this is no easie task, it requires Time and Pains, Zeal and Constancy, if their own Educa∣tion has not given them the advantage of directing themselves, let them address themselves to some dis∣creet Minister; let us first consider the necessity of Repentance, and then the difficulties, and they are more than we can presently imagin. Our lusts are not to be conquer'd by a Sigh, a Tear, or a Resolution, when we are in a fit of Devotion; but let the difficulty be greater than our imaginati∣on, we must resolve to undertake the Combate, and root out every habit and disposition to sin: In order to it, let us first know what is fitting for us to be∣lieve, and then what is fit for our practice; for if we build upon a true Foundation, our Faith will direct us to work out our Salvation by a true Repen∣tance; if we suffer our selves to be deceiv'd by any known sin, we are not in safty, and 'tis not Re∣pentance when we repeat our Wickedness, and we have not conquer'd our lusts till we are able to resist them; he who thinks he may go to Heaven, because he is Honest in the main, or is one the world calls a Moral Man, is in danger of Eternal Ruin; the Young Man in the Gospel had kept all the Commandments from his Youth, and yet lack∣ed one thing needfull to make him perfect; and the reason of this purity is plain, for the same dispositions which we have when we leave this World, will follow us to the next; we are mistaken if we suppose that with this Body we shall put off the bo∣dy of sin; or, because we die in a fit of Devotion, that
God will accept of this last part of our life, and not account for the rest. Our Souls will have the same affections in the other World, as here, for there can be no alteration, as the Tree falls so it lies, and if we resolve not to endeavour a change till Death ap∣proach us, and think that our Reflections upon a Sick∣bed are sufficient to attone a mispent life, we shall be miserably deceived: It is certain indeed that a true Repentance, though never so late will be accepted, but who can be certain that he shall tru∣ly repent at a time when he is not fit for the ordinary Offices of life, when his Soul is upon the Wing, and ready to take its flight into another World. Re∣pentance includes more then can be done in such a dreadful Extremity; it implies not only that part which many endeavour at that time to act, by moving all about them with their Tears and Re∣solutions, but an absolute change in their whole Man. Who can satisfie himself that his heart is right towards God, when he has not an opportunity to try and examine his sincerity? Can any Man be secure that if he should live, that his Vices would not return with his Health, since 'twas necessity, not choice, that drove him to these new Resoluti∣ons; and if he cannot, what unanswerable folly is it to defer what reason and every Man's Conscience suggest ought presently to be done; let us then not trust to uncertainty, but since God gives an op∣portunity to be happy, not make our selves misera∣ble; let us cast off the Old Man with his Deeds, and betake our selves to a newness of life; and to en∣able us in this work, let us set our Faces towards the Altar of God, for 'tis there we are to receive strength and comfort, and every good thing. This
is what we obliged our selves to at our Baptism, and since we have lived unworthy of the First Sa∣crament, let us in Humiliation and Repentance approach the Second, that our sins may be blotted out, and we may be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in Light; and now if any ask what preparation we ought to make, I answer: I know of no other than what I have endeavoured to perswade, and what is necessary and reasonable, even a true Faith and Repentance; that the Sa∣crament is a Duty, is generally acknowledg'd, yet through mistakes there are abundance neglect it. Our Saviour was very particular in this Order to his Dis∣ciples, and his Apostles devoutly press it in all their Writings, and the Ancients received it as an inesti∣mable Blessing. We are told, that unless we Eat Christ's Body, and drink his Blood, we have no life in us, and that this is to be done by Bread and Wine in the Holy Communion, is what the Apostles and generality of Mankind down to this Age have believed. Christ, when he gave it them, told them, it was his Body, and St. Paul directs our Behaviour, that we might not receive it un∣worthily, but discern it as the Lord's body, and therefore first, to Examine our selves, and then Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup, what then should hinder our approaches to this Holy Ban∣quet; that we are wicked is no excuse, for why are we not otherwise; that we are affraid, because of our unworthiness; if there is no other reason but our fear, is no Excuse. For 'tis not the sense of our unworthiness that should hinder us, but our resolution, or unwillingness, to be otherwise, and that indeed will make us unworthy for ever;
for, where shall we be washed, if not in this Fountain which is opened for Sin and Uncleanness? If none but such as are perfect could approach this Holy Table, who then would venture to come near? And what can we think of our Saviour, that could propose a Snare to endanger our Ruin? No, it was ordain'd for such as had a sense of their Unworthiness, and were sensible of their load, but desired to be eased of their heavy burthen; Well, but they who come to the Sacrament are obliged to live stricter lives than other Men, and some are affraid they can't conform to an exactness of Conversation. Why are they not as well affraid, that because they don't lead such lives, that they shall be punished, which would be an argument to put them upon that Tryal, and when once they saw the pleasantness of the paths of Righteousness, they would endeavour to perse∣vere in them? Besides, they are not obliged, but to lead such lives as is necessary to Salvation, and how dares any Man that believes another World do less? There is danger indeed in unworthy Receiving, and there is as great a danger in staying away, both of them are a contempt of the Lord's Body, and will receive their reward; in short, whatever our Scruples are that hinder us from this Ordinance, let us with all speed endeavour to remove them, for there is no excuse for our Abscence, nor any obje∣ction, but what may easily be answered, if we are sincere in our inquiries; 'tis the neglect of this Sa∣crament that is the cause of our coldness in Religion, and I can't tell how it comes to pass, that tho' the Church and State requires all that are at the Age of Sixteen to communicate at least three times in the Year, that there is not one in a Thousand observe the
order; there are a great many considerate persons that never seem to have a desire after it, till they come upon their Death-bed, and then are willing to have it to conduct them to Heaven. The Ancient Church refused to Administer to any that had not received it before, and if the discipline was maintained, it would make us more circumspect; for a great many think if they can have the Minister to pray by them, and give them the Sacrament, all will be well: But if they who refused it in their Health, were deny'd it upon their Death-bed, it would be a dreadful warning to others not to neglect it, and those Ministers who venture now to Adminster it, transgress the Rubrick in this case; but 'tis as in∣discreet to trust to This now, as to depend upon a Re∣pentance, begun at such a time which is hardly pos∣sible to be sincere, and if not, they are lost for ever; there are the same Arguments to bring Men to the Sacrament, as there are to perswade them to a new∣ness of life, without both we are not assured of Sal∣vation, and he that pretends to lead a life accord∣ing to God's Holy Word, and yet refuses to eat of the Bread which came down from Heaven, how can he hope to be raised up at the last day? The truth on't is, Men are not willing to part with their Lusts, and as long as they are in that mind, they do well to stay away, but do very ill to continue in such a resolution; but what shall we say, if neither Pro∣mise, or Threats, Rewards or Punishments, Heaven or Hell, will perswade Men to forsake their sins, nothing will; however we must never be weary in well doing, and 'tis our Duty to exhort one ano∣ther daily, which was the chief inducement of this, Advice to those which never Receiv'd the Sa∣crament,
and this I thought I cou'd not do in a better manner than by shewing, First, the unrea∣sonableness of Sin, and then, Secondly, the ne∣cessity of Repentance; to this end I have collect∣ed a form of Devotion which may be useful in our Conversion, and when we are so happy as to be sensible of the folly of our ways, that we can set before us the difficulty of returning, and yet dare venture thro' all hardships to attain Salvation. I thought it necessary to add some Arguments to oblige us to that Duty, which is our interest to comply with, and which will strengthen our resolutions in Piety; to these Directions, I have collected another form of preparitory Devotions to be used at any time before we approach the Sacrament, and left it to the Rea∣der's Discretion to use as much of it, and as often as he pleases. That our behaviour in the Church might be answerable to the Solemnity, there is ap∣pointed a large Form of Devotion, and I have en∣deavoured to range them in a suitable Order, that every Prayer having a particular relation to what we are then a doing, our Minds might be more mo∣ved, and our Souls thus ascending with our Devo∣tions, we may pray by the Spirit, and the under∣standing also. I'm very willing to believe, that all who come to this Holy Table, endeavour to be as de∣vout as they can, and 'tis possible, fancy themselves very Zealous, if they prescribe their thoughts to that which is good in general, and no doubt 'tis very well if they have so much victory over themselves, as to curb their thoughts and desires; but if by any other helps they can arrive yet farther, and not only when they enter the Church, leave the thoughts of the World behind, but can place such as are suitable
in their room, 'tis not only their vertue, but duty; we are to consider that we are come to remember Christ, and that all our Thoughts ought to bend themselves to such holy Meditations; we should as much as pos∣sible pry into these Mysteries which the An∣gels desire to look into, and thus by not only ta∣king words with us when we enter the House of God, but directions for our Thoughts too, we might not be in danger to offer up the sacrifice of Fools. To these Devotions in the Church I have added some for our behaviour at Home, for 'tis necessary to keep our affections in a heat afterwards, as to kindle them before; besides, I had this de∣sign in it, to inform some, who by their practise don't seem to know any more, than that we are to be serious while we are about this Solemnity, and as soon as 'tis over, forget their Resolutions and the Obligations they have put upon themselves, by Eat∣ing and Drinking before the Lord. We come there to receive Grace to help up to perform our Re∣solutions of amendment, as well as to receive pardon for our past Offences, and unless we come with this design, we can have no Absolution, and I would to God, that we all did approach this Table with such Resolutions: In order to it this Collection of Devotions is humbly offer'd, and if it shall please God to make it an instrument, but to convert one sinner, or add a zeal to any sincere Christian, it will abundantly recompence my trouble, and to God alone be the Praise.
ADVICE To those who never Receiv'd the Sacrament. &c. OUR Saviour has proposed Two Sacraments, as necessary to Salvation, and the Church of England has taken care in her Chatechism to instruct those bred in her Communion to perform both, accor∣ding to the Command of her great Law∣giver: So that as soon as we are taught to Read, we may learn our Duty to God, our Neighbor, and ourselves, and this for a very wise reason, that Reli∣gion may grow up with us, that we mayn't be to learn our Duty when we should practise it. But 'tis the unhap∣piness of a great many People, that they could give a better account of their Faith when they were Children, than at the Age of Discretion. They invert the Example of the Apostle, when they are become men, begin to take upon
them the Childish things; they think what was taught them in their Youth was only fitting for Children to know, and don't become the stu∣dy of their graver years, till their neglect brings them almonst to that necessity, of going to School to learn Wisdom from Babes, and get under∣standing from them that have hardly any knowledge: They have not only forgot what is required of them who come to the Lord's Supper, but are ig∣norant of the meaning of it too. This is owing in great measure to the gene∣ral neglect of Religion; we live with∣out concern, have no other Thoughts but for the present, suffer our selves to be hurried on by our perverted Incli∣nations, and are without God in the World. So miserably do we expose our selves by folly, and inconsiderati∣on that we neither think of our condi∣tion here nor hereafter; and because we are so Mad to live like Brutes, to fancy we shall perish like them that have no Understanding, but let us not deceive our Souls, Religion is no Chimera, and Heaven is worth thinking on. For this end we came into the World, and what is so manifestly our Duty, ought to
be the business of our lives. They who have neglected, or are ignorant of it, ought to inform themselves, and be con∣vinced of their Sin and Disobedience. No man ought to think himself too Old, or Wise, to be instructed; especially in Religion we may always be improving, and when interest joins with our Duty it should be no hard matter to per∣swade us into a compliance. There are very few but are perswaded in them∣selves of the reasonableness of Religion, and intend at one time or other to be∣come Religious; they hope they shall live to a good Old Age, and then grow weary of the World, and its Vices to∣gether; but can they think when they are fit for nothing else, they are capa∣ble to do God good Service: So unrea∣sonable are some Mens expectations, though they come in at the last hour, and are past their labor too, yet hope to stand upon the same Terms with those that have born the heat of the day, and think God a hard Master, if he should discount for their Idleness. Though they can't complain with the Servant in the Gospel, that God reaps where he does not sow, for they tacitly confess 'tis in their own power to im∣prove
their Talent, but are unwilling God should have too much interest: They are sensible their time is given them to work out their Salvation, but suppose a small part will suffice for that, therefore reserve it for the last thing, that at least they may conclude well; but if the night should come on before they have finished, they must not be angry at that dismal surprise; they knew their Master's will, and must submit to be punish'd for their neglect with weeping and gnashing of Teeth. We all have an inclination to be Happy, and accordingly persue what∣ever we think leads to Satisfaction; the only Unhappiness is, we are apt to be mistaken, and place our Felicity in things which profit nothing; we na∣turally adhere to a sensible good, fancy that Religion ties us up from those Delights, and therefore desire to be ex∣cused, and left to our own Enjoyments. There is little hopes of Mens growing wiser, till they are better reconciled to Religion; 'tis the Devil's subtilty to represent its Precepts impracticable, and in so loose an Age, when Men give themselves up to Ease and Luxu∣ry. Nothing appears so terrible as the
taking up the Cross, but if Men could be perswaded to suspend their Opini∣on, till they become capable of giving judgment, we might hope to see no∣thing bear so great a Character, as the Beauties of Religion: We are required to deny our selves nothing that is fit for wise Men to do, and are generally so fond of that Epithet, its wonder we don't endeavour to deserve it. None so really can lay claim to it, as they who have the fear of God before their Eyes; for the fear of the Lord, that is, Wisdom, and to depart from Evil, Un∣derstanding. They have the greatest share of Knowledge, whose conversa∣tion is in Heaven, and study in the Gos∣pel of Christ: There we learn those wondrous Truths which puts Philoso∣phy to a stand, and renders the Wis∣dom of this World foolishness. There we may learn what God has done for us, and what we ought to do for our selves, could we be so happy as to be govern'd by our Reason, to let our thoughts have there proper place, we should in a little time perceive that we were not sent hither to gaze about us, that we have immortal Souls to be taken care of, that the greatest Age is
but a few days, and all the Pleasures of this World momentary and deceit∣ful, that if we all could rejoice in the days of our Youth, yet we must be brought to Judgment; could we but think of these things, we should find enough to do, to secure our interest in Heaven, and may conveniently dis∣pence with the Vanities of this World; for besides the evil of them, they take us off of the contemplation of much bet∣ter things. He that has God and E∣ternity upon his Mind, has infinite va∣riety to employ his Thoughts. The most exquisite Wits have subject for their Fancies, and the ignorant may be improving in true Wisdom. 'Tis our misfortune to suffer the love of this World to prevail upon us, and till we have something more love∣ly to remove our Affections, can't easi∣ly give a Bill of Divorce. Our Pas∣sions are strong, and when we have habituated our selves to the love of a∣ny one thing, can't quickly put a curb to our desires; we talk of Hea∣ven but at a distance, think it suffici∣ent to take up with those pleasures, when we can enjoy these no longer we are sure of the present, and have a
mistrust either that the future will not come, or that they are not worth the exchange, that we should deny our selves a familliar satisfaction for un∣certain expectations. 'Tis from such reasons we are deluded, and though we dare not speak out, are such fools as to mistrust in our hearts the truth of these things. In short, 'tis the want of Faith, we are not fully convinced of the existence of a Deity, or that there is a Providence in the World. This proceeds from the want of consi∣deration, we dont allow our selves time to think, but take it upon trust, we don't endeavour to reconcile it to our Reason, and having no conviction in our minds grow indifferent, at last come to that degree of wickedness as to cast off all thoughts of God and Religion. This is certainly the Case of too ma∣ny: And even among those who are more fully persuaded of these things; that believe there is a God, and a Judg∣ment to come, we find a prodigious Neglect; and have nothing but their Words, to incline us to believe they ever heard of the Christian Religion. In∣deed, they come to Church once a a Week, hear Jesus Christ preach'd, and
that they must depend upon his Merits to be saved. This they are willing to be∣lieve, if God will accept them upon that Condition; for they do not care to be concern'd in the Working out their Sal∣vation; but are free to let our Saviour have the Honour of Conducting them to Heaven, if they may be exempt from the Severity of Fear and Trembling: They can heartily believe any thing that favours their Interest, and are ve∣ry desirous of getting into Paradise by Faith, if God will excufe them from Good Works. But this we must not be∣lieve; for we are as certain as there is a God, that no unrighteous Man shall see his Face; nor any Man, without Re∣pentance, and a true Faith in Jesus Christ. Except we repent, we shall all likewise pe∣rish: And unless we believe that Jesus is the Christ, shall be damned. True Re∣pentance is a hearty Sorrow for Sin past, and a serious Resolution to amend our Lives for the future. True Faith will be shewn by our Works; for if we believe in him, we shall keep his Commandments. We cannot think that God made us for nothing; and was at the Expence of so great a Miracle, only to furnish witty Men with Matter for a strange Story.
There must be something more in Sin, than we imagine; and the Provocations of the Wicked must be exceeding abo∣minable. It must be of a prodigious Nature, that could so incense a merci∣ful God, that nothing less than the Sa∣crifice of his Son could expiate. Can we think the Work of our Redemption of so little value, that it is not to be consi∣dered? Oh! let the Consideration of this move us to be grateful to the ex∣ceeding Love of Christ: Let us glorifie God in our Lives; and let not the Price of his Blood be utterly lost: Let the Time past of our Lives suffice for the Works of Iniquity; and let us break off our Sins by Repentance, and turn to the Lord our God. To which End, let us call our selves to a severe Account, and examine the Errour of our Ways; let us humble our selves in Fasting and Prayer, beg Pardon for our Offences, and Strength to withstand the Assaults of the Devil, and our Inclinations; for till we are thus purified, we expect the Grace of God in vain. Christ will not come into a filthy Habitation; and while our Bodies are unclean, the Holy Ghost will not erect his Temple there. How necessary is it then to begin our Repen∣tance
speedily; to day, while it is called to day, lest any of us be harden'd through the Deceitfulness of Sin? Sin is very bewitching; and when it has got the Mastery, is not easily resisted. Habits require a great deal of Pains to un∣learn; especially, when they are such as cause us not only to take pleasure in them our selves, but delight in those who do the same thing: They are then become mighty Dallila's, dearer to us than our Eyes or Limbs; we can much rather part with either than our Lusts: Of such mighty force are they, that we not only loose our Strength, but Reason; and are led Captives wheresoever they will. A Man thus overcome, is mise∣rable indeed; for he is not only under the Power of the Devil, and his own unruly Lusts; but has God for his Ene∣my: And where can he then flee for Succour? How dreadfully must his Soul be shaken, when his Conscience begins to suggest all things are not well within, that there is a Necessity of a speedy Alteration; that his Impieties are daring, and grown to such a heighth as cannot be thought on without Hor∣rour and Confusion; when he can nei∣ther put off these Reflections, or bear
the Trial of the Prospect! The first Sight renders him monstrous; and the Continuance, exceeding frightful! It casts him into a thoughtless, yet ama∣zing Condition, and leaves him under the Pressure of a wounded Spirit! Such are generally the Conflicts of those that have submitted to the Yoke of Satan, when they first come to themselves: And no Man that believ'd the Torture of this Condition, would put him∣self under so dreadful a Necessity. Alas! these are but the Beginning of Sorrows; there is Eternity behind, and Hell, the Habitation of the Wicked for ever, unless this Sense of Sin drives us to Repentance and Reformation. But 'tis uncertain whether we shall come thus to our selves, till Death overtake us; or, since we resolv'd to sin till we could sin no longer, whether there will be Place found for our Tears. Therefore let every Man call his Ways to remem∣brance: But they who are thus enslav'd in Sin, let them make haste to deliver themselves from the Wrath to come; their Case is very dangerous, they seem to be destin'd to Destruction; for they have so long suffer'd their Lusts to have Dominion over them, that they know
not how to free themselves from this Tyranny of Sin. But blessed be God, who has provided a Lamb for the Sacri∣fice, there is yet a Way for our Redem∣ption; God has not wholly left us with∣out Help in this World. Though the Prayers of the Wicked are an Abomina∣tion, yet those of the Penitent are not so. If we are so happy as to stop in this Career, have but so much Resolu∣tion to begin a Reformation, God is so merciful as to add his Grace to help us forward to Repentance: But 'tis only when God sees us set about it in earnest, for he knows our Hearts and Thoughts long before. Therefore let us embrace the first Thoughts of Repentance, and carry them on to a sincere Reformation: Let us re∣tire from the World, and humble our selves in Fasting; and this not once or twice, but often; for we have need to cry mightily to God, Day and Night, to be redeem'd from this worse than Egy∣ptian Bondage. On the Day of our Hu∣miliation, that the Misery of our Con∣dition may oblige us to the greater Pe∣nitence, let us first consider the Odious∣ness of Sin, that we may learn to detest it; the Aggravation of it, by being
committed frequently, presumptuously, and against Knowledge; that we may abhor our selves for our Folly and Ingra∣titude. Then let us reflect upon the Number of them; which being infi∣nite, ought to lay us in the Dust, and confess our selves to be worse than no∣thing. Reflections of a true Penitent upon his first Conviction. O God! to what an amazing, and mi∣serable Condition have I brought my self! I stand exposed to thy Severest Judgment here; and am liable to thy Indignation hereafter. I know, I am not in a State of Salvation, and yet can't lament my Misery. I am a Sinner, and reflect upon the evil Consequence of Sin; yet am neither Terrified, or Sor∣rowfull. What a heap of Contradiction and Wickedness am I made up of, that believe the Pleasures of thy Law, and yet depart from thy Commandments; that fear the Justice of thy Anger, and yet can't be perswaded to forsake the Evil of my Ways. Thus miserable, O God, do I behold my self; but thou
seest, that I am infinitly more vile than I can imagine; Though my Crimes ap∣pear to me beyond my expression, and my Heart thus condemns me, thou art greater than my Heart, and knowest all things. Thou knowest how often each Sin has been repeated, and the vileness of that Sin; and how much more heinous, by the habitual Repetition, when my Depraved Nature will neither let me know the Baseness of the one, or the Ingratitude of the other. I am in∣sensible how much thou art offended by one Sin, and am forgetfull how often I have repeated that Offence; and can only tell that Sin in me is above measure sinful. O! that there was a Heart in me even to apprehend this! that I cou'd say with a sincere Heart, and pensive Soul, Lord, I am a miserable Sinner. But this is not in my power; I can only reflect upon my Sins at a distance, as if they did not concern me, and my poor Soul was not to answer for them at thy Tribunal. O God, thy Hand is heavy upon me, I know my Sins are abominable in thy Sight, and that thy Judgment inflicts this Hardness of Heart, and that thou art resolved to try me no longer. Thou seest that I am Ground∣ed
in Wickedness, that evil is continually with me, that if thou shou'dst forgive, I shall revolt again, and wherefore shoudst thou withhold thine Hand. O my God, I have nothing to offer to put a Stop to thy Vindictive Justice; but confess, I deserve Eternal Damnation: But who can be content to dwell in Everlasting Burnings? Is there then no Way to escape thy Vengeance? Wilt thou be angry for ever? Yes, O God; un∣less I repent, thou wilt bring me to worse than nothing; for thou wilt condemn me to Eternal Torment. How can I re∣pent, unless thou change my Nature, and give me a Heart to be sorry, and abhor the Evil of my Ways? But why should I expect this Mercy, that have abus'd all others. I can't look up to thee with any Confidence, to beg thee to have Patience with me; for my Prayers must be an Abomination, and my Devotions no way pleasing in thy Sight: Oh! the Misery that I have brought my self into, God has with∣drawn himself, and taken his Holy Spi∣rit from me; there remains only, that I be reserv'd against the Revelation of that Day, in which the Righteous Judg∣ments of God will appear, to condemn
me, and all such ungrateful Souls, to the Torments of Hell. Righteous art thou, O Lord; and in the midst of Flames will I confess thy Justice. Fear is come up∣on me; and thy Judgment is the severer, in that I am not sensible of the Danger. Wilt thou laugh at this my Calami∣ty? And shall not mine Eyes be open, till the Flames of Hell terrifie them? Wilt thou suffer me thus to sink down into Torment; and despise the Groans of a Soul in an Abyss of Misery? Oh, I cou'd be content to yield to thy severest Inflictions here, if I cou'd be brought to the favour of God: But I dare not ask of Thee to correct me, least thou do it in Judgment; and yet I dread thy Rod that it will come, and how can I bear to fall into the Hands of the Living God. Who can deliver me from thy Power, Oh, thou Omnipotent God? What can I do when Misery thus abounds, and each Reflection presents Damnation to my view? Surely, if I was truly affected with my Condition, it would work upon my Spirit, and when my Soul was sensible of Sin, and how bitter a thing it is to depart from God, it would cause such Relentings and Tremblings, such Contrition and Hu∣miliation,
as becomes a Soul loaded with my Crimes. Oh, that my Consci∣ence wou'd rise up against me, and call me to the strictest Account, that my Soul was wounded within me. That I had the fear of an angry God deeply imprinted upon my Soul; Oh, that I was a sorrowful Sinner. Oh, that I could grieve as never Man griev'd; but alas, 'tis not in my power thus to afflict my self, and what would it avail me if I could wrack my Soul, and put my Nature into terrible Con∣flicts. Can the Sighs and Groans, and torturing Convulsions of such a Sinner, move Compassion in the Most High; will not God be Deaf to my Complaint, and regardless of my Cries? Is there then no Help, and must I perish for Ever, wherefore hast thou made all Men for Naught? Why did thy Exuburant love express it self to lost Mankind by such a woundrous Miracle? Why dist thou empty thy self, and come down among us, become Poor, endure Hardship, Cold and Hun∣ger, and run through a Sea of Blood? But to attone those Crimes, from which Men nor Angels were able to set us Free, to afford us that Mercy
which the justice of God would not allow of. Oh, my God, hast thou only excepted me, wilt thou be so severe with me who have most need of the satisfaction of my Saviour which was offer'd for a Sinful World. I am inexpressibly Miserable, and want to be sensible of my Condition, and will infinite Mercy refuse what the love of God came on purpose to do. Can my Sins come near the dimensions of thy Mercy? I own to my Confusion, I am as great a Sinner as a mortal Man can be; but 'tis neither beyond thy Power, nor unsual to thy Mercy to relieve such a matchless Object of Distress. I confess I'm not a penitent Sinner, but thou canst make me one, and though I want an humble and contrite Spirit, yet thou canst ena∣ble me to offer up a Sacrifice that thou wilt not Despise. Oh, my abused Jesus, I fly to thee, thou mayst in∣deed censure the Approach, but 'tis thy Love, thy Mercy, and my own Un∣worthiness which drives me to thee; thou knowest I'm more unworthy then I think my self, but was I yet worse, I firmly believe thy Blood can cleanse me, and that the merit of thy
Cross and Passion can cover my imper∣fections. Oh, Holy Spirit of God, in∣spire me with the humblest Soul and devoutest Affections, that I may ap∣ply my self to the Father of Mercies, and be made a fit Object for the God of comfort to relieve. O God the Father, O God the Son, O God the Holy Ghost; O Blessed Trinity have mercy up∣on me, a miserable Sinner. We may reasonably suppose that a Man who has devoted himself to Wickedness, at the unburthening his Conscience, must entertain some such thoughts as these. 'Tis natural he should be devi∣ded betwixt Hope and Fear; the more he is sensible of his Sins, the greater his Astonishment. His Humiliation and mean Opinion of himself can't be two severe, if he keeps from Despaire; for after all, we can neither sufficiently know the evil of Sin, nor lament for committing it. The more we consider, the greater will be our Aversion, and when we have arriv'd to such a sense of Sin, as will beget in us a hatred to it, we may with more security promise an Amendment. But before we pro∣ceed to that, let us by the help of some
Catalogue, of Sin examine our Conditi∣on more fully, for the Heart is deceit∣ful, and the Memory willing to forget what it is affraid to consider. Having laid before us such a Scheme, let us then beg of God to enable us in this work, that we main't deceive our Souls. Let us upon our Knees consider that we are now to Examine our selves of those things which we are to Answer at the Day of Judgment, if we don't Confess and Repent shall be miserable for ever, and that 'tis much better that we con∣demn our selves, than leave it to the Tribunal of a just God; therefore be∣lieving we are in the presence of God, as we certainly are at all times, but God is more especially present, when we are upon Religious Duties; let us say. Oh, my God! hear the Voice of my humble Petition now I cry unto thee, and lift up my Hands to thy mercy Seat. Behold, Lord, now I am about to search into my own Heart, but alass, my Heart is Deceitful and desperately Wick∣ed, how can I know it? Thou there∣fore that searchest the Heart and triest the Reins, discover to me all the evil and deceits of my own Heart, that I
may Confess, Bewail and forsake them, and obtain mercy. Lord hear me, Lord help me, for the merits of Je∣sus my Saviour, Amen. Oh, my Soul! Thou art now in the presence of the Great Judge of Heaven and Earth, before whose dreadful Tri∣bunal thou must certainly appear at the day of Judgment, to give a strict Ac∣count of all thy Actions, of every idle Word, and every evil Thought, and thy own Conscience will then be thine Ac∣cuser. Think, O my Soul, think if thou canst, what unimaginable Horrors will seize an impenitent Sinner, when the last Trump calls him out of his Grave, and Devils begin to drag him to God's Judgment Seat! What wou'd such a Wretch give to purchase one such op∣portunity of Repentance, as God now in great mercy gives thee; if ever thou hopest to escape those Horrors. O my Soul, make thy Peace with God, judge thy self here, least thou be Con∣demned hereafter. Let us now proceed to ask our selves whether we are Guilty or not; when we find our selves Guilty, let us set it down upon a Paper, and say.
Lord have Mercy on me, and forgive me this sin. To those we have not consented, let us humbly praise God, and say. Glory be to thee, O Lord, for pre∣serving me from this Sin. O continue thy Goodness, and give me Grace to resist it to my lives end. After we have ranslak'd our Breast, and laid before us the dismal scene of our Folly, we shall certainly be moved at our Transgressions, and our Repentance will be usher'd in with Sighs and Groans, to testifie our Abhorrence, or Tears to show our Trouble. It is possible with both together, and when God sees us thus Relenting and Trembling, Weeping and Blushing for our Offences; he may be moved through the intercession of our Saviour, to hear our humble Petitions, for such a Sacrifice he is pleased with, and a Heart thus broken God will not dis∣pise. Therefore let us now humble our selves and with all possible Penitence, con∣fess our selves to God in the following form. Righteousness, O Lord, belongs unto thee, but unto me confusion of Face, the Vainest, the Vilest, the sinfullest of all the Children of Men.
Lord, I am vile in my own Eyes, and desire to be more vile, because my sins have made me vile in thine. I am not worthy of the Air I breath, of the Earth I tread upon, or the Sun that shines upon me; much less wor∣thy to lift up Hands or Eyes to Hea∣ven, for thou hast said that no unclean thing shall come within thy sight, how then shall I appear who am so misera∣bly defil'd? If the Man, according to thine own Heart, cou'd say that he was a Worm, and no Man, Lord what am I? If Abraham, who had the Honour to be called thy Friend, cou'd say that he was but Dust and Ashes, O God, what am I? O my God, thou maidst me of no∣thing; and thou seest how I have spoil∣ed this Work of thine: I have made my self worse than nothing, for I am still in my Sins, and know not what to do, but this I will do. I will confess my Wickedness, and be sorry for my Sins. I will pour out my Prayers in the bitterness of my Spirit; and therefore now Lord call my Sins to my Remembrance, and when thou hast so done, blot them out of thy Remem∣brance, and Pardon me.
A Confession of Sin. O Thou great Judge of Heaven and Earth, before whose glorious Maje∣sty, even the good Angels who never sin∣ned, fall prostrate and tremble; with what debasement and dread ought I to appear before thy awful Presence, who am but Dust and Ashes, and which is infinitely worse a miserable Sinner. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord, God Almigh∣ty, thou art of purer eyes than to be∣hold iniquity, with the least approba∣tion, the way of the wicked and the sacrifice of the wicked is an Abomina∣tion unto thee: Wo is me then, O Lord, Wo is me, for I have inclined unto Wick∣edness, but for the sake of thy well-beloved Son, cast not out my prayer, nor turn thy mercy from me. Miserable wretch that I am, I have gone astray from the very Womb, I was shapen in Wickedness, and in Sin did my Mother Conceive me. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, What is Man then, O God, that he should be Clean, or he that is born of a Woman, that he should be Righteous? Thou, Lord, puttest no trust in thy Saints, The Heavens are nor clean in thy sight, and the very Angels thou chargest with folly.
How much more abominable than am I, who daily drink iniquity like Water. Lord Pity, cleanse, forgive and save me, for thy mercies sake. I know, O God, that in my flesh dwell∣eth no good thing, for when I would do Good, Evil is present with me, and I see a Law in my Members warring a∣gainst the Law of my Mind, bringing me into Captivity to the Law of Sin: Lord have mercy on me, and deliver me from this body of Death, from this ty∣ranny of Sin. Alass, my whole Nature is corrupt, infinitely prone to all Evil, and a verse to all that is Good; my Understanding is full of Ignorance and error, my will perverse, my Memory tenacious of all things that may pollute me, but for∣getful of my Duty; my Passions are in∣ordinate, my Senses the inlets to all impurity; I have abused all my facul∣ties, and am unclean, unclean. Lord pity, cleanse, forgive, and save me, for thy mercies sake. O Lord God, how have I through my whole life violated the sollemn Vow I made to thee at Baptism, by eagerly persuing the Vanities of this Wicked World; by early yeilding to the Temp∣tation
of the Devil, by greedily indul∣ging my own carnal Desires and Lust, by a fruitless and dead faith, and by a disobedience to thy holy Will and Com∣mandments. Father, I have Sin'd against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more wor∣thy to be called thy Son; I have Sin'd, O Lord God, I have Sin'd against Thee. By, &c. [Here make your confession of Sins against God, and then add, O Jesu, Lamb of God, Son of the Fa∣ther, let thy Blood cleanse me from these sins: O pity, forgive, and save me for thy mercies sake. I have sin'd, O Lord God, I have sin'd against thee, and my own self. By, &c. [Here confess your sins against your Self, and then add, O Jesu, Lamb of God, &c. I have sin'd, O Lord God, I have sin'd against thee, and my Neighbor. By, &c. [Here confess your sins against your Neighbor, and then add, O Jesu, Lamb of God, &c. O Lord God, my wickedness is ex∣ceeding great, and my iniquities are in∣finite;
they are more in number than the hairs of my head, and my heart would fail me, but that I know thy mercies are greater than my sins. Have mercy upon me therefore, O God, ac∣cording to the multitude of thy mer∣cies do away my Offences. Who, alas, can tell how oft he Of∣fends? Oh, cleanse thou me from my secret faults; from all my sins of Igno∣rance, or Infirmity, or Omission, or which I have not observed, or which I have forgot, Lord, lay none of them to my charge: Father, forgive me, Lord Jesus have mercy upon me. O remember not the sins and offences of my Youth, but receive me, O heavenly Father, in∣to the Arms of thy Fatherly compassi∣on, and forgive me all my Transgressi∣ons for the merits of Jesus, thy Son, and my Saviour, Amen. O Lord God of Mercy and Pardon, give me a just remembrance and sad apprehension of my sins; teach me to, bewail them with as great indignation and bitterness, as I have committed them with complacency and delight: Let my Prayer and Confession come into thy presence, and obtain mercy and pardon for me. Let not thy Justice and
Severity so remember my sins as to forget thy own mercy, and though I deserve to be condemned, yet thou canst not lose that glorious attribute whence flows comfort to us, and hopes of being saved. Spare me therefore, O merciful God; for to give pardon to a sinner that confesses his faults, and begs remission, is not impossible to thy Power, nor disproportionate to thy Ju∣stice, nor unusual to thy mercy. Bles∣sed Jesu, acknowledge in me whatsoe∣ver is thine; cleanse me from whatso∣ever is amiss: Have pitty on me, now in the time of mercy, and condemn me not when thou comest to judgment, for what profit is there in my Blood. Thou delightest not in the death of a Sinner, but in his Conversion is joy in Hea∣ven; and when thou hast delivered me from my sins, and saved my Soul, I shall praise and magnifie thy Name to all Eternity, O Jesu, God be merciful to me a miserable Sinner. O Lord, who art the God that hear∣est prayers, and alone has power final∣ly to forgive sin, I beseech the merci∣fully hear, and graciously answer these my Petitions for pardon. I am a sin∣ner, and deserve punishment, but, O
Lord, remove my guilt, and spare me, who do now confess with shame and sorrow, my sins unto thee, that I whose Conscience by sin is accused so justly now before thee, by thy merciful par∣don may be absolved from my Guilt, for the sake and through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. By thine Agony and bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious Death and Burial, Good Lord deliver. O Lamb of God that takest away the Sins of the World, Have mercy upon O Christ hear me, Lord have mercy upon me, Christ have, &c. Lord, have mercy, &c. Our Father which art, &c.
A Prayer. O most gracious God, who out of thy boundless Compassion to thy Creatures, art never wanting in any means that may draw them to thy self. I the unworthiest of thy Servants, desire to give Glory to thee in a hearty acknowledgement, that thou hast afforded me all the methods that might either force or allure me to Obedience; but I have resisted that goodness of thine which should have lead me to Repentance: Thy compassion has been affronted by my continuance in sin, and thy forbear∣ance only serv'd to harden me in Ini∣quity. I have lived to provoke thy Mercies, by endeavouring to out-vye them with my Sins; what can I ex∣pect but to find a Judgment worthy of God, such an irreversible ruine as might render me an astonishing in∣stance of thy severity to the whole Earth. Thou hast attested thy self to be indeed a Father of Mercies, and
yet I who enjoy the benefit of them, neither consider them as Blessings, nor thee as a God; but Atheistically defie that providence by which I sub∣sist. (Thou givest me a time for Re∣pentance, but I'm unwilling to throw off this Bondage of Sin, and think it a hardship to submit to that Yoak whieh is easie and delightful, and if I cou'd stifle the Terrors of my Con∣science, wou'd glady proclaim Licence to my Lusts. These are the base re∣turns I have made; thus have I re∣quited the Lord, and incur'd his Dis∣pleasure, yet I am fearless of his Wrath, and can't repent me of my ways, nor consider the Evil I have done. Surely my Heart is heardned; and I am nigh unto Cursing: O Lord, what can I plead to avert the sentence, who am as far from Peni∣tence as Innocence? How can I pray against that Vengeance which I make it my business to pull down? if thou, O Lord, shou'dst spare me, what wou'd it avail if it serve but to set me at a greater Hostillity with thee? O mer∣ciful Saviour, who gavest thy self a ransom for Sinners, look again with compassionate Eyes on me, who
needs now a second Redemption, e∣ven a rescue from my self; Lord, thou seest the miserable state to which I am reduced, Where is thy Pitty, and the sounding of thy Bowels towards the Afflicted? Oh! bow thy Heaven and come down, hear the Prayer of a distressed Sinner, deliver me from that misery I have involved my self, put thy Laws a new into my Heart, and write them in my Mind. O blessed Mediator, who prayedst for thy Crucifiers, interceed also for me, who have under the name of a Dis∣ciple crucified thee afresh; and tho' I have nothing to say for my self, cannot pretend that I knew not what I did; yet let thy Stripes and Wounds, thy Cross and Passion, plead for me: Oh! let thy Blessed Spirit breath again upon me, that even these dry Bones may live in thy sight. Let him so effectually con∣vince and reprove, illuminate and ex∣cite me, that I may cleanse my self from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, walk worthy of the holy Vocation whereto I am called, and evidence my relation to the Prince of Peace. Oh, that my ways were thus direct, but
alas, how little Disposition have I to∣wards it: This change, must be on∣ly the work of that mighty Power, which is able to subdue all things to it self; and yet, O Lord, with what face can I beg of thee to force me to that happiness which I still resolve to resist. What can I say to thee, O thou preserver, thou redeemer of men, who have put my self beyond all the ordi∣nary means of thy grace: I can only lay my self at thy Feet, display my misery, and leave thee to consider thine own compassion. Oh, let that move thee to do for me, whatever my wretched state is in need off. O Lord, Hear, O Lord, forgive, consider, and do it, for thy name sake: Thou art Jesus, a Saviour, save thy servant from his sin, and let me not slide back by a perpetual backsliding. Oh, a∣bandon not thy poor creature, Lord, carest thou not that I perish. Turn thee again, O Lord, sanctifie and cleanse me for I am exceeding sinfull, create a new Spirit within me, melt my obdurate heart into contrition, and if it cannot be done without the rigour of thy Laws, Lord do that, or
any thing with me, so that I may be∣come a Vessel of honour meet for thy Service. But, O Lord, if thy gentler method may have any effect, be pleas∣ed to continue thy Long-suffering, and though I have no pretence to mercy, yet do thou assert thine own work; be merciful because thou hast been so, dispence to me whatever thou seest most apt to reduce me, and that thy outward applications may be no longer in vain, enforce and enli∣ven them with thy free Spirit, subdue my obstinate perversness, and give me at last such Grace as I may not turn into wantonness. Oh, thou, to whom all things are possible, who hast been so merciful to me, work again greater miracles in me; and of a prophane un∣grateful wretch, make me a penitent and obedient servant, that I may study as much to please as I have to provoke thee, & by a continuance in well doing, may obtain the Crown which thou hast laid up for those that serve thee, and possess eternal joys in the Kingdom of thy Father, which thou, O blessed Jesus, hast purchased with thy blood, and sealed by thy Spirit; To which
blessed Trinity be ascribed all praise, honour, Glory, now, and to eternity, Amen. O Lord God, I am Ashamed, and Blush to lift up my Face to thee, for my iniquities are increased over my Head, and my Trespasses grown up unto Heaven. O my Soul, what Fruit have I reapt from all the pleasures of Sin, but Vani∣ty and Vexation of Spirit. Lord, I am ashamed of my own Folly, Madness, and Disingenuity; when I call to mind how greedily I have sucked in my own Pollution; how treacherously I have betrayed my own Soul to Temptations; and combined with the Devils to ha∣sten and increase my own Damnation; how obstinately I have fled from thee, when thy Mercy persued me with pro∣mises of Pardon; how unworthily I have abused thy Goodness, and For∣bearance, and Long-sufferings which should have led me to Repentance. Son of David, Blessed Redeemer, Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the World, have Mercy upon me;
O Jesu, be a Jesus unto me! Thou that sparedst thy Servant Peter that deni∣ed thee thrice; thou that didst cast se∣ven Devils out of Mary Magdalen, and forgavist the Woman taken in Adulte∣ry, and didst bear the convert Thief from the Cross to the joys of Paradise, have Mercy upon me also. Though my Offences are greater than these, yet not their Sins, nor mine, nor the Sins of the whole World, can equal thy Glorious Mercy which is Infinite and Eternal as thy Self. I acknowledge, O Lord, that I am Vile, but yet re∣deemed with thy precious Blood; thou, O Lord, lovest to shew Mercy, be∣hold then a fit Object for thy pitty. My sins are so great and many, that to forgive me, will be a glorious act of mercy: Dispise me not, O Lord, for I am thy Creature, dispise me not, for thou didst die for me; cast me not a∣way in thine Anger, for thou camest to seek and save me: Say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation, let thy Holy Spi∣rit lead me from the Error of my ways, into the paths of Righteousness, to great degrees of Repentance, and thro' all the parts of a Holy Life, to a God∣ly and Holy Death. Grant this, O
Blessed Jesu for thy Mercies, and for thy pitty sake, Amen. Most merciful and indulgent Jesus, hear the complaint of a sad and mise∣rable Sinner. I have searched into the secret recesses of my Soul, there I find nothing but Horror and a barren Wil∣derness, a neglected Conscience over∣grown with Sins, and cares beset with fears and sore Amazement. I tremble when I remember that sad Truth, If the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Wicked and Ungodly appear? I know, O Lord, that all my secret im∣purities shall be laid open at thy dread∣full Judgment. O just and dear God! how shall I appear, who shall plead for me, who am loaden with Impurities, Vanity, Ingratitude, Malice and the Terrors of an affrightning Conscience? Wilt not thou answer for me, O Jesus, thou art my Judge and my Advocate, thou art to pass Sentence upon me for those Sins for which thou diest. O re∣serve not my Sins to be punished in the life to come, for then I die Eternally, but bring me in this World to a severe Repentance. Behold, I am in thy hand, grant I may so Weep and be contrite for my Sins, that in the hour of my Death,
I may find Mercy, and in the day of Judgment be freed from the Terrors of thy Wrath, and the Sentence of the Wicked. Thou hast spared me all this while, and not taken me off in the midst of my Sins, which is an unspeak∣able Mercy, for if thou had dealt with me according to my Deserts, I had been now at this instant sealed up to an Eternity of Torments hopelesly mi∣serably, fearing the Revelation of thy day with an insupportable Amazement. But now under the sweet influences of thy mercy, I am praying to thee, con∣fessing my sins with Sorrow for my in∣gratitude, but with a full hope in thy Mercy. O my dear God, let thy Grace speedily work that in me, for which thou so long hast spared me, even a true Faith and Holy Life; esta∣blish in me a great contrition for my Sins, lead me on to an humble Confes∣sion, and let thy Grace make me bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, O Bles∣sed Jesu, who liveth and reigns, ever one God, world without end, Amen. I hate all evil ways, O Lord, But thy Law will I Love: O God, with shame I confess that other Lords besides
thee have hitherto had Dominion over me. Miserable Wretch that I am, that I should begin so early to offend my Creator and sin so much in so short a time. Lord, I fear I never yet through∣ly considered how evil and bitter a thing it is to depart from thee; O make me every day more and more sensible of the Error of my ways, and of my own infinit Vileness. Miserable Wretch that I am, that ever I should commit those sins which expose me to all the vials of thy Wrath, to all the curses of thy Law, to all thy judg∣ments Temporal or Spiritual in this life, and to all the Horrors and Despair and Torments of the Damned in the life to come. Miserable wretch that I am, that e∣ver I should transgress that Law of thine; O God which is so Just, Holy and Good, perfect and so condescend∣ing to my Infirmities, and in keeping of which there are so great, so uncon∣ceivable rewards. O Blessed Saviour, how can I ever sufficiently lament the guilt of my Sins which was so great, that nothing but thy own inestimable Blood could expiate.
O Blessed Spirit, instil true peniten∣tial sorrow into my Soul; make my Head Waters, and my Eyes Fountains of Tears, or do thou supply the want of them with Sighs and Groans unutter∣able. But alass, I know all the Tears I can possibly shed, can never wash a∣way the least of my Sins, 'tis thy Blood only, Lord, that can do it. O Heavenly Father, in the defect of my own Tears I offer thee, the Blood of thy own well beloved Son, for his sake have mercy upon me. I have been in the snare of the De∣vil, and been led Captive by him, and sin hath reigned in my Mortal Body, and I have obeyed it in the lust there∣of, but from henceforth I resolve to serve none but thee, and from this ve∣ry moment I utterly forsake all my sins and turn to thee. I do from my heart renew my Baptismal Vow; I do for e∣ver renounce the Devil and all his Works, and the Vanities of this World which may pervert me from thy Service, and all the sinfull Lust of the Flesh. O my God, I do steadfastly believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, I will keep thy Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of
my life. All this I am bound to do and believe, and by thy help so I will; and I heartily thank thee, O Father, who hast called me to this state of Salvation, through Jesus Christ my Saviour, and I humbly pray thee for his sake to give me Grace to continue in the same to my lives end. O Lord God I have Sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments; but alass, I'm not able of my self to do nothing that is Good, not so much as to think one good thought, and I no sooner shall rise from my Knees, but I fear I shall be tempted to those very sins I have now so solemnly renounced, and those Temp∣tations will certainly overcome me, un∣less thou, Lord, do'st reasonably inter∣pose thy Grace to with-hold me, but I can do all things through the strength∣ning me; do thou then, O Blessed Sa∣viour, perfect thy strength in my weak∣ness, for in thee only is my trust. O my God, thou hast promised to give thy Holy Spirit to those that ask it. Be∣hold, Lord, I do Humbly, I do Ear∣nestly ask thy Holy Spirit now of thee. O fullfil thy gracious Promises to
me! O vouchsafe me that Holy Spirit I pray for, to purifie my corrupt Nature, to strengthen my Weakness, to comfort me in Troubles, to support me in Dis∣couragements, to succor me in Tempta∣tions, and to asist me in all the part of my Duty. Thou, O searcher of hearts, knowest the sins I'm most inclined to; [here name them] herein will lie my greatest danger of Back-sliding; but, O my God, I beg a double portion of thy Spirit, and invisible aid against them; hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my Foot-steps slip not. O work in me that victorious Faith by which I may overcome the World, the Devil, and my own corrupt Nature. My help standeth in thee, O great Creator of Heaven and Earth, and I commit my Soul to thy keeping. O thou that art Faithful as well as Al∣mighty, keep that safe which is com∣mitted to thy Trust, watch over me that I may not be beguiled by the de∣ceitfulness of Sin, or betrayed by my own treacherous heart, or surprised by my Ghostly Enemies, and give me grace to Watch and Pray incessantly my self, least I enter into Temptation.
O Heavenly Father, for thine own infinit Mercy sake, for thy Truth and Promise sake, for all the Merits and Sufferings of the Son of thy Love in whom thou art always well pleased; pardon all my Sins and Failings, and receive me into thy favour for the sake of him who has taught me to call the Father, and when I pray to say, Our Father which art, &c. The following Form to be added when we have some assurances, that our Hearts are steadfast towards God. O the God of my life, and the un∣exhausted Fountain of mercy, which can never be drawn dry. I have now by the assistance of thy Holy Spirit, gone through, though with weak and trembling steps, the whole exercise of Repentance; for I have confessed my Sins, and thou hast promised, upon my Confession of them, not to impute them to me; I have gone one step farther, I have repented of my Sins, and thou hast promised upon my Repentance,
thou wilt remember them no more; and because thy Holy Word hath taught me, that a new life is the only Repen∣tance, I have this day in thy sight, and in the presence of all the Angels, that attend thee in the conversion of a sin∣ner, made my firm resolution never to fall again into the Sins I have repented of, and now O God the Father of Heaven, who canst not be thought so cruel as to make me only to destroy me, [Have mercy upon me. O God the Son, who knowing thy Father's Will, didst make it thy busi∣ness to come into the World to save me, [Have Mercy, &c. O God the Holy Ghost, who to the same end didst sanctifie me in my Bap∣tism, and hast so often since breathed Holy thoughts into my Soul, [Have mercy, &c. O Holy Blessed and Glorious Trintiy, whom in three persons I adore as my one and only true God. [Have mercy on me. Hear me, O Lord. Help me, O Lord. Save me, or else I perish.
Lord, carest thou not that I perish. Thou that wouldest have all men to be saved. Thou who wouldest have none to perish. And wilt thou now shew thine anger against a Worm, against a Vapour that vanishes before thee? O remember how short my time is, and deliver not my Soul into the power of Hell, for what profit is there in my Blood; no, let me live in thy sight, let me live, O my God, that my Soul may praise thee: O remember for whose sake it was that thou camest from the Bosom of thy Father: Remember for whom it was that thou enduredst the agony of the Cross, and shed thy precious Blood. Was it not for the Sins of the whole World, and hast thou particularly ex∣cepted me? Can I imagine thou diest for Sinners of a lower kind, and left such as I without Remedy: O how ea∣sie is it to thee to forgive, for 'tis thy Nature; how proper is it for thee to save, for it is thy Name; how suita∣ble is it to thy only end of coming in∣to the World, for it was thy business; and when I consider that I am chief of Sinners, may I not urge the Father
and say, shall the very chief of thy busi∣ness be left undone. [Mercy, Mercy, Good Lord. I ask not of thee any longer the things of this World, but thy pardoning Mer∣cy. O that I could hear thee say, as thou didst to him in the Gospel, My Son be of good chear, thy sins are forgi∣ven thee. O that I could never sin against thee more, never purposely, deliberately, willfully sin against thee more, and for those sins of daily Incursion, those o∣ver familiar corruptions of my Nature which thou hast not yet given me strength enough to conquer, Lord, ei∣ther subdue them by degrees, or lay them not to my Charge; but wherein soever my Conscience most accuseth me, therein, O my God, be thou most merciful unto me. [Save me, O Lord, as a brand snatch out of the Fire. Receive me, O my Jesus, as a sheep that has wandred, but now is return'd to the Great Shepherd and Bishop of my Soul. Let this day, O my God, be noted in thy Book, do not thou forget my Pray∣ers, nor suffer me to forget my Resolu∣tions;
though I am weak, though I am unworthy, though I am unprofitable, yet I am thy Servant, and here upon my bended Knees, I humbly beg of thee that I may live and die so. Lord hear my Prayers, and let my cry come unto thee. Lord pardon my Pray∣ers, and let not my coldness, and wan∣drings, and infinite unworthiness turn them into Sin. Lord hear my Prayer, and let my cry come unto thee. O Lord Jesu Christ, Son of the Eter∣nal God, interpose thy holy Death, thy Cross and Passion between thy Judgment and my Soul now, and in the hour of my death, granting unto me Grace and Mercy; to all faithfull people, pardon and peace; to the Church, unity and amity; to all Sinners, espe∣cially those I have led into Sin, Repen∣tance and Amendment; to us all, life and Glory everlasting, who livest and reignest ever one God World without end. Amen. O Lord, bless me, and keep me, O Lord, Make thy face to shine upon me, O Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, and give me peace for ever. Amen.
Having performed this Office with due sincerity, let us reflect upon what we have been doing; 'tis possible the result of our Thoughts may terminate in a mixture of fear and joy: But we ought not to let either passion prevail more than is justly necessary; don't let our fear depress, and cast us into such a Melancholy, as may suggest, God won't be reconciled, and if we have been dull in the performance of these things, that God has rejected us. The Devil knows how fatal this course is, to redeem us from his Power; he is very busie to prevent our repentance, and abuse our imaginations with allu∣sions; perhaps our own disuse of prayer has rendred us uncapable of a due at∣tention; 'tis impossible to become im∣mediately good from being very wick∣ed; or that we should pray with the same steadfastness, as they who are accustomed to this duty: We are there∣fore to strive to the uttermost; where we fail to be sorry, ask God's Pardon and Grace to do better for the future, and in a little time we shall prevail to our satisfaction: On the other side, don't let our joy puff us up, and be∣cause we have shed a few Tears, said so
many Prayers, Fasted and given Alms, that we are now become perfect, and need no more Repentance; we have but set the first step to this great work of our Salvation, were we sure we had fully conquered sin, and shou'd not suffer our selves to be deceived a∣ny more: Yet this negative part of Christianity is not sufficient, 'tis not enough that we cease to do Evil, but learn to do Well; we are now to begin our course, and as we have many things to unlearn, so there are abundance to learn, without which we shall never see the Face of God. What they are the Scripture will inform us, 'tis from thence we are to learn our perfection, for he hath shewed thee, O man what is Good, to do Justice, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God; we are to attend the House of Prayer, frequent the Sacrament, and be holy in all manner of Conversation. If we want to be informed in any thing, let us have recourse to our Pastor, that he may satisfie our Consciences. I would advice that our Confession be made to some discreet Minister; for 'tis a great sign of our Repentance, when we are thus willing to take shame to our selves;
besides 'twill be a greater restraint-upon us. We shall be affraid to join in the next Temptation, when we know we must confess it; 'tis the de∣pravedness of our Nature to be affraid, rather of Men than God. We are not scrupulous to do those things in pri∣vate, which we cou'd not do before Men; 'tis seldom that Companions in Wickedness will suffer one another to be Witnesses of their shame, so easie is it to be affraid to confess what we don't blush to commit; but this I leave to every Man's Conscience, but let him have a care he don't deceive his own Soul. We shall be tortured to little purpose to put our selves upon mock Repentances, and when our Confessions come willfully short of our sins, we willfully exclude our selves from the Favour and Mercy of God; 'twill be a sad remembrance at the last day, to think 'twas in our power to be Happy, that we were not far from the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet must fall short of the Glory of God. To prevent which, let us deal Faithfully with our Souls, when we think we stand, be careful we don't fall, and having begun our course to continue to our lives end, that we may be saved.
When we come abroad into the World, there is a necessity we set a watch over ourselves, we must expect to be attack'd, if we can bear the first assault, the rest will fall by degrees, and every Tempta∣tion be less powerful; when we are first tempted let us remember, that this is the very thing that has cost us so much trouble, which we vow'd to resist, which is our mortal Enemy, and which will set us at a greater variance with God. How can we do this thing, and sin against Heaven? Let us Remember this is the first Tryal, if we submit, how can we think to prevail another time? the next Temptation may have a better appearance. There may be a Thousand things to render it more ta∣king, and so by degrees we shall be brought to our old state, and the last condition will be worse than the first. We must not allow our selves in the Commission of any one known sin, we must resist the beginning, we must not suffer our selves to think upon old Ha∣bits, but with abhorrence; for 'tis not only a sin, but will endanger us to fall back. If we take pleasure in their re∣membrance, the Devil wont fail to ex∣cite our delight, by adding some new
relish to make them more acceptable; if we would shun the danger, we must a∣void the occasion, and then need not fear being led into Temptation. But there is a greater motive yet; we must remember we are but beginning, and to look back at the first step is such a piece of folly, that every body must be ashamed of. Sure none can be so unreasonable to de∣sire it should be reckoned among their good Deeds, that they only thought of Repentance; if we are truly sensible of our sins, we shall be very desirous to get rid of them: We are taught there is no way, but by coming to Christ, they that come unto him must do the Will of his Father, to those he gives power to become the Sons of God, the Chil∣dren of God are manifest; they that do wickedness are not of God. Let us endeavour therefore to add to our Re∣pentance, Obedience, that acceptable Sa∣crifice, and be forward in all the duties of Christianity; that so we may ap∣prove our selves in well doing, for 'tis the will of the Lord that we add to our Faith, Vertue; and when we have tryed our selves, that we can resist Tempta∣tion, and are ready to Good Works; let us then prepare to meet the Lord at
his Holy Table, that we may receive Grace and Strength, to walk in the same all the days of our lives. This is the great duty of the New Law, and there needs no arguments to bring those to the Sacrifice, who are sensible of their necessities, or are desirous of growing better. Our Church has taken care to instruct every Christian how he may become a worthy Receiver, by telling him first what he ought to Believe and then what he ought to Practice. I shall content my self with the method of the Church in both these Cases, and re∣commend it to those who are desirous to be inform'd. Bread and Wine is what the Lord has commanded to be re∣ceived, and the Church has told us, that they signifie the Body and Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken by the Faithful, and the benefits are the strengthning and refresh∣ing of our Souls. This is what we are positively to believe, and when we can give our intire assent, let us according to the Direction of the Church examine our selves, whether we repent truly of our former sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new Life, have a lively Faith in God's mercy through Jesus Christ, with a
thankful Remembrance of his Death, and be in Charity with all Men. This is in short the Duty of every Communicant, and no Man who would come to the Lord's Supper worthily, can leave out any of these things; instead of a great many Arguments, I must press the ob∣servance of them. 'Tis the misfortune of a great many to think they have dis∣charged their Duty, if they can use so much Self-denial as to refrain from their usual excess a week before the Sacra∣ment; say the Morning and Evening Devotion, and bring themselves to con∣fess they are sorry, for what upon a little Examination, they find a miss. This they think is Repentance enough, and because their Book finds no more work for them, set down well satisfied with their performance. They seem willing to compound the matter with God Almighty, confess themselves Bank-rupt, and desire to be set free for paying half Tribute. They have their set times for Devotion, are content to be Fools for three Weeks, and then set down to make up the Month the other week, and confess their Folly: Thus for one weeks Pennance think God is obliged to be reconciled, and because
they have the impudence to wipe their Mouth, conclude God will think they have done no ill; but we can't deceive God, where 'tis to be had, he will ex∣act the uttermost Farthing; let our Con∣sciences be our Judges, and our Guides: Use Books only as helps to Devotion, for 'tis impossible for a Book to be writ to suit every Man's occasion, there is something particular to every one of us, that another perhaps never thought of, and 'tis not likely such a one is ca∣pable to prescribe a Remedy before hand; wherefore when we are arrived so far in our way to Happiness, as the forsaking our old Habits, and placing better in their room, we may venture to draw nigh to that Holy Ordinance, of which whosoever is a worthy partaker shall live for ever. A good Life is the best preparitive to this Feast, 'tis not enough we shake hands with our Vices for a time, and return to our Folly when the Ceremony is over; if we are not qualified before we come, we are in danger to receive this Sacrament Un∣worthily, and the consequence of that is so terrible, that the thoughts of it must amaze us: No Man is qualified that does not sincerely Repent, it can't be
supposed that God has allotted just so much time to mortifie ourselves, or that a week is sufficient to prepare us for Heaven. They who have lived in a course of sin, and never approached this Holy Communion, must not think the first fit of Sorrow sufficient to Denounce them true Penitents. It requires time, and pains to conquer their Lusts, the old Man must be cast off, and they must give a signal of their Loyalty before they be accepted Subjects of the Most High; in short, if upon Examination we find our Faith firm, our Purposes stead∣fast, and our Desires after Christ strong, we may come to the Altar of God, and if we appear there with Charity; our Prayers shall be convey'd from thence to the presence of God. 'Tis upon no other terms we can come with security, for there is no concord between Christ and Beliai: They who frequent the Sacrament, and suffer themselves in the Commission of any known sin, are re∣conciling of contradictions, and will find their mistake to their confusion. 'Tis very certain, as long as we are upon Earth, we are in a state of Trial; no man must expect to be exempt from Temptation: But we should make it
our business to strive and resist the World, Flesh and the Devil. If by sur∣prise, or other accident, we are be∣trayed into sin, we know our duty to be sorry, and arm our selves against it for the future: We may reasonably expect pardon upon this humiliation, if we dont join our good Will, and commit the evil with approbation. This we certainly do, if we suffer our selves to be often over come by the same Temptation; such a one ought to sus∣pect the sincerity of his resolution, and not approach the holy communion, till he is satisfied his heart is perfect in the Commandments of God: But after all, men must be left to themselves in this matter: 'Tis certain, no man can be a Hipocrite against his knowledge, and what pretences men have for Hi∣pocrisy in other cases, they are reasons of a prodigious nature, which shall in∣duce a man to play the cheat upon him∣self: For no man is forced to the Sa∣crament, and if he was, 'tis very sad it should be accounted criminal to Oblige them to be good: However men trifle in other cases, let them be serious in this; if they are really sincere, God will pardon a multitude of Faults; no
Man that knows his own sincerity need be affraid to approach the table of the Lord. When the Minister declares the time of the next Communion, and invites all such as shall religiously be disposed, let us lift up our Souls to God, and beg of him that we may become wor∣thy Partakers of his Body and Blood: In order to it, let us remember, the nearer we draw to God in his Holy Or∣dinances, the greater must be our care in the Management of our selves; tho', (as I have already premised) a Good Life is the best preparative to a worthy Reception of the Lord's Supper, yet when we approach the Presence of the Lord, we ought to be more than ordi∣nary circumspect. 'Twas David's reso∣lution, To wash his hands in Innocency, before he approacht the Altar of God. God himself commanded Joshua to pull off his shooes when he was upon the holy Ground; and then surely 'tis our duty, to become such as the Lord may be we well pleased with: Let us as much as possible this week, have our conversation with God: Don't let it suffice that we have formerly call'd our selves to account, but go over all again,
there may be something past over in our last Examination, or something new to add to our Affliction; however the sight of our late Iniquity will sufficiently affect us, and beholding our misery afresh, we shall be the more desirous of coming to Christ; for our Sins when we are sensible of them, will be a bur∣then too heavy for us to bear: But to increase our Desires, Humiliation and Love, let us reflect on the Goodness of God, in sending Our Saviour Jesus to be a sacrifice for our Sins, that as the Terrors of the Lord first brought us to our selves, so now the Wonders of his Love may effectually perswade us to turn to the Lord our God, that he may have mercy upon us. A Meditation Preparitory to the Communion. LOrd, what is Man, that thou hast respect unto him, and the Son of Man that thou so regardest him? When we had forfeied thy Favour, by a cursed Disobedience to thy Command, and de∣served
to feel the reward of our Folly to Eternal ages; if thou hadst only spared us from thy Wrath, and delivered our Soul from the neithermost Hell, that Mercy had called for our greatest De∣votion, and employed us to eternity in singing Praises; but thy infinite Love would not debar us the priviledge of Creation; since thou madest us for thy self, thou resolvedst to try all means to bring us to the enjoyment of that Happiness. When we were sunk into Misery, almost beyond recovery, what manner of Love didst thou extend to the dropping World which lay in Dark∣ness, and in the shaddow of Death; thou emptiedst thy self, and communicatedst to us of thy fullness, by sending thy Eternal Son out of thy Bosom to make us thy Children, and exalt us to ever∣lasting life. HOly, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sa∣boath, Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory, Glory be to thee O God. Glory be to thee for this in∣comprehensible Mystery: O thou God, who wast manifested in the flesh, Glory be to thee; inspire the universal World to a greatfull acknowledgment
of thy Love surpassing knowledge: That we may all acknowledge thee to be the Lord, for on Earth there is none like thee, and among the Gods there is none can do as thou hast done; When thou tookest upon thee to deliver Man, thou didst not abhor the Virgins Womb, but submitted to our flesh, that thou mightest open the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers. O Thou Word of God, how didst thou strip thy self of thy Glory, and descend from the felicities of thy Throne, to take upon thee the form of a Servant? Thou wert born of poor Pa∣rents, and laid in a Manger; thou in∣duredst Hunger and Thirst, and hadst no place to lay thine head, yet did it not discourage thee from going about to do good. But these were the least of thy sufferings, thy Love to this World urged thee on to greater difficulties, and for which the whole host of Heaven must praise and adore thee to Eternity. After thou hadst declared thy inten∣tion of coming to save Sinners, and notwithstanding the opposition of Men and Devils, didst deliver the Doctrine of Salvation to compleat thy Father's
Will, and fullfill the Scriptures con∣cerning thee; thou proceedest to give thy self a Sacrifice, to attone for those Sins from which neither Men nor Angels were able to set us free. Thy Life in∣deed was an intire piece of sorrow, and thou always didst suffer by the contra∣diction of Sinners: Thy works of Cha∣rity were received as unkindnesses, and thy Miracles supposed to be the works of the Devil, tho' thou spakest as ne∣ver Man spake, yet they rejected both thee, and thy doctrine: Thus didst thou endure those Affronts and Injuries, which were never offer'd to any but thy self, and with much pains, yet ad∣mirable patience, go on not only to confirm thy former goodness, but to add a mercy greater than them all, and seal it by thy precious Blood. Here all our Thoughts ought to be Silence, Amazement, Reverence and Ad∣miration, with Tears of Love and Contri∣tion; that the Eternal Son of God to cloath us with his Grace should cloath him∣self with our humble Nature, and present∣ly load himself with the Burthen of our sins, take upon him their punishment, and die upon the Cross for them too. That the cleansing of us should make him be de∣filed,
with the spittings of Blasphemous Mouths; that for, the washing our Souls, he should shed his precious Blood. This is a business more proper for our Love than Meditation, more to make us active in his Service, than Contemplative in our Thoughts, and to be expressed more by our wonder than our word. BUT, O thou God of Mercy, thou didst not leave us comfortless, thou sawest how much reason we should have to Mourn, Fast and Pray, when the Bride-groom should be taken hence, and therefore didst send thy Holy Spi∣rit to assist us till thy coming again; accomplish therefore the number of thine Elect, and hasten thy Kingdom, that we, with all that are departed in thy Faith, may have our perfect Con∣summation in Bliss. Jesus, my God, give me Grace to be ready when soever thou callest, that I may meet thee with thy Saints at thy second coming, and be fit to enter with thee into thy Glory.
O My Soul take yet a fuller view of the loving kindness of the Lord; consider the infinite compassion of thy Redeemer, how great a regard he had to thy Safety when he was in view of his dreadful Passion; for that very Night in which he was betrayed into the hands of sinful Men, he insti∣tuted the Holy Sacrament, left us his Body and Blood to be a continual re∣membrance of him. O Infinite Charity, which conten∣tedst not thy self with being our Redemption, unless thou also becomest our Nourishment. O infinit Charity, which knowing that our Offences wou'd Nail thee to the Cross, wert yet provi∣ding a remedy for those Offences. Lord, is it thy custom to repay Benefits for Injuries? Come hither ye Devout Souls, bewail with me so great a Sin; come Love with me so great a Love; come with a Spiritual Hunger, and offer up your hearts to receive that Divine Nou∣rishment, and prepare your Souls for this beloved Lord to Enter.
NO sooner had he finished this Ho∣ly Mystery, but he yielded to be encompassed with the Sorrows of Death; having first kindly cautioned his Disci∣ples of the approaching Tragedy, the time of which he had often told them was at hand, the Shepherd was to be smitten, and the Flock scatter'd a∣broad: They had hitherto reposed their confidence in his Protection, and had all their safety from him, but the time was coming when they too must drink of the Cup which was now pre∣paring for him; and that they might be encouraged to follow his blessed steps he first set them the Example of his patience, that they might submit with the greater Resignation; this was his time of Suffering for them, and he only would have them see how wil∣lingly he would lay down his life for their Sakes; they might surely resist unto Blood when he had trod the dread∣ful path before them, but we find his Sufferings came on too fast, and were too severe for them to behold. That stout Champion who had formerly con∣fessed him to be Christ, and was for dying with him, cou'd follow him now
but a far off: His Agony in the Garden was but the beginning of Sorrows; he there saw his Passion but at a distance, though that cast him upon his Knees, and betrayed the Horrors his Soul la∣boured under. Our sins were pressing upon him, and he who knew no sin began to feel the weight of ours, and the Wrath of God which was due to us for ever. Where, O my Soul, behold him pro∣strate on the Ground, his Nature racked with an insupportable Amazement, and the stream of his Blood turned a con∣trary course, forcing it self through the pores of his Body, and his Humanity sunk by an extremity of Sorrow to the Gates of Death. He had no sooner overcome this ter∣rible Conflict, but behold the fatal Messengers of his Afflictions ready to apprehend him; his own familliar Friend, who had eat of his Bread, con∣ducting them to the place where he was. This was their hour, and he was to suffer even for the ingratitude of his Murderers; he finds himself now for∣saken, as well as betrayed by his Friends, and they who could not watch for his safety, could now fly for their
own. Thus desolate and helpless was the innocent Lamb of God, exposed to the extravigance of a Blood Thirsty People, who came upon him with Sword and Staves, but there was little need of Guards to secure one, who was so willing to obey their Summons; tho' their strength and number cou'd not add Resolution to their Guilt, for his own Confession, that I am He, aw'd them into a Reverence, made them go Backward, and fall to the Ground. But now he lays aside his Majesty, and sub∣mits to their Rage, who with Infamy and Derision drag'd him to the Judg∣ment Seat. Where, though their Ma∣lice was great enough to say any thing, cou'd not make their accusations agree; they laid to his Charge things that he never said nor did, yet that with the Voices of the chief Priests must prevail; and though the judge declared him Guiltless, yet the People had among them a Law, by which he ought to die: Even to this, he opened not his Mouth, but submitted to all that their Revenge, Impudence and Cruelty cou'd invent. Since he had profest himself their King, they were resolved not to lead him to Exe∣cution, before they Cloathed him with
Vestments of Derision, Crown him with a Diadem of Affliction, and put the Scepter of Weakness into his Hand; they Bow the Knee before him, Salute him King, and to fill up their Ingrati∣tude, inhumanly defile his Face with Spittle. After the Horrid Pomp of this Solemnity was over, they divested him of this Dignity, and proceeded to treat him like a Slave, and that his Death might appear more dreadful; they usher it in with all its Terrors, with Stripes and Scourges, and all the Tor∣ments their malice could Inflict. Thus bruised and wounded with the weight of our Transgression, he ascends the last steps of his Passion, and without the least Reluctance, stretches out his Arms to be fix'd on the most painful instru∣ment of Death, where, O my Soul, behold the Son of Man lifted up! O dearest God, who wast Wounded, Des∣pised, Crucified, and Crowned with Thorns, and for my sins wert Nailed to the Cross, I beseech thee by the Merits of them all, O sweetest Jesus, to pardon my Of∣fences. His Death was now a hastning on, and their Diversion near to a Conclu∣sion; they were resolved to make the
best use of their time, and make their in∣gratitude last as long as his life; they rail on Him, treat him with all the marks of Infamy, and continue their Revilings to his dying Minute. Their Madness, Fol∣ly, and Aggrevations reached Heaven, put the World into disorder, and turn∣ed the Day into Night, but could not move his Soul; he saw their Madness, felt the weight of their Offences, and on∣ly prayed for their Forgiveness; he pit∣tied their Misery, and when they en∣deavor'd to pull the Vengenace of his Blood upon their Heads, he was shed∣ing it as Sacrifice for their Wickedness. But when the Majesty of Heaven grew Angry, and exerted his Fury, and laid on him the iniquities of us all, he trem∣bled at his Wrath, cou'd not bear the direction of the Deity, and groan'd a∣way his Soul, when God with-drew his presence from his support; yet, nei∣ther the Frowns of his angry Father, nor the Rage of Men or Devils could make him sink, till all was fullfil'd, which the Scriptures spake concerning him; when that was finish'd he only tarried to recommend his Mother to the pious care of his beloved Disciple, bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost.
O crucified Jesus, let thy Blood wash my Scul, I am not ashamed of thy Cross, but adore thee in thy Passion, and acknow∣ledge thee to be God. Let us now turn the Scene, and think how we have offended this God, and lived in a continual Rebellion, and then of what punishment ought we to be thought worthy, who have Slighted, Contem∣ned, and abused such infinite Mercy; Who have returned the Love of God with the basest ingratitude, and had no other reason for our Wickedness, but that God was Good? What an incon∣ceivable Mercy is it that we are not this minute in those unquenchable Flames, where the exquisitness of the Torment should oblige us instead of crying for Mercy to breath out horrid Blasphemies? And as we slighted his Government here, Curse and Dam his severity thee, still sinking our selves deeper in the intollerable Misery, where will be no Mittigation of the Torment, nor end to our sad Affliction. Let us constrain all the forces of our Soul to praise God that we are alive, entreating his Pardon: Let us beg Pardon even for taking that liberty to praise him, and withal, that he would still help us
to praise him more. O let us reflect on every thing that may move us to con∣fess our Wickedness, and be sorry for our sins. The thoughts of these things may well enough put us in a heat, and when our Passions are throughly urged, vent themselves in Sighs, and earnest desires of Reconciliation, that both of them may meet with success; let us add alms to our Fasting and Prayer, for when our Pe∣titions are thus assisted, the mercy of God will not deny us a suitable return; therefore in the entrance to our Devo∣tion, let us set apart something for the Poor, and humbly offer it up in the fol∣lowing form. O God, Blessed be thy Name, all things come of thee, and of thine own do I now give thee; O let this Alms be as an Odour of a sweet smell, and acceptable in thy sight.
Preparitory Prayers before the Com∣munion. ALmighty Eternal God, thou art the comforter of all that call up∣on thee, thou hast concluded all under sin, that thou mightest have Mercy upon all. Look upon me, O God, and have pitty on me, lying in my Blood and Misery in my Shame and in my Sins, in the fear and guilt of thy Wrath, in the shadow of thy Death, and in the Gates of Hell. I confess to thee, O God, what thou knowest already, but I confess it to glorifie thy Mercy, who hast spared me so long; I am guilty of the vilest and basest Follies, which usu∣ally dishonour Fools, and the worst of Men; I have been Proud and Cove∣tous, Envious and Lustful, Angry, In∣devout and Irreligious, restless in my Passions, Sensual, hating wise Coun∣sels, and soon weary of the Offices of a Holy Religion. I cannot give an ac∣count of my Time, and I cannot reckon the Sins of my Tongue; my Crimes are
Intolerable, my Imperfections Shame∣ful, and my Omissions Innumerable: What shall I do, O thou preserver of Men? I'm so Vile I cannot express it, so Sinful that I'm odious to my self, and I'm much more Abominable in thy sight. I have sinned against thee with∣out Necessity, sometimes without Temp∣tation, only because I would Sin. I have been so Ungreatful, Foolish and Unreasonable, that I have put out my own Eyes, that I might with confidence and without fear, sin against so good a God, so mighty a Redeemer; my sin is grown shameful, and aggravated even to Amazement. O God, I'm amazed and confounded in thy presence. BUT yet, O God, thou art the healer of our Breaches, and the litter up of our Head. I must not de∣spair, I'm sure thy gooness is infinite, thou doest not delight in the Death of a Sinner, my sins, though very great, are infinitely less than thy Mercies; I'm not worthy to look up to Heaven, but be thou pleased to look down into the Dust; let me not perish in my Folly, or be consumed in thy Displeasure; give me time to Repent, give me the
power of thy Spirit, that as by thy Gift and Mercy I intend to amend what is amiss, so I may indeed have Grace and Power faithfully to fullfil the same. Inspire me with the Spirit of Repen∣tance and Mortification, that I may al∣ways fight against my sins, till I be more than Conqueror. Support me with a Holy Hope, confirm me with an excellent Operative, and unrepro∣vable Faith, enkindle a bright and burning Charity in my Soul, and grant by the power of thy Spirit, I may o∣vercome all Carnal and Spiritual Wick∣edness, be wholly delivered from sin, preserved from thy Wrath, and at last pass on to the Glories of thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ my Saviour. A Meditation of St. Austin. BEfore thy Eyes, O Gracious Lord, we bring our Crimes; before thee we expose the Wounds of our bleeding Souls: That which we suffer, is but lit∣tle; that which we deserve, is intole∣rable. We fear the Punishment of our
Sins, but cease not pertinaciously to proceed in sinning. Our Weakness is sometimes smitten with thy Rod; but our Iniquity is not changed. When thou smitest us, then we confess our Sins; but when thy Visitation is past, then we forget that we have wept. When thou stretchest forth thine Hand, then we promise to do our Duty; but when thou takest it away, we perform no Promises. If thou strikest, we cry to thee to spare us; but when thou spa∣rest, we provoke thee again to Anger. Thus, O God, the Guilty confess be∣fore thee: Unless thou givest us Par∣don, it is but just we perish. But, O Almighty God, our Father, grant to us what we ask, even though we deserve it not. Pardon us, O Gracious Father; and take away all our Sin: Destroy the Work of the Devil, let the Enemy have no part in us: Acknowledge the Work of thine own Hand, the Price of thine own Blood, and the Purchase of thine own In∣heritance; and bring us to the Place which thou hast design'd for us by the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, by the Pains of thy Cross, and the Glories of thy Resurrection, O Holy and Blessed Jesus, our Redeemer.
MOst merciful God and Father! I thine unworthy Servant, render my humblest Thanks to thy Divine Maje∣sty, that it has pleas'd thee, notwith∣standing my Unworthiness, to give me a Heart to approach thy Blessed Sacrament. Give me thy Grace, that I may be a cu∣rious Spender of my Time this Week, so as I may best resist or prevent all Temp∣tation. Let thy Grace so perpetually assist and encourage my Endeavours, conduct my Will, and fortifie my Inten∣tions, that I may persevere in that holy Condition which thou hast put me in by the Grace of the Covenant, and the Mer∣cies of the Holy Jesus. Oh, let me ne∣ver fall into those Sins, and retire to that vain Conversation, from which the Eter∣nal and Merciful Saviour of the World hath redeemed me. Let thy Preventing Grace dash all Temptations in their Ap∣proach, that my Hopes be never dis∣compos'd, my Faith weaken'd, my Con∣fidence made remiss, nor my Portion be lessen'd in the Covenant. Give me Grace to put on the Wedding-Garment: And since thou hast commanded me to examine my self, let me seriously consider and re∣view my Life and Actions; and how I
am prepar'd for so weighty an Action. I desire to do this, O Lord, help my weak Desires. Give me Power to live more exactly than I have done. I con∣fess, O Lord, I am by Nature a Child of Wrath; give me therefore a True and Lively Faith, that I may be spiritually join'd to thee by the Visible Signs of Bread and Wine: And so cleanse my Soul, that thou mayest take up thy Ha∣bitation within me. I know, O Lord, I am unworthy of this Blessing; yet for thy Name sake, bestow it upon me: And when I present my self before thee, at thy Table, restrain my Wandring and Idle Thoughts; let them be seriously fix'd on the Death of my Saviour: And as I receive this Bread and Wine for Bodily Sustenance, so cause me to feed on the Body and Blood of my Saviour, that it may be real Nourishment to my Soul: Which I beg for the sake of him who offer'd both his Body and Blood for my Salvation; Jesus, thy Son, and my Re∣deemer. Amen. O Most Good and Gracious Jesus, how excellent was thy Love to∣wards us; thou leavest thy Body and Blood to be our Food to Nourish us.
O thou true Food of my Soul, receive me who am to receive thee, quicken me with thy Spirit, feed me with thy Flesh, satisfie me with thy Blood, and let me receive Life from thee, to act and live unto thee. O, my Lord, give me a Heart that I may think on thee, a Soul that I may love thee, and a Mind to remember thee. Let me find thee, O my hearts desire, let me hold thee, O thou whom my Soul doth love; O my life, for whom all things live, by which I live, without which I die. O, my Lord, let me renew this life of mine, by com∣ing to thy Holy Sacrament: Where may I find thee but here? O that I may faint in my self, and depend on thee. O Lord, let me love thee, because thou didst first love me: Where shall I get words to ex∣press the signs of thy particular great love towards me? I bless thee for my Creation, Preservation, and all the Bles∣sings of this life, but most of all for my Redemption, and the benefits convey'd to us in the Holy Sacrament. O let me go to thy Holy Table, to receive Life and Salvation. O that I may cry after God, even the living God; that I may watch for thee more than they who watch for the Morning, and that my delight may be in thy Commandments, O God.
I Dare not presume to come to thine Altar, Most Holy Lord God, be∣fore I have cleansed my Mouth, by con∣fession of my Sins, washed my Hands in Innocency, and purified my heart by profession of my Faith in my Redeemers Blood; for thy sacred Word teaches me that Holy Thing must not be given to Dogs, nor Pearls cast before Swine: with loathing of my self, and greatest detestation of my rebellious corruption, I confess that never Dog so oft returned to his Vomit, nor Sow to wallowing in the Mire, as I have to sin and sensuality. I was at first conceived in Lust, and since Lust has conceived in me, and brought forth sin, and sin had long ago brought forth Death, if thy Grace and Mercy had not prevented it. I am not able to conceive, what sin I have con∣ceived in my heart, or uttered with my tongue, my best actions are tainted, how much more my defects; my Pray∣ers against sin are, through their many imperfections unless thou cover them, abominable in thy sight, how much more the sins themselves, against which I pray: All the remedies which thou hast prescribed in thy Law against the mala∣dies
of my Soul have increas'd them, and so improv'd my sin, that sin is be∣come above measure sinful. O Lord, thy Commandments are exceeding Broad, and extends not only to our Words and Actions, but to our Thoughts, Desires and Affection; the smallest de∣sire of sin, is sin, the very inclination to sin without consent of the will, the delight in sin against the consent of the will, our vain fancies by Day, and dreams by Night, though not in our power to prevent, are pollutions in thy Eyes, who are purity it self. Who then can say his Heart is clean, or who knoweth how oft he offendeth? O cleanse thou me from my secret Faults, Pardon all my known and unknown Transgressions, whether they be Omissi∣ons of any duty Commanded by thee, or Commissions of any thing forbidden. O loose me from those Bonds where∣with Satan and my own Lust have bound me; thou seest I have abundant need of thee, but am so cloged with Guilt, that I am not able to move towards thee. O let not my impenitence and unworthiness frustrate thy Mercies to me, and since thou hast appointed this Spiritual Feast for rich and famished Souls, let my de∣sires
be answerable to my need of it, and do thou qualifie me by thy Grace to receive the full benefits of it. O Christ hear me, and grant that I may ap∣proach thee, with more sincere and fix∣ed Reasolutions of an intire Reformati∣on; and let me receive such strength from thee, as may enable me faithfully to perform them. Lord, there are ma∣ny old Habitual Diseases my Soul groans under, and though I lie never so long at the pool of Bethesda, come never so often to thy Table, unless thou be pleased to put forth thy healing Vertue, they will still remain uncured. O thou Blessed Physician of Souls, heal me, and grant I may so touch thee, that there lothsome Issues may immediately stanch, that these Sicknesses may not be unto Death, but to the Glory of thy Mercy in pardoning so polluted a Wretch. Lord, have Mercy on me, and grant I may ap∣proach thy Holy Table with such Hum∣lity and Contrition, Love and Devotion, that thou mayest vouchsafe to come un∣to me, and communicate to me thy self, and all the Merits of thy Passion. I ac∣knowledge to my shame and sorrow, that this Feast has often been prepared, and I have with frivolous excuses absented
my self, or if I have come, it has been rather to defy than adore thee; I have brought such Troops of thy professed Enemies, unrepented sins, along with me, as if I came not to commemorate, but renew thy Passion of what punish∣ment ought I to be thought worthy, who have trampled under foot the Son of God, counted the Blood of the Co∣venant an unholy thing; by defiling my self with sensual pleasures, and break∣ing my holy Vows since I received the blessed Sacrament, and thereby have in∣curred the greatest danger by receiving that Unworthily, which can take away the guilt of my Sin; yet, O merciful Jesus, this Blood is my only refuge, let this make my attonement, or I perish E∣ternally; Wherefore didst thou shed it, but to save Sinners? O let me find its saving Efficacy, let not the price of thy Blood be utterly lost, but Pardon that heap of sin which I bring to thy Cross to be forgiven, that so I may be an acceptable Guest at thy Holy Table, which I beg for thy Compassion Sake, Jesus my God and Saviour. BLessed and all sufficient Saviour, I, the unworthiest of thy Servants,
prostrate my self at thy Mercy Seat, humbly imploring that Pardon and For∣giveness of my multiplied Transgressions, which render me unfit to receive the least of thy multiplied Kindness, much less of being made a partaker of the greatest in the participation of the Sa∣cred Body and Blood in the Holy Com∣munion. Dear Redeemer, let me ap∣proach this Divine Institution, with a prepared Heart, and a purified Soul. O that infinite Justice of the Almighty, in taking so full vengeance upon sin, even upon thee his only beloved Son, that we might fear and tremble at the sad Effects of sin. O the infinite Mercy of the Al∣mighty, ever to think of such a reme∣dy for miserable Man's Restoration. O the equal Goodness of thee our dearest Lord, who wast a willing Sacrifice, who wast Content, Ambitious, Hungring and thirsting after our Salvation by thy dread∣ful Passion, for which let me how my self at the Footstool of thy Cross, and mourn for thy Sufferings, as occasioned by my Sins. O let the drops of thy Blood trickle down into my Bosom, and wash out the stains of sin there; let thy Thorns pierce me to the Heart, and thy Nails fasten me to thee, as much as e∣ver
they did thee to the Cross: Thou that didst entertain Judas with Tran∣quility, and sufferest him to kiss thy Cheek, reject not me thy unworthy sup∣plicant, but kiss me with the Benedicti∣on of thy Lips, and with the Affecti∣ons of a Saviour; thou that dist permit the Soldiers to bind thee, to satisfie for my looseness and abused liberty, bind me now unto thee with the Chains of Love, let that Holy Union dissolve the Cords of Vanity, and subdue my Pas∣sions and unruly Desires. Dearest Lord, as in my Body of sin there is no part free, so in thy suffering Body there was no whole part; nothing but Sores and Stripes, Wounds and Bruises: I have of∣fended in all my parts, thou wast tor∣mented in all thine, so that with shame and sorrow, I confess that my sins in∣flicted the misery of thy Passion by the hands of thy barbarous Enemies. O let the Spear that pierced thy Heart, sweet∣est Jesus, pierce mine with true Sorrow; let me contemplate on thy Passion, with infinite hatred of sin that occasioned it, and with infinite gratitude to thy Love for performing the same. I adore thee, O Lord, Blessed Jesus, for instituting the Holy Sacrament, strike an awe into my
Soul when I approach it, and create in me Heavenly dispositions to celebrate so Heavenly an institution; let me ve∣rily believe, that if with due preparation I come to thy Altar, as certainly as I receive the outward sings, so certainly shall I receive thy most blessed Body and Blood; to receive which inestimable Blessing, O merciful Lord, do thou fit and prepare me for thy mercy sake in Christ Jesus our Lord. O All sufficient Saviour, teach me by thy great good Examples, O∣bedience and Submission to thy Di∣vine Will. I humbly beseech thee so to prepare my Soul to the due receiving of the Holy Sacrament worthily, that I may thereby effectually feel, tast and feed on thee my Saviour Christ, that I may be thee have Eternal Life. Par∣don, O Lord, pardon my unprepared∣ness to come to so Holy and Divine a Mistery, make thy Word and Sacrament always so powerful and effectual in my Heart, that I may thereby be sanctified and renewed unto all Holy Obedience, unto thy Will, in the mortification of my sinful Corruptions, renewing of thy perfect Image in me unto Holiness,
Righteousness, Sobriety, Truth, Know∣ledge, Faith, Temperance and Chastity. O Blessed Jesus, by thee let me have ac∣cess to thy Heavenly Father, that by thee he may accept me, who by thee is revealed to me; let thy Innocence and Purity procure pardon for my unclean∣ness and disobedience, let thy Humili∣ty extinguish my Pride and Vanity, and thy Charity cover the multitude of my Faults, and that thou wilt with the hands of thy Mercy, immediately after this life, receive my Soul into everlast∣ing Joy and Felicity, there to Reign with thee for ever. A Concluding Prayer. O Lord God, into thy hands I com∣mit my Body, Soul, and Spirit, my Thoughts, Words and Works, desi∣ring wholly to be thine. O my God, Gracious and Merciful accept me in thy beloved Jesus Christ; for his sake let me not go from before thee without a Blessing, a Blessing of Pardon and Peace, a Blessing of thy Spirit and of thy Grace to come Holy to thy Table, a Blessing
of thy favour and of thy love in the Lord Jesus; thus Lord, say of me that thou hast Blessed me, and I shall be thy Blessed for ever; pardon the defect of Prayers, my Coldness and Wandring in my Devotions, and deal with me ac∣cording to thy Mercies in Christ Jesus, who in compassion to my infirmatives has taught me to call thee Father, and when I pray, to say, Our Father, &c. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, &c. Having performed these Devotions faithfully, let us wait for the Blessing of the Lord; if we would have a speedy answer to our Prayers, let us have re∣spect in all our Conversation to what we have been doing. 'Tis not suffici∣ent that we passionately beg God's Fa∣vour, we must endeavour to deserve it by performing his will, and when God sees that we choose him, he will not de∣ny us the Blessings that are needful for us. 'Tis not to be supposed, that Man is serious who can be earnest and zea∣lous in his Closest, but loose and in∣temperate in the World, or that he is heartily desirous to be eased of his bur∣then, who makes no other attempts to
acquit himself, but when he is upon his Knees. Can we think God will hear the Prayer of a Man who only asks to be freed from his Infirmities? When the wicked Man turns from his Wickedness, and does that which is Lawful and Right, be shall save his Soul, and not before. If a Man that is an Adulterer, Lascivious or Unclean, would have his Vices rout∣ed out, he must first set himself against the Sin, endeavour to mortifie the Lust, and avoid the occasion of his Folly, and then he may expect God's Pardon for the past, and assistance for the fu∣ture: He ought during the time of his Tryal to beg God's Grace to help him in the conquest of this Enemy, and if he is sincere, may be sure in a little time, that he will be more than Conqueror; but don't let us fly to God to save us from those Evils we voluntary run in∣to, which we don't care to avoid, and which are no longer uneasie than they sensibly affect us. We shall but mock God, and provoke him to give us up to the deceits of our own Heart; but 'tis hoped they who are arrived so far in Vertue, as to set their Resolutions to approach the Altar of God, have no such custom that they truly are sorry for
their Offences, and intend to lead a new life, that their Faith is such as over∣comes the World, that they have brought under their unruly Appetites, and are zealous of good Works. These are the things about which we ought to Examine our selves, let this be our study, the nearer we approach this So∣lemnity that so we may search every Corner of our Hearts, and when we have set our ways before our Eyes, there is no doubt but we shall bewail the ini∣quity of them, and raise in our Souls an ardent love to Christ who is so rea∣dy to relieve us, and has done so much to bring us into Favour with God. Our unworthiness and his Mercy are sufficient to exercise our thoughts our whole lives, we are astonished at the one, and con∣founded at the other; but when we con∣sider his mercy extends to the other World, even to the making us happy for ever, we know not what to say are desirous, our Eternity should be passed away in his Praises, and even wish for the order of a Seraphim to express our grateful acknowledgments in Joyful Ha∣lelujahs; they who consider the dignity of this Sacrament, will be desirous of approaching thither with all possible
purity, and endeavour to cleanse them∣selves according to the Purification of the Sanctuary. In short, let us but get a true understanding of the Sacra∣ment, and that will teach us our Duty. Let us add the following Form to our Devotions on Saturday Evening. O What shall I do to have my Soul wholly possest with thee, but by coming to thy Holy Communion, there to seal the promises I have made to thee this Week, for the future to live more Godly? Suffer me (thy ju∣stice laid aside) to speak unto thy mer∣cy, me Dust and Ashes, yet suffer me to speak, being 'tis to the mercies of God; say unto my Soul, I am thy Sal∣vation, and hide not thy face from me, let me see it, though I die, least other∣wise I die, so as never to see it; the mansion of my Soul is to marrow to en∣tertain thee. O let it be enlarged by thee, by my coming to thy Table, it is very ruinous, be thou pleased to re∣pair it; cleanse me, O Lord, from my secret sins, from my presumptuous
wickedness deliver thy Servant. I have confessed these my sins unto thee, and hope thou hast forgiven the iniqui∣ty of them. I do not contend in judg∣ment with thee, for thou art the Truth: If thou, Lord, shouldst mark iniqui∣ties, who may abide? But we have confidence in thy mercy through the merits of our Saviour and Mediator, who was also made known to the Saints of Old, that they by the Faith of his Passion to come, as we by the Faith of it past, might obtain Salvation. As he was Man, he was Mediator, but as he was the Word, so he was no midling Person, because equal to God, and God with God, together with the Ho∣ly Ghost, one God. How far hast thou loved us, O thou good Father, who sparedst not thine only Son, but de∣livered him up for us ungodly? How far hast thou loved us, for whom he who thought it no Robery to be equal to thee, was made subject even to Death upon the Cross? Therefore do I justly repose strong hope in thee, that thou wilt heal all my Diseases which are very great, but much greater is the cure which thou hast provided. This is my great delight, and so often as I can be
released from necessary affairs, I will repair to this pleasure of coming to thy Table, neither find I in all these things which I run through any settlement for my Soul, save only in thee. Behold, O Lord, I cast all my care upon thee, let me live, and I will consider the wonderful things of thy Law; thou knowest my Ignorance, my Infirmities, teach me, heal me, O Jesus, in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom. Redeem me with thine own Blood, for I meditate on it; I Eat and Drink at thy Table, and desire to be satisfied there∣with, amongst those who Eat, and are satisfied. Oh! Lord, thou seest how much I have left behind after all my dilligence to cleanse and purifie my Soul. Alas! all my thoughts of thee are but Dreams, my Desires but a Vapour, my love but a Flash, my Prayers are but a Breath, and my Tears will scarce fill a Buble; my Sorrow is no bigger than a Sigh, all that I do, I am ashamed of it my self, and thou mayest much more loath and dispise it. Come thou, O Lord, therefore and search my heart, try me, and know my toughts, see if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead
me in the way Everlasting. Do thou a∣waken in me most lively thoughts, do thou inkindle a burning affection, open thou the Flood-gates of my Eyes, and open thou my Lips that my Mouth may shew forth thy praise. O my gracious God, unless thou interpose thy power, I am very much affraid I shall not keep this little goodness till the next morn∣ing, which now seems to be in me. These weak Thoughts, these faint De∣sires and sickly Affections that are in my Soul, I doubt will not live a Night, unless thou find ways to preserve and cherish them; my inveterate Habits of Evil will smother and choak these new Resolutions, I am in fear that all these Meditations will be flown away, while I am a sleep, and my House be foul a∣gain, unless thou keep me. Ah! my dear God, seeing I have bestowed some small pains upon my heart, and have conceived some little hopes, suffer them not to be dash'd to pieces in a Night, spread the Wings of thy goodness over me, and maintain that, which not I, but thou thy self hast wrought. Lord, let me find when I awake, that my af∣flections and desires are grown beyond the strength of Man, and that thy pow∣er
rest upon me. Oh! let me find a greater fervor than ever in thy Service, let that spark which I fear would go out, be blown into a Flame that will ne∣ver expire; so shalt thou draw mine Eyes towards thy self alone, who work∣est such wonders, and my Lips shall e∣ver flow with thy Praises. Lord, if I may beg this Grace of thee, I am veri∣ly perswaded I shall languish after none but thee; therefore my good Lord, I leave my self in thy hands, hoping that either I am, or would be, such as thou desirest, and if I am arrived but as far as a Will and Desire to be thine, that Will is thine, and therefore seeing the Will is mine too, and we both conspire together, I take the boldness to say, Lord, let thy will be done. Oh! sweet Saviour, I was going to say, I am sick of Love, that I cannot love except thou love me, and make me better, but I cor∣rect my self, and 'tis enough if I be sick, because I cannot love thee. Do thou make me sick, or rather do thou make me well with love unto thee, so shall I come to thy Table with Joy and Glad∣ness, hoping that thou wilt kiss me with the Benediction of thy Lips, for thy love is better than Wine; draw me, and
I will run after thee, yea, we will run after thee, for I will proclaim to others the loving kindness of the Lord, A∣men. Devotions for the Day we intend to Communicate. IT well becomes a Christian's Piety to welcome the day which brings our Saviour so near to us, with acts of Joy and Thnaksgiving, for the approach of so great a Blessing. And since one Night may breed too great a damp, and chil∣ness upon our Spirits, it will be very wholesome to renew those Thoughts and Affections that we left there when we went to Bed, and so go to the house of God, in a sense of our unworthiness, to entertain so glorious a Person; and in a sense of sin which is the cause of that unworthiness, together with a joy in our Souls, and Praises upon our Tongues that he will forgive them, humbly desiring of the Lord that he will accept of us for his Habitation, and that he will come and enlarge our
Souls by a holy Love to him, and long∣ing after him, that there may be room for his Sacred Majesty, and a place clean and dressed to receive him. In order hereunto, as soon as we awake, let us adore that Sacred Majesty of Heaven in the following Ejaculation. A Prayer. O Merciful God, as thou hast a∣wakened my Body from sleep, so by thy Grace awaken my Soul from sin, that I may appear before thee this day at thy Holy Altar, with a pure and undefiled Soul. O Jesus cloth me with the Wedding Garments of Righte∣ousness, and true Holiness, that being a worthy Receiver of thy Body and Blood, I may continue steadfast to my lives end, and at the last Trump, accor∣ding to thy Blessed Promise, be made a pertaker of thy Heavenly Kingdom, Amen. The solemnity of this day requires a most exact attendance in the service of God, all our affections should be so imployed, that even the necessaries of this life, ought not to incumber our
Souls, or take off those Holy Medita∣tions which should be inseperate to our Minds, much more should we dispence with things of less moment, and there∣fore however we indulge our selves at other times; let us now take leave of our Bed, and prepare to meet our God with humble Addresses, and rising with a thinkful acknowledgment for the Mercies of the Night past, let us say, Glory be to thee, O Lord, for watching over me this Night. Lord, raise me up at the last day to life everlasting. In the name of our Lord Jesus, Christ, who was crucified for me, I arise; he by his cross and Passion, save bless and pre∣serve me this day and for ever, Amen. As soon as we are Dressed, let us retire unto our Closet, and before we prostrate our selves at the Throne of Grace, exercise our Thoughts a little upon the approaching Solemnity, and reflect upon our base ingratitude, con∣sider how infinitly unworthy we are of such an inestimable benefit, and then let us adore that inexpressible Good∣ness which gives us so glorious an op∣portunity of waiting on our loving Lord at his Holy Altar, after such a
religious confusion of Soul, let us hum∣ble our selves, and say. Good Lord pardon thy servant why en∣deavours to prepare his heart to seek thee, though I be not cleansed according to the Purification of the Sanctuary. A Prayer. O Lord, I do not presume to come to that great Feast of thy Body and Blood, upon the least opinion of my own worthiness; for when I look upon my self, I dare not come least I should Eat and Drink my own Damnation; but when I consider thy infinite Mercies unto us, and thy own words calling all men without ex∣ception, and knowing that thy crucified Body is not only food to nourish, but Phy∣sick to cure: I beg leave that am but Dust and Ashes to come to thy Holy Table, and with my weak Faith, to feed upon some Crumbs of the Bread of Life. I confess, O Lord, I have no Wedding Garments on me, but I come to seek them at thy Cross, from thy bitter sorrows to derive into my Soul a Godly sorrow working an unfeigned Repentance, from the broken Body, a bro∣ken
Heart, from thy warm Blood flowing from thy wounded side, Zeal and ferven∣cy, that I may love and admire thee my God as I ought to do. I come, O Dear Jesus, to fetch Humility and Temperance, Chastity and Charity, and whatever thou seest needful for me. O bury all my sins in thy Grave, my stony Heart, my na∣tural Corruptions, and vile Affections; I come, O Lord, to fetch a new life from thy Holy and Blessed Resurrection, for I stand in amazement when I consider my own vileness, and how miserable my end must be when the Heavens are not pure in thy sight, and the very Angels are charg∣ed with folly; there is no Holiness, O Lord, if thou with-draw thy Hand, no Wisdom profits if thy Government ceases, when thou leavest us we perish, we are un∣stable and unsecure unless secured and con∣firmed by thee, we fly to thee for help, and yet depart from thy Commandments. O how meanly do I deserve to be thought of, how little and inconsiderable is the good I do; how innumerable, how intollerable are the Evils I have done, many good things have I received from thee, but I have a∣bus'd them; thou hast given me Grace, but I have turned it into Wantonness, thou didst create in me a hope of Glory, but I
have lost my Confidence. Wherefore be∣hold, O Lord, I come unto thee, thou mightest indeed justly censure the approach of such a polluted Creature to be a daring presumption, but I beseech the condemn not the action, but behold the motives which drew me hither, even my own miseries and thy mercies. I increase the number of my sins, what shall I do to thee, O thou pre∣server of Men? Who shall raise me up when I shall fall before thy dreadful Judgment Seat? I will lay my Face in the Dust, and confess my self to be nothing. Pitty my Shame, O God, bind up my Wounds, re∣move those sins that so easily overcome me, and unite me to my Saviour Jesus. O help me to supply in Humility what I want in worthiness, let my mean and just opi∣nion of my self, my bended Knees, and broken Heart, shew that I durst not have adventured so nigh, if thy mercy had not held out the Golden Scepter; O then dear Jesus, be a Jesus to me, and let this Sa∣crament be a savor of life, and thy Body the Bread of life, thy Blood the purifier of my sinful life: O send me not empty away, for I shall faint and die, I cannot live without thee; O let vertue come from thee and heal my Sickness, do thou appear to my Soul in these holy Mysteries, enlighten
my Darkness, turn me from all vain im∣aginations and illusions of the Enemy, all perversness of Will, all Violence and In∣ordinate Passions, sensual Desires, Lust and Malice, Gluttony, Pride, Envy and Detraction; let not sin reign in my mortal Body, nor the Divel lead my Will captive, nor the World abuse my understanding, nor debauch my Conversation. O grant I may receive these Divine Mysteries, for the a∣mendment of my Life, and for a defensa∣tive against all my sins, for the increase of Vertue, and the perfection of the Spirit; this I beg, O merciful God, for the sake of thy Eternal Son, my crucified Saviour and Redeemer Jesus, Amen. Here rising up, read as Follows. AND as they were Eating, Jesus took Bread and gave thanks and blessed it, and breakt it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, Eat this is my Body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me; likewise also, he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it, for this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood which is shed for you, and for many, for the Re∣mission
of sins, and they all drank of it. Verily I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of the Fruit of the Vine, until that day when I drink it new in the Kingdom of God my Father. I adore thee, O Blessed Jesus, for in∣stituting this Holy Sacrament; O let thy Divinity thus stampt on it, strike into my Soul a holy awe in approach∣ing it; O create in me a Heaven dis∣position to celebrate so Heavenly an Institution, and for thy Mercies sake, pardon all my stupid forgetfulness, and ingratitude hitherto; do now create in me such a thankful and lively remem∣brance of thy dying love, that may ex∣cite me to give up my self intirely to thee, as thou didst give up thy self on the Cross for me. [Kneeling say, A Prayer. BEhold, O sacred and undivided Tri∣nity, an unworthy, wretched, weak, and wounded Soul, oppressed with an intol∣lerable weight of Misery, terrified with the consideration of thy inscrutable Judgments, confounded with the memory of her base in∣gratitude,
and encompassed with sorrow. I have with the prodigal wasted that por∣tion of Grace thou didst bestow upon me, and therefore do infinitly want a supply out of thy Treasury; but, O Lord, how shall such a wretch as I dare to approach this Holy Table, how shall this spiritual Manna, this Food of Angels be given to one: Who has chosen to feed on Huscks with Wine? nay, to one who has so often trampled upon these precious things, either carelesly neglecting or unworthily receiving these holy Myste∣ries. O LOrd, my horrible guiltiness makes me not dare to stay away, for where shall my polluted Soul be washed, if not in this Fountain which thou hast opened for sin and uncleanness, hither therefore I come, and thou hast promised him that cometh thou wilt in no wise cast out; this is, O Lord, the Blood of the New Testament, grant me so to receive it, that it may be for the re∣mission of my sins, and though I have so of∣ten, and so wretchedly broken my part of that Covenant whereof the Sacrament is a seal, yet be thou graciously pleased to make good thine; be merciful to my unrighteous∣ness, and remember my sins no more, and not only so, but place thy Laws in my Mind, and write them in my Heart, and by the power of thy Grace. dispose my Soul
to such a sincere and constant Obedience that I may never again provoke thee. Lord grant that in these holy Mysteries, I may not only commemorate, but effectually re∣ceive my blessed Saviour, and all the bene∣fits of his Passion; and to that end, give me such a preparation of Soul as may quali∣fie me for it; give me a deep sense of my sins and unworthiness, that being weary and heavy leaden, I may be capable of his refreshings. Raise up my dull and earth∣ly mind from groveling here below, and in∣spire it with holy Zeal, that I may with spiritual affections approach this spiritual Feast; and let, O Lord, that infinite love of Christ in dying for so wretched a sinner, inflame my frozen and benumed Soul, and kindle in me that sacred fire of love to him, and that so vehement, that no water may quench, no floods drown it, such as may burn up all my dross, and not leave one unmortified Lust within me, and such as may also extend it self to all whom thou hast given me command to love, even my Enemies as well as Friends. O Lord, I beseech thee cloath me with the Wedding Garment, and make me though of my self a most unworthy, yet by thy mercy an ac∣ceptable guest at thy Holy Table, that I may not eat and drink my own Condemna∣tion,
but may have my Pardon sealed, my Weakness repair'd, my Corruptions subdu∣ed, and my Soul so inseperably united to thee, that no temptation may be ever a∣ble to dissolve the Union, but that being begun here, in grace it be consummated in Glory. Grant this, O merciful Father, for thy dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ our Lord. ONce more, O my Soul, con∣template that thou art now a pre∣paring thy self for that Divine Banquet, which thy loving Lord instituted a lit∣tle before those Sufferings and that Death, before the breaking of his Bo∣dy, and the sheding of his Precious, Sacred, and Royal Blood, which he declared to be signified by the breaking of the Bread, and the pouring out of the Wine, for he went that very Night into the Garden, where his pious Soul, apprehensive of Divine Wrath, humbly addressed with reiterated supplications for Relief, and being sensible of the miseries of Mankind pressing hard upon his spotless Soul, the Torments of the approaching Cross, the executing Ter∣rors of the Powers of Darkness, and the whole Artillery of an incensed God,
which he was in little time to graple with; they shook his very Nature, melted him into streams of Blood, and so cast down his Spirits, that nothing less than an Angel of the presence, was able to mittigate the conflicts of this o∣therwise insupportable Agony. These are but the beginning of Sorrows, for no sooner then Mercy overcame the afflicting convulsion of his Soul, who was sorrowful to Death, but he began to fortifie his kind intentions to poor Man, by that inexpressibly loving, and unparallel'd Resignation to the will of his Heavenly Father, he chearfully pro∣ceeded to offer up that Sacrifice which was to appease the Divine Justice for the iniquities of an impious World; when after a most exemplary submission to the affronts and injuries of implaca∣ble Spirits, the ingrateful Malice, and supercillious Envy of those who thirst∣ed for his Blood, being despitefully a∣bused, afflicted and tormented, denied by some, forsaken by others, desolate and comfortless in every sense, truly a Man of sorrows was forced to add weight to his past Sufferings, and bear the Cross of his own Crucifixion.
Where, O my Soul, behold by Faith the Lamb of God lifted up for the sins of the World. O humble thy self into the center of thy own nothing, for of what punishment oughtest thou to be thought worthy, that hast so insensed the Majesty of Heaven, to give up the innocent and most Holy Jesus, thy best, thy only Friend, and his dear Son to be Tortured and Tormented for thy sins. O how cruelly was he scourged with Wips, wounded with Thorns, loaden with the Cross, torn with Nails, pier∣ced with a Spear, and racked on the most painful instrument of Death, his lovely Face defiled with Blood and Spitting, his Ears fill'd with Upbraid∣ings and Curses, his Eyes drenched in Tears for the ruine of his Enemies, and his Soul amazed at the Terrors of an angry God; 'till at length all wounded, broken and bloody with many groans, yet with admirable patience he breaths out his Soul with infinite Charity and Forgiveness. O holy Jesu! how excellent is thy Goodness? O ye blessed Host of Hea∣ven, who rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, adore and praise that unknown sorrow, which ye your selves contem∣plate with awful admiration.
I cannot doubt thy power to ease me, because of these Suffrings of thy Love; I must not question thy willing∣ness, who callest me of thy own accord, nor dare I suspect thy sincerity, who art Truth it self, and always in earnest with poor sinners; my Guilt has made me think to fly from thee, but thy mel∣ting Voice has eneouraged me to turn to thee, and laid me prostrate at thy feet, groaning under my Offences; but if thou wilt pitty me, I am safe; it thou art pleased, I am eased; if thou pardon me, my burden is gone; and if thou wilt take away this intollerable Lord, I will then venture to draw nearer e∣ven to thy Altar, O holy Jesu, there to receive more refreshment from thy mercy. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy leaden, and I will give you rest. These are thy words, O Christ, for you hast spoken them, and they are mine, because spoken for my sal∣vation. O sweet and amiable words in the ear of a poor sinner, by which thou invitest an indigent, starv'd wretch to pertake of thy Body: But who am I, O Lord, that I should come? The Angels and Archangels reverence thee, thy Saints and holy Ones fear before
thee, and yet thou sayest unto me, come: Unless thou hast said it, who could have believed it to be true? Unless thou hadst commanded it, who durst have attempted this approach? Does my Saviour invite? and shall I go? Shall a sinner dare to sit down at his Table? Does he invite, and shall I not go? Shall a Wretch presume to refuse his Call? Rise then, my Soul, and take thy swiftest wings, and fly to the presence of this great Mystery. A Feast of Holy Bread and Holy Wine, in representation of thy sacred Body and blood, where thy all glo∣rious self is freely to the meanest guest a feast of peace and love, and incom∣parable sweetness, to which thy own blest mouth thus kindly callest us. But stay, am I dressed like a friend of the Bridegroom, that I safely may come to the Marriage Supper; have I considered how chast those eyes should be which go to behold the God of purity; have I considered how clean that mouth should be, which presumes to eat that Bread of Heaven, but most, how all caelestial that Soul should be which aspires to a union with the Body of Christ.
Oh! how poor, and dull, and empty am I, how infinitly unworthy of so di∣vine a Sacrament; yet am I call'd by him that can Command, by him that sees and pitties my misery; he bids me come, he surely will receive me, and with his bounteous fullness supply my defects. Go then, my Soul, to that sacred Ta∣ble, and take thy part of that delicious banquet; go all inflamed with Love and joy, and hope, and quench thy holy Thirst with that spring of bliss, when thou hast tasted his everlasting sweetness, and feelest his heavenly streams flow gently on thee; open thy happy breast, and suck those Waters in, and let them freely run over all thy powers. Let them soak deep to the root of thy heart, and turn thy barren heath into a fruitful soil; fruitful in holy thoughts, and pious words; fruitful in good, just and charitable Deeds, fruitful in good examples; and God of his infinite good∣ness confirm all this, that my Soul may bless his holy Name here, and with the whole host of Heaven sing Hallelujah to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for over hereafter, A∣men. [Our Father, &c.
O Lord, bless me and keep me, this day. O Lord make thy Face to shine upon me, and be gracious unto me. O Lord, lift up the light of thy coun∣tenance upon me, and give me peace this day, and for ever. Amen. The Blessings to be obtained, and the sense of our Unworthiness, which sure∣ly by this time is ingrafted in our hearts, will inform us, that each mo∣ment of this day ought to be carefully employed, and therefore in every in∣terval when we can't be upon our knees, let our holy Meditations carry us a∣bove the contemplations of this world; and as this is a day of rejoicing, in which our Souls are to be solaced with the ravishing sweet of so divine a re∣past, let our Actions attest this inward satisfaction, and shew in some sort by their humble demeanor, that they are touched with a sense of those incom∣parable delights, and can relinquish their sensual Enjoyments to attend the Devotions of their better part. After we have thus discharged our Duties in private, let us prepare for our more so∣lemn Devotions in the House of God. In our way thither, let us endeavour
to get stronger apprehensions of God, and the invisible Majesty that dwells there: Let us strengthen our Faith by a positive belief of the presence of the Most High, and this will occasion a holy Awe and Reverence when we en∣ter the Church, and cause us to say with humility: Surely, the Lord is in this place: How dreadful is this place? This is none other but God's house. This is the Gate of Heaven. As soon as we are placed in our seats, it will become us to bow our selves before the Lord, and in humili∣ty of Soul to offer up our Petitions to the Father of Heaven. A Prayer. O Most gracious and merciful Lord, thou hast call'd all those that are weary and heavy laden with the burthen of their sins to come to thee, and hast pro∣mised to ease and refresh them; thou hast invited all those that hunger and thirst af∣ter Righteousness to come to thy Table and tast of thy Supper, and has promised that thou wilt satisfie them in assurance of these
promises; I come to the Lord Jesus, be∣seeching thee to ease and refresh me, and to satisfie me with thy Mercy, for I hun∣ger and thirst after thee, and thy Salva∣tion. I confess that my daily sins have made me unworthy of my daily Bread, much more of this heavenly Banquet. O make my Soul ascend to thee in an humble supplication, and let my Saviour's interces∣sion procure thine acceptance, and give me such a faith as may take possession of all I pray for; besprinkle my polluted Soul in the Blood of thy dear Son Jesus, O let the Blood of his Wounds, and the Water of his Side make me clean, that I may come to the blessed Feast of the spotless Lamb. I confess, O God, that when I consider thy greatness, and my nothing, thy purity and my uncleanness, I see it infinitly unreason∣able and presumptious in me to approach thy sacred prescence, and desire to pertake of thy Sacrament, or hope for a part of thy Glory; but when I consider thy Mercy and thy Wisdom, thy Bounty and Good∣ness, thy readiness to forgive, and willing∣ness to impart thy self unto thy servants, then am I lifted up with hopes, then I come with boldness to the Throne of Grace, even so, O Lord, because thou hast com∣manded and lovest it should be so. It was
never heard from the beginning of the World, that thou ever didst dispise him that call'd upon thee, or forsake any that did abide in thy fear, or that any that tru∣sted in thee was ever confounded; but if I come to thee, I bring an unworthy person to be joyned to thee; and if I come not, I shall remain unworthy for ever; if I stay away, I fear to lose thee; if I come, I fear to offend thee, and that will lose thee more: I know, O God, my sins have sepe∣rated between me and thee, but thy love, O Jesus, and thy Passion, Holiness and Obedience has reconciled us, and though my sins deter me, they make it necessary I should come, and though thy Greatness a∣mazes, yet it is so full of goodness, that it invites and incourages me to approach these holy Mysteries this day. O mighty God, rebuke Satan, restrain all Earthly and Carnal affections, that they do not once dare to whisper a temptation to my Soul, a distraction to my Thoughts, while I am in Communion with thee at thy Holy Altar; do thou, O Lord, rule me by thy Grace, govern me by thy Spirit, and defend me by thy Power, and crown me with thy Sal∣vation, which I humbly beg in the Name and Merits of my Redeemer Jesus, whom with thee, O Father, and the Holy Spirit,
I will Worship as one God to all Eternity, Amen. Let us now employ our Thoughts as becoming the Sons of God, and all the vacant time before the service of the Church, let us employ in holy Medi∣tation. Let us remember not only that we are in his presence, but that this is his day, on which we are met to glorifie his Name; for the good things we have received, to ask such things as are necessary for our future well-fare, and to hear his Holy Word, to direct us in the way to Salvation. Let us beg of him to open our Hearts, that we may receive with meekness the word we are to hear; that for the Merits of Jesus he will receive our Prayers, and no doubt when God sees us earnestly and hum∣bly challenging his Word, he will for his Truth and promise sake grant us all those good things which he knows need∣ful for us; and this should mightily en∣courage us to be sincere at all times when we enter the place where his ho∣nour dwells. Certainly every Christian that is sensible of the greatness of God, won't dare to dissemble or behave him∣self irreverently there, especially at such
a time when our strickest attention is re∣quired, and even that not enough, to contemplate the most High. When the Service begins, we are to lay aside these Meditations, and imme∣diately apply our selves to that, if we devoutly attend to every part, shall need no Paraphrase to heighten those expres∣sions, or make us more in love with that incomparable composure; 'tis the singular excellence of the Common Prayer, that they who frequent it al∣ways find out something that deserves to be more admired than they can ex∣press. I dare affirm no one ever found any flatness or defect that came with∣out prejudice, or was piously inclined, for it contains all that may occasion a sensible pleasure to a good Man. The Sentences and Exhortations are excellent motives to press us to our Duty; the confession full of Pathetical expressions, and suted to the conditions of all men; the Absolution most comfortable to a penitent Soul that wants to be eased from its weary Burthen. The Hymns, and Psalms very proper to stir up our Souls to a holy rejoycing in the Lord; the Scripture has its place that we may receive comfort from those lively Ora∣cles
of Truth. After the profession of our Faith, we supplicate our God ac∣cording to the Apostle, not only for our selves, but for those who are in authority over us, nay, our Charity reaches further, to all Christian Kings and Princes; and to shew we are not forgetful of those of lesser degree, we extend it to all sorts and conditions of men; What can be more agreeable to a devout Soul, than thus to exercise it self in the Law of God? What can be more moving than to see, and hear a devout Priest offering up Prayers and Supplications, and others joining in his Petitions by Ecchoing a hearty Amen? How does it constrain us to out-vie in Zeal, and cause a Holy Emulation, when we hear our Minister with fer∣vency, crying to the Father of Heaven to have Mercy upon us, and we with equal earnestless invocating the Son and Holy Ghost mercifully to hear us? Let others mock, and call them vain re∣petitions, while we endeavour to express the desires of our Souls in those Pathe∣tical supplications, Lord have mercy up∣on us, We are not so vain but to con∣fess our want of that Mercy, nor a∣shamed of the Repetition when we find
the benefit, even the favour of the Lord, which is better than life it self; wherefore I must be earnest with every Christian to attend this service; don't let our thoughts be roving, but cor∣rect the wandrings of our minds, the whole Service is in order to prepare us to a worthy reception of the Holy Sa∣crament; when once we have got the mastry of our selves, and can go along with all the parts of the Church, we shall have less occasions for these helps to Devotion; we shall find so much contained in the Prayers and Exhorta∣tions, as will take up all the vacant time in Holy Meditation; and this will make Holiness become exceeding delightful, when we can turn our Souls towards God, and solace them without interruption; when we can leave the thoughts of this World, and look stead∣fastly to God. But this is to be done by degrees, when we have conquer'd the love of this World, and wearied our selves from its Alurements, and this only to be performed by a con∣stant watch over our words and actions, and perseverance in the ways of good∣ness.
When the Prayers of the Church are over, let us humbly ask God to par∣don our defects in his Service, and say, O Lord Pardon the wandrings and cold∣ness of my Petitions, deal not with me ac∣cording to my Prayers or Deserts, but ac∣cording to my needs, and thy infinit mercy in Jesus Christ, Amen. Having discharged our duty in Pray∣er to God, let us prepare our selves to hear what he will say to us out of his Holy Word; we ought to look upon the Minister as an Ambassador of Christ, and hearken with reverence to his Do∣ctrine at the end of it, to beg that we may bring forth the Fruit of it in our Lives and Conversation, and this we can't do in better words, than in one of the Collects after the Communion. [Grant we beseech thee Almighty God, that the Words which we have heard this day, &c. While the People are going out, let us devoutly turn towards the Table of the Lord, and endeavour with admira∣tion and reverence, to contemplate the approaching Ordinance; let us enter∣tain
thoughts of our unworthiness, and then humble our selves before the Lord, and say, A Prayer. O Almighty God who art infinite in Compassion, and art able to pardon more sins than I can commit; the stretcht out Arms of my dear Saviour upon the Cross, can encompass the largest extention of my sins, and his Passion affords an ever flow∣ing Red Sea to cover them, that they may not become my confusion: O then let his Blood be my Bath, purge me with Hy∣sop and I shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter than Snow, and to capaci∣tate me for these Mercies, let the deepest sorrow wound my Soul; Oh! let it grieve my Spirit that I have lived so long to the grief of thine, and let me grieve so long that I can grieve no more, make my Soul to ascend in an humble supplication, and let my Saviour's intercession procure thine acceptance, and give me such a Faith as may take possession of all I pray for; and least my own trust should deceive me when I have said Amen to my Prayers, do thou
say Amen to my Amen, that so an Esta∣blishment of Blessings may be the crown of my Soul, which I beg through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ. Extinguish, O Lord, all the Fires of Hell, my Lust, Pride, Envy, Malice and Uncharitable∣ness; create in me, O God, a great long∣ing after the Bread of Heaven, and a thirst after the fountain of Salvation, that as the Heart panteth after the water brooks, so my Soul may long after thee, my Savi∣our and Redeemer, Amen. When the Minister goes up to the Holy Table, letus raise our Affections, and prepare our selves to accompany him in this great work, and fixing our selves in a devout posture when he be∣gins the Exhortation to Charity, let our thoughts carry us beyond the lit∣teral Expression of those Sentences; and whilst he Reads, consider the ne∣cessities of the Poor. Let us enlarge our desires, and wish we were able to satisfie the complaints of those who are in want, at least let us resolve to do according as God has put it in our pow∣er, not Grudgingly, and of necessity, because 'tis the custom, and the Church requires it at such Seasons. Here we
have an opportunity of examining our selves whether we have fulfill'd the will of God in this manner. 'Tis not to be supposed that we deserve the name of charitable persons, who take no time to distribute of this World good, but when we can't help it; therefore let us ask our Souls at every Sentence, Hast thou followed this Advice, or obeyed this Command? Hast thou performed that great duty of the Law, doing as thou wouldst be done by? Hast thou restored with interest, whatever thou hast unjustly detained from any Man? And first, have we taken care that they who have sown unto us Spiritual things, should reap of our Temporal; for 'tis meet, those who wait at the Altar, should be partakers with the Altar, for we must know, that even so, God hath ordained, that they who Preach should live of the Gospel? Therefore if we have fail'd to do this, let us ask God's Pardon, and don't let us, because the Minister can't exact it, take that ad∣vantage, and pay nothing? Secondly, have we shew'd our compassion to the poor, by giving Alms? Have we not turned away our Face from our Brother who was in need, but been merciful after our
power? If our Hearts condemn us not, we have confidence in God that he is Righteous, and will not forget, but re∣ward us in the day of necessity; thus may we turn these excellent Admoniti∣ons into heads of Examination, and hap∣py are we if we have offer'd up such Sacrifices as are acceptable. The Church has taken care to tell us what they are, and has placed them at the beginning of this excellent Office to exhort us to Good Works. We are about to remem∣ber that exceeding love of Christ, and the wonderful charity of our Saviour, therefore 'tis very proper in the entrance to this Holy Ordinance, to exhort us to be like minded, that our Lights may shine before men, and the world may see the love of God dwelleth in us, by our readiness to perform his commands; but what need we of Arguments to press us to that which is so reasonable in it self, which the Law of Nature teaches we ought to do. But a sad experience informs us, that neither the law of God nor nature is sufficient to oblige some tempers to compassion; but let all such remember, however serviceable their E∣states are to them in this World, they will turn to their destruction in the o∣ther;
their full Barns that have been shut at the knockings of the Poor, will then be of no advantage, nor the mul∣titude of their riches prevail for their security, both of them will turn to their reproof, the rust of the one, and full∣ness of the other will sink them into despair, and exclude them to Eternity from the Happiness of God. We have been taught that no one must approach this sacred Feast in bit∣terness of Spirit, we must have love to∣wards the Brethren, and if we are in charity with all men, shall more espe∣cially have bowels of compassion to those who are in want; therefore let us while we have opportunity, impart of our a∣bundance, and bless God for enabling us to do good to the House-hold of Saints; and this coming from us so rea∣dily, will be the more acceptable sa∣crifice, for God loves a chearful giver, and that our Alms ascend not alone; 'tis necessary we accompany them with Prayers, and though we have no An∣gel to assure us they come up before God, yet we need not doubt their ac∣ceptance, for God himself has assured us with such sacrifices he is well plea∣sed, therefore let us humbly say, [at the giving our Alms.
[Blessed be thou, O Lord God, for all things come of thee, and of thy own, do I now give thee; O let this Alms be an Odour of a sweet smell, a sacri∣fice acceptable, and well pleasing in thy sight. After the sentences are read, we have nothing to do, but devoutly compose our selves, and joyn with Reverence to the Prayers of the Church; if we con∣sider the substance of this excellent Of∣fice, we shall be freed from the inter∣ruptions which often occur in our de∣votions; for when our minds are whol∣ly taken up with the signification of the words, we shall have less room for wandrings. When the Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church is begun, let us interest our selves in that excel∣lent form, that when the Priest comes to beseech God to accept our Alms and Oblations, let us in our minds humbly beg it for Jesus Christ his Sake, and that together with them, God would receive our Prayers for the Universal Church; for we can't but enlarge our Passions, and desire the good of all Mankind, not only of those who con∣fess Christ, but that the Heathen may be
brought into the Possession of our Sa∣viour, and agree in the Truth of his Holy Word; we must desire the Well-fare of Princes, because they are set o∣ver us by God, for the punishment of Vice, and the praise of them that do well; and for the Pastors of the Church, there is a great deal of reason for us to pray for them, that they may duly ad∣minister this Holy Mystery, and by their Example and Doctrine, both save themselves and those who hear them; they who are in Affliction call for our fellow-feeling, and since we are all of one body, we can't let any member be in disorder, and neglect to procure its remedy; we are passionately to desire the Health and Salvation, not only of those we know want present relief, but to all that are in any danger, Sickness, or other Distress, considering it may be our condition, and we must desire it with the same Ardour, as if it was for our selves; and since God has given us the example of good Men, who are gone before us, we ought to pray that we may follow their steps, that so we may arrive to the same degree of Bles∣sedness, and to obtain all this more cer∣tainly; we are to beg it in the name of
Jesus Christ, believing that God will never refuse any thing that is conveni∣ent for us, when we call upon him in that most prevailing Name, especially since he is our Advocate, we have the assu∣rance of his intercession, and God can deny nothing to the Son of his Love. After this excellent Prayer is over, we are exhorted by the Minister to a more serious preparation to the Communion, though 'tis supposed that every one who approaches this Holy Table, has considered before, repented and got a competent understanding in this sacred Mystery, yet it is very necessary we should attend this Exhortation, and Re∣examine our selves whether we are such as the Gospel requires. The Church has taken care to instruct us in this Du∣ty in such a manner, that we can't easi∣ly deceive our selves; she encourages us with rewards, and sets before us the dreadful consequence of our carelesness or neglect. We may be over aw'd in our private Examination, by the Do∣minion of our Lusts, or perhaps the love of our selves may incline us to think better than we are; but when we hear God's Minister urging us to this Duty, and powerfully representing those things
we have prevailed with our selves to pass over, and that God is immediately present to acquit or condemn us, we are obliged to confess our Wickedness and be sorry for our sin; this is the Re∣pentance we shan't be ashamed of, that will put us in a state to be reconciled with our Saviour, and make us fit to receive the Body and Blood of Christ, and the benefit of that is, the becoming one with him, and to be pertakers of his Everlasting Glory; therefore when we hear the Priest exhort us, Judge therefore your selves Brethren, let us humbly say, I confess my self a sinner, and condemn my ingratitude. [Repent you truly of your sins past, &c. I repent, O Lord, and am sorry for my Wickedness; Have a lively and steadfast Faith, &c. I believe, O Lord, help my unbelief; Amend your lives, &c. O grant me thy Holy Spirit to a∣mend my life; Be in perfect Charity, &c. I forgive all Men their Trespasses, Lord, do thou forgive me; So shall ye be meet partakers, &c. O make me a wor∣thy Communicant; Ye must give most humble and hearty thanks, &c. I adore thy infinit love to Mankind in the Re∣demption of the World by our Lord
Jesus; who did humble thy self to the death upon the Cross, &c. By thy Cross and Passion, sweetest Jesus deliver me; He hath, &c. and ordained Holy Mysteries as pledges of his Love, &c. I remember thy exceeding Love to us, miserable sinners, and adore thy infinite compas∣sion in dying for Mankind; To thee therefore, O Jesus, with the Father and the Holy Ghost; let us give, as we are most bounden; continual thanks, submitting our selves wholy to thy holy Will and Pleasure; studying to serve thee in true Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our Life; A∣men. The Priest proceeds now to a more immediate invitation, and to show us that we ought to think highly of these things, calls only those who have such quallifications as he just before told us was absolutely necessary, and that we might not come rashly, puts it to us a∣gain, ye that do truly Repent, &c. But to heighten our esteem, and make us more in earnest with our selves; let us imagine we hear Christ himself invi∣ting us, for 'tis the Minister in his stead, calling us to Repentance, Con∣fession and Humility of Soul; these are the Garments wherewith we ought to be
cloathed, and he that comes without them, does but mock God, and we have heard the dreadful effect of that presumption; 'tis provoking him to plague us with Diseases, and sundry kinds of Death; we kindle God's wrath against us, and his indignation will last to Eternity. But that the Terrors of the Lord might fright away none but the impenitent, the Church assures us all, they who come with Faith and Re∣pentance, may take the Holy Sacra∣ment to their comfort, and according∣ly exhorts them to draw near to testifie their sincerity by an humble Confes∣sion, and to remove all suspicion of Hy∣pocrisy, commands, that it be done up∣on our Knees with contrition. They who hope for Pardon can expect it up∣on no other Terms, therefore we ought to be very circumspect, that we don't call upon God with our Lips, when our Hearts is far from him; the Sacrifice of such Fools only work their Destruction. Don't let us look upon it as matter of form only, that we are to tell God Al∣mighty a sad story of our selves, and yet in such a manner, as if we were not concern'd for the Sin, nor God for the punishment of it. But when we come
to that part of the Confession, acknow∣ledging our Offences, by Thought, Word and Deed, let us reflect on some of those Transgressions we have repeated most, and have most cause to repent of; let us think of them with sorrow, and de∣testation, with a resolution to forsake them, and a passionate desire to be freed from the Evil of them; let our Hearts go along with our Prayers, and they are such as will inform us of our con∣dition, and being affectionately repeat∣ed, will teach us to be humble and con∣trite, and that will render us capable of the pardon which follows to be pro∣nounced by the Priest. 'Tis impossible to prescribe Rules for our thoughts in the time of Absolution, we have a hundred Idea's at once in our Minds, the Soul is full with Transport, Rejoycing and Humilliation; we have so much to say that we are confounded in our selves, we know not how to bless God enough, are affraid of our wickedness, and astonished at his good∣ness; there is no re-presenting the Pas∣sions of a Soul in this Religious Ago∣ny, nor how prevailing the confused sighs of a ravish'd sinner are to our merciful God. They who are most sen∣sible
of their sins, can best tell what a boundless joy arises at the thoughts of their forgiveness. But lest we should have any mistrust, because of our sins, the Church has col∣lected some comfortable assurances from the Gospel, for 'tis no wonder we re∣ceive our Pardon doubting and trem∣bling; we have need of infallible Au∣thority to perswade us of the truth of these things, when our fear had so cast us down, that we almost were brought to believe that God had utterly forsaken us; we can now cry with chearfulness, bles∣sed be God, that has not so turned his mercy from us, but has sent his Son Je∣sus Christ to call us to Repentance, therefore when we hear the Priest say, Come unto me, &c. Let us humbly say, I come unto thee, O Jesus, ease me of my Burthen; so God loved the World, &c. I believe, Lord save me, or I pe∣rish; this is a true saying, &c. Mercy, sweet Jesus, I am a miserable sinner; If any man sin. O thou great advocate of my Soul, I bless thee, and all that is within me, shall praise thy Holy Name. Certainly our affections are so mo∣ved, that we shall be zealous to lift up our hearts with joy and gladness, and
now confess 'tis meet and right to give thanks; to which purpose let us sum∣mons our strongest affections, that we may with Angels and Arch-angels mag∣nifie the glorious Name of God most High; If it be upon any particular Feast, as Christmas, or Easter, there is grea∣ter reason to strain our selves to the highest Note, to give thanks for those particular Blessings. We are now approaching nearer to these Holy Mysteries, and must ex∣press the greater Reverence, and before we tast how gracious the Lord is, con∣fess our unworthiness to receive him in∣to our Habitation. This we can't do in better Words than the Church has provided for us; therefore we are to joyn heartily in the following form, and beg that our sinful Bodies may be made clean by his Body, that being so prepared, our Souls may be made fit to receive the Lord of Glory. After this excellent Prayer is over, let us look towards the Holy Table, and whilst the Priest is ordering the E∣lements, Meditate and be astonished at the transcending love of Christ; let us lose our selves in contemplation of that Di∣vine Mystery, that Heaven should so con∣descend
to Earth, and Man be united to God; that God should take upon him our Flesh, die for us upon Earth, and nourish us now he is in Heaven. Let us represent to our Faith the intollerable sufferings of our dying Lord, his whole Passion upon Mount Calvary, and the Agonies of that unknown Sorrow there. Imagine we be∣hold him stretch'd upon the Cross, and see the Blood issuing from his wounded side. Behold him grapling with the fury of an incensed God, and all the furies of the Powers of Darkness; and this to redeem us from the Horrors of Hell, which were due to us for Sin and Wickedness. Sure the consideration of these things will create an odiousness of sin, which was so great, that nothing but the Blood of God could ex∣piate; we shall be sensible of our unworthi∣ness, and adore withall, the forces of our Soul that love surpassing knowledge, and beg of our crucified Redeemer, to inspire us with holy Zeal, that our now softned Souls may Eccho Hallelujahs, and all that is within us may sing Eternally to God the Father, who contrived this glorious Re∣demption, to God the Son who effected it, and to God the Holy Ghost, who gives us the benefit thereof.
Let us now return with the Priest, and earnestly beg of our merciful God, that the Elements may really become what they represent. After we have performed that with Devotion, let us leave the rest to God and the Priest, and rising from our Knees at the Consecra∣tion, look toward the Holy Table de∣voutly, attending every Word and Acti∣on, for all is Mystery, and deserves a particular Meditation; let us imagine we hear our Saviour consecrating, and that we like his Disciples at the last Sup∣per, are waiting to be fed with the Bread from Heaven, when we hear the Priest, saying, Who in the same Night he was be∣trayed, took Bread, &c. Let us adore that inexpressible love of our Saviour, which was working our Salvation when his cursed Enemies were contriving his Crucifixion; let us bless the goodness of God, and admire the Humillity of our Saviour that would be represented by no richer preparation than Bread. Here is no costly sacrifice to exhault our Treasure, That, we may bestow up∣on those that want it, the poor which we have always with us; but for the re∣presentation of himself, he chuses what is necessary for our sustinance, to
show us that his Body is as necessary to the strengthning of our Souls, as Bread for the support of our Life; And when he had given thanks, he breakt it, &c. O blessed Jesus, doest thou give thanks for my Redemption, behold I joyn my praises to thine, and bless thee with all my Soul; O shew thy acceptance of my praises, by hal∣lowing these Elements to the purposes they are designed. Saying, Take, Eat, this is my Body which is given for you, &c. Here let us reflect upon the passion of our Saviour, and imagine we see him in that unspeakable Passion, offering up his pious Soul upon the Cross. Do this in remembrance of me. O Jesus, let me never be so ungrate∣ful as to forget thee, likewise also, af∣ter Supper, He took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, &c. Our Saviour was not content to give us his Body alone, but to pour out his Blood for us, and has chosen Wine for the Com∣memoration of that inestimable mercy. O let our Souls thirst after this Cup of Salvation, and when the Minister holds it out to bless it, let us call upon the Name of the Lord; He gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of this, &c. Do this in remembrance of me. This is the time
to Exercise our Faith, and therefore, let us believe they really are to us what they represent, and say a hearty Amen; for it is unto us, according to our Faith, if we believe, 'tis unto us the Blood of Christ indeed; that no doubting nor infidelity may unhallow these sanctifi∣ed Elements to any of our Souls. Let us say. A Prayer after Consecration. LOrd, it is done as thou hast command∣ed, and I doubt not but the Myste∣ry is rightly accomplished; I am perswa∣ded that here is that which my Soul long∣eth after, a crucified Saviour, communica∣ting himself to poor penitent Sinners. O let me be reckoned among that Number, and then I shall assuredly receive thee, Holy Jesus, Amen. O Holy Saviour, I behold thee stretch'd upon the Cross, with thy Arms spread ready to embrace all Man∣kind; Glory be to thee, O Lord Jesus, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, who didst offer thy self a sacrifie to take a∣way
the sins of the whole World, Lord have mercy upon me, and take away mine also. When the Minister is a Communica∣ting, let us humbly desire that God would hear his Prayer. The Lord hear thee, and remember all thy Offerings and Sacrifices; grant thee thy Hearts desire, and fullfil all thy mind. The Lord perform all thy Petitions which thou hast made at this time for thy self, for us, and all Persons, Amen. We have nothing to do now, but compose our selves for the acts of holy Communion, remembering we are to feast with God by Silence and Heaven∣ly Contemplation; let us reflect upon the mercies of God in this Sacrament, and when we have by Faith beheld the Glory of the Lord, confess our unwor∣thiness to appear before him, and ac∣knowledge his goodness, which gives us the opportunity of adoring his inex∣pressible Love. While others are Communicating. O How dreadful is this place? Seem∣eth it a small thing unto thee, O my Soul, to be feasted with God, waited
on by Angels, fed with the Body of Jesus, and refreshed with the Cup of that saving Blood, which hath attoned for the Sins of the World? What meaneth this secret, that so poor a Wretch, and sinful a Rebel, should receive so mighty a Favour, and be received to so near Embraces? How can I approach to these terrible Mysteries, till I have pulled back the Vail, and worship∣ped him that feeds my Body to convey Grace to my Soul, and make that stoop to the Eye of sence, which Angels cannot be∣hold with open Faces? Here is represented the Almighty Love of an infinite Being; here the God of Gods appears all Bloody to fright thee from thy sins; here the All-merciful Saviour of the World, is as it were crucified before thine Eyes, that con∣templating the horrid Aggonies of the Cross, and remembring the cause of his cruel Sufferings, thou mayst mourn for thy ingratitude that brought him to the tor∣ments of that inexpressible Passion; here the Holy Jesus appears loaded with all the Blessings of Heaven; here the everlasting Trinity seems to use his utmost endeavour, to perswade thee into a Heavenly Conver∣sation. To thy Holy Altar, O Dear Re∣deemer, I am coming to renew my Baptiz∣mal Vow, to enter into a Solemn Covenant
with God, and faithfully to promise thee to resign my self intirely to thee, to fall out with thee no more, to be faithful to thee, to vindicate thy Glory, to live up to those Laws which thou hast sealed with thy own Blood. To this end, I eat of thy Bread, and Drink of thy Wine, and so seal my Covenant with thee. Quicken me, O Lord, and make me more earnest and zea∣lous in thy Service, and as thou hast sent thy Son to bring me to thy self, do thou likewise send thy Holy Spirit to sanctifie me for thy self, and then I, who of my self can scarce move unto thy Altar, by the assistance of thy Grace, may run the ways of thy Commandments. Having declared the reasons of our approaching this Holy Table, and beg'd God's blessing upon us, let us Meditate after this manner. Thou, O my God, hast prepared a Table for me, and hast promised, whosoever eat∣eth thereof, shall never Hunger, and drinketh, shall never Thirst. This consideration alone is sufficient to furnish us with matter for Contem∣plation. The mercy of God in pre∣paring this Sacred Feast, the benefits we receive from it, and the time in which
it was institued when he was surround∣ed with the Horrors of Death, and be∣gan to feel the weight of our Trans∣gressions, are enough to put us in a confusion, and constrain us at once to humble our selves even into our first nothing; for abusing such goodness, and then adore that amazing constancy of our Lord, that in the greatest of his Agony, could endure yet more for our sakes, and resign himself to the Cross, notwithstanding the contradiction of sinners. O let us consider this price with which we were bought, and glo∣rifie God in our Bodies and Spirits which are his; therefore bowing our bodies before the Lord, let us consider the wonder of his love. BEhold what kind of love, O my Soul, is expressed by thy Redeemer, when our sins, his treacherous Servants, and enraged Enemies were contriving his Death; he was designing an excel∣lent benefit for us, the stream of his affections was so strong, that our baseness and ingratitude could not check it; we might have expected that the horror of this dismal Night should have made him repent of his undertaking, and
have put him upon reversing all his for∣mer favours; but lo, he adds a greater than ever he had given before, and ap∣points this as a seal to confirm and con∣vey the rest to us. Thy love was stronger than Death, and when all the terrors of thy dreadful Passion were in view, thy Soul was so calm, as to be at leisure to institute this Feast of Joy and Gladness. Surely, I will enter∣tain this Festival with the dearest re∣gard I can express, since it was one of the last and greatest Testimonies of the love of a dying Friend; this blessed Legacy, this parting Remembrance, shall be in my heart for ever. Having considered the exceeding great love of God, in instituting this Sacrament that very Night he was be∣trayed, and that he should be mindful of us, when he was about to drink that Cup of which we were not able; let us now contemplate the preparation our Lord then made for us, and that we have already heard, is Bread, but don't let the meaness of the outward part be a disparagement to this myste∣ry, but let us adore the Humility of our Saviour, who was content with so mean a Re-presentation.
A Meditation upon the Element of Bread. O Blessed Jesus, how lovely is thy Humility thou hast chosen to be re∣presented by Bread, and though some cu∣rious or costly preparation had been more agreeable to thy Dignity, yet this best ex∣presses thy condescension. Bread is the poor Man's Food, yet necessary for the Rich; it springs from the Earth, yet it is the staff of our Life, and given to strengthen Man's heart, and so it signifies, that Body which thou didst take from the Earth, and gavest for the life of the World. O that I may receive thee by Faith, and then I know I shall draw the most salutary nou∣rishment from thee, and thou wilt as ef∣fectually be united to my Soul, as the Bread which is eaten is to my Body. Let me eat this Holy Bread in Charity, O do thou make it thy Body, and it shall be the Bread of Life to my Soul. O merciful Jesus, thou hast taken Bread into thy bountiful hands, and behold I faint for Hunger, I languish for this Spiritual Food, and since I am come so nigh thee, on this blessed day of Distribution, I beseech thee
pass not by me; as thou takest this Bread, so didst thou take thy Body only to be bro∣ken in Sacrifice for us, and in Sacrament to us; let me not therefore want my part. O Eternal Word of God, by whose power all things were made, I will not ask how thou canst give me thy Flesh to eat, because, I am abundantly sa∣tisfied in thy saying, this is my Body, since thou canst make it become to me, whatsoever thou sayest it is. I believe Lord, help my unbelief; what though my senses assure me the outward sub∣stances, and its accidents still remain, yet, my Faith and experience tell me, there is an Efficacy therein beyond the power of any other thing. Alas! the Flesh would profit me nothing, for he that is joined to thee must be one Spi∣rit. O let these sacred Symbols there∣fore make me partaker of thy Nature, and a partner in thy merits; let them unite me to thee, ingraft me in thee, and make that Body mine which did suffer Death for me, and then I shall need no further, but be more happy than if I could understand all mysteries; sure I am, this is thy Body in Sacrament, it communicates to us the blessings and
benefit thereof, and though presented with a Figure, and by a Holy Right, yet it is to all its purposes, that which it doth represent; I will therefore re∣ceive it as thy Body, and esteem it in∣finitly above all other food, that I may not be judged for not descerning thy Body: O let it be unto me according to my Faith. I Am a sinful Wretch, O Lord, and yet if I bid thee depart from me, I banish all true happiness from my Soul; I long for thy presence, but how shall I en∣tertain thee? Thou wast born of a pure Virgin, wraped in clean Linnen, dwell∣est now where nothing defiled can en∣ter, but never was there so unworthy a¦partment prepared for thee, as my pol∣luted heart, into which I durst not pre∣sume to bring thee, but that I know thou canst make it clean; however, when by Faith I see that Body which all the Angels in Heaven worship, I cannot but abhor my self in Dust and Ashes, I am amazed to see such a Ma∣jesty come to visit a Sin-sick Soul in so poor a Cottage, yea, I cannot but trem∣ble at thy presence, O thou King of Glory, because I am so overspread with the filth of sin, but I will lament those
corruptions which I cannot fully purge away, and beseech thee not to dispise me though I deserve it. I confess my self unworthy, but thy condesention in stooping to me will be the more illustri∣ous, and if thou hast less delight in me for the present, thou shalt have more Glory afterwards; When thou hast chang∣ed my vile Body, and made it like to thy glorious Body, according to thy mighty Power. O My Soul, make hast, behold thy gracious Master is dealing his Bread to those that hunger after Righte∣ousness; be not discouraged at thy un∣worthiness, for he gives to all Men libe∣rally, and upbraideth not. O dear Jesus, give me a share thereof, declare me to be thine, by feeding me at this Table, thou, who wert content to be bruised and broken to satisfie my offended God. O be pleased to give thy self, and the merits of this thy Passion unto me; Lord, give me ever more of this Bread. HOly Jesus, I am not worthy to touch this blessed Body, as 'tis thine yet I presume to approach, because thy love hath made it mine. This is the sacrifice for my sins, the price of my
Redemption, and that by which my Soul was ransomed from Hell, and rescued from a dreadful destruction (it was given for me) and it shall now be given to me, and hast thou made such a preparation for me, and offer'd it unto me. Lord, I am trans∣ported at thy love, dear Saviour, I will love thee with all my powers, and strive and pray that I may love thee more, as fervently as ever any thy Saints have done; I will give my self unto thee, and dispise all other things in comparison of thee, and when I have once tasted of this all-saving Sacrifice, which was gi∣ven for me, I'm perswaded that neither Life, Death, Pleasure or Pain, things present or to come, shall be able to se∣perate me from the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen. O My Celestial Food, the bread that came down from Heaven, how does thy sweetness and my own necessities invite me? My body is liable to Tem∣poral, my Soul to Eternal Death; and behold here is the medicine of immor∣tality, which will remove the sting of the first, and destroy the power of the second, which will fill me with the Graces I want, fit me for the Glory I
desire, and advance my Soul and Body above the Power of corruption; I feel a mighty Hunger created in me, which nothing but this Heavenly Manna can satisfie. I despise the meat which pe∣rishes and feedeth for Destruction, and long with impatience to taste of this Body of Christ, of which I may eat and live for ever, which will make the Grave unable to hold me, and Hell not dare to shut its Mouth upon me. O make no long tarrying, but give me now and ever this Bread; I desire nothing but Christ, if I want this repast, shall faint or die before I come to the Mount of God. O My Soul, behold how thou hast incensed the Majesty of Heaven; see thy Saviour offered up for thy sins, and submitting to the heavy Wrath of God, and yet whatever he suffered was thy Portion; Wretch that I am to live in such a manner, that nothing else could satisfie or make my Peace, but here I come this day to call my sins to re∣membrance; I will look on thee whom I have pierced with a most tender and sympathizing Affection, and while I break this Holy Bread with my Teeth, will commemorate how thou wast brui∣sed
for our iniquities, how our offences did torture thee with grief and pain. Holy Saviour, I'm angry at my self, and full of anguish to see what I have brought upon thee; I'm sorry with all my heart, that I have given harbor to thy Murderers, but I hope this dismal spectacle shall mortifie in me all desires after Evil, and make me abhor all those desperate pleasures which must be so dearly paid for by thee, or stand charg∣ed upon my account for ever. A Meditation upon the Element of Wine. O What preparation is our gracious Master making for us, he thinks it not enough to give us his blessed Body with the merits of all those Torments which he suffered in the Flesh; but he is pleased to pour out his Blood and Life, together with it, that we might drink thereof, and so take as it were his very Soul into us; mi∣serable Wretches we are, that nothing less will help us: O how gracious a Redeemer have we, that will not deny us this; be∣hold, O Lord, I Thirst, and this Wine of joy makes me more impatient to taste of
this Cup of Thanksgiving. Thou that hast prepared it for me, make it thy holy Blood unto me, and then it shall cleanse my Soul, and make me thine for ever. O Lord, I tremble at the apprehen∣sions of all those Evils that stand between me and thy Glory; the Grave gapeth for me, and Satan is ready eve∣ry moment to devour me, wherefore I beseech thee, sprinkle me with thy all-saving Blood, that the destroying An∣gel may pass over me. Let me drink of this Cup of Life, and Death shall be Defeated, the Grave Dismantled, and Satan disappointed: Let me drink of thy precious Blood, that I may receive abundance of thy Spirit, so shall my body be hallowed into a sacred Tem∣ple, and my Soul replenished with such Graces, that I can never perish. O give me this Divine Cordial at present, and make to me a preservation for Bo∣dy and Soul to life everlasting. I Dore thy unspeakable Goodness, I delight in thy unmeasurable Mercy, I desire to know nothing but the Lord Jesus, and in him Crucified: O let the Power of thy Cross prevail against all the Powers of Darkness; let the Wis∣dom
of thy Cross make me wise unto Salvation; let the Peace of thy Cross reconcile me to thy Eternal Father, and bring to me Peace of Conscience; let the Victory of thy Cross mortifie all my evil and corrupt Affections; let the triumph of thy Cross lead me on to a state of Holiness, that I may sin no more, but in all things please thee, and in all things serve thee, and in all things glorifie thee. O my God, assist me now and ever, graciously and greatly grant that I may not receive Bread a∣lone, for man cannot live by that, but that I may eat Christ, and then I shall be thy servant for ever. GReat Advocate of my Soul, thou seest my desires to love thee, I leave my self to thy Mannagement; O enter in∣to this frozen heart, and erect thy King∣dom and Empire there, let every desire of my Soul be subject to thee, and make me willing to submit to any thing, so I may but love thee. O Compassionate Saviour, whose Bowels yearn over the penìtent, let my Soul rest in and contemplate thee; enlarge my Mind, loose me from my Bonds, and let the effect of the offering up my Soul in the Holy Sa∣crament,
be, that I may become a servant of Righteousness, and may relish no wis∣dom, but from above. O Lord Jesus, I am not worthy to come near so great a Mystery, but thou can'st make me worthy; and though I am a sin∣ner, I come to offer the sacrifice thou hast commanded. O pardon my Offences, and receive me graciously for thy Mercies sake. I lament, O God, my detestable iniqui∣ties, for having so long, so often, and so obstinately offended thee. O most merci∣ful Lord, pardon me for Jesus Christ his sake. O hear his dying Groans, regard his Agony and Bloody Sweet by his Cross and Passion, let my sins be blotted out by his glorious Resurrection and Ascention, let every Evil affection and lust be cruci∣fied, that I may arise to a newness of life. Great Friend of my immortal Soul, chuse I beseech thee my heart for thy dwelling place, replenish it with thy Graces, and make me to loath these transitory possessi∣ons. O Lord, what is there in Heaven, or what upon Earth that I would have besides thee? My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready.
Lord, what wouldst thou have to me do, grant me to do what thou commandest, and command what thou wilt. O my sweet Saviour, I long for thy Com∣pany, and am miserable without thee, yet dare scarce draw near unto thee, because I have nothing pure enough to entertain thee; Lord, be merciful to me a sinner, for I am grieved for my unworthiness, and amazed at thy condescention in offer∣ing thy self to so vile a Creature. O Holy Jesus, I am utterly ashamed that ever I should put thee to such exceed∣ing Smart and Torture, I am ashamed to think of it, and abhor my sins. O light of mine Eyes, my secure refuge; O life of my Soul, my Maker, my Redeem∣er and my preserver; into thy hands do I commit my Spirit. O joy of my Soul, when shall I love thee with all my Heart, with all my Soul, with all my Might? When shall I enjoy thee? When shall I come and appear before thee? When shall I fully please thee? O that I could always serve thee, that I could perfectly obey thee. Grant me, O my only Love, that I may continually reverence and adore thee. Permit me not, O Lord Jesus, ever to be seperated from thee.
Teach me, inlighten me, direct me, and assist me in all things, but especially at this time, that I may do, or say nothing, but what is agreeable to thy blessed Will, A∣men. I Have made a large Collection of Meditations and Prayers, because of the difference of Congregations; some are very numerous, and I esteem them pertinent to regulate our thoughts in that interval before we go up to the Altar; the lesser Congregations, and they who are desirous to be first at the Holy Table, may have advantage of variety, and make use of them as their inclinations and opportunity will give leave. Our thoughts are not always upon the wing, we require diversity of Arguments to press us to a forward∣ness, besides they are not designed that our mind should be wholly taken up with them, that we should read them all, and then think we may safely go up to the Altar of God. The best com∣posure in the World will be insignifi∣cant, if we don't offer it with Devoti∣on, Sincerity and Affection; one of these Petitions rightly performed, is of greater Efficacy than the whole repea∣ted
in a rambling disorder. Lord, have mercy upon me a miserable sinner, said with humility, was more prevalent than the long Prayer of the wordy Suppli∣cant. God knows our necessity before we ask, and if we ask with Faith, de∣pending on the incercession of our Sa∣viour, he will grant our Petitions even before they are ended; so that I would have some of them repeated with deli∣beration, and between them call in our thoughts reconcile them to our reason and faith, and then offer them up with earnest devotion, and so shall we be prepared to receive the Lord of Glory. When we have made an end of these Meditations, and are ready to go to the Holy Table, rising from our Knees with Reverence; let us say, GReat Captain of my Salvation, I am going to learn to fight the good fight of faith in the blessed Sacrament of thy Love, let thy great Example there, encourage me to fight against all Ambition and Ostenta∣tion, Censoriousness and Uncharitableness, against coveteous, lustfull and blasphemous Thoughts, against guile and hypocrisie, discontent and mistrust of thy providence; against such enemies, give me Grace to
fight, over these let me Triumph, that having striven lawfully, I may at last be admitted to the sight of thy sweet self, and be charmed with thy. Love for ever∣more. Having thus began our Warfares, and declared our chiefest Enemies, let us approach the Holy Altar, that there we may put on the Armor of God, and being endued with Righteousness from above, may walk more securely, and be defended from the subtilty of Men and Devils; therefore as we are going up, let us turn our thoughts to God in the following manner. As we go up to the Altar; I Come, Lord Jesus, O take me to thee, for thou lovest me, and hast prepared a Table for me in the seat of thy Love; in the multitude of thy mercies, O Lord God, do I now approach thy Altar: O pardon my Sins, and receive me graciously; if thou shouldst be extream to mark what is amiss, O Lord, who may abide it, but with the Lord is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption. Lord, hast thou set open this fountain, and wilt thou let a wretched creature die
for thirst in thy presence? Hast thou pre∣pared such Balm to heal me, and shall I languish here before thee? I know if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean, here is the very instrument: Grant therefore, holy Jesus, that I may duly apply it, and rightly use it, and then it shall prepare me for thee, and unite me to thee by such insepe∣rable Bonds, as shall never brake, unless Eternity have an end: Blessed are they who so eat thy Flesh, and drink thy Blood, so as thou requirest, and so as thy Saints have done, for they have been cleansed at this fountain, and here there Union with thee first began. O happy opportunity! Lord, let me do it well this once, and I am thine for ever. Let us now kneel before the Lord, and say, O Jesu, Son of God, everlasting King, receive my Spirit, O my Life, take my Soul, my Joy, draw my heart unto thee, thou that art my Head, direct me: Light of mine eyes, enlighten me: O my comfort, rejoice me; my sweet Food, let me eat thee. O Word of God, refresh me: O Light E∣ternal shine thou over me, that I may un∣derstand, know, and love thee.
After we have thus dedicated our selves to God, let us humbly represent to him the occasion which drew us hi∣ther, and beg for his promise sake, that we may not be sent Empty away. O Lamb of God, thou hast said, he that eateth thy Flesh, and drinketh thy Blood, hath eternal Life; behold thy Servant, O Lord, be it unto me according to thy Word. O Lord God, I desire to renew my Co∣venant with thee, and to seal it now with this Sacrament: Lord, put thy Laws in∣to my mind, and write them in my heart; and for the passion of thy dear Son, which I now commemorate, be merciful to my Un∣righteousness; my Sins and Iniquities do thou remember no more, but be thou my God, and I will be thy Servant. The Minister now approaching us, we ought with the Centurion in the Gospel to acknowledge our unworthi∣ness, to receive so glorious a guest, and after such a Humilliation, let us look up with confidence and represent to the Father of Heaven, the prevailing sacri∣fice of his Son.
LOrd, I am not worthy thou shouldst come under my roof, but speak the word, Lord, and thy Servant shall be whole. Behold, O Lord, the sacrifice of the e∣verlasting Covenant, the Lamb that takes away the sins of the World: Oh, let all the World feel the power of his Interces∣sion; hear, good Lord, the cry of his Wounds, and deny me not since I bring thy Son with me; let us all know that he lives that was dead, and is a live for ever∣more. O holy Bread, which camest down from Heaven, and givest life to the World, come into my heart, and cleanse me from all defilements of Flesh and Spirit; enter into my Soul, heal and sanctifie me within and without. O my Soul, taste now, and see how gracious the Lord is: Whence is it that my Lord himself should come to me. Let us now with steadfast Faith re∣peat after the Minister, bowing our Bodies, The Body of our Lord Jesus, &c. After we have received the Bread, let us lift up our Souls in thankfullness, and say.
Hail! Holy Lamb of God, thrice wel∣come art thou to a poor perishing sinner. Glory be to thee, O Lord, who feedest me with the Bread of Life; let thy crucified Body deliver me from this body of death. Before the Cup. I Will receive the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me; O touch me, and say, I will be thou clean: Oh, let this Blood of thine purge my Conscience from dead Works to serve thee, the ever living God. It will not suffice me, dearest Saviour, to receive thee in part only, for I must be wholly thine, and blessed be thy Name, that thou hast already given me thy holy Body to cleanse my Nature; and now thou art preparing thy precious Blood to wash away my Guilt, my sins have poured out every drop thereof, wherefore thou presen∣test it to me by it self, to shew how truly thou didst suffer Death for me, and now, O my Redeemer, thou hast said this Cup is the Communion of thy Blood, and thy truth is unquestionable, thy power infinite, and thy love was such, as thou gavest thy hearts blood for me; I will receive it there∣fore
as the everlasting Covenant, the Seal of all the promises of thy holy Gospel: I have indeed drunk iniquity like Water, and therefore am unfit to tast this Water of Life, and yet shall perish without it, for I'me all over defiled, and this is the fountain which thou hast opened to cleanse us. I am scorched with the Flames of lust and unruly passion, and this is the Cup which thou hast provided to cool and re∣fresh us: What value is sufficient for me to put upon this immortal Cordial? How can I reverence it enough, since the God of Heaven esteemed it a price sufficient for millions of perishing Mankind: My Soul longeth after it, Lord, let me taste, and my Soul shall live; let me wash in this laver before I come to thy great Tribunal, so shall I be whiter than snow. Let us repeat after the Minister, the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, &c. After the Cup. IT is finished, blessed be the Name of our gracious God. Blessing, Glory, Praise and Honour, Love, Obedience, Do∣minion and Thanksgiving be to thee, O sacred Trinity, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, Amen. Well come, O my good Jesus, now dismiss thy Servant in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. If we have time before we return to our Pews, let us add. HOw chearing is this Cup to me, bles∣sed Jesus, which was so dreadful unto thee; it was thy Agonies and thy Wounds which afforded me this Wine of Joy. Thou didst find how bitter it was, when thou wert appeasing an offended God, but I taste how sweet it is now, that thou hast made him a tender and reconciled Fa∣ther. I receive this Cup, O Saviour, as a new pledge of thy dearest Love, and since thou doest here give me a right to that great Expiation, which thou hast made, I do most humbly commemorate the same before the Father of Heaven, as the full satis∣faction for my innumerable Debts, and I will remember the dolors of thy Cross, with a brisker sense than ever; because thou hast made me drink of thy Blood, and given me thy Soul, thy Life, and thy Spirit; and since thou hast thus joyned me, to thy self, O let nothing seperate that which thou hast so graciously joyned together, Amen.
They who have advanced thus far in their Duty, and been refreshed at the Table of God, will easily acknowledge Thanksgiving to be the least tribute they can pay, and won't be satisfied, that they have given praises at the Al∣tar, but are willing to offer this sacri∣fice every opportunity, therefore let us at our return to our Seats, be ready to acknowledge the loving kindness of the Lord. PRaise the Lord, O my Soul; and all that is within me bless his Holy Name; was it not enough that thou shouldst suffer so much for me, but thou wilt also give all the purchase of those sufferings to me; thy loving kindness is truly admira∣ble, thou hast taken my sins on thy self, and communicated thy Righteousness to my Soul; Lord, while I believe and consider the benefits of thy Passion, I am revived and fill'd with an unwonted Vigour, my Conscience does accuse me of many and grievious sins, but I do here most humbly and thankfully set forth this perfect sin, offering before thy Divine Majesty, I know thou cannot except against it, I believe it is sufficient to attone thine Anger. Bles∣sed Jesus, how is my Soul refreshed, that
is again restored to thy Father's love; let Heaven and Earth praise thee for this glo∣rious Sacrifice, and I will bless thee while I have any being. I have receiv'd thy immaculate Body, and it shall cleanse my sinful Body, and teach me by the vertue of so rare an Example, to relieve my poor Brethren for whom thou hast died, and to conquer my Enemies by charity; for thus thou hast done to me, and both my lips and life shall set forth thy praise, for now I be∣gin to find the Mercy, Peace, Comfort and Grace which flow from the Death of Christ; wherefore I will love thee, Holy Jesus, more than I can express; and since thou hast given thy self, thy Merits and Graces to me, and seal'd a new Covenant with me in thy Blood, I here bind my self by this sacred Cup to be sincerely thine. I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy Righteous Judgments; O let me never unhallow that Body, or defile that Soul in which the Lord Jesus delights to dwell in; let no Oaths, or Lying, prophane those Lips, no Obscenity or Intemperance pollute that Mouth by which these holy Symbols have passed; but let thy Mercy keep me in this happy Temper till I have accomplished all my Resolutions, Amen.
Or This: ALL is thine, Dear Saviour, dis∣pose of all that is here of Body and Soul, of life and lodging, according to thy Divine Will and Pleasure; I intend, O Lord, strengthen me in this very Hour: I intend, O sweet Saviour, a Total Refor∣mation of my Life and Manners, an intire Mortification of my Corporal Senses, an absolute change in my whole Man; grant therefore, O good Jesus, that at each word of my Mouth, at each glance of my Eye, at each morsel I Eat, at each member I Move, at each action Inward or Outward I undertake, I may perform all according to thy holy Will and Pleasure. I will therefore expect from thee, O Heavenly Father, the exact Remembrance; from thee, my Redeemer, the perfect Knowledge; from thee, O Holy Spirit, a true Repen∣tance; from thee, O Sacred Trinity, the entire Absolution and Plenary indulgence from all my iniquities, Amen. We have been informed that this is the great Feast of Love, and are now commemorating that inexpressible love of our Saviour, and since his Blood was shed for the sins of the whole World,
let our Charity extend it self to the ut∣termost parts of the Earth, but more e∣specially, the Holy Catholick Church; therefore the time we spare from our Devotions, let us bestow in good de∣sires to those present, sending up a hearty Amen to the Prayers for our Brethren; let it rejoyce our Souls, to see so many of the Servants of God waiting at his Altar to receive the Bread of Life; let us earnestly pray that this Communion may be life to e∣very one, that all who are present, may meet to Feast in life Everlasting. O Thou Eternal Being, vouchsafe to bless, confirm and strengthen us all who are present before thee, deliver us from the day of Condemnation, and let us not be confounded when we shall appear be∣fore thee in the presence of thy Angels, but grant that through the blood of the Cross, we may all be cleansed from our sins, and presented pure unblamable, and ir∣reprovable in thy sight, that so we may be admitted into that place of purity, where no unclean thing can enter, to sing Eternal Hallelujahs to him that sets upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever.
May what we have now offer'd up to thee, O Lord, be accepted for the good of the universal World, for all those for whom the Holy Jesus shed his most precious Blood, for the Glory of thy Holy Name, and for the coming of the Holy Ghost, that he may please to visit and enlighten all our Hearts. O Lord, be propitious to the Holy Catho∣lick Church, and by the increase of Faith, Hope and Charity, inlarge its Limits; be pleased to remember all that are Fallen, all that are in Captivity, the Infirm, Sick, Stranger, Fatherless and Widow; in great Mercy look upon them all, restore, heal, comfort, and relieve them, for Je∣sus Christ his sake. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his Holy Name, Amen. As soon as the Congregation has communicated, let us prepare to glo∣rifie the Lord together, in order to it, let us reflect upon the Goodness of this God, who has done so much for us, and if we are attentive to the Prayers of the past Communion, 'tis impossible to behave our selves coldly, or indiffe∣rently; there is so much life in the ex∣pressions,
that we are forced to utter them with an affectionate concern, and the greater our Zeal, the greater is the Benefit we receive. Each thought must give us an Idea beyond our Expression, we shall be so wholly taken up with this wonderful love of Christ, that we shall be angry our conceptions are so imperfect, that we don't see more clear∣ly this Beauty of Holiness. O let us lose our selves in this boundless con∣templation, and be ravished with the loving kindness of the Lord; and now that we are in earnest become the Sons of God, we may with confidence lift up our hearts to Our Father which is in Heaven, which is the first Prayer the Church has appointed to offer up to God; we have been feasting at his Ta∣ble, renewing our Covenants, and made pertakers of our Saviour and his Spirit; therefore being so clothed, 'tis very pro∣per our first address be made in his own word. After we have repeated that with Reverence, let us join in the next, for 'tis now high time that we make an offering to the God of our Salvation, and there is nothing we can give more pleasing than our selves to be a reason∣ble sacrifice; therefore let us intirely
dedicate our Souls, Body and Spirit to the service of God, and be infinitly re∣joyced, that God is pleased to accept us therein, and this will enable us more chearfully to joyn in the following Hymne. When our Heavenly King sees us so hearty in his Service, so desirous of Pardon, that we with the greatest Earnestless, cry to the only begotten Jesus Christ; and with all, so forward to return our humble thanks for his Mercy: No doubt he will be near to our Assistance, and reward us with more than we can ask or think, even exalt us to that state of Glory with him that sits on the right hand of the Fa∣ther, and is most high in the Glory of God. After we have thus affectionately joyn'd in the Prayers of the Church, let us with Faith and Thankfulness re∣ceive the Blessing, and then with humble Adoration once more magnifie the good∣ness of God, for who can be weary in praising the noble acts of the Lord? PRaise the Lord, O my Soul, and let all thy Powers be acted with such love and wonder, that thou mayest break forth into all the expression of joy and glad∣ness,
that admiration and gratitude can inspire thee with; Glory be to thee, O Lord, most High. Let us rise from our Knees and bow towards the Holy Table, shewing our unwillingness to depart the place where his Honour dwells, leave it with a re∣luctance, and still say in our hearts, 'tis good for us to be here. They who are arriv'd to such a habit, must necessari∣ly desire another opportunity to glori∣fie God in this manner, and be very fond of frequenting his House till this blessed season returns; for we are not to think our Duty done with our Prayers, we must create a kind of a familiarity with God, and no way so likely to do that, as by the constant ap∣pearance in his House; there it is he has promised to be, and thither we must come if we would have our Pray∣ers returned with success. Though private Devotions be necessary, yet the Publick are absolutely so; there God is honoured by the company of his Saints, and there we have the oppor∣tunity to acknowledge him to be the Lord. 'Tis there we assemble with one accord to present our Petitions to
the Throne of Grace, and 'tis most likely our Incense should pierce Hea∣ven, when it ascends thither in a thick cloud, but sure there will be no occasion to use Arguments to those who have felt the Blessings of coming thus together; they must see how pleasant it is to dwell in such Unity, and prefer the door of the Tabernacle, to the Pa∣laces of Princes; they who are so unhappy as to be Strangers there, who have no taste, nor are perswad∣ed of the Truth of these things, I could wish they would prevail with themselves to try the deliciousness of the Employment, and I am sure they would be obliged to confess not one half has been told them.
A Meditation for the Communi∣on at Christmas. Welcome thrice blessed day, the desire of all Nations, whose distant glories made the Father of the Faithful to rejoice, and whose approaches fill'd the World with wonder and ex∣pectation; thou wert ushered in with Angelick Hymns, and celebrated ever since with Anthems of praise, because thou didst bring forth joy, and a Redeemer to Mankind. Happy am I that have a sacrifice of Thanksgiving in my hand, to ex∣press the delight which my heart doth feel: This Holy Table is the Altar, upon which I offer my Acknowledgmets for all mercies; And Oh, how many, how great are those which this day brings to my remembrance, so Infinite it cannot be expressed, and yet so excellent they must not be forgotten: This day hath reconciled Heaven and Earth, and Contradictions made freinds; to find a way to help us, as if nothing might disagree when Man was at peace with God: O my Soul, summon all thy powers to admire and worship, for all is Miracle, and the Height of wonder, eternity begins to be; the maker of all is made himself; an infinite Majesty is shrunk into the dimensions of a Span; the Word is made Flesh, and God becomes Man, yet remains God still: Here is a Mother who knew no Man, a Son that had no Father on Earth; a Child of Adam, untainted with the contagion that infects all his posterity; an Infant honored with a new gloriou,
Star; adored by Kings; worshipped by Angels, yet born in the condition of the meanest Fortune: All Hail, sweetest Saviour, How lovely is thy condescention? How honourable thy abasement? Thou hast more splender in the raggs of humility, than all the Grandeurs of this world could give thee; thou art more of a King, because thou wouldest be like a Slave for our sakes, and conquers more hearts by thy stupendious Love, and unparalleled self-Denial: O how shall I celebrate this great solemnity, where withall shall I set forth my gratitude for this most auspicious Day; I will receive the Cup of Sal∣vation, and with faith and ravishments of de∣light, feast upon that precious Body and Blood, which Jesus did this day assume for me: It is not enough, dearest Lord, that thou wast born for me, unless that also thou wert born again in me, and as it were become incarnate in my heart: In thy birth thou wast made one with us, thou didst put Flesh; and wert a partaker of our Humanity, and thou hast appointed this Sacra∣ment, that I might be one with thee, be re∣plenished with thy Spirit, and a partaker of Divine Nature: Nor is it any incongruity, if I remember thy passion, and praise thee for thine Incarnation at once; for as soon as thou wast born thou didst begin to die, and the life which was here begun, compared to that glorious Life which thou didst leave, was it self a very death for us, which thy Divinity could not feel, and thy Nativity was the first Scene of thy passion, for it introduced thy Death, and that effected our Salvation, so that I will remember both together;
in both thou hast most admirably humbled thy self to the depth of miseries, and yet I doubt not but thou would have stupid lower, if it had been either necessary or possible, but there needs no more Testimonies of thy love, blessed Jesus, I am already over-whelmed with these that are so strange and undeversed, so sweet and ravishing, that my Soul cou'd not contain, if it did not vent it self in thy praises therefore with Angels. A Meditation for the Commu∣nion at Easter. O My Soul, adorn thy self with the Gar∣ments of Gladness, prepare thy most triumphant Hymns to go forth, and meet this great returning Conqueror; thou didst rejoice when he was pleased to undertake the combat, and didst celebrate his entrance into the Lists with praises: How then will it ravish thee to behold him come off with success and Honour, his war∣fare is now accomplish'd, and he hath passed through the Scorn and Cruelty of Men, the ma∣lice and rage of Devils, the just, but severe anger of God, yea, the shadow of death, and regions of eternal horror; and after all this thy surety is set at liberty, for he hath paid his debts, and cancelled all those dismal Bonds, by which thou art forfeited to eternal ruin, thy Champion is victorious, and as the Trophies of his Conquest, he hath the Keys of Death and Hell, and leads
them both in Triumph vanqished and disarm'd. Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord, we receive thee, dearest Saviour, as born to us a second time, and this shall be thy Birth-day, also the Nativity thought not of our Emperor, yet of thy Empire, thy Restoration to a Sate of Im∣mortality. Thy former Birth shew'd thee to be the Son of Man, but this declares thee to be the Son of God, and now that our Redeemer liveth, he that loved us so infinitely as to die for us doth now ever live to intercede on our hehalf, he that expressed such kindness to us in his passion, hath so fully demonstrated his own Power in his resurrection, that we are sure he is able as willing to deliver us: Let the Heavens rejoice and the Earth be glad, for this is the day that the Lord hath made, a day to be had in everlast∣ing Remembrance, a Time destined to Jubilee and rejoycing: Behold how nature is raising it self from the grave of Winter, and seems annu∣ally to celebrate the memory of our Lord's resur∣rection, in her green and fresh attire, a season chosen by God, a Festival three Thousand years ago, and Observed ever since by Jews or Christi∣ans, or both, with the greatest Solemnity; see how those blinded Jews rejoyced over their Pascal Lamb in the midst of all their calami∣ties, for the deliverance of their Fathers: But we have a nobler Pass-over, for a greater deli∣verance, Christ, our Pass-over is sacrific'd for us, therefore let us keep the Feast, and that upon the precious Body and Blood of the Lamb of God, who is slain, but is alive again; be∣hold
he lives for evermore, wherefore I will go to thy Alter with joy, and tell out thy works with gladness. O most mighty Saviour, who hast not only died for my Sins, but risen again for my justification, and indeed what comfort could I have found in this memorial of thy death, if it had not been for thy resurrection, this Sacrament would have only remembred thy sufferings, and renewed my sorrow, to think that so excellent a person had perished in the attempt; but it is be∣come a feast of joy, because it is an assurance of thy resurrection, as well as a commemoration of thy Passion; and since thou livest, sweet Jesus, we live also, thy resurrection raised our hearts from sad despair, it gives a new life to our hopes, it makes our sorrows light, our labours easie, our lives chearful, and our death advan∣tage, because it hath lost its sting, and is be∣come the Gate into Immortality; we can charm all our fears and Troubles with this one word, the Lord is risen, yea, the Lord is risen indeed, for thou hast washed us in thy own blood, and made us Kings and Preists to God, to Offer up at this Altar never ceasing Praises. A Meditation for the Commu∣nion on Whit-Sunday. I Will go to thy Altar, O Lord, with a new sacrifice of praise, because thou hast given me a fresh Instance of thy Love this day; thou art
slow to punish thy enemies, but speedy to com∣fort thy servants, for no sooner was thy misery changed into glory, but we received the greatest demonstration of thy affections; no sooner didst thou put on thy Crown in Heaven, but the earth felt the bounty of thy dispensations; for it was not possible for thee, sweet Jesus, for thy promise to remain long unperformed, or the sad expecta∣tions of thy Disciples unsatisfied: Being assembled therefore this day, with one heart in one place, they are suddainly surprized with wonder, and inspired with a Heavenly power, such as they had never felt before, vigorous as a mighty wind, chearing as the morning light, inflaming their hearts with zeal, and filling their mouths with Anthems, indited with the Languages of all the World: O wonderfull Change, their Ignorance is turned into Learning, their mistakes into in∣fallibility, their fear into courage, their weak∣ness into strength, their sorrow into joy, and they in a moment made able to confound the Arts, and conquer the Oppositions of the Heathen world, and maugre all the divices of Satan, to set up the Kingdom of the Lord Christ; and shall we not praise thee, for these miraculous dispensations by which the gospel was made known, even to us in the most utmost corners, and last of times; yes, Holy Jesus, we will also meet thee with one accord at thy table, not doubting but thou would give us the measures of thy Spirit there, if our duty, or our necessity, did require it; it is enough to us that thou knowest our need more than will supply them; we dare not ask, lest
thou wilt not give; thou hast given us thy self, wherefore we believe thou wilt not deny us thy Spirit, without which we can have no Intrest in thee, nor benefit from thee: We come not, gracious Lord, with the carnal Jews to devour thy Flesh, but to partake of thy Spirit, which only giveth life, the flesh profiteth nothing; behold thy Spirit hath converted Millions: Let me therefore, together with thy precious Body, receive here such proportions of thy holy Spirit, as may suppress my evil Affections, revive my dead heart, comfort my dejected mind, and turn my ignorance into knowledge, my knowledge in∣to practice, and make that practice so sweet and easie, that this may be a day of joy to me also, solemnized in the white Garments of Sanctifica∣tion and rejoycing; and finally, let not this Heavenly Inspiration be only expressed in Ecstasies, and only fervours this day, but let thy Spirit rest upon me, and dwell in me for ever, so shall I always have cause to bless thee for so incom∣parable a gift: Methinks I feel already the force thereof, bearing down my corruptions, and the bright beams driving the mists of Sin and Error. I find its flames warming my heart with Zeal and charity, and its quickning power opening my sealed lips to shew forth thy praise.
A Meditation for the Commu∣nion on Trinity Sunday. O Admirable mystery! to be adored in the profoundest silence, by the contemplation thereof; when I am struck with amazement I can learn humility, and discover mine own Ig∣norance, and I have the opportunity of exercising a Nobler faith than if I could comprehend it with my shallow reasonings, and imperfect de∣monstrations, the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in Trinity hath been derided by the Hea∣thens, and endeavoured to be perplexed by the Wits of all kind of Hereticks, but it sufficeth me, Blessed Jesus, that thou hast revealed it, and thy Holy Church, divided into many other things, hath universally agreed in thy great Truth, and I am the more confirmed in it because I learn by it to worship with a regular devotion, from hence I am the more confirmed: I am taught to pray to the Father in the Name of the Son, through the assistance of the Holy Ghost, and as long as I live will I praise thee, and magnife thee in this manner; I will bless thee particular∣ly at this Holy Feast for so excellent a revelation, for this Ordinance it self contains many things above my understanding, and its all mystery; the Trinity is the Article, and thy Sacrament the Rite which do distinguish thy true Riligion from all the sects in the World; wherefore, by ob∣serving
this Rite, I do embrace this Faith, and upon the representation of thy death, I do profess to live in it, and die for it, resolving never to have other Lords; when I find the Father giving, the Son giving, and the Holy Ghost dispensing that Gift unto my Soul in this sacred Communion, it shall be a greater confirmation to my faith in divine Mystery, than can be acquired from the most curious search into it: However I am resolved my Reason shall vail to thy word, and I will be content to stay for a full apprehension of this sublime truth, till I am advanced to a State of Angelick perfection, and come to hehold the glories of the true God; till then I will bless thee for what I know, and believe more than I can conceive, and I will worship the same Ma∣jesty which the Heavenly Choir doth, in these Addresses. THE Church has now done her part, and leaves us to discharge the rest, she has told us the benefits, and forewarned us of the danger, let it be upon our own Heads if we have drunk Christ's Blood unworthily; therefore let us as soon as possible re∣tire and examine our behaviour during the Celebration of these Holy Myste∣ries. How our thoughts were employ∣ed, and how earnest our longings were after this Bread of Heaven; whether we had duly examined our selves be∣fore,
and repented as we ought, in what part soever of these things we have done amiss; let us ask pardon and endeavour to come more prepared the next time. This will show that we are sincere with God, and don't come out of custom, but for his Grace and Mercy; and let us take every op∣portunity to ask that, for Christ is now come very near us, therefore let us lay before him all our wants, that so we may be fill'd with his Heavenly Be∣nediction; let us not lose a minute on this day, but be earnest in all manner of supplication, for we must not leave our Devotions with the Church, that would be setting open the door indeed, that Satan might enter into us; but I hardly believe, they who have had their hearts kindled at the Altar, can suffer them to grow cold before they get home; therefore let us retire, before Dinner, and after we have thus seri∣ously reflected upon what we have been doing, let us add to our thoughts the following Meditation.
A Meditation before Dinner. WHen I compare thy acts with mine, Holy Jesus, I am exceedingly ashamed to behold so a vast a disproporti∣on thou givest me, thy Merits and Graces, thy Life and Love at present, and hast promised to me thy Kingdom in reversion, and I have scarce return'd this with the intire devotion of one half hour. O how little is my obdurate Heart affected with the sence of my own Guilt, the fears of thy Divine Wrath, or apprehensions of thy suf∣ferings, yet, Lord, I desire, and did en∣deavour to praise thee, so that I hope thou wilt consider my infirmities with much com∣passion and measure, my services not by the exactness of my performance, but by the sincerity of my wishes, so shall I be accep∣ted before thy Heavenly Father, and by the mercy of that acceptance, be obliged to thee for ever. O Most merciful Lord God, I am a∣mazed at the mighty favours which thou hast shew'd to me a sinful wretched Creature; I cannot but acknowledge thy goodness, though I can make no Retributi∣on,
had I all the World at my disposal, I could freely give it all to thee as a Te∣stimony of my unfeigned gratitude, but I hear thy gracious voice, saying unto me, My Son, give me thine heart, it is not mine, but me thou seekest; sinful and mis∣rable though I am, yet I am the purchase for which Jesus has left his Glory, laid down his Life, done and suffered all these things. O marvelous Condescension! I am nothing, I have nothing, I am void of all Good, full of Evil, and deserving thy Wrath, so that I abhor my self; and canst thou dwell in me! Be it so then, I will dispute no more with unsearchable mercy, I believe, O my God, and wonder, I can no longer re∣sist thy condescending and almighty love, I will with all the joy imaginable give my felf unto thee, who hast but lately restored me to my self; I have been a prisoner to Sa∣tan, a Slave to Sin, and marked out for Destructioon; but thou hast procured my Pardon, Liberty and Life, requiring no more for so inexpressible a bounty, but that I become entirely thine; had I the life of an Angel, the understanding of a Che∣rubim, or the power of one of thy Heaven∣ly Host, thou deservest it all. I'm sorry I'm no better, yet such as I am, I do most freely surrender my self unto thee, my Bo∣dy
and Soul, avowing I will be no more my own, but thy servant: O be thou plea∣sed to come and reign over me, take posses∣sion of this unworthy heart, I hope I shall never be so unjust, perjured and sacrelegi∣ous, as to rob thee of my self hereafter; it is indeed a miserable gift that I offer, a defiled Body, and a stained Soul, but 'tis all I have to give, all that thou requirest, and 'twill be the better for being thine; let me never have another Master, let me never sully, that which the Blood of Christ hath washed, nor sell that to Satan which Jesus hath bought for God. Grant me therefore, gracious Lord, that I may find by the workings of thy Spirit within me, that thou hast accepted me; give me such help from thee, to confirm my hope, that I may always perform my vows, and ne∣ver rob thee of that which I have dedicated in the sincerity of my Soul: I am thine, O save me for thy mercies sake, Amen. Our Father, &c. From the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same, the Name of the Lord shall be great among the Gentiles in every place; incense shall be offer'd unto his Name, and a pure offering for his Name shall be great among all Nations. Glory be to the, &c. As it was, &c.
This Day is appointed to be observ'd as a Festival; and I would have no Chri∣stian so mistake himself, as to keep it o∣therwise: But since it is likewise a Day to be kept holy to the Lord, we must not indulge our selves over-much, lest we run into another Errour, and make us uncapable of serving God, or our selves as we ought, by turning our rea∣fonable Service into sleepy Devotions. And since I'm speaking of the Sabbath, it can't be unnecessary to lay down some Rules for our Observation of it. There is no Christian, but must lament the ge∣neral Neglect of it; for one sort spends it in unnecessary Business; the other, in impertinent Recreations; and even they who are more reserv'd, and seem to have a greater Sense of Religion, are apt to make large Allowances, that except the Time spent in the Church, there is lit∣tle bestow'd on any Act of Religion. The Church requires our Belief of the Morality of the Sabbath; and if we were persuaded that 'tis a Day set a part by God himself, for his own Service, we should have less Inclinations to lay out so much of it in our own: We must po∣sitively believe our Obligations to God on this Day, and resolve, that the Time
we don't spend in the Church, should devoutly be employ'd at home. We should separate our Thoughts from the Concern of this World: In the Morn∣ing, earnestly beg of God that we may sanctifie the Sabbath: After Church, re∣flect upon what we heard; if it was pra∣ctical Matter, resolve to make use of it in our Conversation; if Matter of Faith, examine whether we can give our posi∣tive Assent to it; if we don't justly com∣prehend it, let us endeavour to be bet∣ter inform'd: Let us call to Mind the Benefit of our Creation, Redemption, and whatever else may beget in us holy Thoughts, and a fervent Love to God: Let us turn our Thoughts into our selves, that we may the better understand our Condition towards God; for how is it possible to be sensible of our Affairs, if we don't suffer our Souls to contemplate for their Safety? There are many that can't accuse themselves of notorious Crimes, that can answer to the positive Prohibitions of the Law, All these have I kept from my Youth; yet if they suffer themselves to go further in their Exa∣mination, will find Reason, with the young Man in the Gospel, to be exceed∣ing sorrowful, though upon another Ac∣count;
they will find a dismal Account of other things to answer, and which are as necessary to be repented of, as they are to be observ'd for the future. Be∣sides, Contemplation is the best Way to improve our Understanding in the Ways of Goodness; there is infinite Variety for our Thoughts to work upon, and all of them exceeding pleasant: 'Tis this that will make us in love with Piety; and then we shall soon turn our Specu∣lation into Practice. They who are us'd to meditate, find the Satisfaction of their Consideration: Though 'tis no easie mat∣ter for a Man that has wholly bent his Affection to an immoderate Love of this World, to bring under his unruly De∣sire; he shall hardly begin to think what he is, why he was sent hither, and whi∣ther he is hast'ning, but he shall stop in the middle, and the very Thoughts of the present, put him upon enjoying it in another manner. So vain and trifling are we when we have given up our selves to be mistaken for a while, that 'tis hard to bring us to our Senses, and persuade us we are our selves when we become Rational Creatures. I'm unwilling to prescribe our Christian Liberty on this Day; 'tis certain we may extend it to
all Things of Necessity, but then we should be cautious; for we are general∣ly such Latitudinarians in things that concern our selves, that we are not wil∣ling to lose an Inch of our Liberty; and are apt to think our Time lost, which is bestow'd in the Service of God: Our Trade is not then going on, and we are backwarder by one Day in our Affairs of this World, never considering we have another Merchandize to care for; but if we can secure Wealth enough here, have no great Affection to lay up Trea∣sure elsewhere; as if we were afraid our Riches would corrupt there, or our Venture come short of our Expectations. It was the Observation of a great Man, That the more exact he was in keeping the Sabbath, his Affairs met with the greater Success in the following Week. Whether every Body would be thus hap∣py, I can't resolve, but am sure there can be no Danger in the Trial; and if we fail once, it may succeed the next: However, there is sufficient Reward in it self, for we shall have the Satisfaction of doing our Duty; and that we can't effect more exactly, than by a devout Meditation when alone, and a serious Attention when at Church. They who
have Families, are to instruct their Hous∣hold in their Duty, and see they dis∣charge it; by giving good Examples and Instructions, and seeing they follow them; for when all is done, the effectual Preachers are Parents and Masters: Mi∣nisters may give the best Counsel, and preach the greatest Truths; but 'tis they must see it has its proper Effect in their own Lives and Conversations, and in those that belong to them. If this were industriously practised, what Encouragement would it be to the Ministers to labour more abundantly for the Salvation of their Flock? And how should we all rejoice in the Day of the Lord, that they had neither run, nor labour'd in vain. In short, Our Communion on this Day ought to be free from Lightness or Vanity; not in Worldly Affairs, nor Relations of foolish Stories, and as little as possible in com∣mon Talk, no unnecessary Visit, nor a∣ny where but when we have an Oppor∣tunity of doing good. This ought to be our constant Care, to apply our selves wholly to God and Religion, and avoid every thing as much as possible that would take up our Thoughts on any thing else. This is truly to sanctifie the
Sabbath: And they who can thus ob∣serve it, will find the Benefit, even an Everlasting Rest to their Souls in Heaven. After we have dined, let us retire a∣gain; and when we have rais'd our Af∣fections by a serious Contemplation, let us say, A Prayer after Dinner. O Thou All-seeing, and most holy God! I have been admitted to make my Oblation of Praises, and my self, unto thee; and am infinitely concern'd that thou shouldst accept me therein; not for any Merit in me, but for thine own Mercy sake. O my God, thou knowest I have been polluted with Sin, undutiful to thy Commands, unfaithful to my Promises, and confederate with thine Enemies; yea, even in the time of these holy Mysteries, so obdurate and confused, that I might justly fear, lest my Wretch∣edness should make my Sacrifice an Abomi∣nation: I blush that I am not fitter: I la∣ment that I should bring so many Defile∣ments, where the Purity of an Angel is scarce sufficient: But I take Sanctuary in thy more obliging Condescentions; and because I am so unworthy, will endeavour to esteem my self as vile as really I am in thy sight. Oh, do not look upon the Defects of a wretched Sinner; but remember thine own Mercies,
and accept what thou hast required of me; and so shall thy Favour be more illustrious, because it is bestow'd upon so evil and un∣deserving a Creature; and the Sense of my Unworthiness shall enlarge my Thankfulness, and make me praise thee more than if I had approached thee with all Perfections. It is a mighty Favour to me, O God, that thou hast made Bread to grow out of the Earth, to nourish my mortal Body: But, Oh! how far hast thou transcended that Mercy, in giving me the Bread of Life from Heaven, to feed my immortal Soul! Whom was there in Heaven or Earth that I could have wish'd for, in comparison of Jesus Christ! O my Soul, bless thou the Lord: I went not to gaze, or taste of the outward part; but to satisfie my Soul, by laying hold of the Merits of my Crucified Saviour; yet I have receiv'd the Elements, and thou hast made them to me that which I needed, and desired, even the Body and Blood of thy Son. Oh, how it fills my Soul with Joy to see thy Sacred Majesty appeas'd! But, O merciful God; I tremble in Expecta∣tion of those furious Assaults which will be made upon me by my Enemies, from whom I am withdrawn. O God, thou knowest how often I have return'd to Folly: But if thou pleasest to plant thy Grace within me, and
send thy Blessing upon me, I will not fear the Powers of Darkness. I have receiv'd that Heavenly Food, which is the Means of con∣veying this Grace unto me. I know by this Coelestial Remedy, many of thy Servants have been dreadful to the Powers of Dark∣ness! and thou didst never cast off an hum∣ble Soul. Oh, bless then this Life-giving Mystery unto me, that I may find such Power, Strength and Resolution flowing from thence, that I may stand firm to the Purposes I have made. Sweetest Saviour, I am now thy Servant; Oh, deliver me from Anger, Malice and Intemperance; from Pride, Lust and Covetousness, and all the Furies which use to torture me. O mark me for thine own; and deny me not that Grace which is necessary to make me thine. I'm sure in thee all Fulness of Grace dwells, and let it now overflow, that I may receive of thy Fulness; and then shall I always perform my Vows. Gracious God, I have beheld the Effica∣cious Sacrifice which thy Son hath offered for us; I have remembred it, blessed be thy Name for it, though not so highly as I am oblig'd, for the Benefits are inestimable: There is no Want of Merit in Jesus to de∣serve, nor of Mercy in thee to bestow Re∣mission: Oh, let there not want in me, nor
in any for whom Christ died, grace to ac∣cept this Pardon, Behold, Lord, how I struggle under a load of guilt, but I have receiv'd that which is an effectual remedy, who was ever reconciled to thee, but by Jesus, or who was ever so much thy Ene∣my, but this Holy Sacrifice has made their Peace, and shall it be ineffectual only to me; Dear Father, let me find the Effeca∣cy thereof in my self, and then I shall be engaged to praise thee more and more for this great Salvation through Jesus Christ. Our Father, &c. The Grace of our Lord Jesus, &c. HAving thus renewed our desires, and fired Souls with an ardent love of Christ, let us prepare again to meet the assembly of Saints, that we may worship God together, and give thanks to his Name, that we may re∣ceive new instructions for the amend∣ment of our Lives, and the confirma∣tion of our Faith, that we may inlarge our desires after Heaven, and see the pleasures of the Habitation of the Lord. At our return home, 'twill be necessary that we give up our selves to a serious Meditation of our actions this day, if our heart condemn us not, then have
we confidence towards God; if other∣wise, let us humbly beg Pardon: Let us be earnest in this Examination, for 'tis of great moment to be very circum∣spect now; don't let us cry Peace when 'tis far from us, and fancy we are reconciled to God, when we are in league with the Devil; for so every one is, that has not been heartily sorry for his sins, and seriously intended a refor∣mation of his Life; we must not think our selves perfect because our affections are raised, and we seem to have a zeal for the Glory of God, for no one can approach this solemnity without trans∣port; if we examined our selves before entertained Resolutions of Repentance, and come with Faith and Humility, though during the Celebration of these Mysteries, we had Wandrings, evil Thoughts and Disturbances; yet if we struggled with them then, and are sorry for them now, God will receive us in∣to his favour; therefore 'tis very neces∣sary we should now call our selves to an account, be sorry for the ill, and bless God for the good, which may pro∣perly be done in the following form.
A Prayer at Night. BLessed be thy glorious Name, O Lord; for all thy unspeakable Mercies to me, and all the World; I adore and mag∣nifie thee for thy great goodness, in giving thy Son to die for me, and making me par∣taker of his blessed Body and Blood. O Lord, what is Man that thou regardest him? Or what am I a vile and wretched sinner, that thou shouldest be thus favour∣able to me, thou hast been pleased to ad∣mit me to renew that Covenant with thee, which I had broken, and to give me assur∣ance of thy readiness to pardon so vile and great a Sinner as I have been. I have received the pledges of thy love, and been admitted to thy Holy Table; I have there devoted my self again unto thee; I have vowed Obedience, and after the most so∣lemn manner, consecrated my self to thy service. Thou art a God that knowest the heart, and art not to be mocked; I trem∣ble when I consider thy infinit Power, Wis∣dom, and Holiness; let these thoughts be∣get in my Soul a great fear of thy Name, and care to perform thy Will. Grant I may not turn the Grace of thee, my God, in∣to wantonness, and that I may not receive
thy grace in vain. O Lord, help thy Ser∣vant, keep the possession of my Soul which I have unfeignedly surrendred up to thee. O pardon the defect I have been guilty of in the performance of the duties of this day, and unite my heart, O'Lord, to sear thy Name, grant that I may spend the remainder of my time in obedience to thee, and in acts of Charity to my Brethren, create a clean heart, O Lord, and renew a right Spirit within me; guide me by thy Counsel, and at last receive me to thy Glory. I do great∣ly desire the Salvation of Mankind, and humbly represent to thy Divine Majesty the glorious sacrifice which our dearest Jesus made of himself upon the Cross, and by a never ceasing intercession now exhibits to thee in Heaven in the Office of an Eter∣nal Priesthood, in behalf of all that have communicated this day in the divine My∣steries in all the Congregations of the Christian World, in behalf of them that desire to communicate, and are hindred by any accident, sear, or the sentence of their own Consciences. Give unto me, O God, and unto them a portion of all good Prayers, which are made in Heaven and Earth, the intercession of our Lord, and the supplications of all thy servants, unite us in the band of the com∣mon Faith, and a holy Charity.
I humbly commend to thee this Church and Kingdom, all our superiors in Church or State; have mercy upon all states of Men and Women, give thy grace speedily to all wicked persons, especially those that I have tempted to sin, that they may repent, live well, and be saved; to all good people give an increase of Gifts and Holiness; to all Scismaticks and Hereticks grant conver∣sion; and to all that have erred from the Truth, bring thou into the right way. O merciful God, I humbly pray unto thee in vertue of our Holy Saviour, to grant un∣to us all the graces of an excellent and per∣fect Repentance, an irreconcilable hatred of sin, a love of thee, an exact imitation of the Holiness of the Blessed Jesus; fox the sake of the Sacrifice of thy Eternal Son, O Heavenly Father, let it be, because it is best, and because thou lovest it should be so, Amen. O God the Father of Heaven whose mer∣cy is over all the World, I am infinitly pleas'd to behold thy Glory, and to hear the praises which thou hast gotten by thy mercy to poor sinners, and I could even pour out my Soul in the manifestation of that joy which my heart conceives at thy univer∣sal Honour; wherefore I will praise thee by Acknowledgments, bless thee with
Hymns, worship thee with the lowest Re∣verence, and glorifie thee to the utmost of my Power. I will give thanks unto thee with all my Soul, for thy Pitty, Patience, and Mercy towards thy unworthy and mi∣serable Creatures. How shall I express thy welcome into my Soul, blessed Jesus? Or how shall I celebrate thy Praises? I will remember what thou art in thy self, and what thou hast done for us: O thou Eternal and only begotten Son of God, e∣qual to the Father, who art thy self both Lord and God. How lovely art thou, O thou innocent Lamb of God, encircled with Millions of redeemed Souls, whom thou hast washed in thy Blood? O how il∣lustrious a Brightness shines round thee, whilst thou art in the midst of all thy hap∣piness interceeding for poor Sinners. I adore thee, and long to do thee Honour, my Lord and my God; hear then my im∣portunate supplications, and enable me to proclaim the goodness of the Lord. BLessed Jesus, the Author and finisher of our Faith, who art the same Ye∣sterday as to Day, and for ever; thou hast given Spiritual means to those that fear thee, and wilt ever be mindful of thy covenant, but my goodness is as a morn∣ing
Cloud which soon passeth away; my Devotion fleeth like a shadow, and ne∣ver continueth in one stay; Oh, do thou esta∣blish me with thy free Spirit, that I may not so easily forfeit my Comfort, forget my Duty, and break my Vows; how unweari∣ed art thou dearest Saviour, in doing well unto me? How constant is thy Love, and shall I be so ungrateful to thee, so cruel to my self, as to forsake thee, and my own Happiness? I fear the Power and Policy of mine Enemies, I do with shame and sorrow call to mind my former returns to folly. I most passionately entreat thee not to leave me to my self, I have, through thy goodness, now obtained some measure of Peace; my Eyes are enlightned, my Heart revived, and my purposes seem to be sincere; give me thy grace therefore that I may be able to perform whatsoever I have promised, that I may be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in thy work; O Lord, let me hold fast that which I have, and daily strive to gain more; make me faithful to Death, that thou mayest give me a Crown of Life. Now the God of Peace which brought a∣gain from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant;
make me perfect in all good Works, work∣ing always that which is well-pleasing in his sight, and the Blessing of God Al∣mighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be with me for ever, Amen. Our Father, &c. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, Amen. There is no occasion to prescribe a∣ny Rules for our Behaviour between the Evening Service, and the time of rest; we have already been informed, that no part of this day when we don't communicate, ought to be spent in our own inventions; then surely it re∣quires our strickest observation when we have had so great an honour con∣fer'd upon us, to be adopted the Chil∣dren of God; the thought of this will continually run in our mind, and we shall have sufficient reason to be always praising God, till Nature puts us in mind of our Necessities, and that its time to commit our Souls and Bodies into his keeping, when we shall be un∣able to take care of our selves.
THE CONCLUSION HAving thus begun our Course, Let us run with dilligence the race that is set before us; 'Tis now that we are begun to be Christians, and let us be very cautious how we discredit the holy Name by which we are call'd: 'Tis not sufficient to assume the Title, with∣out departing from Iniquity to compleat the Character: Therefore at our return to the World, let us have the mercies of God in continual remembrance; let that good∣ness which has so far led us on to repen∣tance, move us to be zealous in his service, and prevent our ingratitude, by keeping our selves from every evil work. Let us consider, that we are bought with the price of the Blood of Jesus, and looking upon our selves so redeem'd, let us not sell our selves any more to work wicked∣ness. Let us consider the dignity of our Nature; that God has made us but a little lower than the Angels; that we only came into this World in order for a better; that we were born on purpose to be eternally happy; Why then should we do any thing to de∣base
our selves, and make us uncapable of that blessedness, which the Wisdom and Goodness of Heaven has prepared for us? The consideration of this will lead us to praise God for our Creation, which we ought sincerely to do, and shall want no motives to offer up our Thanksgivings, if we consider the inestimable benefits we may receive by it. Let us consider we are but begun in our way to Glory; that to falter in our purposes wou'd endanger our ruin; and to return, wou'd be to lose the glorious pains we have been at in our conversion: All those Prayers and Tears, Fasting and Alms-givings, which enter'd Heaven in our behalf, and by the intercession of our Saviour, done so great things for us, will turn to our con∣fusion; be a terrible accusation of our hypocrisy, and banish us to eternity from the presence of God; besides, how can we expect to attone Heaven, if we should at∣tempt a second Repentance, when all our former Vows prove false? Won't God be deaf to our complaints, when they are usher'd in by such treacherous Advocates? Can feigned tears move compassion from that God, who is a lover of truth? What form of Prayer will serve our turn, when we have made use of the best composures as a mock to the Judge of Heaven? Oh, Christian! since thou hast approach'd the Altar of God, and there vow'd a perpetual Obedience to his Will, as thou hopest
Heaven has heard thy petitions, and sign'd thy release; as thou believest thou hast eat the Flesh, and drunk that Blood of Christ, and by that incomprehensible Mystery art united to our Saviour Jesus; as thou hopest from this wonderful mercy to be raised at the last day to Eternal life, live worthy of thy Calling, by a perfect submission to the Will of God, and a holy perseverance in his ways, make thy Election sure. Since thou hast thus put on the Armour of God, and taken to thy self the sheild of faith; resist the World, the Flesh, and Devil, and thou shalt at last reap that reward which is laid up for those who have continued in well doing, and by their constancy in some sort merited, that eternal Gift of God, which is a Crown of Glory in endless in∣conceivable joys. Let us endeavour to fill our Souls with all vertues, and when we are so happy as to have our inclinations after goodness, that we have a fondness for the Glory of God, and habituated our selves in his service, we shall find the advantage of our conversion; for besides the inward peace and satisfaction, which is the result of a pious mind, we may enjoy with more pleasure the Goods of this World, than when we gave a loose to our desires, and were led captive by our lusts; when we so industriously persue our happiness, we shall arrive to that degree of goodness which will make it as uneasie and difficult to commit wicked actions,
as 'twas at first hard to refrain them. We shall have an aversion to Vice, and see our weakness and folly that cou'd be subject to its embraces; it will then lose all its charms, and we shall yield to that divine Truth, that God is only to be loved; that Religion is our wisest choice; that to be happy is to understand her, for her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. This indeed is what very few believe, Men generally frame an austere Notion of Religion, think it ties them up from the business and pleasure of this World; they have an inclination to serve God, but think he requires so much of their time, that they have but little for them∣selves, or Families: This may be one rea∣son why some are so religious by fits, they are mighty zealous against an Easter, or any particular time of Devotion, but as soon as the Season is over return to their former habit of indifference, and can give no other reason, but that their Business calls them off, as if Devotion consisted in saying just so many prayers; at such an Hour to be in their Closset; to fast such a day in the week, and to neglect the Affairs of this World, because we can't serve God and Ma∣mon. Such a Notion of Duty is certainly very prejudicial to the practise of Religion: God created this World for our convenience, and did not design we shou'd be preserved like the Lillies, which toil not, neither do they Spin, but commanded man to get his
bread with the sweat of his brow, and can we think his labour shall be turn'd to his reproof; that whilst he honestly persues the necessary Duties of his Calling that he shou'd be accused for not imploying that time upon his knees. Providence has ordered very differing circumstances among men, and to discharge with fidelity the Post in which he has placed us, is part of our Reli∣gion, and when justly perform'd, as accept∣able as our Devotion; we may enjoy a great deal of this world, and yet be very good Men; nay, by being vertuous, we may make a freer use of it; for Vertue teaches a right use of every thing, and God has deny'd us nothing that is useful, for all things were created for the use of man: In short, 'tis not the use, but abuse of this World, that renders us obnoxious to God: We may endeavour after Riches, but not to set our hearts upon them. They are given us to do good with, and when we cross the intent of them, by making them a useless Treasure, the rust of them will make them to consume. Religion don't tie men up from the Affairs of this World, it only teaches them how to behave themselvs in it, by prescribing such Rules which are necessary for the quiet or∣der of the World in general, and for a just management in particular between men; for the general Government of the World, it teaches us that we submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man; that we be not
unruly, stiring up sedition by speaking evil of Dignities; and it comprehends the Church Government, as well as State, by constitu∣ing an Order of Men who are to watch for our Souls, and for that reason we are to Obey them that have the rule over us in the Lord. Thus, by obeying Our Spiritul Pastors, and Temporal Masters, we shall at last receive the Reward of our Obedience; but they who resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation: For the particular management of our selves amongst our Neighbours, we are, if possible, to live peaceably with all Men; to be just, and Charitable, and in every thing to do as we wou'd be done by; to be dilligent in our Calling, and by an honest industry provide for our Families. We are not to be solicitous for the Morrow, nor by a carping care after this World neg∣lect the other: If we are successful, let's look up to him who is the giver of all good things, for his is the hand that sows the seed, and his the hand that gives the Blessing. If we have losses, and become poor, let us submit with Patience, and resign our selves to his Wisdom, still relying upon his Pro∣vidence. Such a Contentment may move the compassion of Heaven to raise us again in this Worlds esteem, or what's infinitly better, remove us from the present Evils, to the Joys of his Kingdom. Let us re∣member that we ought to receive Evil as well as good from the hand of God, that he knows what is best for us, and why
then shou'd we be angry that God does that which is wisest, and most fit to be done. Let us cast all our care upon him, and whatever condition we are in shall have most satisfaction; this is as much a duty, as 'tis pious in it self, and incumbent on the whole race of Mankind. The Rich ought more particularly to have respect to it, least they suffer by their confidence, and trusting in the Multitude of their riches be con∣founded: The Mighty, that they mayn't be brought low; and thee Poor, least God forget their Cry. Oh, how happy are they who can with confidence look up to God, that can use this World, neither abusing it, nor themselves; by making it a hindrance to their Religion, and by an unaccountable extravigance, make that miserable change of their Souls for their Vanity. Let us first seek the Kingdom of God, and his Rightousness; looking upon our selves as born for another World, and that we are only in our Passage thither. Cou'd we but perswade our selves of this truth, we shou'd remove our affection, and make use of this World, but as it serves to con∣duct us to a better. To what purpose shou'd we strive to heap up riches, when we know not who shall gather them? Why shou'd we be coveteous to establish a Name, when the Glory of this World so soon passes away? Let us do all possible good in our Station, endeavouring to be exemplary to the present Age, and not be solicitous
for the sounding of our fame to the future: That can't affect us, for we shan't be sen∣sible of it; or if we were, can it add to our happiness in Heaven, or shall we have leisure to be pleased with our own Cha∣racter, when we shall be in veiw of him, in whose Presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for ever∣more: But after all, our Vertuous Actions must have another motive than Popular applause; for if we do our good Deeds to be seen of Men, we have our reward; we can have no retribution of our good works that are not with a design to the Glory of God; we must do them, because God re∣quires them, and is best pleased when such Devotions are offer'd up for his sake: It shows our conformity to his Will, when our obedience proceeds from a sense of our Obligations to him, and then he that gives a Cup of cold water in his Name, shan't lose his reward. The Mercy of God ap∣pear'd in this, nor that we loved him, but that he loved us; and can we be too grate∣full to the inexpressible love of the Father? Can we propose a greater advantage than we shall receive at his Hands, or suppose 'tis not honourable to be just, for we rob him of his tribute, and make our Vanity the occasion of the Good. The folly of this is too gross to have any Advocates, for tho' Men love to blow the Trumpet that have it found in the Name of God: There∣fore let us be good, because God is so, and
this will put us upon every opportunity to please him, that we may by a constant pra∣ctise of Vertues, mould our selves more and more into the likeness of him, in whom God was so well pleased, because he went about doing good. It concerns us who have gone thus far in the way of Holiness, that have ceased to do Evil, and began the pleasant exercise of doing Good, to endeavour the performing it in the most acceptable manner. The Ho∣ly Scripture gives us direction, and our Sa∣viour's Example to encourage us; let us therefore look up to that pattern of Righte∣ousness, that we may as much as possible be Holy, as he is Holy, and we shall find him summing up all in this one word, Love. 'Tis Love, that is the great Duty of the New Law, and absolutely necessary to be studdied by all who intend to be saved: We shall have no excuse for our Ignorance, or neglect of that Duty, which God came on purpose to instruct and enjoyn. We ought to have it perpetually in our Minds, and never proceed to any action without it. In our Retirements we ought to be thinking of it, because that will prompt us to seek some new occasion of our Love, and in our Business, because then we shall ne∣ver act amiss; for how can he be guilty of an injustice, who has love in all his thoughts, that not only studies to do as he would be done by, but is always considering to do the good in his power, without the mean con∣sideration
of return; for to arrive to the utmost of this Duty, we must not only con∣sider what we would have done to our selves, but what is fitting for us to do to o∣thers. This indeed must be left to our Con∣sciences, but let's have a care of deceiving our selves, for our Consciences are to be our accusers. Let us remember that we are to shew our selves Disciples of our great Ma∣ster, by loving one another, and if we truly do so, God will reward us according to our Love; we can't evidence our Relation to him more than by our compassions to the ne∣cessitous, and we are assur'd that unless we put on bowels of compassion, we have no right to his promise, for if a man sees his Brother in want, and relieves him not, how dwelleth the love of God in him. Let us consider that we are all of the same Body, that Christ died for us all, and therefore 'tis not fitting any one member should pe∣rish. Christ came to procure to himself a peculiar People, Zealous of good Works, and we must not reckon our selves as his Ser∣vants, till we can submit to his Command∣ment. Great Men have it in their Power, to relieve the Distressed, to be merciful to the Poor, and to be a Friend to the Father∣less and Widow; the Poor must not be want∣ing in their part, by being grateful to their Benefactors, and faithful in their Trust, by being humble, obedient and contented, for Love teaches us all things; if we could but possess our minds of this excellent Virtue, it
would abate the swelling of our Ambitions, it would inform the Proud that 'tis nothing but his conceit which advances him above his Neighbour, and inform the indigent, that nothing but an inward peace and sa∣tisfaction is to be desired by those who have any understanding, for Love's the generous Vertue of the Mind. If Men believed this, they would not so much labour after a great Name as a Good, nor desire riches so much to advance their Families, as to benefit the Necessitous. They would not covet to be Great for the sake of Honour, and a gaw∣dy Retinue, but to have it in their power to be Just, to advance Merit, and give re∣ward to Desert. Great Men, tho' they have no Employment, have least occasion to be Idle; if their Country don't require their Immediate service, they have the more time to attend their better part; let God receive their leisure, and the publick be the better by their Piety. If God has Blessed them with great Estates, and raised them to great Dignity, they have the more reason to be diligent, in employing their Honour and Fortune to his Service; it con∣cerns them to manage with caution, and not turn the bounty of God into Licenti∣ousness; they are to give an account of their Stewardship, and where much is gi∣ven, much will be required; it was given them that they might have an opportunity to do good, and they have the blessing of God here and hereafter for their Encourage∣ment.
How ought they then to adore the goodness of God, that has put it so much in their power to be Happy, by giving them a valuable blessing here, as an earnest of a future Reward. But we are not to think that Charity belongs only to great Men, 'tis true, they have it in their power to excell Men of less condition, but we are all to dis∣tribute of this world's good, as God has put in our power; and tho' we can't do great things, let us do what we are able; there is an obligation even upon the poor themselves, to afford what help they can to assist their Brother in Distress; in short, if we have Love, that will teach us all that is owing to our selves or Neighbour, that so we may live as becomes those who profess that Gospel of Christ in all manner of Holy Conversation; to let the love of God dwell in us richly, and endeavour to a similitude of him, who is the express image of his Fa∣ther, who is Love. Having considered that 'tis both our Du∣ty and interest now we are arrived thus far, to persevere to the end, that we may be saved; that in order to it we must fill our selves with all Vertues, and that the chief∣est of them is Love; let us resolve with all our Souls to prosecute these considerations to purpose; let us not think we stand too secure to be shaken, but reflect upon our former weakness, and still suspect our frail∣ty, wherein we most fear by earnest sup∣plication; let us make known our request
to God, that he may support us in the day of Danger, and cover us from the assaults of our Enemies; we are always to lament our old Miscarriages, and their remem∣brance ought to be grevious. To this end let us continue steadfast in our Addresses to God, and beg that he would still give us a sense of the odiousness of sin, that so we may be deterr'd from committing it. Let us, as much as possible, frequent the Church, if our necessary Business will not give us leave to attend her daily Devotions Morn∣ing and Evening, let us not fail of offering up our private Sacrifice. No Business must intrench upon that, 'tis a right which be∣longs to God, and if we value our safety, we must not omit it: Let no Man be dis∣couraged, because he can't attend the ser∣vice of the Church so constantly as he would, if we do it but as often as we can, God is no such Task-master, but he accepts of our Will and Endeavours. But God knows, People are very apt to take up with Excuses, and because they hant a mind, will make their business to prevent their Duty, and they who have leisure prefer their Idle∣ness to Devotions; and what I admire at most, some people who frequent the Sacra∣ment, very seldom approach the House of God but when they go up to the Altar, as if the Church doors were never open but on Sundays, or once a Month. How can these Men's Religions be sincere, who have no de∣sires to give God thanks in the Assemblies of
his People, and confess their sins among the Congregation of the Lord? How do they live in obedience to the Church, that don't appear at Morning and Evening Pray∣er, unless unavoidably hindred? And how do they deceive themselves when they make a lying Excuse? Let us all, to whom God gives an opportunity, wait on him con∣stantly in his House; let us observe the Fasts, and the Feasts of the Church, with Reverence and true Devotion, and not bring a scan∣dal upon the Church by our ridiculous mi∣stakes about them; let our Fasts be as she directs, and as God has appointed, and let our Feasts be kept Holy to the Lord. On Saints-Days, let us commemorate the Bles∣sings conveyed to us by that Saint we have in Remembrance, at Easter, Whitsunday and Christmas, the wondrous Mysteries which the Church commends to our Devotion, and not turn them into Jollitry and Pro∣phanness Let our Lent and Ember Days be held in Veneration, and if we can't strictly Fast, let us do all we can for Mortification; let the poor Man and Labourer nor take the opportunity of these Seasons, to spend them in his Diversion; there is no such plea∣sure as in the Service of God, which is per∣fect freedom; and since Providence has de∣nied them other opportunities, let them take these to watch for their Souls, and improve them in true knowledge; let not the Rich feed themselves in Luxury, and make these Holy Seasons an occasion of greater De∣bauch,
for that will make God as much displeased with our appointed times and feasons, as the Jewish New Moons and Sab∣baths; but let us all, according to the true intent of them, improve them in true De∣votion, and if we continue in the observance of these things, time will shew us the beau∣ty of Holiness. We shall then behold this World with pleasure, and be glad that we were born to this delicious Employment. Let they who have Families and Chil∣dren take care to give Examples of Piety, and have so much Charity as not to deny them all opportunities of attending the Church, let them have recourse to God as often as they can, and see that publick Pray∣ers at least once a day be performed in their Houses; instruct them in Religion, and of the Church; teach them the excel∣lency of the Prayers, and to perform them with Devotion; we had need do all we can to bring Religion into Vouge, and pray that God would Establish his Church in Righte∣ousness. Let us show our Zeal for the Glory of God, by promoting of Holiness among Men, and take care that our Conversation be void of Offence, and give up our time as much as possible to Devotion, that by our constant Addresses, we may be fill'd with God's Grace, and Heavenly Benediction; 'tis to all our Advantages to be upon our Knees, or in Meditation; as frequent as we can; they who know the Pleasure of Con∣versing
with God, need no Arguments to bring them to their Closet. The Saints of Old were very Zealous in this Duty; they had their set Hours of Prayer, and if we followed their Piety, we might assure our selves of the like Success. It was David's constant practise to praise God in the Even∣ing, Morning, and at Noon-day; and I'm sure our necessities are as urgent as his, and if they who have most leisure would dou∣ble their Devotion, and offer up their Sa∣crifices six times a day, their labour would not be in vain; besides, when we are accu∣stomed to this frequent Communion with God, we shall be convinc'd with Holy Da∣vid, That the ways of God are exceeding plea∣sant, and be ready upon our Solemn days of Devotion to stretch our Zeal to an Equa∣lity with his, who took up the holy Reso∣lution of praising God seven times a day, because of his Righteous Judgments. FINIS.
