8396 506.h.10[68] 99892784 187164
❧ By the King. THe Kings most Excellent Maiestie, finding that the infection of the Plague is at this present in sundry places of the City of London, & neere adioyning to the same, though not (God be thanked) with the mortalitie of great numbers; yet so dispersed in diuers of the best and most open streets of the said Citie, as doe giue iust cause to doubt, that the contagion thereof, by great resort of people, might be further spread, aswell in the City, as into other parts of the Realme, whereby both danger might ensue to his Royal person, the Queene his dearest wife, and his children, and to his most louing Subiects repayring thither for their Suites and causes, and likewise by such increase of the infection, if it should happen (which God forbid) the next Session of his High∣nesse Parliament, appointed for the great and waighty affaires of the Realme, might bee prorogued: His Maiestie, for these necessary considerations, and hoping that the infection will, by the goodnesse of Almighty God, with the coldnesse of the yeere, and such wholesome Orders as are taken in his said Citie, the rather cease by the adiournement of part of this next Terme of S. Michael now at hand, from the Vtas of the same, vntil the fourth Returne of the said Terme called Mense Michaelis next comming. His Maiestie therefore, of his especiall fauour and clemencie, is pleased and contented, to ad∣iourne the said Terme of S. Michael, that is to say, From the Vtas thereof, vnto the said fourth Returne of the said Terme, called Mense Michaelis next comming; Which his Maiestie signifieth to all and singular his louing Subiects of this his Realme, to the intent that they and euery of them, which hath cause or commandement to appeare in any of his Highnesse Courts at Westminster, in or at any day or time from and after the said Vtas of S. Michael, may tary at their dwellings, or where their businesse otherwise shall lye, without resorting to any of the sayd Courts for that cause, before the said Mense Michaelis next comming, and that without danger of forfeiture, penaltie, or contempt to incurre towards his Highnesse in that behalfe. And neuerthelesse his Maiesties pleasure is, That two of his Iustices, that is to say, of either Bench one, shall the first day of Michaelmas Terme, called Octabis Michaelis, according to the ancient order of the Lawes, keepe the Essoignes of the said Octabis Michaelis. At which Vtas of S. Michael, Writs of adiournement shall be directed to the said Iustices, giuing them authoritie to adiourne the said Terme of S. Michael, that is to say, From the Vtas thereof, vntill the fourth Returne, as before is said. And the said adiournement shall be made in the first day of the said Vtas, commonly called, the day of Essoignes. And further his Maiesties pleasure is, That all matters, causes and Suits, depending in any of his other Courts betweene party and party, as in his Highnesse Courts of Chancery, Starchamber, and Exchequer, Courts of Wards and Liueries, Duchy of Lancaster, and Court of Requests, shall haue continuance, and the parties shall haue day from the date of these presents, vntill the said fourth Returne, as before is sayd. Prouided alway, and his Maiesties pleasure and commandement is, That all Collectors, Receiuors, Sheriffes, and other Accomptants, and all other persons, that should or ought to Accompt or pay any summe or summes of Money in any of his Maiesties Courts of Exchequer, Court of Wardes and Liueries, and of his Duchie of Lancaster, or in any of them, or to enter into any Accompt in any of the sayd Courts, shall repayre vnto the accustomed places at Westminster, where his Highnesse hath appointed such Officers and Ministers, as for that purpose his Maiesty hath thought expedient, and there to pay and doe in euery behalfe, as though no such Proclamation of Adiournment had been had or made. And his High∣nesse further pleasure and commandement is, That all Sheriffes shall returne their Writs and Proces against all such Accomptants and Debtors, at the dayes therein appoynted. And if any person or persons, who ought to accompt or pay any summe or summes of Money to his Maiestie in any of the Courts and places aforesayde, doe make default therein, That then his Highnesse Writs and Proces shall be awarded and sent forth against euery such person and persons, and the same to be duely and orderly serued, and returned by the Sheriffes and Officers thereunto appointed, in such like maner and forme, as the same should haue been, if this present Proclamation had not beene made. And if any Sheriffe or other Officer shall make default, or be negligent in seruing, executing, or returning of any the Writs and Proces aforesaid, That then euery such Sheriffe and other Officer, shall incurre such paines and penalties, as by the sayd Courts, or any of them shall be taxed and assessed; Willing and commaunding all and euery his Maiesties Sheriffes, Officers, Ministers and Subiects, to whom it doeth or shall apperteine, to obserue and keepe their assemblies and apparances with all their Re∣turnes and Certificates, in his Highnesse sayd Courts at Westminster in Mense Michaelis next comming, then and there to bee holden and kept, and there to doe their Offices and dueties in euery behalfe, in like maner and forme, as they should or ought to haue done, if this present Proclamation had not beene had or made, as they will answere to the contrary at their perils. Giuen at our Honour of Hampton Court, the Three and twentieth day of September, in the Fourth yeere of our Reigne of great Britaine, France, and Ireland. God saue the King. ¶ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. ANNO 1606.
