24444 S104863 99840594 176389
¶ Excepte a man haue the profession of his baptyme in his harte, he cā not vnderstonde the scripture. AS a mā can by no means read, excepte he be taught the letters of the crosse∣rowe, euē so it is vnpossi∣ble for a man of whatso¦euer degre or name he be to vnderstonde ought in the scripture vn∣to the honoure of God, and health of hys soule, excepte he be fyrst taught the profes¦sion of his baptyme, and haue it also wryt¦ten in hys harte. Whych profession stondeth in .ii. thyn∣ges: The profes∣sion of oure baptyme what it i The one is the knowlege of the law of God, vnderstandynge it spiritually, as Christ expoūdeth it Mathew in the .v. vi. and .vii. chapter: so that the roote and lyfe of all lawes is thys: Loue thy LORDE God with al thyne hart, all thy soule, and all thy myghte, and thy neghboure as thy selfe for his sake: and that loue only, be the fulfyllynge of ye law (as Paule teacheth,) and that what soeuer dede we do, and not of that loue, that same fulfylleth no lawe in the syght of God.
And the other is to knowe the promises Gospell. of mercye, whyche are in oure saueoure Christ, vnderstandynge them also purely wythoute all leuen, after the mercyfullest fashion as scripture expresseth them, and after all fatherlye loue and kyndnesse of God vnto al that repēt towarde the sawe and beleue in Christe. And to haue this profession wrytten in thyne harte, is to consent vnto y• law that it is ryghteous, and good, and to loue it in thyne harte & to submyt thyselfe thervnto for to learne it, and to rule and square all thy dedes therby, & thē to beleue in Christ that for hys sake, all thy synnes whyche thou dyddest before y• knowlege of this pro¦fession, are forgeuē the clerly, both pena & culpa (to vse y• Romysh termes,) and that for none other satisfaction to Godwarde, then Christes bloude, and euen so, that all the synne which we do after this knowlege ether of chaunce, ignoraunce, infyrmyte, negligence, or prouoked and ouercomme of ye flesh, is forgeuē vs lykwyse both pena and culpa thorow repentaunce and fayth in Christe wythoute oure satisfaction of workes to Godwarde. Not wythstondynge we beynge all
sonnes of one God, & seruauntes of one Christ must agre amonge our selues, & he that hath offended, must mekely know∣lege his fault, and offer hymselfe to make amendes vnto the vtmost of hys power, and yf he haue not where wyth, and axe forgeuenesse for Christes sake, the other is bounde to forgeue hym. Nother wyth¦out reconcylinge hym selfe vnto hys bro∣ther maye ony man be at the fyrst recea∣ued vnto the profession of Christes fayth, nor continue therin, nor be receaued in agayne yf he be for hys open offences put therout. For how can a man loue hys neghboure as well as hymselfe, & be sory that he hath hurt hym, excepte he shulde offer hymselfe to make amendes? And we muste from hence forth walke in the lyfe of penaunce (yf ye wyll haue it so called) and after the doctrine of Christ euery man tame hys fleshe wyth prayer fastynge, and the continual meditacyons of Christes Penaunce and passions for vs, and of the holy sayntes: and with such abstinence, and kynde of lyuing as euery man thinketh moost mete for hys cōplex¦ion, the yonger confessyng theyr infirmi¦ties to ye elder, discreter, & better learned
and axynge theyr aduyce and wholsome counsell for the repressynge of theyr disea¦ses, but all to tame the flesh, and to serue thy neghbour, wythout ony supersticious mynde. But to Godwarde is ther no satisfac∣tion saue fayth in Christes bloude out of a repentynge harte. For oure outwarde dedes can not be referred vnto God to do hym seruice in hys owne persone, and to helpe hym or make hym better there wyth. We can do no more with thē, wer they neuer so perfecte, and done wyth all loue, then satisfye the lawe for the present tyme, and do oure duety vnto oure negh∣boures, and tame oure owne fleshe, but not to make satisfaction to God for synne that is once past. The synne that is once commytted must God forgeue frely of a fatherly loue for Christes sake. When God visiteth vs with sycknes, pouerte, or what so euer aduersite it be, he doth it not of a tyrannous mynde to satisfye hys luste in oure sufferrynge of euell, to make satisfaccion for the synne that is paste, of the whiche we repent and be sory: But of a fatherly loue, to make vs knowe oure selfes, and fele hys
mercy, and to tame the flesh, and to kepe vs from synnynge agayne. As no natural father punyssheth hys chylde because he delyteth in tormentynge of hym, to take satisfaction for the synne that is paste. But fyrst teacheth kyndly and sufferreth and forgeueth once or twyse, and then at the laste, when he seyeth the body so wan∣ton that the chylde can not contynue in the ryghte waye, for the rage of wylde lustes, he beateth hym, to subdue the flesh only and to tame it, that the doctryne of the father may haue hyr due course in the harte of the chylde, & shulde not be choked wyth sustes, and concupiscences of oure wycked nature. Euen so is it of God, yf ony of hys chyldren that haue professed his law, and the faythe of oure saueoure, be negly∣gent to tame hys fleshe, wyth prayer, fa∣stynge, and gooddedes after the doctryne of Christe, he wyll surelye scourge hym to brynge hym in to the ryghte waye a∣gayne, and to kepe hym that the doctryne of hys soules health peryshe not in hym. But he taketh not hys mercye from vs, nor thynketh on the synne yt is paste, after that we repente and be full conuerted,
but absolueth vs both a pena and culpa for Christes sake, and is as myghtye and as mercyfull to do it for Christes sake, as the B. of Rome for mony, besides that he hath promysed mercyfully so to do. ¶ The knowlege of our baptyme is the keye and the lyght of the scripture. ANd agayne as he whyche knoweth hys letters well, and can spell per∣fectly, can not but reade (yf he be diligēt:) and as he which hath cleare eyes wythout impediment or let, and walketh therto in the lyght and open daye can not but se, yf he attende and take hede: euen so who so euer hath the profession of bap∣tyme wrytten in hys harte, can not but vnderstonde the scripture, yf he exercise hymselfe therin, and compare one place to another, and marke the maner of speche, & axe here and there the meanynge of a sen∣tence of them that be better exercysed than he is. For as the doctrine whiche we shulde The keye & lyght of the Scripture. be taught before we were baptysed, and for lacke of age is deferred vnto the yeares
of discrecyon is the keye, that byndeth & lowseth, locketh and vnlocketh the consci¦ence of all synners: euen so that lesson, where it is vnderstande, is onely y• keye that openeth all the scripture, and euen ye whole scripture in it selfe gathered toge∣ther in a narowe compasse and brought in to a compendiousnesse, and tyll thou be taught that lesson, that thyn hart fele the swetnesse of it, the scripture is locked and shut vp from the, and so darke, that thou couldest not vnderstande it, though Peter, Paul or Christ hymselfe dyd ex∣pounde it vnto the, nomore than a blynd man can se, though thou set a candell be∣fore hym, or shewest hym the Sonne, or poyntest with thy fynger vnto that thou woldest haue hym to loke vpon. Now be we all baptysed: But alas How y• scri¦pture is loc¦ked vp from our vnder∣standynge. not one from the hyest vnto the lowest euer taught the profession or meanynge therof. And therfore we remayne all blynde generally, as well our great Ra∣bynes for all theyr hygh learnyng, which they seme to haue, as the lay people: yee and so muche the more blynde are our great clerkes, that where the laye people for a great nombre of them are taughte
nothynge at all, they be al wronge taught and the doctrine of theyr baptyme is all corrupte vnto them, wyth the leuē of false gloses, yer they come to reade the scrip∣ture. So that the lyght whych they brynge wyth them to vnderstande the scripture wyth all, is vtter darkenesse and as con∣trary vnto the scripture, as the Deuel vn¦to Christ. By reason wherof the scripture is loc∣ked vp, and become so darcke vnto them, yt they grope for the dore, and can fynde no waye in, and is become a mase vnto thē, in the whych they wandre as in a myste, or (as we saye) led of Robbyn goodfellow that they can not come to the ryght way no though they turne theyr cappes: and ye blyndnes therof hath blynded theyr eyes wyth malyce, so that thoughe they beleue not the scripture to be false, yet they per∣secute the ryghte vnderstandynge therof, and can not beleue it true in the playne sence, whych it speaketh to them in. It is become a turne agayne lane vnto them, whych they can not go thorow, nor make thre lynes agre together. And fynally the sentences of the scripture are nothynge but very rydels vnto them, at the whych
they caste as the blynde man doth at the crowe, and expounde by gesse, an hūdreth doctours an hundreth wayes, and one man in .xx. sermons allegynge one texte after .xx. fashions, hauynge no sure doctri¦ne to cleue vnto, and all for sacke of the ryght knowlege of the profession of oure baptyme. ¶ He that hath the profession of baptyme wrytten in hys harte can be no heretyke. ANother conclusion is thys: As he whych euer crepeth alonge by the grounde and neuer clymmeth, can¦not fall from an hygh: Euen so no man y• hath the profession of his baptyme wryt∣ten in hys harte can stomble in the scrip∣ture, and fall vnto heresyes, or become a maker of diuision and sectes, and a defen¦der of wyld and vayne opinions. For the whole and only cause of heresyes and sec∣tes is Pryde. Now the lawe of God tru∣ly interpreted robbeth al them, in whose hartes it is wrytten, and maketh them as bare as Iob of all thynges, where of a mā can or maye be moued to pryde. And on
the other syde they haue vtterlye forsaken themselues wyth all theyr hygh learnynge and wysedome, and are become the seruaū¦tes of Christe onely, whych hath boughte them wyth hys bloude, and haue promy∣sed in theyr hartes vnfaynedlye to follow hym, and to take hym onely for the auctor of theyr religion, and hys doctrine onely for theyr wysedome and learnynge, and to mayntayne it in worde and dede, and to kepe it pure, and to buylde no straunge doc¦trine there vpon, and neuer to be hyghest, but fellowe wyth theyr brethren, and in that fellowshippe to waxe euer lower and lower, and euery daye more seruaunt than another, vnto hys weaker brethren, after the ensample and ymage of Christe, and after hys cōmaundement and ordinaūce, and not in fayned wordes of the Byshop of Rome. Thys be sayde bycause of them that The scrip∣ture ma∣keth no he∣retykes. saye that the scripture maketh men here∣tykes, and corruppeth wyth false opinions contrarye to the profession of theyr bap∣tyme, and the lyght where wyth they shuld expounde the scripture is turned into dar¦kenesse in theyr hartes, and the dore of the scripture locked, and the welles stopped vp
yer they come at it. And therfore because theyr darknesse can not comprehēde the lyght of scripture, as it is wrytten Iohan. i. The lyghte shy∣ned in darknesse, but the darknesse coulde not comprehende it, they turne it into blynde rydles, and reade it wythout vnder¦standynge, as laye men do our Lady mat∣tens, or as it were Marlynes prophecyes, hauynge euer theyr myndes vppon theyr heresyes. And whan they come to a place that soūdeth lyke, there they rest & wrynge out wonderfull exposicions to stablyshe theyr heresyes wythall. Is it not a great blyndnesse to saye in the begynnynge of all together, that the whole scripture is false in the lytterall sence, and kylleth the soule? Whyche pestilente heresye to proue they abuse the texte of Paule, sayenge: The letter kylleth, because that texte was become a rydle vnto them, and they vnder¦stode it not. Whan Paule by thys worde lettre vnderstode the lawe geuen by Mo∣ses to condempne all consciences and to robbe them of all ryghteousnesse, to com∣pell them vnto ye promyses of mercy that are in Christ. Heresye spryngeth not of the scripture
no more than darkenesse of the Sonne, but it is a darke cloude that spryngeth out of the blynde hartes of ypocrites, and couereth the face of ye scripture, and blyn¦deth theyr eyes, that they can not behold the bryght beames of the scripture. The whole summe than of altoge∣ther is thys: Yf oure hartes were taught the appointmēt made betwene God & vs in Christes bloude, whan we were bapti¦sed, we had the key to open the scripture, and lyght to se and perceaue ye true mea∣nynge of it, and the scripture shulde be ea¦sy to vnderstande. And because we be not taught that profession, it is the cause why the scripture is so darke, and so farre passynge oure capacite. And the cause why oure exposicions are heresyes, is be∣cause we be wronge taught, and corrupt wyth false opinions before hande, & made here tykes yer we come at the scripture, and haue corrupte it, and it not vs: as the tayste of the sycke maketh wholsome and well seasoned meate bytter, weerysh and vnsauery. Neuerthelesse yet the scrip∣ture abydeth pure in herselfe and bryght, so that he whych is sounde in the faythe, shal atonce perceaue that the iudgement
of the heretykes is corrupte in theyr ex∣posytions, as an whole man doth fele at once euen with smellynge to the meate that the tayste of the sycke is infected. And with the scripture shal they euer im¦proue heresyes and false exposytions, for the scripture purgeth herselfe, euen as y• water once in the yeare casteth al fylthy nesse vnto the sydes of it. Whiche to be true, ye se by the authorite of Paule .ii. Timothe the .iii. Chapter, sayenge: All the scripture was geuen of God by in∣spiracyon, and is good to teache with all, to improue: and so forth. And by the en∣sample of Christ and the Apostles, howe they confoūded the Iewes with the same scripture which they had corrupt, & vnder¦stode them amisse after theyr owne dark¦nesse: and as ye se by the ensample of vs now also, how we haue manifestly impro¦ued the ypocrites in an hundreth textes, whiche they had corrupte to proue theyr false opinions, brought in besydes ye scrip¦ture, and haue dryuen them of. And they be fledde and openly confesse vnto theyr shame, that they haue no scripture, and synge another songe, and say they recea∣ued them by the mouth of the Apostles.
Vnto the which stoppyng of theyrs I an¦swer here grosly, seynge they are answe∣red befor: That as he were a foole which wolde trust hym to tell his mony in hys absēce, that hath pycked hys purse before his face: euen so syth ye haue corrupt the open scripture before our eyes, and are takē wt ye maner, that ye can not denye: we were mad to beleue that it, whych hath lyen .xv. c. yeare as you saye in your rottē mawes, shulde nowe be wholsome for vs, ye haue chewed and mingled it wyth your poyson spatle. Can ye beare vs in hande and persuade vs thynke ye wyth youre so∣phistrye to beleue that ye shulde ministre your secrete tradicions wythout grounde truely, whan we se you ministre the open scripture falsly? Can ye bewytch our wyt∣tes wyth youre poetry, to beleue, that ye shulde ministre youre secrete tradicions for oure profyte, whan we se you corruppe the open scripture to the losse of our sou∣les for your profyte? Nay it is an hūdreth tymes more lykely that ye shulde be falser in secrete thynges than in open. And ther¦fore in the very sacramentes whyche the scripture testifyeth, that Chryste hymselfe ordened them, we muste haue an eye vn∣to
your hande, how ye mynistre them. And as we restore the scripture vnto hyr ryght vnderstondynge from youre false gloses: euen so delyuer we y• sacramentes and ceremonyes vnto theyr ryght vse frō youre abuse. And that must we do wyth the scripture, which can corrupte no man that commeth thereto wyth a meke sprete, sekynge there only to fashion hymselfe lyke Christ, accordynge to the profession and vowe of our baptyme. But contrary¦wyse, he shall there fynde the myghtye power of God, to altre hym, and chaūge hym in the inner man a lytle and lytle in processe, vntyll he be full shapen after the ymage of our saueour, in knowlekege and loue of all truth and power to worke there after. Finally then for as muche as the scrip¦ture is the lyght and lyfe of Gods electe, and that myghty power, wher with God treateth them and shapeth them, after y• symilitude, lykenesse and very fashion of Christ, and therfore sustenaunce, com∣forte, and strength to corage them, that they maye stonde fast, and endure and merylye beare theyr soules health, where¦wyth the lustes of the fleshe are subdued,
and kylled, and the sprete mollifyed and made softe, to receaue the print of the y∣mage of oure saueoure Iesu. And for as muche as the scripture is so pure of it self that it can corrupte no man, but the wyc¦ked only, whiche are infect before hande, and yer they come at it, corruppe it wyth the heresyes that they brynge with them. And for as much as the complaynt of the hypocrytes that the scriptur maketh here¦tykes is vayne and fayned, and y• reasons where wyth they wold proue that the lay people ought not to reade the scripture is false, wycked, and the frute of rottē trees: therfore are they faythfull seruauntes of Christ and faythful ministres and dispen¦sers of hys doctrine, and true harted to∣ward theyr bretheren, which haue geuen themselues vp in to the hand of God, and put them selues in ieoperdy of all perse∣cution, theyr very lyfe despysed, and haue translated the scripture purely and wyth good conscience, submyttyng themselues and desyrynge them that can, to amende theyr translation, or (yf it please them) to translate it themselues, after theyr beste maner, yee and let them sowe to theyr gloses, as many as they thynke they can
make cleue therto, & then put other mens translation out of the waye. Howe be it thoughe God hathe so wrought with them, that a greate part is translated, yet as it is not ynough that the father and the mother haue bothe be∣gotten the chylde, and brought it into thys worlde, except they care for it, and brynge it vp tyll it can helpe it selfe: Euē so it is not ynoughe to haue translated, though it were the whole scripture in to the vulgare and commune tunge, excepte we also brought agayne the lyght to vn∣derstonde it by, and expell that darke cloude, whiche the hypocrites haue spred ouer the face of the scripture, to blynd the ryght sence and true meanynge therof. And therfor are ther diuerse introductiōs ordeyned for you, to teache you the pro∣fession of your baptyme, the only lyght of the scripture: one vpō the epistle of Paul to the Romaynes, and another called: The pathway into ye scripture. And for y• same cause, haue I taken in hāde to en∣terpret thys epistle of saynt Ihon ye Euan¦geliste, to edifye the laye man, & to teache hym how to read the scripture, & what to seke therin, & that he may haue to answer
the hypocrites, and to stoppe theyr mou∣thes wythall. And fyrste vnderstande that all the epistles that the Apostles wrote, are the Gospell of Christe, though all that is the Gospell be not an Epistle. It is called a Gospell, that is to saye glad tydynges, be∣cause it is an open preachynge of Christe: and an Epistle, because it is sent as a letter or a byll to them that are absent. (❧)
¶ Here beginneth the fyrst Epistle of Saynte Ihon. The .i. Chapter. THat vvhiche vvas from the begynnyng declare vve vnto you, vvhiche vve haue sene vvith out eyes, vvhich vve loked vpon, and oure handes haue handled of the vvord of lyfe. For the lyfe appeared, and vve haue sene, and beare vvitnesse, & shevv vnto you that euerlastynge lyfe, vvhiche vvas vvith the father & appeared vnto vs. In that saynt Ihon sayeth. The thynge whych was from the begynnynge, and the euerlastyng lyfe that was with the father, he wytnesseth that Christ is very God, as he dothe in the begynnynge of hys gospell, sayenge: The worde or the thynge was at the begynnynge, and the thynge was with God, and that thynge was God, and all thynges were made by it. And when he sayeth: Which we herd, & sawe wyth oure eyes, and our handes han¦dled
hym, he testifyeth that Christ is very man also, as he doth in the begynnynge of hys Gospell, sayenge: The worde or that thynge was made fleshe, that is, became man. And thus we haue in playne & open wordes a manifest article of oure fayth, yt our saueour Christ is very god & very mā. Whiche article who so euer not only beleueth, but also beleueth in it, thesame is the sonne of God, and hath euerlastynge lyfe in hym, and shall neuer come into cō∣demnacion, as it is wrytten Ihon the .i. He gaue them power to be the sonnes of God, in that they beleued is hys name. And Ihō .iii. he that beleueth in the sonne, hath euerlastyngelyfe. And a lytle before in the sayde chapter: He that beleueth in hym shall not be cōdemned. And to beleue in the wordes of thys article, is that ea∣tynge of Christes flesh and drynkyng hys bloude, of the which is spoken Ihō .vi. The wordes whych I speake are sprete and lyfe and the fleshe profyteth not at all, mea∣nynge of the fleshly eatynge of his body, & of the fleshly drynkynge of his bloude. Ther is therfore great difference betwene To beleue in Christe. beleuyng that ther is a God & that Christ is God and mā, and to beleue in God and
Christ God and man, and in the promy∣ses of mercye that are in hym. The fyrste is commune to good and bad, and vnto y• deuels also, & is called n historical faythe and belefe. The seconde is propre vnto the sonnes of God, and is theyr lyfe, as it is wrytten: The ryghteous lyueth by fayth, that is, in puttynge hys truste, confydence and whole hope in the goodnesse, mercy, & helpe of God, in all aduersities, bodely and goostly, and all temptacions, and euē in synne and hell, howe depe soeuer he be fallen therin. But as he which feleth not his disease, can longe for no health: euen so it is im∣possyble for ony man to beleue in Chri∣stes bloude excepte Moses haue had hym fyrste in cure, and wyth hys lawe haue robbed hym of hys ryghteousnesse, and condemned hym vnto euerlastynge death and haue shewed hym vnder what damp∣nation they are in by byrthe in Adam. And howe all theyr dedes (appeare they neuer so holy) are yet but damnable synne because they can refer nothynge vnto the glorye of God, but seke themselues, theyr owne profyte, honoure and glorye. So that repentaunce towarde the lawe muste
go before thys belefe, and he whiche repen¦teth not, but consenteth vnto the lyfe of synne, hath no parte in thys faythe. And when Ihon calleth Christ the euerlastynge lyfe that was wyth the fa∣ther, he signifyeth that Christ is our lyfe, Christe is oure lyfe. as after in the pistle, and in the fyrst also of hys gospell, sayenge: In hym was lyfe. For vntyll we receaue lyfe of Christ by fayth, we are dead, and can be but deade, as sayeth Ihō in the .iii. He that beleueth not in ye sōne, can se no lyfe: but ye wrath of God abydeth vpon him. Of the which wrath we are heyres by byrthe sayeth Paul, Ephe .ii. Of the whiche wrath we are ignoraunt, vntyll the lawe be publy∣shed, and walke quyetly after our lustes and loue God wyckedly, that he shuld be content therewith and mayntayne vs ther¦in, contrary vnto his Godly and ryghte∣ous nature. But as soone as the lawe (whose nature is to vtter synne. Rom .iii. and to set man at variaunce, with God) is preached, then we fyrste awake out of our dreame, and se our damnacyō, & hate the lawe, which is so contrary vnto oure nature, and grudge agaynst God therto s yonge chyldrē do agaynst theyr elders
whan they fyrst commaunde, and counte God a cruell tyraunt because of hys lawe in that he condemneth vs for that thynge whych we can not loue, nor of loue fulfyll. But whan Christe is preached, howe y• God for hys sake receaueth vs to mer∣cy, and forgeueth vs all that is paste, and hence forth rekeneth not vnto vs our cor∣rupt and poysoned nature, and taketh vs as hys sonnes, and putteth vs vnder grace and mercy, & promyseth that he wyll not iudge vs by the ryghteousnesse of the law but nourture vs wyth all mercy and paci∣ence, as a father moost mercyfull, only yf we wyll submytte our selues vnto hys doc¦trine and learne to kepe hys lawes: yee and he wyll therto consyder oure mekenesse, and what so euer chaunceth neuer taketh awaye hys mercy, tyll we cast of the yocke of oure profession fyrste, and runne awaye wyth vtter defiaunce, that we wyll neuer come more at scoole. Than oure stub∣burne and harde hartes mollify and waxe softe, and in the confydence and hope that we haue in Christe and hys kyndnesse we go to God boldly as vnto our father and receauelyfe, that is to say loue vnto God and vnto the lawe also.
That vvhich vve haue sene & herd, vve declare vnto you, that ye may ha∣ue fellovvship vvyth vs, and that oure fellovvship may be vvyth the father, and vvyth hys sonne Iesus Christ. And these thynges vve vvryte vnto you that your ioye may be full. To bryng vnto ye fellowship of God The touche stone of all true doctri∣ne and prea¦chers. and Christ, & of them yt beleue in Christe, is the fynall intent of all the scripture, why it was geuen of God vnto man, and the only thynge whych all true preachers seke, and wherby ye shall euer knowe and discerne the true worde of God from all false & counterfayted doctrine of vayne tradicions: and the true preacher from the wylye vpocrites. We preach vnto you (say¦eth saynt Ihon) yt euerlastynge lyfe whych we haue herde, and in hearynge receaued thorow fayth, and are sure of it, to drawe you to vs out of y• fellowship that ye haue wyth the damned deuels in synfull lustes and ignoraunce of God, for we seke you, and not yours, as sayeth saynt Paule the ii. to the Corinthiās the .xii. Chapter. We loue you as our selues in God, & therfore wolde we haue you fellowes, and equall wyth vs, and buylde you vpon the funda∣cyon
layde of the Apostles and Prophe¦tes, which is Christ Iesu, & make you of the houshold of God for euer, y• ye & we, fellowes & brethrē, and coupled together in one sprete, in one fayth, & in one hope, might haue our fellowship therby wt god, and become his sonnes and heyres, and with Iesus Christ, beynge his brethren & coheyres, and to make your ioye full tho∣row that glad tydynge, as the angell sayd vnto the shepherdes. Luce .ii. Beholde I shewe you great ioye that shalbe vnto al people, how y• ther is a Saueoure borne vnto you this daye, which is Christe the LORD. And this tydynges we bryng you wyth the worde of God only, whiche we receaued of hys sprete, and out of the mouth of his sonne as true messaūgers. We preach not our selues, but Christ our LORDE, & vs your seruaūtes for his sake, we do not loue oureselues, to seke yours vnto vs, that after we had wt wy∣les robbed you of all ye haue, we shulde exalte our selues ouer you, & seperate our¦selues from you, and make oure selues a seuerall kyngdome, fre and franke, ray∣nyng ouer you as Heythen tyrauntes, & holdynge you in bondage to serue for our
lucre and lustes, tanglynge your consci∣ence wyth doctrine of mā, whych draweth from God and Christe, and frayenge you wyth the bouge of excommunicacion a∣gaynst gods worde. Or yf that serued not shakynge a swearde at you. And thys is the tydynges vvhych vve haue herde of him, and declare vnto you, that God is lyght, and in him is no darcknesse at al. Yf vve saye that vve haue fellovvship vvyth hym, and yet vvalke in darkenesse, vve lye, and do not the truth. But and yf vve vvalk in lyght, as he is in lyght, thā haue vve fellovvship together, and the bloude of Christ hys sonne, clenseth vs from al synne. As the deuell is darkenesse and lyes, so is God lyght and truth onely, and ther is no darkenesse of falshed and consentyng to wyckednesse in hym. And the bryght∣nesse of hys lyght is hys worde & doctrine Christ and hys worde▪ are y• lyght as the .c. and .xviii. Psalme sayeth: Thy worde is a lanterne vnto my fete and a lyght to my pathes. And Christ is ye lyght that lyghteneth all men. And the Apostles are called the lyght of the worlde, because of the doctrine. And al that know y• truth
are lyght. Ye were once darkenesse (sayeth Paule Ephesi. v.) but nowe lyghte in the LORDS: walke therfore as the chyldrē of lyght. And good workes are called the fru∣tes of lyght. And al that lyue in ignoraūce are called darknes, as he sayeth afterward He yt hateth hys brother walketh in darke∣nesse. For yf the lyght of the glorious gos∣pell of Christe dyd shyne in hys harte, he coulde not hate hys brother. By walkynge vnderstande, consen∣tynge, Walkynge in darknes or in lyght doynge, & workynge. Yf we walke than in darknesse, that is, consent & worke wyckednesse, and saye we haue fellow∣ship with God, welye. For, to haue fellow¦ship wyth hym, is to knowe and consente and professe hys doctrine in our hartes. Now yf the commaundementes of God be wrytten in oure hartes, oure membres can not but practyse them, and shewe the frute of thē. So whether lyght or darknes be in the harte, it wyll appeare in the wal∣kynge. For though our membres be neuer so deade vnto vertue, yet yf oure soules knowlege the truthe, and consente vnto ryghteousnesse, we haue the sprete of lyfe in vs. And therfore sayeth Paule Roma. viii. Yf the sprete of hym that raysed vp Ie¦sus
from death be in you, than wyl he that raysed vp Iesus from death, quycken your mortall bodyes, by the reasō of the sprete yt dwelleth in you. So yt it is not possible for hym that knoweth the truth, and consen∣teth therto to continue in synne. And thā fynally yf we haue the lyght in our hartes and walke therin, than we haue fellowship wyth God, and are hys sōnes and heyres, and are purged from all synne thorowe Christes bloude. Yf vve saye vve haue no synne, vve deceaue ourselues, and the truthe is not in vs. Yf we thynke ther is no synne in vs, we are begyled and blynde, and the lyghte of Gods worde is not in vs, and ether fol∣lowe synne as beastes wythout conscience at all. Or yf we se the grosse fynnes, as murther, theft, and adultrye, yet we haue hanged a vayle of false gloses vpon Mo∣ses face, & do not se nor perceaue the bright¦nesse of the lawe, how that it requyreth of vs as pure an harte to God, and as great loue vnto our neghbours, as was in oure saueoure Iesus, and ceasseth not before to condempne vs as synners.
Yf vve knovvlege our synnes, he is faythfull and iust to forgeue vs our syn∣nes, and clense vs from all our vnrygh∣teousnesse. Yf we confesse our synnes, not in the prestes eare, (though that tradicion resto∣red vnto the ryghte vse were not dampna∣ble) but in oure hartes to God wyth true repentaunce and faste belefe. Than is he faythfull to forgeue and to purge vs, be∣cause of hys mercyful truth and promyse. For he promysed Abrahā that in hys sede all the worlde shuld be blessed frō the curse of synne. And hath abundauntly renewed hys euerlastynge mercy vnto vs in y• new testamente, promysynge that our synnes shalbe forgeuen vs in Christes bloude, yf we repent and truste therto. Yf vve saye vve haue not sinned, vve make hym a lyer, and hys vvorde is not in vs. For hys worde testifyeth agaynst vs, that we are all synners, yee & els Christe dyed in vayne. Salomon sayeth .iii. Reg. viii. That ther is nomā that synneth not agaynst God. And Paule proueth by the authorite of y• scripture vnto y• Romayns that we are al synners wythout excepciō.
And the scripture wytnesseth that we are damnable synners, and that oure nature is to synne. Whyche corrupte and poysoned nature, thoughe it be begonne to be cured and healed, yet is it neuer tho∣row whole vntyll the houre of death. For the whych cause wyth al oure best frutes, ther growe wedes amonge. Nother can ther be ony dede so perfecte that coulde not be amended. Whan a blynde bongler won¦dereth at hys glorious workes, a conny workeman that hath a clere iudgemente perceaueth that it is impossible to make a worke that coulde not be made better. Now the lawe requyreth workes of vs in the hyghest degre of perfeccion and ceas∣seth not to accuse vs, vntyll oure workes flowe naturally as glorious in perfeccion as the workes of Christe. And Christ tea∣cheth vs to praye in oure Pater noster: Forgeue vs oure trespasses, as we for∣geue oure trespassers. Where by ye maye easely vnderstande that we synne daylye one agaynste another, and all agaynst God. Christ taught also to praye that our father shulde not let vs slyp into tempta∣cion: sygnifyenge that our nature can not but synne, yf occasions be geuen, excepte
that God of hys especyall grace kepe vs backe. Which pronyte to synne is dānabe synne in the lawe of God. Dauid prayed in the .lxviii. Psalme. Let not the tempest drowne me, let me not fall in to the bot∣tom, and let not the put shut hyr mouthe vpon me, as who shulde saye. Fyrst kepe me God from synnynge, then yf I shall chaunce to fal as no fleshe cā escape, one tyme or other, then call me shortly backe agayne, and let me not synke to depe ther in: and thoughe I yet fall neuer so depe, yet LORD let not the wayt of mercye be stopped, sygnifyenge that it is impossible to stande of oureselues, and much lesse to ryse agayne. Whiche impotencie and fe∣blenesse is damnable in the law of God, excepte that we sawe it, and repēted, and were fled to Christ for mercy: whych he geueth abundaūtly vnto thē that requyre it wyth a faythfull harte, and not waue∣rynge fayth. ¶ The .ii. Chapter. MY lytle chyldren, I vvryte these thynges vnto you that ye synne not. And though ony man synne, yet vve haue an Aduocate vvith the father, euen Iesus Christ, vvhich is ryghteous.
I wryte vnto you on the one syde, that God is lyghte, and therfore that no man which wyllinglye walketh in the vnfrute¦ful workes of darknesse, hath ony fellow∣shyp wyth that lyght, or parte in y• bloude of his sonne. And thys I wryte and testify vnto you my deare chyldren, that ye synne not, that is, yt ye consent not vnto synne, & shulde synne of lust and purpose malycy∣ously: but contrarywyse that ye feare god and resyst synne wyth all your myght and power, accordynge as ye haue promysed. For whosoeuer synneth of purpose after the knowlge of the truth, thesame synneth agaynst the holy goost remedylesse. Hebre. vi. and also .x. And on the other syde, I testifye vnto you that we be alwaye synners, though not of purpose & malice, after the natur of damned deuels, but of infirmitie and frayl¦tye of oure flesh, whyche flesh not only let¦teth vs that oure workes can not be per∣fect, but also nowe and then thorow many¦folde occasions and temptacions caryeth vs clene oute of the ryghte waye, spyte of oure hartes. How be it (I saye) yf when the rage is past, we turne vnto the ryghte waye agayne, and confesse oure synnes vn¦to oure father wyth a repentynge harte, he
hath promysed vs mercye, and is true to fulfyll it. So that yf we synne not diuel∣lyshlye agaynst the holy goost, refusynge the doctrine whiche we can not improue that it shulde not be true, but after y• frayl¦tye of man, ther is no cause to dispayre: For we haue an aduocat and an interces∣sor wyth the father, euen Iesus Christ that is ryghteous. The name of oure aduocat is Iesus, Aduocate. that is to saye, a saueoure. Call hys name Iesus sayde the angell to Ioseph, for he shall saue his people from theyr synnes. Math. i. And thys aduocat and our Iesus to saue vs from oure synnes, continueth euer, as it is wrytten▪ Hebre. vii. and hath Sempiternum sacerdotium. an euerla∣stynge office to make an atonement for synne. By the reason wherof sayeth the text, he is able euer to saue thē that come to God thorowe hym, wyth repentaunce and faythe, and lyueth euer, to speake for vs. And besyde that, oure Iesus is God and almyghtye. He toke oure nature vpon hym, and felte all oure infyrmyties and syknesses, and in felynge learned to haue compassion on vs, & for compassion cryed myghtely in prayers to God the father for vs, and was herd. And ye voyce of thesame
bloude that once cryed, (not for vēgeaūce as Abels, but for mercye only) and was herd, cryeth nowe and euer, and is euer herd, as ofte as we cal vnto remēbraunce wyth repentynge fayth howe that it was shed for our synnes. He is also called Chri¦stus, Christus. that is to saye kynge anoynted with all myght and power ouer synne, death, & hel, and ouer all synnes, so that none that flyeth vnto hym, shall euer come into iudgement of damnatiō. He is anoynted wyth all fulnesse of grace and hath al the treasure and riches of the sprete of God in hys hande, wyth y• whych he blesseth al men, accordynge to the promyse made to Abraham, and is therto mercyfull to geue vnto all that cal on hym. And how much he loueth vs, I report me vnto the ensam¦ple of hys dedes. And he is ryghteous, both toward God in that he neuer synned, and therfor hath optayned al his fauoure and grace, and al¦so towarde vs, in that he is true to fulfyll all the mercye that he hath promysed vs, euen vnto the vttermoost iote. And he is the satisfaction for our syn¦nes, & not for oures only, but also for al the vvorldes. That I call satisfaction, the Greke cal¦leth Satisfactiō what it is.
Ilasmos, and the Hebrewe Copar. And it is fyrst taken for the swagynge of woundes, sores, and swellynges, and the takynge away of payne and smart of thē And thence is borowed for the pacifyeng and swagynge of wrath and anger, and for an amendes makynge, a contentyng, satisfaction, a raimsome, and makynge at one, as it is to se abundatlye in the Byble. So that Christe is a full conten∣tynge, satisfaction and raunsone for our synnes. And not for oures only whyche are Apostles and disciples of Christ whyle he was yethere, or for oures whiche are Iewes or Isralites and the sede of Abra¦ham, or for ours that nowe beleue at this present tyme: but for all mens synnes, both for theyr synnes whiche went before and beleued the promyses to come, and for oures which haue sene them fulfilled, and also for all them whiche shall after∣warde beleue vnto the worldes ende, of whatsoeuer nation or degre they be. For Paule commaundeth .i. Timothe .ii. to praye for all mē & all degrees, sayeng that to be acceptable vnto our saueoure God, which wyll haue all men saued and come to the knowlege of the truth, that is some of all nations and al degrees, and not the
Iewes only. For (sayeth he) ther is one God, and one mediatoure betwene God and man, the man Christe Iesus, whiche gaue hymself a redemption and ful satis∣faction for all men. Dauid also sayde in y• xviii. Psalme: Theyr sounde is gone tho¦rowout all the earth. So that the benefyt stretched on all men. Let thys therfore be an vndoubted ar∣ticle of thy faythe, not of an hystorye faythe as thou beleuest a yeste of Alexan¦dre, or of the olde Romaynes, but of a lyuely faythe and belefe, to putte thy trust and confydēce in, and to bye and sell theron, as we say, & to haue thy sinnes ta∣kē away, & thy soule saued therby, yf thou hold it fast: and to cōtinue euer in synne, & to haue thy soule damned yf thou let it slyp, that our Iesus, oure saueoure that sa¦ueth hys people from theyr synnes, & oure Christ, that is oure kynge ouer all synne, death, and hell, anoynted with fulnesse of all grace, and with the sprite of God, to distribut vnto all men, hath accordynge vnto the Epistle to the Hebrues and all the scripture, in the dayes of hys mortall fleshe, wyth fastynge, prayenge, sufferynge and cryenge to God myghtely for vs, & wyth sheddynge hys bloude made full sa∣tisfaction
both a pena and a culpa (wyth oure holy fathers leue) for all the synnes of the worlde, bothe of theyrs that wente be∣fore, and of theyrs that come after in the fayth, whether it be origynall synne or ac∣tuall. And not only the synnes committed with consent to euell in tyme of ignoraūce before the knowlege of the truthe: but also the synnes done of fcaylte after we haue forsaken euell, and consented to the lawes of God in oure hartes, and walke in the lyght of hys doctryne. He saueth his people from theyr synnes Christ only is oure Sa¦ueoure. Math. i. and that he only. So that ther is none other name to be saued by. Actu. iiii. And vnto hym beare all the Prophetes re¦corde, that al that beleue in hym, shall re¦ceaue remyssion of theyre synnes, in hys name. Actu the .x. chap. And by hym only we haue an entrynge in vnto ye father and vnto all grace. Ephe. ii. and .iii. and. Ro. v. And as many as come before him are the∣ues and murtherers. Ioh. x. that is, who so euer preacheth ony other forgeuenesse of synne then thorow fayth in his name, the same slayeth the soule. Thys to be true, not onely of orygy∣nall but also of actuall, and aswell of that we commytte after our professyon, as be¦fore,
mayest thou euidently se by y• ensā∣ples of the scripture. Christe forgaue the woman takē in adultery. Ioh. viii. and an other whom he healed Ioh. v. And he for∣gaue publycanes and open synners, and put none to do penaunce as they call it, for to make satisfaccyon for the synne: which he forgaue thorow repentaunce & sayth, but enioyned them the lyfe of pe∣naunce, the profession of theyr baptyme, to tame the flesh in kepynge the cōmaun¦dementes, and that they shulde synne no more. And those synners were for y• most parte Iewes, & had theyr originall synne forgeuen them before thorowe fayth in the testament of God. Christ forgaue his Apostles theyr actuall synnes after theyr profession which they commytted in denyenge hym, and put none to do pe∣naunce for satisfaccyon. Peter Actu. ii. absolueth the Iewes thorow repentaūce and fayth frō theyr actuall synnes, which they dyd in consentynge vnto Christes death, and enioyned them no penaūce to make satisfaccion. Paule also had his ac¦tuall synnes forgeuen hym frely thorow repentaunce and fayth, without mentiō of satisfaccyon. Actu. ix. So yt accordynge vnto this presente texte of Ihon, yf it
chaunce vs to synne of fraylte, let vs not despayre, for we haue an abuocate and in¦tercessour, a true attourney wyth the fa¦ther Iesus Christe ryghteous towarde God and man, and is the reconcilynge & satisfaccion for our synnes. For Christes workes are perfecte, so that he hath obtayned vs all mercy & hath set vs in the full state of grace & fauoure of God, and hath made vs as welbeloued as the angels of heauen, thoughe we be yet weake. As the yonge chyldren though they can do no good at all, are yet as ten∣derly beloued as the olde. And God for Christes sake hath promysed that what so euer euell we shall do, yet yf we turne & repente, he wyll neuer more thynke on our synnes. Thou wylt say, God forgeueth the Popysh for¦geuenesse. displaysure but we muste suffre payne to satisfye the ryghteousnesse of God. A thā God hath a ryghteousnesse whych maye not forgeue payne and all, that the poore synner myght go skot fre wythout ought at all. God was vnryghteous to forgeue the thefe hys payne, and all thorow repen¦taunce and fayth, vnto whom for lacke of leasure was no penaunce enioyned. And my fayth is, that what so euer ensample
of mercy God hath shewed one, that same he hath promysed all. Yf I owe you .xx. li. ye wyl forgeue me, that is, ye wyl nomore be angrye, but I shall paye you the twēty poundes: O popyshe forgeuenesse, wyth whome it goeth after the commune pro∣uerbe, no peny no pardon. Hys fatherhead geueth pardon frely, but we must pay mo¦ny abundauntly. Paules doctrine is. Roma. iiii. Yf a man worke, it oughte not to be sayde, that hys hyre was geuen hym of grace or fa∣uoure, but of duety: But to hym that wor¦keth not, but beleueth in hym that iustify∣eth the vngodlye, hys fayth (he sayeth not hys workes although he commaūdeth vs deligentlye to worke, and despyseth none that God commaundeth,) hys fayth (say∣eth he) is rekened hym for ryghteousnesse. Confirmynge hys sayenge wyth the testi∣mony of the prophete Dauid in the .xxxi. Psalme, sayenge: Blessed is the man vnto whome God imputeth or rekeneth not hys synne: that is to saye, whych man al∣thoughe he be a synner, yet God layed it not vnto hys charge for hys faythes sake. And in the .xi. he sayeth. Yf it come of grace than it commeth not of workes. For than were grace no grace sayeth he. For it was
a very straunge speakynge in Paules ea∣res to call that grace that came of deser∣uynge of workes: Or that deseruynge of workes, whyche came by grace. For he rekened workes and grace to be contrarye in such maner of speche. But oure holy father hath coupled them together of pure lyberalite I dare saye, and not for coue∣tousnesse. For as hys holynesse, yf he haue a cause agaynste ony man, immediatlye breatheth out an excommunicacion vpon hym, and wyl haue satisfaccion for the vt∣termoost farthynge and somewhat aboue, to teache them to beware agaynste ano∣ther tyme, yer he wyll blesse agayne from the terrible sentence of hys heuy curse: Euen so of that blessed complexion he de∣scribeth the nature of the mercy of God, that God wyl remytte hys anger to vs vp¦pon the appoyntment of oure satisfaccion. Where as the scripture sayeth: Christe is oure ryghteousnesse, iustifyenge, oure re∣dempcion, oure attonemente, that hath ap¦peased God, and clensed vs from our syn∣nes, & all in hys bloude, so that hys bloude is the satisfaccion only. And that thou mayest the better per∣ceaue Workes cā be no satis∣faccion for synnes to Godwarde. the falshed of our holy fathers flesh ly ymagiuacion, call to mynde howe that
the scripture sayeth, Iohan. iiii. God is a sprete, & must be worshipped in the spretes that is, repentaunce, fayth, hope, and loue towarde hys lawe and our neghboure for hys sake, is hys worship in the sprete. And therfore who so euer worshippeth God wyth workes, and referreth hys workes to God, to be asacrifice vnto hym, to ap∣peare hym, as thoughe he delyted in the worke for the workes sake, the same ma∣keth of God an ymage or ydoll, and is an ymage secuer, and as wycked an ydola∣trer, as euer was ony blynde Heythen, & serueth God after y• ymaginacion of hys owne harte, & is abominable vnto God, as thou seyst in how many places God de¦fyeth the sacrifyce of the chyldren of Is∣rael, for the sayd ymaginacyon. So that who so euer supposeth that hys candle stic¦kynge before the ymage, hys puttynge a peny in y• bore, hys goynge a pylgrimage hys fastynge, hys wolwarde goynge, bare foote goynge, hys crouchynge, knelynge, and payne takynge, be sacrifice vnto god as though he delyted in them, as we in ye gestures of Iacknapes, is as blinde, as he that gropeth for hys waye at noone. Gods worship is to loue hym for hys Gods wor∣p. mercy, and of loue bestowe all oure wor∣kes
vpon our neghboure for hys sake, and vpon the tamynge of oure fleshe, that we synne not agayne, whych shulde be y• che∣fest care of a christen man: whyle Christ careth for that, that is once past and com¦mytted already, whether before oure pro∣fession or after. For the condicions of the peace that is made betwene God and vs in Christes bloude are these: The lawe is set before vs, vnto the whych yf we con∣sente and submyt our selues, to be scolers therof, than are not only all oure foresyn¦nes forgeuen, both pena and culpa (wyth oure fathers lycence euer) but also of oure infirmities, weaknesse, pronite, redynesse & motions vnto synne are pardoned and taken aworth, and we translated from vnder the damnacion of the lawe, which dampneth as wel those infirmities as the synne that spryngeth of them, and put∣teth vs vnder grace, Ro. vii. So that we shall not hence forth, as longe as we for∣sake not oure profession be iudged by the ryghteousnesse of the lawe, but chastised yf we do amysse, as chyldren that are vn∣der no lawe. Now than yf God in Christ pardō our infirmyties, by reasō of whych we can not escape but that we shall now and than synne: it followeth that he must
lykewyse pardon the actuall synne whych we do, compelled of those infyrmities in spyte of oure hartes and agaynst the wyll of the sprete. For yf thou pardon the sycke¦nesse of the sycke, than muste thou pardon the dedes whych he doth or leaueth vndon by the reason of hys sycknesse. Yf the mad∣nesse of a madde man be pardoned, and vn¦der no lawe, than yf he murther in hys madnesse, he maye not be slayne agayne. Yf chyldren wythin a certayne age are not vnder the lawe that flayeth theues, than can ye not of ryght hāge thē, though they steale. What Popysh pardonynge were that? Thys doth Paule Roma. the vii. chap. so confirme, that all ye worlde can not quytch agaynst it, sayenge: I consente vnto the lawe of God that it is good, and fayne wolde I do it, and yet haue I not al∣wayes power so to do, but fynde another thynge in my fleshe, rebellynge agaynste the wyll of my mynde, and leadynge me captiue into synne, so that I can not do that I wolde do, but I am compelled to do that I wolde not. Yf (sayeth he) I do that I wolde not, than I do it not, but the synne that dwelleth in me doth it, and thā sayeth he: Who shall delyuer me from thys body of death, in the whyche I am
bounde presoner agaynst my wyl? Than∣kes Christes victory. be to God (sayeth he) thorowe Iesus Christ our LORDE, whych hath conque∣red & ouercome sinne, death, and hel, & hath put the damnacion of the lawe out of the waye, vnto all that professe the lawe & be∣leue in hym. We be vnder the law to learne it, and to fashion oure dedes as lyke as we can: but not vnder the damnacion of the lawe, that we shulde be damned thoughe oure dedes were not as perfecte as the law requyreth, or thoughe of fraylte we at a tyme brake it. As chyldren are vnder the lawe that they steale not, but not vnder the damnacion thoughe they steale. So that all they that are grafted into Christe to followe hys doctrine, are vnder ye lawe to learne it only, but are delyuered from feare of euerlastynge death and hell, and all the threatenynges of the lawe, and frō conscience of synne, whyche feared vs frō God. And we are come in to God tho∣rowe the confidence that we haue in Ie∣sus Christe, & are as famylyar and bolde wyth hym, as yonge innocente chyldren whyche haue no conscience of synne, are wyth theyr fathers and mothers, or them that norysh them. Whych were impos∣sible yf God now (as the B. of Ro. payn∣teth
hym) dyd shake a rodde at vs of .vii. yeares punishment, as sharpe as the pay¦nes of hel for euery trespas we do, whych trespasses for the nombre of them were lyke to make our purgatorye almoost as lōge as hel, seynge we haue no gods word that we shalbe deliuered thence, vntyl we haue payde the last farthynge. And ther∣fore coulde our conscience neuer be at rest nor be bolde and familiar wyth God. Yf ye say the B. of R. can delyuer my conscience from feare of purgatorye (as hys poetrye onely putteth me in feare) & that by thys texte: what so euer thou byn¦dest Bynde and owse. on earth. &c. Yf thou thys way vnder¦stande the texte, what so euer thou beyng in earth, lousest ouy where, than myghte he louse in hel & bynde in heauē. But why Note thys texte, maye not I take the texte of Christ, Ihon xvi. what so euer ye axe my father in my name he wyll geue it you, and desyre for∣geuenesse of altogether in Christes name both a pena & culpa, and than remayneth no suche purgatory at all. How be it the texte of byndynge and lousynge is but bo¦rowed speche, howe that after the simili∣tude of worldly byndyng & lousynge, loc∣kyng & vnlockyng, y• worde of God truely preached doth bynd & louse the cōscience.
God sayeth to Hieremy the prophete in his .i. Chap. Behold I geue the power ouer nations and kyngdoms, to plucke vp by y• rootes and to sheuer in peces, to destroye and cast downe, & to buyld and plāt. How did he destroye nations and kyngdomes, and how dyd he buyld thē? verely by prea∣chyng and prophecieng. What natiō kyng¦dome or Cytie he prophecyed to be ouer∣throwen, was so. And what Cytie he pro∣phecyed to be buylt agayne, was so: and what nation, after they wer brought into captiuitie he prophecied to be restored a∣gayn, were so: and whom he prophecied to peryshe, peryshed: and whō he prophecyed to be saued, was saued. Euen so whō so euer a true preacher of Gods word sayth shalbe dāned for his sin, because he wyll not repent and beleue in Christ, thesame is dāned: and whō so euer a true preacher of gods word sayth shalbe saued, because he repenteth & beleueth in Christes bloud, ye same is saued. And thys is the byndynge and losyng yt Christ ment Not withstondyng ye must vnderstōde that whē we haue synned, though our har¦tes were not to synne, & though we repent¦yer the dede be done, yet the body in syn∣nynge hath ouercōme the sprite, and hath
gottē the mastry. So that y• sprite is nowe weaker and febler to vertue and to follow the lawe of God & doctrine of Christ, and the flesh stronger to followe vice & synne. Wherfore as when an olde sore is broken forth agayn, we begynne as it were a new cure wyth greater diligēce and more care thē before: euē so here we must renewe our olde battayle agaynst ye flesh, & more stron¦gly go to worke, to subdue it, accordyng to the profession of our baptyme which is y• very sacrament or sygne of repētaūce, or yf they wyl so haue it called penaūce, by y• in∣terpretatiō of Paule Ro. vi. For ye plun∣gyng in to y• water, as it betokēneth on y• one parte y• Christ hath washed our soules with his bloude, euen so on y• other parte it sygnifyeth y• we haue promysed to quench and slaye y• lustes of the flesh, with prayer fastynge, and holy meditacion, after the doctryne of Christ, & with al godly exercise that tame the fleshe and kylle not ye man. Wher vpon the bysshoppes that succe∣ded Howe pe∣naūce came vp & purga¦tory. the Apostles, (when men had don ony open synnes) enioyned them penaunce as they call it, by the authorite of the congre∣gacion and gouerners therof, and aduyse of the moost wyse and discrete, and with ye wyllynge consente of the trespassers, to
tame the flesh, as to go wolward, to wear shyrtes of heere, to go bare foote and bare heade, to praye, to faste bread and water, some once in ye weke, some twyse or all the weke, an whole yeare .ii. yeares .iii. yeares vii. yeares .xx. yeares, and some all theyre lyues longe, and to go on pylgrimage, to byset the memoriall of Saynts, to strēgth them the better to followe theyr ensam∣ple and such lyke, & all to slay the worldly mynde of the fleshe. Whiche maner when it was once receaued of the people by co∣stume, it became a lawe. And the byshops by lytle and lytle gat it whole into theyr owne handes. When byshoppes sawe that, how they had gotten the symple people vnder them in suche humble obedience, they keganne to set vp theyr crestes, and to raygne ouer them as princes, and to enoyne sore pe∣naunce for smalle trifles, namelye yf ought were done agaynste theyre pleasure and some they bet sore, and spared other, & solde theyr penaunce to the ryche, and o∣uerladed the poore, vntyl the tyranny was waren so greueous, that the people wolde beare it no lenger. For by thys tyme what wyth the multitude of Ceremonyes and heape of mens constitucions, whose ryght
vse was therto clene forgotten: and part∣ly because oure shepeherdes were busyed to seke themselues and theyr hye autho∣rite, and exalted euery man hys trone, & were become wolues vnto the flock. The cause why the people were disobediēt vn∣to wholsome counsel was, that the worde of God was sore darkened and no where purely preached. And therfore the pre∣lates loth to lose theyr hygh authorite & to let the people go fre out of theyr yocke beganne to turne theyr tale and synge a newe songe, howe that thys penaūce was enioyned to make satisfaction to God for the synne that was committed, robbynge our soules of the frute of Christes bloude and makynge vs image seruaūtes, refer∣rynge oure dedes vnto the person of God and worshyppynge hym as an ymage of Here was purgatorye kyndled. our owne ymaginatiō with bodely worke saynge morouer: Yf we wold not do suche penaunce here at theyr iniunctions, we must do it in another worlde, and fayned purgatory where we muste suffre .vii. yeares for euery sinne. And whē ye kyngdō of Antichrist was so enlarged, that it must haue an heade, they set vp our holy father of Rome, or he rather vsurped the rowme wyth vyolence, & to hym was geuē thys
prerogatiue to sell whom he wolde from purgatorye. And the sacramēt of penaūce they thus describe: Contrition, Confession, and Sa¦tisfaction. Contrition, sorowe for thy syn∣nes: Confession, not to God and them whom thou hast offended: but tel thy syn¦nes in the prestes eare: Satisfactiō to do certayne dedes enioyned of them to bye out thy synnes. And in theyr description they haue clene excluded the fayth in the satisfactiō of Christes bloude, which only bringeth lyfe and the sprite of life, & righte¦ousnesse, and without the which it is vn∣possible to please God. Hebr. xi. In whose steade they haue put in the presumpcyon of our owne workes. And for lack of trust in Christes bloude, our contritiō is but a frutelesse sorowe in the respecte of hell, which maketh vs hate the lawe styll, and consequently God that made it, where true contrition annexed with fayth is so∣rowe in respect of the lawe, vnto ye which we consent that it is good, and loue it, & therfor mourne partely because we haue offended it, and partely because we lacke power to fulfyll it as we wolde. These thynges to be true oure prelates knowe by opē historyes, as wel, as that it
is noone whē the Sōne is flatsowth: but it delyteth them to resiste the holy goost, and to persecute ye preachers of the thyn∣ges, which yf they as well loued them as they knowe them to be true, they wolde preache the same them selues, and lyue therafter. Hereby ye may se yt our workes are but to tame the fleshe only, and can be no satisfactiō to God, except we make hym an image, and oure selfes image ser∣uaūtes. And hereby ye may se how out of thys open penaunce came the eare cōfes∣siō, satisfactiō of workes, purgatorye and pardons. For when they had putte the satisfaction of Christes bloude out of the waye, then as they compelled men to con∣fesse open synnes, and to take opē penaun¦ce, euen so they compelled them to con∣fesse secrete synnes and to take secrete pe∣naunce. And as they made marchaundise of opē penaūce, so dyd they of secrete. And for them that wold not receaue suche par¦don, fayned they purgatorye: and for thē that receaued them, fayned they pardon: turnynge byndyng and losyng with prea∣chynge Gods worde vnto byenge and sellynge synne for mony. And sence that tyme hetherto, the worse the people were, the better were the prelates contēte, euer
resistynge that they shuld be made better thorow theyr blessed couetousnesse and proude desyre of honoure. And out of thys false presumption of workes, sprange the wycked vowes of re∣lygion, which they vowe to make satisfac¦tion for synne, and to be hygher in heauē, in steade of the lyfe of penaunce which Christ taught vs in the Gospell to tame the flesh and to crucifye the mēbres wyth all, that we hence forth shulde walke in ye wayes of Gods law, and synne nomore. And to speak of worshyppyng of sayntes & prayeng, vnto thē & of that we make thē our aduocates wel nye aboue Christe, or altogether, thoughe it requyre a longe disputacyon, yet it is as bryght as ye daye to all that knowe the truth, how that our fastynge of theyr euens, & kepynge theyr holy dayes, goynge bare foote, styckynge vp of candels in the bryghte daye in the worshippe of them, to optayne theyr fa∣uoure, or geuynge them so costly yewels, offerynge into theyr boxes, clothynge theyr ymages, shuynge them with syluer shues, with an ouch of Cristal in y• myd∣des, to strake the ppes and eyes of the ygnoraunt, as a man wolde strake yonge chyldrens heades, to entyce thē & brynge
them in, and rocke them aslepe in ygno∣raunce: are wyth all lyke seruyce playne ydolatrye, that is in Englyshe ymage ser∣uyce. For the sayntes are spretes, and can haue no delectacion in bodely thynges. And because those bodelye dedes can be no seruyce vnto the spirituall sayntes, and we do them not to be a seruyce to oure sel∣ues or our neghbours: we serue the worke and the false ymaginacion of oure fleshlye wytte, after the doctrine of man, and not of God, and are ymage seruauntes. And thys is it that Paule calleth seruire ele¦mētis mundi, to be in captiuite vnder domme ceremonies and vayne traditions of mens doctryne, and to do the worke for the worke it selfe, as though God delyted therin for the dede it selfe, wythoute all o∣ther respecte. But and ye wyll know the true wor∣shyppynge of sayntes, herken vnto Paule Philip. ii. where he sayeth: Ye shyne as lyghtes in the worlde, holdynge faste the worde of lyfe vnto my glory or worshyp, agaynste the daye of Iesu Christe, that I haue not runne nor laboured in vayne. That is to wete, the worshyp whyche all true sayntes now seke, and the worshippe, that all the true messaungers of God
seke thys daye, or euer shal seke, is to draw all to Christe wyth preachynge the true worde of God, and wyth the ensample of pure lyuynge fashioned therafter. Wyl ye therfore worship sayntes truely? than axe what they preached, and beleue theyr doc∣trine. And as they followed that doctrine, so cōforme your lyuynge lyke vnto theyrs. And that shalbe vnto theyr hygh worship in the commynge agayne of Christ (whan all mens dedes shall appeare, & euery man shalbe iudged and receaue hys rewarde ac¦cordynge vnto hys dedes) howe that they not onely whyle they here lyued, but also after theyr death wyth the ensāple of theyr doctrine and lyuynge lefte behynde in wry¦tynge and other memorials, vnto the en∣sample of them that shulde followe, wāne vnto Christ them that were borne. v hun∣dreth, yee a thousande yeares after theyr death. Thys was theyr worship in ye spret at the begynnynge as they were spretes, & The styc∣kynge vp of candels be∣fore yma∣ges. lyghtes were stycked before theyr memori¦als at the begynnynge to be a ceremonye to put vs in remembraūce that we so pray¦sed the sayntes and boasted theyr lyuyn∣ges that we followed theyr ensamples in our dedes, as Christe sayeth Math. v. Let your lyght so shyne before men, that they
se youre good workes, and glorifye youre father that is in heauen. For preachynge of the doctrine, whyche is lyght, hath but small effecte to moue the harte, yf the en∣sample of lyuynge do disagre. And that we worship sayntes for feare lest they shulde be displeased and angrye wyth vs, & plage vs or hurte vs, (as who is not afrayed of saynte Laurence? who darre deny saynt Anthonye a flese of woll for feare of hys terrible fyre, or leste he sende the pockes among our shepe?) is Hey¦then ymage seruyce, and clene agaynst the fyrste commaundemente, whych is: Heare Israel the LORDE thy God is one God. Now God in the Hebrwe is called Elor: Elohim in the plurel nombre, strength or myght. So that the commaundement is: Heare Israel he that is thy power & might Note thys for the fyrst cōmaunde∣ment. thy swearde and shylde is but one, that is, ther is none of myght to helpe or hurte the saue one, whych is altogether thyne at thy commaundement, yf thou wylte heare his voyce only. And all other myght in the worlde, is borowed of hym. And he wyll lende no myght agaynst the contrarye to hys promyses: kepe therfore hys commaū∣dementes, and he shall kepe the. And yf thou haue broken them, and he haue lente
of hys power agaynst the, repente & come agayne vnto thy profession, and he wyl re¦turne agayne vnto hys mercye and fetche hys power home agayne, whyche he lente to vexe the, because thou forsokest hym and brakest hys commaūdementes. And feare none other creature: for false feare is the cause of all Idolatrye. Moreouer all we that are baptysed in Christ haue professed to do good for e∣uell, and not to auenge oure selues. And many of vs come to such perfeccion that we can be prouoked by no temptacion to desyre vengeaunce, but haue compassion, and mekely praye for them that slaye vs. How wycked a thynge than is it to thynke that the sayntes trouble and plage vs, because we do them not suche supersti∣cious honoure, whych is theyr dishonoure and oure shame? It is verely a Popysh y∣maginacion, and euen to describe the sayn¦tes after the nature of our prelates, which be meke and lowly tyll they be where they wolde be: But whan they be once alofte, they playe the tormentours yf we wyl not honoure them, & do what soeuer they com¦maunde more earnestly, than that whych God hymselfe hath commaunded, & feare them aboue God hymselfe.
And it can be but lyke abominacion also, that we chose of a fleshly mynde euery man hys seuerall saynte, or rather seueral God, to be our aduocates, attorneys me∣diatours, (whā ther is but one .i. Tim. ii) and intercessours, and call them oure ad∣uouryes, whan we myght better call them Aduouryes our adulterers, and serue them, or rather a paynted post in theyr steade, wyth our y∣mage seruice, therewyth to bynde them for to helpe vs, whan soeuer and for whatsoe∣uer we cal vnto them, and to saue our sou¦les therto wyth theyr prayers and merites & wyll yet nother heare the doctrine or fol∣lowe the ensample of lyuynge (whyche is theyr onely honoure in the sprete) of ony saynt, whose doctrine & lyuyng is autētyk For fyrst, God whych alone hath po∣wer to helpe or hurte, hath made appoynt∣mēt betwixt hym & vs in Christes bloude & hath bounde hymselfe to geue vs what so euer we axe in his name, testifyeng ther¦to that ther is none other name to besaued by, and that he wilbe a father vnto vs and saue vs both in this lyfe, and in the lyfe to come, and take vs from vnder the damna∣cion of the lawe, and set vs vnder grace & mercy, to be scolers only to learne the law and that our vnperfecte dedes shalbe takē
in worth: yee and thoughe at a tyme we marre all thorowe oure infirmyte, yet yf we turne agayne, that shalbe forgeuen vs mercyfully, so that we shalbe vnder no dā¦nacion: whych testament is confirmed wt sygnes and wonders wrought thorow the holy goost. Now thys indented obligaciō layde aparte, we make another of oure owne ymaginacion betwene the sayntes & vs, in theyr merytes for our ymage seruyce Whych can be but a false fayth, seynge it hath not Gods worde (vnto whych alone we ought to clene) but it is also clene con∣trarye therto. And agayne the sayntes were not sa∣ued thorowe theyr owne merytes, but tho∣row Of the me∣rytynge of sayntes. Christes. Nother were theyr dedes, whych they dyd after they were receaued vnder grace, sufficient in themselues to ful¦fyll the lawe for the present tyme, saue as Christes merytes dyd supplye the imper∣fectnesse of them, and that whych was lac¦kynge on theyr parte thorowe theyr infir∣mytyes. And therfore as the sayntes holy workes made no satisfaccion for the synne that they dyd before they were receaued vnder mercy: euen so made they none for the deadly synnes, whyche they dyd vn∣der mercy: seyng the dedes were vnperfecte
and had synne annexed vnto them by rea∣son of the flesh, and were insufficient to ex¦cuse theyr owne maysters. What mery∣tes haue they in store for vs than, seynge by all mens confession they nowe meryte not? Yf the moost obedient chylde in the worlde disobeye hys fathers commaunde∣mentes, hys fore good dedes can not make that disobedience to be no synne, or to be a satisfaccion, that the chylde shuld presume in the cōfidence of hys olde dedes & thynk hys father shulde do hym wronge to pu∣nyshe hym. But he muste knowlege hys faulte, and that he hath deserued punyshe∣ment, and desyre forgeuenesse vnto the glo¦rye of hys fathers mercyfulnesse, and not of hys olde dedes, thoughe hys olde obedi∣ence be a greate presumpcion that he syn∣neth of frayltye and not of purpose. Euen so yf I beynge as holy as euer was Paule in hys moost holynesse, synne thys day tho¦row fraylty of my flesh, myne old good de¦des can be no satisfaccion, but I muste knowlege my synne vnto my father and graunte that I haue deserued damnacion, & mekely desyre forgeuenesse, and chalēge it by the obligacion where in God hathe bounde hymselfe to me, vnto the glorye of the mercye of God, and not to the glory
of my holy dedes. For yf my dedes saue me, it is my glory. But yf he forgeue frely without respect of my dedes, then it is the glorye of his mercy by Paules doctrine vnto the Romaynes. Moreouer yf the sayntes be in hea∣uen, then can they be there in none other case thē y• aungels, in which state Christ testifyeth they shalbe in the resurrecion. Now the aungels are mynisters sente of Theangels serue vs. God to do seruyce vnto the electe which shalbe saued. Hebr. i. And hath boūde hym¦selfe yf I come in the ryght waye by the dore of Christes bloude, and are helpe, y• he wyll sende me (yf nede be,) an hundreth legions of aungels or sayntes. But when God hath bounde hymselfe to sende me aungels or sayntes, or an angel or saynt, he hath not promysed to sende this angel or that, or this or that saint. And therfore whan I appoynt God whom he shal send, and bynde hym where he hath not boūde hymselfe, to sende me what saynt I wyl, I tempt God. And thus this chosynge of seueral sayntes is but temptynge of God. And yet we do worse then this: for we leaue the way of Christes bloude and go not to God thorow hym, but runne to y• sayntes in a testament of our owne ma∣kynge,
& wyll that they ether saue vs them¦selues for our ymage seruyce, or compell God for theyr merytes sakes to saue vs. Why goest thou not vnto thy father thyn owneselfe? I am a synner wyll they saye & dare not. Yf thou go in the ryght waye, thou hast no synne. Christe hath taken all thy synnes from the, and God hath no rod in hys hande, nor loketh foure, but merely, that it is a lust to beholde hys cherfull coū¦tenaunce, and offereth the hys hande. But thys waye is stopped vp thorow vnbelefe, and therfore we seke another whyche is no way to lyfe, but vnto euerlastynge death. We wyll not loke on the lawe wyth open eyes, and therfore haue we no due repen∣taunce, and so no lust to herken vnto the Gospell of gladde tydynges in Christes bloude. And where the ryght waye is set before vs, & we of malyce wyll not walke therin, God can not but let the deuell play wyth vs, and iuggle our eyes to confirme vs in blyndnesse. But after what maner doth Christe How christ prayeth for vs. pray for vs? Verely Christ in the dayes of hys mortall flesh suffred and prayed for al that shalbe saued, and optayned, and was herde, and had hys peticions graunted. And he made satisfacciō, and purged, and
purchassed forgeuenesse, euen then for al the synnes that euer shalbe forgeuē: And his prayenge for vs, and beynge a media∣tour nowe, is, that the remembraunce of all that he dyd for vs, is present in ye sight of god the father as fresh, as in the houre he dyd them, yee ye same houre is yet pre¦sent and not past in the syghte of God. And Christ is now a kyng and raygneth and hath receaued power of all that he prayed for, to do it hymselfe, and y• when so euer the electe call for ought in his na¦me, he sendeth helpe euen of the power, which he hath receaued: yee yer they axe, he sendeth his sprete in to theyr hartes, to moue them to axe. So that it is his gyfte that we desyre ought in his name. And in all that we do or thynke well, he preuen∣teth vs with his grace: yee he careth for vs yer we care for our selues, and when we be yet euel, he sendeth to call vs, and draweth vs with suche power, that oure hart is can not but consente and come. And the angels stande by and behold the testament of the electe, how we shalbe re¦ceaued into theyr fellowship, and se all y• grace that Christ shall poure out vpō vs. And they reioyce and prayse God for his infinite mercy, and are glad and lōge for
vs, and of very loue are ready agaynst all houres when we shall call for helpe in Christes name, to come and helpe. And Christ sendeth them when we call in his name, and yer we call, euen whyle we be yet euel & happely persecut ye truth of ig∣noraūce (as Paul dyd) the angels wayte vpō vs to kepe yt the deuels slaye vs not, before the tyme of our callynge be come. Now yf an angell shulde appeare vn∣to the, what woldest thou saye vnto him? Yf thou praydest hym to helpe, he wolde answere: I do. Christe hath sent me to helpe ye, and beleue that ye angels be euer aboute y• to helpe. Yf thou desyredest him to praye for the to optayne this or that, he wolde saye: Christ hath prayed, & hys prayer is herde, or what so euer thou ax∣est in his name, he wyl shewe the al that God wolde do to the, and what he wolde also haue the to do. And yf thou bele∣uedest so, then werest thou safe. Yf thou desyredest hym to saue the with hys me∣rytes. He wolde answere that he had no merytes (but yt Christ only is LORDE of all merytes) nor saluacyon, but yt Christ is LORDE of saluacion. Wylte yu ther∣fore be saued by merytes wold the angel saye, then praye to God in Christes na∣me
and thou shalte be saued by the merytes of hym, and haue me or some other thy ser¦uaunte immediatlye to helpe the vnto the vttermoost of our power, and to kepe the, and brynge the vnto the rewarde of hys merytes. Yf thou woldest promyse hym to worshyppe hym wyth ymage seruyce, that is to stycke vp a candle before hys ymage, or suche an ymage as he appeared to the in, he wolde answere that he were a sprete, and delyted in no candle lyghte, but wold byd the geue a candle vnto thy neghboure that lacketh, yf thou haddest to many. And so wolde he answere the, yf thou wol∣dest put mony in a boxe for hym, or clothe hys ymage in clothe of golde, or put goldē shues vpon his ymages foote. Yf thou say¦dest that thou woldest buylde a chappel in his name, he wolde answere that he dwelt in no house made wyth stones, but wolde byd the go to the churches that are made already, and learne of the preacher there howe to beleue, and howe to lyue, and ho¦noure God in the sprete, for the whyche cause churches were chefelye buylded, and for quyetnesse to praye. And yf ther be no church, then to geue of it that thou mayest spare to helpe that one were buylded, to be a preachynge, and a prayenge house, and
of worshyppyng God in sprete, and not of ymage seruyce. And yf Paule appeared vnto the, what other thynge coulde he answere al∣so then that he were a sprete, and wolde re∣fuse all thy ymage seruyce? And yf thou speake to Paule of hys merytes, he can none otherwyse answere the, then he an∣swered his Corinthians, that he dyed for no mans synnes, & that no man was bap∣tysed in his name, to trust in hys merites. He wolde saye, I buylded all men vpon Christes merytes, preachyng that all that repented and beleued in hys name, shulde be saued, and taken from vnder the wrath, vengeaunce, and damnacion of the lawe, and be put vnder mercy and grace. And by thys faythe was I saued from damna∣cion, and put vnder mercy and grace and made one wyth Christe to haue my parte wyth hym, and he wyth me, or rather to make a chaunge: that he shulde haue all my synnes, and I his mercy & the gyftes of his grace, and become glorious wyth ye ornamentes of his ryches. And of my sa∣ueoure Christ I receaued this lawe, that I shulde loue my brethren, all Gods e∣lecte as tenderly as he loued them. And I consented vnto thys lawe, for it semed
ryghte, and became a scoler to learne it. And as I profyted in the knowlege, fayth and loue of Christ, so I grewe in the loue of my brethren, and suffred all thynges for theyr sakes, and at ye last waxed so per¦fecte, that I wyshed my selfe damned (yf it myghte haue ben) to saue my brethren. And all my brethren that receaued Christ receaued the same commaundement, and grewe therin. And they that were perfect loued me and all theyr other brethren, no lesse then I loued them. And loke wt what loue I ministred ye gyftes of grace whych I receaued of Christ for the edifyenge of his congregacion, vpon my brethrē, wyth the same loue dyd they ministre theyr gyf¦tes agayne on me, whiche they had, and I lacked. And so loue made all commune. And moreouer yf they call my workes my merytes, I bestowed all my workes vpon my brethren to teach them, & reaped the feute therof, euen my brethrens edify¦enge and soules health, yee & reape day∣ly, in that I lefte my doctrine and ensam¦ple of lyuynge behynde me, by the whych many are conuerted vnto Christ daylye. Yf thou desyre therfore to enioye parte of my merytes, go and reade in my gos∣pel, and thou shalt fynde the frute of my
laboure, the knowlege of Christ, y• health of thy soule, and euerlastynge lyfe. And as I loued my brethren whē I ly∣ued, so I loue them styll, and nowe more perfectly. How be it my loue then was paynfull: for the more I loued, the more I sorowed, feared, and cared for them, to brynge them in to the knowlege of the truth, and to kepe them in vnite of fayth, lest the false Prophetes shulde deceaue them, or theyr owne infirmytyes shulde breake peace and vnite, or cause them to fall into ony synne. But now my loue is without payne. For I se the wyl and prouidence of God, and howe the ende of all thynges shalbe vnto his glory and profyte of the electe. And though I se the electe shall somtyme fall, yet I se how they shall aryse agayne, and how that theyr fall shalbe vnto ye glo∣rye of God & theyr owne profyte. And we that are in heauen, loue you all alyke nother loue we one more & another lesse. And therfore yf ye loue vs more one thē another, that is fleshly, as myne olde Co¦rinthians once loued, and I rebuked thē. Nother can we be moued to come more to helpe one then another. But we wayt when God wyl sende ony of vs vnto the
electe that call for helpe in Christes name. Wherfore yf thou wylte be holpē of ony of vs, praye in Christes name, and God shall sende one of vs, an angell or a saynt, to kepe the power of the deuels from you: but not whome thou woldest chose, temptynge God, but whome it pleaseth God to sende. And yf youre preachers loue you not af¦ter thesame maner, to edyfye you with the true doctrine of Christe, and ensample of lyuynge ther after, and to kepe you in vny¦tye of fayth & charite, they be not of Chri∣stes disciples, but Antichrist, which vnder the name of Christe, seke to raygne ouer you as temporal tyraūtes. And in lyke ma¦ner: Yf thys be not wryttē in your hartes yt ye ought to loue one another as Christe loued you, and as ye had ensample of vs his Apostles, ye go astray in vanities and are not in the ryght waye. And therby are vve sure that vve knovve hym, yf vve kepe his commaū¦dementes. This is cleane agaynst the doctryne The state of grace. of them which saye that we can not know whether we be in the state of grace or no. Ihon sayeth yf we kepe hys commaunde∣mentes, then we be sure that we knowe
Christe is euerlastyng lyfe Ihō .xvii. Thē contrarye to the byshop of Ro. Christen men haue doctrine to know whether they be in grace or no. The kepyng of Gods cōmaundemētes certifieth vs yt we be in the state of grace But the pharisaycall doctours haue no doctryne to knowe when a man is in the state of grace, wherfore it is manyfeste yt they kepe not Gods commaundementes, nor be in state of grace, but of all vngra∣tiousnesse. Nother know such doctours whether they be in state of grace, but kepe mens commaundementes, ergo mens cōmaun¦dementes certifye not that we be in state of grace. Thoughe thou haue a deuotion to styck vp a candle before a poste, and so forth, yet thou canst neuer be sure therby that thou arte in the fauoure of God. But yf thou haue deuotion to helpe thy brother in all hys mysfortunes, because he is ye ymage of God, and price of Christes bloude, then thy deuotion certifyeth the, that thou arte in the fauoure of God or state of grace. He that sayeth I knovv hym, & yet ke¦peth not his cōmaundementes, is a lyer and the truth is not in hym.
Whan oure pharises saye, do as we A sure argu¦mēt to kno¦we fals pro¦phetes y. dyd you, and not as we do, they testifye that they kepe not Gods commaundemē¦tes, vnto whych testimony oure eyes also beare recorde, & they that kepe not Gods cōmaundementes be lyars, and haue no truth in them. And thā whan they preach, they can not but preach lyes. And than though they preache Christe, they preach hym falsly vnto theyr fleshly vauntage, & not our soules health. And for as muche as we maye haue no fellowship wyth thē that kepe not Gods commaūdementes, i. Cor. v. and in as muche as all suche are false prophetes, voyde of all truth, it follo∣weth that we ought to geue oure doctors no audience, though theyr defēders stode by them wyth theyr sweardes drawen, but rather to laye downe our heades and stretch forth oure neckes, to be slayne. He that kepeth hys vvorde, in him verely is the loue of God perfecte: and hereby knovv vve that vve are in him That is, he that kepeth hys cōmaun¦dementes, loueth vnfaynedly, and is ther¦by sure that he is in God. For to be in God, is to beleue in the mercy of God. And to beleue in mercy, is cause of loue, and loue cause of workynge. And therfore
he that worketh for Gods sake, is sure that he loueth, and that he trusteth in God: whych is to be in God or Christ. And as by wylfull kepynge of the commaunde∣ment A rule to knowe whe¦ther we lo∣ue God or loue hym not. we be sure that we loue God, and be¦leue in God, euen so thorow wylfull brea∣kynge of them we maye be sure that we no¦ther loue nor beleue in hym, and therfore that we be not in hym. He that sayeth he abydeth in him, ought to vvalke as he vvalked. All that be baptysed in Christe, are washē in hym, to put of pryde, wrath, hate and enuye, wyth all theyr olde conuersaci¦on: by the whyche they oppressed theyr neghbours, and haue promysed to become euery man euen as Christe hymselfe vn∣to his brethren in loue and kyndnesse, both in worde and dede. They therfore which resyste Christes testamente, and wyll not let it be knowen, and walke in the testa∣mente of Antichriste of Rome, wyth vni∣ons, pluralities, and tot quots, some one of them, robbynge ten paryshes of y• tenth Loke vpon the B. Ro. owne decre¦es Causa xii. quest. ii. and other places. of all theyr yearely increase, and wythdra∣wynge from them Gods worde, the foode of theyr soules, and from the poore, theyr dayly sustenaunce, whych oughte to haue theyr parte in the tythes and other rentes,
whan the preacher and other necessary mi∣nisters haue oute theyr partes, a due and lawfull stipende: are not in Christe. For Christ nother so walked, nor taught. Brethren I vvryte no nevv cōmaū¦maundement vnto you, but an olde cō∣maundement, vvhych ye had at the be¦gynnynge. For an olde cōmaūdement is the vvorde, vvhych ye herde frō the begynnynge. I wryte no new precepte, but onely put you in remembraunce of that olde, whyche was taughte you whan ye were fyrste baptysed in Christe, to loue eche o∣ther, as he dyd you. Whyche is an olde commaundemente, and was geuen at the begynnynge of the worlde, and hath euer sence bene wrytten in the harte of all that put theyr hope in God. Agayne, a nevv commaundement I vvryte vnto you, vvhyche is true in hym, and also in you: for the darke∣nesse is past, and the true lyght novve shyneth. The deuell hath sowen hys darknesse in the felde, where thys commaundement shulde growe, & the wedes of mēs tradici∣ons had ouergrowen ye corne of thys olde cōmaūdemēt: so that it was waxē olde, &
clene out of knowlege▪ But Christe the lyght of all true doctrine nowe shyneth, & hath scattered the darknesse, and plucked vp the wedes by the rootes, and restored thys olde commaundement agayne. And in hym it is a true commaundement, for he loued truely. And in you it is a true cō¦maundement, for ye for hys sake loue one another truely also. And by the reason of thys renewynge, it is called a newe com∣maundement, as it is nowe called newe learnynge, and may well so be: for it hath lyen longe in darknesse, and that in suche darknesse, that many be shryned for ho∣lye sayntes, whose dedes and lyuynge when thou lokest vpon them, conferryng them to the lyghte of thys olde doctrine y• nowe shyneth agayne out of darknesse, they are abomynable blasphemyes to Gods doctrine, ye which they haue sworne to teach and followe. He that sayth he is in the lyght, & yet hateth hys brother, is in darknesse. For who so euer feleth hys owne dam∣nation vnder the lawe, & beleueth in the mercie that is in Christ, the same can not but loue Christ, and hys neghbour for his sake. And therfore he that hateth hys brother for ony offence done to hym, the
same seyth not what Christ hath done for hym, but is in darknesse styll. He that loueth hys brother abydeth in the lyght: and ther is none offēdyng in hym. Abydeth in the lyght, that is, conti∣nueth in the knowlege of Christ. And ther is none offendynge in hym, that is: Fyrst he wyll wyllyngly do nothynge, ether in worde or in dede that shall offēde his bro∣ther. For loue wyll not let hym. And secō¦darely, yf ought be done or sayd, that may be well done or sayde, he taketh it to the best, and is not offended. And thus ye se that the knowlege of Christ is cause of al goodnesse, and the ignoraunce of Christ is cause of all euell. And so the doctrine of them is not false, whyche saye, that fayth in Christe is the roote of all godly vertue, and the cause of kepynge the com¦maūdemētes: & where faith is, there to be no synne, nor dānacion: and that say, vn∣belefe to be the mother of al vyce, & cause of breakynge the cōmaundementes, and to kepe men in synne and dānacion only, as fayth only louseth vs thence. And he that hateth hys brother, is in darkenesse, and vvalketh in darke∣nesse, & knovveth not vuhether he go¦
eth: for darknes hath blynded his eyes He that hateth hys brother, is in the ignoraunce of Christe, and of hys owne synne, and wythout repentaunce & fayth, that hys synnes be forgeuē him in Christ, and therfore is mercylesse vnto hys bro∣ther, whom Christ commaundeth hym to pytie and loue. And in that ignoraunce he walketh: that is, worketh euell, and loueth the thynges of the world, and seketh in thē the lustes of the flesh, whych are the quen∣chynge of the sprete and death of the soule and for loue of them hateth hys brother. And thys ignoraunce of Christe, whyche is vnbelefe, is cause of all the wyckednesse that we do vnto our brethren. I vvryte vnto you lytle chyldren that your synnes are forgeuen you for hys names sake. I vvryte vnto you fa∣thers, that ye knovv hym that vvas frō the begynnynge. I vvryte vnto you yonge men, hovv that ye haue ouer∣come the vvycked. I wryte vnto you that are yonge in the fayth and yet weake, and therfore fall now and than, how that youre synnes are forgeuen you, as soone as ye repent and re¦concyle youre selues vnto youre brethren, whom ye haue offēded, euē for hys names
sake only, and not for our owne dedes, whe¦ther afore or after, or for ony other mans dedes or satisfaccion, saue for hys only. I wryte vnto you that are fathers in the doctrine of God, to teach other, how that ye knowe hym that was from the be∣gynnyng, and is no newe thynge, though he newly receaued oure nature. And tho∣rowe knowlege of hym (whych is the only lyght and the dore vnto the knowlege of God) ye are become fathers in the scrip∣tures, or els ye had neuer vnderstande it, though ye had studyed neuer so muche, as it appeareth by the indurate Iewes, and al¦so by oure new pharises, whyche persecute the scripture and the true sence therof, be∣cause they be drowned in the ignoraunce of Christ, as theyr dedes and contrarye ly¦uynge well testifye. I wryte vnto you yonge men that are stronge in sufferyng persecucions, & fyght for youre profession, not wyth the sweard, but with sufferyng, how that ye haue ouer¦come that wycked, whyche poysonned the worlde at the begynnyng, and yet worketh in the chyldren of darknesse and vnbelefe: and that in beleuynge the worde of truth, as it followeth anone after. I vvryte vnto you yonge chyldrē
hovv that ye knovve the father. I vvryte vnto you fathers hovv that ye knovve hym that vvas from the be∣gynnynge. I vvryte vnto you yonge men that ye be stronge, and the vvord of God dvvelleth in you, and that ye haue ouercome the vvycked. I wryte to you yonge chyldren home that ye knowe the father, whome ye loue thorowe knowlege of the sonne, or els ye had neuer knowen hym as a father, but as a iudge & a tyraūt, and had hated him. I wryte vnto you fathers as before, how ye are fathers of al truth in knowyng the sonne, or els ye hadde euer continued in darknesse remedylesse. I wryte vnto you yonge men, howe that ye are stronge, and that your strēgth is the worde of God whyche dwelleth in your brestes thorow fayth, in the whyche ye haue ouercome the wycked deuell and all hys pompe, as it followeth in the .v. Chap. thys is the victory that ouercom∣meth the worlde, euen our fayth. Loue not the vvorlde, nor the thin¦ges that are in the vvorlde. Yf a man loue the vvorld, the loue of the father is not in hym. For all that is in the vvorld, as the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eyes, and the pryde of good, are not of the father but are of the vvorld: and the vvorlde vanysheth avvaye, & the luste therof. But he that doeth the vvyll of God, abydeth euer. The loue of the worlde quencheth the Auarice or couetous∣nesse. loue of God. Balaam for the loue of the worlde closed hys eyes at the cleare lyghte which he well sawe. For loue of the world the old pharises blasphemed the holy goost and persecuted the manyfeste truth, which they coulde not improue. For loue of the worlde many are thys daye fallen awaye. And many which stode on the truths syde and defended it a whyle for loue of the worlde, haue gotten them vnto the contra¦rye parte, and are be come the Antichristes of Romes mamelukes, and are waxen the mooste wycked enemyes vnto the truthe and moost cruell agaynst it. They knowe the truth, but they loue the worlde. And when they espyed that the truth could not stond with y• honoures which they sought in the worlde, they hated it deadly & bothe wyttynge and wyllynge persecuted it, syn¦nynge agaynste the holy gooste. Whyche synne shall not escape here vnpunyshed, as it shall not be wythout damnation in the
world to come, but shall haue an ende here with confusion and shame, as had Iudas Iscarioth the traytoure. By the lust of the fleshe is vnderstand The lust of the fleshe & of the eyes. lechery, which maketh a man altogether aswyne: and by the lust of the eyes, is vn∣derstonde couetousnesse, whiche is the roote of al euel, and maketh to erre from the fayth. i. Timoth. the last And then fo∣loweth pryde: which .iii. are the world and capitaynes ouer all other vices, and occa¦sions of all myschefe. And yf pryde, couetousnesse, & lechery be the worlde as saynt Ihon sayeth, then turne youre eyes vnto the spiritualty, vn to the Romane byshop, Cardinals, bys∣shops, abbates, and al other prelates, and se whether such dignityes be not y• world, and whether the way to them be not also the worlde. To get the olde Abbats trea¦sure, I thynke it the redyest waye to be y• newe. Howe fewe come by promotion, ex¦cept they bye it, or serue longe for it, or both? To beskylled in warre and in pol∣lynge, to mayntayn warre and lustes: and to be a good ambassyadoure, is the only waye to a bysshopryke, or to paye truely for it. Se whether pluralyties, vnions, tot quots, and chaungynge the lesse benefyce
and bysshopryke for the greater (for the contrarye chaunge I trowe was neuer sene) maye be without couetousnesse and pryde. And then yf suche thynges be the worlde, and the worlde not of God, howe is oure spiritualtye of God? Yf pryde be sekyng of glorye, and they that seke glorye can not beleue Ihon .v. howe can oure spiritualtye beleue in Christe? Yf coue∣tousnesse turne men from the fayth, how are oure spiritualtye in the faythe? Yf Christ (when the deuel proferred hym the kyngdomes of the worlde and the glorye therof) refused them as thynges vnpossi∣ble to stande wyth hys kyngdome, whiche is not of ye world: of whome are oure spiri¦tualtye, which haue receaued them? Yf Couetous∣nesse. couetousnesse be a traytoure, and taught Iudas to sell hys Master: howe shulde he not in so longe tyme teache oure spiritu∣altye the same crafte? Namelye, when they be of all kynges secretes, and the am¦bassiadours of theyr secretes, and haue therto thorowt all Christendome a secret counsell of theyr owne, of the whiche ne∣uer laye man was partaker, and wyth the which they turne the ende of all appoyn∣tementes vnto theyr owne honoure and profyte. Couetousnesse hath taughte thē
to brynge in damnable sectes accordyng vnto the prophecye of Peter, and to cor∣ruppe the scripture with false gloses, and to turne euery good ordinaunce that had a vertuous begynnynge vnto a vycyous ende. The promotions of the spiritualtye corrupte theyr myndes, wyle they be yet in the shell and vnhatched. For they come thyther but for couetousnesse, and to a∣uoyde the crosse of Christe in the worlde: except thē that be compelled of theyr frē¦des, or be so symple that they marke not theyr falshed beforhande. Who knowyng the truth & louyng it, wold put his heade in ye Romysh byshops haltre that so mose¦leth mens mouthes, that they cā not opē them to defende ony truthe at all? When temporall kynges were in theyr hygh au∣thorite, then the generall councell repres∣sed the enormytes of y• spiritualtye. But sence the Antichriste of Rome, cardinals, and byshopes were exlated, and the Em∣proure and kynges became theyr seruaun¦tes, they wolde suffre nought to be deter∣myned in theyr councelles that shulde re¦forme the worlde of theyr deuellysh pryde, insaciable couetousnesse, and stynkynge lecherye, which may stonde with no god∣lye vertue. But y• worlde which is not of
God, shall at the last haue an ende with cō¦fusion, and they onlye abyde, y• do the wyll of the father: whych wyll is that we beleue in the sonne, and loue one another. Let thē therfore that haue the worldes good (I myght saye the worldes god) vse it, but not loue it, that they maye be ready to bestow it at the pleasure of God. And let them which haue it not, desyre it not: for it blyn¦deth the eyes of the seynge. Deu. xvii. But let them put theyr trust in God, whyche shall not fayle them, nor leaue them desti¦tute of rayment and foode, whych Paule counselleth to be content wyth. The rych (as Iames sayeth) persecute the true bele¦uers. The ryche wyll neuer stonde forth openly for the worde of God. Yf of .x. thou¦sande ther sprynge one Nicodemus, it is a greate thynge. Lytle chyldrē it is novv the last hour and as ye haue herde that Anthichrist shulde come, euē so novv are many An¦tichristes come already. Vvhereby vve knovv, that it is the last houre. They vvent out of vs, but vvere none of vs. For had they bene of vs, they had con¦tinued vvith vs. But that fortuned that it myghte appeare hovve they vvere not all of vs.
Houre is here taken for tyme. The last What the last houre is. houre is as much to saye, as the last tyme. Though the Apostles myghte not knowe when the last daye shall be, and how longe the worlde shulde endure, yet thys was shewed them, and vs by them, that Anti∣christ shuld fyrst come: and not only come but also preuayle and be receaued after a worldly maner and raygne ouer all, & set vp a longe cōtinuynge kyngdome with dā¦nable sectes & wonderfull kyndes of ypo∣crisye, that is to saye, falshed cloked vnder a contrarye pretence, as testifyeth Paule and also Peter. Which Antichrist begāne with the Apostles, & dyd sow his doctrine Antichrist. amonge the doctrine of the Apostles, prea¦chynge many thynges as the Apostles dyd, and addynge euer somwhat of his owne, y• the wedes myghte euer grow vp together wt the corne. Of the which Ihon gathered a sygne, yt the last daye drewe nye, though he could not be sure how longe it were therto. Antichrist is one of the fyrste that seyth the lyghte, and cōmeth & preacheth Christe a whyle and seketh hys glorye in Christes Gospell. But whan he espyeth that ther wyll no glorye cleue vnto that preachyng, then he getteth hym to the cōtrarye parte, and professeth hymselfe an open enemy, yf
he can not disgyse hymselfe, and hyde ye an∣gle of his poysoned heresye vnder a bayte of true doctrine. The Apostles were cleare eyed, and espyed Antichrist at once, and put hym to flyght, & weded out hys doctrine quyckly. But whan charite wexed colde, and the preachers beganne to seke themselues, and to admytte glorye and honoure of ryches, then Antichrist disgysed hymselfe after the fashiō of a true Apostle, & preached Christ wylyly, bryngyng in now thys tradicion, and nowe that, to darken the doctrine of Christe, and set vp innumerable ceremo∣nyes, sacramentes and ymagery, geuynge them sygnifycacions at the fyrste: but at the laste the sygnifycacions layed aparte, preached the worke as an holy dede, to iu∣stifye and to put awaye synne, and to saue the soule, that men shulde put theyr truste in workes and in what so euer was vnto hys glory and profyte, and vnder ye name of Christ, mustered Christe out of altoge∣ther, and became heade of the congregaci∣on hymselfe. The byshop of Rome made a lawe of his owne to rule his church by, and put Christes out of the waye. All the byshop∣pes sweare vnto the byshoppe of Rome,
and all curates vnto the byshoppes, but all forsweare Christ and hys doctrine. But seynge Ihon toke a sygne of the last daye, that he sawe Antichrist begyn, how nye oughte we to thynke that it is, which after .viii. hūdreth yeares raygnyng in prosperite, se it decaye agayne, and his falshed to be disclosed, & hym to be slayne with the sprete of the mouth of Christe, that is, with that olde doctrine that pro∣ceded out of Christes mouth? For Paule sayeth: when Antichriste is vttered, then commeth the ende. But ye haue the anoyntynge of that holy, and knovve all thynge. I vvryte not vnto you as thoughe ye knevve not the truthe, but as vnto them that knovve it, and hovve that no lye is of the truthe. Christ in the scripture is called y• ho¦ly, The holy. because he onely sanctifyeth and hal∣loweth vs. And he is called Christ: that is to saye, anoynted, because he anoynteth oure soules with the holy goost, and with all the gyftes of the same. Ye are not a∣noynted Anoynted. wt oyle in your bodyes, but with the sprete of Christ in your soules: which sprete teacheth you all truth in Christ, & maketh you to iudge what is a lye, and
what truth, and to knowe Christe from Antichrist. For excepte he taught your soules within, the pourynge in of wor∣des at youre eares were in vayne. For they must al be taught of God. Io. vi. And the thynges of God noman kno∣weth, saue the sprete of God: and the car∣nal man knoweth not the thynges of the sprete of God, whan contrary, the spiri∣tual that is anoynted with the sprete, iud¦geth all thynges .i. Cor. ii. And therfore we are forbydden to call vs ony mayster vpon earth. Math. xxiii. seynge we haue all one mayster now in heauē, which on∣ly teacheth vs with his sprete, though by the admynistracyon and office of a fayth ful preacher. Which preacher yet can not make his preachynge sprynge in y• harte, nomore thē a sower can make hys corne growe, nor can saye this mā shal receaue the worde, and this not: but soweth the worde only, and commytteth y• growyng to God, whose sprete breatheth where he lysteth, and maketh the grounde of whose harte he lysteth frutfull, & choseth whom he wyl at his own pleasure, and for none other cause knowen vnto ony man. Vvho is a lyare, but he that deny∣eth that IESVS is CHRISTE?
The same is Antichrist, that denyeth the father and the sonne. For as much as Antichrist & Christ are two contraries, and the studye of An∣tichrist is to quenche the name of Christ, how can the Romysh byshop and hys sec∣tes be Antichrist, whan they all preache Christe? How was (saye I agayne to the) Pelagius, whose doctrine the Byshop of Rome defendeth in the hyghest degre An∣tichrist, and all other heretikes also? Vere¦ly syr the byshop of Rome seketh hymselfe as al heretykes dyd, and abuseth the name of Christ, to gather the offerynges, tythes and rentes in hys name, to bestowe them vnto hys owne honour and not Christes, and to brynge the conscience of the people into captiuite vnder hym, thorowe super¦sticious feare, as thoughe he had suche au¦thorite geuen hym of Christe. And eue∣ry syllable that hath a sounde as thoughe it made for hys purpose, that he expoun∣deth falsly and fleshly, and therwyth iug∣leth and bewytcheth he the eares of the peo¦ple, and maketh them his owne possession, to beleue what hym lysteth, as though it made no matter to them whether he prea∣ched true or false, so farre as they beleue & do as he byddeth them. But all the textes
that shewe hym to do hys duety, he puteth out of the waye, and all the textes therto that set the cōsciences at lyberte in Christ and proue oure saluacion to be in Christe onely. And wyth Pelagius he preacheth The B. of R. and Pe∣lagius agre the iustifienge of workes, whych is the de∣nyenge of Christe. He preacheth a false byndynge and lousynge wyth eare confes∣sion, whyche is not in the truste and cō∣fidence of Christes bloudsheddynge. He preacheth the false penaunce of dedes, not to tame the fleshe, that we synne nomore, but to make satisfaccion and to redeme y• synne that is past. Whyche what other can it be saue the denyenge of Christe, whyche is onely redempcion of synne? He maketh of the workes, of the ceremonies, (whych were wont to be sygnes and remē¦braunce of thynges to be beleued or done) ymage seruice vnto God and his sayntes, whyche are spretes, to purchase wyth the merytes of thē what so euer y• blynde soule ymagineth: whych all are the denyenge of Christ. For yf thou wylt receaue ony a∣noyntynge of grace or mercy ony whence saue of hym, he is no longer Christ vnto the. Christ is called Iesus, a saueoure: he is Iesus. Christus. called Christus, kynge anoynted ouer all men, of whom they must holde, & of whose
benefyte muste all they haue. He is called Emanuel, God is wyth vs. For he onely Emanuel. maketh God our God, our strength, po∣wer, swearde and shylde, and shortlye oure father. He is called Sanctus, that is, holy Sanctus. that halloweth, sanctifyeth, and blesseth all nacions. And these be hys names for euer, and be no names of ypocrisye, as we sometyme call hym Thomas Curtesye, whych is but a churle: and as we cal them curates, whych care for theyr paryshes as the wolfe for the flocke: and them byshop∣pes, that is ouerseers, whyche wyl so ouer se, that they wyll suffre nought to be pro∣sperous saue theyr owne cōmune welth: and as some call themselues deade, which Deade men lyue in all voluptuousnesse: and as some call themselues poore wythout hauynge Poore men ony thynge proper, and yet lyue in all a∣bundaunce: and as they shaue and disgyse themselues wyth garmentes and ornamē∣tes to signifye euer a contrary thynge thā that they be. Naye Christ is no ypocrite or disgy∣sed, that playeth a parte in a playe and pre¦senteth a persone or state whych he is not: But is alway that hys name sygnifyeth. He is euer a Saueour and oure anoynted wyth grace, and euer maketh God wyth
vs, and euer sanctifyeth. Nother is ther ony other to saue & sanctifye frō synne, or anoynte wyth grace, or to set God at one wyth men. And these thynges whych hys name signifye, doth he euer vnto al that haue trust & confidence in hys bloude, as soone as they repente of the synne, whyche they desyre to be saued and sanctifyed from Now though the Byshop of Rome & hys sectes geue Christe these names, yet in that they robbe hym of the effectes, & take the significacions of hys names vnto thē∣selues, and make of hym but an ypocrite, as they themselues be, they be the right An¦tichristes, and denye both the father & sōne For they denye the wytnesse that the fa∣ther bare vnto hys sonne and depryue the sonne of all the power and glorye that hys father gaue hym. Vvho so euer denyeth the sonne, the same hath not the father. For noman knoweth the father but the sonne and to whome the sonne sheweth hym. Math. xi. Moreouer yf thou knowe not the mercy that God hath shewed the in Christe, thou canst not knowe hym as a father. Thou mayest well besyde Christ knowe hym as a tyraūt. And thou mayest knowe hym by hys workes, as the olde
Philosophers dyd, that ther is a God, but thou canst nother beleue in hys mercy, nor loue hys lawes, (whyche is hys only wor∣ship in the sprete,) saue by Christ. Let therfore abyde in you that vvhych ye herde at the begynnynge. Yf that, vvhych ye herde at the be∣gynnyng shal remayne in you, thā shal ye continue in the sonne & in the fa∣ther. And thys is the promyse that he hath promysed vs, euerlastynge lyfe. Yf we abyde in the olde doctrine, which the Apostles taught, and herkē to no newe The Apost∣les doctrin ought we to abyde by learnynge: than abyde we in the sonne (for vpon the sonne buylde they vs) and in the father thorowe confidence in the sonne, & are heyres of euerlastynge lyfe. These thynges haue I vvryttē vn∣to you, because of them that deceaue you. And the anoyntynge that ye re∣ceaued of hym dvvelleth in you, and ye nede not that ony man teach you, but as that anoyntynge teacheth you of all thynges, and is true, and is no lye. Euen as it hath taught you so a∣byde therin. Whan a true preacher preacheth, the sprete entreth the hartes of the electe, and maketh them fele the ryghteousnesse of the
lawe of God, and by the lawe the poyson of their corrupt nature, & thēce leaeth thē thorowe repentaunce, vnto the mercye that is in Christes bloud. And as an oynt¦ment Anoyntyng healeth the bodye, euen so the sprete, thorow confidence and trust in Christes bloude, healeth the soule, and maketh her loue the law of God, and therfore is it cal¦led anoyntyng or oyntmēt, and may wel be sygnifyeth by the oyle of our sacramēt. But outwarde oyle can nother heale the soule nor make her fele, saue as a sygne, or as a bushe at a tauerne dore quencheth a mans thyrste, nother is it a thynge to put truste in, let vs therfore followe the teachynge of the sprete, whych we haue receaued (as Paule sayeth) in earneste to certifye oure hartes & to make vs fele the thynges of God, & not cleue vnto the tra∣ditions of men, in the whych is no felyng, but y• one sayeth so & another thus, confyr¦mynge theyr assercions wt glorious persua¦sions of wysedome, but not after y• wysedō of God. Whych reasons another denyeth with contrary sophismes: & so ryseth braw¦lynge about vayne wordes wtout certente. And novv lytle chyldren abyde in hym, that vvhan he shal appeare, vve may haue confidence, & not be made
ashamed of hym at hys cōmynge. Here are two thynges to be marked: one yf we cleue vnto Christ after the doc∣trine of the Apostles and as they buylt vs vpon hym, we shalbe bolde and sure of our¦selues at hys cōmyng, as a seruaūt, which in hys maysters absence doeth onely hys maysters commaundementes, can not be confoūded at hys cōmynge home agayne. But and yf we followe mēs doctrine, how can we be bolde? yee how shulde we not be ashamed wyth our teachers? vnto whom he shall than saye (whan they boast them∣selues, how that they haue bene hys vyca∣res) I knowe you not, departe from me ye that haue wrought wyckednesse, and vn∣der my name haue brought in damnable sectes, and haue taught youre disciples to beleue in other thynges than in me. Now the summe of al that the Apostles taught, and how they buylt vs vpon Christ, is the new testament. But the Byshop of Ro∣mes doctrine is not there founded, but euē improued. Confounded therfore shal he be whyche wyttynge and wyllynge shutteth hys eyes at the true lyght, and openeth thē to beleue hys lyes. Another thynge is thys, al y• scripture maketh mencion of the resurreccion and
commynge agayne of Christ: and that all men, both they that go before, and they that come after shall then receaue theyr rewardes together, and we are commaū∣ded to loke euerye houre for that daye. And what is done wyth the soules from the departynge of theyr bodyes vnto that daye, doth the scripture make no mentiō, saue only yt they rest in the LORD and in theyr fayth. Wherfore he that determy∣neth ought of the state of them that be departed, doth but teach the presūptuouse ymaginations of hys owne brayne: No∣ther can hys doctrine be ony artycle of our fayth. What God doth wyth them, is a secret, layed vp in the treasury of God. And we ought to be pacient, beynge cer∣tifyed of the scripture, that they whiche dye in the fayth, are at rest, and ought no more to searche that secrete, thē to search the houre of the resurrection, which God hath put only in hys owne power. But thys remēbre, that the whole natur of mā is poysoned and infecte with synne: And the whole lyfe of sinne must be mortified. Nowe the roote of all synne and first vice that we were infecte wyth, is, that we wold be wyse, where God hath not taught vs, as ye se how Eue wolde haue bene as
God in knowlege of good and bad. And therfore hath God hyd many thynges in hys power, and commaunded that we shal search none of hys secretes farther, then he hath openned them in hys scrypture, to mortifye thys poyson of all poysons, ye de∣syre to appeare wyfe, & that we be ashamed to be ignoraūt in ony thynge at all. Wher¦fore they that vyolently make articles of y• fayth wythout Gods worde are yet alyue in the roote of synne; and vice, and growe out of the deuel, and not out of Christe. And theyr articles are of the blyndnesse of the deuel, and not of the lyght of Christe for Christes lyghte hath testimonye of the scripture euery where. Yf ye knovve that he is ryghteous, knovve that all that vvorke ryghteous¦nesse are borne of hym. Oure nature is to worke wyckednesse and so blynde therto, that it cā se no righte¦ousnesse. And then it followeth that we must be borne a newe in Christ, yer we be or can ether do or yet know what is rygh∣teous. And in hym we must fyrst be made ryghteous oure selues, yer we can worke ryghteous workes, whyche conclusion is contrarye vnto the B. of Rome. For he sayeth that the workes do make the man
ryghteous, and Christes doctryne sayeth: that the man maketh the workes ryghte∣ous. A righteous mā spryngeth out of righ¦teous workes sayeth the B. of Romes doc¦trine, ryghteous workes sprynge oute of a ryghteous man, & a ryghteous mā spryn∣geth out of Christ, sayth Christes doctrin. The workes make the man ryghteous that before was wycked sayeth the B. of Rome, the workes declare that the man is ryghteous sayeth Christes doctrine, but y• man was fyrst made ryghteous in Christ and the sprite of Christe taught hym what ryghteousnesse was, and healed hys harte, and made hym consent therto, and to haue hys luste in ryghteousnesse, and to worke ryghteously. ¶ The .iii. Chapter. BEhold vvhat loue the father hath shevved vs, that vve shuld be cal∣led the sonnes of God. For thys cause the vvorlde knovveth you not, because it knovveth not hym. Dearly beloued, novv vve are the sons of god thoughe yet it appeareth not vvhat vve shalbe, but vve knovv that vvhā he shal appeare, vve shalbe lyke hym: for vve shall se hym as he is.
The loue of God to vs warde is ex∣cedynge grace, in that he hathe made vs hys sonnes wythoute all deseruynge of vs, and hath geuen vs hys sprete thorowe Christe, to certifye oure hartes thereof, in that we fele that oure truste is in God, & that oure soules haue receaued health and power to loue the lawe of God, whiche is a sure testimonye that we are sonnes and vnder no damnacion. Nother ought it to discorage vs, or to make vs thynke we were lesse beloued, because the worlde hateth vs, & persecuteth vs, for the worlde knoweth vs not. Nother let ony maruayle The world coulde not knowe Christe. for the worlde coulde not knowe Christe hym selfe for all hys gloryous commynge wyth myracles and benefytes in hea∣lynge the sycke and raysynge the deade. But for all the oppression of the worlde we are yet sure that we are Goddes son∣nes. And in lyke maner though the glorye that we shalbe in appeare not: yet we are sure that we shalbe lyke hym, when he ap∣pearethe. As darknesse vanysheth awaye at the cōmynge of the Sonne, & the worlde receaueth a newe fashion, and it turneth into lyght, and is sodenlye made glorious: Euen so when he appeareth, and we shall The world shal knowe Christe. se hym as he is, we shall wt the lyght of him
be chaunged into the glorye of his ymage and made lyke hym. And then shall the worlde know both hym and vs vnto theyr shame and confusion. And all that haue thys hope in hym purge themselues, as he is pure. The fayth and hope of a christen man, are no dead, ydle, or baren thynges: but lyuely, workynge and frutefull. For when the law thorowe conscience of synne hath slayne the soule, then hope and truste in Christes bloude thorowe certifyenge of ye conscience that ye damnacion of the lawe is taken awaye, quycken her agayne, and make her to loue the lawe, whiche is the purifyenge of the soule and hyr lyfe, and seruynge the lawe in the inner man. And then the sayde gyftes of hope and faythe stretch themselues forth vnto the mem∣bres, dead with natural lust, consent, and custome to synne, and quicken them, and purge them, with the wholsome penaūce of Christes doctrine, and make thē serue the lawe outwarde, and beare wholsome frute of loue, vnto the profyte of theyr neghbours, accordynge to Christes loue vnto vs. For yf the sprete of Christe The faythe of a Christē man. (with the whiche God anoynteth vs, and
maketh vs kynges, and sealeth vs, and maketh vs hys sure and seueral kyngdome whyche he geueth vs in earnest .ii. Cor. i. and wyth the whyche he chaungeth vs in to the ymage of Christ .ii. Cor. iiii.) dwell in oure soules thorowe faythe, thesame sprete can not but quycken the membres also, and make them frutefull. Roma. viii. Wherfore the faythe and hope of the Ro∣mane byshop, whych by theyr owne cōfes∣sion maye stande wyth all wyckednesse, and consent vnto all euel, and be wythout repentaunce towarde Gods lawe (as it appeareth by theyr thre capitall synnes, touched of Ihon a lytle aboue: pryde, co∣uetousnesse and lechery) are no true faythe and hope, but vayne wordes and vysures only, accordynge to hys other disgysynge and names of ypocrisye. All that commytte synne, cōmyt vnrighteousnesse, for synne is vnrygh∣ousnesse. That the Englyshe calleth here vn∣ryghteousnesse the Greke calleth Ano∣mia, What syn is. vnlawfulnesse, or breakynge the law. So that all synne is breakynge of Gods law, and only the transgression of Gods lawe is synne. Nowe all Gods lawes are The sūme of Gods lawe. conteyned in these two poyntes: Beleue
in Christ, and loue thy neghboure. And these two poyntes are the interpretynge and expoūdyng of all lawes, so that what so euer edifieth in fayth and loue, is to be kepte, as longe as it so doeth. And what so euer hurteth fayth or loue, is to be bro¦ken immediatly, though bishop, kinge, em¦perour or an angel cōmaūde it. And all in¦differēt thynges y• nother helpe nor hurte fayth and loue, are whole in y• handes of father, mother, master, lorde and prynce. So that yf they wyl synne agaynst God, and ouerlade our backes, we maye well runne awaye, yf we can escape, but not auenge our selues. But and yf they wyll breake into thy conscience, as the byshop of Rome doeth with his domme traditi∣ons, & sayeth, to do this saueth thy soule, and to leaue it vndone loseth thy soule, then defye them as the workes of Anti∣christ, for they make the synne agaynst y• faythe that is in Christes bloude, by the which only thy soule is saued, & for lacke of that only, damned. And how loue brea¦keth y• lawe, take an ensāple: It is a good Loue brea∣keth y• law. lawe that men come to the church on the sondayes to heare Gods worde, and to re¦ceaue the sacrament of the body & bloud of Christ, in a remembraunce of his be∣nefytes
and so to strengthen thy soule, for to walke in his loue & in the loue of oure neghboure for his sake. &c. yet yf my father mother, or ony other that requyreth my helpe be sycke, I breake that good cōmaun¦dement, to do my duty to myne elders or my neghboure. And thus all lawes are vn¦der loue and geue rowm to loue. And loue interpreteth thē: yee and breaketh them at a tyme, thoughe God hymselfe cōmaunde them. For loue is lorde ouer al lawes, and the thynge that Christ commaūded aboue all other. And ye knovv that he appeared to take avvaye oure synnes, & ther is no synne in hym. Christe dyed not alone to purchasse pardō for our foresynnes, but also to slaye all synne, and the lyfe of synne in our mem¦bres. For all we that are baptysed in the name of Christe sayeth Paule. Ro. vi. are baptysed to dye wyth hym concernynge The sygni∣ficacion of oure bap∣tyme. synne, and that as he after hys resurrec∣tion dyeth nomore, so we after our bap∣tyme shuld walke in a new lyfe, and synne nomore. Our mēbres are crucyfyed wyth hym, in all that pertayneth vnto ye lyfe of synne. And yf in Christ be no syn, thē how can ther be wylfull synne in the fayth that
is in hym, or in the quycke membres that thorowe fayth grow out of hym? Euery man therfore that hath the true fayth of Christe, purgeth hymselfe, as he is pure. All that abyde in hym synne not. And all that synne, haue nother sene hym nor knovven hym. As ther is no synne in Christ ye stock, so can ther be none in the quycke mem∣bres that lyue and growe in him by fayth. And they that geue them selues to synne haue nother sene, knowen, or felt by fayth the mercy that is in hym. Our holy fa∣ther then whiche forbyddeth matrimony, and geueth his disciples lycences wyth his holy blessynge to kepe whores, and plura∣lytyes, vnions, and totquots, to robbe the paryshes, hathe nother sene nor knowen Christ, nomore haue his disciples that cō∣sent vnto this iniquite. And yf they knowe hym not, they can not truely descrybe him vnto vs. It followeth thē that theyr prea∣chynge is but ypocrisy. Lytle chyldrē let no mā begyle you. He that vvorketh ryghteousnesse, is ryghteous, as he is ryghteous. Iudge men by theyr dedes. For who so euer hath the lyght of God in hys soule, he wyll let hys lyght shyne, that men shall
se hys good workes. And therfore where ye se not the ryghteousnesse of workes in the membres outwarde, there be sure, is no ryghteousnesse of fayth in the harte in¦warde. Let no mā mocke you wyth vayne wordes. Who so euer preacheth the Christ in worde and dede, hym take for Christes Christes vycare. vicare. And them that wolde proue thē∣selues hys vycares wyth Sophistrie, and whan it is come to ye point make a sweard only of theyr myghty argumentes, & lyue contrarye to all hys doctrine, and in all theyr preachynges blaspheme and rayle on hys blessed bloude, take for the vycares of Antichrist. He that synneth is of the deuel, for the deuell synneth frō the begynnyng But for thys cause appeared the sonne of God. Euen to destroye the vvorkes of the deuel. Al that are borne of God do no synne, for hys sede abydeth in them, and they can not synne, because they be borne of God. And here by are the sōnes of God knovven, and al∣so the sonnes of the deuell. God and the deuell are two contra¦ry fathers, two contrary fountaynes, an two contrary causes: the one of all good¦nesse,
the other of all euell. And they that do euell, are borne of the deuell, and fyrste euel by that byrth, yer they be euell. For The mā is fyrst euel. yer a man do euell outwarde of purpose, he conceaued yt euell fyrst in his mynde, & consented vnto it, and so was euel in his harte yer he wrought euell: and yer he cō¦ceaued euel in his harte, he was borne of the deuel, and hadde receaued of hys sede and nature: By the reason of which na∣ture, sede and byrth, he worketh euell na∣turally, and can do none other. As Christ sayeth Ioh. viii. Ye are of the father y• de∣uel, and therfore wyl do the lustes of your father, for it is a cōmune prouerbe: The chylde followeth his fathers nature. And on the other syde, they that do The mā is fyrst good. good, are fyrst borne of God, and receaue of his nature & sede, and by the reason of that nature and sede, are fyrste good yer they do good by y• same rule. And Christe which is contrarye to the deuell came to destroye the workes of the deuel in vs, and to geue vs a newe byrth, a new nature, and to sow new sede in vs, that we shulde by the reasō of that byrth, synne nomore. For the sede of that byrth, that is to wete the sprete of God, and the lyuely sede of his worde, sowen in oure hartes, kepeth
oure hartes that we can not consente to synne, as the sede of the deuell holdeth the hartes of hys, that they can not consente to God. Thys is contrarye vnto the B. of Rome in two poyntes: In the one that he sayeth, that oure good dedes make vs fyrst good, and teacheth vs not to beleue in Christes bloud, there to be washed & made fyrst good. And in another, that he sayeth, God choseth vs fyrst for our good qualy∣ties and properties, and for the enforce∣mēte and good endeuoure of our frewyll. What good endeuoure is there where the deuell possesseth the whole harte, that it cā consente to no good? And fynally ther is greate difference betwene the synne of them that beleue in The fayth∣ful and vn∣faythfull synne dy∣uersly. Christ vnfaynedly, and the synne of them that beleue not. For they that beleue, syn not of purpose & consente to wyckednesse that it is good, castynge and compassyng aforehande wythout grudge of conscience to brynge theyr purpose aboute. Theyr fathers conceaued myschefe these eyghte hundreth yeares ago, and the sonnes consente vnto the same, and haue no po∣wer to departe there from. And ther∣fore theyr synne is deuelysh and vnder the damnacion of the lawe. But yf he that
beleueth synne, he doth it not of purpose, or y• he consenteth vnto the lyfe of synne, but of infirmytie, chaūce, and some greate temptacion that hath ouercome hym. And therfore hys synne is veniall and vn∣der mercy and grace, thoughe it be mur∣ther, thefte, or adultery, and not vnder the damnacion of the lawe. So that hys fa∣ther shall scourge hym, but not caste hym awaye or damne hym. Marke the synne of Saul and of Dauid. Saul euer excused hys synne, and could not but persecute the wyll of God: And Dauid confessed hys synne, wyth greate repentaunce at ye fyrst warnynge, whē soeuer he forgat hymselfe. All that vvorke not righteousnesse are not of God, nor he that loueth not hys brother. For thys is the tydynges vvhiche ye herde at the begynnynge, that vve shuld loue one another, and not be as Cayn, vvhiche vvas of the deuell, and slevve his brother. And vvherfore slevve he hym? for hys de∣des vvere euel, and hys brothers rygh∣teous. Maruayl not my brethrē though the vvorlde hate you. The lawe of ryghteousnesse is, ye we loue one another as Christe loued vs, and he that hath not thys loue lyuynge in hys
harte, and whan the tyme is, bryngeth not forth the frutes therof, the same is not of God, but of the deuell, whose byrthe and properte of the same ye se described in Ca∣yn, how he resysted God and persecuted y• chyldren of God for theyr belefe and wor¦kes therof. And as ye se in Cayn & hys bro¦ther Abell, so shall it euer cōtinue betwene the chyldren of God and of the deuell vn∣to the worldes ende. Wondre not therfore though the worlde hate you. Vve knovve that vve are transla¦ted from death to lyfe, because vve loue the brethren. He that loueth not hys brother, abydeth in death. Al that hate theyr brethren are murthurers: & ye knovve that no murthurer hath e∣ternall lyfe abydynge in hym. Yf thou loue thy brother in Christe, & arte ready to do and to suffre for hym as Christe dyd for the, than thou arte sure thereby that thou arte the sonne of God, and heyre of lyfe, and delyuered frō death and damnacion. So haue Christen men sygnes to knowe whether they be in ye state of grace or no. And on the other syde he that hath no power to loue hys brethren maye be sure that he is in the state of death and damnacion. Another is thys: Let
euery man loke vpon hys harte, & be sure that he whyche hateth hys brother, hathe slayne hym before God, and is a murthe∣rer, & murtherers shall not obtayne ye king¦dome of God. Gala. v. but are Cayns bre¦thren, and the deuels chyldren, and are hey¦res of death and euer vnder damnacion. Compare the regiment of the spiritualte whych haue had the temporall swearde in theyr handes nowe aboue .viii. hundreth yeares vnto this doctrine of Ihon, & iudge whether they haue led vs truely after the steppes of Christes doctrine or no. Hereby vve are assured of loue, be¦cause he lefte hys lyfe for vs, and ther¦fore oughtevve to leaue oure lyues for our brethren. He thē that hathe the substaūce of the vvorld, and seyth hys brother haue nede, and shutteth vp his compasson from him, hovv dvvelleth the loue of God in hym? Yf we felte the loue of Christes death, it wolde sure set oure harte on fyre to loue hym agayne, and oure brethren for hys sake, & shulde neuer ceasse to slaye oure re∣systynge mēbres, vntyl we could not only be well content, that our brethren were in prosperouser state than we: but also vntyll we coulde blesse them whan they curse
vs, and pray for them whē they persecute vs, and to suffre death for them, to testify the word of theyr soules health vnto them, and wyth loue to ouercomme them, and to wynne them vnto Christe. Yf nowe euery christen man oughte to haue thys rule of hys profession before hys eyes to learne it, that he shulde loue hys brother as Christe dyd hym, to departe wyth hys lyfe for hys brothers ensample, how farre are they of from good scolers, that can not fynde in theyr hartes to departe with a lytle of the abundaunce and superfluyte of theyr temporall goodes, to helpe theyr neghbours nede? My lytle chyldren let us not loue in vvord nor vvyth the tūge, but vvyth dede and of a truthe. For thereby vve knovve that vve be of the truth, and so shal vve certify oure hartes in hys syght Yf we haue power to worke, then doeth the worke certyfye oure hartes, that oure faythe in Christe, and loue to God and oure neghboure for hys sake are vnfayned, and that we are true chyldren & no ypocrites. And then are we bolde in oure conscience before God. And thys is it that Peter meaneth .ii. Peter .i. where he byddeth vs mynister in oure fayth ver∣tue,
Godly lyuynge, and al maner of good workes, and there with to make oure vo∣cation and election, or oure callynge and chosynge sure. For the syght of the worke doth certyfye vs that God hath called vs, and chosen vs vnto grace and mercye. But and yf when the tyme of wor∣kyng is come, we flye and haue no power to worke, then wyll oure conscience ac∣cuse vs of synne and transgression wyth in the harte before God, and so for feare of ye rod we darre not be bolde, but drawe back and stande a loofe. Let a chylde haue neuer so mercifull a father, yet yf be breake hys fathers com¦maundementes, thoughe he be not vnder damnation, yet he is euer chyd and rebu∣ked, and nowe and then lasshed wyth the rodde: by the reason wherof he is neuer bolde in hys fathers presence. But the chylde that kepeth hys fathers commaun¦dementes, is sure of hymselfe, and bolde in hys fathers presence, to speake and axe what he wyll. They that mynister well, get them good degre and greate confidē∣ce in the faythe that is in Christe Iesu, sayeth Paule .i. Timo. iii. He that wor∣keth, is bolde before God and man. For hys conscience accuseth hym not wythin,
nother haue we ought to wyte hym wt all, or to caste in his teth. And as wtout syghte of the workes Iames the Apostle can not se thy fayth Iaco. ii. nomore shal thou euer be sure or bolde before God or man. But yf oure harte condemne vs, God is greater then oure harte, & kno∣vveth all thynge. Yf our conscience accuse vs of synne, God is so great and so myghty, that it cā¦not be hydde. Dearly beloued yf oure hartes con¦demne vs not, then vve truste to god∣vvard. And vvhat so euer vve axe, that shall vve receaue of hym because vve kepe his cōmaūdemētes & do the thyn¦ges vvhich are pleasaunt in his syghte. Kepynge of the commaundementes maketh a man se hys fayth, and to be bold therin. And fayth when it is wythout con∣science of synne, goeth into God boldlye, and is stronge and myghtye in prayer to coniure God by all hys mercyes, and ther¦with opteyneth what so euer he axeth, of all hys promyses. And the texte sayeth be∣cause we kepe hys commaundemētes. Yee verely his cōmaūdemētes make vs bolde. But the kepynge of mens traditions and domme ceremonyes make not bold before
God, nor certifye oure consciēce that oure fayth is vnfayned. Thou shalt not knowe by sprynkelyng thyselfe wt holy water, nor kyssyng ye pax, nor with takynge asshes, or though thou were anoynted with al ye oyle in teames strete, yt thy fayth is sure. But and yf thou couldest fynde in thyne harte to bestowe bothe lyfe and goodes vpō thy neghboure in a iust cause, and haste pro∣ued it: then art thou sure, that thou louest Christe, and felest that thou hast thy trust in hys bloude. And thys is hys commaundement, that vve beleue in his sōne Iesus Christ, and loue one another, as he gaue com∣maundement. Fayth is the fyrst & also the roote of al Fayth is  roote of all commaūde¦mentes. cōmaundemētes. And out of fayth spryn∣geth loue, & out of loue, workes. And when I breake ony cōmaūdemēt, I syn agaynst loue. For had I loued, I had not done it. And when I synne agaynste loue, I synne agaynste faythe. For had I earnestly and wyth a full truste remembred the mercye that Christe hath shewed me, I must haue loued Wherfore when we haue broken ony commaundement, ther is none other way to be restored agayne, then to go through repeutaunce vnto oure fayth agayne, and
axe mercy for Christes sake. And assoone as we haue receaued fayth that our synne is forgeuen, we shall immediatly loue the commaundement agayne, and thorowe loue receaue power to worke. And he that kepeth his commaun∣demētes abydeth in hym, & he in hym. And hereby vve knovve that ther dvvelleth in vs of hys spryte, vvhyche he gaue vs. Thorow the workes we are sure that we continue in Christe, and Christ in vs, and that his sprite dwelleth in vs. For his spryte it is that kepeth vs in faythe, and thorowe faythe in loue, and thorowe loue in workes. ¶ The .iiii. Chapter. DEarly beloued beleue not euery sprete, but proue the spretes vvhether they be of God. For many false Prophetes are gone out in the vvorlde. Spretes are taken here for preachers, because of the preachynge or doctryne, Spretes. whyche yf it be good, then is it of y• sprete of God: and yf it be euell, of the sprete of the deuell. Nowe oughte we not to be∣leue euery mans doctrine vnaduysedly,
or condemne ony mans preachynge yer it be herd and sene what it is. But a chri¦sten mans parte is to examen, iudge, and trye it, whether it be true or no. Quench not the sprete sayeth Paule .i. Thessalo. the last, nother despyse prophecyenges, but proue all thynge, and kepe that which is good. Destroye not the gyftes of the sprete of God, but trye whether they be of God, and good for the edifyenge of his congregacyon: and kepe that whiche is good, and refuse that which is euell. And suffre euery persone that hath ony gyfte of God, to serue god therin, in his degre and estate, after a christen maner and a due ordre. Why shall we trye the doctri∣nes? Verely for ther be many false Pro∣phetes abrode already. We tolde you be∣fore that Antichrist shulde come, as oure mayster Christ tolde vs yt he shulde come But now I certify you that Antichristes kyngdome is begon already. And his dis∣cyples are gone out to preach. Trye ther¦fore all doctrine. Wherwith shal we trye The tryall of all doc∣trine. it? With the doctrine of ye Apostles, and with the scripture, which is ye touch stone: yee and because ye loue compēdiousnes, ye shall haue a shorte rule, to trye them withall.
Here by knovve ye the sprete of God. Euery sprete that confesseth that Iesus Christe is come in the fleshe, is of God. And euery sprete that confesseth not that Iesus Christe is come in the flesh, is not of God. And the same is the sprete of Antichrist, of vvhom ye haue herde that he shulde come: And euen novv he is in the vvorlde already. What soeuer opinion ony membre of Antichriste holdeth, the grounde of all hys doctrine is to destroye this article of our fayth, that Christ is come in the flesh. For though the mooste parte of all here∣tykes confesse that Christe is come in the fleshe after theyr maner, yet they denye that he is come as the scripture testifyeth, and ye Apostles preached hym to be come. The whole studye of the deuell and all hys membres is, to destroye the hope and truste that we shulde haue in Christes fleshe, and in those thynges whyche he suf∣fred for vs in hys fleshe, and in the testa∣ment and promyses of mercy, whyche are made vs in hys fleshe. For the scripture testifyeth, that Christe hath taken awaye the synne of the worlde in his fleshe, and that at thesame houre that he yelded vp hys sprete into the handes of hys fa∣ther,
he had full purged and made ful sa∣tisfaccion for all the synnes of y• worlde. So that all the synne of the worlde, both before his passyon and after, must be put awaye thorowe repentaunce towarde the law, & fayth and trust in his bloude, without respecte of ony other satisfaccion, sacrifyce or worke. For yf I once synne, y• lawe rebuketh my cōscyence, and setteth variaunce betwene God and me. And I shall neuer be at peace with God agayn vntyl I haue herde y• voyce of his mouth, howe that my synne is forgeuen me for Christes bloude sake: And as soone as I beleue that, I am at peace with God. Ro¦ma. v. and loue his lawe agayne, & of loue worke. And that Christe hath done this ser∣uyce in his flesh, denye all the membres of Antichrist. And herby thou shalt know them. All doctrine that buyldeth ye vpon The doctri¦ne that is of God. Christ, to put thy trust and confidence in his bloude, is of God, and true doctrine And all doctrine that withdraweth thyn hope and trust from Christ, is of the de∣uell, The doctri¦ne that is of y• Deuel. and the doctrine of Antichriste. Ex∣amyne the Romysh byshop by this rule, & thou shalt fynde that all that he doeth, is to the destruccion of this artycle. He
wresteth all the scriptures, and setteth thē cleane agaynste the woll, to destroye thys artycle. He mynystreth the very sacramen¦tes of Christ vnto the destruction of thys artycle: and so doth he all other ceremo∣nyes, and his absolucion, penaunce, pur∣gatory, dispensations, vowes, with al dis∣gysynges. The Romysh bishop preacheth that The B. of Romes doc¦trine of Christe. Christe is come to do awaye synnes, yet not in the flesh, but in water, salt, oyle candels, ashes, freres cotes, and monkes coules, and in the vowes of them that for∣sweare matrimony, to kepe whores, and sweare beggerye, to possesse all the trea∣sure, ryches, wealth and pleasures of the worlde, and haue vowed obedience, to dis∣obey with authorite all the lawes, both of God and man. For in these ypocritysh & false sacrifices, teacheth he vs to trust for the forgeuenesse of synnes, & not in Chri∣stes flesh. Ye are of God lytle chyldren, and haue ouercomme them. For greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the vvorlde. He that dwelleth in you, and worketh in you thorowe faythe, is greater then he which dwelleth & worketh in them thorow vnbelefe. And in hys strengthe, ye abyde
by youre profession, and confesse youre LORDE Iesus, how that he is come in y• flesh and hath purged the synne of all that beleue in his flesh. And thorow that fayth ye ouercomme them in the verye tormen∣tes of death. So that nother theyr iuglyn¦ges, nother theyr pleasures, nother theyr threatenynges, or tormentes, or the verye death, wherewyth they slaye your bodyes, can preuayle agaynst you. They be of the vvorlde, and ther¦fore they speake of the vvorlde, and the vvorlde attendeth vnto them. Vve be of God, and he that knovveth God, heareth vs. And he that is not of God, heareth vs not. And hereby vve knovve the sprete of truth & the spret of erroure. Ther be and euer shalbe two genera∣cions Two gene∣racions in the worlde. in the worlde. The one of the deuell, whyche naturally herken vnto the false A¦postles of the deuell, because they speake so agreable vnto theyr naturall complexion. And another of God, whych herken vnto true Apostles of God, and consente vnto theyr doctrine. And thys is a sure rule to iudge spretes by, that we iudge thē to haue the sprete of truth, whych herken vnto the true doctrine of Christes Apostles: & thē
to haue the sprete of erroure, which herken vnto worldly and deuelysh doctrine, abhor¦rynge the preachynge of the Apostles. And loke whether the Romysh Byshops doctri¦ne be worldly or no, yf pryde and couetous¦nesse be worldly, yee and lechery to. For The B. of R. doctrine is worldly. what other is al hys doctrine, than of be∣nefyces, promocions, dignities, byshopry∣kes, cardinalships, vicareges, parsonages, prebendes, chaunge of byshoprykes, and resignynge of benefyces, of vnions, plura∣lities, totquots, and that whych commeth once into theyr handes, maye not out a∣gayne: yee and of whores and concubynes and of captiuynge of consciences for coue¦tousnesse: and all that herken to that doc∣trine abhorre the Apostles, and persecute it and them that preache the it. Dearly beloued let vs loue one an other, for loue is of God. And all that loue are borne of God, and knovv God And he that loueth not, knovveth not God: for God is loue. Ihon syngeth hys olde songe agayne, and teacheth an vnfallible and sure tokē whych we maye se and fele at oure fyngers ende, and therby be out of all doute, that our fayth is vnfayned, and that we know God and be borne of God, and that we
herken vnto the doctrine of the Apostles purely and godly, & not of ony curiosite, to seke glory and honoure therin to our sel¦ues, & to make a cloke therof to couer oure couetousnesse, and fylthy lustes. Whyche token is, yf we loue one another. For the loue of a mās neghboure vnfaynedly sprin¦geth out of the vnfayned knowlege of god in Christes bloud. By y• whych knowlege we be borne of God, and loue God, & our neghbours for hys sake. And so he that lo¦ueth hys neghboure vnfaynedly, is sure of hymselfe that he knoweth God, and is of God vnfaynedly. And contrary wyse, he yt loueth not, knoweth not God. For God The fun∣tayne of loue. in Christes bloude is suche a loue, that yf a mā sawe it, it were impossible yt he shuld not breake out into ye loue of God againe and of hys neghboure for hys sake. Here in appeared the loue of God vnto vs vvarde, because God sent hys onely sonne in the vvorlde, that vve shulde lyue thorovve hym. Here in is loue: not that vve loued God, but that he loued vs, and sente hys sonne, a sa∣tisfaccion for our synnes. Yf a man had once felte wythin in hys conscience the fearce wrath of God towarde synners, and the terrible & moost
cruell damnacion that the lawe threate∣neth, and than behelde wyth the eyes of a stronge fayth, the mercy, fauoure & grace the takynge awaye of the damnacion of the law, and restorynge agayne of lyfe fre¦ly offred vs in Christes bloude: he shulde perceaue loue, and so muche the more, that it was shewed vs, whan we were synners & enemyes to God. Rom. v. and that wyth out al descruynges, wythout our endeuou¦rynge, enforcynge and preparynge our sel¦ues, and wythout all good motions, qua∣lities, and properties of our fre wyl. But whan oure hartes were as deade vnto all good workynge, as the membres of hym, whose soule is departed, whyche thynge to proue, and to stoppe y• blasphemous mou∣thes of all oure aduersaries, I wyll of in∣numerable textes rehearse one in the be∣gynnynge of the seconde chapter to the E∣phesians, where Paule sayeth thus: Ye were deade in trespasse and synne, in the whych ye walked accordynge to the course of the worlde, and after the gouernoure y• ruleth in y• ayre, the sprete that worketh in the chyldren of vnbelefe, amonge whyche we also hadde oure conuersacion in tyme past, in the lustes of oure fleshe, and ful∣fylled the lustes of the flesh & of the mynde
so that the fleshe and the mynde were a∣greed both to synne, and the mynde con∣sented as well as the fleshe) and were by nature the chyldren of wrath, as well as other. But God beynge ryche in mer∣cy, thorowe the great loue where wyth he loued vs, euen whan we were deade in synne, hath quyckened vs wyth Christ: for by grace are ye saued: and wyth hym hath raysed vs vp, and with hym hath made vs sytte in heauenlye thynges thorowe Iesus Christe, for to shewe in tyme to come the exceadynge ryches of hys grace, in kynd∣nesse to vs warde in Iesus Christe. For by grace are ye saued thorowe fayth, and that not of youre selues: for it is the gyft of God, and commeth not of workes, lest ony man shulde boaste hymselfe. But we are hys workemanship, created in Christe Iesu vnto good workes, vnto y• whyche God ordened vs before that we shuld walke in them. The texte is playne. We were stone deade and wythout lyfe or power to do or cōsent to good. The whole nature of vs was captiue vnder the deuel, and led at hys wyll. And we were as wyc∣ked as the deuell now is, (Excepte that be now synneth agaynst the holy goost,) and we consented vnto synne, wyth soule and
body, and hated the lawe of God. But god of hys grace only quyckened vs in Christ, and raysed vs out of that death, and made vs syt wyth Christ in heauenly thynges. That is: he set our hartes at reste & made vs syt fast in the lyfe of Christes doctrine and vnmoueable from the loue of Christe. And fynally, we are in thys oure seconde byrth Gods workemanship and creacion in Christ: so that as he whyche is yet vn∣made, hath no lyfe nor power to worke, no more had we tyll we were made agayne in Christ. The preachyng of mercy in Christ quyckened our hartes thorow fayth wrou¦ght by y• sprete of Christ, whych God pou∣red into our hartes, yer we wyst. Dearly beloued yf God so loued vs, then ought vve to loue one another. Yf we felte the loue of God in Chri∣stes bloude, we could not but loue agayne, not only God and Christ, but also al that are bought wyth Christes bloude. Yf we loue God for y• pleasures that we receaue, than loue we oure selues. But yf we loue hym to do hym pleasure agayne: that can we none otherwyse do, than in louynge The vse of loue. oure neghboures for hys sake: thē that are good, to cōtinue them in theyr goodnes, & them that are euell, to drawe thē to good.
Loue is the instrument wherewyth fayth maketh vs Gods sōnes, and fashioneth vs lyke the ymage of God, and certifyeth vs that we so are. And therfore cōmaundeth Christe Mathew the fyfte. Loue your ene¦myes, blesse them that curse you, praye for them that persecute you, that ye maye be the sonnes of your heauenly father, whych maketh hys Sonne ryse ouer good and badde, and sendeth hys rayne vpon iuste and vniusteryee whyche made the Sonne of hys mercy shyne vpon vs, and sente the rayne of the bloude of hys deare and onely childe vpon our soules▪ to quycken vs, and to make vs se loue to loue agayne. No man hath at ony tyme sene God. Yf vve loue one another, God dvvelleth in vs, and hys loue is per∣fecte in vs. Though we can not se God, yet yf we Nomā hath sene God. loue one another, we be sure that he aby∣deth in vs, and that hys loue is perfecte in vs: that is, that we loue hym vnfaynedly. For to loue God truely, and to geue hym thankes, is only to loue oure negh∣boure for hys sake. For vpon hys persone thou canst bestowe no benefyte. And for so much as we neuer sawe God, let vs make no ymage of hym, nor do hym ony ymage
seruice after oure owne imagynatiō, but let vs go to the scripture that hathe sene The scrip-hath sene God. him, and there were what fashion he is of, & what seruice he wyll be serued with. Blynd reasō sayeth: god is a kerued post and wyl be serued with a Candle. But scripture sayeth: God is loue, and wyl be serued with loue. Yf thou loue thy negh∣boure, then art thou ye ymage of God thy selfe, and he dwelleth in the lyuyng tem∣ple of thyne harte. And thy louynge of thy neghboure for hys sake, is hys seruice and worshyp in the spirite, and a candle that burneth before hym in thyne harte, & ca∣steth out the lyght of good workes before the worlde, and draweth all to God, and maketh hys enemyes leaue theyr euell, & come and worshyp hym also. Here by vve knovv that vve abyde in hym, and he in vs. For he hath ge∣uen vs of hys sprite. He that hathe not Christes spryte, the same is none of hys. Rom. viii. Yf we haue the sprite of God, then are we sure. But howe shall we knowe whether we haue the sprite? Axe Ihon and he wyl saye yf we loue one another. And vve haue sene and do testifye that the father hath sent hys sōne, the
saueoure of the vvorlde. Vvho so euer confesseth that Iesus is the sonne of God, in hym dvvelleth God, and he in God. And vve haue knovvē & beleued the loue that God hath to vs. Fyrst the Apostles taught no fables, but that they sawe and receaued of God, by the wytnesse of hys sprite. Secōdaryly Ihon ascendeth vp one step hyer, frō loue to fayth, and sayeth: He that beleueth that Iesus is Gods sonne, hath God in hym. And I doubte not but the B. of Rome and hys defenders wyll answere Ihon, and saye: Thē the deuel hath God in hym, and is also in God. For other fayth, thē suche as y• deuel hath, felte they neuer ony. But Ihon preuenteth thē sayeng: we haue kno¦wen and beleued the loue that God hath to vs. That is, we beleue not only wyth story fayth, as men beleue olde cronicles, but we beleue the loue and mercye that God shewed vs, and put oure trust and confidence ther in: (and so taketh scriptur belefe) We beleue that Iesus is the sonne of God, became man, and was slayne for oure synnes, whiche is a token of greate loue. And that loue beleue we, and truste therto. Where Paule sayeth .i. Corint. xii No mā can cal Iesus LORDE (except the
holy goost haue taught hym,) but thorow the holy goost. He meaneth not wyth the mouth only, but in the harte wt vnfayned fayth, puttynge his hope and trust in the lordship which he hath ouersynne, dānaciō hel and death. For so coulde no mā cal Ie∣sus LORDE, excepte the holy gooste had taught hym, as Christe sayeth Math. xvi. flesh and bloude shewed the not that. But yet how shal I se my fayth? I must come downe to loue agayne, and thence to the workes of loue, yer I can se my faythe. Not alwaye, but somtyme yu shalt fele thy fayth without ye outward dede, as in great aduersite & persecution, when the deuel as∣saulteth the with desperation, & layeth thy synnes before the, & wolde beare the in hāde that God had cast the away, & left the suc¦currelesse, for thy synnes sake, then cōmeth fayth forth wt hyr shyld, and turneth backe agayn the dartes of the deuel, and answe∣reth: Nay, for Iesus is ye sonne of God: yee and my very God, & my very LORD, and hath taken awaye my synnes & all damna¦ciō. And this trouble & aduersitie which is come vpō me, by settyng on of the & of thy lymmes, is only to make me fele the mercy of my father & his power, and helpe with∣in in my soule, and to slay the rest of the
poysen which remayneth in the fleshe. God is loue, and he that abydeth in loue, abydeth in God, and God in hym. Thys haue we herde aboue, and it is easy to be vnderstonde. Herefore is loue perfecte wyth us, that we shulde haue confidence in the daye of iudgmente. How so euer thys texte dothe sounde, thys me thynketh shulde be the meanynge: that we shulde prouoke eche other to loue, and euer haue those ensamples of edy∣fyenge before oure eyes that shulde mooste moue vs to loue. For perfecte loue ser∣ueth to make a man bold, because it is the kepynge of the commaundementes. And therfore he that is perfecte in loue, when he seyth hymselfe (yet in thys worlde) to be vnto his neghboure as God is vnto him, & to be lyke his heauēly father in all ensam∣ples of kyndnesse, is bolde in the presence of God: yee though he come to iudge syn¦ners. When on the other syde, they that cō¦tinue euer in theyr wyckednesse, & growe not in loue, fall often. And therfore theyr conscience euer accuseth them, and put∣teth them in feare, by the reason of the freshe memory of the offence, that they
can not attōce be bold, though they haue neuer so great promyse of mercy. Ther is no feare in loue, but perfect loue casteth oute feare: For feare hath paynfulnesse. He therfore that feareth, is not perfecte in loue. Loue is not paynfull, but maketh all thynge easy & pleasaunt. Feare of punysh∣ment for the trespasse newly commytted, is paynfull: Therfore where loue is per∣fecte, there is no such feare. Loue is y• ful∣fyllynge Loue. of the commaundementes, and therfore where loue is perfecte, there is no synne. And where the conscience doth not accuse of synne, there is fayth bolde to go in to God, and to stande before him, and loke hym in the face, and to coniure hym by all his mercyes, and to axe the pe¦titions of his desyre. Lacke of loue is the breakynge of the commaundementes, & cause of synne. And where the cōscience accuseth of synne, there fayth is abashed, dismade, ashamed, and afrayed to go in, for fear of rebuke. Loue therfore serueth to make a man bolde in the daye of iud∣gement, and in all temptacions. Ihon speaketh not generally of all Feare. maner feare, but of that only, whiche the conscience of synne putteth a man in.
For dyuerse feares ther be that accompa¦ny loue, and growe as she doeth. The more a woman loueth hir chylde, y• more she careth for it, and feareth lest oughte shulde chaunce vnto it amysse. Euen so the more we loue our brethren, the more we care for them, and feare lest ony tem¦tacion shulde trouble them. As Paule sayeth .ii. Corin. xi Who is sycke, and I am not sycke? who is offended or hurte, & myne harte burneth not? How cared he for Timothe, for Titus, and for all that were weake, and for the Corinthiās, Ga¦lathians, and for all congregacions? and how diligētly wrote he to them in his ab¦sence? & the more we loue God, the more diligent and circūspecte are we, that we offende hym not. And tel me I praye the, who so euer hath had experience, what a payne and grefe, yee and what a fretting corrosefe is it vnto the harte of a true lo∣uer of God, to heare the poyson genera∣cion of vypers, the pestilente secte of y∣pocritish pharises, wyttyngly & wyllyng∣ly to blaspheme and rayle on the opē and manyfest truth of the holy goost? Yf ye wyll se how bolde loue is, go to Moses, Exodi. the .xxxii. Chapter, and Numeri the .xiiii. Chapter, and there be∣holde
how he coniureth God, and among all sayeth: Forgeue this people, or put me out of the boke that thou hast wrytten. As who shulde saye, they be thy people, & thou commaundest me to loue them, and for thy sake I loue them, and teach them, and care for them as a mother that had borne them, and loue them no lesse then my selfe. Wherfore yf thou loue me as thou promysest me, then saue them with me: or yf not, then cast me awaye wyth them, and let me haue suche parte as they take. And Paule sayd as muche Roma. ix. Loke vpon worldly loue, and se what pagientes she playeth now & then, and how dronken a thynge it is: & be sure where the loue of God is perfect, she wyl not onely go betwene bodely death and hyr louer, but also betwene hym and hell. Yf a man wolde take of this, that a man myght be so perfyte in this lyfe, that he might not be perfyter, it wold not follow. For though the sprete at a tyme get the vpperhande of the fleshe, and wynneth her selfe so to God, that she can not tell whether she be in the body or no: yet the fleshe wyll pull her downe agayne, & not let her continue, and now & then plucke of some of hyr fethers, for mountynge so
hye agayn e. For Moses fell wel ynoughe thorowe vnbelefe after that feruentnesse. we loue hym, because he loued vs fyrste. We deserue not the loue of God fyrste, but he deserueth oure loue, and loueth vs fyrste, to wynne vs, and to make vs hys frendes of hys enemyes. And as soone as we beleue hys loue, we loue agayne. And Fayth is y• mother of loue. so faythe is mother of all loue. And as greate as my faythe is, so greate is loue, though fayth cā not be perfectly sene, but thorowe the workes of loue, and in ye fyre of temptacion. Yf a man saye, I loue God, and ha∣teth his brother: he is a lyar. For howe can he that loueth not hys brother whome he seyth, loue God whom he seyth not? And thys commaundement haue we of hym: that he which loueth God, loue his brother also. To loue a mans neghboure in God is a sure rule to knowe that we loue God: and not to loue hym is a sure token that we loue not God: and to hate oure negh∣boure is to hate God. For to loue God is to do hys cōmaundementes, as Christe sayeth Ioh. xv. Ye are my louers yf ye do
those thyngehich I haue commaunded you: and the commaundement is to loue oure neghboures: then he that loueth not hys neghboure, loueth not God. And lyke¦wyse to hate the commaundement, is to hate God that commaunded it: and the commaundemente is to loue oure negh∣boures: he then that hateth hys brother, whome oure God byddeth hym loue, ha∣teth God. ¶ The .v. Chapter. AL that beleue that Iesus is Christ are borne of God. And all that loue hym whiche begat, loue hym that is begotten of hym. In thys we knowe that we loue God, & kepe hys commaundementes. For this is the loue of God, that we kepe hys cō∣maundementes. Thys is a sure conclusion that we be Fayth ma∣keth vs Gods sons borne of God thorowe fayth, & that faythe maketh vs Gods sonnes, in that we beleue that Iesus is Christe, as the fyrste chapter of Ihon also testifyeth: He gane thē power to be the sonnes of God, in that they bele∣ued in hys name. What it is to beleue that Iesus is What is to beleue that Iesus is Christe. Christ, may be vnderstande by that which is aboue rehearsed. It is a farre other
thynge than as y• deuell beled it agaynst hys wyll, and to hys greate payne, or as they beleue it, whych to fulfyl theyr synne, enuye the glorye of Christ, and persecute hys Gospell, forbyddynge to preache it, or to reade in it. To beleue that Iesus is Christe, is to beleue in Christe: that is, to beleue earnestly, and to put al thy trust therin, and to laye the pryce of thy soule thervpon, that the sonne of Maria, whom the aungell commaunded to be called Ie∣sus, because he shulde saue his people from theyr synnes, is that Christe, that Messi∣as, and that anoynted. whych God promy¦sed the fathers shulde come and blesse all nacions, and anoynte them wyth the oyle of hys sprete, and wyth mercy and grace, and to delyuer them from death of theyr soules, whych is the consentyng to synne, and to make them alyue wyth consentyng vnto the lawe of God, and in certifyeuge them that they be the sonnes of God. And to put the whole truste in all that he suffred in hys fleshe for thy sake, and in al promyses of mercy that are in hym, and that thou be fully persuaded y• ther is none other name vnder heauen geuen vnto mē, to be saued from synne by, or to purchasse forgeuenesse of ye leest synne that euer was
cōmytted or euer shalbe in thys worlde. Another conclusion is thys: Who so euer loueth God, loueth all that beleue in God. For al that loue hym that begetteth, loue them that are begotten of hym: and all y• beleue in God, are begotten of God thorowe that belefe, and made hys sonnes: than all that loue God, loue all that be∣leue in God. Another conclusion is thys: Whan we loue God and hys lawe, than we loue the sonnes of God. Whych is thys wyse proued: The loue of God is to kepe the lawe of God, by the texte before and after: the lawe of God is to loue oure neghbou∣res, and therfore yf we loue God in ke∣pynge hys lawes, we muste nedes loue the sonnes of God. But Ihon shulde seme to be a very negligent disputer to many men in that he here certifyeth vs of the loue of oure neghboures by the loue of God, whan a∣boue he certifyeth vs that we loue God because we loue oure neghboures. He se∣meth to do as I herde once a greate clerke in Oxforde stāde halfe an houre in a pul∣pyt, to proue that Christe was a true pro∣phete by the testimony of Ihon baptyste, and another halfe houre to proue Ihon the
baptiste a true prophete by the authorite of Christ, as we saye, clawe me, clawe y•: and as euery thefe myght lyghtely proue hymselfe a true man, in bearyng recorde to another as false as he, and takynge re∣corde of the same agayn. Which kynde of disputyng, scoolemē cal petitio principi the prouyng of .ii. certayn thynges, eche by the other, and is no prouynge at al. As oure holy father proueth the authorite of scripture by hys decrees (for the scripture is not autentike, but as hys decrees ad∣mytte it) and to make hys decrees shyne and appeare gloriouse, and to optayne authorite, he allegeth the scripture after hys iuglynge maner, to make fooles star∣ke madde. But it is not so here, for both the demō¦strations are certayne, doth the profe of the loue of God, & hys lawe by loue of my neghboure, and the profe of the loue of my neghboure by the loue of God and his lawe. For when .ii. thynges are so ioyned together, that they can not be separated, then the presence of the one vttereth the presence of the other, whether soeuer thou fyrst seyst. As yf I se fyre, I am sure that some thyng doeth burn. And yf I smel bur¦nynge, I am certifyed of fyre: Euē so the
loue of God is the cause why I loue my The loue of God is cause of my neghbours loue. neghboure: & my loue towarde my negh∣boure is the effecte of y• loue of God. And these .ii. loues are euer inseparable, so that whether so euer I fele fyrst, the same certi∣fyeth me of the other. Ihon calleth the loue of a mans negh∣boure the dedes of loue, after the Hebrue speche, as to helpe at nede, thoughe he were euen an enemy to me, to geue the best coū∣sell I can, to vysite and relyue hym yf he be sycke and nedy, yee yf nede were, to be∣stowe euen my lyfe also for hym. For the dede declareth what the man is wythin. Nother can my loue to God, and sayth be sene to the worlde, saue thorowe the wor∣kes. And by the workes doeth Christe cō∣maunde vs to iudge. So that yf a man haue euel workes, and continueth therin, he loueth not God, nor knoweth God, no though he call hymselfe mayster doctoure, or Gods vycare. Nother vnderstandeth he Gods worde, for all hys hye diuinitie: but is in all hys preachynge an ypocrite, a false prophete, and a lyar, though hys preachynge please the worlde neuer so well. Neuerthelesse a man is certifyed that he loueth God yer he come at the worke, by the testimonye of the sprete,
whych is geuen hym i earnest. The spret sayeth Paule. Roma. viii. testifyeth vnto oure sprete, that we be the sonnes of God: and than it testifyeth yt we beleue in God: for thorowe fayth are we sonnes. And thā it certifyeth me that I loue God. For fayth and loue are inseparable. The sprete thorowe faythe certifyeth my conscience that my synnes are forgeuen, and I recea∣ued vnder grace, and made the very sonne of God, and beloued of God. And than naturally myne harte breaketh oute into the loue of God agayne, and I seke how to vtter my loue, and to do God some plea∣sure. And because I can nother do seruyce or pleasure vnto hys owne personne, my neghboure is before me, to do God seruice and pleasure in hym, and to be to hym as Christ is to me, because he is my brother, bought wyth Christes bloude as I am. And I consent vnto that lawe, and loue it yer I come at the dede, and longe after the dede. And than whā I loue my neghboure in the dede accordynge to thys lawe, I am sure that I loue hym truly. Or els yf I examined not my loue by thys lawe, I myght be deceaued. For some loue theyr neghboures for pleasure, profite, glory and for theyr doynge seruice only, as oure spi∣ritualty
loue vs, and of that blessed loue, do theyr busy cure to kepe vs in darknesse: whyche loue is a sygne that a man hateth God and hys neghbour therto and loueth hymselfe only. But Gods lawe is, that I shulde absteyne from myne owne pleasure and profyte, and become my neghboures seruaunte, and bestow lyfe and goodes vp¦pon hym, after the ensample of Christe. Wherfore yf I loue myne neghboure out of the loue of Christe, and after the ensam¦ple of hys lawe, I am sure that I loue hym truely. And hys commaundementes are not greueous. For all that is borne of God, ouercommeth the worlde: and thys is the victory that ouercōmeth the worlde, euen oure fayth. To loue is not paynfull: the cōmaū¦dementes are but loue: therfore they be not greuous, because loue maketh the cō∣maundementes easy. The seruyce that a A goodly si¦militude of loue. mother doeth vnto hyr chylde is not gre∣nous, because she loueth it. But yf she shulde do the tenth parte vnto one that she loued not, hyr harte wolde braste for im∣pacience. Vnto a man that feleth not the loue of Christe, it is as impossible to kepe the commaundementes, as for a Camell
to entre thorowe the eye of a nedle. But im¦possible is possible and easye to where the loue of Christe is beleued. For it follow∣eth, all that are borne of God, ouercomme the worlde: that is to wete, the deuel which is the ruler of the world, and hys disciples whych haue theyr luste in hys gouernaūce and consent to synne, bothe in bodye and soule, and geue themselues to follow theyr lustes wythoute resystaunce: and theyr owne fleshe, whyche also consenteth to synne, do they ouercome, wyth al that mo¦ueth to synne. By what victory? Verely thorowe faythe. For yf oure soules be truely vnderset wyth sure hope and truste, and continuall meditacions of Christes loue, shewed already, & of succurre, helpe & assistence that is promysed in hys name, & wyth the continuall memory of theyr en∣samples whych in tymes past haue fought thorowe fayth and ouercome: than were it impossible for the worldewyth al hys chy¦ualry, to ouerthrow vs wyth ony assault or with ony ordinaūce that he could shute agaynst vs. For yf that fayth and medi∣tacion were euer presente in vs, than loue thorow that fayth, shulde easely ouercōme what so euer peryll thou couldest yma∣gyne. Reade in the byble, and se what con∣questes
faythe hath made, both in doynge and also sufferynge. The .xi. Chapter vn¦to the Hebrues mynistreth vnto the ensam¦ples abundauntly. How myghty was Da¦uid whan he came to fyght, and how ouer¦came he thorowe fayth? And how mygh∣tyer was he whan he came to suffrynge, as in the persecucion of kynge Saul? In so muche that whan he had hys most mortal enemy kynge Saul, that .xii. yeares perse∣cuted hym agaynst al ryght, (that whā he had gottē hym in hys hādes to haue done what he wolde wyth hym) thorow faythe he touched hym not, nor suffred ony man els to do, though he was yet all hys lyfe a man of warre and accostumed to murther and sheddynge of bloude. For he beleued that God shulde auenge hym on hys vn∣ryghteous kynge, vpon whom it was not lawfull to auenge hymselfe. Vvho is it that ouercommeth the vvorlde, but he that beleueth that Ie∣sus is the sonne of God? Yf to beleue that Iesus is Gods sōne be to ouercōme the worlde, than oure pre∣lates vnderstād not what belefe is, whych affirme that the best belefe, and the worst man in the worlde, maye stande together. Thys is he that came by vvater
and bloude Iesus Christ: not by vvater only, but by vvater and bloude. And it is the sprite that testifyeth, because the sprite is truthe. For ther are thre that beare vvytnesse in heauē. The father, the vvord & the holy goost. And these iii. are one. And ther are .iii. vvhyche beare recorde in earth: the sprite, vva∣ter, and bloude, and these .iii. are one. Christe came with .iii. wytnesses, wa∣ter, bloude, and sprite. He ordened the sa∣crament of baptyme to be hys wytnesse vnto vs. And he ordeyned the sacramente of his bloude, to be hys wytnesse vnto vs. And poureth hys sprite into the hartes of hys, to testifye and to make them fele, that the testimonye of those .ii. sacramen∣tes are true. And the testymonye of these iii. is, as it after followeth, that we haue euerlastynge lyfe in the sonne of God. And these .iii. are one full wytnesse, suf∣ficient at the moost that ye law requireth, which sayeth .ii. or .iii. at the moost is one full sufficient wytnesse. But alas, we are not taught to take the sacramentes for wytnesse, but for ymage seruyce, and to of∣fre the worke of them to God, wyth suche a mynde, as y• old heythen offred sacrifices of beastes vnto theyr Gods. So that what
so euer testifyeth vnto vs, that we haue euerlastynge lyfe in Christe, that mouthe haue they stopped wyth a leuended maun∣chet of theyr pharisaycall gloses. Yf vve receaue the vvytnesse of mē, the vvytnesse of God is greater. For thys is the vvytnesse that God hath borne of hys sonne. Yf the wytnesse of men, whan they be iii. is to be receaued, muche more is the wytnesse of God to be receaued. Nowe the wytnesse that these .iii. water, bloude, and sprite beare, is the witnesse of God, & ther∣fore the more to be beleued. He that beleueth in the sōne of God hath vvitnesse in himselfe. And he that beleueth not God, maketh hym a lyar, because he doth not beleue the vvyt∣nesse that God hath testifyed of hys sonne. And thys is the vvytnesse, that God hath geuen vs eternall lyfe: and thys lyfe is in his sonne. He that hath the sonne, hath lyfe. And he that hath not the sonne of God, hath not lyfe. The true beleuers haue the testimo∣ny of God in theyr hartes, and they glo∣ryfye God, wytnessynge that he is true. They haue the kyngdome of God wyth in them, and the temple of God wythin
them, and God in that temple, and haue the sonne of God, and lyfe thorowe hym. And in that temple they seke God, and offre for theyr synnes the sacrifice of Chri¦stes bloude, and the fatte of hys mercyes in the fyre of theyr prayers, and in the con¦fydence of that sacrifyce go in boldlye to God theyr father. But the vnbeleuers blaspheme God, and make hym false, describynge hym af∣ter the complerion of theyr lyenge nature. And because they be so full stuffed wyth lyes, that they can receaue nothynge els, they loke for the kyngdome of God in out¦warde thynges, and seke God in the tem∣ple of stone, where they offer theyr ymage seruice and the fat of theyr holy dedes: in confydence wherof they go into God, and trust to haue euerlastyng lyfe. And though the texte testifyeth that thys lyfe is only in ye sonne, yet they wyll come at no Sōne nor Sonne shynynge, but as vncleane byr¦des, hate the lyght. These thynges haue I vvrytten vnto you that beleue in the name of the sonne of God, that ye maye knovv that ye haue euerlastynge lyfe, and that ye maye beleue in the sonne of God.
They that haue y• fayth of Christes Apostles, knowe that they haue eternall lyfe. For the sprete testifyeth vnto theyr spretes that they are the sonnes of God. Rom. viii. and receaued vnder grace. Oure doctours saye, they can not knowe whyther they be in the state of Grace: therfore they haue not the fayth of the A¦postles. And that they knowe it not, is the cause why they rayle on it. Thys is the confydence that vve haue in hym, that yf vve axe oughte accordynge to hys vvyll, he heareth vs. And yf vve knovve that he hea∣reth vs, vvhat so euer vve axe, vve knovve that vve haue the petitions that vve axe of hym. Christ sayeth Math. vii. Axe and it shalbe geuen you. And Ioh. in the .xvi. cha What so euer ye axe in my name, he shal geue it you. To axe in the name of Ie∣su To axe in Christes name. Christ and accordynge to his wyll, be both one, and are nothinge els, but to axe the thynges contayned in the promyses and testament of God to vs warde, that God wyll be our father, and care for vs, both in body and in soule: & yf we synne offraylte and repent, forgeue vs, and my∣nistre all thynges necessarye vnto thys
lyfe, and kepe vs that we be not ouer∣come of euell. &c. Now yf they whiche beleue in Christ are bold with God that he heareth them, and sure that he graun∣teth theyr petitiōs, it followeth that they which are not bolde that he heareth thē, nor sure that he graunteth theyr petici∣ons, do not beleue in Christ. They that go to dead sayntes, with whiche they ne∣uer spake, nor wote where they be, be not bolde that God wyll heare them, nor sure that he wyll graunte thē theyr peti∣cyons, therfore they beleue not in Christ. That they be nother bolde nor sure, that appeareth fyrste by theyr dedes, and se∣condarely by theyr owne confession, for they saye: What, shulde God heare them or graunt them ought, seynge they be vn∣worthy? yee and they confirme it with a symilitude of worldly wysedome, y• they shulde be put backe for theyr malapert∣nesse, and fare y• worse. As yf a rude fel∣lowe shulde breake vp into the kynges priue chābre, and preasse vnto his owne person without knockynge or speakynge to ony other officer: so that they beleue it an augmentynge of synne, to go to God themselues in the confydēce of Christes bloude as he bad them.
Yf a man se hys brother synne a synne not vnto death, let hym axe, and he shall geue hym lyfe, for them that synne not vnto death. Ther is a synne vnto death, and for it I laye not that thou shuldest praye. All vnryghteous∣nesse is synne. And ther is a synne not to death. What soeuer sinne we se in y• world, let vs praye, and not dispayre. For God is the God of mercy. But for the synne The synne to death. to death, which is resystyng grace, & fygh¦tynge agaynst mercy, and open blasphe∣mynge of the holy goost, affirmynge that Christes myracles are done in Beelse∣bub, and his doctrine to be of the deuell, I thynke that no Christen man yf he per¦ceaue it, can otherwyse praye, then as Paule prayed for Alexander the copper∣sinyth the .ii. Tim. ye last: that God wolde rewarde hym accordynge to his workes. They that go backe agayne after they knowe the truth, & geue themselues wyl∣lyngly to synne, for to followe it and per∣secute the doctrine of truth by professiō, to mayntene falshed for theyr glorye and vauntage, are remedylesse: as ye maye se. Heb. vi. and .x. Balaam synned so, the false Prophetes in the olde testamēt syn∣ned
so, the Pharises synned so, Alexander synned so, and now many synne so, follo∣wynge theyr pryde and couetousnesse. Vve knovve that all that are borne of God, synne not: But he that is borne of God kepeth hymselfe, and the vvyc¦ked toucheth hym not. As thou readest in the thyrde chap∣ter, they that are borne of God can not synne, for the sede of God kepeth them. They can not cast of the yocke of Christ and consent to continue in synne, nor de∣fye his doctrine, nor persecute it, for to quench it, or to mayntene ony thynge cō¦trary vnto it. But in what so euer capti∣uite they be in ye flesh, theyr hartes yelde not, but ymagen to breake lowse and to escape, and flye awaye, vnto the party & standarde of theyr LORD Christ. And as men of warre they euer kepe watch and prepare themselues vnto warre, and put on ye armure of God, the which is Gods worde, the shylde of fayth, the helmet of hope, and harnesse themselues with the meditatiō of those thynges which Christ suffered for vs, and with y• ensamples of all the sayntes yt followed hym, & thynke earnestly that it is theyr parte to lyue as purely as y• best, & come after as faste as
they can. And yet in all theyr workes they knowlege themselues synners vnfayned∣ly, as longe as one iotte of theyr perfecte∣nesse that was in the dedes of Christe, is lackynge in theyrs. So that the deuell can not touche the hartes of them, no∣ther wyth pryde, or vayne glorye of pure lyuynge, nother to make thē consentynge vnto ye fleshe in grosse synnes, yf at a tyme they be taken tardy and ketch a fall. What so euer chaunce them, the deuell can ketch no holde on them, to kepe them styl in cap∣tiuite: but they wyll breake louse agayne, and repent, and do penaunce, to chastyse theyr fleshe that they come no more vnder the deuels clawes. Vve knovve that vve be of God, and that the vvhole vvorlde is set on myschefe They that beleue: that is to saye, put theyr trust in Christe, se both theyre owne glorious state in God, and also the wret∣ched estate of the worlde in theyr wycked¦nesse. But the worlde as they knowe not God, nor the glorye of the sonnes of God: Euen so they se not theyr owne mysera∣ble estate in wyckednesse and damnacion vnder the lawe of God, but the worse they are, the bolder they be, and the surer
of thēselues, the farther from repentaūce, and the more standynge in theyr owne cō∣ceates, for the darkenesse that is in them. And therfore say our doctoures, a mā can¦not knowe whether he be in the state of grace or no, nor nedeth to care therfore. And they be therfore the blynde leaders of the blynde. Vve knovve that the sonne of God is come, and hath geuen vs vn∣derstandynge to knovve hym that is true: and vve be in the truth thorovve Iesus Christe. He is very God and e∣ternall lyfe. Christ is al, and the fountayne of al, and of hys fulnesse receaue we all. And as he poureth the gyftes of hys grace vpon them that beleue in hym, so he geueth thē vnderstandynge to knowe the very God, and that they be in the verye God, and that they haue optayned that thorow hys purchasynge: & leaueth not hys shepe in darkenesse. And the same Iesu Christe is very God, and eternal lyfe. God and e∣ternall lyfe was he from the begynnynge, and became man for the great loue he had to vs, for to brynge vs vnto hys eternall lyfe. And he that hath ony other waye thy∣ther, whether they be hys owne workes, or
other mens, or workes of ceremonyes, or sacramentes, or merytes of sayntes, or of ought saue Iesu Christe onely: shall neuer come thither. The worlde seyth the byshop of Rome, and seyth that they whyche be in hym, be lordes in thys worlde, & therfore they care to be in the B. of Rome: but whe¦ther they be in God or not they saye, it is not necessary to knowe. Lytle chyldren bevvare of ymages. Serue none ymage in youre hartes. Idolatry is Greke, and the Englyshe is ymage seruyce. And an Idolatrer is also Greke, and the Englysh an ymage ser∣uaunt. Idolatrye: Idolatrer. Be not Idolatrers, nor commyte Idolatrye, that is, be none ymage seruaun¦tes, nor do ony ymage seruice, but beware of seruyng all maner ymages. And thynke it not ynoughe to haue put all the ymages of false Gods out of the waye, yf ye nowe set vp the ymage of the very God and of hys true sayntes in theyr rowmes, to do y• same seruice vnto them, whyche ye dyd to the other. For ye maye do as stronge y∣mage seruyce vnto the ymage of God and his saintes, as vnto the ymage of false god¦des: yee thou mayest cōmytte as great ydo¦latry to God, & yet before none outwarde ymage, but before the ymage whyche thou
hast fayned of God in thyne hart, as thou mayest before an outwarde ymage of the deuell. The Iewes in the temple of God, where was none ymage of God, dyd as greate ymage seruyce to God, as the Hey∣then vnto theyr false Gods: yee the Iewes in doynge to God the thynges whych god commaunded them, dyd commytte worse Idolatry, & synned greuouslyer agaynste God, than the Heythen dyd in offerynge vnto theyr false Gods, whyche thynge to be true, the prophetes testifye. For whan the Iewes dyd theyr ceremonyes and sacri¦fyces (the meanyng and sygnificaciō lost, and the cause forgotten whych God orde∣ned them for) to flatter and please God wt the gloriousnesse of the dede in itselfe, and to purchace oughte of hym for the costly∣nesse or propernesse of the present, what o∣ther made they of God in theyr ymagina¦cion, than a chylde? whom yf he crye or be displeased, men styl wyth a popet, or yf we wyll haue hym to do ought, make hym an horse of a stycke, or such lyke. Yf thou brynge a bole of bloude, and set it before God, to flatter hym, to stroke hym, and to corye and clawe hym, as he were an horse, and ymaginest that he hath pleasure and delectacion therin, what
better makest thou of God, than a bochers dogge? Yf thou brynge the fat of thy bea∣stes of God, for the same ymaginacion, what makest thou of God, than one that had nede of greace to grease shues or sinere bootes? Yf thou burnest bloude and fat to¦gether to please God, what other thynge doest thou make of God, thā one that had lust to smell to burnt flotesse? God commaunded a curtefye of all fyrst rype frutes to be offred: not to be an ymage seruice, but a wytnesse and testy∣mony that he had made them growe, that ye people shulde not forget God, but thynke on hys benefytes, & loue hym, and of loue, kepe hys commaundementes. And lyke∣wyse yf ony hadde synned agaynst Gods lawe, God commaunded that they shulde repente, and than brynge a beast, and slay it, and offre the bloude and the fatte of the inwardes: not to make satisfaccion, but to testifye only that God was appeased, and had of hys mercy at the repentaunce of the harte forgeuen the synne. The sacrify∣ces of bloude were ordeyned partely to be a secret prophecyenge of Christes bloude∣sheddynge, and partely to be a testimonye and certifyeng of our hartes, that y• synne was forgeuen, and peace made betwene vs
and God, and not to be a satisfacciō. For that were ymageseruice, and to make an ymage of God. We reade in the histories that whan a loue daye, or a truce was made betwene man and man, the conuenauntes were rehearsed: and vpon that, they slewe bea∣stes in a memorial and remembraunce of the appoyntment only. And so were the sa¦crifices sygnes and memorials only, that God was at one wyth vs. For the Iewes It is Io∣wyshnesse not to be∣leue wyth-sygnes and myracles. coulde beleue no wordes though an angell had spoken wythout a token, as we holde vp our fyngers and clappe handes. And lykewyse what so euer they were bydden to do, they muste haue had a token of remē∣braunce, though it had ben but a rynge of a rushe, as it is to se in the Byble. Euen so oure ymages, relyques, cere∣monies, and sacramentes were oure me∣morials and sygnes of remembraunce on¦ly. And he that geueth in hys harte more to them than that, is an ymage seruaunt. But whan God is a sprete and worship∣ped in the sprete, we for lacke of fayth, be∣ynge spretlesse, and hauynge no power to desyre of God ony spirituall thynge, serue God in the body, wyth ymagined seruyce for suche worldlye thynges, as our profes∣sion
is to defye. Who kysseth a relyque, or beholdeth an ymage for loue of the sayntes lyuynge, to followe theyr ensample? Naye we wyl fast the sayntes euens, and go bare¦foote vnto theyr ymages, and take payne, to obtayne greater pleasure in the worlde, and to purchase worldly thynges as main¦tayne the bodye in lustes, that the soule cā¦not once wyshe for power to lyue as the sayntes lyued, or to longe for the lyfe to come. Yf we wente a pylgrimage to kepe the remembraunce of the sayntes lyuynge in mynde for oure ensample, and fasted & wente bare foote to tame the fleshe that it shulde not luste after suche worldly thyn∣ges, whych we nowe desyre of the sayntes, than dyd oure fastynge and pylgrimage goynge serue vs, yee and the saynte were yet oure seruaunte to edifye vs in Christe wyth the remembraunce of hys lyfe lefte behynde, to preache and to prouoke vs to followe hys ensample. For oure bodely seruice can be no seruice vnto the saynte whych is a sprete, excepte we ymagen him to be an ymage. Saynte Whyte muste haue a chese S. Whyte must haue yearly a chese. once in a yeare, and that of the greateste sorte, whych yet eateth no chese. It shalbe geuen vnto the poore in hyr name say they
Fyrst that to be false, we se wyth our eyes. Secondarely, Christ cōmaundeth to care for the poore, & geue them al that we maye spare in hys name, sayenge that what is geuen them, is geuen hym, and what is de¦nyed them, is denyed hym. Yf the lawe of Christe be wrytten in thyne harte, why di¦stributest thou not vnto thy brethrē wyth thyne owne handes in the name of thy sa¦uoure Iesu Christ, which dyed both for thē and the, as thou hast vowed and promy∣sed to hym in the baptyme? Moreouer they saye: It is geuen vn∣to saynt Whytes chappellayne. Saynte Whytes chappellayne hath a stypende al∣ready sufficient for a Christen man, and oughte to receaue nomore, but there wyth to be content, and to be an ensample of de¦spysynge couetousnesse. Moreouer, that prest that wolde followe the lyuynge of Ie∣su Christe as saynte whyte dyd, and teach hys parysshēs to do so, were a ryght chap∣pellayne of Christe. And they haue a pro¦myse to be fedde and clothed, as well as euer was theyr mayster in the name of Christe. And so be they and euer were, so that they nede not to begge in the name of saynt Whyte. What shall saynte Whyte do for the
agayne for that greate chese? (for I wote well it is not geuen for noughte) shall she geue abundaunce of mylke to make butter and chese? All we that beleue in Christ, are the sonnes of God, & God hath promysed to care for vs, for as much as we care for the kepynge of hys cōmaūdementes, and hath promysed that we shall receaue what so euer we axe to hys honoure and oure nede, of hys hande. Yf we than be the na∣turall sonnes of God, why rūne we from oure father, a beggynge to saynte Whyte? Saynte Whyte sendeth no rayne vpon earth, nor maketh the Sōne shyne theron, nor maketh y• grasse grow. Nother is ther ony Gods worde that he wyll now do so much for vs at hyr request. But god hath promysed yf we wyll kepe hys lawes to do so muche for vs at oure owne requeste, for the bloude of hys sonne Iesu. What other thynge than is thy seruynge of S. Whyte, than lacke of sayth and trust to Godward in Christes name, & a false fayth of thyne owne, faynyng to saint Whyte warde for thyne ymageseruice, or seruynge her wyth chese, as though she were a bodely thynge?  lyke disputacion is it of al other saintes. And as we worship the sayntes wyth ymageseruyce to obtayne temporall thyn∣ges:
euen so worshippe we God. And as the Iewes turned theyr sacrifyces vnto ymage seruyce, which were geuē them of God to be sygnes to moue them to serue God in the sprete: Euen so haue we oure sacramentes. And for an ensample let vs take the masse, whiche after the B. of Masse is made an y∣mage ser∣uice. Romes abuse, is the moost damnable y∣mageseruice that euer was sence it be∣ganne. Christe accordynge to the testy∣monye of the scripture, made in the dayes of hys fleshe, satisfaction for all the synne of them that had beleued or shulde beleue in hys name, & obtayned that they shulde be the sonnes of God, and taken from vn¦der the damnation of the lawe, and putte vnder geace & mercye, and that God shuld hence forth deale wyth them as a mercy∣full father dealeth wyth hys chyldrē that runne not awaye from hym, no though ought be at a tyme chaunced amysse: but tary euer styll by theyr father and by hys doctrine, and confesse theyr trespasse, and promyse henceforthe to enforce thēselues vnto the vtmost of theyr power that they do no more so neglygentlye. And thys pur¦chase made he with the thinges which he suffred in his fleshe, and wyth the stronge prayers which he prayed. And to kepe this
testament, euer fresh in mynde, that it were not forgotten, he left wyth vs the sacrament of his body & bloude, to streng¦then, our fayth, and to certifye our cōscy∣ence, that our synnes were forgeuen as∣soone as we repented and had recōcyled our selues vnto our brethrē, and to arme our soules, thorowe the continuall remē¦braunce of Christes death, vnto the des∣pysynge of the worlde, mortifyeng of the flesh, and quenchynge of the lustes and thyrst of worldly thynges. As they whiche haue dayly conuersacion wyth the sycke and myserable, & are present at y• deathes of men, are moued to defye the worlde, and the lustes therof. And as Christ had instute the sacra∣ment of his body and bloude, so the bys∣shops in the processe of tyme, set sygnes of all the rest of Christes passion, in the ornamentes and gestures of the masse: so that the whole passion was dayly des∣crybed before our eyes, as though we had presently loked vpon it. And marke also for what cause they Ta ryght vse of the masse. came vnto the sacrament: they reconcy∣led themselues eche one to other, yf ony man had offended his brother, yer they were admytted into the congregacion
or body of Christ to be membres of eche other, knyt together in one fayth & loue to eate the lordes supper (as Paule cal∣leth i. Cor. xi. i. Cor. x. Ephesi. i. it) for the congregacion thus gathe∣red is called Christes bodye, and Christe theyr heade. And lykewyse yf a man had ben taken in open synne, agaynst the pro¦fessyon of his baptyme, he was rebuked openly. And he confessed hys synne opēly, and axed forgeuenesse of God and of the congregacion, whom he had offended wt the ensample of his euell dede: and toke penaunce as they call it, of the congrega¦cion, that is certayne discrete iniunctiōs how he shulde lyue and ordre hymselfe in tyme to come and tame his fleshe, for the auoydynge of the sayd vyce: because hys confession and repentaunce which he se∣med to haue, shulde be none ypocrisy, but an earnest thynge. For yf an open synner be founde amonge vs, we must immedi∣atly amende hym, or cast hym out of ye cō∣gregacion wyth defyaunce and detesta∣cyō of his synne, as thou seyst how quyck¦ly Paule cast out the Corinthian, y• kept his fathers wyfe, and whan he was war∣ned wolde not amende. Or els yf we suf∣fre such to be amonge vs vnrebuked, we can not but attonce fal from the constaū¦cye
of our profession, and laugh and haue delectacion and consent vnto theyr synne, as it is come to passe thorow out all chri∣stendome. Whiche is ten thousāde tymes more abominable then yf we synned oure selues. For the best man in the worlde that hateth synne, myghte at a tyme thorowe fraylte of the fleshe be drawen to synne. But it is altogether deuelyshe and a sure token that the sprete of Christe is not in vs nor the profession of our baptyme writ¦ten in the harte, yf we laughe at another mans synnes, though our selues absteyne for shame or feare of hell, or for what so euer ymagynacion it be: or that we be so blynde that we se none other synne in vs, then oure outwarde dedes. And ye penaūce enioyned frayle persones, that coulde not rule themselues was vnder the authorite of the curate and the fadde and discrete men of the parysh, to releasse parte, or al at a tyme, yf necessyte requyred, or whā they sawe the personne so growen in perfectnes that he neded it not. But se wherto it is nowe come, and after what maner oure holy father that is at Rome dispenseth wyth altogether. And se what oure byshop¦pes offycers do, where the authorite of the curate and of the Paryshes is become.
Yf in .x. paryshes rounde ther be not one learned and discrete to helpe the other, then the deuell hath a greate swynge a∣monge vs, that the byshops officers that dwel so farre of, must abuse vs as they do. And yf within a diocese or an whole lande we can fynde no shyfte, but that ye byshop of Rome that dwelleth at y• deuell in hell, must thus mocke vs, what a stroke thynke ye hath Satan amonge vs? And all is because we be ypocrites, and loue not the waye of truth, for all our pretendynge the contrary. And to begynne wythall, they sayde Confiteor, and knowleged themselues to be synners. And then the prest prayed in generall for al estates and degrees and for encreace of grace, and in especyall, yf nede requyred: vnto whiche prayers the people herkened and sayde. Amen. And then the Gospell and glad tydynges of forgeue∣nesse of synnes was preached, to steare vp our fayth. And then the sacrament was mynistred for the confyrmacion of the faythe of the Gospel, and of the testament made betwene God and vs of forgeue∣nesse of synnes in Christes bloude, for oure repentaunce and faythe: as ye se how after all bargens ther is a sygne therof
made, ether clappynge of handes, or vo∣wynge a peny or a grote, or a pece of golde or geuynge some earnest, and as I shewed you, howe after a truse made they slewe beastes, for a confirmacion. And then men departed, euery man to his busynesse, full certifyed that theyr synnes were forgeuē, and armed wyth the remembraunce of Christes passion and death for the morty¦fyenge of the fleshe all the daye after. And in all these was nother the sacrament, no¦ther other ceremonyes of the masse ymage¦seruyce vnto God, and holy dedes to make satisfaction for our synnes, or to purchasse suche worldly thynges as the gospell tea∣cheth vs to despyse. And now cōpare thys vse of the masse to oures, and se whether the masse be not become the moost damna¦ble ydolatrye and ymageseruice that euer was in the worlde. We neuer reconcyle oureselues vn∣to oure brethren whych: we haue offended: we receaue vnto oure masse the open syn∣ners, the couetous, the extorcyoner, the adulterer, the bakbyter, the cōmune whore and the whorekeper, whiche haue no parte in Christe by the scripture, yee such are suf¦fred to saye the masse, as the vse is nowe to speake: yee suche are we compelled wyth
the swarde to take for our pastores and curates of oure soules, and not so hardy as to rebuke them. Nother do they repent and confesse theyr synnes, and promyse amendement, or submytte themselues to wholsome iniunctions for the auoydynge of suche synnes, and tamynge of theyr fleshe. We saye confiteo, and know∣lege oure selues to be synners in latyne, but neuer repent in Englysh. The preste prayeth in latyne, and sayeth euermore a styll Masse, as we saye. For thoughe he synge and streyne hys throte to crye loude vnto them that be by hym, yet as longe as no mā woteth what he prayeth, or whe¦ther he blesse or curse, he is dome & spech∣lesse. And so in that parte we abyde frut∣lesse, and vntaught how to praye to God. And the Gospell is songe or sayde in latyn only, and no preachynge of repen∣taunce towarde the lawe, and faythe towarde Christe had. And therfore abyde we euer faythlesse and without studyenge to amende oure lyuynges. And of the ceremonyes of the masse we haue none other ymagynacion, then that they be an holy seruyce vnto god whych he receaueth of oure handes, and hath great delectacion in them, and that we purchase greate fa∣uour
of God wt thē, as we do of great mē here in the worlde with gyftes and presē∣tes. In so much that yf y• prest sayd masse without those vestimentes, or lefte the o∣ther ceremonyes vndone, we shulde all quake for feare, and thynk that ther were a synne commytted ynough to synke vs all, and that the prest for his labour were worthy to be put in the byshop of Romes purgatory, and there to be brent to ashes And of the very sacramēt it selfe we knowe none other thynge, then that we come thyther to se an inuisible myracle, Neuerthelater it were somewhat yet, yf they had bene as louynge, kynde, carefull and diligente to teache the people to re∣pente, & to beleue in the bloude of Christ for the forgeuenesse of theyr synnes, vnto the glorye of the mercy of god, and of hys exceadynge loue to vs, and vnto the pro∣fyte of our soules, & vpon that preachyng to haue ministred the sacramente as a me¦moriall, remembraunce, sygne, token, ear¦nest, the seale of an obligacion, and clap∣pynge of handes toghether for ye assuraūce of the promyse of God, to quyet, stablysh and certifye our conscyences, and to put vs out of al wauerynge and doute, yt our synnes were forgeuen vs, & God become
our father and at one wyth vs, for whyche cause onely Christ ordened it: as they were zelous and feruent to mayntene the cere∣monies of the masse in all poyntes. For nowe they haue taken awaye the sygnifi∣cacion and very entent of the sacramente to stablyshe the eare confession, theyr me∣rytes, deseruynges, iustifyenge of workes, and lyke inuencion vnto theyr owne glo∣rye and profyte: what doth the sacrament admonysh vs of reconcilynge vs to God? But now they haue destroyed for y• nonce that fayth whyche profyted, & haue set vp wyth wyles, sotylty, falshed, gyle and with violence, that fayth whyche profyteth not: we haue good cause to iudge and examine the doctrine of the spretes, whether it be groūded vpō Gods worde or no. We take paynes to come thether to se straūge holy gestures, wherof, saye they to theyr shame who knoweth the meanynge? and to heare straunge holy voyces, wherof, saye I also that no mā knoweth the vnderstandynge, and to loke vpon the sacrament, and all to optayne worldly thynges, for that seruice. Why, maye not all men desyre worldly thynges of God? Yes, we ought to aske of God onely sufficiency of all worldly thyn¦ges, as we do spirituall thynges, yet not
for bodely seruyce, seynge God is a sprete but for the goodnesse and mercy of our fa¦ther, and for the truth of hys promyse and deseruynges of hys sonne. And so whā we do mē bodely seruice, we ought to loke for oure wages of God: lest yf he moue not ye hartes of our maysters, we be shrewedlye payed: and lykewyse whan we lende or bargene, we oughte to desyre God for pay¦mente, lest thorowe our negligence he for∣get vs, and the appoyntmentes be not tru¦ly kepte. Some ther be yet that aske hea∣uen for bodely seruyce, whych is lyke abho¦minacion. But who commeth thyther wyth re∣pentaunce and fayth, for to obtayne forge¦uenesse of hys synnes, and wyth purpose to walke in the lyfe of penaunce, for the ta¦mynge of the flesh, that he synne nomore? and to stablysh hys harte in that purpose, and to arme hys soule agaynst al that mo¦ueth to the contrary, and whan he goeth home, is certifyed in hys conscience, tho∣row that sygne and token, that his synnes are forgeuen hym? As Noe was certifyed by the sygne of ye raynebow that the world shulde nomore be ouerrunne wyth water, and as Abraham was certifyed by ye signe of circūcision, that God wolde fulfyll to
hym and hys ofspringe al ye mercyes that he had promysed: and as Abraham Gene. xv. whē he asked a signe to be sure that he shulde possesse the lande of Canaan, was certifyed thorow y• sygne that God gaue hym therof, & of the foure hūdreth yeares that hys posteryte shulde be in thraldome in Egipte, and of theyr delyueraunce: and as Gedion was certifyed by the signe of hys flese, of the victorye that God had pro¦mysed hym: and as many other that bele∣ued in God were certifyed by the sygnes that God gaue thē, of the promyses which God made them? Verely no man. For oure prelates which laye for themselues, compelle intrare, cōpell not vs to entre into ony suche feaste, nor wyll suffre ony such meate to be set before vs: for feare of ouerthrowynge the foundacion of theyr false buyldynge, wherof springeth so great glorie and profit vnto thē, which funda∣cion to buylde theyr lyes vpō, they coulde neuer haue layed, excepte they had fyrste thrust this doctrine of oure soules health cleane out of knowlege. And as soone as they had blynded that lyght, they be¦came leaders in darknesse, and made of yt masse Imageseruice: so that the straunge holy gestures, must be meritorius workes
to deserue longe lyfe, health, ryches, ho∣noure, fauour, dignite, and abundaūce of all that we haue, forsakynge our baptyme, & to arme vs from bearynge of the crosse wyth Christe. And they haue made of it a pyll of two contrarye operacions: so that the same medecine that preserueth our sou¦les from purgatory, dothe purge the body of house, landes, retes, goodes and mony. And the lyght that rebuketh thē, they call sedicious, that it maketh the subiectes to ryse agaynst theyr prynces. Whych thyng the ypocrites layed sometyme vnto y• pro∣phetes, as ye maye se in the olde testament And at laste they layed it vnto Christes charge, as ye maye se in the Gospel, and to the charge of the Apostles, as ye may se in theyr actes. But at all suche tymes, the ypocrites themselues steared vp such a swearde to mayntene theyr falshed, yt euermore a greate parte of the worlde pery∣shed thorowe theyr owne mys∣cheuous prouokynge pryn∣ces to battayle. ¶ Thus much I haue sayd because of thē that deceaue you, to geue you an occasion to iudge the spretes.
¶ Here begyn¦neth the .ii. Epistle of S. Ihon. THe Elder vnto the elect lady and hyr chyldren, whyche I loue in the truth: and not I only, but also al that haue knowē the truth, for the truthes sake, whych remayneth in vs, and shal be in vs for euer: wyth you be grace, mercy and peace, from God the father and frō the LORDE IESVS CHRIST the sonne of the father, in truthe and loue. Thys all is the tytle and superscripci¦on of the Epistle or lettre, wherein (to cō∣fyrme it the more) he setteth hys name, of∣fice, to whome he wryteth it, and an Apo∣stolicall salutacion or wysshynge. And is as much to say: as I Ihon the Elder wryt thys Epistle vnto the faythfull congrega∣cion, and vnto the same I wysh grace and peace, and that they perseuer or continue in the truth and loue. The cause why he
calleth hymselfe the Elder and not Ihon I reken be, that it was moost vsed of euery man and commune, and full of Apostoli∣call swetnesse and authorite: not only be∣cause of the worshippe of age, but also by reason of the holy callynge and office. Moreouer he calleth the church or congre∣gacion a lady, because she is the bryde of ye LORDE Iesus: and the membres of the church he calleth chyldren, remaynynge so styll in comparynge and aludynge. As for hys wyshynge is playne ynough, for it is so ryfe in other Epistles. But Ihon addeth Truth & Loue, as hys maner is to dryue it, desyrynge them to be and continue ther¦in. The truth doth he set agaynst ypocrisy and erroure and lyes, that it be nothynge, but a true fayth. Charite conteyneth al ex¦ercyse of godlynesse. Besyde thys he men∣gleth amonge such thynges as maye pro∣cure vnto hym fauoure of ye hearers & som¦thynges of the truth, to make the hearers myndes to geue hede, and to cōfirme and stablysh thē: sayenge: Whych I loue in the truth, that is, truly, hartely and syncerely. For Christen charite ought to be without al simulacion & ypocrisy. I loue them for the truthes sake, that is: because they exer∣cyse the truth, do I loue thē. And not only
do I loue thē, but also all they that knowe the truth, where by he rayseth vp theyr har¦tes and corages, and entyseth them to far∣ther endeuoure of godlynesse. To thys al∣so pertayneth it yt he sayeth, that the truth shall abyde wyth vs for euer: by the whych comfortable sayenges we can not but be confirmed and stablyshed in godlynesse. I reioyced greatly that I founde of thy chyldren walkynge in the truthe, as we haue receaued a commaunde∣ment of the father. He begynneth hys matter wyth reioy¦cynge, beynge glad that ther be founde a∣monge them suche as refusynge errours and deceauers, haue layed handes on the truthe. And that not euery truthe, (for thoughe they be somtyme neuer so farre from it, yet do they thynke to holde faste the clere truthe) but that truthe that is ge∣uen of the father by the very euangelicall doctrine. Nother can ther be ony other truth. Thus se we than and learne where¦fore we ought to reioyce: We se whych be the rule of the true and godly truth. For an earnest & true fayth can not but braste out in workynge and declarynge the in∣warde treasure that God hath commyt∣ted vnto oure fidelite and trust.
Thys reiocynge had Paule also of hys Philippians, Collossians and Thes∣salonians that (lyke faythfull stewardes) gaue out the manyfolde grace commytted vnto them by Paules preachynge: so that they receaued it agayne wt vauntage: that is, heauenly and spiritual for worldly and temporall, and a vncorruptible crowne, for despysynge worldly goodes. And now I beseke the Lady, not as though I wrote a new commaunde¦ment vnto the, but that same whyche we had from the begynnyng: that we shulde loue one another. And thys is the loue, that we shulde walke after hys commaundementes. He exhorteth them to procede cōstaūt∣ly in the euangelicall truthē, & to loue eche other. And in commendynge thys to them he alleged two poyntes, namely: the au∣thor therof, and hys auncientnesse. It is not I (sayeth he) that commaunde you to continue in the truth, but the LORD hym¦selfe, whych sayeth in the Gospell: He that cōtinueth vnto the ende, shalbe saued. No∣ther do I wryte a new commaundement, or lately spronge vp amonge vs, but the moost auncient, the whych was also com∣maunded in the lawe, where it is wrytten
on thys wyse: Loue thy LORDE God a∣boue all, and thy neghboure as the selfe. That (I saye) that Christ restored, & that floryshed from the begynnynge of true re∣ligiō, namely: that we loue eche other; that do I wryte vnto you. Lo howe commenda¦ble thys be, and not to be refused. And for farther declaration he sayeth: And that is the loue, that we shulde walke after hys cō∣maundementes. Thys (namely) is y• pyth of loue or Christen charite, to kepe the cō∣maundementes. For our LORDE in the Gospell (from whence these wordes seme to be taken) sayeth: He that hath my com∣maundementes, and kepeth them, he it is that loueth me. And agayne: Abyde in my loue. Yf ye kepe me commaundemen∣tes, ye shall abyde in my loue. That is my commaundemente, that ye loue eche other  I loued you. Nother let ony man mar∣uayle at these wordes of oure Saueoure: For all the cōmaundementes are referred euery where to loue: yee and of Paule also Rom. xiii. Thys commaundement is, that (as ye haue herde from the begynnynge) ye shulde walke in it. For many decea∣uers are entred into the world, which confesse not that Iesus Christe is come
in the fleshe. This i a deceauer, and an Antichriste. He rehearseth and beateth in charite or loue as his maner is to do: and here to he allegeth a cause, the which steareth the church to a redynesse, and watchynge, & to an earnest endeuoure of godlynesse. For this cause sayeth he do I so earnestly beate in loue, for this cause ought you be diligēt namely: because ther are many deceauers come into the worlde, y• are busy to drawe you into erroure from the waye of truthe. Frō suche endeuoure to withdrawe youre¦selues, goynge forth & procedyng in true re¦ligion, truth & loue. Besyde thys he payn∣teth and describeth suche deceauers wt cer∣tayne notes or markes, sayenge: They cō∣fesse or graunt not that Christe Iesus the Messias very God & mā, of whom y• pro∣phetes prophecyed aforehande, shulde come in the world. Of such he geueth verdyte cō∣tynently, sayenge: This is a deceauer or withdrawer & Antichrist. The true sygni∣fycacion of ye word Antichrist is as much, What Anti¦christ is to saye. as agaynst Christ or contrary to Christer Now trye all learnynges & conferre thē to y• true doctrine of Christ, ether in the olde or new testament, & yf thou fynde them disagreynge to y• foresayde true doctrine,
counte both the doctrine, & hym that vtte∣reth it euen Antichrist, & the doctrine dam¦nable: Euē as vnlawful marchaundyse is. Of this loke farther in y• .i. epistle y• .ii. and iiii. chapters, where it is farther declared. Loke on your selues, that ye lose not that we haue wroughte, but that we maye haue a full rewarde. He reasoneth of the harme or daunger, and these wordes seme to be taken oute of Ezechiell the .xviii. Chap. where he sayeth: Yf the ryghteous turne awaye from hys ryghteousnesse, & do iniquite, accordynge to all the abhominaciōs y• the wycked man doth, shall he lyue? all the ryghteousnesse that he hath done shall not be thought vpō. It is a shorte & pythy sentence to moue or admonyshe where he sayeth: loke on your selues, & is as muche to saye, as: Let euery one beware, left he beynge rechelesse in that he hath wel begonne, lese all y• frute of such good dedes as he hath hetherto wel accomplyshed: But rather passynge by all Antichristes doctours let vs so rūne, yt we may receaue a ful rewarde: y• which none do receaue, but such as endure vnto y• ende who so euer transgresseth and a∣bydeth not in the doctrine of Christe, hath not God. He that endureth in the
doctrine of Christe, hath both the fa∣ther & the sonne. Here doth he now adde greater thyn¦ges. For it is a very great thynge to wāte God, and to haue nother the father nor y• sonne. But he y• abydeth not in the truth & loue, he hath nother the father nor the sonne. Wherfore we ought to endeuoure and busyly to laboure that we procede in the waye of truth. Of this reade more in the .ii. Chapter of y• .i. epistle of S. Ihon. Christ sayeth Ioh .xv. Without me can ye do nothynge. For as the braunche cut from the tre can brynge no frute: so lyke¦wyse he yt is cut frō ye vynestocke, which is Christ can not but abyde vnfruteful, & trāsgresse ye cōmaundemētes of god, wher¦fore also he hath not God, nor no parte with hym, but shalbe cast in ye vtter dark¦nesse, where shalbe waylynge and gnas∣shynge of teth. Contrary wyse he that abydeth in y• stock or tre, is partaker both of the sappe and goodnesse of it, and is euer workyng the wyll of the father, the frute of Chri∣stes merytes, and the gyftes of the holy goost: so that al thynges do serue hym for the best Roma. viii. Yf ther come ony mā vnto you, &
brynge not this learnyng, hym receaue not in to the house, nother byd hym God spede: For he that byddeth hym God spede is partaker of his eueldede Wyth playne wordes commaūdeth he to auoyde and fiye the company of he¦retykes, and to cleue constaūtly to Chri∣stes doctrine. They that brynge theyr doctrine and not Christes, or they that preach or followe doctrines contrary to Christes doctrine they be Antichristes. Now the doctrine of Christ is comprehē¦ded in the wrytynges of the Prophetes and Apostles. Wherfore, what soeuer he Who be heretikes. be that bryngeth not y• scriptures, or tea∣cheth ought agaynst ye scripture, is in no wyse to be admytted vnto thy company, or ony of thyne, nother vse ony commu∣nicacion wyth such. For euell communi∣caciōs infecte good maners. And ye dwel¦lynge neare of suche, doth peruerte euen the best also. By the house he meaneth al maner dwellynge by of such: and by byd∣dynge God spede, he meaneth familyar communicacion. Erasmus enlargynge the wordes of faynt Ihon sayeth featly on thys wyse: Yf ony come to you that bryngeth a doc¦trine contrarye to thys, that thereby he
myght leade you from the truth of y• gos∣pell, vnto hym ought ye geue so lytle hea¦rynge, that ye receaue hym not into youre house, yf he do requyre lodgynge: nother salutynge wyshe hym health, yf perchaunce he do mete you in the waye. For it is to be douted lest he infecte the housholde wyth hys seyournynge by the, and render the euel for the benefyte that thou shewest hym in permyttynge hym y• vse of thy house, which gretynge, cōmu∣nicacion, & reasonynge be cause therof. For euel cōmunicacions corruppt good maners as one of the olde sages sayeth. Morouer he that vseth familiarite wyth such deceauers or saluteth them, is taken as partener wyth them. For he geueth the wycked a corage, and an occasion to thynke that he is of some estimacion a∣monge thē, whom he goeth aboute to sub¦uerte: & vnto other he geueth a semblaūce of euell, as thoughe he dyd fauoure hys wyckednesse, whose company he doth not refrayne. The sayeng of Iesus Sirach in his boke Ecclesiasti. the .xiii. Cha. is lyke to this, where he sayeth: He yt toucheth the pytch, shalbe stayned of it, & he y• vseth the proud mās cōpany, shal waxe proude. I had many thynges to wryte vnto
you, neuerthelesse I wolde not wryte wyth papyr and ynke, but I truste to come vnto you, and speake wyth you mouth to mouth, that oure ioye maye be full. The sonnes of thy electe syster grete the. Amen. In cōcludynge his epistle he promiseth to come vnto thē▪ & presently to declare these & other thynges more largely: & that for this purpose, not to take them with gy¦les & craftynesse, to vse dominion ouer them, & poll them of theyr mony: but that theyr Christē ioye may be complet. And Whan ioye is complet. it is complete whan we all perceaue the busynesse of ye fayth aryght, and exercyse it by charite. In  ende also he setteth the salutacion of that churche, fro whēce he wryteth, makynge all congregacy∣ons syster brydes of one spouse. ye LORDE Iesu Christ, and the membres, that is, the Christians endued with grace, he calleth chyldrē. That also that he rather wyl en∣due theyr mynde spiritually with wordes and by mouth, then by wrytynge and with penne, is also graciously sayd. For it is no profyte vnto vs to se, heare, or reade the doctrine of the Apostles wrytten on papir with ynke, without we wryte it al∣so in our mynde, redressynge our lyfe and
maners after it. This epistle in all thynge sauoureth and is conformable vnto the sprete of S. Ihon the Apostle, though some wyll saye it to be of one Ihon a prest, elder, or se∣nioure. Neuerthelesse how so euer mēs iudgemētes do vary, sure∣ly ther is nought wrytten in this, that is not to be red in the fyrste epistle: wherfore it is of lyke sprete, so y• noman can refuse it without he do wyckedly. For this then, and for openynge his truth so clearly, be prayse and glory vnto God. AMEN. ¶ The ende of the .ii. epistle of S. Ihon.
¶ Here begyn¦neth the .iii. Epistle of S. Ihon. THe Elder vnto the belo¦ued Gaius, whom I loue in the truth. welbeloued I wyshe in all thynges that thou prosperest and farest well, euen as thy soule prospereth. Thys begynnynge and salutacion is playne, neuerthelesse som what varyenge from the commune vse of the Apostles. It maye be applyed to Gaius housholde and maye be vnderstande thus▪ I wysh & desyre that as thy soule prospereth, and is endued wyth all maner of spirituall gyf∣tes: euen so all thy frendes and housholde , or so prospere God all that belongeth vnto the. For it is the mooste felycite that can be to haue a sounde mynde in a sounde body. Here is to be noted y• nature of true loue, which reioyceth at dure negh¦boures health: yee can suffre hys enemye to prosper, howe the more his frende?
I reioyced greatly whan the brethrē came and testifyed of the truth that is in the, how thou walkest in truth. I ha∣ue no greater ioye than for to heare that my sonnes walke in verite. S. Ihon reioyceth that fyrst he hath receaued the truth, and that he walketh therin wyth great prayse of the brethren. To walke in the truth is to lyue a godly To walke in the truth lyfe accordynge to the rule of truth, wyth¦out gyle or simulacion. Nother is it y∣nough to knowe the truth, wythout we walke also therin: that is to refourme our wordes, dedes & all our lyuynge thereby. Moreouer the greatest ioye that sayntes haue, is, that they hear vs walke in truth wherfor they couet not to be worshipped supersticiously. For the labour they toke to enfourme vs was not to be rewarded agayne of vs with ceremonious seruice,  therin to delyte: but to delyte in declaring the frute of theyr laboure, by our cōuer¦sacion accordynge to the wyll of God s they taught. Euen as the plowmn besto¦wynge great laboure vpō his feldes, hath no greater delyte & ioye, thē to se hys fel∣des geue plenty of corne: to y• which en∣tent he bestowed al his laboure. Dearly beloued thou doest fayth¦
fully whatsoeuer thou doest to the bre¦thren and to straungers, whyche bare wytnesse of thy loue before al the con¦gregacion. Vvhich brethren whā thou bryngest forwardes on theyr iourney, (as it pleaseth God) thou shalt do wel, because that for hys names sake they went forth, & toke nothynge of the gē¦tyles, we therfore oughte to receaue suche, that we also myght be helpers of the truthe. Fyrst it is requyred that we receaue ye truth, and remayne sounde in the fayth, & secondarely that we be thankefull: Wher∣fore the Apostle reioyceth wt Gaius of the hospitalite and benefyte, whych they vnto whom he had shewed it testifyed opēly be∣fore all the congregacion. Thys place tea∣cheth thākfulnesse, & yt no mā is to be depri¦ued of hys due reward. And because we be boūde to do well o euery mā, & chefely to the mynisters of gods word: therfore doth Ihon prayse yt in Gaius, & in hym al other faythful, vsynge therto argumētes of cour¦tesy & profitablenes. For it is courtesy (say¦eth he) yf yu bryng thē forwardes on theyr iourney (as it pleaseth god) y• is: yf yu stuffe thē wt foode by ye waye, & intreate thē well whyle they are by ye. For thou knowest to
whom thou geuest it, namely God, which sayd: He that receaueth you, receaueth me. And to thys belongeth also the reason fol∣lowynge: For they wente forth for the na∣me of Christe. That is: they go aboute to preache the gospel, and not to be enryched and to do theyr owne busynesse. And ther∣fore do they take nothynge of the Genty∣les, vnto whome they preach, that so they myght wynne the more vnto Christe, be∣cause they be farre from suspicion of se∣kynge auauntage amonge the Gentyles. It is therfore oure dutye, (whych do know that the labourer is worthy of hys wages) to receaue such good men and succurre thē wyth oure substaunce. To the ende dothe he also ioyne the rewarde sayenge: that we also myght be helpers of y• truth, namely that seynge we maye not preach, and we be bounde to forther the truth; we maye do it wyth oure substaunce, helpynge & aydyng them so, to whom the office is commytted and are apte therto▪ M .x. sayeth Christ: He that receaueth a prophete in the name of a prophete, shall receaue the rewarde of a prophete, and he that geueth one of these lytle ones a cuppe of colde water in the na¦me of a disciple, verely I saye vnto you he shall not lose hys rewarde. By thys place
it appeareth that ther were many good mē at that tyme, whyth followynge the ensā∣ple of Paule preached the Gospell frely vn¦to the Gentyles. For the men of the primi¦tyse church dyd so earnestly couet the glo∣rye of the LORDE Christ to be promoted and set forth, that for hys sake they dyd suf¦fre and toke great payne for it. But they that were not ordyned to that office, gaue therto al theyr substaunce, that the labou∣rers in the Gospell shulde want nothyng. And amonge suche was Gaius the chefest a ryche man as it semeth, whome Paule also Roma. xvi. calleth hys ooste and the ooste of all the congregacion. Besyde these also dyd many good men of the meane sort helpe to promote the Gospell lykewyse. And we (vnto whom the endes of y• world be come) lye snorkynge lyke sloggardes. They that are apte to teache, & to whome God hath geuen grace in preachynge and facunde or welspeakynge, wyll not put thē¦selues, nor theyr substaunce in hasarde: ether wyll not take the laboure vpon thē, wythout they be wel anoynted wyth some fatte benefyce or stipende, and because few or none obtayne them, that be mete for it, therfore is that office so slackely executed. And agayne the Patrons wyll admytte
none that be poore & haue nought, though they be mete for it. Yee so farre we be from mynistrynge our substaunce to such, that we enuye and wythdrawe from them such stipende, as of longe tyme haue ben geuen of other to suche vse: and thus we se that y• doctrine of godlynesse, & the glory of Chri∣stes name do perysh. But I praye God geue vs that sprete that we se to haue occu¦pyed theyr hartes of whome Ihon speaketh here, and prayseth them. I wrote vnto the congregacion, but Diotrephes whych loueth to haue the preeminence amonge them, recea¦ued vs not. Vvherfore yt I come, I wyll peclare hys dedes whych he doth yea stynge on vs wyth malicious wordes, nother is there wyth content. Not only he hymselfe receaueth not the brethrē but also he forbyddeth thē that wolde and thrusteth them out of the congre∣gacion. It is not playne of what wrytynge Ihon doth speake, neuerthelesse, it semeth yt he wrote vnto that congregacion wherin Gaius was, in the whych wrytynge he ex¦horted them to do it that they sawe Gai∣us do. But one Diotrephes, wythstode these holy admonicions, whome he here re¦buketh,
blamynge hys heresy, reuylynges, wantōnesse of tunge, & hys studye in pryde & ambicion: & besydes thys he blameth hys vncurteousnesse, despysynge cruelnesse & tyranny against the brethren. He is euē an ensample of al heretykes and wycked men whych also resyst the gospell. Neuerthelesse at thys tyme he wryteth not bytterly a∣gaynst hym, but kepeth it vntyll he come & be present wyth hym: for thā doth he threa¦ten he wyll pull awaye hys vysure. And y• is the dutye of true hyrdemen, to forgeue nought, nor to spare wycked deceauers. What thynke ye wolde Ihon saye now a∣dayes yf he came agayne in those churches that wyll seme euangelical, & fynde not on¦ly one Diotrephes, couetynge ye primacye but innumerable Cardinals, Patriarkes Byshops & other prelates of the churche? I passeouer that some of them chatter I wote not what agaynste the doctrine of truth, yt they receaue not the pure doctrine of Christ & hys Apostles, & that they con∣dēne & excōmunicate such as wolde recea∣ue it. God draw vs out of y• lyōs mouth. Dearly beloued follow not that whych is euel, but that whych is good He that doth well, is of God, but he that doth euell, seyth not God.
He addeth to preserue Gaius frō offen∣dyng, as though he wolde saye: Thou kno¦west what Diotrephes goeth about, where¦fore I wolde not haue ye to follow y• maner of men, & therfore setteth he a generall rule and sentence, namely: that it is to be fol∣lowed that is good, and not that which is euell. The which sentēce maye be alleged a¦gaynst them that brynge forth to stablysh theyr opinions, longe tymes, the maners & costumes of y• fathers, wyllynge rather to be ruled thereby, thā by Gods holy worde, whiche neuerthelesse shall testify agaynste vs at y• great daye, or wt vs, & not y• fathers costumes, & maners. He ioyneth also ano∣ther sentēce to thys, sayenge: He that doth well, is of God: but he that doth euell, per∣ceaueth not Gods busynesse, nother shall he se hym after thys lyfe. Wherfore that which is is good, and God hath cōmaun∣ded, that is to be done, and not other mēs maners, ensamples, and costumes, which somtyme were institute for some cause, thā nedyge a reformacion. Demetrius hath a good reporte of all men, and of the truthe: yee and we oureselues also beare recorde, and ye knowe that oure recorde is true. To a wycked ensample he ioyneth, set∣teth
and cōferreth the ensample of Deme∣trius a good mā, that ther be nought lefte behynde to confirme Gaius mynde. For the myndes of good men be greatly mo∣ued wyth the ensamples of euell men, wherfor we se scripture oftentymes heale thys grefe. It must vndoutedly haue ben a man of maruaylous integrite and vn∣blameable thys Demetrius, vnto whome all the congregacion of good mē, yee and the truth also, besyde that the Apostle Ihō a man wythout gyle, and that had not le∣arned to flattre gaue such verdyte. Wher¦fore we passynge by Diotrephes, let vs rather followe Gaius & Demetrius For such be set for our ensample to follow, and the other to eschue. I haue many thynges to wryte, but I wyll not wyth penne and ynke wryte vnto the. For I truste I shall shortely se the, and we shal speake mouth to mouth. Peace be wyth the. The louers salute the. Grete the louers by name. As he concluded the seconde epistle, so concludeth he thys last also. And here in are many fayre ensamples of loue and charite, which be rather to be followed thā to be disputed vpon. S. Ierome semeth to
attribute these two epistles, the .ii. and .iii. vnto one Ihon a diuine or preste. But I can not se what be conteyned herein that is vnworthy of S. Ihō. For the shortnesse hath also a won¦derous fauoure. And the brefnesse hath also mysteries: wher∣fore it is not to be refused. ¶ The ende of the iii. Epistle. ❧
A table for to finde the notable places treated vpon in this exposicion of the epistles of S. Ihon. Angels serue vs. xxxii. Aduouryes. xxx. Anoyntynge. ❧❧ xlviii. Antichrist. xliii. What Antichrist is to saye. xci. Byndynge and losynge xxiiii. Baptyme. The profession of our baptyme what it is. ii. The knowlege of our baptyme is the keye of the scripture. iiii. He that hath the profession of hys bap∣tyme wrytten in his harte can be no heretyke. vi The significacion of baptyme. lii. Christe. Christ is our lyfe. xii. Christ and his worde are the lyght. xv. Christus. xix. xlvi. Christ only is our saueoure. xx. Christes victory. xxiii. Howe Christ prayeth for vs. xxxii.
Christ is called holy and anoynted. xliiii. The worlde could not know Christ. L. The worlde shall knowe Christe. L. Christes vicare. liii. What it is to beleue that Iesus is Christe. lxviii. To axe in Christes name. lxxv. The church is a lady. xci. Couetousnesse or auarice quencheth the loue of God. xli. xlii. Doctrine. The tuychstone of all true doctrine and preachers. xiiii. A sure argument to know false. prophetes by. xxxvii. The B. of Rome & Pelagius agre. xlvi. The Apostles doctrine ought we to abyde by. xlvii. The tryall of all doctrine. lix. Doctrine that is of God or y• deuell. lx. The B. of Romes doctrine of Christ. lx. The B. of Ro. doctrine is worldly. lxi. Dead men xlvi. Emanuel. xlvi. Fayth. To beleue in Christe xi. Fayth is cause of al goodnesse. xli. The fayth of a Christen man. li. The B. of Romes fayth. li.
Fayth is the roote of all commaunde∣mentes. lviii. Fayth is the mother of loue. lxviii. Fayth maketh vs Gods sonnes. lxviii. The faythfull and vnfaythfull synne dy∣uersly. liiii. Feare. lxvi. Popysh forgeuenesse. xxi. Gospell. ii. God. A rule to knowe whyther we loue God or not. xxxvii. To be in God. xxxviii. To knowe God. xlviii The summe of Gods lawe. li. No man hath sene God. lxiiii. The scripture hath sene God. lxiiii. Who be heretykes. xci. Iesus. Iesus is our aduocate. xviii. Iesus. xlvi. What it is to beleue that Iesus is.   Christ. xviii. lxviii. Idolatry. lxxviii. Idolatrer. lxxviii. Ignoraunce is cause of wycked∣nesse. lxi. Whan ioye is complete. xcii. The lust of the flesh & of the eyes. xli.
Loue. Loue breaketh the lawe. lii. The fountayne of loue. lxii. The vse of loue. lxiii. The pyth of loue. lxiiii. Loue. lxvi. The loue of God is cause of my negh∣bours loue. lxx. A goodly similitude of loue. lxxi. Last houre. xliii. The man is fyrst euell or good. liiii. Merytynge of sayntes. xxxi. Masse is made an ymageseruice. lxxxi. The ryght vse of masse. lxxxi. Purgatory. How penaunce and Purgatory came vp. xxv. How purgatory was kyndled. xxvi. Poore men. xlvi. Scripture. How the scripture is locked vp from oure vnderstandynge. v. The scripture maketh no heretykes. vi. They key and lyght of the scripture. iiii. Christ and hys worde are the lyght. xv. The scripture hath sene God. lxiiii. Satisfaccion what it is. xix. State of grace. xxxvi. Sanctus. xlvi.
Spretes. lxii. Synne what it is. li. The synne to death. lxxvi. Sygne. It is Iewyshnesse not to beleue wythoute sygnes and myracles. lxxx. Two generacions in the worlde. lxi. Walkynge in darkenesse or in lyght. xv. Workes. Workes can be no satisfaccion for synnes to Godwarde. xxii. Worshippyng of sayntes wyth styckyng vp candels before them. xxix. Gods worshippe. xxii. Worldly goodes. xliiii. S. Whyte must haue yearly a chese. lxxx. To walke in the truth. xciii.
