H66a [ocm]13527972 206093
A Full and True ACCOUNT Of a Terrible And Bloody Engagement At SEA; Between a Squadron of the French Fleet, And the Naval Forces, Under the Command of Our English Admiral. TOGETHER, With a particular Account, of the Sinking of Three of the French Men of War; taking of Two, and Disabling most of the rest: With the great Courage and Bravery of our English Sea-Men. In a Letter to an Eminent Merchant in the City of London. Printed, According to Order. SIR, BEing very much in haste, I here give you a few particulars of our Late and Bloody Engagement, with part of the French Fleet, which take as followeth. Our Admiral with nine Ships of War, cruising off the French Coast, overtook a small Portugeze Vessel, that had a while before been Chas'd by a French Privateer, and after several Questions concerning her Voyage and other Mat∣ters; he was inform'd by the Master; that he had but six hours before seen about Nine Leagues of Brest, Thirteen French Men of War, design'd as  was Credibly inform'd in a direct Course to joyn the
Thoulon Fleet, whereupon the Admiral, without delay, caused all His Squadron to vere out all the Sail they could, and made right after them: About nine of the Clock the next Morning he happily got sight of them; at which, the English giving a gallant Shout, made all the way they possibly could up to them; the French steered away at the sight of our Fleet, as fast as could be; but finding that twas impos∣sible to avoid Fighting, with a seeming Bravery▪ at last they turned, and lay by, ex∣pecting  with all the out∣ward Rolution as could be, within  Cannon-shot: Our Admir at last advancing, gave the Signal of Battel, and followed it Himself with a Gal∣lant Broad-side; which the French Admiral as bravely returned. And now by this time our Fleet advancing, they fell to it pell-mell; and notwithstan∣ding the Disadvantage of Number, they quickly made the French perceive that Eng∣lish Hearts were resolved to run the greatest Hazards, ra∣ther than seem to have the least apprehensions of the inequali∣ty of their Number; the Fight however continued obstinate for the space of three Hours, and then the ch Admiral receiving  Shot,  nd endeavoured to bea ; but our Admiral perceiving their Design, made up through the midst of them with such Vigor, that we quickly  our Selves Masters of Two of their best Ships and had the satisfaction of seeing three more fink down-right before us; the rest much shatter'd and torn, with much ado, got away, leaving us with our two Prizes, and heartily re∣oycing for the present Ad∣vantages we had gained, and wishing for the like Oppor∣tunities hereafter. This is all at present from yours J. H. ADVERTISEMENT. THere is lately Published a New Play; Entitusled, The Bloody Duke, or, the Adventures for a Crown; a Tragi-Comedy as it was Acted at the Court at Alba Regalis, by several Persons of great Quality. This Play, toge∣ther with those two New ones lately Publisht; Entituled, The Abdicated Prince, and the late Re∣volution: Containing, a full Ac∣count of the private Intriegues of the Two last Reigns, and the Most Remarkable Transacon that have happened since. Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. LONDON: Printed for W. Brown in Aldersgate-street.
