H2814a [ocm]12176593 199152
A LETTER From his EXCELLENCY the Heer Van Horne To the High and Mighty Lords THE States Generall Of the United PROVINCES, From on Board the Hollandia Sailing off of Nermontier, Wherein is given a true Accomtp of the Actions of the Dutch Fleet upon the Coasts of France, as also of their Landing in divers places on the said Coasts. Faithfully translated out of the Dutch Copy. London, Printed for J. G. 1674.
A LETTER From his EXCELLENCY the Heer Van Horne To the High and Mighty Lords THE States Generall Of the United PROVINCES. High and Mighty Lords, SInce I had the Honour of writing to your High and Mighti∣nesses upon our departure from Torbay, we have used all possi∣ble Endeavours to accomplish our Design; and coming about Heyssant, we sailed as near the French Coast as the Art of Navi∣gation would permit. The Enemy upon our Coming near, raised the whole Country along the Coast, and made divers Shots at us a severall distances. We understanding from the Prisoners that we had taken in di¦vers Barks, that a great part of the Gentry of Bretaign appeared a
Brest and thereabout, which City they had very much fortified, and furnished it with many Cannon; and that they had also placed others upon the Ships that were there ranged to prevent any coming into the Haven; all the Commanders of the Fleet were of this Opi∣nion, that (confidering how the Wind did bear, as also the Dangers of that Coast) we should doe no otherwise for the present, but shear off, and go with those ships upon which divers Companies of the Land-Forces were embarqued, and lie between Bell Isla and the Cardinals, till being all joyned together again, we should sail with our whole Force for the River Loyr. The 23. of June we arrived before Bell Isle, and took the same day about the Evening 2 Barks laden with Wne and Salt. The next day in the Morning we spake with a Skipper of an English Ship laden with Corn, that came out of the Haven from the Fort of Bell Isle, who assured us that he saw 8000 men in Arms in the Island, among which were 600 Horse, all Gentlemen, Inhabitants of the Continent. But this being not at all confirmed by a Pilot whom we had taken, and who was also upon Bell Isle 3 daies before, and told us that the same was but a Report, without any Certainty of Truth in it; here∣upon we resolved to land upon this Island, and I went with the Heer Admirall Tromp to take a View thereof, and found a very convenient lace for Landing. In the mean time I sent a Trumpeter to the Inhabitants, with an Order that they should depute some to come on Bard us, to under∣and our Intentions, upon pain of being plundered. The Trumpe∣er being brought to the Governour of the Fort, he having read the der, returned the same presently again into his hand, and said, at the Inhabitants should not submit to that Order; and if so be e would attack the Island, that they should very well be able to fend the same. Hereupon we landed very happily the next day in the Morning, ding much less Resistence then we expected, not withstanding the nemy had made 2 Retrenchments there, one above another, that ere thick set with men. The climbing up the Hill was found to  very tedious. So far as I can judge, and as I verily believe, there ere not in all above 3000 men upon the Island that were in Arms: that English-man was much mistaken. This Evening after we had traversed one part of the Island, we en∣camped
in a Valley, about a Musket-Shot from the Castle, where we found water to drink, a convenience very much wanting in that Island. The 28th^ of June we encamped at Soison, where we brought together the most part of the Cattel that were upon that Island, whereof there was great store, and put them on board the Fleet. After we had layn there 2 days, getting a sight of our foremost Ships, we resolved to embark again, without making any Attempt upon the Fort; for it would have taken up too much time, which we might otherwise employ more profitably and advantageously in the Service of your High and Mightinesses. We took also 3 Pieces of Canon with us, which we had taken from the Enemy. We stee∣red our Course to the River of Nantes, and came upon the 3d. of July in the Morning into the Bay of Bourg-neuf, and anchored over against Nermontier. The Tide being spent that day before we could land, we resolved the next day to make up to the Island of Nermontier, which we did. The Enemy had there upon the Coast cast up some Batteries and Trenches, in which they had posted their Muskettiers: and because there was not much water, so that we could not come to Land with our Sloops, Boats & Pinks, the most of our men marched up to the Middle through the water, so that divers of their Bandeliers were spoiled. The Enemy made some Discharges upon us out of their Trenches, and from behind the Walls of a Dorp, under which in a short space after we landed. We were no sooner come among them, but they betook themselves to flight, and saved themselves upon the Conti∣nent of Poictou; quitting also at the same time the Castle of Ner∣montier. We took upon the same, as also upon the Batteries along the Coast, 17 Great Pieces, 8 of Brass, and 9 of Iron, with 19 Ships that were on ground, and could not be carried away. In the Service we had 135 killed and wounded, with divers Officers; as namely, the Lieu∣tenant-Colonel and Major of my Regiment, 1 Captain, 1 Cap∣tain-Lieutenant, and 2 Ensigns, who in all probability will be reco∣vered. The Prisoners that we took in the Rencounter told us, that there
were 5000 men upon the Continent ready to come for the Island, and that there were 500 already on their march towards it: which made me to hasten my March as much as might be, to encounter them upon the Passage, leaving Captain Braekell with 3 Companies of Samen, and 70 Muskettiers, to defend the Castle; and Captain Hardenbroeck, with a Company of Seamen of Admiral Tromp's, in the Abby. Coming in the Evening near the Passage, we understood that they were all retired again to the Continent, where we also could discern a great Number of people, as well Foot as Horse. The want of fresh water obliged me to encamp one hour's distance from thenc, leaving the Heer van Somerdijck with 400 men for the De∣fence of that Post. The 5th. of July in the Morning came thereabout 2 Brigandines built after the fashion of Gallies, which those of Rochel had sent to discover our Fleet, each of them having on board 3 Pieces of Canon and 35 Seamen, all well armed. These not knowing that we were landed, came near the Shoar, where the Heer van Somerdijk had laid 60 Muskettiers close behind a Hillock; and while he amused them by leaving one French-man for them to see, the rest came so suddenly up to them, that they surrendred themselves. It is conjectured this Island hath about 2000 Houses in it; and it is divided for near 50 Rods from the main Continent, so that we could shoot with our Muskets easily to the Enemy that lay encamped be∣fore us on the other side of the Water, and they to us. At Low-wa∣ter the Land that lies between Bovin and Beauvoir, which is the firm Land of Poictou, puts out so far, and this Island is so dry, that they could pass over dry shod with as many men in Front as they pleased, from the one side to the other; which Passage is but an hour's going, and may be marched either 2 hours before, or 2 hours after Low-water. The Enemy gave out a report, as if they had Orders from the King to come over with all their Forces, as well Foot as Horse, to make us quit that Post: in the mean time they themselves set all their Salt-pans on fire about Bovin and Beauvoir, by which we discovered, that they were more afraid of our coming over to them, then that they had any intention to attack us. After we had lain there 3 weeks, your High and Mightinesses Ser∣vice forbidding my proceeding any farther there, we imbarked again,
having first blown up a part of he Castle, slghted their Works along the Coast, levelled their Houses, all their Cattel (which were a great Number) being consumed; and moreover having taken Hostages of them, till the money should be paid which was agreed upon for the saving their Houses from Burning, being the summe of 14000 Rix-dollers: which Agreement hath been since advanced by their Rfrac∣tariness. From our Prisoners we understand, that the Duke de Chaulnes is with a Reserve of 40 0 Horse of the Gentry between Croisic and St. Lazare, about 6 hours march from thence; and that the Duke de Retz, with about 1200 Gentlemen, and 5000 of the Inhabitants, was between Bourg-neuf and Mache, one hour from thence. The Duke de Vieuville, with 2000 Gentlemen, all Horse, and 8000 Inhabitants, were spread over against us in our sight, at Bovin and Beauvoir: The 2 last may joyn at a short warning. The Duke of Guadagne commands at Rochel, Oleron, and the Isle of Rhé into which places they have put most of the Souldiery, supposing that our Design may lie there. According to the report of divers Prisoners, which is also confirm∣ed by the English and Hamburgers Ships coming from thence, there are in the Island of Rhé onely, 10000 men in Arms, and 1000 Horse: they have also drawn amongst them 5000 of the Inhabitants, and within this 6 weeks there are come to them the Foot-Regiments of Guadagne, Neuf-ville, Louvigny, and a Battalion of Marine Foot, with other particular Companies, as also the Horse-Regiments of Courselle and Belleguard: the first of which hath a Command under Guadagne; the second over the Horse; and Lauvay over the Fortifications. From Oleron we have no farther particulars, but that they are full of Souldiers there, as well Foot as Horse; and that within this 3 weeks there is also arrived a Battalion of the Marine Companies. The Governour of St. Sebastian hath written to me, that he had made a narrow Enquiry into the Forces of the Enemy along the Coasts, and found that they had in Arms above 80000 Foot and 6000 Horse, fom Rochel to Bourdeaux and Bayonne. That the Marshals de Gramoni and Obret, with the Counts de la Sere and Louvigny, had the Charge of th Coasts between Bourdeaux and Bayonne. The Prisoners, and others that are come from thence, say that the Misery along the Coast is so great, that they are wholly ruined by the
Cavalry and Taxes; yea in as bad a manner as if they had the Army of an Enemy among them; so that there is not any thing in the least left remaining but the Houses. The Heer Admiral Tromp hath given your High and Mightinesses Advice of the Burning of a French Fregat, which was chased on the Coast by 2 of our Men of War, with his taking of a good Prize; so that I will not here repeat the same. We shall be presently again under sail, to prosecute what farther Work is appointed us. In the Ship Hollandia, sailing off of Ner∣montier. Where also High and Mighty Lords, &c. Signed W. A. Count van Horne. FINIS.
