H3549 [ocm]10745695 204716
The Humble PETITION OF THE Lord MAJOR, Aldermen, and Common-Council of the CITY of LONDON, Presented to the PARLIAMENT On Thursday June 2. 1659. Together with the ANSVVER Of the House thereunto. LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwell, 1659.
To the PARLIAMENT of the Common-wealth of England. The Humble Petition and Address of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common-Councel as∣sembled. Sheweth, THat the Almighty Power and Provi∣dence of God having brought your Ho∣nours once more into the exercise of the Supreme Power over these three Nati∣ons; we conceive these are leading Providences, and Calls on us, to own Him and his Instruments; which we desire in all humility to do, and to fall down at the feet of that great and righteous Lord, in whose power alone it is to set up and pull down. We are now encouraged to make our humble
desires in this to your Honours, not onely from the often and ancient experiences which your Honours have had of the many and free engagements of this City, and the Members thereof, in your greatest extremities, against the old, common, and con∣stant Enemy, and our affections still remaining up∣on the same Principles, and to the same Ends; but also from your own Declaration of the Seventh of May, 1659. wherein you have engaged, to en∣deavour the asserting, establishing, and securing the Properties and Liberties of the People, both as Men and Christians; and vigorously to endea∣vour the carrying on the Work of Reformation, so much desired, and so often declared for, to the end there may be a Godly Magistracy and Mini∣stry upheld and maintained in these Nations, there being not any thing more dear unto us, than the maintenance of Religion in its power and purity, and our Civil Rights, and Liberties inviolably; which we verily believe God and Men expects from you, as your return to this speaking Provi∣dence, that hath brought you once more together, To whom as in Duty bound we do make this our humble Address: Praying, I. That the Estates, Properties and Priviledges of all Persons and Corporations, may be inviolably pre∣served to them according to Law.
II. That a due Regulation may be of the Lawes, and Proceedings in Courts of Justice and Equity, to prevent the great expence of time and monies that hath formerly been, to the vexation of the Peo∣ple. III. That all Christian Endeavours may be used to re∣concile all those that fear God and walk holily accor∣ding to the Rule of Gods Word, that none of them be oppressed in the Exercise of their Consciences in the things of God. IV. That the Maintenance of Ministers, setled by Law, be continued to them, and where that affords not a comfortable subsistence, such addition may be given to a Godly, Learned, Painful Gospel preach∣ing Ministry, in all Parishes and Parts of the Na∣tion, as may provide for them and their fami∣lies. V. That the Universities and Schools of Learning
may enjoy their Rights and your further favours, that so they may flourish in piety and Learning; And that all scandalous School-masters and Tutors may be removed, to prevent the corrupting of youth. VI. That the very much decaied Trade of this City and Nation may be revived, by easing the burthens that lie upon it, and putting it under good Regulation and Government; That the Seas may be so guarded, that the Trade, Treasure, and strength of the Na∣tions may not so often fall into the enemies hands. VII. That the Militia of this City and Nation may be put into the hands of men fearing God, friends to our Common Cause, of known integrity and Interest in the respective places for which they serve; And that this Citie may new receive the favour they have for∣merly had, to present the names of persons, Free∣men of the same, to Your Honours Consideration, for that Trust. VIII. That you would so settle the Government over these three Nations, that for the form of it we may be less subject to Changes; and for the Instruments from
time to time intrusted with the management of it, they may be men truly fearing God, living holily, and such as have eminently shewed their love to God and his work in these Nations, All which we humbly submit to your Great Wisdomes; and pray that God would so direct and guide your hearts in this, and whatever comes before you, That the issue of all may be his Glory, the Nations good, and your own comfort at the great day of Account. SADLER. The House being informed that the Sheriffs and diverse Aldermen of the City of London were at the Door, they were called in, and being come to the Barr, Sheriff Bateman told the House, That they were appointed by the Lord Major, Alder∣men, and Commons of the City of London in Common-Council assembled, to present this their humble Petition and Address to the Parlia∣ment of the Common-wealth of England, and
thereupon presented a Petition, which after the Petitioners were withdrawn, was read, and was Intituled, The humble Petition and Address of, &c. The Sheriff and Aldermen of the City of Lon∣don were again called in, and Mr. Speaker gave them this Answer: Mr. Sheriff, and the rest of the Aldermen and Gentlemen of the City of Lon∣don: The House, as they have receiv'd, so they have read your Petition; and find it an Address from the body of the great and antient City, and it con∣taineth matters that proceed from great wisdom and judgment, and was done with great delibera∣tion, and therefore deserves the better acceptanee; And they do accept of this Petition, and of your good affections and expressions therein, and have commanded me to give you thanks, both for your good expressions and affections; And Mr. Spea∣ker did give them the thanks of the House accor∣dingly. FINIS.
