M459 99828795 207594
THE MANNER OF Electing and Enstalling the Knights of the most Noble Order of St. GEORGE called the GARTER. Which is to be performed on the 16. and 17. of April next, at the Castle of WINDSORE. With, A Catalogue of the present Knights of that ORDER. LONDON, Printed for James Thrale, and are to be sold at the  the Cross keyes at Pauls gate 1661.
The Names of those Honourable Persons, Companions of the Most Noble Order of the Garter. THe Kings Most Excellent Majesty, Soveraign. The King of Denmark. His Royal Highness, James Duke of York. The Duke of Newburgh. Prince Elector Palatine. Prince Rupert. Prince of Aurange. Algernon Earl of Northumberland, Lord High Coun∣stable at the Coronation day. Thomas Earl of Barkshire. William Earl of Salisbury. Charles Duke of Lenox and Richmond. Thomas Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer of England. George Duke of Albemarle, General of all his Ma∣jesties Forces. Aubery Earl of Oxford. James Duke of Ormond, Lord Steward of his Ma∣jesties Houshold. William Earl of Newcastle. Montagu Earl of Lindsey. Edward Earl of Manchester. William Earl of Strafford. Edward Earl of Sandwich. General Marcin.
A Relation of the manner of the Ele∣ction and Installation of the Noble Order of St. George, at Windsore, &c. BEfore I Come to speak of the Statutes of this noble Order, it will be necessary to acquaint the Reader with it's Foun∣der, and the occasion of it's Institution. The Founder of it was Edward the third King of England, a person of a most ac∣complisht Virtue, the Thunderbolt of War, and in times of Peace nothing inferiour to any Law∣maker of the best ages so much celebrated. This most excellent Prince, the Glory of his times, and a chief Ornament of Europe, having exceedingly pre∣vailed both against the French and Scottish Kings, discomforted their Armies and taken one of them in Person, ordained this most Noble Order and society of Knights, so to adorn their Valour, manifested in the Warres with honor the reward of Virtue. There number 26. no more ut pretium faciat raritas, least being else communicated unto many it might at last become despicable, nor ever have our Kings ex∣ceeded the number, but still confined themselves un∣to the first intention of the Founder. For the occa∣sion
of its Institution it is generally received that it took beginning from a Garter of the Queen, or ra∣ther of Joan Countess of Salisbury, a Lady of In∣comparable Beauty which fell from her as she dan∣ced, and the King taking it up from the ground, a number of Nobles and Gentlemen standing by laugh∣ing at it, The King said that shortly it should come to pass that Garter should be in high Honor, and e∣stimation: adding withall these words in French Ho∣ny So it qui maly pense, (i. e.) Shame be to him that evill thinks. Which after was the Motto, or Impress of the Garter. Which were it so (saith Mr. Cambden) it needs not seem to be a base originall thereof, con∣sidering as one saith Nobilitas sub amore jacet, He adds withall that some report how from his own Gar∣ter, given forth as a signall of a battail which speed so fortunatly, he called them Knights of the Garter. But whatsoever the occasion was, likely it is that it took this name from the blew Garter, which the Fel∣lows of it weare on their left leg: carrying the afore∣said Impress wrought with Golden Letters, and en∣chased with precious stones and fastened with a Buckle of Gold, as with the bond of most inward so∣ciety in token of Unity and Concord, that so there might be a Communion as it were of Virtues and good will among them. Dr. Cowel reports in his Interpre∣ter that he hath seen an antient Monument wherein it doth appear that this most Noble Order is a Col∣ledge or Corporation, having a Common Seal consi∣sting of the Kings of England as Soveraigns thereof or chief Guardians of it 25 Knight fellows (as they call them or Companions) of the Garter 14 Canons Resident being Secular Priests, 13 Vicars or Chorall
Priests, and 26 of the inferiour sort of Gentry, Mili∣tary men commonly called Poor Knights of Wind∣sore (whereof indeed there are but twelve) There belongs also to this Heroick Order the Prelate of the Garter which is the Lord Bishop of Winton for the time being; a Chancellor, a Register thereof which alwaies is the Dean of Windsore, An Usher which is one of the Ushers of the Kings Chamber called the Black rod, and last of all a Chief Herauld, even the most principall of all; Garter first King at Arms, In∣stituted by that Victorious Prince King Henry the fifth, to attend Chiefly on this Order, and to do them service at their Funerals. A brief View of some of the Statutes of this Or∣der, The Kings of England are (as I said before) the Soveraignes of this Noble Order, and either do in person or by their lawfull Deputies by them no∣minated and appointed, elect the Fellows of the Or∣der, and Solemnize the Festivals, and hold the Chap∣ters. To them it also appertains to have the decla∣ration, reformation, and disposition of the Laws and statutes of the said most Noble Order. Which Laws and statutes were first Instituted and devised by the Victorious Prince King Edward, of that name the third; after revised and ratified by many of the suc∣ceeding Kings. And on the Reformation of Religi∣on much altered by King Edward the sixt. About this time (saith Sir John Hayward in his History of this Prince) the Order was almost wholly altered as by the statutes thereof then made doth appear. A thing not to be wondered at, for even the Laws of the most setled States and Kingdoms have been often changed and varied according to occasion and the
Princes pleasure. Unto them also to the Soveraigns, I mean, or to their Deputies, it appertains to chose and nominate into the Order whom they esteem to be most worthy of that Honor, and like to be the greatest Ornaments unto it. Yet so that six at least of the said Fellows do conveene at the Election, and concurre in it, the residue of them being all war∣ned to be there present, and such as faile of their attendance without just cause, such as the Soveraign shall approve, to be amerced. In their Elections two things there are which they especially observ. First, that the Party nominated, be a Gentleman of Name, and Arms; for three descents both by the Fathers side, and the Mothers side. For which cause when the Garter was reproachfully taken from the Lord William Pagit, by Dudly of Northumberland to give to John his Eldest son, the Earl of Warwick: he used this colour to disguise that foule dishonor; that the said Lord, (as the first raiser of his house) was said to be no Gentleman of blood, neither by father nor mother, as Sir John Heyward tels the sto∣ry. The second thing to be observed is that the party nominated be without spot or foul reproach: as viz: not convict of Heresy; nor attaint of Treason; nor by his Prodigality and Riot decayed in his Estate, by means whereof he is not able to conserve the Honor of his Order; nor such a one as ever fled in the day of Battail; his Soveraign Lord, or his Lieutenant be∣ing in the field. In all which cases a Knight Elected, and Installed may also if it please the Soveraigne, be degraded. The Party chosen by the Prince, if he be a stran∣ger,
is certified thereof soon after by letters from the Soveraign: and many times the Statutes of that Or∣der have been sent unto him to consider of them, whether or no he will accept of this Election. But this is a matter meerly formal; for commonly our Kings are first well assured of the Parties good affe∣ction to them, before they choose him: and as for Soveraign Princes it is a true note of Mr. Cambdens, that the most mighty of them have reputed it their chiefest Honour to be chosen and admitted into this Company. If he accept it (as no question but he will) then doth the Soveraign forth with send unto him by his Ambassadour and the chief Herald (commonly) the whole Habit of the Order, with the Garter and the Collar wherewith they do invest him. And on the other side, the Prince or Stranger so invested, within convenient time, send their sufficient Depu∣ty with a Mantle of blew Velvet, to be installed in their room at St. GEORGE'S Church in Winsore. But if the party chosen be a Subject of the Kingdom, the Garter is delivered to him presently upon his Election, to signifie that he is chose into the Order. Afterwards in the Chapter-house, upon the reading of his Commission before the Soveraign or his De∣puty, he is invested with the Robe and with the Hood. Then follows the Installment, performed with many grave and magnificent Ceremonies: which done, he doth receive the Collar of the Or∣der. This at their Installations have alwayses an Oath administrated, that to their power, during the time they shall be fellows of the Order, they shall de∣fend the Honour, Quarrels, Rights and Lordships, of the Soveraign, and that they shall indeavour to pre∣serve
the Honour of the said Order: and all the Sta∣tutes of it they shall well observe, without fraud or covin. Which Oath is by the Natives of the King∣dom taken absolutely, and in terms; but many times by Strangers relatively and by halfes, in reference to some former Order. So when King Henry the third of France, was by the Earl of Darby invested with the Garter, Anno 1585. he took his Oath to keep the Statutes of the Order in all points, wherein they were not opposite to the Order of St. Michael, and the Holy Ghost, to which he had been sworn before. Upon which rea∣son also Frederick King of Denmark, though he did joyfully accept the habit of the Order, refused to take the Oath at all, because he had been sworn be∣fore (at his Installation in the Order of St. Michael) to the King of France. Being thus solemnly instal∣led and seated in the place belonging to them in the Chappel, their next care is to fasten an Escotcheon of their Arms and Hachments, in a plate of mettal, upon the back of their said Stalls, which they re∣move according as themselves in Order are advan∣ced higher. And in that order they do also change the places of their Banners, Swords and Helmets, which are continually set over their said Stalls, du∣ring their being of the Order. This only is the dif∣ference, that at the death of any of the Knights of this most Noble Order, their plate of Arms is left for ever to that Stall, where last they sat, to preserve their memory: whereas the Banner, Sword and Helmet, are all taken down, and offered with all due solemnities, the Offerings made by such of the sur∣viving Knights, as by the Soveraign shall be destina∣ted
to that service. I said before that they remove their Plates, and Hachments, according as themselves in order are advanced higher in this Order, they take place according to the antiquity of their Creation, and not according to their Dignities, Titles, and E∣states, so that sometimes a Knight Bachelour hath place before an Earl or Baron, as not long since we had example in Sir Harry Lea Knight, keeper of the Armory. Only in Honour unto Strangers which be Dukes, or sons and brethren unto forrein Kings and Princes, it is permitted that they take their rooms and places according to their quality. Hitherto we have spoken of the Election of Saint GEORGE's Knights and their admission to the Order. A little would be said now of the means and wayes whereby their rooms are void, and their places destitute: and they are three: For ei∣ther they are void by Death, or by Degradation, or by Cession and surrendry. The second of these (for we wil not speak of Death) is Degradation, a piece of Justice more to be commended where it may not, than where it may be spared. The Cases wherein Degradation is allowed of, I have already shewn, but the examples are but few. William Lord Pages which was so scornfully degraded by Northumber∣land, was by Queen Mary with great Honour resto∣red again unto his Order. And Sir John Fastolfe, which for his valiantnesse had been elected of the Order, was by the Duke of Bedford, under whom he served, and unto whom he was great Master of the Houshold, divested in great anger, of his George and Garter: because he had departed from a Battel (which the English lost) without stroke stricken:
but afterwards by means of his friends, and upon good excuse and reason by him alledged in his de∣fence (for certainly he was a wise and valiant Cap∣tain, however on the Stage they have been pleased to make merry with him) was restored to his Ho∣nour. The third and last means of avoidance, is by Cession or surrendry, and here of the examples are also very few. This I am sure of (not to make further search into it) that Philip King of Spain be∣ing offended with Queen Elizabath about her alter∣ing of Religion, and thereby alienated from the En∣glish, delivered back unto the Lord Vicount Moun∣taque the Robes and Habit of the Order wherewith he was invested on his Marriage with Queen Mary. By which his Act, as the Historian hath observed, he seemed to break off utterly all amity and friendship with the Realm of England: It is true indeed, King Philip being once resolved to renounce his Order; was of necessity to send back the Habit; for so it is ordained amongst them, that even such of them as depart this life, are to take care especially, that the Garter be restored to the Soveraign; by him, and by the company of the said Order, to be disposed of to some other: examples in which kind are infinite to relate. Windsore, the fairest and most stately of our En∣glish Palaces, was by King Edward who adorned and beautified it, conceived most fit to be the seat of this most excellent Order which he had established. An house indeed worthy of such Inhabitants; and there∣fore worthily honoured by them: For here they alwayes leave in readinesse the Mantle of their Or∣der, to be laid up for them, for any sudden chances
which might happen to require their presence at St: GEORGE'S Chappel, or in the Chapter-house: Here do they solemnize the Installations of their brethren, and perform their obsequies. And lastly, such a reverend regard they owe the place, that if they come within two miles of it (except that they be hindred by some weighty and important business) they alwayes do repair thereto, and putting on their Mantles, which are their in readinesse, proceed unto the Chappel, and there make their offerings. Nor do they go at any time from out the Castle, if their occa∣sions bring them thither, till they have offered in like manner. Having thus spoken of the statutes of this most Noble Order whereby they are and have been gover∣ned, we will descend in the next place to give you notice of their Patron, which after the opinions of those times, they chose unto themselves. Of which this Polydore Virgil. This order is (saith he) dedi∣cated unto St GEORGE as the chief Saint, and Patron of the men of War; whose Festivall they therefore solemnly observe with many noble Cere∣monies. But what need Polidore have been produ∣ced unto this purpose, since from the Charter of the Institution we have a testimony more authenticall. For there King Edward tels us that to the Honor of Almighty God, and of the Blessed Virgin St. Mary, and of the Glorious Martyr St. GEORGE, Pa∣tron of the Right Noble Realm of England, and to the Exaltation of the Holy Catholick Faith, he had ordained, established, created and founded within his Castle of Windsore, a Company of twenty six Noble Knights to be of the said most Noble Order
of St. GEORGE, named the Garter. It is true indeed what Polidor hath well observed, with how great Ceremony and Solemnity the Knights do Ce∣lebrate this Feast: Attending both on the Vesper, and the day it self at Divine Service, attired in the most rich and stately Mantels of the Order: and gallantly adorned with their most rich and sumptu∣ous Collars (which we call of SS.) The Image of St. GEORGE, garnished with pearls and precious stones, appendant to them. In which their going to the Church, and in their sitting at the Table, they go and set by two and two, every one with his fellow which is fore against him in his stall. And if by chance it happen that his Fellow be not present he doth both go and set alone, I say if it chance to happen: for all the Fellows are obliged to be there personally present, without a just and reasonable cause acceptable to the Soveraigne or his Deputy, and signified by speciall letters of Excuse. O∣ther Pompe and Rich magnificence of this Feast I forbear to mention, as being unable to express it. The mind is then best satisfied in such things as this, when the eye hath seen them. But I proceed unto St. GEORGE, of which their Patron, and the No∣ble Order it self, the Marriage of the Thame, and Isis, and Poem written some years since, doth thus des∣cant.
Windsore relate no more the glorious things In thee, thy guilded roofes, and Tombs of Kings. Or that thou art so honored in the rites Of George, the Cappedocians Martyrs, Knights. Who clad in Mantels rich, and circuled round The leg, with that the Garter so renown'd. Doth so advance thy name, and with its raise Splendant and glorious, so the world amaze: That Burgandy her Golden Fleece neglects And France St Michaels Collar disrespects. And Spain and Malta both esteem but small. Their Crossed robes. Thy Order dims them all. Hence it is, that the Knights of this most honora∣ble Order, are called in Latine Equites Georgiani, St. GEORGES Knights, and sometimes also in English, as in that passage noted out of Poly Al∣bion. The Temple of St. George, where his honored Knights Ʋpon the hallowed day observe their antient rites. The other Ornaments and Habits belonging to this Order, besides the Garter; are a Gown, a Kir∣tle, a Chaperon, a Cloak, a Girdle, and a Collar: all Stately and Magnificent, both for stuffe and fa∣shion,
but worne only upon daies of Extraordinary Solemnity for ordinary use, besides the Garter which is for every daies wearing, and their Cloak with the Sun on the left shoulder of it in his full Glory, which last was added by his late Majesty of ever Blessed Memory, they have a Blew Ribbon which they weare about their necks; with the pi∣cture or rather portraicture of the GEORGE, ap∣pendant to it. FINIS.
