O71 c.112.h.4[28] R225711 99886225 186485
depiction of crown The Oath of Allegiance, Enacted 13. Jacobi, Cap. 4. Which Oath was solemnly taken by every Member of both Houses of PARLIAMENT, RUMP and all. I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, professe, testifie, and declare in my Conscience before God and the World, That our Soveraign Lord KING CHARLS is lawfull and rightfull King of this Realm, and of all other His Majesties Dominions and Countreys; and that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other, hath any power or authority to depose the King, or to dis∣pose any of his Majesties Kingdomes or Dominions, or to authorize any forreign Prince to invade or annoy him, or his Countreys, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance, and obedience to his Majesty, or to give License, or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumult, or to offer any violence or hurt to his Majesties Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of His Majesties Subjects within His Majesties Dominions. Also, I do swear from my heart, That, notwithstanding any Declaration, or Sentence of Excom∣munication, or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope, or his Suc∣cessors, or by any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him, or his See, against the said King, His Heirs, or Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their obedience: I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against His, or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or colour of any such Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise: and will do my best endeavour to disclose and make known unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traiterous Conspira∣cies which I shall know or hear of to be against Him, or any of them. And I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as impious and here∣tical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which be Excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be depos'd, or murther'd by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do believe and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope nor any person whatso∣ever, hath power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully ministred unto me; and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensa∣tions to the contrary: And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sence and understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation, or mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever. And I do make this Recognition and acknowledgement heartily, wil∣lingly and truly, upon the true Faith of a Christian. So help me God. Printed for the benefit of those Persons who have forgotten that they did once take this Oath. Anno Dom. 1660.
