O820 [ocm]12535409 199750
Unto the Questions sent me last night, I pray accept of the ensuing Answer, under the Title of two Questions con∣cerning the Power of the Supream Magistrate about Religion, and the Worship of God; with one about Tythes, Proposed and Resolved. Question I. WHether the supream Magistrate in a Nation or Com∣mon-wealth of men professing the Religion of Jesus Christ, may or ought to exert his power Legislative and Executive, for the supportment, preservation, and fur∣therance of the profession of the Faith, and worship of God; and whether he may and ought to forbid, coërce, or restrain such principles and practises as are contrary to them, and de∣structive of them. The Affirmative of both the parts of this Question is proved. I. From the Light and Law of nature. For, 1. That there is a God. 2. That this God ought to be believed in, and worshipped accord∣ing to the Revelation that he makes of himself. 3. That it is incumbent on his worshippers in their several capaci∣ties, to defend and further that worship which answers the light and knowledge they have of him. 4. That to revile, or blaspheme this God, or his Name, is an evil to be punished by them who have jus puniendi, or the right of restraint in them, or committed unto them, Are all dictates of the Law of nature, principles inseparable from that light which is natural, and necessary unto rational creatures, sub∣sisting
in a moral dependance on God, and confirmed by Scripture, Heb. 11. 6. Exod. 22. 28. To assert then that the supream Magistrate, as such, in any Nation, ought not to exert his Authority for the ends, and in the way enquired after, is contrary to the Light and Law of nature. II. From the Law of Nations. For, 1. The due and regular improvement of common natural notions, and inbred principles, unto universal publick Good, is the Law of Na∣tions, whose general foundation is laid, Gen. 9. 5, 6. 2. The constant usage of mankind in their political societies, an∣swerable unto right Reason, is the Revealer or Discoverer of this Law of Nations. 3. This Law is an evidence and presumption of truth and right, paramount unto, and uncontroulable by any thing but express Reve∣lation; or it is a discovery of the will of God, less then, and subordi∣nate unto no way, but that of immediate revelation. 4. The wilful breach or contempt of this Law, in its allotments or assignation of bounds to the interests and concernments of men, is generally esteemed the most righteous ground of one Nations wage∣ing war upon another. 5. That the supream Magistrate in each Common-wealth, ought to exert his power and authority, for the supportment, preservation and furtherance of the worship of God, and to coërce and restrain that which would ruine it, is a maxime of this Law of Nations, manifested by the common constant usage, and universal entrances, unimpeached by any one contrary instance (where this Law hath prevailed) of all mankind in their political societies; nor is this practise controuled by express revelation, but is rather confirmed, Jerem. 2. 10. Therefore to deny the lawfulness of the Authority enquired after, and its due execution, is contrary to the Law of Nations. III. From Gods institution, in and by Laws positive, upon do∣ctrines of Faith, and wayes of Worship, of pure Revelation. For, 1. Among the people of the Jews, as is known and confessed, God appointed this as the chief and supream care and duty of the Magi∣strate, to provide by the Authority committed to him, that his worship, as by himself revealed, should be preserved, and provided for, in all the concernments of it; and that what was contrary unto it in some instances, he should coërce and restrain, Deut. 14. 2, 3, 18, 19. chap. 16. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
2. Though the instituted worship of God was for the greatest part then typical, and to endure but for a season, yet the preservation of that worship by God commanded, was a moral duty; Deut. 16. 20. 3. Gods command to the Magistrate, for the exercise of his care and duty in reference unto his typical worship, did not respect it, as typical, but as his worship. 4. The Law and command of God for the Magistrate in that Common-wealth to take care and do as above, was not only an emi∣nent priviledge, blessing and advantage to the Common-wealth, as such; but it was also a special mercy to all and every one of his chosen ones in that Common-wealth; and what is given or granted by God to all or any of his Saints by the way of priviledge or mercy, is not disanulled, but either by express revocation, or the institution of somewhat exhibiting a greater priviledge, or mercy, wherewith the former proves inconsistent. 5. No revocation of this grant, or command, and institution, no appointment of any thing inconsistent with it, appears in the Gospel. Then universally to deny the right and exercise of the Power en∣quired after, is contrary to the positive law of God, given in reference unto doctrines of Faith, and wayes of Worship, of pure Revelation; such as were those professed, and walked in under the Old Testament. IV. From the Example of all Godly Magistrates, accepted with God from the foundation of the world. For, 1. There is no one Magistrate left on record in the whole Book of God, with any commendation given unto him, or approbation of him as such, but it is firstly and chiefly on this account, that he ex∣erted the Power and Duty enquired after. David, Hezekiah, Josiah, Nehemiah, as others, are instances. 2. Since the days of the publication of the Gospel, no one Magi∣strate hath obtained a Good report among the Saints and Churches of Christ, but upon the same account. 3. No one Magistrate is remembred to have omitted this care, work or duty, but a mark, or blot is left upon him for it, as a person disapproved, and rejected of God. 4. Nothing but an express discharge by way of Revelation, can acquit a Magistrate from following the example of all and every one of them, who in their work have been approved of God, in that wherein they were so approved. Wherefore, To affirm that the Supream Magistrate ought not to exert his Authority for the ends mentioned, is to affirm, That the Ma∣gistrate
is now accepted with God, in and for the not doing of that which all other Magistrates have been accepted with God in, and by the doing of: which seems unreasonable. V. From the promises of Gospel times. For, 1. Promises given in a way of priviledge and mercy, that men should do any thing, decare it to be their duty so to do. 2. There are many promises that in Gospel times Magistrates shall lay out their power, and exert their Authority, for the furthe∣rance and preservation of the true Worship of God, the profession of the Faith, the Worshippers and Professors thereof, and therein the whole interest of Sion, Isai. 1. 26. chap. 49. 22, 23. 3. All the promises relating unto Gods Providential Dispensations in the World, with reference unto the Interest of his Church and peo∣ple, do center in this, that the rulers in and of the world shall exert and exercise their power in subserviency to the Interest of Christ, which lies in his Truth, and his Worship; which cannot be done, if the Power enquired after be denyed, Isai. 60. 3, 11, 12. to 17. Revel. 11. 15. To say then, that the Supream Magistrate in a Common-wealth of men professing the true Christian Religion, ought not to exert his Legislative and executive power in the defence, and for the fur∣therance of the Truth and Worship of God, and for the restraint of the things that are destructive thereunto, is to say, that the promise of God is of no effect. VI. From the Equity of Gospel Rules. For, 1. Whatever is of Moral Equity, and hath the power of obliga∣tion from thence, the Gospel supposeth, and leaves men under that obligation, pressing them unto obedience thereunto, Phil. 4. 8. 2. Whatever was instituted and appointed of God formerly, is of Moral positive Equity, if it be not repealed by the Gospel; and therefore the forementioned institution of the Magistrates Duty in the things under consideration, is supposed in the Gospel. 3. The Gospel Rules on this supposition are, that the Magistrate is to promote all Good, and to hinder all Evil that comes to his cog∣nizance, that would disadvantage the whole, by its civil disturbance, or provoking God against it, and that in order to the Interest of Christ and his Church: Rom. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Tim. 2. 2. with Prov. 8. 15, 16. 4. That what is Good and Evil upon an Evangelical account, evi∣dently
and manifestly is exempted from these Rules, cannot be proved. Therefore to say it, is contrary to the equity of Gospel Rules. VII. From the confession of all the Protestant Churches in the world. That all the Protestant Churches in the world assert, at least the whole of the duty contained in the affirmative of the Question to be incumbent on the supream Magistrate, is known to all men that care to know what they assert. VIII. From the confession of those in particular, who suffer in the world on the account of the largeness of their principles, as to toleration and forbearance. The Independants; whose words in their confession are as fol∣loweth. ALthough the Magistrate is bound to encourage promote and pro∣tect the Professors and Profession of the Gospel, and to manage and order civil administrations in a due subserviency to the interest of Christ in the world, and to that end to take care that men of corrupt minds and conversations do not licentiously publish and divulge Blasphe∣mies and Errors, in their own nature subverting the faith, and inevi∣tably destroying the souls of them that receive them: yet in such diffe∣rences about the Doctrines of the Gospel, or wayes of the worship of God, as may befall men exercising a good conscience, manifesting it in their conversation, and holding the foundation, not desturbing others in their wayes or worship, that differ from them, there is no warrant for the Magistrate under the Gospel to abridge them of their liberty. IX. From the spiritual sence of the generality of godly men in the world. This can be no otherwise known, but by the declaration of their judgements, and as to what can by that way be found out or disco∣vered, a Thousand to one, of men truly godly, are for the Affir∣mative, Vox populi Dei, est vox Dei. X. From the pernicious consequences of the contrary assertion; whereof I shall mention only two. 1. The condemnation and abrenunciation of the whole work of Reformation, in this, and other Nations, so far as it hath been pro∣moted by Laws or Constitutions of Supream Magistrates: as in the Removal of Idolatry, destroying of Idols and Images, prohibiting the Masse, declaring and asserting the doctrine of the Gospel, sup∣porting the professors of it; which things have been visibly owned and blessed of God.
2. The destruction of the Plea of Christs interest in the govern∣ment of the Nations; especially as stated by them, who in words contend to place him in the head of their Laws and Fundmentall con∣stitutions; where nothing in a Government may be done for him, nothing against them who openly oppose him, men can scarce be thought to act under him, and in subordination to him. The conclusion from hence is; to advance an opinion into any neces∣sity of its being received, which is contrary to the Law of Nature and Nations, Gods Institutions and Promises, the equity of Gospel rules, the example of all Magistrates, who have obtained testimony from God that they discharged their duty unto acceptation with him, to the con∣fession of all Protestant Churches, the spiritual sence of the generality of Godly men in the world, and attended in it self with pernicious conse∣quences, seems to be the effect of self-fulness, and readiness to impose mens private apprehensions upon others, the only evil pretended to be avoided by it. II. The next Question is. May the Supream Magistrate, by Laws and Penalties compell any one who holds the head Christ Jesus, to subscribe to that Confession of faith, and attend to that way of worship which he esteems incumbent on him, to promote and further? That we may answer distinctly, observe; I. That the enquiry is concerning them only that hold the head; For others, their case is not proposed. They are left to the provi∣dence of God, in his working on the hearts of them, whom he rais∣eth up for Governors, according to the measure of light, love and zeal which he shall be pleased to impart unto them. And though it cannot be proved, that any Magistrate is authorized from God, to take away the life or lives of any man or men, for their disbelie∣ving or denying any heads or Articles of the Christian Religion; yet it doth not seem to be the duty of any professing obedience to Jesus Christ, to make any stated, legal, unalterable provision for their immunity, who renounce him. II. That things, or opinions of publike scandall, National demerite, and reproach to the profession of the Gospel, ought to be restrain∣ed from being divulged by that publike speaking of the Press, or in Extrafamiliall Assemblies, both which, according to the usage of all Nations, are under the Power, and at the disposal of the Supream Magistrate, was before proved, in our answer to the first Enquiry.
III. It is agreed that the measure of Doctrinal holding the Head, consists in some few clear Fundamental propositions. IV. It cannot be denied but that most men in the determination of this Question, have run into extreams, much upon the account of their present Interest, or that of some Party of men, wherein and with which as to some special self-ends, they are engaged. These things being premised, I answer to the Question Nega∣tively, and that because the Authority enquired after, exerted to the ends mentioned, would immediately affect the Conscience, and set up it self in direct opposition to the light of God therein; A defect of proving the conveyance of such an Authority over the Consciences of men holding the head, having been long since dis∣covered. The Third Question. Whether it be convenient that the present way of the maintenance of Ministers or Preachers of the Gospell be removed and taken away, or changed into some other provision. Answer. I. That the Publike Preachers of the Gospel ought to be main∣tained, by a Participation in the temporal things of them to whom the word is preached, is an appointment of the Lord Christ, and of the Apostles in his name and authority, 1 Cor. 9. 14. Gal. 6. 6. II. The reasonableness of this Gospel Institution is manifested by the Holy Ghost. 1. From the Law of Nature, Luke 10. 7. 1 Cor. 9. 7. 11. 2. From the Law of Nations in the same place. 3. From the tendency and Equity of Mosaical Institutions, 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. III. Where God by providential dispensations hath laid things in a Nation, in a subserviency to an institution of Christ accor∣ding to his promise, Psal. 2. 8. Isa. 49. 23. as he hath done in this case, to oppose that order of things, seems to be a fighting against God and his Annointed. IV. The payment of Tythes, 1. Before the Law, Gen. 14. 20. Heb. 7. 4, 5. with 2. The like usage amongst all Nations, living according to the light of Nature; 3. Their establishing under the Law; with 4. The express relation in Gospel Appointment unto that establishment, 1 Cor. 9. 14. do make that kind of payment so far pleadable, that no man without being able to answer and satisfie
that Plea, can with any pretence of a good conscience, consent to their taking away. V. A maintenance by a Participation in mens Temporals, for those who preach the Gospel, being expresly appointed by Jesus Christ, and reference for the proportion, being directly made by the Apostle, unto the proportion allotted by God himself under the Old Testament; for any man, or number of men to suppose they can make a better and wiser allotment, especially when and where a neer approachment thereunto is already made by providence, seems to be a contending with him, who is mightier then they. VI. To deprive Preachers of the Gospel, when sent out into their Masters harvest, and attending unto their work, according to the best of the light which the present age enjoyeth, with visible and glorious success, of the portion, hire, wages, or temporal sup∣portment prepared for them in the good providence of God, up∣on pretences of inconveniences, and dissatisfactions of some pre∣judiced men, seems to be an attempt, not to be parallel'd from the foundation of the world. VII. Where-ever, or in what Nation soever there hath been a removal of the maintenance provided in the providence of God, for the necessary supportment of the publike Dispensers of the word, the issue hath been a fatall and irrecoverable disadvantage to the Gospel and interest of Christ in those Nations. It appears then first, That to take away the Publike maintenance provided in the good Providence of God, for the publike Dispensers of the Gospel, upon pretences of present inconvenience, or pro∣mises of future provision, is a contempt of the care and faithfulness of God towards his Church, and in plain terms, down right Robbery. Secondly, To entitle a Nation unto such an action, by imposing it on them without their consent, is down-right Oppression. VIII. An alteration of the way of payment of that Revenue which is provided in the Providence of God for publike Preachers, by the way of Tythes, into some other way of payment, continu∣ing the present Right, is not obnoxious or lyable to any of the fore∣mentioned evils, but its convenience or inconvenience may be freely debated. Yours J. O. London, Printed for Francis Tyton, 1659.
