S2328 [ocm]11995402 196455
A SECOND POWDER-PLOT, Discovered in his EXCELLENCY the LORD GENERALLS Armie. Truly relating the manner of this de∣sperate, cowardly, and malignant PLOT: In two severall Letters. The first from one of the Lifeguard to his Brother in LONDON. The other from a Lievtenant in the ARMIE. Published according to Order. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, September 5. 1644.
TWO LETTERS; Discovering a second Powder-Plott in his Excellency the Lord Generalls Armie: wherein the admirable hand of GOD hath appeared. Loving SIR, I Hope you have received the Last I writ of the 15th Instant, wherein I certified you that the Army was twentie miles into Cornwall, where the King with his own Army, Prince Maurices, Hoptons, and Green∣vils had laine about a weeke, within halfe a mile of us. Since which time the Enemy hath marched downe upon us, and wee have been in Skirmish a weeke to morrow morning; in which time, blessed be God, wee have lost none of note, and but very few private Souldiers. What the Enemy hath lost I know not. The reason the Battle hath conti∣nued so long, and is like to continue much lon∣ger,
is in regard both Armies are within inclosures: wee are come very neare one of the other: many of our great Pieces and theirs are within Musket-shot of each other: The Enemy doth confidently assure themselves of Victory, using many opprobrious speeches to us; for wee have much talke with them. The first morning they fell opon us, I was sent out  a partie of men to encounter them; wee had very hot service all day, and were within ten yards one of another; sometimes wee argue together, som times wee scoulded together like the Fish-wo∣men in Cheap-side, and sometimes wee fought very hot; wee were so neare, that sometimes the Kings men would leape over the hedge into the midst of us, taking us for their owne men: They use all the power, violence, and treachery they can, to destroy and cut us off. But in God in whom our strength doth lie, and on whom the eyes of our farewell are fixed for succour and reliefe, hath hitherto helped us, and owned his owne Cause, and given us and the whole Kingdome new experience of his love and goodnesse to us, in preventing the treacherous de∣signe of our Enemies: yesterday the Enemy were readie all to fall upon us at once, and that they might more surely prevaile against us, had procured one
whom yet wee have not found out, to blow up our Traine, and had so farre effected it, that the wild-fire and lighted Matches were put into some Wag∣gons; one Match (by the providence of God) con∣trary to the nature of Match, went out of it selfe, and another Match was found burning in a tynne Box, ready to give fire to the wild-fire. I hope the delive∣rance from this second Gunpowder-Plot, will never be forgotten by us: The Lord is good to us in pro∣viding for us in so barren a place. Wee were above a fortnight without Beere, but now wee have some sometimes from the Lord of Warwick, as also Bisket, Butter and Cheese, so that, blessed be God, wee are in no great want. Wee daily expect Collonell Mid∣dleton to come to us with reliefe. Wee question not but the Lord will either sustaine and strengthen us, or else will supply us with reliefe in due season. August 26th.
Sabbathi 25 Aug. 1644. Loving Brother my best respect presented. WEE lie now at Leatthell in the middle of Cornwall, where wee have en∣dured much hardship for want of bread, yet find provision beyond expression, blessed be God. When wee entred Cornwall at Lanceston, where wee tooke sixtie barrells of Powder, besides great store of Ammunition, and twelve Pieces of Ordnance taken at Salt-Ash: and likewise two hundred Prisoners: The 22 of this moneth we fought from morning to night, and thorow Gods mercy wee had but little losse; but divers of the Enemy. The 25 of this moneth being Sabbath day, wee have had a second Powder-Plot, which had not God wonderfully prevented, it might have proved of as dangerous consequence as the first: And thus it was; On Sabbath day 25th of the said moneth, our whole Traine was intended by the Enemy to be blowne up: the Enemy plotting by
some members in our Army, caused two great baggs of wild-fire to be made, which was put into a Wag∣gon, and two ends of Matches being tyed to the mouth's of both the bags, a Bandeleire being fasten'd to one of them, the bottome of it being broken out, and the end of the Match within the Bandeleire, the Regiment of Foote standing about the Artillery, the Match burning, and the Enemy round about the Towne, expecting execution, that they might be rea∣dy to fall on, to cut the throats of our Forces: Now stand still, and see the salvation of God: The first Match burned cleane out to the Powder, and there dyes, doing no execution at all: The second Match was burned within two inches of the Powder, where the Controwler going to deliver out some Powder to the Regiments, found these things thus done, yet the actor in this bloudy intended Massacre is not found out; Digitus Dei; to the Lord, the dis∣coverer of secrets, be all the glory. FINIS.
