W2436 816.m.3[117] 21.h.3[167] R225366 99886076 188738
royal blazon or coat of arms W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MONDROIT By the King, A PROCLAMATION. WILLIAM R. WHereas His Majesty has Received Information, that the Persons herein after Named, have, with divers other Wicked and Traiterous Per∣sons, Committed High Treason, in Compassing and Conspiring the Death and Destruction of His Majesties Royal Person, and in Adhere∣ing to His Enemies; for which Cause several Warrants for High Treason have beén Issued out against them, but they have withdrawn themselves from their usual Places of Abode and are fled from Iustice: His Majesty hath therefore thought fit (by the Advice of His Privy Council) to Issue His Royal Proclamation, and His Majesty does hereby Command and Require all His Loving Subjects to Discover, Take and Apprehend the Lord Montgomery and Sir John Fenwick, where∣ever they may be found, and to carry them before the next Iustice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, who is hereby Required to Commit them to the next Goal, there to Remain until they be thence Delivered by due Course of Law. And His Majesty does hereby Require the said Iustice or other Magistrate immediately to give Notice thereof to Him or His Privy Council. And for the Prevention of the going of the said Persons into Ireland, or other Parts beyond the Seas, His Majesty dors Require and Command all His Officers of the Customs, and other His Officers and Subjects of, and in the respective Ports and Maritime Towns, and Places within His Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, That they, and every of them, in their respective Stations and Places, be Careful and Diligent in the Examination of all Persons who shall Pass, or endea∣vour to Pass, beyond the Seas; and if they shall discover the said Persons above-named, or ei∣ther of them, then to cause them to be Apprehended and Secured, and to give Notice, as aforesaid. And His Majesty does hereby Publish and Declare to all Persons who shall Conceal the Persons above-named, or either of them, or be Aiding and Assisting in the Concealing of them, or Furthering their Escape, that they shall be Proceéded against for such their Offence, with the utmost Severity according to Law. And for the Encouragement of all Persons to be Diligent and Careful in endeavouring to Discover and Apprehend the said Persons, His Majesty does hereby further Declare, That whosoever shall Discover and Ap∣prehend the Persons above-named, or either of them, and shall bring them before some Iustice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate, as aforesaid, shall Have and Receive, as a Reward, the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds; Which said Sum of Five Hundred Pounds, the Lords Commissioners of His Majesties Treasury are hereby Required and Directed to Pay accordingly. Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Twenty second Day of March, 1695. In the Eighth Year of Our Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695.
