10155.3 22884259 25857
ARTICLES to be enquired of, within the Prouince of Canterburie, in the Metropoliticall visitation of the moste reuerende Father in God, Edmonde Archbishop of Canterburie, Primate of all Englande, and Metropoli∣tane. In the xviij. yeare of the reygne of our most gracious soue∣reygne Ladie Elizabeth, by the grace of God, Queene of Englande, Fraunce, and Ire∣lande, defender of the fayth, &c. ¶Imprinted at London by Willyam Seres. Anno. 1577.
Articles to be enquired of, within the Prouince of Canterburie. &c. WHether Common prayer be song or sayde, by your Per∣son, Uicar, or Cu∣rate in your seuerall church or chappels distinctly and reue∣rently, and in suche order as it is sette forth by the lawes of this Realme, without any kind of alteration, and at due and conuenient houres? and whe∣ther your Minister so turne himselfe, & stand in such place of your Church or Chaun∣cell, as the people may best heare the same? And whether the ho∣ly Sacraments be likewise ministred reuerently in such maner, as by the lawes of the Realme is appoynted? and whether vpon Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, not being holydayes, the Letanie and other prayers appoynted for the day, be sayde accordingly? 2 Whether you haue in your parish Churches and Chappels, all thinges necessarie and requisite for common prayer, and ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, specially the Booke of common prayer with the newe Kalender, a Psalter, the English Bible in the largest volum, the two Tomes of the Homelies, the Para∣phrases of Erasmus transllated into English, the table of the ten commandements, a conuenient Pulpit well placed, a comely and decent table, standing on a frame, for the holy Communion, with a fayre lynnen cloth to lay vpon the same, and some couering of Silke, Buckram, or other such like, for the cleane keping therof, a fayre and comely Communion cup of siluer, and a couer of siluer
for the same, which may serue also for the ministration of the com∣munion bread, a decent large surplesse with sleeues, a sure Cofer with two locks and keyes for the keeping of the Register booke, & a strong chest or boxe for the almose of the poore, with three locks and keyes to the same, and al other things necessarie in and to the premisses? 3 Whether the forme of commination agaynst sinners, with certaine prayers following the same, set forth in the latter ende of the booke of comon prayer, to be vsed at diuers times in the yere, be by your Minister plainly and distinctly read in your Church or Chappell vnto the people, betwene the Letanie, and the comme∣moration or ministration of the holy cōmunion, three times at the least in the yeare, that is to say for order sake, yerely vpon one of the three sundayes next before Easter for the first time, vpon one of the two Sundayes next before the feast of Pentecost for the se∣conde time. And for the thirde time, vpon one of the two sundays next before the feast of the birth of our Lorde, ouer and besides the accustomed reading thereof vpon the first day of Lent? 4 Whether in your churches and chappels, all Aultars be vt∣terly taken downe and cleane remoued, euen vnto the foundation, and the place where they stoode, paued, and the wall wherevnto they ioyned, whited ouer, and made vniforme with the rest, so as no breach or rupture appeare? And whether your Roodloftes be taken downe, and altered so, that the vpper partes thereof with the soller or loft be quite taken downe vnto the crosse beame, and that the sayde beame haue some conuenient creast put vpon the same? 5 Whether your Churches and Chappels with the Chauncels thereof be well and sufficiently repayred, and kept without abuse of any thing? And whether your churchyards be well fenced and clenly kept? And if any part thereof be in decaye, through whose default it is so? 6 Whether all and euery Antiphoners, Masse bokes, Grailes, Portesses, Processionals, Manuals, Legendaries, and all other bookes of late belonging to your Church or Chappell, which ser∣ued
for the superstitious Latine seruice, be vtterly defaced, rent, and abolished, and if they be not, throughe whose default that is, and in whose keeping they remayne? And whither al Uestments, Albes, Tunicles, Stoles, Phanons, Pixes, Paxes, Handbelles, Sacringbelles, Censers, Crizmatories, Crosses, Candlestickes, Holy water stocks, Images, and such other reliques and monu∣ments of superstition and Idolatrie be vtterly defaced, broken, and destroyed? And if not, where, and in whose custodie they re∣mayne? 7 Whether your person, vicare, curat, or minister, doe weare any cope in your Parish church or chappell, or minister the holy Communion in any Chalice heretofore vsed at Masse, or in anye prophane Cuppe or glasse, or vse at the ministration thereof anye gestures, rites, or ceremonies, not appointed by the booke of Com∣mon prayer, as crossing or breathing ouer the sacramentall bread, and wine, or shewing the same to the people to be worshipped and adored, or any such like, or vse any Oyle and Chrizme, Tapers, spattle, or any other Popish ceremonie in the ministration of the Sacrament of Baptisme? 8 Whyther any holydayes or fasting daies heretofore abroga∣ted, or not appointed to be vsed as holy dayes, or fasting dayes by the newe Kalender of the booke of Common prayer, be either pro∣claymed and bidden by your Person, Uicar, or Curate, or be su∣persticiously obserued by any of your parish, and what be their na∣mes that so doe obserue the same? and whether there be any rin∣ging or tolling of Belles to call the people togither vsed in any of those dayes, more or otherwise, than commonly is vsed vpon other dayes that be kept as workedayes? 9 Whether, when any man or woman is in passing out of this lyfe, the Bell be tolled, to moue the people to praye for the sicke person, especially in all places, where the sicke person dwelleth neere vnto the Church? and whether after the time of his or hir passing out of this world, there be any more ringing but one short peale before the buriall, and another short peale after the buriall, without any other superfluous or supersticious ringing? and whe∣ther
on all Saints daye after Euening prayer, there be any rin∣ging at all, or any other supersticious ceremonie vsed, tending to the maintenance of Popish purgatorie, or of prayer for the dead, and who they be that vse the same? And whether there be any rin∣ging or knolling of belles on Sunday or holydayes, betweene morning prayer and the Letanie, or in any time of the common prayer, reading of the Homelies, or of preaching, except one bell in conuenient time to be rong or tolled before the Sermon, or any other ringing vsed vpon Saints eeues or festiuall days, sauing to common prayer, and that without excesse, and who doth ring or knoll otherwise? 10 Whether your Person, or Uicar, haue preached, or cause to be duely preached in your Church, his quarterly or monethly Ser∣mons, as by the Queenes Iniunctions he is bound, and what be the names of such as haue preached for him? and whether he hath admitted any man to preach, not hauing sufficient licence, or hath inhibited or letted any from preaching, hauing sufficient licence? 11 Whether any person or persons, not being ordred at the least for a Deacon, or licenced by the Ordinarie, do say common pray∣er openly in your Church or Chappell, or any not being at the lest a Deacon, doe solemnise matrimonie, or administer the Sacra∣ment of Baptisme, or deliuer vnto the Communicants the Lords Cup, at the celebration of the holy Communion, and what he or they be, that so doe? And whether the Person, Uicar, or Fermer of your benefice, do cause, or suffer any Curat or Minister to serue your Church, before he be examined and admitted, by the Ordina∣rie, or his Deputie in writing, and doe shewe his licence to the Churchwardens? and whether any Curate doe serue two Cures at one time, without the speciall licence of the Ordinarie, or his Deputie in that behalfe, in writing first had? 12 Whether your Person, Uicar, or Curat, doe euery sunday when there is no sermon, reade distinctly and plainly some part of the Homelies prescribed and set forth by the Queenes authoritie to be read, and euery holyday, when there is no sermon, immedi∣ately
after the Gospel, openly, playnely, and distinctly recite to his parishioners, the Lordes prayer, the Articles of the faith and the ten Commaundements in English? and whether any Minister not admitted by the Ordinarie, or by other lawfull authoritie, doe expound any scripture, or matter of doctrine, by the way of ex∣hortation, or otherwise, and thereby omit and leaue of the reading of the Homelies? Whether your Person Uicar, or Curate do euery Sunday and holyday openly in the Church, call for, heare and instruct all the Children, Aprentises, and seruants of both sexes, that be of conuenient age within your parish, or at the least so many of them by course, as the time will serue, and as he may well heare and in∣struct for halfe an houre at the least, before or at the euening pray∣er, in the ten Commandements, the Articles of the beliefe, and the Lordes prayer, and diligently examine and teach them the Cate∣chisme, as it is now allowed, and set forth? And whether for that purpose, he doth take the names of them all, and by course call cer∣tayne of them by name euery sunday and holyday, to come to the teaching of the same Catechisme? 14 Whether all fathers and mothers, maysters, and dames of your parishe, cause their children, seruants, and apprentices, both mankind and womankinde being aboue seuen yeres of age, and vnder twentie, which haue not learned the Catechisme, to come to the Church on Sundayes and holydayes, at the times appoin∣ted, or at the least such and so many of them, as your Minister shal appoynt, and there diligently and obediently to heare and to be or∣dered by the Minister, vntill such time as they haue learned the same Catechisme, and what be the names of those that doe not cause their children, seruantes, and apprentises, so to come to the Church, to be instructed and examined, and how many of the said children, seruants, and apprentises be in your parishe, which be∣ing aboue seuen yeares olde, and vnder twentie yeares of age, can not say by heart the sayde Catechisme, and what be their names and age, and with whom they dwell? 15 Whether your Person, Uicar, Curate, or other Minister in
your Church or Chappell, hath admitted to the receyuing of the holy Communion, any open and notorious fornicatour, adulte∣rer, or euill liuer, by whom the congregation is offended, without due penance first done, to the satisfaction of the congregation, or any malicious person that is notoriously known to be out of cha∣ritie, or that hath done any open wrong to his neighbour by word or deede, without due reconciliation first made to the partie that is wronged? 16 Whether your Person, Uicar, Curate, or Minister, hath admitted to the holy Communion any of his Parishe being aboue twentie yeares of age, eyther mankinde or womankinde, that can not say by heart the ten Commaundementes, the Articles of the fayth, and the Lordes prayer in English, and what be the names of such as cannot say the same, or being aboue fouretene yeares, and vnder twentie yeares of age, that cannot say the Catechisme, allowed and set forth in the sayd booke of Common prayer? And whether he marie any persons which were single before that can∣not say the Catechisme? And whether he vseth to examine his pa∣rishioners at conuenient times before he administer vnto them, & namely before Easter yearely, to the intent he may knowe, whe∣ther they can say by heart the same, which is required in this be∣halfe, or no? 17 Whether your Priests and Ministers be peacemakers, and no brawlers, or fowers of discorde, and exhort their parishioners to obedience towardes their Prince, and all other, that be au∣thoritie, and to charitie and mutuall loue among themselues? whe∣ther they be diligent in visiting the sick, and comforting them, and doe moue them earnestly, especially when they make their Testa∣ments, to consider the necessitie of the poore, and to giue to their boxe or chest their charitable deuotion and almose. 18 Whether they neglect the studie of the holy Scriptures and of the worde of God? and whether such of them as be vnder the degree of a maister of Arte, haue of their owne, at the least the newe Testament both in Englishe and Latine? and whether they doe euery day with good aduisement conferre one Chapter of the
Latine and English togither at the least? And whether they haue giuen due accompt therof, and to whom? 19 Whether any of your persons, vicars, curats, or mini∣sters be fauourers of the Romishe or forreyne power, letters of true religion, preachers of corrupt and Popishe doctrine, or main∣teyners of sectaries, or doe set forth and extoll vayne and supersti∣cious religion, or be maintainers of the vnlearned people, in igno∣rance and errour, encouraging or moouing them rather to pray in an vnknowne tongue, than in English, or to put their trust in a certayne number of prayers, as in saying ouer a number of beades, Ladie Psalcers, or other like? 20 Whether any doe preach, declare, or speake any thing in derogation of the booke of common prayer, which is set forth by the lawes of this Realme, dispraysing the same, or any thing ther∣in contayned? 21 Whether your Person, Uicar, or Curate, hath or doth main∣teine any doctrine contrarie or repugnant to any of the Articles a∣greed vpon by the Clergie in the Conuocation holden at London Anno. domini .1562. for the auoyding of diuersities of opinions, & for establishment of consent touching true religion, set forth by the Queenes authoritie? & whether any hauing bene admitted to his benefice since the thirtenth yeare of the Queenes reigne, hath noe within two monethes after his induction, publickly redde the said Articles in your Church in the time of Common prayer there with a declaration of his vnfayned assent therevnto? 22 Whether your person, vicar, curate, minister, or reader, doe church any vnmaried woman, which hath bene gotten wyth childe out of lawfull mariage, & say for hir the forme of thanksegi∣uing of woman after childbirth, except such an vnmaried woman haue either before hir childbirth, done due pennaunce for hir fault to the satisfaction of the congregation, or at hir comming to giue thankes doe openly acknowledge hir fault before the congregati∣on at the appointmēt of the minister, according to ye order prescri∣bed to the sayd Minister, by the Ordinarie or his Deputie, the same churching to be had alwayes on some Sunday or holyday,
and vpon none other day? 23 Whether any of your persons, Uicars, Curates, or Mini∣sters, or any other Priest, or any lay man or woman, doe wilfully maintayne, or defende any heresies, false opinions, or popish er∣rors, contrarie to the lawes of almightie God, and true doctrine, by publike authoritie in this realme nowe set forthe, and what be their names? And whether any keepe any secrete conuenticles, preachinges, lectures, or readings contrary to the law? and what be their names? 24 Whether there be any in your parishe that openly or pri∣uately say Masse, or heare Masse, or any other kinde of seruice or prayer, than is set forth by the lawes of this Realme? 25 Whether any popish Priests, eyther going as Priestes, or disguised in other apparel, or altering their names for any cause, or any other, or rumiagate persons, mislikers, or deprauers of true religion, that doe not minister or frequent common prayer nowe vsed, nor communicate at times appoynted by the law, doe resort secretly or openly into your parish, and to whom, and of whom be they receyued, harbored, and relieued, and what be their names and surnames, or by what names are they called? 26 Whether your Persons and Uicars, be resident and dwell continually vppon their benefices, doing their dueties in prea∣ching, reading, and ministring the Sacraments? and whether they keepe Hospitalitie, according as their liuings will extende? And whether their houses and Chauncelles be well repayred and vpholden? 27 Whether they or any of them haue mo benefices then one, how many, and in what countryes they be, and what be the names thereof? 28 Whether they, when they be absent from their benefices, doe leaue their cures to a rude and vnlerned person, and not to an honest, and well learned expert Curate, which can and will teach the people wholesome doctrine? and whether in their absence they doe procure learned men to preach in their churches and cures, at least one sermon euery quarter of a yeare?
29 Whether such persons and vicars as be not resident, ney∣ther keepe hospitalitie, doe relieue their poore parishioners, and what giue they yearely to them, and if they be not resident, and may dispende yerely twentie poundes or aboue, eyther in this dio∣cesse, or elsewhere? whether doe they distribute euery yere among their poore parishioners, at the least the fortieth part of the fruites of their benefices, where they be not resident? 30 Whether your persons, vicars, curates, & Ministers, kepe well their registers of al Weddings, Buryings, and christenings within your parish, and doe present a copie of them once euery yeare, by Indenture to the Ordinarie, or his officers▪ and whe¦ther they read the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions euery quar∣ter of the yeare once, or no? 31 Whether they▪ or any of them, keepe any suspected women in their houses, or be incontinent persons, giuen to drunkennesse, ydlenesse, or be haunters of Tauerns, Alehouses, or suspected places: or be hunters, haukers, dicers, carders, tablers, swea∣rers or otherwise suspected of any notorious crime, or giue any euil example of life? and whether they (as they ought to doe) occu∣pie them selues in the reading, or hearing of some part of the holy scripture, or other good Author, or in some other godly or lauda∣ble exercyse, meete for their vocation? 32 Whether they, or any of them, doe keepe or suffer to be kept in their personage or vicarage houses, any Alehouses, Tipling houses, or tauerns, or doe sell Ale, Bere, Wine, or any victuall? 33 Whether your persons or vicars haue bought▪ their bene∣fices, or come to them by Simonie; fraud, or deceyt, or by anye colourable pact, or other vnlawfull meane whatsoeuer, or be vehe∣mently suspected or defamed thereof? And whether they keepe in their owne handes, or haue demised, and let to ferme their per∣sonages, and Uicarages, or their Glebe lande, or Tythes, or any part thereof? and whether any such lease be made for the per∣fourmaunce of any Simonicall part, made directly or indirectly, betweene the Incumbent and the Patrone, or betweene the In∣cumbent and any other person, for the presenting of the same
Incumbent to that benefice? 34 Whether any minister or priest presented to any benefice in this Diocesse hath couenanted, promised, or practised to or with the Patrone therof or any other person or persons that had the ad∣uousion or gift of the same benefice, or with any other person or persons on his or their behalfe, to giue to him or his friende, any summe of redy money, for presenting him to the same, or haue offe∣red by promise or bonde any lease, eyther of the whole benefice, ly∣miting the rent farre vnder the iust value, or of the mansion house, Glebe landes, or any portion of the tythes, and fruites of the same benefice, receiuing little or nothing therefore, or suffering the pa∣trone or any other person that presented him, to haue his owne ty∣thes within the benefice free vnto himselfe, or else haue graunted some yerely pension or other yerely commodity, to him, his child, seruant or friend for preferring him to the same benefice, or other∣wise haue suffered him to make a gayne by any colour, deceyt, or Simoniacall part in bestowing the sayde benefice? 35 Whether the Church of your parishe be now vacant or de∣stitute of an Incumbent, or no, and if it be, howe long it hath bene so, and who is the Patrone? and whether he suffereth the benefice to lye vacant, and occupieth the glebe land, and taketh the tythes and other fruites to himselfe, during the time of the vacation: or who also occupieth and taketh the same? 36 Whether there be any lay or temporall man, not being with in orders, or any child that hath, or enioyeth any benefice or spi∣rituall promotion? 37 Whether any priest or minister be come into this Dioces, out of any other Dioces, to serue any cure here, without letters testimoniall of the Ordinarie, from whence he came, vnder his au∣tenticke seale and hand, to testifie the cause of his departing from thence and of his behauiour there 38 Whether for the retayning of the perambulation of the cir∣cuite of your parish, the person, vicar, or curate, churchwardens and certayne of the substantiall men of the parish, in the dayes of the Rogations, commonly called the gang dayes, walke the accu∣stomed
boundes of your parishe, and whether in the same peram∣bulation and going about, the curate doe vse any other rite or ce∣remonie, than to say or sing in English, the two Psalmes begin∣ning Benedic anima mea domino, that is to say, the Ciii. psalm, and the Ciiii. psalme, and such sentences of Scripture, as be ap∣pointed by the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions, with the Letany and suffrages following the same, and reading one Homelie alre∣die deuised and set forth for that purpose, without wearing any sur∣plesses, carying of banners, or handbelles, or staying at Crosses or any such like popish ceremonies. 39 Whether the parish clarke be appoynted according to the auncient custome of the parish? and whether he be not obedient to to the person, vicar, or curate, specially in the time of celebration of diuine seruice, or of the sacraments, or in any preparation there∣vnto? And whether he be able and ready to reade the first lesson, the Epistle, and the Psalmes, with aunswere to the suffrages as is vsed? and whether he keepe not the bookes, and ornaments of the Church fayre and cleane, and cause the Church and Queere, the Communion Table, the Pulpit and the Funt to be made de∣cent and cleane, agaynst seruice time, the communion sermon, and baptisme? 40 Whether there be any man or woman in your parish that resorteth to any popish Priest for shrift or auricular confession, or any that within three yeares nowe last past, hath bene reconciled vnto the Pope, or to the Church of Rome, or any that is reputed or suspected so to be? and whether there be any that refuse to com to the Church to heare diuine seruice, or to communicate accor∣ding to the order now established by publicke authoritie, and what be their names? 41 Whether there be any person, or persons, ecclesiastcall or temporall within your Parish, or elsewhere, within the Dio¦ces, that of Late haue retayned, or kept in their custodie, or that reade, sell, vtter, disperse, carie, or deliuer to others any Englyshe bookes, set forth of late yeres at Louaine, or in any other place be¦yonde the seas, by Harding, Dorman, Allen, Saunders, Staple∣ton,
Marshall, Brystowe, or any of them, or by any other English papist, eyther agaynst the Queenes Maiesties supremacie in mat¦ters ecclesiasticall, or against true religion, and catholicke doctrine now receyued, and established by common authoritie within this Realme, and what their names and their surnames are? 42 Whether there be any in your parish, that vseth to praye in English, or in Latine vpon Beades, or other such like thing, or vpon any supersticious popishe primer, or other like booke, and what be their names? 43 Whether the people of your parish, especially housholders, hauing no lawfull excuse to be absent, doe faythfully and dili∣gently endeuour them selues, to resort with their chyldren, and seruauntes, to their parish church or chappell, on the holy dayes, and chiefly vpon the Sundayes to Morning and Euening prayer and vpon reasonable let thereof to some vsual place, wher com∣mon prayer is vsed, and then and there abyde orderly and soberly, during the time of common prayer, Homelies, Sermons, and other seruice of God there vsed, reuerently and deuoutly giuing themselues to the hearing thereof, and occupying themselues at times conuenient in priuate prayer? and who they be that eyther negligently or wilfully absent themselues, or come very late to the Church vpon the Sundayes especiall, or that walke, talke, or otherwyse vnreuerently behaue themselues in the Church, or vse any gaming or pastyme abroade, or in any house, or sit in the Streetes, or Churchyarde, or in any Tauerne or Alehouse, vpon the Sunday, or other holydaye, in the time of common prayer, Sermons or reading of the Homelies, eyther before noone, or af∣ter noone? 44 Whether the forfayture of twelue pence, for euery such of∣fence, appointed by a statute made in the first yere of the Queenes Maiesties reygne, be leuied and taken according to the same Sta∣tute by the Churchwardens, of euery person that so offendeth, and by them be put to the vse of the poore of the parish, and if it be not, by whose default it is not leuied. And what particular summes of mony haue bene forefayted that way, and by whom since the feast
of Easter in the yere of our Lorde .1575. vntill the day of giuing vp the presentment concerning these Articles. And so from time to time, as the saide Churchwardens and swornemen shall be ap∣poynted to present in this behalfe, and how much of such forfey∣tures haue bene deliuered to the vse ofthe poore of the parish, and to whom the same hath bene deliuered? 45 Whether ye know any, that in the time of the reading of the Letanie, or of any other part of the common prayer, or in the time of the Sermon, or reading of the Homelies, or any part of the Scriptures to the parishioners, any person haue departed out of the Church without iust & necessarye cause, or that disturbeth the Minister or preacher, any maner of wayes in the time of diuine seruice or sermon? and whether any in contempt of their parishe church or minister, doe resorte to any other church or no? 46 Whether there be any Inkeepers, Alewiues, Uittaylers or Tiplers, that suffer or doe admit any person or persons, in their houses, to eate, drinke, or play at Cardes, Tables, or such like games in the time of common prayer or sermon, on the sundayes or holydayes? and whether there be any shoppes set open on sun∣dayes or holydayes, or any Butchers or others, that cōmonly vse to sel meate, or other thinges, in the time of common prayer, prea∣ching, or reading of the Homelies? and whether in any Fayrs or common markets falling vpon the sunday, there be any shewing of any wares before the morning prayer be done? and whether a∣ny Markets or selling of any wares be vsed or suffered in anye churchyardes? 47 Whether for the putting of the Churchwardens and Swornemen the better in remembraunce of their dutie in obser∣uing and noting such as offend, in not comming to diuine seruice, your minister or reader doe openly euery Sunday, after he haue red the second Lesson at morning and euening prayer, monishe and warne the Churchwardens and swornemen to looke to theyr charge in this behalfe, and to obserue who contrarie to the sayde Statute offend in absenting themselues necligently, or wilful∣ly from their parish Church or chappell, or vnreuerently (as is
afore sayde) vse themselues in the time of diuine seruice? 48 Whether the Churchwardens of the last yeare haue giuen to the parish a iust account of the Church goodes and rentes that were committed to their charge, according vnto the custome that hath bene afore time vsed, and what Church goods they or any o∣ther haue solde, and to whom? and whether to the profite of your Church or no? and what hath bine done with the money thereof comming? 49 Whether the Churchwardens and sworne-men of the last yere, haue of any priuate corrupt affection concealed any crime, or other disorder in their time done in your parish, and haue not pre∣sented the same to the Byshop, Chauncelour, Archdeacon, Com∣missarie, or such other as had authoritie to reforme the same? and whether they or any of them, at any such time as they should haue bene at diuine seruice on Sundayes or holydayes, and should ther haue obserued others that were absent, haue ben away themselues at home, or in some tauerne, or Alehouse, or else about some world∣lye businesse, or at Bowles, Cardes, Tables, or other gaming, without regarde of their office and duetie in that behalfe? 50 Whether any man hath pulled downe or discouered anye church, chauncell, or chappell, or any part of any of them, anye church porche, Uestrie, or Steeple, almosehouse, or such like, or haue plucked downe the belles, or haue felled or spoiled any wood or timber in any churchyarde? 51 Whether your Hospitals, Spittles, and Almosehouses be well and godly vsed according to the foundation and auncient or∣dinances of the same? whether there be any other placed in them, then poore impotent and needie persons, that haue not wherwith, or whereby to liue? 52 Whether any of your parish being of conuenient age, haue not receyued the holy communion thrise this last yeare at the least▪ and namely at Easter last or thereabouts for once, and what their names are? or receiuing, haue not signified the same before to your person, vicar, or curate, that he might conueniently examine them, or that haue refused to come to him to be examined?
53 Whether there be any in your parish that hath or doth of∣fend contrarie to the statute made in the xxxvii. yere of the reigne of King Henrie the eyght for reformation of vsurie, & reuiued by an Acte made in the xiii. yere of the reigne of the Queenes Maie∣stie, what be the names of such offenders, & what is the maner of their vsury? 54 Whether there be any in your parish, that minister the goods of those that be dead, without lawfull authoritie, or any that suppresse the last will of the deede, or any executors, that haue not fulfilled their testators will, specially in paying of Legacies giuē to the Church, or to other good and godly vses, as to the reliefe of pouertie, to Orphanes, poore schollers, poore maydes mariages, high wayes, schooles, and such like? 55 Whether there be any, which of late haue bequeathed in their testaments, any Iewels, Plate, ornaments, cattle, or grayne, or other moueable stocks, Annuities, or summes of money for the erection or finding of any obites, diriges, trentales, torches, lights tapers, lampes, or any such like vse now by lawe forbidden, which are not payde out of any lands, and wherevnto the Queenes Ma∣iestie is not entytled by any Acte of Parliament, and if there be a∣ny such Legacie or appointment, what is the names of such testa∣tors, and of the executors of their testaments, what is the quanti∣tie and qualitie of the gyft, and to what godly and lawfull vse is the same conuerted and employed? 56 Whether there be any money or stocke appertaining to your parishe church or chappell, or to the poore of your parish, in anye mans handes that refuseth or deferreth to paye the same, or that v∣seth fraud, deceit, or delay to make any accompt in the presence of the honest of the parish for the same? and whether any such stocke be decayed, by whose negligence, and in whose handes? and whe∣ther the store of the poore mens boxe be openly & indifferently gi∣uen where neede is, without partiall affection? 57 Whether the schoole maisters which teach within your pa∣rishe, eyther openly, or priuately in any Noble or Gentlemans house, or in any other place there, be of good and syncere religion
and conuersation, and be diligent in teaching and bringing vp of youth? whether they be examined, allowed, and licenced by the or∣dinarie or his officer in that behalfe? whether they teach the Grā∣mer set forth by King Henrie the eyght of Noble memorie, and none other? whether they teach any thing contrarie to the order of religion now established by publike authoritie? and whether they teach not their schollers the Catechisme in Latine lately set forth, and such sentences of scripture as shall be most expedient and meete to moue them to the loue and due reuerence of Gods true religion, now truely set forth by the Queenes Maiesties au∣thoritie, and to induce them to all godlynesse and honest conuersa∣tion, and what be the names and surnames of all such schoolemay∣sters and teachers of youth within your parish, aswell of such as teach publikely, as those that teach in the houses of Noble men, Gentlemen, or other priuate men? 58 Whether there be any among you that vse Sorcerie or Witchcraft, or that be suspected of the same, and whether any vse any charmes or vnlawfull prayers, or inuocations in Latine, or otherwise, and namely Midwyues in the time of womens tra∣uayle of child? and whether any doe resort to any such for helpe or counsayle, and what be their names? 59 Whether there be among you any blasphemers of the nams of God, greate or often swearers, adulterers, for nicators, incestu∣ous persons, Bawdes or receyuers of naughtie and incontinent persons▪ or harborers of women with childe which be vnmaried, conueying or suffering them to goe away before they doe any pe∣nance, or make satisfaction to the congregation, or any that be ve∣hemently suspected of such faults, or that be not of good name and fame touching such crimes and faultes, any drunkards or ribalds, or any that be malicious, contentions, or vncharitable persons,  slanderers of their neighbors, raylers, scolders, or  betweene neighbors? 60 Whether be any in these partes, that haue maried with in the degrees of affinitie or consanguinitie, by the lawes of God forbidden, so set out for an admonition, in a table nowe appoynted
to be affayred in euery parish church within the Dioces, or any that being diuorsed or seperated for the same▪ doe yet notwith∣standing cohabite and kepe company stil togither, or any that be∣ing maried without those degrees, haue vnlawfully forsaken their wiues or hosbands, and maried others. Any man that hath two wyues, or any woman that hath two husbands, any that being di∣uorced or seperated a sunder, haue married agayne. Any married, that haue made precontracts. Any that haue made priuie of secret contracts. Any that haue married or contracted themselues with∣out the consent of their parents, tutors, or gouernours. Any that haue married without banes thrise solemnely asked. Any cupples married, that liue not togither, but slaunderously liue apart. Any that haue married out of the parish church where they ought to haue solemnised their marriage? 61 Whether the Minister & Churchwardens haue suffered any Lords of Misrule, or summer Lords, or Ladies, or any disguised persons, or others in Christmas, or at Maygames, or any Mor∣rice dauncers, or at any other times, to come vnreuerently into the church or churchyard & there to daunce, or play any vnsemely parts, with scoffes, ieastes, wanton gestures, or ribald talke, name∣ly in the time of common prayer. And what they be that commit such disorder, or accompanie or maintayne them. 62 Whether the Archdeacon, Chauncelour, Commissarie, Of∣ficiall, or any other vsing Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction in this Dio∣ces, their Registrares, or Arctuaries, Apparitors or Summōers, haue at any time winked at and suffered any adulteries, fornica∣tions, incests, or other faults and offences, to passe and remayne vnpunished, and vncorrected, for mony, rewardes, brybes, plea∣sure, frendship, or any other partiall or affectionate respect, or a∣ny of them haue bene burdensome▪ to any in this Dioces, by ex∣acting or taking excessiue fees, excessiue procurations, any re∣wardes, or commodities, by the way of promotion, gift, contribu∣tion helpe, redemption of penance, omission of quarter Sermons, obtayning of any benefices, or office, or any other like wayes or meanes?
63 Howe many Adulteries, Incests, and Fornications, are no∣toriously knowne to haue bene committed in your parishe, since Easter .1575. Howe many offenders in any such faults haue bene put to open penance, and openly corrected, and howe many haue bene wynked at, and borne withall, or haue fined and payed mony to the Archdeacon, Chauncelour, Commissarie, Officiall or their deputies, or to the Deanes, Registrares, or Sumners, or any of them, for to escape open punishment, and correction: and what their names and surnames be? 64 Whether the Deanes, Rurals, and Sumners, or any of thē doe pay any annuall rent, fee, or pension for their offices, and what they pay, and to whome? 65 Generally whether there be among you, any notorious euil lyuers, or any suspected of any notorious sinne, fault, or cryme, to the offence of Christian people committed, any that stubburnly re∣fuse to conforme themselues to vnitie and godly religion, now es∣tablished by publike authoritie, or any that bruteth abroad rumors of the alteration of the same, or otherwise that disturbeth good or∣ders, and the quietnesse of Christes Church, and the christian con∣gregation? The tenor of the othe, ministred to the Church∣wardens and swornemen. YE shall sweare by all mightie God, that ye shall diligently consi∣der all and euery the Articles giuen to you in charge, and make a true aunswere vnto the same in writing, presenting all and euery-such person & persons, dwelling within your parish, as haue commit¦ted any offence or fault, or make any default, mentioned in any of the sayde articles or which are vehemently suspected or defamed of any such offence, fault or default, wherein ye shall not present any per∣son or persons, of any euill will, malice, or hatred, contrarie to the truth, nor shall for loue, fauour, mede, dread, or any corrupt affection, spare to present any that be offendours, suspected or defamed in any of these cases but shal do vprightly, as men hauing the feare of God before your eyes, and desirous to mayntayne vertue, and suppresse vice. So God helpe you.
