10634.5 S2119 23043463 26139
THE EXPOSITION OF certain partes of Scripture, according to the mindes of the chieffe Doctors, that in our time were in reformed chirches, & also of some old doctors, wherin thow shalt se the trew doctri∣ne of indifferent things, of garments, and of th'auctoritie that Princes, & Prelates haue to set owt rites and ce∣remonies. Saincte Ambrose Byshop of Millane vppon the vij. of the former Epistell of Sainct Paul to the Corinthians. YEar bought vvith a priced, be ye not made the bondmen of men. It is trewe because we ar bought with so deare a price, that we could not haue ben bought againe, of any but only of Christ who is ritche in all thinges: Therfore he that is bought with a price, ought more to serue or to do his dewtie in th'office of a bondman, that he may after a manner, make recompence to his byer.Thei ar bōd men, that subdue thē selues to mens super∣stitions. Therefore those that ar bought of God (that is, of Christe) ought not to be bound∣men of men: But such ar bondmen of men, that sub∣due them selues or obey mens superstitions. THEOPHILAGTVS Archebyshop of Bulga∣ria, vppō the vij. chapiter of the former Epistel of Sainct Paul to the Corinthians, and vppon thesame vvordes.
TH'apostel reasoneth not these matters only to slaues or bondmē, but he speaketh them, to those that ar free:To execute euel cōmaū¦dements for mans sake is to become mans ser∣vant. or he rather doth enstruct all sortes, yea the Christians them selues, that they do not any thing for mans sake, or pleasure, and that they do not execute, or fulfill those com∣maundementes of men, whiche ar naught for that were to serue men, euen by such, as ar raun∣somed for a price. And a littel after, he hauing spoken of this vvordly and spiritual bondage, vvriteth thus. Therfore, the Apostle hath prouided very well in bothe cases, (to wete) first, least vnder the pre∣tence of God his seruice, seruantes shold depart from there masters, in whose power there bo∣dies ar. Secondly,To please the bodely Ma∣ster further then they ought, is, to becomē bōd¦men. least they shold fall from God, when as they will serue there bodily Masters, further thē becōmeth, or that they ought to do. ERASMVS ROTERODAMVS, in his boke of annotations, vppon the fift chapiter of the former Epistel, of sainct Peter. NEque ceu Deminium exercentes aduersus Cleros, &c. Neither shall ye be as exercisers of Lordsship against the people, or parishes. For he vnderstandeth by this worde Cleros, not Dya∣cons, or Elders, but the flock which fell to euery man by chaunce,B. ought as little to vse Lordship o∣uer the com¦mon people, asouer there fellowe El∣ders. to be gouerned, least any man shold iudge, that Byshops vvere forbidden, to exercise any Lordship ouer clerkes, but that hit vvas graunted them, to be Lordes ouer others And here he calleth El∣ders Bishops, for as yet, there was not, so huge a nombre of priestes, but as many Elders as there were, so many byshops there were. This com∣maundemet
of the Prince of the Apostells, shold haue ben written in golden letters, and set vp in all palaces of the Byshops: Feade (saith he) the flock, oppresse hit not pill hit not, and do this not vnwillingly, but of a sincere desier, and mind, as fathers, neither for silthie lucres sake: as though he had seen before, that there vppon shold rise a plage, or pestilence to the chirch. To conclude, not plaing Lordes after the māner of Kinges, but fede with example, and ouercome with goode deades. Now a daies, the cōmon sort of Byshops, heareth nothing of there learned flatterers, but Lordships, Dominions, Swordes, Kayes, and Powers: Whervppon riseth in somme of them,Some B. at pompous as Princes & some more cruell then Tyrauntz. more pompouse Pride, then some Kings vse, and more cruelnes then some Tyrauntes occupie. Also, in thesame vvork, vppon xi. chapiter of Sainct Mathevves Gospel. SVrely, Sainct Peter in thactes of th'apostel∣les, doth opēly call the lawe of Moses (which was laied, for a time, vppon the rebellious people of the Iewes) an hard and a heauy burthen, which neither we not oure fathers, were liable to beare, neyther can any mā doubt, but that it is trueth which the trueth hath pronounced. The yooke of Christ is, in very dede pleasaūt, and his burthen is light, so that no mens traditions be laied vpon mens sholders, beside, or more then that thinge, which he hath alredy appoincted: and he hath commaunded nothing els, but that one shold loue another, and there is nothing so bitter; but that Charitie will seasone, & make hit
swete. Whatsoeuer is according to Nature, it may easely be born, but there is nothing, that agreeth more with Mannes Nature, then Christes Phi∣losophie, which goeth abowt to do no other thing, almost then to restore oure Nature, (that is fallen) to her innocēcie, and sinceritie, againe. But euen as the ordinances of men, did make heauie the lawe, being by hit self, greuous enough for the Iewes:The lawe of Man may make heauy the light yoke of Christ. Euen so must vve diligently take hede, that the additions, ordinaunces, and doctrines of mē, make not the lavve of Christ (vvhich of hit self, is pleasaunt and light) heauy and hard to beare. Which ordinaūces so at the first crept in, as though they were small, and ought not to be cared for, or re∣garded, or els, they being commended with the shewe of Godlines be gladly receaued of them, that ar more simple, thē foresighted. Those that ar once receaued by pecemele, do growe and en crease, vnto a huge quantitie, & do presse downe & ouerthrowe mē, whither they wil or no, either by the help of custome (whose violence is a certaine tyrannie) or els,Teinstru∣mentes of spirituall bondage. by the aucthoritie of Princes, which hold stistly, hit that is rashely receaued, abusing hit for there profit and gaines. And a little after. There ar some that knitt together, either a cold sillogisme of a pece of scripture, which they do not vnderstand, or els make an article of faith, of a mannes ordinaunce, and of such men ar we iudged, to be Christians, or no Christiās, which appertaine nothing attall to Christian Religion. And a littel after.The burthē of Mās or∣dinaunces and tradi∣tions. What auaileth it to speak of the burthen of Man his institutions, when as many yeares ago Saint Augustine, in a certaine epistel, to Iāuarius, he is angry, and be waileth th'estate
of Christes chirche, so to be burthened, that the cōdition of the Iewes was almost more tollera∣ble then the condition of the Christians: what if he sawe the fre people of Christ, snared with so many lawes, and ceremonies, and not only op∣pressed with a single tyrannie of prophane Prin∣ces, but also of Byshops, Cardinalles, Popes,Not only prophane princes, But also B. ar oppressors of the chirch. and most of all of there seruauntes: who being dis∣guysed, with the visure of Religion go busily a∣boute, the busines of there bellies. The Iewes had no certaine kind of apparaile forbidden thē, more then that which was made, of flaxe and wolle together, howe many constitutions ar there made nowe for apparraile, & what super∣stition, is there in garmentes, and in coloures of thesame, at this present tyme. ¶ Also, againe in thesame vvork vpon the xxiij. of Matth. SOme wrest this place so farre, as,Such. B. we haue somme now a daies in England men ought to obey, all manner of thinges whatsoeuer the Byshops, Presidences, or Rulers commaunde, although they be vngodly, and that for there au∣cthorities sake: when as Christ did speak only, of them which did teache rightly the lawe of Moses, and not of such, as did snarre men with there ordinaunces and constitutions. Nowe per∣aduenture after thesame māner a Byshop might be heard, which preacheth truly the gospell, al∣though he liue but a little according to thesame. But who can abide, that they shold occupie an open tyrannie against Christis doctrine, and make lawes for there owne aduantage, measu∣ring
all thinges according to there gaine & glo∣rious maiesties. They that snare the people with rites and ordinances, deuised for there profit, and to fulfill there tyrannie, do not sitt in the chaire of the gospell, but in the chaire of Simon magus and Carphas. Martine Buter vppon the first chapiter of S. Paulo to the Ephes. AMongest the mebers of this chirch,There is no member of the chirch that can be bul. their is none in all the earth that is the hedde therof: But the chirch, hathe Christ hedd therof, in heauen. The princes in dede, & the Magistrates of all places may be called heddes, but not in the ecclesiasti∣call body, but in the politick bodie, and in the politique gouernement. And a littel aster he saieth. Christ by him self, is gouernor of the chirch, yet notwithstanding he vseth the seruice of Angells, and of men, and yet for all that he is alwaies pre¦sent with his chirch. And a little aster. Seing that the chirch, hath Christ her hedde, he surely as a good shepeherd, with his word gathereth toge∣ther his shepe that go astray, and he cometh to open his father to his shepe, and to drawe all thing to him, to open there mindes, that they by trew faithe may vnderstand the gospell, by the which faith he iustifieth them. This faith is mighty in working thorough Charitie, which Charitie seketh not her owne, wherfore there is a wonderfull vnitie, and joyning together of the members, as hit was saied in the primatiue Chirch, They had one sowle and one hert in the Lord. Furthermore, for as much as Christ is the
Ruler, and gouerneth hit in all thinges, and Paul beareth witnes hereafter in the fiueth chapiter, moniseth wemen that they shold be subiect, or obedient vnto there husbandes, as the chirch is vnto Christ. He purgeth hit, or maketh hit clea∣ne with his bloode, although he vse in hit, diuers ministeries or seruices, yet is he the chieff gouer∣nor, the first, and the most strong and mighty. ¶ And a little after. Wherin standeth or consisteth the vnitie of the chirch? Not in garmentes,VVherin the vnity of the chirch consisteth. Not in ceri∣monies. not in Ceremonies, as thow shalt se here after in the fourth chapiter, in these wordes, Indeauoring or laboring to kepe the vnitie of spirite, in the bōde of peace, &c. Therfore the vnitie of the chirch, standeth in the vnitie of the spirite, of Charitie, of the word of God, of Christ, of the sacramen∣tes, and in the communion of giftes, that we may consent in one, that we may agre in one thing, that we may speake one thing, that no mā shall rule him self, but geue him self to be ruled, vnto Christ, & the Spirite, that we shold cōsent with the will of oure heauenly father, that we shold allowe altogether thesame things, and re∣proue also thesame: for by the Spirite in thesame place he doth vnderstand, the inward power of the spirite, from whence come all oure counsai∣les, and doinges, which in all thinges ought to be thesame and like hit that is of God, opened vnto vs in the worde. There is one word, one Scripture, one Baptisme, & one death of Christ, one Father, one Religion, and one Charitie, one sacrament of thākes giuing, and one laing oune of handes, and one discipline, and one consent of the Ministers, and of those by the which these
ar ministred: To conclude all thinges that ar or∣dained, to the buylding or profitt of the Chirch, we must haue all those as one thinge. But what∣soeuer is not declared in the word, there is no ne¦cessarie vnitie in that, but rather liberty, &c. ¶ Vpon thesame chapiter he vvriteth thus. To the byl∣ding of godlines,Prelats ar become Ty∣ruants in making lawes. al thinges ought to be done in the Chirch, and hit is commaūded that the Ru∣lers of the Chirches, shold teach those thinges that Christ hath commaunded: wherfore, they ought not to make thē selues Tyrauntes, in exacting or requiring of mens cōsciences, that vvhich Christ ne∣uer commaunded. Thesame BVCER in his commentaries on Matth, vpon these vvordes.Matth. 18. Luc 7. Wo vnto the vvorld for offences. AN offence is, what so euer we say or do by any meanes which riseth not of sound or perfect faith, and is not ordered of sincere and trew loue, promoting Godes glory, and oure neighbours Saluation. After that this Doctor hath spoken, of offen∣ces generally, and shewed them not to beseme Christians, and hath also perticulerly amplified the matter, in deedes of them selues not euel, but done contrary to Charity, with abuse of Chri∣stian liberty as. Rom. 14.1. Cor. 8. This note first geuen, that sainct Paul often with somme force, repeateth this name, A brother: He cōcludeth that this is the Scope and drifte of all. So to order and do all thinges, that they may make to the edifiēg of oure Brethren, so shall hit fall oute that som∣metime liberty is to be vsed some time not: for
when as wordes ar to be cōfirmed with deedes, then must (saieth he) the liberty that is preched nedes be confirmed with examples. This he set∣teth owt with th'examples of Peter. &c. at An∣tioch. Galat. 2. Commending his vsing of Chri∣stian liberty in meates, and discommending his dissimulation: and also of Paul in not circunci∣ciding of Titus. Galat. 2. Wherin he noteth thus. 1 First, if in this slippery place Peter caught a fall, who is hit, that ought not to be careful her∣in, and to take heed. 2 Secondly, in reprouing of Peters dissimula∣cion he saieth. To conclude, for that we must al∣waies prease, to perfection and fulnes of faith, greater respect was surely to be had to the gen∣tiles, which had alredy receued ChristPlano plainly, then to them which did lewdly stick yet, to theElementio Mundi. ceremonies of the world: who in conclusion, by long bearing with, might be the more con∣firmed in there error. 3 Thirdly, we must further consider, whether they be trew or false brethern, which go aboute to infring or weaken Christian liberty, for we must regard only the trewe brethern, to beare with them herin. These thinges, premised after this manner, he applieth the whole doctrine of offences, by the example, of outeward thinges, and ceremo∣nies, to oure time and state of Religion, in these wordes. As in oure time, if a man would still dissimule, or hide the liberty, of owteward thinges, which the visured chirch men, by subteltie and tyran∣nie, haue taken from christian people, for th'ob∣stinate
enemies of the gospell sake, who do ab∣horre and blaspheme all that doth come from vs: seing they abhorre and blaspheme Christ, and the gospell hit self, hit shold not only, not admēd those, but rather shold more confirme them in euel, and very much offend such, which haue re∣ceaued Christ, whilest the Minister preacheth vnto them, trueth vtterly voyed of examples. For they ar many, which hardly can be perswaded, that we haue all thinges in Christ whilest mens Inuētions, are had in such price and estimacion. Owte of question greate fault is here in, nowe a dayes committed, and that not of the rude and common sort of people: But of the hed protestā∣tes and chief gospellers. I confesse in deede, that all though all the ordinaunces against the liber∣ty of owtward thinges were of Antechriste his bringing in (as is difference of personnes, mea∣tes, daies, places, and infinite such other thinges) yet for that the common people were born in hand, that they all, were commaundementes of the Chirch guided by gods spirite, and so gene∣rally receaued of mē, as thinges, proceding from Gods will and apoinctment: that therefore we shold vse the liberty (purchased vnto vs by Christ) circumspectly, and warely, euen now a dayes, and with Paul many tymes, circumcide Tymothe, (that is to say) for oure partes vse well some ceremonies, which other men abuse, so as hit were seking occasion, to preach Christ since∣rely and purely: Although in deede these deuises of Men, can by no meanes be compared to Cir∣cumcision, and such like orders of God. But what is the cōmō practise? Māny fearing
forsoth the offence of the crosse, and in vaine going abowte, to please both men and God, af∣ter long preaching of the word, when wordes and talke, requier nowe example and deedes, (pretēding other mēs infirmities, when in deede they ar therin let with there own wekenes) both them selues becam yet slaues, to mennes tradi∣ditions, and cause other men also to be the like. Oh saye they, nothing is to be tempted rashely, these thinges haue continued many yeares they cannot be put away sodenly, regard must be had to the weake, with hastie spede we shold not plant the gospell, but ouerthrow hit. I wold wish these men first considered,Matth. 11. what that sentence meaneth. The kingdome of heauen suf∣fereth violence, and the violent catch hit vnto them. Thē that these thinges, are not hasted rashly, but thē, when they ar chaunged, Christ not yet being once commended and withowt faithe: and not when Christ is alredy preached, and the nett of the gospell so long cast forth, that hit hath in a manner taken, as much as may be taken in that circuit, or compasse of sea, and now there remai∣neth nothing els but to confirme, and bring cre∣ditt to wordes, by exāple in doinges. Surely the case thus standing, workes also wherin men ha∣ue put there cōfidences, more then in Christ, are to be forsaken, and men must remembre that there can be no fellowship, had betwene Christ and Antechrist. Againe, hit is a thing very absurd and folish, that because, that falshod hath by littell and lit∣tel, and of lōge time crept in, and growen, there∣fore to go aboute to prescribe longe time also to
receaue the trueth in Christ, otherwise shold Christ, no more be estemed of vs, then Ante∣christ. Certainly if we shall not receaue Christ, so sone as we knowe him: we shall neuer enioy him. Moses, Samwel. Elias, Ezechias, Iosias, delt not after this sort: But assone as they had resto∣red, the knowledge of the lawe to the people, by and by they abolished and attonce all abhomi∣nations, and restored the ceremonies of God. Wherfore it is nothing worth, that they saie, who allawaies bragge, that there ar greater thin ges to be vrged, then reformation or admend∣ment of ceremonies, so become Patrones to An∣techristes relictes. As for ceremonies, they ar co∣gnisances or testimonies of oure Religion, and therefore we also begin oure Religion with the ceremonie of Baptisme: and if any be to be recea¦ued againe, by meanes of his repentaunce, after that he is excommunicated for his wickednes, he is straight reconciled to the chirch, by the sa∣crament of the supper: Wherefore they must nedes be vveake in the faith of Christ, vvhich differre the re∣mouing of Antechristes ceremonies, and nevvnes of lyf vvill surely, verie lately appere in them, if euer hit appere at all And in dede vve se at this day cold and slack pro∣ceding in christian Religion, and profession, in those pla∣ces vvhere Antechristes ceremonies be born vvithall, and all thinges much more liuely, and effectuall, vvhere they be abolished and done avvay. For if thei stay at any time, this onely is the cause, that the vvord of God, either is not thouroughly credited, or not estemed accordinglie. For howe so euer, those that suppose them selues to be strong in faith, vse not these thinges: where I praye yowe, is there zeale, for Christes glorie, or
there brethern, wheras they still vse them, so no doubt they do hit of weakenes of faith. Certainly as there is no agrement at all bet∣wene Christ and Belial, so sincere and vnfained Christians, can by no meanes abide any of Ante∣christes trumpery. Although with this there zeale, they endeauor them selues to purge, the chirch here, as the glory of Christ may therby chiefly be auanced, yet to the weaker sort they will haue such respect, as to do nothing rashely or owt of seasone, but will teache the weak with gentelnes, to wax stronger in knowledge. Yet will they do there endeauour, with examples to bring them forward, not regarding the blindnes of a few, who ar to much addicted to Antechri∣stes ceremonies, and perhaps no trew and vnfai∣ned brethern. Offending there, whilest verie ma∣ny other weake ones, continually thinck thus with them selues. If these thinges vvere so euel, they shold surely be abolished: if either they vvere so good al men (especially that reckon them selues Christians) vvold in dede receaue and embrace them. These men surely, if they be elect, shall at the lenght be confirmed, all though all the world offend them, and no man edifie them. But woe in the meane time, vn∣to them, by whome they ar offended. Wherfore as sone as trew godlines, hath ben preached and professed of manny, Antechristes ceremonies, and rites must by and by be abrogated, neither must delay be made, till godlines be in all poin∣ctes growen vp to perfectiō, els shold, that trash, neuer be abolished, and remoued. These myld and toe, toe moderate and sober Christians, who can beare all Antechristian thin¦ges,
in verie deede like vnto them at Corinth, who knowing that an Idoll was nothing, did eate thinges offered vnto Idolles, and boasted (as these our men do) in outward matters we ar free: what is that to me that another abuseth the se thinges naughtely? I will vse them well. For as those weakened the faith of many, both in that they lesse abhorred Idolles, through there exāple & also in that they for the most part cōmunica∣ted with thē against there cōsciēces, so no doubt do these oure lukewarme gospellers, nowe a∣daies.What is Antechrists ceremonies. They know right wel that all Antechristes ceremonies (that is to say, all such haue ben brought in withowt gods word) are not worth a-rush: And because they ar owtward things wherin we haue liberty, they will vse them as fre¦ly forsoth, not waighing that many things ar law¦ful, which ar not expedient, and that oure liber∣tie, must serue, either whome they in the meane time offend, or obscure the glorie of Christ. For they confirme those in there error, which as yet knowe not, that these thinges ar free, and at li∣berty. As for the defenders therof, the professed ennemies of Christ they make them glad and bold,They shut Christ owte of Dores that brare with cere∣monies. and finally they weaken the febles faith, which had forsaken and cast them awaie. Thus on God his name they prouide fairly for the weak ones, yea rather they serue herin there owne bellies, in that they studie to gratifie, either Christes ennemies, or els backsliders. For no man other then these, vvill earnestly contende for su∣perstitious ceremonies. This is there modestie or bea∣ring, where with they ar so farre from helping the gospel, or encreasing hit, that by little, they dis∣place
hit. Surely vve haue to thanck these men, that as this day all thing is gone backvvard, and turned vpside dovvne, in many places, vvhere the gospell hath ben long time preached: wheras no example can be brought of like alteracion in those places, where Christ being earnestly, and purely preached, ceremo∣nies also ben reformed, according to the rule of his word. For as for those thinges, which haue disordredly, or confusely happened, Christ either not at all, or not sincerely preached, they apper∣taing nothing to vs. For asmuch therefore, as Christ so sore dete∣steth offences, and crieth, woe vnto the world by meanes of offences, wo vnto the man by whome offence commeth: we must with all di∣ligence take hede both in these and other thin∣ges, that we be offensiue to no man, but especial∣ly to the littel ones, those I meane not, that ar in in age only such but in faith and vnderstanding also. The perfect knowledg of God and Christ is lyff euerlasting, whatsoeuer therefore may by any meanes, either hindre or obscure hit, let hit neither be spoken, ne yet don of vs: but to the vt∣termost of oure powers let vs remoue those things away. Then let vs prouoke them, both by exhortations, and examples, that men will ex∣presse those thinges in there lyff, geuing no pla∣ce herin, either to oure oune affections, or other mens seing that it is better to be drowned in the sea, then to giue offence, &c.
Peter Martyr vvriting vpon the .13 chapiter of Sainct Paul to the Romaines, on these vvordes: let euerie sovvle be subiect vnto povvers that ar set in high au∣ctoritie. IF, as we haue concluded, they ar to be repro∣ued, that rendre euell for euel, and it is thoffi∣ce of Christian men, to shew thoffice of charitie vnto them that haue deserued euel of us: they ar doubtles greatly to be reproued, which for good deedes, restore euell deedes, and shewe not vnto men that haue ben frendly vnto them (as the Magistrates be) honor and obedience. Because thapostel is about to entreate diligently, and lar∣gly of this matter, that we may vnderstand the better what his meaning is, we will define, what is a Magistrate? A Magistrate is a chosen person and that of God that he shold, defend the lawes, and peace, and represse and hold downe vices, and all thinges that ar euel, with ponish∣mentes, and his sword. The efficient cause is God. Thende is the keping of the lawes, and of peaces, and driuyng away of vices, and all hurt∣ful thinges, and thencrease of vertues. The for∣mal cause is, the ordre that he apoincteth by the prouidence of God in matters that appertaine vnto men, or in wordly matters. The materiall cause, is a mā or a person, for who soeuer is cho∣sen to be a Magistrate, he is one chosen owt of Men. 'The right way, and compendious manner of theaching, is almost general. First it is ordai∣ned that all men shalbe vnder the power of the Magistrate. And afterward that is proued of the cause efficient, that all such powers ar of God.
And after hit is proued by the cōtrary, that they that despice the cheeff Ruler, ar ennemies to God, and that to there harme. And furthermore the same thing is proued by thende, or finall cau∣se, that the Ruler is made for our greate profit & commoditie. ¶ And vppon the same chapiter in the 604 page and xit line, he vvriteth of the same thieff Rulers thus. But these Ecclesiasticall Papists will say that the kinges thē selues, and the common powers, haue giuen ouer of there owne righte, and haue willed that clarkes, shold be exempted. But vve ought not to loke vvhat Princes haue done in these matters, but vvhat they ought to haue done. For it lieth not in there power to put downe the lawes of God, wherfore if this godly cōmaundemente of Paull, will that euery sowle shold be subiect to the higher power, in any case men must nedes obey hit. For those thinges that God hathe ordained, & decreed cannot be called back againe by mans auctority. Howe be it these wordes ar to be restrained, and drawē together: that we may vnderstād, that we ar subiect vnto the Magistrate, no further then belongeth vnto his vocation and office, but if he wold go beyond those bondes, and commaund any thing that is cōtrary to godlines or the lawe of God, we ought rather to obey God then men. Also vppon the same chapiter, on these vvordes, Quae sunt potestates a Deo ordinatae sunt: Those povvers that ar, ar ordained of God, &c: he vvriteth thus. THe matter nowe will not suffer vs to couer with silēce, howe that Bonifacius in his ex∣trauagāt, (which beginneth, vnā sanctam) abuseth
the wordes of the Apostel, to confirme his Pri∣de. For here vpon he wold proue, that those thinges that ar of God, haue some orders amōg∣est them selues, that there dignities may be kno∣wen one from another being distinct and sepa∣rated by certaine degrees, and that there vppon hit followeth that the powers that ar of God ar not all a like, and that is the higher power which is exercised or occupied about the worthier mat∣ter, and because the Ecclesiastical power is occu∣pied in spirituall matters, and the ciuil in bodely matters: Therfore hit followith saieth he, that the Ecclesiasticall power is highest, and ought not to be subiect vnto the ciuill Magistrate, for the Pope (saieth he) hath iurisdiction ouer all Princes becaus Christ did say what soeuer thow shalt bind on earthe shalbe bound in heauē, &c. And to make the matter more plaine, he alled∣geth oute of Ieremie these wordes. Behold I ha∣ue ordained the aboue kinges and nations, that thow shouldest pull in peces, and destroye, and that thow shouldest byld and plant. But as these arguments ar full of Pride, and swelling: So ar they most ful of vanitie, for first to begin withal. Paul doth not speak here, of the degrees of po∣wers distincted or disseuered amongest them selues, for he only saieth thus, that all powers what soeuer they be, ar ordained of God, and I do not denie but the Ecclesiasticall power, or the power that Ecclesiasticall persons haue, is in spi∣rituall matters, for hit is occupied in the Mini∣sterie of the word of God, and therefore we graunt that, that power, is the gretest because the vvord of God ought to commaund and rule all men. But
this power maketh men to bring to subiectiō all vnderstanding, and to bring downe or destroy the highnes of all mens reasons. Let these excel∣lent greate lordes do these thinges, let them preache the word of God, and let them leaue there inuentiōs of men, and then if there be any that will not heare them, We do not doubt, but that they condemne them iustely, whether they be Princes, Kings, Monarches, or Emperors: yet for all that it shall not folowe, that they ar not subiect, vnto the politicke power in things per∣taining to this bodily lyffe, & to possessions, and lādes, howsen and Maners. Nay rather (as cōcer∣ning the Princes office) they ought to be subiect to a godly and Religeous Magistrate, not because vve thinck that the vvord of God or Sacramentes, ought to be subiect or subdued to man his lavves, but that it is thoffice of a Magistrate to ponish or displace chirch Ministers if they behaue them selues ill in there office, or Iugle with the trueth, or defa∣ce it, or do falsly minister the Sacramentes. Let them binde and lose (that is to say) by the word and preaching let thē declare who be bounden, and who be losed: yet for all this they ought not to exempt them selues frō the ciuill Magistrate. For euen as a king though he excell in his excel∣lent dignity, is bound to obey the vvord pronounced by the Ministers of the chirch: Euen so an ecclesiasticall man, although he be set in an excellent place, and office is not exempted, or discharged from the obedience or subiection of the Magistrate. ¶ Also in the same vvorke, pag. 609 on these vvordes, De minister est vltor ad Iram the vvriteth thus. Euen as he is the officer of God, vnto thy good and
profite if thow do well: Euenso is he thofficer of God vnto wrath, that is to say, to reuenge and ponish if that thow behaue thy self naughtely: Neither ought he to whome the sword is com∣mitted, to be ignorant that he is the keper not only of the latter, but also of the former table: wherfore he ought diligētly to take heed that Religiō be mini∣stered out of the vvord of God. And let him not thinck as many Princes now adaies beare them selues in hand, that, that charge appertaineth nothing vnto them: for they vvill in deede deale ovvte benif∣ces and Byshoprickes to whome soeuer they list, but they care not whether they, whome they haue promoted to such dignities do there dewties or no. ¶ Also vpon these vvordes of Paul to the Corinth in the first Epistell the 7. chap. Nolite fieri serui hominum. THere ar other bondages of Men whiche ought also to be eschewed; that for the get∣ting and purchassing of Ritches, we shold not be Parasites, flatterers, or men pleasers, or we shold not be to muche affraied, and for these causes shold be turned to Idol seruice, and euell Kindes of worshipping. They ar greued vvith this kind of bondage, vvhich obey the naughty vvill of there vngody Masters, or Lordes and set more by them then by God. It appereth by these thinges, that the Corin∣thians cam to this opinion, that, such as cam to Christ shold chaung and ouertourn all thinges. And with this kind of folishnes ar the Religious men nowe a dayes sicke, which will haue there garmentes, there manners, and the owtward cō∣dition
of there liffe newe, in so much, as they must chaunge there old names also, where with they were named before. But Paul denieth that we shold do so, & he doth determine that those ar to be holden that ar not contrary vnto the word of God. ¶ Also vpon the 13 to the Rom. SVrely the state of christendome was neuer in worse case then since the Byshops did vsurp and take vnto them the sword: for euery man doth se that these two offices (that is) the Tem∣porall, and Ecclesiasticall, do so hinder one ano∣ther, that he that occupieth the one, cannot exer∣cise the other, for there is not any man that can be found so prompt, and diligent, that he is hable to excute either of both of them rightly, and in ordre. ¶ Also vpon the 8. chapiter of the Iudges. MOreouer the Bishop of Rome did boast, that he was made hedde of the chirch, vvhich thing cannot in any vvise appertainge vnto any man. For both mouing and the fiue wittes called sences, flowe downe from the hedde, through the sinnewes into the mēbers, as Paul doth very truly teache in his Epistels, both to Thephesians, and Collossians, but there is no mā that is hable to performe that, as of him self, by ioinctes and tosettinges to quicken the mēbers of the chirch with the spirite of God. It belongeth onely vnto Christ to deale owte vnto his members spirituall
motions, the litghtening of the mind, and euer∣lasting lyfte. In deed, Kinges and Magistrates may be called the heddes of the people, because the ciuill gouernement is exercised by them, and we may loke to haue from them good lawes, and ciuill mo∣tions: But in the chirch it is not entreated of the ciuill lyffe, but of the spirituall and euerlasting, which we cānot loke for of any, but only of God, neither is there any mortall man that can quic∣ken the membres of the chirch. I do iudge that the Kinges and Magistrates that ar godly ought to be set or counted in the chirch in the formest or highest place, or dignitie, and that hit belon∣geth to there office, if that Religiō be euell han∣deled, to correct the defaultes, for they beare the sword for that ende, that they may defend the honor of God, but they cannot be the heddes of the chirches. Paul to the Romaines and Corin∣thians (where he maketh cōparacions betwene the members of the chirch) maketh some of thē to be eyes, some to be nosthrilles, eares, hand and feete: but he vouchsaueth not to deck any mem∣ber with the dignitie of the hedde. And yet the∣same Paul writing to the Ephes. saieth of Christ, that God gaue him, to be hedde of the body of the chirch. Therefore let the Papistes, shewe, where hit is saied in holy scripture, that there was another hedde giuen vnto the chirch beside Christ. If they can do that lett them haue the vi∣ctorie: but I am sure they ar neuer hable to do hit. For if such a hedde shold be giuē to hit, then the chirch shold be A monster with two hed∣des. ¶ Also vpon the. 10. chap. of the. 2. of the Kinges.
Iehu brought to passe that the temple of Baal shold be ouerthrown, so that it shold not be any more occupied, as hit was before. Wherfore mā∣nie thought, that it was not wel done that Chri∣stians (after that they had embraced the gospel of the sonne of God) shold yet still kepe vnde∣stroyed the instrumentes of the Pope after a mā∣ner. And they do much better promote godlines which did bring to passe that all Images, standing Ima∣ges and others, and that all ornamentes of the Popes de∣uise, shold be vtterly destroyed at once. For as we reade in the Ecclesiasticall Histories, when Constan∣tine the greate became. A Christian man, he com¦maunded that the Idolles temples shold be shutt vp: But because they remained so vn put doune, it was an easy: matter for Iulian the Apostata who came after to open them againe, and to bringe in the Idolles of thold superstition to be worship∣ped in the same places. The which thing the no∣bel Prince Theodosius perceaueng, commanded them so to be put down, that they shold no more be restored againe. After this manner did Iehu, because the Idolles shold not be restored againe. Ioannes Epinus abovvte the yeare of oure Lord. 1549 in the preface set before the boke of Matthias Flacius Il∣lyricus, called De veris & falsis adiaphoris. THe Diuel could not haue found, or deuised any thing more crafty or subtill, to destroy the trew worshipping of God, & to ouerthrowe the trew chirch of Christ: then the chaunging, and bringing in of thinges called indifferent. He hath profited more there with, then if he shold
haue gone abowte with cruelnes, and tyrannie: for there is such strenght in this poyson of indif∣ferent thinges, that hit can make men that were before in other matters talkatiue, and most ful∣lest of wordes, vtterly doume and speachles, and other that were eloquent to be now stutters, & somme that were honestly and rightly brought vp, to be doubtful, & wauering, some that were shepeherdes to become wolues, and some that were Christians to be Epicures, that is to say, godles, and of no religion, and only giuing them selues, and studieng to get, and hold the com∣modities, and ritches of this world. That trans∣formation and chaunge, that is written by Ho∣mere, to haue ben wrought, by sorcerous char∣mes and cuppes of the famous witch Circe, is nothing to be compared, to this new chaunge which is brought to passe by the sorcery of thin∣ges indifferent. This is the best councell of all, that godly Doctors, and Teachers of the Chirch ioyne there mindes together, there studies, there labors, prayers, and there confession, that they maye defende the doctrine and learninge of Christ, and trew worshippinges of there Chir∣ches, with one consent, with the sword of God his worde, and the bearing of Christes crosse. The Prophetes & Apostells following this coū∣cel, ouercame the whole world, and did purge and skoure the chirch from vngodlines and Ido∣latry. There cānot be any better councell found, then God him self hath giuen. It belongeth to vs to do oure dewtie, and to committe (with oure prayers) vnto the Lord the successe and prospe∣rous end of the matter.
¶ Matthias Flacius aboue named, in his ovvne vvorke. De Adiaphoris. FIrst for asmuch, as I entend to write of thin∣ges indifferent, as they ar named, and some ar so in deede, it is best to tell what this word in∣different meaneth. Indifferent is called in the Greke Adiaphoron, and in Latine Indifferens, and in Duytch eine mittelding. And hit signifieth a thing, wherof is made no matter, whether a man kepe hit or do not kepe hit, or whether hit be hande∣led after this manner, or that manner. There ar in the Chirch certaine thinges which ar indiffe∣rent, and that there is such in the chirch of God, it may easely be proued by Paul, as in the former to the Corinthians the 7.8.10. and 14. chapiters, also to the Romanes in the. 14. chapiter may ap∣pere. Of which sort ar: to liue maried, or vn ma∣ried, so that hit be don in Chastitie, to eate mea∣tes or to abstaine therfro, to kepe daies, or not to kepe daies, withowte superstition, to take wagis of them, to whome a mā preacheth to, or to take none at all, to vse a prescribed māner of teaching in the Temple, to heare or to singe. If any man wold call back againe, and re∣store the garmentes or vestementes of Ethnish, or Popish sacrifices, and bring thē into the chir∣ches after the vse of them were once put downe, he shold do contrary to that which is semely and comenly. It lieth not in the power of any man, to or∣daine any worshippings of God, withowte the commaundement of God. Al thinges that ar indifferent, ar so far indiffe∣rent,
as they serue for the glorie of God, and the profit of the Chirch. But if they passe beyond those bondes, they ar not indifferent: but ar, vn∣godlines, and abhominations, and by all meanes, of all men to be eschewed. Whatsoeuer Antechrist doth, thesame he doth for the Diuelles sake, whose vicar he is, and of whome he is stirred vp to play his part: And whatsoeuer vnchristian Princes do in Religion, they do hit for Antechristis sake, and his seates sake, as the letters of the Pope, vnto the Bishops, and the Bishops letters sent to Popishe Princes, & to diuers chirches, beare witnes. And further, whatsoeuer the Popishe Princes, and vnchristian courtes do in these matters, and chaunges, they do hit for the pleasure & fauor of the supreame gouernors. Also whatsoeuer thold diuines do in these matters, they do hit to gratifie the Court, and the inferior Princes. At the last, whatsoeuer the younger diuines do, either to set forth or not to hindre this mischieff of indifferent matters, they do hit for the pleasure of there old Masters. Wherfore from the first to the last, they serue all Antechrist, and the Diuell, and committ whore∣dome with the greate whore, and drinck of her cup, as hit is prophicied in th'apocalips (not wit-owt a cause) of the last times. We nede not to care for that which some do ofte time rehers, that the chirch hath allwaies ben in somme bondage, for although hit hath ben allwaies in politick bondage, yet she neuer did tempre her self, or fashiō her to the Religion of vngodly mē, neither wold God, that she shold be subdued vnto any spiritual bondage, But ra∣ther
that she shold stedfastly defend her liberty, and not to be made the bond woman of men, seing that she is redemed with the precious blood of Christe: Wherfore seing that these Ri∣tes ar thrust vppon the chirch whether she will or no, and that of the greatest, and most openly knowen ennemies of Christ (that is of the Pope and both of learned and lay Papistes) it is not lawfull by any meanes to receaue them, neither ar they thinges indifferent, but the wicked com∣maundement of Antechrist and Antiochus. Oure indifferentiaries that ar of stowter sto∣maches, would not beso nice, and of a straight conscience, that they dare not defie the gold of the golden calf but that they wold desier some far part of hit to be giuen vnto them. Those things that haue ben offered in Idol seruice, or serued Idolatry, they ar Idolatrous, & can not serue God, and he wold that such shold be cast awaye. The brasen serpent was ordeined of GOD,VVhat then to surplesses. and that by Moses the seruant of GOD, and his greate Prophet, but after hit serued Idolatry, it was no more God his serpent, or Moses serpent, but the serpent of Idolaters, and the Diuelles ser∣pent, and Ezechias is praised (who brak-hit) for that deede. Euen as we defie and abhorre, the garments or cote of a theeffe, of a Murtherer of A Hang∣man, or of a common whore, though the garmēt hit self be innocent and hath done no harme, neither will any honest man do so much as gla∣dly touch hit: So all they that ar godly in dede, defie such Popish trifles with all there hartes, be∣caus
that they haue serued in the Popedome, & ben occupied with abuses and wickednes: and haue serued the sacrificers that were polluted and defiled with idolatry. Austin sayth, that faith is in great ieoperdy, when it is amongest a great nomber of ceremo∣nies. This is most trew in all thinges, that the man that is occupied about many thinges doth not sufficientlie take hede to euerye one of thē, and therefore it is trulie said: They that in the fire, many irons hold: Must nedes haue some of them right cold. SO the people, being charged to kepe all the commaundementes of god and his ordinan∣ces, and more straitlie commaunded to kepe mo ordinances of men then goddis commaundemē∣tes, must nedes coldlye kepe some of the com∣mandementes of God. If that the indifferentiaries go forward to re∣forme the chirch of Christ as they haue begon, and will set in the place of godlye and lerned prechers: whom they haue put away fooles and courtlie flatterers, shortly we shall haue no god∣lye preachers at all. Were there is a heauie bondage in ceremo∣nies, and in the worshipping of God, there can∣not the glad libertie of Christ be. Ceremonies ar the cheife sinewes or strēgth of the popedome: and the greatest postes and stayes of religion stand therein amonge the pa∣pistes. When the indifferentiaries propound,
offer vnto the ministers (that do not gladlye re∣ceaue any popish thinge) the quere cote, called in duch chorrok (which we call commonlie in english a surplesse,) and they will not receyue it: then the traditioners make exclamation, saiyng, what a small matter is it to weare a surplesse, or a whit cote aboue a blak, but in dede if they can get thē once in these cotes, they will afterward deliuer them to the Romaines that they may buffet them, as the old Romaines did handle Christ when they buffeted him, hauing the white cote vpon him which they put on against his wyll. What other thing goeth the deuell about, with all his thowsand craftes and subtelties, but to confirme the wicked in theyr wickednes, and to geue them occasion to triumph ouer the trew chirch, and ouer Christe him self, and to blasphe∣me the holie name of the lord, and of the con∣trarie part to discourage and make sad the holie goste in godlie men, and to make them faynt in godlines, & at length, also to doubt of the whole doctrine of the trew chirch, what thinge can more make afrayd, and make faynte souldiers, then to se theyr captaynes quake and trēble for feare? Cesar sayde that he had leiuer fyghte with an hoste of Lions, that had a hart for theyr Cap∣tayne, then with an host of hartes whose Cap∣tayne were a Lion. If any man should speake thus to another, and say thou hast stolen from me an hundred crownes, I require of the that thow restore me them againe quietlie, lest I be compelled to vse gainst the some more violent remedies: and yf this mā accused of thefte, should first paie him x
crownes in part of paymēt, & asterw ard xx.crow∣nes, should not he make him selfe giltie of theft and thereby be bound in paine of hāging to pay the hole some of money that is required of him, and should not he shew him self as readie to pay the rest as these ij. portiones, of what soeuer pur∣pose or intent he should do so? I suppose so in dede: Euen so, when we ar accused of the corru∣ption, and marring of the whole Religion of Christ, and ar commanded to restore it to the old estate againe and we begin to restore it in such thinges as seme most cōmonlie before mens eies (as ar outward rites and ceremonies) do not we seme to condemne our owne selues: may not we be thought to deny our owne religion? how soeuer bewteous dreames we feyne in our thoughts. It was an indifferent thinge, for Christ to wash his handes, yea it had a ciuill and a natu∣rall cause, for it is good manners and ciuilitie to come to the table rather with washed handes then with foule handes, besides that, after the doctrine of the phisitiones of Salerne, it is hol∣som for the eies, to washe the handes oft, yet not withstāding all these, Christ woulde not washe his handes with the Pharises, because he would ouerthrow their traditiones, and would not seme by his washing to confirme and alow their traditiones. It is not the poinct of a good christian, and as litle the office of a good diuine, to beleue that, by angring of God and by swaging of mannes wrath, that we shall come to any perfect peace. For tyrantes ar only as it were certaine roddes
in goddes hande, as God witnesseth him selfe, in esay the Prophit, wherefore the hand should ra∣ther be pacified and swaged from wrath, then the rod but if it were possible to pacifie & please the rod, that it shoulde not beate vs against the will of the hand: then were it to be feared that the hande shoulde cast the rod away and take a Betell or a Maule and breake vs all as small as Powlder. Luther did truly name wicked wysdome to be the feire hore of the Diuell. The Apostelles had leyuer that their scoles should be broken vp then in any part to geue place vnto the vngodlie, or to cōfirme or allowe their traditiones. What boldnes is this, that men dare geue vnto goddis enemies any part of the treasures of the chirch, which the sonne of God hath geuen vnto it. It belongeth not to any one man, neyther to a fevv men to ordeyne such ceremonies or rites as ar aboue named, (to wete) such as neither promote the glory of God, nor profit has chirche, but haue only a vayne shevv of holynes or semelynes, and do no other good, and that vvithout the cōsent of the chirch or congregation, much lesse ought any mà to make such, quite contrary to the mynd and will of the Chirch, or of the assembly of gods people. For all thinges belonge vnto the Chirch, and the Ministers ar teachers of it, and not Lordes, as Saincte Paule Saith, and they ar geuen to the Chirche of Christ. Therefore all they offēd gre∣uouslye, videlicet papa cum suis, whether that they ar Bishoppes or other men, which without the
consent of the Chirche, or against the consent of the Chirche, with an vntollerable licentious vsurping libertie, dare ordeyne any thing in the Chirch of Christ yea although it be not vngodlye. As they that put on the Crowne of thorne vpon Christes head to mock him, gaue him no honor, (although they semed to make him a Kynge) but greued him very sore and put him to muche payne. Euen so they that vvill bevvtifie and bonor the Sacramentes and Chirch of Christ vvyth the ceremonies of his aduersary Antichrist, do not honor trulye Christ and his sacramentes but dishonor them and deface them. The teachers of the gospell in Saxony, could scarcely driue away the abuses, no not after that the foundation of the abuses were taken away, neither at this howre canne oure Auditores be deliuered from those abhominationes & super∣stitiones, which they were brought vp wyth all from their tender yeares vntill the tyme of the preachinge of the gospell: wherefore wyth a lyt∣tel preaching of those olde rites and ceremonies that they were brought vp vvyth all, they vvill easely runne ageyne to the vvhole sink and abhomination of the vvhole popedome. Few yong persones excepted, that were borne sence the preaching of the gos∣spell, that neuer heard neyther sawe any such abhomynation. The spouse of Christe is dishonored and put to shame, when she is clothed with the garmen∣tes of the Hore of Babylon. What conformitie is this, whē as the Spouse of Christ is made lyke the Hore to Babylon in ceremonies? God who is gelous, wil not suffer
that the Chirch hys Spouse should be clothed with the garmētes apoincted by a wicked man. 1 These ar the incommodities that rise and springe of the receuing of some of the Popes ce∣remonies. They bringe home the popedome againe. 2 They open the wyndowes to all the super∣stitiones of Antichrist. 3 They darken the gospell, and hinder the light of it so throw ghtly to shine as it did before. They receaue agayne wholues into the She∣pefold, and dryue away true Shepherdes. 5 They make faynt and discorage all godly men, and cōfirme and strength thē all stubborne and wicked Papistes in theyre papistrie, &c. Melanthon vvryting vppon the xiij. chap. of Sainct Paule to the Romaines. THere may be also reasones gathered, of the differēce of powers,If there be difference of powers, thē ar they in diuers per∣som. God hath giuē chardge vnto the Magistrates or Rulers, that they should make iust lawes, therefore he myll also that we should be obeydient vnto those lawes: But he deliuered vnto the Shepherdes or Pastors, the sure worde, neyther will he that we shalbe lawe makers any furhter, or to put therevnto any other lawes: Therefore he requireth that we should be obeydiēt vnto that word and not vnto new lawes which men shall further add vnto the worde.Lawes made beside and beyond the word ar not to be obeied. And so the difference betwene one power and a nother bringth more lyght vnto this question. Yet for all that hit is more safe to leane vnto an other reason, (to wete,) that the
learning of the Apostles doth require that we should thinke that hit is deadly synne,No deadly sinne to break chirch lawe if hit may be dou withowte offence, or contumacy. and on the contrary part that the breakinge of the ecclesia∣sticall traditiones or Chirch ordinaunces, wyth∣out the case of offence and contumacie, is no deadly sinne. Melanthon vpport the .xiiij. chapiter to the Romaines. The error in ceremonies bredeth many great disprosites and hurtes: the first is. The doctri∣ne of the gospell of fayth, & of the benefit of Christ, is darckned,Discommo∣dities by Error in Ce remonies. vvhen the opinion creapeth in, that such obseruances deserue forgeuenes of sinnes, or that by them we are made ryghteous, as the Iewes dyd ymagen of theyr rytes. This opinion doth natu∣rally occupie mēnes mindes, except they be taught right∣ly by the gospell. The second incommodety ys, that the doctrine of difference of vvorkes is destroyed, when ceremonies are preferred before the politi∣que iyfe, but novv they are more set by then then in∣warde spirituall exercises are,Man natu∣rally, endi∣ned to ill by ceremonies. as are pactens and cal∣ling vppon the name of God. As Monckes called theyr traditiones more perfit then others. The third discommodety is, that the opinion of necessitie crepeth in vvich is a very perilous crucisieng of the cōscience. The fowrth is, that the opinion of necessitie (that is) that ce∣remonies can not be missed in the Church, bredeth vncureable discord and contention, as in tyme past there was diffention for keaping of the feaste of Easter.Lög vse brin geth this opi∣nion in The fifte is, that there is falsely geuen to the Bishoppes auctorities, of mokinage nevv vvorshippinges,
when as the trewe vse of ceremonies is not kno∣wen: And so is the doctrine of the new Testa∣mēt darckned, and vngodlines is confirmed, and the Tirannye of the Bishoppes encreased. And a lytle after. when as the opinion of worshipping, or of necesitie cometh vnto thinges indifferent,Contention is bred an ce∣remonies. and .B. bccō lyraunts. then such traditiones, darcken the doctrine of the Gospell and the opinion that commeth thereto maketh the traditiones, made of thinges indifferēt to be vngodlye: Therefore hit is vvell don to breake such, and to put them avvay that: that false opinion may,How indif∣fcrēt things ar made ill. be corrected for it is very necessarie & nedfull that the errors concerning worshipping, merites, and necessitie, shoulde be cast away. Phillip Melanthon vppon the xxvij. of Math. CHrist is accused, that he hath sturred vp Se∣dition thoughout all Iewrye, from Galelye to Ierusalem, and that he for bade tribute to be geuen vnto the Emperor. These are greate tres∣passes, and accusationes, and this kynd, ofte ti∣mes greueth afore hād the Doctors or Teachers, we are called Seditious, because we do not obey the Emperor, commaunding vs, that we shoulde receaue wycked doctrine. And a litle after. Christ aunsvvereth not vnto all the lyes that are made a∣gainst him, but leaueth them that are openly knowen: But he answereth vnto the question of the kingdome, & graunteth that he is a Kyng,Difference of Christ king dome. and maketh an open difference betwene the Kingdome of the worlde, and his own Kynge∣dome, whereof he beynge the Sonne of God, is the King: So the Chirche ought clearly to purge
her selfe of the crime of Sedition, and to say, that she wolde geue all lawfull obedience in all poli∣tique matters vnto the Magistrate: but concer∣ning doctrine that she wold obey god (as it is commaunded) rather then man. And here let all godly men consider the difference betwene the politique Kingdome, and the euerlasting, wher∣in the Sonne of God calleth vs vnto euerlasting Rytches and gyueth forgeuenes of sinnes vnto vs, and lyfe euerlastinge. And these Kingdomes ought not to be con∣founded,Cōfounding of authori∣tie. and myngled one wyth an other, as the Pope vnder the pretēce of the mynisterye wylbe the Kyng of the worlde,VVicked∣nes of Pope. & Lorde ouer Kinges. And after another manner the povvers and myngled to∣geyther vvhyleste the Emperor and Princes vvyll set oute a nevv doctrine vnto the Chirches, For they haue made the Interim and wyll stablish in the Chirch the Masse,How lay Princes ar made Po∣pes. and Inuocatiō of Sainctes, and such other lyke thinges, and they wylbe Docters and Pa∣stours: when as they do not vnderstand the do∣ctrine but are open enemies against it, this is not to be allowed, but let there be difference made betwene one office and another and let euery man labor faythfully in his office. Pylate commaundeth Christ, to be scourged, and to be crowned wyth a Crowne of thornes. Pylate graunteth that Iesus is innocent & faul∣ties, and yet for all that he vexeth him wyth re∣proches and punishment, euen as some now a dayes do, whychkyll not Iesus, and vtterly take not away thē that preache ryghtly because they cannot, yet by manye signes they declare theyr hatred agaynst them, for they despise the poore
Preachers, and suffer them many wayes to be trow bled: the Pope & all his Byshopes do scorge Christ, whē as they set vp theyr Kyngdome, they crowne Christ wyth thornes and put a purple garmēte vpon him, that is to say they do worke much sorowe to Christe and to his trew Chirch by that false and wycked lordship whych they atrogantly take vnto them selues agaynst the wyll of God and the health of the Chirch. Afterward Pylate, is perswaded euen to kyll Christ, when he hearde once these wordes sayde vnto hym, thow arte not the Emperours frend yf thou do not crucifie him. Euen such men are they which play wyth the wycked, for although in the beginyng, they are not most cruell of all other, Yet by lytle and lytle they wax worsse and worsse. Therfore men had nede to take hede at the beginnyng according vnto the sayng of the Scripture, what fellow ship hath Christ wyth Be∣liall, &c. ¶LET VS THINKE OF THESE HORRIBLE EXAMPLES, AND LET vs flee, such tryfling playeng, and hearyng vvith out Enemies And let vs openlye confesse that vve do differ from them in doctrine, And let vs not consent and agree vvyth them vvhen as they makethen compositions. IHon Alasco (a Baron of Poleland by byrth) in Kynge Edwardes dayes was called into En∣glād by the Prince, at Master Cranmers the Ar∣chebishop of Cāterburies cō mendatiō & coun∣cell,
vnknowen to the most parte of his conty∣men: vnto whom was comitted by the King the chardg of the straungers Churches here, whych the forenamed worthie Kynge Edward by his letters patentes in the fowrth yeare of his reign erected in London, makyng this Ihon Alasco su∣perintendet thereof, and appoinctyng therto such other ministers as the sayd Ihon Alasco (who was an earnest suter on the behalfe of the strangers) thought mete for that rome, he ta∣kyng this chardge vppon him so vsed him self therein vntyll the death of Kyng Edward that all the godly straungers and sondrye others had much ioye and cōfort of him, the whole realme had a singuler treasure of him, and the enemie had nothiug that he could iustly chardge hym wyth all. Brieselye to say, his singuler trauaile in the Lordes haruest in preaching and wryting both here and a broade, his profound and depe knowledge of thynges, his syncere iudgment in all poynctes of religion, and hartye affection to the maintenaunce of Christes Kingdome against open enemyes, and counterfait gospelers corru∣ptyng the simplicitie of chrystian religion, besi∣des his vprightnes of lyfe, godlye conuersation and other qualeties mete for such a personage: causeth much lamentation for the lacke of him, in the Church of Christ through out christen∣dom, at these dayes: And wyll procute a conti∣nuall remembraunce of him wyth honor amōg∣est est the godlye vnto the worldes ende. This testi∣monye hath Kyng Edward of famous memorie vnder the greate seale of England giuen of him whych is inprint at this daye extant in laten to
besene of all the world. IHON ALASCO BORNE in Poleland a very famous and notable man, both for his ho∣nest vpryghtnes and innocēcie of lyfe and beha∣uiour and also for his rare and singular know∣ledge in learning, &c. ¶ The iudgement of Maister Ihon Alasco of remouing the vse of singular apparell in the Chirch ministerie vvrytten the 20. daye of September in the 5 yere of the rargne of Kynge Edvvard the sixth: vvhich vvas as follovveth. FYrst of all I affirme that in the Chirch of Christ, there are some thinges to be obserued continually, some thinges are indifferent and free: other some thinges are by no meanes tolle∣rable. Such thynges as ought continually to re∣maine in the Church, are the pure doctrine of the Prophetes, & Aposteies, whych for the suste∣naunce of the soule are to be diligētly proponed to the shepe of Christ by the Ministers of God, where vnto are adioyned the sacramentes of ba∣ptisme and the Lordes supper ministred accor∣dyng to the Apostolik order, set forth in the wri∣tinges of the Euangelistes and Apostles to the which may very fytlie be annexed Ecclesiasticall discipline. I call those thynges ffree whatsoeuer they be that serue profitablye and commodiouslye to the ministerye of the worde and Sacramentes, so they haue theyr originall ground in the Scriptu∣res, haue no commaundement against them, cō∣taine a manifest commoditie to the Chirch and
mens conicien∣ces. Of this sort are these, to assemble to geither in the Church thys hower or that howre this daye or that daye, to vse in the administration of the Sacramentes this kynde of prayer or that kynd, the seuerall tymes in the yere to celebrate the supper of the Lord, but ones or oftenar. These thynges that are vttarly to be remoued from the church, are of two sortes, some haue so manifest impietie annexed to them, that they cā∣not disceyue those that are but meanelye instru∣cted in gods worde as are worshipping of Ima∣ges, worshipping of breade and wyne, propha∣naciō of the Lordes Supper, through the Masse, praying to Sainctes, prayng for the dead, and in∣finit such other mōsters, which Antechrist hath brought into the church of Christ, there ar other thynges brought in by the same Antechrist, whych are much contrarye to christian libertye obscure Christ, encrease hypocrisie and bringe in pryde, and sweilyng into the church, and yet in the meane whyle haue a certaine shew of profit & comlines, of this sort are the apointed fasting days, choise of meates, muche singynge in the church and such as is not vnderstanded, organe playing, and vse of church apparell, in admini∣stracion of the Sacramentes. Now what great incommodities and hurt haue crept into the church by meanes of euerye one of these, and yet maye more crepe in, except they be remoued I cannot at this present parti∣cularlye declare. I haue here onely to entreat of the vse of apparell, and to shew cause whie by no meanes, it ought any lōgar to be borne with
of a godlye Magistrate in a reformed church of Christ, allthough many deuises muented by wyttie heddes may be alleged, for some deffence thereof, but we regard not wyttie heades, but the Testimony of gods wyll.Math. 15. First of all I conclude that euen these garmen∣tes are vttarlye to be remoued from the church as a deuise of man by that ground and reason whych Christ and the Prophetes and Apostles vse in excluding or thrusting forth of the church as a pernicious thynge,colo. 2. all mens doctrines tradi∣tions or deuises. Polidore virgil,Li. 6. de in∣ucnt. beareth wytnes thereof, it is a manner taken from the Hebrews that preistly apparell wyth couering of Altars, wyth other thinges necessarie for the vse of the Temple, should be consecrated, and the garmé∣tes appoyncted ouar to the Preistes, and others wythin orders, who should put them on when they occupied them selues about holie thynges, whych Pope Steuen the fyrst dyd first apoinct should be done, amongst oure Chirch men: for he sayth, that in the begynning whan religion begane to spring, Preistes were wont to put no∣thing more vppon them, when they went to de∣uine seruice, standing raither to decke them sel∣ues inwardlye wyth verteus of the mind, and to cast awaye affections and vices of the bodye, then to take on them new attire. Now thus rea∣son I, and gather. Yf they changed not theyr gar∣ment or apparell whan they went to gods serui∣ce, then they vsed none for theim that were ad∣mitted into the Mynisterie of the gospell. Paule and Barnabas were contented wyth laying on handes, Fasting and prayer, Paul dili∣gentlye
prescribing to Timothie, and Titus all the offices of A Bishop, makith no mention of peculiar garmentes and other ceremonies. and that the vse of apparell did not by and by goe ouer all Churchis, it is euident enough by the decre of Celestine the fyrst Byshop of Rome: whose wordes are these against such peculiar vesture of Bishopes. We are to be discerned (saith he) from the common people or other, in doctri∣ne not apparell, in conuersation not in habit, in puritie of mind not in attire: For yf we begine to geue our selues to nouelties, wee shall contemne and cast awaye the order that the Fathers haue deliuered, and lefte vs and shall make a place for superfluous supersticions: wee must not therfore drawe the simple mindes of the faithfull to such thinges, for they must rayther be instructed, then begiled, and mocked, neither must we deceiue theire bodylie eyes, but poure in precepted into theire mindes. Thus far he, yet can we not de∣nye, but as men bend, and inclyne to supersticion of them selues: so some kyned of garmentes al∣though verye simple and plaine had crepte into many Churchis before this mans dayes. For Syl∣uester no doubt gaue the occasion. But Carolus (called the great) finished the matter as stories beare wittnes. Now it is made manifest that the vse of peculiare apparell in the church or ecclesia∣sticall persones, is a mere deuise and inuention of men, and therfore to be reiected for this cause if there were no more. They which wolde kepe thuse of this appa∣rell in the Church as a thinge instituted of God, refer the same to Aarons preysthoode, but they
litle for see what they say. For we knowe by the scriptures, that Christ is not a Priest after the or∣der of Aaron, but of Melchisedech, & that Aarōs pristhood was extinguished, and toke ende in Christe with all the parts therof, among the which we recken also the apparell. Therfore Christ the verie wisdome of the father vsed no new, or peculiar kynd of apparell in holie mini∣sterye, neyther appoincted any other to be vsed. For that the figuratiue priesthod as a shadowe was perfited, and ended in Christ the one and onelye Priest. All they therfore that call agayne Aarons apparell into the Chirch, dishonor Chri∣stes priesthod, as though beynge the lyght it self, he nedid shadowes, neither wyll that excuse ser∣ue, to say that all Aarons priesthod is not called into vseagayne, but some parte therof onelye: but he that receyuith a parte, doeth not reiect the wholle. But all Aarons priesthode being a figure and shadowe is no doubt to be reiected, for that it is abrogated, and as many as do restore againe those thynges that the auctorytie of gods worde hathe destroyed and abrogated, are transgressers of gods lawe. Paule therfore well teachith, that the bond mayde is to be cast forth & hir Sonne, singnifiyng that all the bondage of the lawe is to be reiected, after the lyght of the gospell is spronge forth and risen, and he wyilith vs not to suffer our selues to be remoued from our liber∣tye in Christ, now it is to playne that the doctri∣ne and commaandementes of whatsoeuer kynd of appparell peculiar, in gods mynisterye is a trās∣gression of gods lawe: For because Aarōs priest∣hode is called in to vse agaye.
If any man by occasion of the first argument deny that the garmentes are a portion of Aarons priesthoode, and say that they were by a certaine libertye brought in of the Byshopes of Rome, to adorne and set forth priestlye ordar, yet saith he not enough why they may be lawfully retained, we knowe that the Pope of Rome is very Ante∣christe him selfe, wherfore his priesthode also is Antichristian, wherby Christes priesthod who∣lie is foyled and vtterlie troden vndar fote. But forasmuch as the chiefest part of the priesthod of the Pope consistith in Ceremonies, Anoin∣ting shauing, Miters, and garmētes, for with owt these they accoumpt no man Byshoppe, and they coumpt hym Byshop whatsoeuar he be other∣wyse, that is set oute with these thinges, yt fol∣lowith that yf we condemne the popish priest∣hod, for that it is Antchristian, wee ought to auoid all the partes and notes therof also. For how can A godlie and Christian hart, loue the marke of the blasphemus popish priesthode? Where with Christes pristhood is so great∣lie contaminate and defiled. he therfore that ha∣teth Antechrist pristhod must hate also all the notes and markes therof. Againe he that loueth partes thereof can not hate the whole. Moreouar yf we knowe that the Popes priest∣hood, with all the notes and signes therof be Antechristes priesthod and euerie worke of An∣techrist be Satans worke, we must not promote and helpe it forward, but ouerthrow & destroy it, if so be wee wylbe workers together wyth Christ, who came to destroy the workes of the Diuell, as the scriptures beare record.
And let vs not thynke that it is law fell for anye man to institute, reduce or kepe in vse by his auctoritie these garmentes, for all power is giuen to edifie & not to destroy, (as Paule sayth) who in the same place saith, we can do nothing agaynst the truth, but for the truth. And edefiyng is to build the faythfull vppon Christ, in fayth, hope charytie, and innocēcie of lyffe, cōtendyng alwayes to more perfection: but the garmentes promote or helpe forth none of these thynges: but rayther obscure Christes face, bryng in a cer∣tayne agrement wyth Antechristes pristhod, or rayther a backesliding to the shadowes of Aarō from the bodye of Christ. The truth is it for the whych Apostolike men and christian Magistrates ought to trauell, and Christ is content wyth the ordinaunce whych he him self hath left, neyther doth he any longar require shadowes: wherfore they must and wyll labore for it, not against it, by reuokynge those thynges whych Christ hath destroyed and abo∣lished. Furthermore Paule simplie admittith no∣thing into the Church but that which may ede∣fie, (that is to say) encrease godlines peculiar gar∣mentes in the ministerie edifie not, therfore are they not to be borne. those thinges that minister a certaine counterfait, or fantasticall occason to godlines, do not by and by edefie: but they must nedes giue Christians a necessarie prouocation vnto godlines. But garmentes contrarie wyse partlie encrease hautines, and pride in them, that vse them: partlie hypocrisie: partlye both twain: And to minister occasion to hypocrisie, it is ve∣rye
readie for them, yea it must nedes be. For yf that vertew be in thee, which thow imaginest to be signified by the apparell, why by shewing of it doest thou take the reware of men? but yf it be not, art not thow a plaine Hypocrite? beinge in∣deed an other maner of man then thow preten∣dest to bee? And thow canste not escape by say∣eng these priuat garmentes signifie no vertew in vs, but admonish vs as it were of our dutie and office. what then I pray yow admonished the Apostles of their dutie and office? attire or the spirit of the Lord? the loue of the Chirch and Christ? doe they then forget their dutie, as often as they put these garmentes of? why rather me∣ditate they not in the word of the Lord day and night, and therby mend their wayes, for that it Pearceth the ground of the hart? when apparell, can moue enelye the owtward mā. What thing dothe Christ three scuerall times require of Pe∣ter, to be admonished of his office, in feading his sheeppe: suarly nothyng but loue. Againe it is to be feared, lest it brede an opi∣nion of merite, or some such other sollye, that the dignitie of the Minister or Sacramentes, or prea∣chinge the word is dimmished, vnlesse these vn∣profitable, and pernicious garmētes be vsed. this feare of mans merite alone should moue vs that vestimentes ought to be shutt out of the Temple with other ceremonies deuised by men. It is vn∣godly to giue such occasion of offence, or falling to the weake for whom Christ dyed. How casie a matter it is to put considence in these thynges, experiēce hath taught vs so, that he that wayeth these thinges, and hath no consideration therof,
may seme not to be free from the suspicion of vngodlines, neither can they excuse them selues, that it is known to all men, that there lyeth no good, nor hurt, in the garmentes, for though we graunt this, this knowledge was in these dayes, whē they were first brought in of the Byshops: we are borne, not for our selues onelye, but wee serue the Chirch, and our posteritie also: to whō to leaue Christes religion verie pure, can not but be verie acceptable vnto god. No more whan he dyeth, wyllynglie leauith his children a Testa∣ment or wyll, vnlesse it be throughlie perfect, that all occasion of striue maye be cut of. why shew we not lyke diligence, and fidelitie in gods Testament? I know that some men bragg that the holie ministerie is adorned and bewtysied bye garmē∣tes, but it is indede much obscured and darckned therbye. For the apparell affecting and occupiēg mennes eies, do stay and hynder theyr myndes from the consideration of such spirituall thyn∣ges as are don in the sacramētes, and drawe thē to delyghtes and pleasures of the Senses. Holy simplicitye commendeth and setteth forth gods ordenaunces. Examples make of our side, both of Christ, and the Apostles, and also the primiti∣ue Church: which, it is more safe, more holye, and more profitable to follow, then to alter and chaunge, or bye doing otherwise to condempne christ. Here farther add I that which Paule hath noted of mennes doctrines, that outwardly, they haue a spice and shew of wysdome through su∣persticion, and humblenes of the mind, and hur∣tinge of the bodie,Coll. 2. and not by any honor thereof
to the satissieng or filling of the fleshe. At the length tyrannie is brought in, and the garment is put vppon men, will they nill they. And this ty∣rannie suerly makith that if a thinge be of his own nature free and indifferét, it nowe ceaseth to be indifferent. Paulle in falt and plaine wor∣des forbiddeth Christians to submit them selues to suche superstitious tyrannie.Collo. 2. 1. Cor. 7. If therefore ye be dead from the ordenaunces of the wo lde &c. and againe become not the seruantes of men. Is it not a verie hard bondage, and mere slauerye, to be driuen to a certaine kind of garment in the Church that sauoreth ether gentilitye, or heath∣nishnes or Araons priesthode, or els Antechrit stianisme and poperie that is so many wayes hur∣full and no way profitable? But what maketh vs, to delyght so to defyle our selues with popish filthines? whie geue we not that honor to. Iesus Christs priesthode? which popish Priestes giue to Antechristes priest hode? There is nothing so small or light by hym prescribed, although it diffent or varie from Christ, which his obserue not verye supersti∣tiously and precisely to the vttermost. Whye do not we agayne lykewise in all thynges obey Christ, contenting our selues with his naked and simple trueth? To conclude,1. thess. 5. seing that Paule iudgeth it mete to abstaine frō all shew and aperaunce of euill, and we haue shewed that to prescribe garmen∣tes in the administracion of holye thynges is in dede euill: for that it is deuyse of men, they be partes or members of the Aaronicall or popysh priesthode, they edifie nothing at all, they brede
hautines and pride, hipocrine, and opinion of merit or deseruynge, what christian is he that wyll not iudge them mete to be eschewed and shounnid? There are obiected somme thinges of the fautors and patrons of these garmentes, vvhich it shall suffice breiflie and in fevv vvordes to note and touch, for that they ouer∣throvve not our reasones before Alleadged. IN indifferent thynges we must haue regard to the weakenes of our bretherne,First obiect after the example of the Apostles. A man may deny those thinges to be indiffe∣rent, which obscure Christes pristhode,Aunswere and of them selues engédre, stire vp, and cause nothinge els but hipocrisie, sectes, and pride, in the Chirch, hauing no originall or ground in the scriptures and yet are commaunded with tyrannie vnse∣melie for Christianes. The Apostles are neuar readde to haue done such thynges as these are, that we falselye pretend not, or vainelye cloke our selues with the godlye industrie of the Apo∣stles to plant the Church of Christ. Againe seing that they them selues thinke mete to haue res∣pect to the weak herin, whye graunt they not free vse hereof to the stronge and those that are stayed? And when shall the weake more better learne that those thinges are vaine, foolysh and hurtfull: then when they see them abrogated? How can the simple and igno: aunt thinke other wise with them selues, then that some godlines cōsistith in those thinges that yet remaine, when they see so manye other thynges whych were
vsed in times past done awaye: wherefore weaknes is not releued & holpen, but hindered and liurt yf garmentes and such lyke ceremonies be retayned and kepte, because they be kepte in the opinion of the mynde, and by them mē mea∣sure the dignitie and worthynes of the Sacra∣mentes. Agayne,Second ob∣iection. they obiect the Magistrates law and decree in retanynge garmētes. But I knowe our Magistrates godlines, wysedome and forward∣nes to be such, that when he shall depelye waye, and well cōsidar rhe daunger and incōuenyence of these ceremonyes, he wyll reioyce that there be some that desire to runne before in the law of the Lord, and to prepare and make the waye ra∣dye for other, that he maye reuoke and brynge all thynges to the sinceritye and perfectiō of the Apostles ordre they know that power and au∣ctoritye is giuen them in the Church to edifica∣tion, not to destruction, to stand on the truthes side to defend it, not to oppresse it. Seing this godlynes in our Magistrate is knowne to be willyng and readye, I wot not wheather he can be blameles, whatsoeuar he be that wyll vndar cloke of his defence, tiranniouslye defend mens traditiones, or thrust them on other men against their wylls, contrarie to the Lordes commaun∣demēt. But those thinges comonlye delyght and please much bettar, which wee our selues haue chosen, then those whych gods lawes prescribe. Neyther againe haue we here to feare any tu∣mult, if mens preceptes & rules especiallye being superstitious be remoued out of the chirch, wher bye we kyndle and prouoke the wrath of God.
But rayther the nerar we shall come to Chrystes institution and orders, and the farthar wee shall departe or go frome Antechrystes institutions and orders, the more quiet peace and rest of the Realme haue we to loke for. That policie and wysdom of mans reason (which seketh and promiseth it selfe peace by vnlawfull meanes) is ficle sliperie and deceptfull. Saul sekynge gods fauor by the sacrifices of the Amalachites whych were forbidden, cast away hym selfe vnaduisedlye. Ther is one way and meanes to attayne sastie and health by. Yf we al∣together tourne to repentaunce, beleue the gos∣spell, walke in innocencie of lyfe, and retaine no∣thynge into the church, which eyther hath not the expresse word of god for it, or els drawe and take thence as out of a fountaine, his infallable and sure grownd of beginynge. And then that trew Pastors, and such as be paynfull and dili∣gent in teachyng, be placed and set ouer chur∣ches, dome, and enill Shepeherdes being exclu∣ded, and thrust forth: so shall the Kynge and hys people florrishe according to the promises of God, often repeted in the Prophetes. Bullengerus Decade quinta sermone nono. IT is openly knowen, that our Lord in his first supper, and that the Apostles also in the cele∣bratiō of the supper, vsed A common and honest garment, therefore hit is not contrarie to the first institution: yf the Minister go to the Lordes ta∣ble arayed with his owne garment, so that it be
comly and honest. Suerlye they that are commu∣nicantes vse no other garmentes, then their com∣mon garmentes: here had men nede to take hede that supersticion creape not in, it semeth that the old Fathers vsed A cloke or an ouermost garmēt aboue their common garment. But they did not that by any example they had of Christ or hys Apostles, but after the tradition of man. At the length thys stuffe that we see at this tyme, was gathered by following of the Sacerdotall aparell of the old lawe, and was cast vppō the Ministers that wolde minister the communion, And Inno∣centius the third of that name doth not conceale that, But we haue learned a great whyle a goe, that the leuiticall rites and ceremonies are not onelye abrogated, But that they ought not to be brought againe into the Church by any man. Therfore when as we lyue in the lyght of the Gospell and not in the shadovv of the lavve, by good right vve cast avvay that Massely, and leuiticall apparell. Bullengerus in the vi. Chapter of the beginning of Errors. THe Fathers of old time, had vsed a playne garment, and not greatly costly, which they vsed in celebrating of the sacramentes and other gods seruice, for the most part they were coue∣red with an ouermost garment: whiles the Mi∣nister went about to serue the Chirch at the ta∣ble of the I ord. For of olde time the Priest was couered with that garment, which seemed to euery countrie most honest, whilest he did con∣secrate and deuide the bodie and blood of the
Lorde. But the stuffe that is vsed now a dayes, was fet from th eIewish priesthode, as Rabanus is the witnes, which in the first booke of his in∣stitutions and the xiiii. chapter, and in those that followe doeth diligently declare, how that thys attire in all poinctes is like vnto the apparell of Aaron. And Innocentius the Pope (for this attyre vtterlie vvomanishe and lyke vnto maidēs playes,) was so bold as openly to pronounce and giue senten∣ce, that not all the customes of the lawe are not abolished or put downe. And these doth he wright in the iiii. booke and iiii. chapter, of the misticall sacrament of the Altare. Musculus vppon the second Chapter of the Epistell of Sainct Paule to the Ephesianes. IN this our age, there ar some that carnestlye go about, that the partes that are at debate sholde be brought vnto vnitie,Blind se∣kers of vni∣tie. but they crre in that wheras they goe aboute to seke it not in Christ whych maketh, them one that ar at debate. But thinke not that vnitie may be gotten after this manner, that we should go back ouer vnto thē, and returne, and be made Papistes agayne, but by this way trew vnitie can not be gotten, whyche can not consist but in him that maketh of both one. The same Musculus vpon the second Chapter of the se∣cond epistell of Sainct Paule to the Cormthians. IS it not the office of a Shepherd, to brynge home agayne into the way shepe that starv abrode, whether they will or no, lest they should
perishe? I answer that we do nottwitch or speak agaynste the lawfull office of trew Pastores, whose office is to bringe agayne into the way, but against lordshippe whych first Christ, him selfe spake against & reproued: the 22. of Luke. And afterward the Apostell Peter in the 5. chapi∣ter of his former epistell, and god him selfe in the old testament reproued in false shepherdes whyche playd the Lordes, to cruelly ouer his slocke. A trew Shepherd seketh his shepe that strayeth away, when he hath found it, he layth it vppon his shoulders least it shuld perishe. But a false Shepherd kylleth and destroyeth: so our Lordes of chirches do not instruct and teache those that they iudge to erre in the Chirche, because they can not, nay because they care not, but wyth commaundement constreyne them to deny the truthe that wyth theyr violence they may bryng to passe what they wyll and wyth tormentes cō∣pell them to recant and cruelly kylll them that wyll not. Is not this to be Lordes ouer oure fayth in the Churche of Christe? For vvhat other thynge is it to play the Lordes then not by the lavv, and lavvfull povver,Haue Lord ship inspiri¦tual mat∣ters is. not for the profit of the Subiectes, to com∣mand those thinges that arryght and lavvfull but euē at theyr commandement, for theyr owne lust and pleasure, to exercise lordshippe ouer theyr Subiectes, and to shew the preminence of theyr superioritie to a poinct whatsoeuer they lyst, to be beleued, and done, and that with high lookes, and great pride and wyth cruell threaninges, to exhort in all thynges obeydience of all men euē most seruile and fullest of slauerye, and require the same to be performed against the cōsciences
of the faithfull people. If the Lordes of the Chir∣ches be free from this kynd of lord shippe let thē restore the free cōsciences of faithfull mē againe from the yoke of mans auctoritie and let them abyde in the christen libertye wherby they are not the bond men of mē, but his, of whom they were bought agayne with a greate price or ran∣som. Musculus vpon the xxij. chapiter of sainct Mathevv. WE see here how men sho'd obey Magi∣strates, and what difference they ought to put betwene God and the Emperor for all though he be the officer of God, there is one thinge that is dew vnto him, and an other that is dew vnto GOD: Therfore we ar taught hete ij. thinges. The first is, that the seruantes of God not only may, but ought to obey the Magi∣strate. the Apostles did teach this Roma. 13: and, 1. Pet. 3. The second thinge is,VVhat de to God, what to Princes. that there is one thinge dew to the Emperor and an other dew to God. It that is erthlye udevv to the Emperor, and it that belongeth vnto religion is devv vnto God. in erth¦ly thinges we haue the Image of the Emperor in A coyne, which teacheth what we owe vnto the Emperor. Againe, we bere in our soule by the sea∣linge of Christ and his holie spirit beinge signed or coyned through baptisme and haue therebye the inscription of the name of Christ whereby we are taught what we owe vnto God. God for∣biddeth not vs to giue vnto the Emperor it that is dew vnto him. The were it not great wicked∣nes and vngodlines yf that the Emperor wold
not suffer it that is dew vnto God to be giuen vnto him but will take it vnto his owne selfe? Musculus in his comune places in the chapter of Magistrates. BY consideryng of these thinges it appeareth plainlie,The ciuill Magistrat can do no∣thing with∣out the word of God. although the care and chardge of christen relgion belonge vnto Christien, Magi∣strates, yet for all that, it belongeth not vnto them without the word of God to ordeine any thinge. Musculus in his comuneplaces in the title of the Ministers of the word. IT is therfore otu of all doubt, that it was or∣deined by the Apostles in the first and aposto∣lick Church that the elders of the Church, Episio∣pountes, (that is to say, they that haue the chardge of the Lordes flocke) shold exercise the ministe∣ry of teaching and gouerning by their comune labor, and that they shold be as a man wolde say, akephaloi (that is to say subiect to no hed and President) of which sort euen at this time some Ministers of the word ar found in some Chir∣ches, emongest whome none is found superiot or hygher then ar other in office, and in power: although one be more excelent then an other, in learninge, in the gifte of eloquence, or wisedom. But after the times of the Apostelles (as Sainct I erom saith) when there rose emongest the el∣ders of the chirch dissentiones and schismes or sectes and as I do iudge when as that tempta∣tion of superioritie or hygher auctoritie entred
into the mindes of the elders: Shepherdes and Teachers litle by litle, some one of the number of the elders began to be chosen, which was made president aboue the rest and he beinge set in a higher degree was named a Bishoppe, and so he alone toke that name vnto him, which be∣fore, other had comune with him. But wheather that cowncell did profit the Church of Christ, or no, that such Byshoppes shold be made, which rather by the coustome, thē by the trueth of gods ordinance, should be brought in and be of grea∣ter auctoritie then Elders: it was better declared in times folowinge,Howe Bis∣hops rise vp. then it was sithence vvhen this custome at the frrst vvas brought in, for wee may blame that custome, for all the hygh pride, ritches, tyran∣nie, and corruption of all Chirches of Christ, vvhich these princely and knightlie Bushoppes haue, and do novv ex∣ercise. Which thynge if Ieremie had sene, doubtles he vvold haue knovvledged this councell to haue bene, not of the holy ghost, to take avvay diuision as was pre∣tended, but Sathans councell, to destroy and to waste the old Ministers of feading of Christes flocke, whereby it might be also brought to passe that the Chirch sholde not haue trew Pastors, Docters, Elders, and Bishoppes, but vnderneth the visers of those names, idle bellies, & myghtie Princes, whych not onelye wyll not preach thē selues, and feade the people of the Lord wyth holsom doctrine, but wyll not suffer the flocke to be fed by any other, whych thynge they do by great violence.
Musculus also in the same place vpon the same mat∣ter intreatinge of the povver of Mynisters. THis mater hath bene wonderfullie tossed with a continuall contētion through them which hath more aspired for preeminence, and gaped for the supreme power, then haue gon a∣bout the lawfull exercisinge of the ministerie, for they desired rather to be Lordes in the chirch then to serue it. And at this present time, the most part of them which castinge away the tyrannie of the Byshoppe of Rome, will seme to haue brought the Chirches ageine into the libertie which was purchassed by Christ, ar assaulted with this temptation. These, beinge otherwayes good men, and exercisinge faithfully and dili∣gently the office of teachinge:O postillick B. that wold be woth proucl Lordes and humble. Apolie. suppose that by this mcanes, they shall profit the Churches, if they deliuer the Ministry of the vvord from contempt and despicinge (which hit suffereth now in all places) and vvolde restore it to the old honor againe. But on the other side, there ar other not euell men, but also well learned and workers in the word of God, that stand vp against these,Some men mark, and some trie the Lorship, what it is. beinge afraid least through the studie and zeale of these men, not beinge suffi∣cientlie circumspect, and ware, the dooreshold be opened by litle and litle to brynge into the Chirch againe the olde Lordshippe (that is) least they by their aucthoritie which they haue of the Ministerie of the word might open the way to false & vanfaithfull Ministers to abuse the power that is defended and brought in againe by them to the contrarie. And they suppose that this feare is not in vaync, whilse they consideringe the be∣ginninge
of the popish Lordshippe, call to reme∣brance vnder how bewteous a pretence, and by the zeale of great and holy men, by and by after the time of the Apostelles it was brought into the Chirches. And a litle after be saith. It is plainly to be granted at the beginning that some power was giuen vnto the ministery of the word and to the dispēfation of the mysteris of God which is profitable and mightie to edisication, yea and necessarie for our saluation, which is through Christe, and that is ment by the way of a smili∣tude of Christ him selfe when as in the xxiiij. of Mathew he saithe who thinkest thow is a faith∣full seruant and a wise. Whom the Lorde hathe made Ruler ouer his housholde to giue them meate in time? he meaneth that he wolde giue vnto his Disciples such power ouer his Chirch as they haue to whome the whole housho de is committed of the good man of the howse, that they shold giue thē sufficient meat. & Marke 13. Euen as a man that goeth into a far countrey leaueth his howse and hath giuen power vnto his seruantes and hath apoincted euery man his office and hath giuen chardge vnto the Porter that he shold watche. Watch ye therefore, &c. Doubtles he spake these thinges vnto his Disci∣ples, to shew what sholde be their condition,VVheather was this cō mission cō∣mitted vn∣to Princes only, or only to the Di∣sciples of Christ and their shcces∣sort . in the Howse of God, after that he had departed from them to Heauen And a litle after amongest 3. powers there is one that is called potestas iuris, that is the power of ryght, whereby a man hath lordshippe ouer his owne substance, whych is not subiect vnto an other mans ryght: This power of ryght is gi∣nen
of God the Father vnto his sonne Christ, for he sayth all power is giuen vnto me in Hea∣uen and in Earth. Peter taketh away this povver from the Ministers of Christ vvhen he saythe,S. Peter ta∣keth away all dominiō and lord∣shippe from the elders of the Church, therfore he grāteth no∣ne neither to the P. neyther to any B of his making VVhoare ininrious to the maiestie of Christ and to the libertie of the Chircy. who pertey∣ne vnto the kingdome of Ante∣christ. exerci∣single single lordshipe 1. Pet. 5. and the Apostell Paule refuseth it, saing we ar no Lordes of yowre faith and he exhorteth faithful men that they submit not them-selue vnto them which wyll exercise lordshippe ouer them, when he sayth be ye not made the seruantes, or bondmen, of men, wher∣fore they that chalenge vnto them selues this power in the howse of God for that end that they shall not be seruantes of Christ but Lordes of the Church, ar eniuryous and do vvrong to the maiestie of Christe and also to the libertie of the Church. As many as do this vtterly perteyne vnto the Kingdome of Antechriste, which occupienge the place of Christ in the Church and chalenging all his aucthorytie not onely for this cause that he is contrarie to Christe but also for that he thrust him selfe into the Church in stde of Christe is iustly called Antechrist thatis the aduersarie and also the vy∣car of Christ for euen as he is called Antistrate∣gos not only that is against the chefe Capitaine but he also that thrust him selfe by vsurpation vnto the souldiers to be theyr chefe Capitayne and braggeth of his office. Rodolphus vpon the 22. Chapiter of Marke. THere is no strōger or greater hynderaunce vnto saluatiō,No greater hinderaunc to saluacion to faith thē the counter∣fit aucthori tic of false Prelates. and to fayth, then is the coun∣terfait aucthoritie of false Prelates, confirmed by
the prescriptiō of long time, for by the reuerence that men haue vnto them hit is brought to passe, that men dare not depart from them,Loug tunc is the main∣tainer of errors the word is the wraer of them. euen for the errors that all men spie in them, because that the commune people dothe knowe, that so ma∣nye hundred Years, emongest all men, of euery order and place, haue had them in such honor, and so greatlie regarded. A litle after in the same Chapter. THe Papistes do saye that they are not rashlie to be prouoked to angre whych are defen∣ded by the publique aucthoritie of Kynges,Such as are made defen∣dors of the publicke health of the Chirch must not fcare kinges whose angre to styrre vp against any man is very ieopardous, but I answere that such men ought not to be afrayde of any perels whom God hath appoincted for to be Kepers and Defenders of the publique health or saluation. And we do knowe that the false Prophetes haue euer had thys good Lucke, that they haue had Kynges and Princes to be theyr Defedors and prote∣ctors. And yet for all that, neyther the Prophetes, nor the Apostles gaue any place vnto them,False Pro∣phetes are euer defen∣ded trevv Prophetes but syldom. be∣cause the commandement of God droue them vnto this, that they shold with ieopardye of their lyues stoughtly both wythstand them, and theyr Patrones, or Defendors. And these wordes of God which he spake vnto Ieremie are well kno∣wne. Be not thow afrayd when thou seest them, least I destroy the, whylest they loke vpon thee, for behold, I make this day, a well defended cy∣tie, a Pyller of yron, and a brasen wall, againste the Kynges of Iuda, against the Princes and the
Priestes of the same: Therefore there is no cause whye they that are gods officers shold feare the tyrnnnie of the world. The same Rodolphus a little a feer in the same chapter. CAuete a Scribis inquit. Beware saith he of the Scribis in dede it is but A short sentence, but such a one as many men doubtles thought vntollerable. For he speaketh of them, which for the space of many hundred yeres occupied the chiefe place in the Church. To whom God, had committed his lawe and the key of knowledge (as it is sayde in another place which also sitting in the preachinge Stoole of Moyses, gloried much, that they did succede the old Priestes and Prophetes,The people must depart and not ac∣knowledge the Phare∣ses for Pa∣stors. and occupied their places, yet for all that Christ moueth his Disciples, that they shold beware of them, that is to say, that they sholde not knovvledge them to be their Pastors, but rather that they shold depart from them, for so Sainct Peter the Apostle someth, afterwardes to expound these wordes, when as he saieth to them of Ierusalem that axed counsell of hym separemini a genera∣tioneista praua.Leter might seme auctor of scisme. Seperate or depart your selues from this crooked and froward generation. But what other thinge was this then to make A Scis∣me or sedition vnto them,VVhen cō∣cord is eucll and Ʋhen dissentiou is good. which vntill that time semed to be knit together by A greable consent emongest them selues, but as euery concord and agrement is not good, so euery deuisiō, or dissent is not euill, and as they offende which agree to∣gether in it that is euell, so they deserue no small
praise which disturbe and breake vp such con∣corde and agrement, that they may learne to cō∣sent vnto the trueth, which before did conspire and agree together in lyes. The same Rodolphus vvritynge also vpon the same Chapiter sayeth. THe Pope calleth hom againe from banish∣ment not only the Iewish ceremonies, but also the ceremonies of the Gentiles, and he put∣teth them to death that desiar, to enioy the chri∣stian lybertie: And a little after he sayeth, Euan∣gelio omnis in religione imaginum vsus prohi∣betur, quem simul in lege & Prophetis damnari certum est. In religion all vse of Images is for∣bydden by the gospell: whose vse also is condem∣ned without all doubt, in the lawe and the Pro∣phets. The same Rodolphus vpon the first Chap. of the Apostoles Actes. THere ought nothynge to be preached,Reformērt of religion must not bring in su∣perfluous rites abo∣lished. or taught in the Church, sauynge onely such doctrine as was deliuered by the holy Ghost: for the Chirch or cōgregation is the howse of God, in the which the voyce of the good man of the howse ought onely to be heard, and all thinges ought to be ordered accordinge to his appoinct∣ment. And a little after he sayeth we do gather that the Kingdome of GOD ought to be set a broade and defended, neither vvith carnall vvea∣pons, neither by the strength of the Princes of this vvorlde.
But with the preachinge of the word wherwith the spirit of Christ, vseth for to worke strongly in meus mindes. The same Gualterus vpon the xiiij. Chap. of the Actes, if that the Apostles durst not take vpon them such aucthoritie as to go away from Christes commaundement, and to thrust new traditions vnto the Churches, doubt∣les their rashnes and presumption, can not in any wise be accused, who at this tyme, vnder their name and pretence dare so vnshamefastly do it. The same Rodolphus vpon the 2. of Sainct Marcke. THis is also to be marked,VVho are Destroyers of religion. that mans traditio∣nes can neither be ioyned, neither he made to agree with the gospell. And they that go a∣bout that purpose, do nothinge els, but by litle, endeauor to ouerthrowe all religion: for emon∣gest these there is great discord, but where as Christ is allowed, who is made vnto vs of God, the right wisedome all the wisedome of man must nedes giue place with all his traditiōs And a litle furder, he saith. As in husbandry hit is conuenient,A litle po∣pith, leauen mareth all religion. that the thornes and brambles, shalbe first plucked vp by the rootes, if thow wilt haue any sede to growe and to bringe forth fruite, so except, all thynges be taken away euen at once, it can neuer bringe forth worthie fruites. For of small remnauntes that abide behinde we shall see greate heapes of errors to springe vp, wherefore those commaun∣demētes that were giuen for the pulling downe of Altars, & breaking of Idoles in peces appeare
yet still. Which GOD wold so earnesbly to be kept, that he wold, that the very golde, which was sometime consecrated vnto Idoles, shold be cast away and be burnt. And in diuers places cer∣taine Kynges are reproued and blamed, which haue bestowed no euell or small labor, in refor∣minge of doctrine & religion because they leafte vnput downe, or not destroyed, the high places which some called Chapells, which before their times, were the Shoppes or worke howses of false worshippinge. And wold to God there were not now exāples in this oure tyme whych sufficiently teache vs how ieperdous a thynge hit is that there do remaine som remnauntes of instrumentes of olde supersticion, for they fetch from hence occasion to sinne, whych vnder pre∣tence of the gospell seke theyr owne prosit.Keapinge of olde rites maketh Bo∣ner and the wicked hope will. Fur∣thermore there is giuen hope to men, that are supersticious that theyr supersticion shalbe re∣stored agayne. Which wyth stand the reforma∣tion of the Church. Therefore, all Ministers and Magistrates ought diligently to take heede, and marke this sentence of Chryst, that wee go not about to sewe the newe or raw cloth of the gospell to supersticions, whyche in dede are an olde and a rent garment, but let vs vse great di∣ligencie and vnceaseable zeale to ouerthrowe them. The same Cualterus vvrytynge vpon the 7. chap. of the Actes of the Apostles. THe primitiue church, as we see here, had her diseases, neyther are they lyght trespaf∣fes
neyther small faultes, which are here reher∣sed, but horrible faultes, they put difference be∣twene Nation and Natiō, they are diuided with factions, they occupie contention and that not preuely, they bewray the bytternes of theyr min∣des most wyckedly by theyr murmuryng. There∣fore we see that the primatiue Church was in∣fected wyth that synne, for the which many thowsandes vnder Moyses were ouerthrowne in the Wyldernes. The same Gualterus vpon the first chap. of the Actes of the Apostles. THerefore it is an vngodly, and a tirannicall rashnes of them, whych, thinke that they may make newe Articles of the fayth, and to thrust into the Church traditiōs by the aduise of mans reason. ¶ FINIS.
