11932 99856756 22380
THE Knowledge of Thinges vnknowne. Apperteyning to Astronomy, wyth necessary Rules, and certayne Speares contayned in the same. Compyled by Godfridus super palladium de agricultura Anglicatum. ¶ Imprinted at London, in Fleetestreete, beneath the Conduite, at the Signe of S Iohn Euangelist, by H. Iackson. 1585.
Ptholomeus. ¶ This is vnknown to many men, though they be knowne to some men.
¶ Here beginneth the Booke of Knowledge. ¶ Sunday. IF the Natiuitye of oure Lord come on a Sunday winter shall be good, Ver shalbe windy, sweete and hoate, Vintage shall be good, Oxen waxeth, shepe shalbe mul∣tiplied, Hony and milke, and all goods shalbe plenteous. Olde men and wo∣men shall dye, peace and accord shalbe in the land. Also the Sundayes of ech yeare in the hower of the day, or of night, to doe all thinges that thou wilt begin it is profitable. Who that bene born shalbe strong great and shining. Who that flieth shalbe found. ¶ Monday. If it come on the Monday, Wynter shall bee medled. Verre shall bee windye and good, Sommer all
drye or euen the contrarye, if it be ray∣ny & full of tempest, Vintage shal be in middle assise. In ech Mondaye of the same yere, in the hower of day, or of night, to doe all thinges that thou wilt begin it is good, dreames pertayneth to effecte. Who that is borne shall be strong. Who that flyeth shall soone be found, thefte done shalbe proued. He that falleth into his bed, soone shall re∣couer. ¶ Tuesday. IF it come on the Tuesday, winter shall be good. Ver shalbe wyndie, Sommer shall be good, Vintage shal he trauaylous, women shall dye, ships shall perishe on Seas. In each Tues∣day of the same yeare, in the hower of day or of night, to doe all thinges that thou wilte begin it is good. Who that is borne shall be strong and couetous, dreames pertayneth to age. Who that flyeth shall soone be found, thefte than
done shalbe proued. ¶ Wednesday. IF it come on the Wednesday, wyn∣ter shall be sharpe and harde. Ver shall be wyndye and euell, Sommer shall be good. Vintage shall be good and traueilous, good witte thou shalte fynde, yong men shall dye, honey shall not be earnde, Berers shal trauayle, Shipmen shall trauaile in eche yeare. In eche Wednesday of eche yeare, to doe all thinges that thou wilte begin it is good. ¶ Thursday. IF it come on the Thursday, Wynter shall bee good. Verre shall bee wyndye, Sommer good, Vintage good and plenty shall bee Kinges and Princes perameter shall dye. And in each Thursdaye of eche yeare, to doe all thinges that thou wilte be∣gin is good. Who that bene boane
shallbe of fayre speech and worshipful. Who flyeth shal soone be found, thefte done by a wench shall be proued. Who that falleth in his bed rather other lat∣ter ofte was wont to recouer. ¶ Fryday. IF it come on the Fryday winter shal∣be merueilous. Ver windy and good, Sommer good and drye, Vintage plenteous, there shall be dolour of the ayre, Sheepe, and Been shall perishe. Otes shall be deare. In ech Fryday of ech yeare, to doe all thinges that thou wilte begin, it is good. Who that bene borne shall be profytable and Lechrous. Who that flyeth shall soone be found, thefte done by a Childe shalbe proued. ¶ Saturday. IF it come on the Saturdaye, Wyn∣ter shall be dyrke, Snowe shall bee
great, fruite shall be plenteous, Ver shall be wyndye, Sommer euel. Vin∣tage euill by places, Otes shalbe dere, men shall waxe sicke, and beene shall dye. In no Saterdaye of that same yeare, whether it be in the hower of day or night, to begin euery thing vn∣neath it shall be good, but if the course of the moone bring it thereto, thefte done shall be founde, hee that flyeth shall turne againe to his owne, they that is sicke shall long wayle, and vn∣neath they shall escape, that they ne should dye. ¶ Here followeth of the byrth of Children. ON the Sondaye, who that is borne, hee shall bee greate and shyning. Who that is borne on the Monday, to begin all
thinges he shalbe good, who that is borne on the Tuesday, he shall be co∣uetous, and he shall perish wyth yron, and vnneath he shall come to the laste age, to begin all thinges he shall bee good. He that is borne on the Wed∣nesday, he shall lightly learne wordes. He that is borne on the Thursdaye, he shalbe stable and worshipfull, and to begin all thinges is good. He that is borne on the Frydaye, hee shall be of long lyfe and lecherous, and to begin all thinges it is good. He that is borne on the Satur∣day, he shal seldom be pro∣fitable, but if the course of the moone bring it thereto.
¶ Here beginneth the nature and dis∣position of the dayes of the moone, with the birth of Children. The first day. IN the fyrst daye of the Moone, Adam was made to doe all thinges it is profytable, & what euer thou wilt to doe good, and that thou se∣est in thy sleepe, shall be well and shall be turned into ioye. If thou seemeste to be ouercommen, neuer the latter, thou shalte ouercome. A chylde that is borne shall soone waxe, and bee of long lyfe, and ritche. He that falleth sycke shall long wayle, and hee shall suffer a long sycknesse, it is good to let a little blood.
The seconde day. JN the second day of the moone. Eue was made, to do an erand it is good and to doe all thinges it is profitable, to buy and to sel, and to flye into a ship to make away, to sowe seedes, thefte done shal soone be found. Whatsoeuer thou shalt see in sleepe, soone effecte it shal haue, whether it be good or euel, to let blood it is good. A childe that is borne soone shall waxe, and he shall be a lecherour or a strumper. ¶ The iii. day. IN the third day of the Moone, Cayn was borne, of all thinges that should be done, it behooueth thee to abstayne, but only that thou wilt not that it wax agayne, it is good to drawe up rootes in the yard, and in the field, theft done shall soone be found, whatsoeuer thou seest in sleepe it is nought, who that is borne menlyche shal waxe, but he shall
dye yong. A sick man that faleth in his bed shal trauayle, and he shall not es∣cape, to let blood it is good. ¶ The iiii. day. IN the fourth day of the moone Abel was borne. hatsoeuer thou doste is good in eche trauayle. The dreames that thou seest hath effect, hope in God & counsayle good. A child that is born he shalbee a good creature, and much he shalbe praysed. A man that falleth sicke, eyther soone shall be healed, or soone shal dye, it is good to let blood. ¶ The .v. day. IN the fyfte daye of the Moone, doe nothing of errandene of worke, to make sacramente, it is not good. Who that flyeth, bounde or dead he shal be shewed, the dreame that thou shalte see, shall be well. After that thou hath seene, it shall be. Be∣ware
ware that thou leese no counsayle. A chylde that is borne shall dye yong. He that falleth in his bed soone shall dye, to let blood it is good. ¶ The .vi. day. IN the vi. day of the Moone, to send children to schole it  good, and to vse hunting, the dreames ye thou shalte see, shall not hap in good, but beware that thou say naught to any man. Thy counsayle doe not discouer. A chylde borne shal be of long lyfe and syckly. A sycke man vnneath shall escape, to let blood it is good. ¶ The vii. day. IN the vii. day of the Moone, A bell was slayne. He that falleth sicke shal dye, he that is borne shal be of long life and good to lette blood, and to take drinke it is good. A dreame that thou seest, long after shall be. Who that fly∣eth shal soone be found, and theft also.
To buy sooyne, to tame beastes, to clip heires, and to take all manner of no∣rishing, it is good. A sicke man if he be medicined shall be healed. ¶ The viii. day. AND in the viii. day of the Moone, whatsoeuer thou wilt doe is good, all thinges that thou wilt treate, to go in counsayle, to buy Manciples, and beastes, foldes of sheepe into an other place, to change it is good, to set foun∣damentes, to so we seedes, to go in a way. A childe that is borne shalbe sick, but in al dayes he shalbe a purchasour, and he shall dye yong. A dreame shall be certaine, and soone shall bee. If thou seest sorry thinges, turne then to the east, he that waxeth sick shall lyue, thefte shalbe found, to let blood it be∣houeth in the middest of the day. ¶ The ix. day.
ANd in the ninth day of the Moone Lameth was borne, to doe all thinges it is profytable, what thing thou wilt enter to make, it is good, and shall profyte. A dreame that thou seest shall come in the daye following, or in the seconde day, and thou shalte see a sygne in the East, and that shall apere in slepe openly, within xi. dayes shall come, a child borne in all thinges, shalbe a purchasour and good, & long of life. A sicke man shall waile much, & arise. Who shalbe chased shall not bee found, & who that is oppressed shalbee comforted, presume thou not to let blood. ¶ The x. day. ANd in the tenth daye of the Moone was borne the Patriarke Noe. Whatsoeuer thou wilte doe, shall per∣tayne to lighte, Dreames be in dayne, and within iiii. dayes shall come wyth out perrill, a childe that is borne shall
enuyron many countries, and he shall dye olde, whatsoeuer be loste shall bee hyde, who that is bounde shal be vn∣bounde. Who that flyeth after, shalbee found: Who that falleth in trauayle, without perrill shalbe deliuered, who that falleth into his bed, he shall long abide, to let blood it is good. ¶ The xi. day. AND in the xi. day of the Moone, Sem was borne, it is good to begin workes, to go out to seeke, to make wedding. A dreame wyth∣in .iiii. dayes shall be fulfylled wyth out perrils, and such it shall appeare after that thou seest. A chylde that is borne shall bee of long lyfe, and re∣ligious, and loueable, he shall haue a sygne in the forehead, or in the mouth, or in the eye, and in latter age he shalbe made better. A wenche shall haue a
sygne that shee shall bee learned wyth wisdome, to goe into a way, it is good and to chaunge foldes of sheepe from place to place, he that is syck, and he be long sycke, he shalbe healed, ech day to let blood it is good. ¶ The xii. day. AND in the xii. day of the Moone, was borne Canaan the sonne of Cham, nothing thou shalte begin, for it is a greenous daye, a dreame shall be certayne, to ioye to thee after that thou seest within ix. dayes, it shall be fulfylled. To wed and to doe er∣rands it is profytable, that is lost shall be found. A child that is borne shalbe of long lyfe, angry, and honest, a sicke man shallbe greeued and aryse, who that is taken shalbe lefte, thefte soone shall be found, to let blood at euen it is good.
The xiii. day. ANd in the thirteene daye of the Moone, Noe planted Vynes, and in eache daye Vynes beene made, to plante Vines it is good, after that thou seest, thy dreame shalbe, and with in foure dayes, it shall come to glad∣nesse, but take heede to Psalmes, and to Drysons. A chylde borne in aduer∣sitie shalbe let, he shall bee angry, and he shall not be long of lyfe. Who that is bound shall be loosed, that is loste shall be found. Who that waxeth sicke long time shall trauayle, and vnneath shalbe saued but dye. To wed a wyfe, it is good. It is good eche daye to let blood. The xiiii. day. THe xiiii. daye of the Moone, is a good daye and a glade. Noe bles∣sed all thinges that shalbe done, what soeuer thou wilte doe, and shall come to thee to heale. A dreame within sixe
dayes shall be, to make wedding it is good, and to goe in the waye. Axe of thy friend, or thine enemye, and it shall be done to thee. A chylde that is borne, shall be a traytour, the sicke man shall be chaunged and ryse, and shalbe hea∣led by medicine, to let blood it is good. ¶ The xv. day. ANd in the xv. daye of the Moone, Tongues were deuided, doe no worke, begin no erand, for it is a gree∣uous day. A sicke man shall long tra∣uayle, but hee shall escape. A dreame that thou seest nothing shall noy, but soone shall come. A chylde borne shall dye yong, that is lost shall be founde, to let blood it is good. ¶ The xvi. day. ANd in the xvi. daye of the Moone Pythagoras was borne, the au¦thour of Phylosophers, to buy and t
sell it is good, to tame Oxen and o∣ther Beastes. A dreame is not good after long time it shall come, and it shalbe harmefull, to take a wife and to make wedding it is good, foldes of sheepe from place to place to chaunge it is good. A chyld that is borne shalbe of long lyfe, but he shalbe poore, for∣sworne and accused. A sicke man if he chaunge his place, he shall liue, to let blood it is good. The xvii. day. IN the xvii. daye of the Moone, it is euill to doe an erand, a dreame that thou seest, after long time shalbe, or within xxx. dayes. A Childe that is borne shalbe sely, he that is sick shalbe much greeued and aryse, that is loste, shalbe found, to send children to schole, to be wedded, and to make medicine, and to take it, is good, but not to lette blood. The xviii. day.
AND in the xviii. daye of the Moone, is good for all thinges to be done, namely to begyn houses. And to set children to schoole, dreames are good, and shalbe done wythin xx. dayes. Who that sicknesse hath, shall soone rise or long be sicke, and then re∣couer, thefte then done shall bee found. A knaue childe then borne shall be vn∣ouercome and eloquente, prowde vn∣peaceable, & not long lyfe. A maid child than borne, shalbe chaste, laborous, senyaunte, and better in her hynder age, they shall both be marked aboue the knees, not so hardye thou to lette blood this day. The xix. day. IN the xix. daye of the Moone, is not full good, ne full euill, dreames shall come within xx. dayes, who that hath sicknesse shall soone ryse, if bee take medicine, thefte than done, shall
not be founde: A knaue chylde then borne, shalbe true, benynge, fleight, wyse, euer waxe better and better in great worshippe, and haue a marke in the brow. A mayde chylde then borne, shalbe right sicke: saue not payde of one man, that day is good to bleede. The .xx. day. AND in the Twentye Daye of the Moone, Isaack blessed hys Sonne, what euer thou wilte do is good, a dreame that thou seest shall appeare, but say it to no man, to make wedding is good, to buy a manciple, it is good, to builde houses it is good, to change foldes of sheeepe from place to place, it is good, and to tame beasts and to so we seedes. A chylde that is borne, shalbe a fyghter and hee shall haue many aryuynges, that is loste shalbe founde, to chaunge beene it is good. A sycke man shall long wayle
or soone aryse, to let blood on euen it is good. The .xxi. day. ANd in the xxi. daye of the Moone, Saule was borne, fyrst King of the Iewes, a dreame is true, and to ioye shal pertaine within iiii. dayes. A child that is borne shall fynde much euill, he shalbe a theefe, and witty, he shall be a traytor, and traueilous, Esau toke the residue blessing of his father, it is good to heale swyne, and other beastes, it behoueth to abstaine from gamyng thinges, to goe in the way it is good. A sicke man shalbe sick and aryse, thefte shalbe found, let no blood neyther day nor night. The xxii. day. IN the xxii. daye of the Moone Io∣seph was borne, it is a daye of ho∣lynesse, if thou doest any errand, thou shalt fynd it greeuous, dreames shalbe
certayne and shall come to ioy. A child borne in all days, shalbe a purchasour, merry, faire, religious, and leperous. A sicke man both late is confyrmed, and healed. Beene to chaunge from place to place it is good. A sick man shall be sicke and be healed, to let blood all day is good. The xxiii. day. IN the xxiii. day of the Moone, Ben∣iamin was borne, Sonne of the right syde, the laste sonne of the Pa∣triarke Noe. What euer thou wilte do is good. A dreame that thou seest, shall turne to ioy, and nothinge shall noye, and other while it was wonte to fall within eyghte dayes. To take a wyfe it is good, to make wed∣dinges, to set foundamentes, to o∣pen newe earth, to tame Beastes, it is good. A chylde borne, shall be out∣cast, and many lettinges, hee shall
make, and in synnes he shall dye. A sicke man shall be sicke, and arise, it is good to let blood. The xxiiii. day. IN the xxiiii. daye of the Moone Go∣lyas was borne, a dreame that thou seest signifyeth thy heale, and nothing shall noye, a childe borne shall be com∣pendious, and shall doe wonderfull thinges. A sicke man shall languishe and be healed, to let blood before the thirde hower it is good. The xxv. day. In the xxv. daye of the Moone, our Lorde sente sygnes into Egipte by Moyses, and in eche day he passed the red sea, he that maketh sacramente, shall dye in a perrillous death, beware dread to come, the dreame signifyeth harde things, and within x. dayes it was wonte to come. Early then bowe thine heade into the Easte. A chylde
borne shalbe an euill man, many per∣rilles he shall suffer. A sycke man shall sustaine iniurye, and vnneath shall es∣cape, it is good to let blood. The xxvi. day. IN the xxvi. day of the Moone Moy∣ses dryed the red Sea. In the daye Ionathas the sonne of Saule was borne, & dead is Saule wyth his sons, thou shalte begin nothing, the dreame shalbe certayne, and shalbe turned in∣to ioye, to men Pilgrimes it pertay∣neth to beware of spyes, of thyne en∣nemies. A chylde borne shall be full loueable, but neyther ritche nor pore. A sycke man shall trauayle and aryse, it he haue the Dropsye, he shall dye, to let blood a little it is needefull. The xxvii. day. IN the xxvii. Daye of the Moone, oure Lorde rayned Manna, to
the children of Israel, what euer thou wilte do is good, be busy, for a dreame that thou seest was wont to come, ey∣ther to good or euill. A chylde borne shalbe of long lyfe, and moste loued. and menelyche straunge, neither riche nor pore. A sycke man shall rise to life, he shall be holden in much langoure, but he shall be healed, foldes of sheepe frō place to place to change it is good, to let blood on euen is good. The xxviii. day. ANd in the xxviii. day of the Moone the dayes be fighting Tabernacles bene fixed in Desarte, what euer thou wilte doe is good: a dreame that thou seest shall turne into ioy, and shal come welfullich. A child borne shalbe muche loued, he shalbe holded in sicknesse, a sicke man that fasteth in infyrmitye, soone shall be saued, to let blood in the euening it accordeth.
The xxix. day. ANd in the xxix. day of the Moone, the Iewes went into the lande of beheast. Herode the King cutte of the childrens heades, begin nothing, the dreame shalbe certaine, and good glad¦nesse and ioy it signifyeth, an errande begon, it is good to fullfyll, to take a wyfe it is good, but nilte thou not to make dowers, ne wryte Testa∣mentes. A childe borne shalbe of long lyfe, wyse, and holy, and meke, to fish, and hunt it is good, a sicke man shall not greeuously be sicke, but scape, it is good to let blood. The xxx. day. ANd in the xxx. Day of the Moone, Samuell the Prophete, was borne, whatsoeuer thou wilte doe is good, a dreame that appeareth to thee certayne, and within ii. dayes
thou shalte see, and thou shalte fynde a red sygne in the East, within ix. dayes. A chylde borne shalbe of long lyfe and profytable, and well measured in eche thing. A syck man shal nigh come to deth, in no ma¦ner let no blud. These and many other pertaineth to men after as the course of the moone fo∣loweth. ¶ Here endeth the nature and dispo∣sition of the dayes of the Moone wyth the byrth of Chyl∣dren. And here follo∣weth of Saturne and what Sa∣turne is.
SAturne, what is Saturne, he is the fyrste Planet and the wickeddeste, and he vnbeginneth the Zodyacke but once in thyrtye yeares, than fol∣loweth it forth in the Zodyacke by xii. sygnes, that Saturne reigneth in eche sygnes ii. yeares & a halfe, in .vi. sygnes he raigneth xv. yeares. And in all the xii. sygnes he reigneth euen xxx. yeares, and right as there are twelue sygnes in the Zodyacke, so are there twelue monthes in the yeare, eache sygne to his month. Wherfore beware before, and make purueyaunce there∣fore, and looke when Saturne reig∣neth in the iii. winter sygnes, that is to say, Capricorne, Aquarie, and Pisces, and so long those vii. yeares and halfe a yeare, shalbe scarsenes and dearth of corne, fruite, Beastes, and all other thinges, for in the .iii. yeares signes he hath might and most power to fulfyll his malice if he be not letted by neigh∣bourhood of any good planet.
¶ What the Thunder signifyeth in e∣uery yeare. THunder in Ianuary syg∣nyfyeth the same yeare, great wyndes, plentye of corne, and battaile perad∣uenture also. Thunder in February, sygnifyeth that same yeare many men, namely rich men, shall dye in great sicknesse. Thunder in March signifyeth that same yeare great win∣des, plentye of cornes, and debate a∣mongest people. Thunder in Aprill, signifyeth that same yeare to be fruit∣full, and merry, and also death of wic∣ked men. Thunder in Maye, sygnify∣eth that yeare, neede, scarcenesse, and dearth of cornes, and greate hunger. Thunder in Iune, signifieth that same yeare, that woodes shalbe ouercasten with windes, and great raging shall be of Lyons, and Wolues, and so lyke
of other harmefull Beastes. Thunder in Iuly, signifyeth that same yeare shalbe good corne, and fruites of Bea∣stes, that is to say, their strength shall perishe. Thunder in August, signify∣eth the same yeare, sorrowe, wayling of many, and of most hote thinges, and also many shall bee sicke. Thunder in September, signifieth that same yere great wynd, copye of corne, that is to say plenteous, and occasyon of folke, that is to say, much falling. Thunder in October signifyeth the same yeare, great winde and scantnesse of cornes, of fruites, and trees. Thunder in No∣uember, signifyeth that same yeare, to be fruitefull, and merry, and cheape corne. Thunder in December signify∣eth that same yeare, cheape corne, and of wheate, peace and accord among the people.
¶ This Chapter following declareth what are the euill dayes, and for∣bodd en in the yeare. And also which be the best bleeding dayes in the yeare. WYt thou well that in euery month be two euill dayes, one in wax∣ing of the Moone, and another in the wanynge. The Kalenders she∣weth them, and their howers o∣penly ynough, in the whiche dayes, if anye folke take sickenesse, or be∣ginne anye newe thinge, it is great grace if euer it fare well, or come to good ende. Also there are fyftye Ca∣niculer dayes, that is to saye, for the xv. Kalend. of August, to the Nonas of September, in the whiche dayes it is forbidden by Astronomye to all ma∣ner of folkes, that they let them no blood, ne take no drinkes, & also good
it is to abstaine then from women, and they shold great leches know and keepe, and teache to other men. For whye all that time reygneth a starre, that is called Caniculacanis in latten, a hound in English, nowe of this fore∣said star Canicula, the foresaide fyftye daies, are called Caniculer dayes, that is to say hore dayes, and byting as a Bytch, for the kinde of the star Cany∣cula, is boyling and brenning as fyre, and biting as a bytch whelp, that time the heate of the sunne, and of the star, is so dowlcet and violent, that mens bodyes at midnight, sweates as at midday, and swelleth lightly, bloweth and brenneth, and if they then be hurt then be they more sicke, then at anye other time, and right neerer dead. In those dayes all venemous Serpentes creepeth, flyeth, and gendreth, & so they ouerset hugely the ayre, in seeding of their kind, so that many men are dead
thereby, there agayne all the so er, namely those dayes, a fyre is good, nighte and daye, and holesome. And seethe such meates, and take heeds of great violent meates. Also from the xviii. Kalend of Octo∣ber, to the xvii. Kalend of Nouember, looke thou take no colde, for then the powers of man, of earth, & of althings else setten. And they maye not  agayne till the evill Kalend. of a plil, wherefore such thinges as thou takest within the powers, thaffection ye shalt with hold till they open, truly it should lesse harme thee to take cold at Christ∣mas than then. ¶ To knowe how a man shall keepe himselfe in health. IF thou wilte keepe thee long in helth then holde this rule, that is to saye, flye anger, wrath, and enuie, & gyue
thee to mirth in measure, trauaile sad∣lye, so that thou sweate not to muche in the Sommer, and namely the Ca∣niculer dayes, flye al manner of strong drinkes, and hote spices, brenning meates namely to haue them vsandly. Faste not to long at morue. Suppe not to late at nighte, eate not haste∣lye, nor eate but little at once, and that that thou eatest, chew it well, euerye time that thou eatest, rest a little rather after, fleepe not thou vnder meale, namely but of these iiii. months. That is to say, Maye, Iune, Iuly, and Au∣gust. And yet the lesse that thou stepest then the better it is: to sleepe well in the waxing of the night, and be earlye up in the morning, tymelyer the bet∣ter. And, euerye daye beware of wic∣ked mystes, that none enter in thee asting, for thereof commeth great pe∣tilences & great heate. And in greate old and in pestilences eate much gar∣lycke
euerye day .ix. Safforne chyues, it will doe thee much good. Eate yn∣nough in winter, eate ynough in Ver, but eate but little in Sommer, looke thy meate be well seasoned in Haruest beware of fruites, for they are not good, if it be giuen thee for medicine, of all manner of meates, sodden is the best, eate not to many hote spices, nor eate but little at once, for better it were to eate .vii. times on the day, then once thy fyll, fleshe is more nourishinge then fyshe, eate not to muche sowre meates nor salte, for they will make thy bones sore: looke thy drinke be not to newe, ne to olde, sweete pow∣dred meates be moste holesome. Of al thinges take measure, and no more, for in measure restes Vertue. And that Sayntes did holde them to.
¶ To knowe what perrillous dayes, come in the chaunge of euery Moone. IN the chaunge of euerye Moone be ii. dayes in the which, what thing soeuer is begon, late or neuer, it shall come to good ende, and the dayes be full perillous for ma∣ny thinges. In Ianuary, when the Moone is iii. or iiii. In February .v. or .vii. In March .vi. or .vii. In Aprill .v. or .viii. In May viii. or. ix, In Iune .v. or .xv. In Iuly iii. or .xiii. In August .viii. or .xiii. In September .viii. or .xiii. In October .v. or .xii.
In Nouember .v. or .ix. In December .iii. or .xiii. Astronomers sayeth, that vi. dayes in the yeare are perilous of death. And therfore they forbid men to be let blood on them, or take any drinkes. That is to saye. The thirde daye of the Moneth of Ianuary. The fyrste daye of the Moneth of Iuly. The seconde daye of the Moneth of October. The last daye of the Moneth of A∣prill. The first day of August. The laste daye going oute of De∣cember. ¶ These vi. dayes wyth greate dilly∣gence oughte to be kepte, but namely the latter iii. for all the vaynes are then full. For then whether man or beaste be knit in then, wythin vii.
dayes, or certaynly wythin xiiii. dayes they shall dye, And if they take anye drinkes wythin xv. dayes, they shall dye. And if they eate any goose in these iii. dayes wythin xl. dayes they shall dye. And if any chylde be borne, in these iii. atter dayes, they shall dye a wirked death. ¶ Astronomers, and Astrologyers, sayeth, that in the beginning of Mar∣che the vii. night d the xiiii. daye, lette thee blood of the right arme. And in the beginning of Aprill, the xi. daye, on the lefte arme. And in the end of May iii. or v. day, on whether arme thou wilte. And thus of all that yeare, thou shalte sykerly be warish from the Fe∣uers, and from the falling gowte, and from the fyster gowte, and from losse of thy sight. Bial magest in sente loqui of Ptholomei. Eche mans body is ruled by a certaine signe of the Zodyack.
Wherefore as sayeth Ptholomens in the place of bone. If thou be sycke in any limbe, doe no medicine vnto that lymbe, when the Moone is in the sygne of that lymbe, for it shall rather hynder, then fourther. And namely flee blood letting, at that time of those lymbes. Thus shalte thou knowe whiche sygnes reigneth in whiche lymbes. The Bull reigneth in the neck and in the throate ouer all. The Gemuse reigneth in the shoul∣ders, armes, and haudes. The Creues or Lobster, reigneth in the breast stomacke, and limbes, arte∣ries, the mylte, heart, lyuer, and gall, and those iii. be the signes of Ver. The Lyon reigneth in the backe, syde, bones, sinewes, and gristles. The Mayde reigneth in the wombe Myddryfe, and Guttes. And also she reygneth, other whyle in the sto∣macke,
lyner, gall, and mylte, and other nutise limbes, beneath the mid∣drife. And the Crab in the hearte, lunges, and arteries, and other smale lymbes, about the middryfe, and those three signes are in Sommer. The Ballaunce reigneth in the na∣uill, and in the reignes, and the lower partes of the wombe. The Scorpyon reigneth in the blad∣der, in the arse, and in other preuy har∣nes, and in the maryes. The Sagittaries eneth in the thyes, and buttockes▪ and these three are signes of haruest. The Caprycorne reygneth in the knees. The Aquarie reygneth in the legges and ancles. The Fyshe reygneth in the Feete, and those three be the sygues of wyn∣ter.
¶ Saturne, Iupster, Mars, Soll, Venus, Mey, and Lund. ¶ Saturnus is cause of deth, dearth, and place. ¶ Iupster is muse of long peace, rest, and vertuous liuing. ¶ Mars is cause of yns debate, and warre ¶ Soll is cause of lyfe health, and waring. ¶ Venus is cause of lusty loue, and Lechery. ¶ Mercury is caise of much speeche, Marchan eightes. ¶ Luna is cause of moystones greate waters and vyolent floudes. Saturne hower is good and strong to doe all thinges that asketh strength onely, and to noughte else saue to bat∣tayle, for it is wonderous euill, that man or woman, that hath that starre Saturne to hys plannet, he is melan∣colyous, black, and goeth swiftelye, he
hath a voyde heart, wicked and bitter as wormewoode, he will lightlye be wroth, he is ianous, witty, couetous and yrerons, he eateth hastely and is false, and most what louing to lye, and hath shining eyen as a Ent, he hath in the forehead a marke or a wounde, of fyre, he is poore, and his cloathes are rent vnto a tyme, and thus he hath o∣pen sygnes and all his couetous is by other mens possessions, and not by bys owne. Iupiter hower is good in all thin∣ges, namely to peace, loue and ac∣corde. Who that hath thys starre to hys Planet, he is sang, rud∣dye, and goeth a large pace, neyther to swifte, nor to softe, his stature is seemely, and shyninge hes hath a fayre vysage, louelye semblaunce, fayre lyppes, fayre heares, and a shi∣ning broade face, fayre bvies, hys cloathes are good and stronge,
he is sweete, peaceable, and softe. Mars hower is euill, and not full euill, it is better by night then by daye. For it is Masculyne on the night, and Femynine on the daye. It is good to doe anye thing, but wyth greate strength, by nighte it is good to en∣ter battayle, and also by daye, but not so much good as by nighte. Who that hath this starre to hys Planet, hys making is of good defence, and often tymes his face is red with blood, hys face is small and sotell, and laugh∣inge, and he hath eyen as a Catte. And all the dayes of hys lyfe, he wyll accuse many men of euill, hee hath a wounde of a sworde in his face, he is moste Colericke. And thus he hath o∣pen signes. ¶ Soll hower is worste of all other howres, no man in this hower maye do his will saue Kynges, and Lordes, and that wyth greate strength. Who
that in this hower entreth battayle: hee shall be deade there. Who that hath this starre to his Planet. He hath sharpe eyen, greate speeche, and wic∣ked thoughtes in hys heart, he is wic∣ked and auarous, neyther whyte nor blacke, but betwixte both, hee hath a marke in the face or a wounde, and hath a wound in hys body of fyre, and he is right wicked and grudging in hys deedes. Venus hower is good in all thinges, and it is better on nyghte than on daye, euer till myddaye, at midday it is not good, for the sunne couereth it. On Sunday the ix. hower is Ve∣nus hower, sue not then to anye Lord ne potestate, for if thou doe thou shalte fynde him wrothe. Who that hath this starre to his Planet, name∣lye if he be borne by night in Venus hower, he is whyte and hath a rounde face, little foreheade, rounde beard,
he hath a myddle nose, and myddle heeres of eyen, he is laughing and len∣tigious, and he hath a marke in the face, hys making is fayre and playne, and oft tymes his nether lip is greater then the ouer. And who that is borne, vnder Venus, when she is not in full power, he hath a sharpe nose and some∣what crooked, fayre heeres, softe eyen of running water, the is a singer, he longeth much of games, and loueth them well, and his tales he sweete. Mercurious hower from the be∣gynninge to the middle, is good in all thinges, and from the middle to the ende it is harde, and it is not much better on nighte then on day, and eche tyme of the nighte and daye hee stan∣deth before the Sunne or behynde, therefore hee hath hys power muche more by nighte then by daye, from morne to the fyfte hower of the day, he hath his power, and from thence to
the nynth, he hath no power. Who that hath this starre to hys planet, he hath a sharpe stature, and a sharpe long face, long eyen long nose, great heeres of hys eyen, and thicke, na∣rowe forehead, long bearde, thynne heere, long armes, long fyngers, long feete, long hatrell of the heade, hee is meeke and loueable, and he will doe eche thing to certayne space, hee is more whyte then blacke, and ofte tymes ryghte whyte, and hee hath greate shoulders. And who that is borne vnder Mercurious, when he is not in his full power. That is to saye. From the fyrste hower of the daye, to the nynth, he is black and dry, he hath crowded teeth, and sharpe, he hath a wound in his bo∣dy wyth fyre, he is scorged wyth wan∣des or smitten wyth a sword, and men sayeth on him an euill name, of euill tales, and of manslaughter.
The Moones hower is ryght good and righte euill from the fourth day, to the xvii. it is good, namelye to all those that are borne in it, and from the xvii. daye to the xx. daye, it is some∣what good, but not so good: & from the xx. day, to the xxvii. day it is euil, name∣ly to all those that are borne in it. Who that hath this star in his Planet and borne therevnder, when it is in full power, he hath a playne face, and pale, sometyme lentigious, and doeth his willes to men, he hath somewhat seemely semblaunce, and he is ryche, he hath meane stature, neyther to long nor to shorte, he hath strayghte lyppes, and hollowe eyen. Who that is borne vnder this starre, when it is not in full power, he hath a strayghte face and drye, and malicious, he hath little teeth, and Albugine, that is to saye. A whyte strike in the eare.
¶ The nature and conditions which is found comprehended in man. NAturally a man is hardye as the Lyon. i. Prue and worthy as the Oxe. ii. Large and liberall as the Cocke. iii. Auaricious as the Dogge. iiii. Hardy and swifte as the Harte. v. Debonayre and true as the Turtle Doue. vi. Malicious as the Leopard. vii. Pryue and tame as the Doue. viii. Dolorous and guilefull as the fox. ix. Simple and milde as the Lambe. x. Shrewde as the Ape. xi. Light as the Horse. xii. Softe and pittifull as the Beare. xiii. ¶ Deare and precyous as the Oly∣phant. xiiii. ¶ Good and holesome as the Vny∣corne. xv. Vyle and slouthfull as the Asse. xvi:
Fayre and prowd as the Pecock. xvii. Glotonous as the Wolfe. xviii. Enuyous as a Bytch. xix. Rebell and inobediente as the Nigh∣tingale. xx. Humble as the Pigyon. xxi. Fell and foolish as the Oustrich. xxii. Profytable as the Pysmyre. xxiii. Dissolute and Vacabounde, as the Goate. xxiiii. Spitefull as the Phesaunt. xxv. Softe and meeke as the Chiken. xxvi. Moueable and varying, as the Fyshe. xxvii. Lecherous as the Bore. xxviii. Stronge and puissaunte, as the Ca∣mell. xxix. Traytour as the Mule. xxx. Aduysed as the Mouse. xxxi. Reasonable as an Aungell. xxxii. And therefore he is called the little world, or else he is called all creatures, for he doth take parte of all.
¶ Here followeth the discription of the fower Elementes, and of the iii. Complections. I Doe thee to wyt that in ech man & woman reyg∣neth ech planet and euery signe of the Zodiack, and euery prime qualities, and euery Elemente, and euery complecti∣on, but not in euery lyke, for in some men reigneth one more, and in some reigneth another, and therefore men be of dyuers manners, wherfore good it is that we see shortely the kinde of those primes qualityes, and so forth on the others. ¶ Of the foure Prime qualities and what they are.
FOure Pryme qualityes there bee. That is to saye, moystenesse, hote∣nesse, dryenesse, be two contraryes, and there∣fore the may not nigh together wyth∣out a meane, for the hotenes on the one side bindeth them together, & coldnesse on the other syde. Also hotenesse and coldenesse are two contraries, and therefore they maye not nighe toge∣ther, wythout a meane, for the moystenesse on the one syde, byndeth them together. And dryenesse on the other, moystnes is cause of euery thick substaunce, and of euery sweete taste. And there agayne drynesse is cause of euery thin substaunce, & of euery soure stinking taste. And also hotenesse is cause of enery red coulour, and large quantitye. There agayne coldenesse is cause of euery whyte coloure and little
quantitye. ¶ Combyne. That is to saye knitte these fower Pryme qualityes, alter these iiii. combinacions, that is to say, knittinges, and then they will holde iiii. Elementes, that is to saye. The Ayre moyst and hote. The Fyre hote and drye. The earth drye and colde. The Water colde and moyste. The Ayre and the Earth, are two con∣traryes, and therefore they maye not nigh together, but as Fyre byndes them on the one side betweene them. And the water on the other syde be∣tweene them. Also Fyre and Water, are two contraryes, and therefore they maye not nigh together, but as the Ayre betweene them byndes on the one syde. And the Earth be∣tweene byndeth them together, on the otherside. The Fyre is sharp, sub∣till, and moueable. The Ayre is sub∣till, moueable, and corpulent, and dull.
The Earth is corpulente and thycke. The Water is moueable, corpulente and dull. The Earthe is corpulente, dull, and vnmoueable, righte as an eggeshell, Vingose a thinskin. And that skin Vingose the whyte, and in the middeste of the yolke, is a little tender hole, righte so the fyre Vyn∣gose the Ayre, ten times more, and ten tymes. Then the Ayre Vyngose the Water ten tymes more, and ten tymes tymer then the Water, The water Vyngose the Earth ten tymes more, and ten tymes timer than the Earth. In the hearte of the Earthe is the Senter of the worlde. That is to saye, the middeste poynte. And in euery Senter is hell. And there agayne aboute the Fyre, are the star∣res, and aboute them is heauen Chri∣stalin, that is to saye, waters of all blisse, departed in ix. ordes of Aun∣gels, then is Heauen in the higheste
rownes, and largest. And there a∣gayne is Hell in the lowest, narowest, and straightest. Right as there be iiii. Elementes, so there bee fower Complections, accor∣ding in all manner qualityes, to these fower Elementes. The fyrst is Sanguine, that is to say blood, gendreth in the lyuers, lymbe, and lyke to the Ayre. The second is Choler, gendred in the Gall, and lyke thereto. And it is accor∣ding to the Fyre. The thyrde is Melancholye, gende∣red in the mylte, and lyke to the dreg∣ges of blood, and it accordeth to the Earth. The fourth is Flumes, gendered in the Lunges, lyke to galte, and it ac∣cordeth to the water. A Sanguyne man much may, and much coueyteth, for he is moyst and hote. A Chollerycke man, muche co∣ueyteth
and little maye, for he is hote and drye. A Melancholious man, little may and little coueyteth, for he is drye and colde. A Flumaticke man, little couey∣teth, and little may, for he is colde and moyst. A Sanguine man is large, louing, glade of cheare, laughinge, and rud∣dye of cloure, stedfast, fleshlye, ryghte hardye, mannerly, gentle, and well nourished. A Choloricke man is guilefull, false and wrathfull, traytoures, and right hardy, quint, small, drye, and black of coloure. A Melancholyous man, is enuy∣ous, sorry, couetous, harde, and false, holdining, guilefull, dredfull, flothfull, and cleare of colour. A Flumaticke man is slomery, sleepy, slowe, sleightfull, and muche
spetting, dull, and harde of wyt, fat vysage, and white of coloure. ¶ Of the iiii. quarters of the yeare, and of the iiii. complections, and what they are. IN the yeare bee foure quarters, ruled by these foure complections, that is to say. Ver, Sommer, Haruest, and Wynter. Ver hath iii. moneths. That is to say, March, Aprill, and Maye. And it is sanguine complection. Sommer hath also iii. monthes. That is to saye, Iune, Iuly, and August. And thys quarter is cholerick complection. Har∣uest hath also iii. monthes, that is to say, September, October, Nouem∣ber, and this quarter is Melancholius complection. Winter hath also iii.
monthes. That is to saye, December, Ianuary, and February, & thys quar∣ter is flumaticke complection. Eche day also these fower complecti∣ons reigneth, that is to say, from three after midnight, vnto ix. reigneth san∣guine, and from ix. after midnighte, to three after midday, reigneth chollo∣rick, and from iii. after middaye, to xi. after middaye reigneth Melancholy, and from ix. after midday, to iii. after midnight reigneth fleume. Also in the fower Quarters of the worlde reigneth these fower complec∣tions. That is to saye, Sanguyne in the East. Chollericke in the South. Melancholy in the West. And fleume in the North. Also the fower complections reyg∣neth in fower ages of man. That is to say. Choller in Childhode. Sanguine in manhood. Flume in age. And Me∣lancholius in old childhoode. If from
the byrth, to xiiii. yeare full done, man∣hode is from thence to xxx. yeare age. From thence to l. yeare. And olde from thence to lxxx. yeare, and so forth to death. Also these fower complections reig∣neth in fower partes of mans body. Choller reygneth in all the soulet lim∣bes, from the breast vpward. Sanguyne reigneth in all small lim∣bes. Also from the middrife to the we∣sand. And Flume reygneth in all noury∣shing limbes, also from the reynes to the middryfe. And Melancholy reygneth in all the limbes, from the reignes downe∣warde. Wherefore euery mans vrine is cast in fower, that is to saye, Corkill, Su∣perfice, Myddest, and grounde, eue∣ry partye of the vrine to hys parte of mans bodye. And therefore to fower
thinges in euery vryne wee must take heede, that is to saye, Substaunce, quantitye, Choler, and contente, three Substaunces there are: That is to say, thicke, thin, and middle. Thicke Substaunce betokeneth much moystnes. Thinne substaunce betokeneth much drynes. And myddle substaunce betokeneth temporaunce. Also iii. Quantityes bee in Vryne. That is to saye, Much, Little, and Meane. Much quantitye betokeneth greate colde. And little quantity betokeneth great heate. And meane quantitye betokeneth temperaunce. Also take heede to the taste whether it be sweete or not. Sweete taste betokeneth health.
And other taste betokeneth sycke∣nesse. Also in Vrynes be xx. coloures, of the which the fyrste ten betokeneth colde, and the other ten betokeneth heate. The x. coloures that betokeneth cold are these. The fyrst is blacke, a darke cole and commeth of lyued going before. The seconde lyke to leade, and those two betokeneth mortifycation. The thyrde is whyte as cleare wa∣ter. The fourthe is lacktike, lyke to whay. The fyfte is caropose, lyke to graye russet, or to Camels heare. Thy sixt is yelow lyke to salow leaues falling of trees, and those iiii. coloures betokeneth indigestion. The seuenth is subpale, that is to say not full pale.
The eyght is pale, lyke to some sodden fleshe. The nynth is Subsitryne, that is to say, fulsitryne. The tenth is sytryn, lyke to a pony∣siter, or to right yelow flowers. And these fower coloures betokeneth beginning of digestion. Nowe we haue seene the coloures which betokeneth colde. So we will see the other ten whiche betokeneth heate. The fyrst is Subrife, that is to say, not full ruffe. The seconde is ruffe, lyke to fyne Golde. And those two coloures betokeneth perfecte digestion. So the vryne be middle of substaunce, myddle of quan∣tity, sweete of taste, and without con∣tentes. The thyrd is subrife, that is to say ful redde.
The fourth is redde, lyke Saffron durte. The fyfte is subrugund, that is to say not full rubugund. The syxte is rubygunde, lyke a strong flame of fyre. And these fower coloures betokeneth passing of dige∣stion. The seuenth Ynopose, like to whyte wyne. the eyght is Kinanos, lyke to rotten blood. And these two betokeneth a∣dustyon. The ninth is greene, as the cole∣stocke. The tenth is blacke, as a cleare blacke horne. And thys blacke com∣meth of greene going to fore. And these two betokeneth adustion and death. In Vryne be eyghteene contentes. That is to saye, Serkell, Ampull, Graynes, Clowdes, Scume, At∣terer,
Fatnes, Humer, Blood, Gra∣uell, Heres, Scalos, Bran, Cryno∣dose, Sperme, Dust, Eskes, Sedy∣men, or Ipostas. The Serkle, sheweth all the qua∣lityes of the head. Ampull, that is to say creme, sheweth also the brayne disturbed. Graynes betoken of remne, and glutte. Clowdes sheweth vyce, of the small limbes. Scumme, that is to saye fome, she∣weth ventositye, and often the Iaun∣dyes. Atterer that is to say quiter, sheweth vyce of the reygnes. The bladder, or of the lyuer. Fatnesse as oyle droppes, sheweth wasting and dissolucion of the bodye, namely of the loynes. ¶ Humer, lyke glet, or like drestes, of blood, or rotten Gall, it sheweth
vice of the middrife, or aboue or be∣neath. Blood sheweth vice of the liuer, or of the reignes, or of the bladder. Grauell sheweth the stone. Heres sheweth the dissolution, of the fatnes of all the body, of the reignes namely. Scalos and branne, sheweth the thirde spyce of Feueretyke iniu∣rable. Sperme, that is to saye mankinde, sheweth to much lechery. Dust sheweth the gowte, or a woman conceyued. Eskes the preuye harneis to be gree∣ned. Zedymen, that is to say, clods in the grounde of the vryne, or breaking vp∣warde The Cyrkle is called Ipostas. That is to saye, the grounde, and it hath moste sygnyfycation of all
and namelye of the lower par∣tyes. Of euery mans bodye, bee fower principall lymbes, that is to saye, soulet limbes, small lymbes, and no∣rishing limbes, and gendring lym∣bes. Sowlet lymbes, be the braynes, and all that are there aboute, downe to the wesand. Small lymbes be the hearte, and the lunges, and all that be aboute them, betwixte the wesand and the middrife. Nourishing lymbes, be the ly∣uer, Mylte, Gall, and guttes, and all that be about them, betweene the Wesand and the Middryfe, and the Reygnes. Gendring lymbes, be the reygnes, bladder, preuie harneys, & the lymbes about, fro the reygnes downwarde.
¶ Also here followeth an A.B.C. Whereby thou mayest knowe of what Planet euery man is. AE. 1. I.S. 1. B.K. 2. Q.R. 2. G.L. 3. D.M. 4. C.D. 6. V. 2. L. 7. F. 8. P. 1. X. 9. ¶ Departe this by 9. vnto a hundred. And 1. or 8. be ouer, then the Sunne is hys Planet, if 2. or 9. be ouer, then Venus is hys Planet: If 3. be o∣uer, then he is of Mercury: If 4. be ouer then he is of the Moone: If 5. be ouer, then he is of Saturnus: If 6. be ouer, then hee is of Iupyter: If 7. be ouer, then hee is of Mars. ¶ Adam. 31. Andren. 12. Aldon. 25. Nufos. 12. Benaster in is. 92. Becus. 9. Dauid. 9. ¶ Also here followeth another A.B.C. to knowe by, of what sygne in the Zody∣ack euery man is, that is to say, vnder which sygne he is borne, and to whyche sygne he is moste lyke. Also here by thou mayest knowe hys fortune, and the momente in the
which he shall dye. Also here by thou maye knowe thy fortune, and infortune of manye thinges, Townes, Cities, and Castles. ¶ A2. B2. C20. D41. E5. F24. G3. H20. I10. K13, L42. M12. N22. O21. P21. Q24. R27. S22. T91. V13 X20. Y20. T7, ¶ If thou wylte knowe by thys A.B.C. anye man as it is sayde before, take hys name and hys mothers name. And also if thou wilte knowe of anye Towne, by thys A.B.C. as it is sayde before, then take that Townes name, and the name of the Cyttye of Ierusalem, for that is the mother of all Townes, and then account the letters of the names, by the number of thys A.B.C. and when thou haste all done, departe it by 28. and if 1. or 2. be ouer, then that that thou see∣kest longeth to the Weather: and if 3. or 4. or 5. be ouer, then that that thou séekest lon∣geth to the Bull, and if 6. or 7. be ouer, then longeth it to the Iemuse, and if 8. or 9. be ouer, then longeth it to the Crabe, and if 10.11. or 12. then longeth it to the Lyon, and if 13. or 14. then longeth it to the Virgine, and if 15. or 16. be ouer, then longeth it to the Ba∣lance, and if 17.18. or 19. then longeth it to the Scorpyon, and if 20. or 21. then longeth it to the Sagitarie, and if 22. or 23. then lon∣geth
it to the Caprycorne, and if 24. or 25. then longeth it to the Aquary, and if 26.27. or 28. then longeth it to the Fyshe. ¶ Another Alphabet. DEparte anye thing in 7. by the proper name of these letters: A. will tell, whiche of the 7. it is, by the ouer number de∣uided by 9. A.3. B.4. C.2. D.2. E.2. F.4. G.2. H.5. I.3. K.5. L.6. M.25. N.25. O.12. P.13. Q.15. R.8. S.13. T.2. V.23. X.98. Y.56. Z.34.
¶ To knowe the weather that shall bee all the yeare, after the chaunge of euerye Moone, by the Pryme dayes. SVndaye Pryme, drye weather. Munday Pryme, moyst weather. Tuesday Pryme, colde and wynde. Wednesday Pryme, meruaylous. Thurseday Pryme, fayre and clere. Fryday Pryme, fayre and fowle. Suturday Pryme, rayne. ¶ A Rule to knowe vppon what Letter, what hower, and what minute, as fol∣loweth.
Pryme vppon hora mynutes. A 29. 9. B 4. 5. C 13. 1 D 20. 18. E 18. 12. F 21. 4. G 13. 20. EVermore thus reigneth these feuen planets. First reigneth Saturne, then Iupiter, then Mars, then Soll, then Venus, then Mercurye, and then Luna, Saturne
is Lord on Saturday, Iupiter is lord on Thursday, Mars is Lord of Tues∣day, Soll on Sunday, Venus on Fri∣day, and Mercury of wednesday, and Luna on Munday. Saturne Iupy∣ter, Mars, Soll, & Mercury, is mas∣culine. That is to say Mankinde, Ve∣nus, and Luna, are Feminine, that is to say womankind. Saturne, Mars, and Luna, are euill Planets, Iu∣pyter, soll, and Venus, be good Planettes, and Mercury is chaun∣geable. On Saturdaye the fyrste hower after midnighte reygneth Saturne, the seconde hower Iupiter, the third hower Mars, the iiii. hower Soll, the v. hower Venus, the since hower Mercury, the vii. hower Luna. And then againe Saturne the viii. hower, and Iupiter the ix. hower, Mars the x. hower, Soll the xi. hower, Venus the xii. hower, Mercu∣rye
the xiii. hower, and Luna the xiiii. hower. Then agayne the thyrde of day time. Saturne the xv. hower, Iupyter the xvi. hower, Mars the xvii. hower, foll the xviii. hower, Venus the xix. hower, Mercury the xx. hower, and Luna the xxi. hower. And then agayne the iiii. tyme, sa∣turne the xxii. hower, Iupyter the xxiii. hower, Mars the xxiiii. hower. And then beginneth soll, in the hower after midnighte on the sun∣day, Venus the second hower, Mer∣cury the thirde hower, Luna the iiii. hower, saturne the fyfte hower. And so forth hower by hower, and Planet by Planet, in order as they stande. Eche Planet to hys owne daye, reyg∣neth euermore certaynely, the tyrste hower, the viii. hower, the xv. hower, and the xxii. hower. And so fourth euermore one after another. And nexte after that reygneth the Planet
that is nexte in order, as thus, Sa∣turne, Iupyter, Mars, Soll, Venus, Mercurius, and Luna. ¶ Of the moste best and profytablesse dayes that be in the yeare, to let blood. IN ye beginning of March that is to saye, the vi. and the tenth daye thou shalte drawe out blood of the right arme. In the beginninge of Aprill, of the lefte arme, and that in the xi. daye, for the sight. In the ende of Maye, of which arme thou wylte, and that a∣gayne the Feuer, and if thou so doest, neyther thou shalte lose thy sighte, nor thou shalte haue no Feuers, how long thou lyuest.
¶ Quot retinente vita et non mortis Imago Si semperfuerint viuens morietur et infra.   Goodhap. Mishap. Mishap.   Best. 1. 13.   Sorrowe. 2. 14. 24. 3. 16. 26. 4. 17. 23. Best. 6. 18. 27. Dearth. 11. 8. 10.   20.   ¶ Est vesper Eplaton deampulle. Philosophie. Vita. 5. 19.   Heauines. 7. 21. 28. 9. 22. 29. Vita. 12. 25. 30. Ioye. 15.       Vita. Ioye. Ioye.   Collige per numeroes aliquid cupis esse phan∣dre Iunge simullatum feriaque Diem.
A. iii. B. vi. C. xii D. xx. E. xxvi. F. xxv. G. iii. K. xv. L. xxi. M. xv. N. xxii. O. xx. P. xiiii. Q. xvi. R. iiii. S. xxix. T. xxviii. V. iiii. X. vi. Y. vi. Z. iii. Sunday. xiii. Munday. xviii. Thuesday. xv. Wednesday. xxv. Thurseday. xi. Fryday. xv. Saturday. xxvi. ¶ Thus endeth the Speare of Platon.
WHo so euer in the vii. daye of Marche letteth him blood in the righte arme, in the leuenth daye of Aprill in the left arme, he shall not lose the sight of his eyen. And in the fower or fyfte last daye of Maye, in both armes be letten blood, he shal haue no feuers. Whosoeuer in the fyrste day of each moneth falleth into anye infyrmitye, the thyrd day ensuing is to dred, which if he passe, he shall escape tyll thirtye dayes. Who so falleth in the seconde day, is to dread which if he passe, though he long be sick, he shalbe deliuered. He that falleth in the thirde daye, at nexte shalbe deliuered. He that falleth sycke in the iiii. daye, he shall bee greeuouslye to the xxviii. daye, whiche if hee passe, he shall escape.
He that falleth the fyft daye, thoughe he suffer greeuously, he shall escape. He that falleth in the sixte day, though he seeme to be healde, neuer the latter in the fyfte daye of the other moone, he shall be deade. He that falleth in the vii. daye, wyth∣out griefe he shall be delyuered. He that falleth the viii. daye, if he be not whole at the xii. daye, he shall be deade. He that falleth in the ninth daye, though it be wyth great griefe, he shal escape. He that falleth in the x. day, wythout doubt he shall be deade. He that falleth in the xi. daye, he shall be delyuered the next day. He that falleth in the xii. daye, but if he be delyuered wythin two dayes, within xv. he shall be deade. He that falleth in the xiii. daye, tyll the xviii. dayes he shall be sycke, which
if he passe, he shall escape. He that falleth in the fourteen daye he shall dwell till the xv. and so he shall escape. He that waxeth sycke the xv. daye, but if he recouer wythin xviii. dayes, he shall be dead. He that falleth in the xvi. daye, though he be greeued till xxiiii. dayes, till the xxviii. dayes he shall escape. He that falleth in the xvii. day, he shall dye the x. day. He that falleth sick in the xviii. daye, soone shall bee healed. He that falleth in the xix. daye, also shall escape. He that falleth syck in the xx. daye, in the v. daye he shall escape, but neuer∣thelesse, in the moneth following he shalbe dead. He that waxeth sycke in the xxi. day, but he runne into perrill of death within x. dayes of that other moneth,
he shall be delyuered He that waxeth sicke in the xxii. daye, but he runne into perill of death with∣in ten dayes of that other moneth, he shall be delyuered. He that falleth in the xxiii. daye, thoughe it be wyth greeuousnesse of payne, in the other moneth, he shall bee delyuered. He that falleth in the xxiiii. daye, in the xxvii. daye he shall bee delyuered, but neuerthelesse in the moneth follo∣wing he shall be dead. He that falleth sycke in the xxv. day, thoughe he suffer a little, neuerthelesse he shall escape. Hee that falleth in the xxvi. daye, thoughe he suffer to the outpassing, neuerthelesse in that other moneth, he shall be delyuered. Hee that falleth in the xxvii. daye, it manasseth death. He that falleth in the xxviii. daye,
it manasseth death. He that falleth the xxix. daye, little and little in that other month, he shall be deliuered. He that falleth sicke in the xxx. daye, it is doubte whether hee passe anye of these. Also he that waxeth sicke in the xxxi. whether hee shall escape, it is vn∣knowne. ¶ Here followeth the nature of the xii. Signes. ARies is hote and drye, nature of the fire, and gouerneth the heade & face of man, & is good for bleeding, when the Moone is in it, saue in the party that it gouerneth and ruleth Taurus is euill for bleeding. Taurus is drye and colde, nature of earth and gouerneth the necke and
the knot vnder the throate, and is euill for bleeding. ¶ Gemini is euill for bleeding. Gemini is hote and moyst, nature of the ayre, and gouerneth the shoulders, the armes, the handes, and is euill for bleeding. ¶ Cancer is indifferent for bleeding. Cancer is colde and moyst, nature of water, and gouerneth the breast, the stomacke and the milte, and is indiffe∣rent, neyther to good nor to badde for letting of blood. ¶ Leo is euill for bleeding. Leo is hote and drye, nature of fyre, and gouerneth the back and the sides, and is euill for blood letting. ¶ Virgo is indifferent for bleeding. Virgo is colde and drye, and nature of the earth, & gouerneth the wombe, and the inwarde parties, and is ney∣ther good, nor euil for bleeding, but be∣tweene both.
¶ Libra is right good for bleeding. Libra is hote and moyste, nature of the ayre, and gouerneth the nauill, the reynes, and the lowe partes of the wombe, and is very good for bleeding. ¶ Scorpio is indifferent for bleeding Scorpio is colde and moyst, nature of the water, and gouerneth the mem∣bers of man, and is neyther good nor bad for bleeding, but indifferente, be∣tweene both. ¶ Sagittarius is good for bleeding. Sagittarius is hote and drye, nature of fire, and gouerneth the thighes and is good for bleeding. ¶ Capricornus is euill for bleeding. Capricornus is colde and dry, nature of earth, and gouerneth the knees, and is euill for bleeding. ¶ Aquarius is indifferent for bleding. Aquarius is hote and moyste, nature of ayre, and gouerneth the legges and is neyther good nor euill for bleeding▪
Pisces is indifferente for bleeding. Pisces is colde & moyst nature of wa∣ter and gouerneth the feete, and is neyther good nor euill for bleeding, but indifferent. No man ought not to make incisi∣on nor touch wyth yron the members gouerned of any signe, the day that the Moone is in it, for feare of the greate effusyon of blood that mighte happen: Nor in likewise when the sunne is in it for the great daungers and perrill that might follow thereof. ¶ Here followeth the Anathomye of the bones in mans body, and the number of them, which is in all ii .C. and xlviii. IN the top of the head is a bon that couereth the brayne, the which Ptholomeus calleth ye Capitall bone. In the scull be two bo∣nes, which bene called parietalls, that
holdeth the brayne close and stedfast. And more lower in the brayne, is a bone called the crowne of the heade, and one the one syde and on the other, bene two holes wythin the whyche is the pallays or roofe bone. In the part behynde the head bene iiii. lyke bones, to the which the chayne of the necke holdeth. In the nose ben ii. bones. The bones of the chaftes aboue be xi. and of the neyther iaw ben ii. aboue the ap∣posite of the brayne, there is one be∣hynde named collaterall. The bones of the teeth be xxx. eyght, before iiii. aboue, & iiii. vnderneth, sharpe edged for to cut the morsels, and there is iiii. sharpe ii. aboue, and ii. vnderneth, and ben called conines, for they be lyke co∣nies teeth. After that bene xvi. that be as they were homers or grindinge teeth, for they chewe and grynde the meate the whiche is eaten and there is iiii. aboue on euery syde, & iiii. vnder¦neath.
And then the iiii. teeth of sapy∣ence on euery syde of the chaftes, one aboue and one vnderneath. In the chin from the head downewarde bene xxx. bones called knottes or ioyntes. In the breast before bene vii. bones, and on euerye syde xii. rybbes. By the necke betweene the head and the Shoulders, bene ii. bones named the sheres, and ben the ii. shoulder blades. From the Shoulder to the Elboe, in ech arme is a bone called the Adiutor, from the Elbow to the hande bone, e∣uery arme ben ii. bones, that ben called Cannes, in eche hand bene viii. bones, aboue the palme bene iiii. bones which bene called the Combe of the hande. The bones in the fingers in ech hande xv. in euery finger three. At the endē of the ridge ben the huckle bones, where∣to bene fastened the two bones of the thighes, in eche knee is a bone called the knee plate.
From the knee to the foote in eche leg, ben ii. bones called canes or marybo∣nes. In each foote is a bone called the ancle orpin of the foote, behynde the ancle is the heele bone in ech foote, the which is the lowest parte of a man. And aboue each foote is a bone called the hallowe bone. In the plant of ech foote bene fower bones. Then ben the combes of the feete in ech of the which ben fyue bones, the bones in the toes in each foote bene the number of xiiii. Two bones ben before the belly, for to holde it stedfast with the two bran∣ches. Two bones ben in the head be∣hind the eares, cald oculares, we reken not the tender bones of the ende of the shoulders, nor of the sydes, nor dyuers little gristles and speldres of bones for they be comprehended in the number aforesayde.
¶ Here followeth the Flubothomy, wyth the names of the vaynes, and where they rest, & how they ought to be letten blood. HEre I do you to wit, that the vayne in the middest of the foreheade would be letten blood for the ach, & payne of the heade, and for Feuers (Lytargy) and for the me∣grime in the head. About the two eares behinde is two vaynes the which be let blood to geue cleare vnderstanding, and vertue of light hering, & for thick breath, and for doubt of Meselrye or Leprye. In the temple bene two vaynes, caled the Ar∣tiers for that they beat, which ben let∣ten blood, for to diminish and take a∣way the greate replection and aboun∣daunce of blood that is in the brayne, that might noy the head and the eyen,
and it is good agaynst the gowte, the megrime, and dyuers other accidents that may come to the head. Vnder the tonge bene ii. vaynes, that ben letten blood for a sicknes caled the Sequamy, and against the swelling & apostumes of the throate, and agaynst the Equinancye, by the which a man might dye sodaynly for default of such bleeding. In the neck ben ii. vaynes caled origi∣nals, for that they haue the course and abundaunce of all the blood that go∣uerneth the body of man, and princi∣pally the head, but they ought not to be letten blood wythout the counsayle of the Phisition, and thys bleeding auai∣leth much to the sycknesse of Leprye, when it cōmeth principally of ye blood. The vayne of the hearte, taken in the arme profyteth to take away humors, or euill blood that might hurte the chā∣ber of the heart, or the aperteinance, &
is good for them that spitteth blood, & that ben shorte winded, by the which a man may dye sodaynely for defaulte of such bleeding. The vayne of the liuer taken in the arme swageth the greate heate of the body of man, and holdeth the body in health, and this bleeding is profytable, also agaynst the yelow axes, and Apo∣stume of the liuer, and agaynst the pal∣sy, whereof a man may dye for default of such bleeding. Betweene the maister finger and the leth finger to let blood, holpen the dol∣lors that commeth in the stomack, and sydes, as botches, and apostumes, and diuers other accedents that may come to these places, by great abundance of blood and humoures. In the sydes betweene the wombe and the braunch, bene two vaynes of the which that of the right syde is let∣ten blood for the dropsy, and that of the
lefte side for euery sicknes that cōmeth about the milte, and they should bleede after the persons be fat or leane, take good heede at foure fyngers nighe the insicion, and they ought not to make such bleeding, wythout the counsaile of the Phisition. In euery foote bene three vaynes, of the which three, one is vnder the ancle of the foote named sophan, the whiche is letten blood for to swage & put oute dyuers humours, as botches and apo∣stumes that cōmeth about the groines and it profiteth much to women for to cause their menstruosity to descend, & delaye the Emerodes that commeth in the secret places and other lyke. Betweene the wrestes of the foote, and the great toe is a vayne the which is letten blood for dyuers sickenesses, & inconueniences, as the pestilence that taketh a person sodaynely, by the great superabundance of humoures, & thys
bleding must be made wythin a natu∣rall daye, that is to say, wythin xxiiii. howers after that the sycknesse is ta∣ken of the pacient, and before that the Feuer come on him, and this bleeding oughte to be done after the corpolence of the pacient. In the angles of the eyen, bene two vaynes, the which bene letten blood, for the rednes of the eyen, or watry or that runneth continually, and for dy∣uers other sicknesses that may happen and come by ouer greate abundaunce of humoures and blood. In the vayne of the ende of the nose, is made a bleeding, the which is good for a red pympled face, as bene redde drops, pustuls, small scabs, and other infections of the heart, that may come therein by to great replection, and a∣bundaunce of bloud and humoures, & it auayleth much agaynst pympeled noses, and other like sicknesses.
In the mouth in the gummes ben iiii. vaynes, that is to say, two aboue and two beneth, the which ben leten blood for chaufing and canker in the mouth and for toothack. Betweene the lip and the chin is a vayne that is letten blood to geue a mendement vnto them that haue an e∣uill breath. In ech arme bene iiii. vaynes, of the which the vayne of the head is the hy∣est, the second next is from the hearte, the thyrd is of the liuer, and the fourth is from the mylte, otherwise called the low liuer vayne. The vayne of the head taken in the arme, ought to bleed for to take awaye the greate replection and aboundance of blood that may annoy the head, the eyen and the brayne, and auayleth greatly for chaungeable heates, and swelling faces and red, and for diuers other sycknesses that maye fall and
come by great abundaunce of blood. The vayne of the mylte, otherwyse called the lowe vayne, should bleed a∣gaynst feuer tercians and quartaynes, and in it ought to be made a wide and a lesse deepe wound then in any other vayne, for feare of winde, that it maye gather, and for a more incenuenience, for feare of a smowe that is vnder it, that is called the Lesard. In eche hande bene three vaynes, whereof that aboue the thombe ought to bleede, to take away the great hete of the visage, and for much thick blood and humors that ben in the head, and thys vayne delayeth more then that of the arme. Betweene the little fynger, and the leche fynger, is letting of blood that greatly auayleth agaynst all feuer ter∣tians, and quartaynes, and agaynste flumes and diuers other lettinges that commeth to the paps and the milte.
In the thigh is a vayne, of the whych bleeding auayleth agaynst doloure of the genitoures, and for to put out of mans dody humoures that bene in the graynes. The vayne that is vnder the ancle of the foote without is named Sciot, of the which bleeding is much worth agaynst the paynes of the flancks, and for to make auoyde and issue diuers humoures which would gather in the sayde place, and it auayleth greatly to women to restrayn their menstruosity when they haue to great abundance. ¶ Thus endeth the Flubothomye. BE it to vnderstande, that there be in the yeare fower Quarters, the which be named thus, Vere, Hyems, Estas, and Autumnus. These ben the fower seasons in the yeare, as Pryme tyme is the spring of the yeare, as Februarye, March, and Aprill. In
these three months euery greene thing growing, begynneth to budde and floorishe. Then commeth sommer, as Maye, Iune, and Iuly, and these three mo∣nethes euery herbe, grayne, and tree, is in his kinde, & in hys most strength, and beauty, and then the sunne is at the highest. Then commeth Autumne, as Au∣gust, September and Detober, that al these fruites waxen rype, and bene ga∣thered and housed. Then commeth nouember, Decem∣ber and Ianuarie, and these three mo∣nethes be in the winter, that time the sunne is at the lowest, and is at the tyme of little profite, as we Astrono∣mers saye, that the age of man is lxxii. yere, and that we lyken but one whole yere, for euermore we take syxe yeare for euery moneth, as Ianuary, or Fe∣bruarye, and so forth. For as the yeare
chaungeth by the xii. monthes into xii. diuers manners. So doeth man chaunge hymselfe xii. tymes in his lyfe by xii. ages, and euery vi. times vi. maketh xxxvi. And than man is at the best, and also at the high∣est, and xii. times vi. maketh lxxii. and that is the age of man. Thus must you counte and recken for euery month vi. yeare, or else it may be vnderstand by the foure quarters, and seasons of the yeare, so man is deuided into foure parts, as to youth, strength, wysedome, and age. He so to bee xviii. yeare yong, xviii. yeare strong, xviii. yeare in wisedome, and the fourth xviii. yere to goe to the ful age of lxxii.
¶ Here followeth to show howe a man chaungeth xii. times, euen as the xii. months doeth. HE must take the first vi. yeare for Ianuary, the which is of no vertue nor strēgth, in that season nothing on the earth groweth. So man after that hee is borne, till he be vi. yeare of age, is wyth little or no witte, strength, or cunning, and maye doe little or nothing that commeth to any profite. Then commeth February, and then the dayes longeth, and the sunne is more hotter, then the fyeldes begin to waxe greene. So the other vi. yere till he come to xii. the childe beginneth to grow bigger, and is apt to learne such thinges as is taught him. Then commeth the month of March, in which the labourour soweth the earth and planteth trees, and edyfieth
houses, the chylde in these vi. yeares waxeth big to learne Doctrine, and science, and to be fayre and pleasaunte and louing, for then he is xviii. yeares of age. Then commeth Aprill, that the earth and the trees is couered wyth greene Flowers. And in euery party goodes encreaseth abundauntly. Then com∣meth the younge man to gather the sweete flowers of hardinesse, but then beware that the colde wyndes, and stormes of vices beate not downe the flowers of good maners, that shoulde bring man to honoure, for then is he xxiiii. yeare of age. Then commeth Maye, that is both fayre and pleasaunte, for then Byrdes sing in woodes and Forestes, nyght and daye, the sunne shyneth hote, as then man is most lusty, mighty, and of deliuer strength, and seeketh playes, sportes, and manly pastimes, for then
is he full xxx. yeares of age. Then commeth Iune, and then is the sunne at the highest in his meridional, he may ascēd no higher in his stacion. Hys gleamering golden Beames ry∣peth the Corne, and then man is xxxvi. yeare, he maye ascende no more, for then nature hath giuen them courage and strength at the full, and ry∣peth the seedes of perfecte vnderstan∣ding. Then commeth Iuly, that our fruites be set on sunning, and our corne a har∣dening, but then the sunne beginneth a little to descende downwarde. So then man goeth from youth towarde age, and beginneth for to acquainte him whyth sadnesse, for then he is come to xlii. yeare. After that then commeth August, then we gather in our corne, and also the fruites of the earth, And then man doeth hys dillygence to gather for to
fynde hym selfe, to mayntayne hys wyfe, chyldren and hys housholde, when age commeth on him, and then after that vi. yeare, he is xiviii. yeare of age. Then commeth September, that wynes be made, and the fruites of the trees be gathered: And then there wythall he doeth freshly begin to gar∣nishe hys house, and make prouision of needefull things, for to lyue wyth in wynter, whych draweth verye neare, and then man is in his moste stedfaste and couetous estate, prospe∣rous in wisedome, purposing to ga∣ther and keepe as much as shoulde bee sufficient for him in hys age, when he maye gather no more, and then is hee liiii. yeare of age. And then commeth October, that all is into the aforesayde house ga∣thered, both corne, and also other ma∣ner
of fruites, and also the laborers plowe and sow new seedes on the erth for the yeare to come. And then he that nought soweth, nought gathereth, and then in these vi. yeare a man shall take himselfe vnto God, for to do penance & good workes, and then the benefites the yere after his death, he may gather and haue spirituall profyte, and then man is fully the tearme of lx. yeares. Then commeth Nouember, that the dayes be very short, and the sunne in manner giueth but little heate, and the trees losen their leaues. The fields that were greene, looketh hoare, and gray. Then al manner of hearbes bene hyd in the ground, and then appeareth no flowers, and then wynter is come, that the man hath vnderstanding of age, and hath lost hys kindly hete and strength, hys teeth begin to rotee and to fayle hym. And then hath he little hope of long lyfe, but desyreth to come
to the lyfe euerlasting, and these vi. yeares maketh him lxvi. yeare of age. Then last commeth December, full of colde, wyth frosts, and snows, with great wyndes, and stormy weathers, that a man may not labor, nor nought doe. The sunne is then at the lowest, that it maye descende. Then the trees and the earth be hid in snowe, then it is good to hold them nie the fyre, and to spende the goodes that they gate in sommer. For then man beginneth to waxe crooked and feeble, coughing & spitting and loathsome, and then he lo∣seth hys perfecte vnderstanding, and his heyres desyre hys death. And these vi. yeare maketh him full lxxii. yeares, and if he lyue any longer, it is by his good guiding and dieting in hys youth howbeit, it is possible that a man may liue till he be a C. yeare of age, but ther be but few that liueth so long, tyll they come to a hundred yere of age.
¶ Hereafter followeth the Rutter of the distaunces from one Porte or countrey to another, and fyrst of the compasse of England. THe Compasse of Eng∣lande rounde aboute, is iiii. M. iii. C. & ix. myles. Venis doeth stande from Flaunders East and by South viii. C. myles. And nexte course by the sea, from Flaunders to Iaffe, (is thys.) From Sluse to Calays is lxx. miles. From Calays to Buchefe lxxx. myles. Frō Bucheffe to Lezard ii. C. lx. miles. From Lezard to Capfenestes, sixe hundred l. miles. From Capfenester to Lisbone, is two hundred and lxxx. miles. From Lisbone to Cap S. Vincente
to the stractes two C. xl. miles. From the stractes the Iebalter, vnto the Ile of Sardine xi. C. miles. From Malfitana in Sardine, to I∣nalta, is iiii. C. and lx. myles. From Inalta by the course of Saro∣gora and Sicill, to sayle to Iaffe in Surrye, is a M. viii. C. miles. From Iaffe to Baffe in Sypre, to the Castle Roge, is ii. C. xx. miles. From Castle Roge to Rodes, a hun∣dred. miles. From Rodes to Candy ii. C. l. myles. From Candy to Modon, three hun∣dred myles. From Modon to Corsue, three hun∣dred myles. From Corsu to Venis, is eyght hun∣dred myles. THE length of the costes of Surry, of the Sea costes, is from the gulfe of Ermony, to the gulfe Dalarlze,
nexte the South and bee West, from Lazarya to Ryse, is three score and fyue miles. That is to vnderstande, from Laza∣ry in Ermony to Soldin, that cōmeth from the ryuer comming from Anthy∣oche lxx. miles. AND from Soldin, to the Porte of Lycha, nexte vnto the South fyftye miles. From Lycha to the Porte of Tortosa South l. myles. From Tortosa vnto the Porte Try∣poll south l. myles. From Bernet to Acres south, and bee west lxx. myles. From Acres to Porte Iaf, south, and be west lxx. miles. From Porte Iaf, to Porte Delezara, south, south west a C. xxx. myles. From Damyat Lariza in Surrye, to Damiat in Egipt C. lxxx. miles.
From Damyat to Babylon Alchare, lxxx. miles. From Damyat to Alexandre, a hun∣dred x. miles. THe length of Mare Maior is from the Gulfe S. George in the middest of the gulfe that is betwixt Trapasant Sanastopoly to the porte of Messem∣bre west, from S. George a thousand lx. miles. The bredth of the west ende, is from the bras S. George of Constantinople, vpon the ryuer of Danabes nexte the North, from S. George Brase, fyue hundred lx. myles. FRom Pero to Caffa, in Tar∣tary, Northeast vi. C. myles. From Caffa to the stractes, of the Tane, Northeast, a hundred miles. The Gulfe of Tane is aboute sixe hun∣dred myles.
The Capt of Caffa is aboute sixe hun∣dred myles. From the Head of Tane to Sanasto∣poly, foure C. myles. From Sanostopoly, to Trapasonde▪ by West ii. C. l. myles. From Trapasonde to Synopya, next to the south iiii. C. xxx. miles. From Synopya to Pero, nexte the West, southwest ii. C. xxx. miles. From Pero to Messember, nexte the Norwest ii. C. xxx. miles. From Messember to Mancro, North, Northeast, a C. ix. miles. From Mancro Castro, to Danobia, Northeast a C. xxx. miles. From Danobia to the stractes of Caf∣fa nexte the East. ii. C. myles. ¶ The compasse of the Ilandes. THE Ile of Sypre, is aboute fyue hundred myles.
The Iles of Roobes, is boute an C. xxx. myles. The Ile of Lange is aboute foure∣core myles. The Ile of Necrypont, is about three hundred myles. The Ile of Cecilya, is aboute seuen hundred myles. The Ile of Sardyne, is about seuen hundred myles. The Ile of Mayorke, is aboute two hundred myles. The Ile of great Brytayne, is aboute two thousand myles. The Ile of Irelande is aboute a M. vii. C. myles. The principallitye of Murre, is about vii. C. myles. ¶ Thus endeth the Rutter of the dis∣taunce from one Porte or Countrye to another.
Jmprinted at London, in Fleetestreete, beneath the Conduit, at the Signe of S. Iohn Euangelist, by Hugh Iackson. 1585.
