1312.7 99852296 17612
THE OVERTHROVV OF the Gout / Writ∣ten in Latin verse, by Doctor Chri∣stopher Ba∣lista. IMPRINTED AT London by Abraham Ueale dwelling in Paules Church yard at ye signe of ye Lamb. 1577.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, his very good Frende M. RICHARD MAISTERS Doctor in Phisick, and Seruant to her ex∣cellent Maiestie. SYR, I SEND you heer a short trea∣tise of the Gout, wri∣ten by one Balista a Frenchman, and dedicated to a great Phisitian in Fraunce. It came by Fortune (beeing as I think not any where els to be had) into my hands, which for the bene∣fit of diuerse my freends troubled with that disease, and partely for mine owne recreation, that was somthing delighted with the wri∣ter (in as good maner as I could) I
Englished. The verse in Latin is not very eloquent, and therfore no meruail though the translation be rude and vnpleasant. But sure his Method and order is not in mine oppiniō to be dissalow¦ed, but rather much to be commen∣ded. I haue noted him in such pla∣ces as I thought conuenient, and would haue farther augmented him but that I thought it not good to be to curious in an other mans woork. Such as it is: I send it you and commit it to your good allowance and protection. Your very loouing freend. B. G.
❧The Ouerthrowe of the GOVTE. AGainst the Goute wt al her force my minde desires to goe: And wt a valiaunt hand to fling, my darts at this my foe. Longe time this beast hath now presumed, her wicked force to bend: Against that good olde man that doth, the Sedun flock defend, Diseased sore he lies and able, not to stirre a limme: So hath the wretche benomd his Joints and so hath plagued him. That still he is inforste to keep his house, as doth the Snaill: O pitious hap and great mischaunce, that each man ought to waill. It gréeues me to the hart to se, the torments that he beares: Her crueltie Constrayneth me, to staine my chéekes with teares My sorowes doth cōmaund ye doutfull hap of Mars to trye: Why stand I stil? I will assayle, the monster presentlye. Drawe néere O swéet Redéemer of, the World before vndoone:
Of that moste glorious maiestie, the true and only sonne. Uouchsafe to giue thy spéeding darts, in this my quarrel iust: And cause that I with them may throwe this monster in the dust. And thou O noble Phillip, by all the Gods abooue that be: I thée require to showe thy self, a man in eche degrée. Hope wel for hope auaileth much, In driuing gréef away: I dout no whit, but shortly thou shalt sée a fairer day. More hapeneth in an houre somtime, then in a thousand yéer: And many great commodities, in smallest time appéer. I trust to driue the Gout vnto the lothsome pit of hel: And that thou shalt good Phillip haue thy feet again ful wel. Doo you no more but bear in minde, the woords that I shall say: And these my lessons that I giue, doo cary wel away. The suttle shackles that this Beast, dooth binde the féet withall:
Podagran all the learnd of Gréece, haue euer vsde to call. Hence sprang at first the hateful name, of this so painful gréef: That suddainly the feet unwares, assaileth like a theef. At first it rageth in the ioynts, and then assaults the toes: And straight from thence with hastie course vnto the héel it goes. And somtimes to the buckle bones, where as it swelles and showes: With pain while as abundance great, of humors thether flowes. Somtime the Cod beside, that bothe the stones incloseth round: Dooth swel withall and hanging lowe, it oftentimes is found. The causer of this great disease, not euermore is one: Oft times the parents are the cause it falles the Childe vpon. When as the séed but féeble is, wherof the frute is wrought: For since the root such weakenes hath, the plant must néeds he nought. Besides to vehement exercise, the Gout dooth often bréed:
Of seruice long in Venus court, it likewise dooth procéed. The very frame of all the limmes, is shaken with this game: Eche Sinow eke enféebled is by vsing of the same. And Bacchus thou that wunted art, the spirits to reuiue: Doost vse to hurt the féet of such, as in thy seruice striue. Of Martiall acts in stately stile, did Ennius alwaies write: And in his cups did blase the déeds, of many a worthy knight. Yet of the Gout at last he dyed, nor could his verses saue: (With all the swéetnes that they had) their maister from the graue. Great hurt beside vnto the ioynts, dooth euermore arise: Of colde, excessiue Idlenes, and to much exercise. The hart with fury once inflamde, dooth kindle presently: And fireth all the humors straight, that in the body lye. Wherby vnbrideled all, they rome and raunge in euery place:
And paining all the Senous sore, they vex in pitious case. Oft times of thick and clammy fleume, this vile disease dooth bréed: Somtime again, of bothe the sortes of Choler dooth procéed. And tomuch blood while as it dooth, the tender ioynts oppresse: Is many times the onely cause, of this vnquietnes. Moste gréeu'd with this disease are men. the women not so much: The cause is plain and euident, who listeth it to touch. One reason is because that heat, in man dooth more excéede: Which causeth that the humors pearse, the senowes more with spéed. Moste subiect to the gout are those, that greatest age haue séene: And such as with some sicknes great, haue long tormented béene. And cares of minde and sorowes great, doo bréed this gréeuous sore: And want of wunted exercise, as hath béen said before. Let this suffise to showe the spring, of such a lish sprite:
Now time it is my weapons for, to showe and fall to fight. And first I wil begin with herb, with Juyce and mettals bright: And then of stones that serue the turn, I craue the aid and might. Then Beasts and Birds I set in rank, and cause them to restore: The weake and wearish limmes of those that lamed were before. And last of all my Tables doo I spred with meat and Wine: And there the perfect diat for this sicknes doo assigne. ¶ First Toutsane vnto thée I giue, Not our common Toutsane but Dios∣corides his Panacaea reed Ma∣thiolus. the cheefest place before: That doost deriue thy worthy name, of bealing euery sore. Thou beaten small and mingled wel with reasons good and sweet: In plaister made applyed wel, doost heal the féeble feet. An herb there is that in the Sun, Mary Goldes. dooth woundrously delight: And after him dooth euermore, direct her course aright. That when be once begins to rise, dooth spred and open wide:
And mourning hangeth down her hed, when Westwards he dooth slide. This medled wel with sewet of a Gote, dooth driue away. The Gout, the like dooth Balme stamped if to the féet you lay. And Ueruen sod in water dooth the féet from sicknes saue: Which herb the noble Romans wont in great account to haue. The alter fair of Iupiter, with this they vsde to swéep: And therwith euery corner of their houses sprinkled déep. Beside the Herald when he gaue, defiance to his foe: Commaunded was with Garland all of Ueruen clad to go. Coleworts in this disease are good, béeing sodden specially: The broth wherof refuse not thou, to drink for remedy. Put Coliander to the Cole, and Salt and Rewe beside: And flower fine of Barley that, by grinding small is tride, A Pultise made of these, if to the aking ioynts ye lay:
It greatly dooth the paines asswage, and driues the Gout away. And if the Gout be such as in his rage it dooth not swel: The Radish root wil help, if that in Wine you séeth it wel. The noble Radish that our fathers olde, did greatly looue: And did indéed the same estéeme, all other meats abooue. At Delphus was it then decréed, it should be grau'd in Golde: The Béet in siluer to be framde, the Raape in leaden moulde. This to the Gout is to be laid, the Juce of Woodbinde thick: And mingle there withall the meal or Flower of Fenugrick. And Nettel rootes wel brused in the strongest Uinager: The leaues beside béeing pouned with The leaf & the seede with Beres Greace. the tallowe of a Bear. And stinking Assa faetida, in spunges wel applyde: Wil like wise help the gréeuous Gout, and Feuer sore beside. If therunto you put the War, that is from Cipresse brought:
And sée that with the suet of a Gote it wel be wrought. Plantain béeing pouned wel with salt, and Lens with Pap made with Barly Polent good: The water Betany, besides Hemp roots, and Sothernwood. The Juyce of Henbane mixt with meal, that from the Mil dooth flye: And war, with Gum Armoniack in equall quantitie. And boyled wel in Uinagre. the braunche of Poplar small: With Herb that beares his name of Age, that Grounsil we doo call. To this it néedful is to put, the greace of fatted Bore: And mingle wax with Willowe leaues, that wel haue sod before. An Herb there is that in the Sea, Phicus marina Sea weed. dooth alwaies winde about: Which (if it be not ouer dry) wil heale the painful Gout. Who would beleeue that heaps of Corne, should driue the Gout away, And bring the féeble foot his force, to stand without a stay? As Sextus searching of the Barnes, Sextus Pompeius was taken with the Gout:
He laid him down in heaps of Wheat, that closde him rownd about. When suddainly he felt him self, aswel as any man: And rysing vp with ioyful hart, to walke about began. For all the humor out was drawen, and dryed by this reléef: That was the hed, the fountain and the cauie of all this gréef. For such a force is in the Wheat, as that it hath béen séen: The vessels ful in shortest time to drawe and dry vp clens To Elder leaues. the Sewet of a Gote put orderly: This laid vnto the féet wil be a present remedy. Forget not that same herb beside that gréen dooth alwaies growe: Houseleek or Singre. It healeth those same angry Goutss, that red and fiery showe. The Gourd that groweth wilde his rine, is thought to doo the same: Which also helps the hed that dooth with fiery humors flame. The like béeing sod in Uinagre The wylde Cocumber. the Cocumber wil doo:
So wil the Cole, the surging Seas that groweth néer vnto. Sea Col∣wort it gro¦weth vnder the Clyfts besydes Seaforde in Sussex And Purslain pounded wel with Salt, dooth heale this painful rage: And likewise dooth the fiery heat of shingles soon assawge. Tis very straunge that rust of Iron, wil heale the gréeuous Gout: The wound beside with Lancel made, wil let the poyson out. When Telephus with staf of fierce Achilles wounded was: And neuer a Surgion there aboute: could bring the cure to passe. They took aduisement of their Gods, Apollo answered thus: Achilles Swoord (quoth he) shall saue, the life of Telaphus. With ioyful mind went Telephus, to méet his enemy: Who striking gaue him with his wound, a present remedy. The treacle good beside, that cures the deadly poyson strong: Is souerain to be vsde against the Gout retained long. What should I héer of Salt intreate Nature that all things spun:
Created nothing néedful more for man then Salt and sun. With salt we sauour all our meat, and doo preserue our food: Take Salt away our bankets loss, no Uiands séemeth good. Salt maketh strong and lustie Joynts, example good may be: A Bag of Salt beatē smal wet in boyling wine and layd to the feet. Or salt ve∣ry fine bea∣ten with Oyl of Ca∣momil made in an Ointment. The tough and sturdy limmes of horne, in Fishers that we sée. Salt with his fretting force, dooth enter, pearce and thorow spring: Dissolueth, eateth, burneth vp and fineth euery thing. With Hony, Oile, and meal béeing mixt and beaten as it ought: It maketh good the féet again, that féeble were and nought. And if you list my poore aduise, in this disease to take: Go get you to the Sea and bathe, your féet when they doo ake. Tis good in Brimstone bathes somtime to wash your self beside: Which wil refresh your crased limmes, and stop a stormy tide. Take water with Salt Péeter mixt and Brimstone, let them boil:
And wash your legges, or if you list, with Lées of sodden Oyle. And now for stones, let thrée suffise, the Jet as one of those: From whence a stinking sulphur asre, ascendeth to the nose. The smel wherof doo Serpents shun, wherwith what soeuer you write: In brittel vessel made of Earth, wil neuer out of sight. Lay this vnto your Gout, the stone that Iron vp dooth take: Dooth tame this mad vnruly beast, and quickly out dooth shake. Beat small a Medstone, mix it with the Milk of such a wight: As at her first deliuery brings a pretie Boy to light. This wil asswage the Gout, if that you lay it therunto: And bring the Senowes to their force, to doo as they should doo. You worthy creatures that haue life, with haste your selues addresse, And let me haue your helping hands, in this my busines. The bones of man to ashes burnt, and made in pouder sine:
Béeing drunk, is not of littie force, against this foe of mine. And womans milk, if that you ioyne the Humlock therwithall: Applyed to the féet dooth heale, the raging torments all. Put Goosegrece héerunto and ad green Isop to the same: Or Opium wherwithall you may, a parfect medicine frame. Opium the Juyce or Gum of black Pop∣pey. With grece of swine, ioyne womans heare and this shall doo you good: Béeing laid vnto the aking féet, that rage with angry mood. Refuse not thou to bath thy feet, with Urin of a man: Prouided that the party be, as helthy as ye can. The right foot of an Egle, to your right foot look you lay: And to your left leg lay the left, to driue the gout away. Somtime again with Horseleaches, beset your féet about: That Blood suckers are termed of the rude and common rout. These neuer wil forsake the legges, wherto they cleaue and pul:
(So great desire they haue to blood) til all their skin be ful. But all the vilest humors that, they in those partes doo finde: Which were the causers of this gréef, they drink with gréedy minde. And when they once haue fiid them selues, as ful as they may be: They leaue the place and fall away, as beasts that drunken be. But if they chaunce to cleue to fast, and wil not leaue their holde, Then sprinkle beaten Salt theron burnt wul or ashes colde. It holsom is beside to open in thy féet some bleeding vain: Wherby the humor passeth out, that bréedeth all thy pain. An aged Cock wel stewed in broth, béeing drunk dooth pleasure great: In filling all the ioints and limmes with swéet and plesant heat. The milk of Asses drunck dooth heale, the gout with raging mood: So dooth the flesh therof if that, you vss it for your food. The Owle that hath a body fat, you seeth in water stall:
And often eat the tender flesh and drink the broth withall. The Grece of Swine, with Ashes mixt of dung that Gates doo make: Is very souerain, if therwith Gotes dūg mingled with Barly flower and Uinagre, a good Pul∣tis. So is the root of marsh ma∣lowes min∣gled with Ducks greace, for olde swel∣ling goutes you noynt the féet that ake. O worthy Greace of Swine that doost, deserue so great a praise: What good vnto the ioynts of man, thou bringest sundry waies. When as the limmes and members all, with colde congealed be: Their naturall heat again, and warmth they straight receiue from thée. Thou supplest stifned partes and such as weake and féebled be: Restorste to helth and sores doost heale that lothsome are to sée. Thou driu'st the Gout from hand and foot, what should I vtter more? In few woords wil I speake at once, thou healest enery sore. Such force to thée the helthful roots, of noble herbes doo giue: Wherwith the wandring herds of Swine in pleasant pastures liue. The Romains, that by valure all the world did once subdue:
Had thée in honor great for this, thy vertues that they knew. With thée the gladsome Bride, when as the house she enter should Of her new maried mate, the posts and thresholdes couer would. Héer of the wife first took her name, because in times before: The charge to her committed was of noynting of the doore. For they supposde this Grease would put all troubles vnto night: And that for euer after, no misfortune enter might. But to my Gout again, The Dung of Kites and ashes fine: Of Snailes and Wesel burned bothe wil heale this Gout of thine. Let Legges that thus diseased be, be bath'd with Wesels blood: The Sewet like wise of a Calf, for this is very good: To this may also added be, the flesh of fearful Déer: And there withall the Broth wherin, A For flea∣ed cut in small Gob∣bits destil∣led wt Oile of Camo∣mil, Oile of Rew, oile of wormes, of eche . oun∣ces, a quan¦titie of A∣qua vite. A good wa∣ter to noint the ioynts. the Hare hath boyled cléere. With case of craftie Fox let all thy foot wel wrapped be:
And for to noint them with the Greace, of Reynard helpeth thée. And good it is in skinnes of Dgs, to kéep and wrap them wel: And with the greace of them to noint, the painful féet that swel. Moreouer take a Crowe and quick put him in Horsedung déep: And close him so that he may haue, no place away to creep. When foure dayes once be ful expirde, go take him from his graue: And burn him straight, then mingle Wax with the Ashes that you haue. This laid vnto the feet, dooth driue this monster quite away: And makes the poore diseased man, to go without a stay. And Iunoes bird, the Peocock helps if that his dung you take: And plaister wise apply it to, the lamed limmes that ake. Annoint thy féet with drippings hot of greasy rosted Cat: And take the Beauers stones beside, and mingle wel with that. To Ashes burn the Mullets hed, that in the sea dooth swim:
With pleasant Honye mingle it, and noint thy crased lim. Go take the crauking Frog, and with thy knife, go quarter out His members all, and lay his féet vnto the painful Gout. So that the right doo touch the right and that the left doo lye: Upon the left, so shalt thou finde a present remedy. ¶ But leauing now these creatures héer, though many more there be: Of like effect, for who can write of all in eche degree? I wil thée straight wayes showe how thou, thy table shalt prepare: And in what sorte for thine auail, thou shalt appoint thy fare. Great Gluttony and surfetting, the limmes dooth quickly lanie: And therfore would I soberly, thy diet thou shouldst frame. First see thy bread be baked wel, that thou at Table hast: And neither black nor yet to white, but pleasant in the taste. All trifles banish from thy boord, and meal with honye made:
As Custards, Pyes and Florentines, and other of this trade. All Salt and slimy meats, and flesh that long dooth poudred lye: And fish in Salt preserude, all such I warne thée for to flye. Bothe Garlick, Rue and Onions soure expel them far from thée: Although the fond Egiptians doo: suppose them Gods to be. Abstain from Pepper, Raapes & Grapes that in the spring time be: From Apples, Peares, and such like frute as winter giueth thée. Nor suffer thou the deadly Beanes to come vpon thy boord: Which once the wise Pithagoras condemned by his woord. With this the holy Préests durst neuer deale in all their rites: It longeth vnto Goblins and to black and fearful sprights. It dooth the sence and wit of man, bothe dul and dampish make: And rayseth in the night such dreames, as makes the hart to quake. Bothe Peason, Nuts and Chesnuts grose despise thou in this case:
And take thou héed that at thy boord, no Chéese haue any place. Let these suffise for food, the Hen and Chanticlere the bolde: The Wether and the lustie Stéere, who neuer yet was colde. The Cunny, Hare, the Partridge, and the Egge thats rosted rere: And all the smallest Birds beside that tender limmes doo beare. Such Fishes small I like, as in the running Riuers fléet: And such as haue no scales, for to refuse I think it méet. The Lamperns shun, that licking of the rock was wunt to lye: And therwithall the Crab that sidling séekes her self to wry. Let not the Eele thy Table touch, a clamy humor stil: Dooth from this fish procéed, that all the ioints of man dooth fil. The Lamprey long agone was had, in estimation great: And taken for his daintie taste, to be a Princes meat. Antonia (Drusus wife) was wunt, the Lamprey for to féed:
And set her out with rings of golde, the farther to excéed: A Lampry dead Hortensius did bewaile with many a teare: Such was the fauour of the great goodwil that he did beare. But medle not with it whosoeuer thou art that hast the gout: For why, it dooth increase thy paines, and brings thy gréef about. In fewe woords for to make an end, For who can all things touch: In this disease much helthsomer is flesh, then fish by much. Take for your drink the mildest wine, and cléerest you can get: And mingle it with water wel, the fume away to fet. What quantitie you ought to drink, I néed not heer define: Your own discretion héerin best, a measure may assigne. But this I onely warn you of, that when you leaue your meat: You leaue with some desire to drink, and some desire to eat. Then féed on Coliander séeds, when thus you wel haue fed:
To make a mery hart and kéep the vapours from the hed. Giue not thy self to too much sléep, nor watch not all the night: And let some distance be betwixt, thy sleepe and supper light. Lye not vpon the back for this is for the body nought: But very seldome vse to ride, take neuer any thought. Somtime it shall be good awhile, to passe the time away: To hear the pleasant instrument, of such as wel can play. Nothing then Musick, more our gréef and sorowes banish can: It glads the minde, and mery minde dooth make a helthy man. Far from thée look thou euer haue▪ all grim and sollemne Syers. All louring lumpish lookes that lothe, bequeath them to the Fryers. Make choyse of such companions, as be wise and swéet withall: Whose talke delightful is to hear, and voide of any gall. Whose grauitie is poudred with, an honest pleasant minde:
Not tedious to the hearer, nor vain waster of his winde. Take such into thy company, eschue the fléering mate: The flatterer, and such as where they come doo so we debate. Use alwaes holsome exercise, thy féet to walke assay: This exercise consumes and wastes the humors il away. For long and slothful Idlenes, decayes the members all: And dooth disgrace the body quite, And causeth it to fall. And like as Iron rusteth straight, with lothsome Canker vile: If that you suffer it to rest and vse it not a while. So are our bodyes straight defilde, and vnto mischéef fall: If that we let them idle be, and woork them not at all. Beside a pitious sight it is, a lamentabie case: In sée the King of Creatures all lye lame and not haue grace. Nor wil to exercise him self, but Idle stil to bée:
And through his owne great fault & blame, to want his libertie. By little and little try thy strength, with certain rule and rate: Which force with labour wil increase, so it be moderate. Auoid the aire that flameth stil, with ouerscorching heat: And that which ouercolde the members all dooth il intreat. If these my rules you doo obserue I trust you soon shall sée: This cruel raging Gout, as she deserues destroyd to bée. Inough now haue we tryed the féelde, the Trumpet bids retire: Héer stands the bownds of mine exployt and end of my desire. ❧Soli Deo honor et Gloria. FINIS.
A Dialogue betwixt the Gout and Cri. Balista. Gout. ALas poor wretch alas, which way now shall I turn my sight: whil as so great a storme of darts doo ful vpon me light? O haplesse wretch whome lews aspects, of hateful starres haue torne: Accursed be the lothsome day: that euer I was borne. All pearst with darts I am and knowe not how my self to saue: My ioynts are all benummed so, and neuer a foot I haue: What fauour more hath nature showed, to beasts then vnto me: That hath ordained them a meane to kéep their libertie? Oft times the Stag dooth laugh to scorne the Hunter and his Hound: The Bore dooth laugh and euery beast, that in the woods are found. And why? for trusting to their féet they scape the dangers all: Good féet dooth many times preuent, great mischéefs that would fall.
But I alas more slowly mooue, then any Tortoise great: And lame and feeble as Ilye, the darts vpon me beat. What now remaines? but that to hel pale death me down dooth cast: And make an end of this my life, that may no longer last. Alas and shall I dye? B. Thou shalt. G. Whōe doo I hear? B. Me. G. Whom? B. Thy greatest fo. G. What is thy name? what Region camst thou from? B. My name Balista is. G. Why doost thou shoot thy shaft{is} at me? B. To make thée dye. G. I not deserue so great extremitie. B. A thousand Gallowses thou dost, a thousand Fires with all: A thusand racks, a thousand whéeles, and after death dooth fall. A thousand Helles thon doost deserue, I haue not long to tel: The sundry sortes of torments that thou hast deserued wel. G. Tel me the cause. B. The cause is this that men of worthy fame: Thou with thy mischéeuous disease, hast plagued and stricken lame.
G. Whō haue I plagued? B. Whōe? it were to much for me to tel: Alas I am not able for to stay from wéeping wel. Besides a number that thou wretched beast, bast lamed quite: While in tormenting of their ioynts, thou shewds thy cruel spite. The good Sedunian Bishop thou haste caused down to fall: And ouercome, doost kéep him yet in prison, as thy thrall. Whose worthy life dooth glister like, the Sun with blasing beames: Him hast thou in thy shackles shut, and tyed vp in thy teames. And therfore dye yu shalt. G. For pittie yet showe fauour vnto me: B. That can I not. G. Thou art no stéele, B. I wil be vnto thée. G. O spare me yet I thée beséeche, thy Philip shall be frée: And wel shall haue his helth again, and walke at libertie. B. I more deman̄d. G. Whats that? B. That thou foule beast, doo neuer tuch: The limmes of any vertuous man, nor trouble any such.
G. To this I graunt. B. I warne thée look, thou kéepe thy promesse wel: Thy members els asunder wil, I teare and send to hel. G. Whome wilt thou licence me, with shackels sharp to take and binde? B. For that these words that I shall say to thée lay vp in minde. First set thy shackels vpon such, as alwaies fight and brall: And murther on an other stil, for euery trifle small. Whose féet are euer forward, for to rome vnto the swoord: Contrary to the swéet decrée, of Christe our sauiours woord. G. But may I be so bolde to touch, the féet of mightie Kings? B. Yea hardly for thence the roof, of all this mischéef springs. what Region can you finde where Mars, his Banner hath not spred? What Cuntrie now that is not with the blood of Christians red? For what so euer the ambitious mindes, of Princes foorth dooth bring: Lis we poore soules that féele the smart, tis we that only wring.
Go fetter thou their féet with bolts, that neuer wil away: Except they ceasse their madnesse soone, and from their follyes stay. G. And whome besides shall I attempt? B. The burston bellyed lout: To him that scarce for fat can beare, his lothsome guts about. G. I neuer medle with the paunch, B. The paunches such I call: As féed them selues vntil they be, as fat as Oxe in stall. And nether feed with word nor life, the shéep they ought to serue: But slothful beasts doo leaue their flock for hunger like to sterue. G. And shall I touch no more but these? B. Yes, such as vse to sweare: Whorehunters, théeues and surfetters, their ioynts in sunder teare. And for auoyding many woords, I thus conclude with thée: For beare the vertuous and the good, plague those that wicked be. FINIS.
