16769.5 23153180 9285
CERTAIN necessary Directions, as∣well for the Cure of the Plague, as for preuenting the Infection; With many easie Medicines of small charge, very pro∣fitable to his Maiesties Subiects. Set downe by the Colledge of Physicians by the Kings MAIESTIES speciall command. With sundry Orders thought meet by his Maiestie, and his Priuie Councell, to be carefully executed for preuention of the Plague. Also certaine select Statutes commanded by His Maiestie to be put in execution by all Iustices, and other officers of the Peace throughout the Realme; Together with His Maiesties Proclamation for further direction there in: and a Decree in Starre-Chamber, con∣cerning buildings and In-mates. ¶Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAIESTIE: And by the Assignes of IOHN BILL. 1636.
¶To the Iustices of Peace. AS the want of Lawes occasioneth wrongs to be committed witting∣ly; And want of know∣ledge of Lawes carieth men into offences ignorantly: So are Laws themselues a burthen when they are too many, and their very num∣ber is a cause that few are execu∣ted: where Penall Lawes haue o∣therwise no life, but in their exe∣cution. And certainely that Ma∣gistrate who knowes but few, and causeth those to be duely obser∣ued,
deserueth better of the Com∣monwealth, then he that knoweth many, and executes but few. Therefore is the Composition of this Volume, that those few Laws, and other ordinances being most needfull for the time, may bee ea∣sily had, soone knowne, and duely executed; Which is required by His MAIESTIE.
¶The Contents of this BOOKE. AN Aduice set downe by the Colledge of Phisici∣ans, for preuention and cure of the Plague. 2 Orders concerning health. 3 A Proclamation for quickning the Lawes made for the reliefe of the poore, and the suppressing, punishing, and setling of the sturdy Rogues and Ʋagabonds. 4 An Act for the reliefe of the poore.
5 An Act for the necessary reliefe of Souldiers and Mariners. 6 An Act for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars. 7 An Act for the charitable reliefe and ordering of persons infected with the Plague. 8 A Decree of Starre-Chamber against Inmates and ne Buil∣dings.
At Whitehall 22. Aprill, 1636. Present The Kings most Excellent Majesty. L. Archbishop of Cant. Lord Keeper. Lo. Duke of Lenox. L. Chamberlain. Earle of Dorset. Earle of Salisbury. Earle of Holland. Lord Viso. Wilmot. Lord Cottington. Lord Newburgh. M. Treasurer. M. Comptroller. M. Vicechamberlaine. M. Secretary Coke. M. Secretary Windba. IT was this day ordered, that the Iustices of Peace of Mid∣dlesex and Surrey, shall forth∣with meet together, and shall seriously consider of and set downe such rates as are fit for the raising of moneyes to build Pest-houses, or to prouide other convenient habitations, or places of aboade for infected People, and to furnish them with all other necessaries for their
reliefe, and shall take order for levying, and collecting the same accordingly. It is likewise thought fit and ordered, that the Iustices of Peace of Middlesex shal repair vnto, and ioine with the Lord Maior and Aldermen of the Citie of London, in making additionall orders (to those heretofore printed) to bee forthwith printed for preventing, so much as may be, the increase of the infection; And shall be hereby authorised from time to time hereaf∣ter to make such orders as they shall thinke fit and convenient for the purposes aforesaid. Also the Church wardens and Overseers of the poore, and Constables of every Parish, are hereby required and enioyned to prouide themselues with bookes for their directions. Lastly, the Physicians of the Citie of Lon∣don are to renew the former booke touching their Medicines against the Infection, and to adde vnto and alter the same as they finde the present times and occasions to require, and to cause the said booke to be forthwith printed.
TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAIESTIE. WHereas it hath pleased your MAIESTIE, out of your Royall care of the safety and welfare of your Subiects, by your speciall Command, as also by Order from the Lords of your MAIESTIES most Ho∣nourable Priuie Councell to enioyne the Colledge of Physicians to renew their for∣mer book touching their medicins against the infection, and to adde vnto and alter the same, as they finde the present times and occasion to require: Wee, the Presi∣dent and Colledge of Physicians, in all obedience to your Royal Command,
haue often met and maturely considered of the premisses, and vpon serious reuiew of our former booke, haue made such additions and alterations as wee iudged most requisite for the present occasion; which we haue caused to be printed, and now most humbly present vnto your most Gracious MAIESTIE.
An aduice set downe by the Col∣ledge of Physicians, by his MAIESTIES speciall Command, containing certaine neces∣sary Directions, as well for the cure of the Plague, as for preuenting the Infection; with many easie Medicines and of small charge, the vse wherof may be very profitable to his MAIESTIES Subiects. Doctors, Apothecaries and Chi∣rurgions. THe Church orders for prai∣ers being first obserued as in former times, it is thought necessary that by the gouern∣ment of the City there be ap∣pointed sixe or fowre Doctors at least, who may apply themselues to the cure of the Infected: and that these Doctors bee stipendiaries to the City for their liues: and that to each Doctor there be assigned
two Apothecaries and three Chirurgions, who are also to be stipended by the City, that so due and true care may be taken in all things, that the people perish not without helpe, and that the Infection spread not, while none take particular care to resist it, as in Paris, Venice, and Pa∣dua, and many other Cities. And if any Doctor, Apothecary or Chirur∣gion stipended by the City shall happen to die in the seruice of the attendance of the Plague, then their widowes suruiuing shall haue their pensions during their liues. Men or goods from forreigne in∣fected places. IT is likewise necessary that there be care taken that neither men nor goods may come from any suspected places be∣yond the seas or in the land, without certifi∣cate of health, or else either to bee sent suddainely away, or to be put to the Pest∣house or some such like place for forty daies (according to the custome of Italy,) till the certainty of their soundnesse may bee dis∣couered. Two places for entertainement are to bee prouided; one for the sound and ano∣ther for those who are infected.
That all established good orders bee reuiued. THat the Statutes and good Orders made and formerly published against common Beggars, against all manner of Plaies, Bowling-allies, Inmates, Tip∣ling-houses, Lestalls, against the sale of corrupt flesh or fish, may be reuiued and strictly executed, and that the Skauen∣gers in generall, and euery particular hous∣holder take care for the due and orderly cleansing of the streets and priuate houses, which will auaile much in this case. That Dogges, Catts, Conies and tame Pidgeons be destroyed about the Towne, or to bee kept so sparingly that no of∣fence may come by them, and that no Swine be permitted to range vp and down the Streets, as they frequently doe, or ra∣ther not to keepe any at all. It were also to bee wished that the Slaughter-houses were vtterly put from out the liberties of the City, being in them∣selues very offensiue, And that tunnells in Church-vaults be considered of, and the depth of graues.
To be catolous vpon any suspition. IT is to be feared, because every one desi∣reth his owne liberty, that none will giue notice of any suspition of the Plague a∣gainst themselues; wherefore that must be the Ouerseers care, vpon any notice or su∣spition of Infection, by the helpe of the Doctors, Chirurgions, Keepers or Searchers, to finde out the truth thereof, and so to proceed accordingly, but not to depend vpon the Testimony of women Searchers alone. The care to be taken when a house is visited. THat vpon the discouery of the Infecti∣on in any house, there bee present meanes vsed to preserue the whole, as well as to cure the infectted. And that no sick person be remoued out of any house, though to another of his owne, without notice thereof to be giuen to the Ouerseers and to be by them approued: or if the whole be to be remoued, that notice be giuen to the O∣uerseers of their remoue, and that caution be giuen that they shall not wander about till they be sound. The house that is known to be infected, though none be dead therein, to be shut vp,
and carefully kept watched by more trusty men then ordinary warders, till a time af∣ter the partie be well recouered, and that time to be forty dayes at the least. Caution concerning flying into the Countrey. BEcause many masters of families, pre∣sently vpon the visiting of their houses before any be dead, fly into the countrey to their friends, by which meanes the plague is often carried into the countrey: That no man shall depart his house except it be to an house not inhabited, and that it be to an house of such distance as that he may conueniently trauell thither without lying by the way, much lesse that hee send his children or seruants and this to be done, by the approbation of the Ouerseers vnder their hands. That such also as remooue into the Countrey before their houses bee visited, haue a certificate from the Ouerseers of their parish, vnder their hands and seales, testifying, that such persons were not visited before their remoue, that by ver∣tue thereof they may the freelir tra∣uell in the Countrey, and be more readily entertained. That no infected person be secretly con∣ueied out of any house: and in any such mis∣demeanour
the master of the house, both from which the sicke party is sent, as also the master of the house into which the par∣tie shall be receiued without the licence of the Ouerseers of both parishes respectiue∣ly, shall be seuerally punished at the discre∣tion of the Ouerseers. Because it is likely that the better sort will not call to them such Doctors as are deputed to the Care of the plague, vpon the first fulling sick of any in their houses, lest thereby they might draw greater infection vpon themselues▪ if therefore any house so bring other Doctors shall happen to be vi∣sited, that then the Doctor, who shall ordi∣narily take the care of that house, shall pre∣sently cause notice of the said infection to be giuen to the Ouerseers, that care may be had thereof by the Physicians deputed. Buriall of the dead. THat one being dead in any house of the Plague, notice be giuen to the Ouer∣seers, and that the dead party be buried by night in priuate manner; yet not without the priuity of the Minister, Clerk, Bea∣rers, and Constable or Ouerseers, and that none enter the visited house but per∣mitted persons, vpon danger to be present∣ly shut vp themselues, and that there be a visible marke set vpon the outside of the
doore, and to stand shut vp fourty dayes, and that there be no tolling or ringing of Bells at such priuate burialls. Caution about apparell and housholdstuffe. THat no apparell nor housholdstuffe be remoued or sold out of the infected house, for six moneths after the infection is ceased in the house, and that all the Bro∣kers and inferiour Criers for apparell be restrained in that behalfe. Preseruatiues. Correction of the ayre. FOr the correcting of the infectious aire, it were good that often Bonfires were made in the streets, and that sometime the Tower Ordnance might be shot off, as al∣so that there be good fiers kept in & about the visited houses and their neighbours. Take Rosemary dried, or Iuniper, Bai∣leaues or Frankincense: cast thē same vp∣on a Chafingdish, and receiue the fume or smoake thereof. Also to make fiers rather in pans to re∣moue about the chamber, then in chim∣neies, shall better correct the aire of the houses, adding a piece of old iron to the fire.
Take a quantity of Vineger very strong, and put to it some small quantity of Rose∣water, ten branches of Rosemary, put them all into a bason, then take fiue or six flint stones, heated in the fire till they bee burning hot, cast them into the same Vi∣neger, and so let the fumes be receiued from place to place of your house. That the house be often perfumed with Rue, Angelica, Gentian, Zedoary, Set∣wall, Iuniper wood or Berries burnt vp∣on imbers, either simply, or they may bee steeped in Wine vineger, and so burnt. Perfume the house and all therein with this: Slake Lime in Vineger, and aire the house therewith, burne much Tar, Rosen, Frankinsence or Turpentine, both in the priuate houses, and in the Churches be∣fore prayers. By perfuming of apparell. SVch apparell as you shall commonly weare, let it be very cleane, and perfume it often, either with some Virginia Cedar burned, or with Iuniper, and if any shall happen to be with them that are visited, let such persons, as soone as they shall come home, shift themselues, and ayre their clothes in open ayre for a time. By carrying about of perfumes. SVch as are to go abroad shall do well to carry Rue, Angelica, or Zedoarie in
their hands to smell to; and of those they may chew a little in their mouthes as they go in the street, especially if they be afraid of any place. It is not good to be ouer-fearefull, but it cannot be but bad to be ouer-presumptuous and bold. Take Rue one handfull, stamp it in a morter, put thereto Wine vineger enough to moisten it, mixe them well, then straine out the iuyce, wet a piece of spunge, a toast of browne bread therein, tie it in a thin cloth, beare it about to smell to. Take the root of Angelica beaten gros∣ly the weight of six pence, of Rue and Wormwood, of each the weight of foure pence, Setwall the weight of three pence, bruise these, then steep them in a little Wine vineger, tie them in a linen cloth; which they may carry in their hands, or put it into a Iuniper box full of holes to smell to. Or they may vse this Pomander. TAke Angelica, Rue, Zedoarie, of each halfe a dram, Myrrhe two drams, Camphire six graines, Wax and Labda∣num of each two drams, more or lesse as shall be thought fit to mixe with the other things, make hereof a ball to carry about you: you may easily make a hole in it, and so weare it about your neck with a string.
The richer sort may make vse of this Pomander. TAke Citron pills, Angelica seeds, Zedoary, red Rose leaues, of each halfe a dram, yellow Sanders, Lignum Aloes, of each one scruple, Galliae Moschatae foure scruples, Storax, Calamit, Beuzoni, of each one dram, Camphire six graines, Labdanum three drams, Gum Tragaranth dissolued in Rose water enough to make it vp into a Pomander, put thereto six drops of spirit of Roses, inclose it into an Iuory box, or weare it about your neck. By inward Medicines. LEt none go fasting forth, euery one ac∣cording to their fortunes, let them eat some such thing as may resist putrefaction. Some may eat Garlike with Butter, a Cloue two or three, according to the abili∣ty of their bodies: some may eat fasting, some of the electuary with Figs and Rue hereafter expressed: some may vse London Treacle, the weight of eight pence in a morning, taking more or lesse, according to the age of the party; after one houre let them eat some other breakfast, as bread and butter with some leaues of Rue or Sage, and in the heat of summer of Sor∣reli or Wood-sorrrell.
To steep Rue, Wormwood or Sage all night in their drink, and to drink a good draught in the morning fasting, is very wholsome, or to drink a draught of such drink after the taking of any of the preser∣uatiues will be very good. In all summer Plagues it shalbe good to vse Sorrell sawce to be eaten in the mor∣ning with bread, and in the fall of the leafe to vse the iuyce of Barberies with bread also. By Cordialls. Mithridates medicine of Figs. TAke of good Figs and Walnut kirnels of each twenty foure, Rue picked two good handfulls, of Salt halfe an ounce or somewhat better: first stamp your Figs and Walnuts well together in a stone morter, then adde your Rue, and last of all your Salt, mixe them exceedingly well: take of this mixture euery morning fasting the weight of sixteene pence, to children and weake bodies lesse. Or this will be effectuall also. TAke twenty Walnuts, pill them, Figs, fifteen, Rue a good handfull, Tormen∣till roots three drams, Iuniper berries two drams, Bole Armoniack a dram and a halfe. First stamp your roots, then your Figs and Seeds, then adde your Wal∣nuts,
then put to your Rue and Bole, and with them put thereto sixe drams of Lon∣don Treacle, and two or three spoonfuls of wine vineger, mixe them well in a stone motrer, and take of this euery morning the quantitie of a good nutmegg fasting they that haue cause to goe much abroad, may take as much more in the euening two houres before supper. For women with child, children, and such as cannot take bitter things, vse this. TAke conserue of red Roses, conserue of Wood-sorrell of each two ounces, con∣serues of Borage, of Sage flowers, of each sixe drams, Bole Armoniack, shauings of Harts horne, Sorrell seeds, of each two drams, yellow or white Sanders halfe a dram, Saffron one scruple, Sirrupe of Wood-sorrell, enough to make it a moist Electuary; mixe them well, take so much as a Chesnut at a time, once or twice a day, as you shall finde cause. For the richer sort. TAke the shauings of Harts horne, of Pearle, of Corall, Tormentill rootes, Zedoarie, true Terra Sigillata, of each one dram, Citron pills, yellow, white and red Sanders, of each halfe a dram, white Am∣ber,
Hyacinth-stone prepared, of each two scruples, Bezoar stone, of the East Vni∣cornes horne, of each 24. graines, Citron and Orange pills canded, of each three drams, Lignum Aloes one scruple, white Suger Candie, twice the weight of all the rest, mixe them well being made into a Dredge powder. Take the weight of 12. d. at a time euery morning fasting, and also in the euening about fiue a clocke or an houre before supper. With these powders and Sugar there may be made Lozenges, or Manus Christies, and with conuenient conserues they may be made into Electuaries. All which and many more for their health they may haue by the aduice and directions of their owne Physicians: or at least Physicians will not be wanting to direct them as they may haue need to the poore for charities sake. They may also vse Bezoar water, or Treacle water distilled, compounded by the Physicians of London, and known by the name of aqua Theriacalis stillatitia, which they may vse simply; or they may mixe them also with all their Antidotes, as oc∣casion shall require. The vse of London Treacle is good both to preserue from the sicknesse, as also to cure the sicke, being taken upon the first apprehension in a greater quantitie, as to a man 2. drams, but lesse to a weake body,
or a childe, in Carduus, or Dragon water. Take of the finest cleare Aloes you can buy, in colour like to a liuer, and therefore called Hepatica, of Cinamon, of Myrrhe, of each of these the weight of three French Crownes, or of two and twentie pence of our money, of Cloues, Maces, Lignum Aloes, of Mastick, of Bole Orientall, of each of these halfe an ounce, mingle them together, and beat them into a very fine powder: of the which take every morning fasting the weight of a groat in white wine delayed with water. Take a dry Figg and open it, and put the kernell of a Walnut into the same, being cut very small, three or fower leaues of Rue commonly called Herbgrace, a corne of Salt, then rost the Figg and eat it warme, fast three or fower houres after it, and vse this twice in the weeke. Take the powder of Tormentill, the weight of six pence, with Sorrell or Sca∣bious water in Summer, and in the Win∣ter with the water of Valerian, or com∣mon drincke wherein hath bene infused the fore named herbes. Or else, in one day they may take a little Wormewood and Valerian with a graine of Salt, in an other day they may take se∣uen or eight berries of Iuniper, dried and put in powder, and taking the same with common drincke, or with drincke in which
Wormewood and Rue hath been steeped all night. Also the Treacle called Diatessaroum, which is made but of foure things, of light price easie to be had. Also the roote of Enula Campana taken in powder with drinke. Likewise a piece of Arras roote kept in the mouth as men passe in the streets. Take six leaues of Sorrell, wash them with water and vineger, let them lie in the said water and vineger a while: Then eats them fasting, and keepe in your mouth and Chew now and then either Setwall or the roote of Angelica or a little Cinamom, or foure graines of Myrrhe or so much of rat∣tle Snake roote. By Medicines Purgatiue: IT is good for preuention to keep the bo∣die reasonable open, especially with such things as are easie of operation and good to resist putrefaction, such are these Pills which are vsually to be had at good Apo∣thecaries, and are called Pestilentiall Pills. Take Aloes two ounces, Myrrhe and Saffron, of each an ounce, Ammoniacum halfe an ounce; make them vp into a masse with the Iuice of Limons, or white Wine vineger, to keep the bodie open, A small Pill
or two will be enough taken a little before supper, or before dynner, but to purge the bodie take the weight of a dram made into fiue or six or more Pills in the morning fa∣sting, and that day keepe your Cham∣ber. If the Patient be costine and bound in his body, let him take a suppositary made with a little boiled honey, and a little fine powder of salt, and so taken in at the fundament, and kept till it mooue a stoole. For the poore take Aloes the waight of six pence, put in the pappe of an Apple: and for the Richer, Pills of Ruffus to be had in euery Apothecaries shop. Such as are tied to necessarie attendance on the infected, as also such as liue in visi∣ted houses shall doe well to cause Issues to to be made in their left Armes or right legs, or both as the Doctor shall thinke fit. Blood letting. IF the Patient be ful of bloud and strong, let him be let bloud vpon the Liuer-veine in the right Arme, or in the Median veine of the same arme (if no sore appeare.) For bloud-letting and strong purging there must bee particular directions had
from the Doctors deputed according to the constitution of the parties. These two last remdies of blood-letting, and strong purgings, are to bee vsed the first day that the Patient shall fall sicke as cause shall be to vse the one or the other, (no sore appearing) In which case, if any sore or spots shall appeare, they are both to be forborne. Vomits. To prouoke vomit, with two ounces of Ranck Oyle, or Walnut Oyle, a spoone∣full of the Iuice of Celendine, and halfe a spoonfull of the Iuice of Radish roote, or two spoonfuls of Oxymel of Squils with Posset drink and oile. Medicines expulsiue. THe poison is expelled best by sweating prouoked by posset ale made with Fen∣nell and Marigolds in winter, and with Sorrell, Buglosse, and Borage in sum∣mer, with the which in both times they must mingle London Treacle, the waight of two drammes: and so to lay themselues with all quietnesse to sweat one halfe houre, or an houre if they be strong. For the cure of the Infected vpon the
first apprehension, Bur seeds, Cucheneely, powder of Harts horne, Citron seeds one, or more of them, with a few graines of Camphire, are good to bee giuen in Car∣duus or Dragon water, or with some Treacle water. Take Burre seeds and Cucheneely, of each halfe a dramme, or to a weak body of each one scruple, Camphire fiue graines, mix these with two ounces of Carduus or Dragon water, halfe an ounce of Treacle water, sirrup of Wood sorrell a spoonefull, mix these, giue it the Patient warme, co∣uer him to sweat, you may giue him a se∣cond draught after twelue houres, let him drinke no cold drinke, this posset drinke or the like will be good to giue the visited li∣berally. Take Wood-Sorrell halfe a handfull, Marigold flowers halfe so much, sha∣vings of Harts-horne three drams, a figge or two sliced, boile them well in cleare pos∣set drink, let them drink thereof freely, you may put thereto a little suger. Take Citron seeds six or eight, shavings of Harts-horne halfe a dramme, London Treacle one dramme, mix them with two ounces of Carduus water, or with three ounces of the prescribed posset drinke. Drinke it warme and so lie to sweat.
Take Sorrell-water fiue or sixe spoon∣fuls, Treacle-water one spoonefull, Lon∣don-Treacle one dramme and a halfe, mix them well, giue it warme, and so lay the Patient to sweat. Take Tormentill and Celandine roots of each foure ounces, Scabious and Rue of each one handfull and a halfe, White wine viniger three pints, boile these till one pint be wasted, straine out the liquor, which reserue for the vse of the Infected: let it be taken thus. Take of this liquor and of Carduus wa∣ter of each one ounce and an halfe, London Treacle one dramme and a halfe. Bole-Armoniak halfe a scruple, put thereto a litte sugar, mix them well, let the partie drinke it warme, and couer him to sweat. In Summer this is good. TAke the Iuice of Wood-sorrel two oun∣ces, the Iuice of Lymons one ounce, Diascordium one dramme, Cinamom sixe grains, Viniger halfe an ounce, giue it warme, and lay the sicke party to sweat. Vse this in case of Fluxes of the belly or want of rest. Take an Egge and make a hole in the top of it, Take out the white and yolke,
fill the shell with the weight of two french crownes of Saffron, rost the said Egge thus filled with Saffron vnder the Em∣bers, vntill the shell begin to wax yellow. Then take it from the fire, and beat the shell and Saffron in a morter together with halfe a spoonefull of mustard seed. Take of this powder a French crowne waight, and as soone as you suspect your selfe infected, dissolue it into ten spoonfuls of posset Ale, and drinke it luke-warme, Then go to bed and prouoke your selfe to sweating. Or, Take one dram of the Electuarium de Ouo. Take fiue or six handfuls of Sorrell that groweth in the field, or a greater quantity according as you wil distill more or lesse of the water thereof, and let it lie in∣fused or steeped in good vineger the space of twenty foure houres, Then take it off and dry it with a linen cloth, and put it into a limbeck, and distill the water thereof, and as soone as you finde your selfe touched with the sicknesse, drinke foure spoonfuls of the said water with a little sugar, and if you be able walk vpon it vntill you sweat, if not, keep your bed, and being well coue∣red prouoke your selfe to sweating.
Take of the root Butter-burre, other∣wise called Pestilent▪ wort one ounce, of the root of great Valerian a quarter of an ounce, of Sorrell an handfull, boyle all these in a quart of water to a pinte, then straine it, and put thereto two spoonefulls of Vineger, two ounces of good Sugar, boyle all these together vntill they be well mingled: let the infected drink of this so hot as he may suffer it, a good draught, and if he chance to cast it vp againe, let him take the same quantity straight way vpon it, and prouoke himselfe to sweat. Or the Infected may take one dram of this powder following. Take Sugar of Roses foure ounces, Ginger two ounces, Camphire one ounce, make these into fine powder, keep it made vp into Balls with Wine. Take of the powder of good Bay-berry, the huske taken away from them, before they be dried, a spoonfull; let the Patient drinke this well mingled in a draught of good stale Ale or Beere, or with a draught of white Wine, and go to bed, and cast him∣selfe into a sweat, and forbeare sleep. Take the inward Bark of the Ash-tree one pound, of Walnuts with the greene outward shels to the number of fiftie, cut these small; of Scabious, of Veruin, of
euery one a handfull, of Saffron two drams, powre vpon these the strongest Vi∣neger you can get foure pintes, let them a little boyle together vpon a very soft fire, and then stand in a very close pot well stopt all a night vpon the embers, after distill them with a soft fire, and receiue the wa∣ter close kept. Giue vnto the Patient laid in bed and well couered with clothes, two ounces of this water to drinke, and let him bee prouoked to sweat, and euery eight houres during the space of twenty foure houres giue him the same quanti∣tie to drinke. Care must bee taken in the vse of these sweating Cordialls, that the party infected sweat two or three houres, if hee haue strength, and sleep not till the sweat bee ouer, and that hee haue beene well wiped with warme linen, and when he hath been dried let him wash his mouth with water and vineger warme, and let his face and hands bee washed with the same: when these things are done, giue him a good draught of Broath made with Chicken or Mutton with Rosemary, Thyme, Sor∣rell, Succory and Marigolds; or else Wa∣ter-grewell, with Rosemary and Winter-Sauory, or Thyme Panado seasoned with veriuyce or iuyce of wood-sorrell. For their drinke let it be small Beere warmed
with a toste, or water boiled with Carra∣way seed, Carduus seed, and a crust of bread, or such posset drinke as is mentioned be∣fore in the second medicine; after some nu∣triment let them sleepe or rest often wash∣ing their mouth with water and vineger. These Cordials must be repeated once in eight, ten or twelue houres at the fur∣thest. If the partie infected vomit vp his me∣dicine, then repeat, it presently, or else giue him two or three spoonefuls of Vineger of Squills, or Oxymel of Squills with▪ pos∣set drink, and then after proceed. Medicines externall. VEsicatories applied to the armes, in∣side of the thighes, or about the bot∣tome of the calfe of the leg, will draw forth the venome: but the vse of these requires the direction of the Doctors deputed. For the swelling vnder the eares, arme∣pits, or in the groines, they must bee al∣wayes drawen forth and ripened, and broke with all speed. These Tumors, and much more the Car∣buncles and Blaines doe require the care and skill of the expert Chirurgion: but not to leave the poorer sort destitute of good remedies, these following are very good. Pull off the feathers from the tailes of
liuing Cocks, Hennes, Pigeons, or Chic∣kens, and holding their bills, hold them hard to the Botch or swelling, and so keepe them at that part vntill they die, and by this meanes draw out the poison. It is good to apply a cupping glasse or embers in a dish, with a handfull of Sorrell vpon the embers. To breake the Tumor. TAke a great Onion, hollow it, put into it a Figge, Rue cut small, and a dram of Venice Treacle, put it close stopped in a wet paper, and roste it in the embers. Apply it hot vnto the Tumor, lay three or foure one after another, let one lie three houres Scabious and Sorrell rosted in the embers mixt with a little strong leaven, and some Barrowes grease, and a little salt, will draw it and breake it. Take two or three rosted onions, a Lil∣lie root or two rosted, a handfull of Sca∣bious rosted, foure or fiue figs, a piece of leauen and a little Rue, stampe all these to∣gether, if it be too dry, put to it two ounces of oile of Lillies, or so much salt butter, make a pultesse, applie it hot, after it hath lien three or foure houres, take it off and burne it, and apply a fresh pultesse of the same, if it proue hard to breake, adde a little burnt copperasse to the pultesse.
Or this. TAke the flowers of Elders two hand∣fuls, Rocker seed bruised one ounce, Pigeons dung three drams: stampe these together, put to them a little oile of Lillies, make thereof a pultesse, apply it and change it as you did the former. To draw. VVHen it is broken, to draw it & heale it take the yolke of an Egge, one ounce of honey of Roses, Turpentine halfe an ounce, wheat flowre a little, London Treacle a dram and a halfe, mixe these wel, spread it vpon leather, change it twice a day, or take Diachylon cum Gummis. For the Carbuncle. APplie an actuall or potentiall Cautery, saying a defensatiue of Bole▪ Armoni∣ack, or Terra Sigillata, mixed with Vineger and the white of an Egge, round about the tumour, but not vpon it. Take three or foure Cloues of Garlick, Rue halfe a handfull, foure Figges, strong Leauen, and the Soote of a Chymney in which wood hath beene burnt, of each,
halfe an ounce, Mustard-seed two drams, Salt a dram and a halfe, stampe these well together, and applie it hot to the sore: You may put thereto a little salt butter, if it be too dry. Or this. Take Leaven halfe an ounce, Ra∣dish Rootes the bigger the better, an ounce and an halfe, Mustard-Seed two drams, Onions and Garlick rosted, of each two drams and a halfe, Venice Trea∣cle, or Mithridatum, three drams, mixe these in a morter, applie it hot thrice a day to the Sore. But these Sores cannot be well ordered and cured, without the personall care of a discreet Surgeon. Take of Scabious two handfuls, stamp it in a stone morter, with a pestle of stone if you can get any such, then put into it of old Swines grease salted two ounces, and the yolke of an egge, stampe them well together, and lay part of this warme to the sore. Take of the leaues of Mallowes, of Camomyll Flowers, or either of them a handfull, of Linseed beaten into powder two ounces, boyle the Mallow leaues first cut, and the flowers of Camomyll in faire water, standing about a fingers breadth:
boyle all them together, vntill all the water be almost spent, then put thereunto the Linseed, of wheat flowre halfe a handfull, of Swines grease, the skinnes taken a∣way, three ounces, of Oyle of Lillies two ounces, stir them still with a stick, and let them all boyle together on a soft fire with∣out smoake, vntill the water bee vtterly spent: beat them altogether in a morter vntill they be well incorporated, and in fee∣ling, smooth and not rough. Then take part thereof hot in a dish, set vpon a Cha∣findish of coales, and lay it thick vpon a linen cloth, applying it to the sore. Take a white Onion cut in pieces, of fresh butter three ounces, of leauen the weight of twelue pence, of Mallowes one handfull, of Scabious, if it may bee had, one handfull, of Cloves of Garlick the weight of twenty pence: Boyle them on the fire in sufficient water, and make a pultesse of it, and lay it warme to the sore. Another. Take two handfuls of Valerian, three rootes of Danewort, an handfull of Smallage or Lovage. Seeth them all in Butter and water, and a few Crums of bread, and make a pultesse thereof, and lay it warme to the sore till it breake.
Another. If you cannot haue these hearbes, it is good to lay a loafe of bread to it hot, as it commeth out of the Oven (which after∣ward shall be burnt or buried in the earth) or the leaues of Scabious or Sorrell rosted, or two or three Lilly rootes, rosted vnder Embers, beated and applied.
¶Orders thought meete by his MAIESTIE and his Priuie Councell, to be executed throughout the Counties of this Realme, in such Townes, Villages and other places as are, or may be hereafter Infected with the Plague, for the stay of fur∣ther increase of the same. AS the most louing and gra∣cious care of his Maiesty for the preseruation of his People, hath already beene earnestly shewed and de∣clared by such meanes and waies as were thought expedient to suppresse the grie∣uous Infection of the Plague, and to pre∣uent the increase thereof, within the City of LONDON, & parts about it; so what∣soeuer other good meanes may bee yet re∣maining which may extend and proue be∣houefull
to the Countrey abroad (where his Maiestie is sorry to vnderstand that the Contagion is also in many places disper∣sed) it is likewise His gracious pleasure, that the same be carefully prouided and put in practise. And therefore hauing ta∣ken knowledge of certaine good Orders that were vpon like occasion published in time past, together with certaine Rules and medicines prescribed by the best and most learned Physicians, and finding both of them to serue well for the present time, his Maiesty is pleased, that the same shall be renewed and published: And withall straitly commandeth all Iustices of the Peace, and others to whom it may appertaine, to see the said Orders duely executed. At the Court at Hāpton Court this 30. of Iuly. 1603.
Infection of the Plague. INprimis, All the Iustices in euery County, aswel within the Liberties as without, immediately upon know∣ledge to them giuen, shall as∣semble themselues together at some one generall place accustomed, be∣ing clear from Infection of the Plague, to consult how these Orders following may be duly put in execution: not meaning that any Iustices dwelling in or neere places infected, shall come thither, whiles their comming may be doubtfull. And after their first generall assembly, they shall make a di∣stribution of themselves to sundry Limits and diuisions, as in other common seruices of the County they are accustomed to doe, for the prosecution thereof. 2 First, they shall enquire, and presently informe themselues by all good meanes, what Towns and villages are at the time of such assembly infected within every their Counties, and in what Hundred or other Diuision the said Townes and Villages are, and how many of the same places so infected are Corporate Townes, Market Townes, and Villages, and shall consider of what wealth the inhabitants of the same townes and Parishes are, to be able to relieue the poore that are or shalbe infec∣ted, and to be restrained in their houses.
3 Item, thereupon after conference v∣sed according to the necessitie of the cause, they shall deuise and make a general taxati∣on, either by charging the Towne infected with one summe in grosse, or by charging the speciall persons of wealth within the same, to be forth with collected for the rate of one moneth at the first, and so if the sick∣nesse shall continue, the collection of the like summe, or of more or of lesse, as time and cause shall require, and the same to be every first, second, third or fourth weeke employ∣ed to and for the execution of the said Or∣ders. And in case some of the said Townes Infected, shall manifestly appeare not to bee of sufficient abilitie to contribute suf∣ficient for the charges requisite, then the Taxation or Collection shall bee made or further extended to other parts, or in any other further limits, as by them shall bee thought requisite, where there shall be any such Townes or Villages so infected, and vnable to relieue themselues. And if the said Townes be situated in the borders & con∣fines of any other shire, then as the Iustices shall see cause and need for the greatnesse of the charge requisite, that the parts of the shire ioyning to the Towns infected be not able, they shal write their letters to the next Iustices of the other Shire so confining, to procure by collection some reliefe, as in like
cases they are to relieue them, in respect of neere neighbourhood of the place, & for that the same Infection may be the better stayed from the said adioyning places, though they be separated by name of the County. 4 Item, they shall cause to be appointed in euery Parish aswell infected as not infec∣ted, certaine persons to view the bodies of all such as shall die, before they be suffered to be buried, and to certifie the Minister of the Church and Churchwarden, or other prin∣cipall Officers, or their substitutes of what probable disease the said persons died: and the said viewers, to haue weekely some al∣lowance, & the more large allowance where the Townes or Parishes bee infected, du∣ring the infection, towards their mainte∣nance, to the end they which shalbe in places infected, may forbeare to resort into the company of others that are sound: and those persons to be sworne to make true report ac∣cording to their knowledge, & the choise of them to bee made by direction of the Curate of the Church, with three or foure substanti∣all men of the Parish. And in case the said viewers either through fauour or corrupti∣on▪ shall giue wrong certificate, or shal refuse to serue being thereunto appointed, then to cause them to be punished by imprisonment, in such sort as may serue for a terrour to others.
5 Item, the houses of such persons out of the which there shall die any of the Plague, beeing so certified by the viewers, or other∣wise knowen, or where it shall bee vnder∣stood, that any person remaineth sicke of the Plague, to bee closed vp in all parts during the time of restraint, viz. sixe weekes, after the sicknesse be ceased in the same house, in case the said houses so infected shalbe within any Towne hauing houses neere adioyning to the same. And if the infection happen in houses dispersed in Villages, and separated from other houses, and that of necessitie, for the seruing of their cattell, and manuring of their ground, the said persons cannot conti∣nue in their houses, then they bee neuerthe∣lesse restrained from resorting into company of others, either publikely, or priuately du∣ring the said time of restraint, and to weare some mark in their vppermost garments, or beare white rods in their hands at such time as they shall goe abroad: yf there be any doubt that the masters and owners of the houses infected, will not duely obserue the directions of shutting vp the doores, special∣ly in the night, then shall there be appointed two or three Watchmen by turnes, which shall be sworne to attend & watch the house, and to apprehend any person that shall come out of the house contrary to the order, and the same persons by order of the Iustices,
shall be a competent time imprisoned in the stockes in the high way next to the house in∣fected: and furthermore, some special marke shall be made and fixed to the doores of eue∣ry of the infected houses, and where any such houses shall be Innes or Alehouses, the Signes shall be taken downe for the time of the restraint, and some crosse, or other mark set vpon the place thereof to be a token of the sickenesse. 6 Item, they shall haue good regard to chuse honest persons, that either shall collect the summes assessed, or shall haue the custo∣die thereof, and out of the said collection to allot a weekly proportion for the finding of victuall, or fire, or medicines for the poorer sort, during the time of their restraint. And whereas some persons being well disposed to yeeld almes and reliefe, will be more wil∣ling to giue some portions of victuall, as corne, bread, or other meat, the same shall be committed to the charge of some special per∣sons, that will honestly and truely preserue the same, to be distributed as they shall be appointed for the poore that are infected. 7 Item, to appoint certaine persons dwelling within the Townes infected, to prouide and deliuer all necessaries of victu∣als, or any matter of watching or other at∣tendance, to keep such as are of good wealth being restrained, at their owne proper costs
and charges, and the poore at the common charges: and the said persons so appointed to be ordered, not to resort to any publike as∣sembly during the time of such their atten∣dance, as also to weare some marke on their vpper garment, or to beare a white rod in their hand, to the end others may auoide their company. 8 Item, that in the shire towne in euery Countie, and in other great townes meete for that purpose, there may be prouision be∣spoken and made, of such Preseruatiues and other remedies, which otherwise in meaner towns cannot be readily had, as by the Physicians shall be prescribed, and is at this present reduced into an Aduice made by the Physicians, and now printed and sent with the said Orders, which may be fixed in Market-places, vpon places vsuall for such publique matters, and in other Townes in the bodies of the parish Churches, and chappels: in which Aduice only such things are prescribed, as vsually are to be had and found in all Countreys without great charge or cost. 9 Item, the Ministers and Curats, and the Churchwardens in euery parish, shall in writing certifie weekely to some of the Iu∣stices, residing within the Hundred or other limit where they serue, the number of such persons as are infected and doe not die, and
also of all such as shall die within their Pa∣rishes, and their diseases probable whereof they died, and the same to be certified to the rest of the Iustices at their assemblies, which during some conuenient time would be eue∣ry one and twenty dayes, and thereof a par∣ticular book kept by the Clerk of the Peace, or some such like. 10 Item, to appoint some place apart in each Parish for the buriall of such persons as shall die of the Plague, as also to giue or∣der that they be buried after Sun setting, and yet neuerthelesse by day light, so as the Ceate be present for the obseruation of the Rites and Ceremonies prescribed by the Law, foreseeing as much as coueniently he may, to be distant from the danger of infec∣tion of the person dead, or of the company that shall bring the corpse to the graue. 11 Item, the Iustices, of the whole Coun∣tie to assemble once in one and twentie dayes, to examine whether those Orders be duely executed, and to certifie to the Lords of the Priuie Councell their proceedings in that behalfe, what Townes and Villages be infected, as also the numbers of the dead, and the diseases whereof they dyed, and what summes of money are taxed and col∣lected to this purpose, and how the same are distributed.
12 Item, the Iustices of the Hundred, where any such infection is, or the Iustices next adioyning thereunto, to assemble once a weeke, to take accompt of the execution of the said Orders, and as they finde any lacke or disorder, either to reforme it them∣selues, or to report it at the generall as∣sembly there, to be by a more common con∣sent reformed. 13 Item, for that the contagion of the Plague groweth and encreaseth no way more, then by the vse and handling of such clothes, bedding and other stuffe as hath bin worne and occupied by the Infected of this disease, during the time of their disease: the said Iustices shal in the places infected take such order, that all the said clothes and o∣ther stuffe, so occupied by the diseased, so soone as the parties diseased of the plague are all of them either well recouered or dead, be either burnt and cleane consumed with fire, or else aired in such sort as is prescribed in an especiall Article contained in the ad∣uice set downe by the Physicians. And for that peraduenture the losse of such apparell, bedding, and other stuffe to be burnt, may be greater then the poore estate of the owners of the same may well beare: it is thought very good & expedient, if it be thought meet it shall be burnt, that then the said Iustices, out of such Collections as are to be made
within their Counties for the reliefe of the poorer sort that be infected, allow also them such summe or summes as to them shall be thought reasonable, in recompense of the losse of their said stuffe. 14 Item, the said Iustices may put in execution any other Orders that by them at their generall assembly shall be deuised and thought meet, tending to the preseruation of his Maiesties Subiects from the infec∣tion. And to the end their care and diligence may the better appeare, they shall certifie in writing the said Orders newly deuised: and if any shall wilfully break and contemne the same, or any the Orders herein specified, they shall either presently punish them by imprisonment, or if the persons so contem∣ning them, shall be of such countenance as the Iustices shall thinke meet to haue their faults known to His Maiestie, or to the Councell, they shall charge and binde them to appeare before Vs, and the contempt due∣ly certified, that there may be a more notori∣ous sharpe example made by punishment of the same by order of His Maiesty. 15 Item, if there be lacke of Iustices in some parts of the Shire, or if they which are Iustices there, shall be for the time absent, in that case the more number of the Iusti∣ces at their assembly shall make choice of some conuenient persons to supply those
places for the better execution hereof. 16 Item, if there be any person Ecclesia∣sticall or Lay, that shall hold and publish a∣ny opinions (as in some places report is made) that it is a vain thing to forbeare to resort to the Infected, or that it is not chari∣table to forbid the same, pretending that no person shall die but at their time prefixed, such persons shall be not onely reprehended, but by order of the Bishop, if they be Ecclesi∣asticall, shall be forbidden to preach, and be∣ing Lay, shall be also enioyned to forbear to vtter such dangerous opinions vpon pain of imprisonment, which shall be executed, if they shall perseuere in that errour. And yet it shall appeare manifestly by these Orders, that according to Christian charity, no per∣sons of the meanest degree shall be left with∣out succour and reliefe. 17 And of these things aboue mentioned, the Iustices shall take great care, as of a matter specially directed and commanded by his Maiesty vpon the princely and natu∣ral care he hath conceiued towards the pre∣seruation of his Subiects, who by very dis∣order, and for lacke of direction do in many parts wilfully procure the increase of this generall Contagion.
¶Orders conceiued and agreed to bee published by the Lord Maior and Aldermen of the Citie of London, and the Iustices of Peace of the Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, by direction from the Lords of His Maiesties most Honourable Privy Councell. WHereas in the first yeere of the Reigne of our late Soue∣raigne, King Iames of happy memory, ouer this Realme of England, an Acte was made for the charitable reliefe and Ordering of persons infected with the Plague: whereby Authority is giuen to Iustices of Peace, Maiors, Bayliffes, and other head Offi∣cers, to appoint within their seuerall Li∣mits Examiners, Searchers, Watchmen, Keepers, and Buriers for the persons and places infected, and to minister unto them Oathes for the performance of their Offi∣ces. And the same Statute also authori∣seth the giving of other Directions, as un∣to them for the present necessity shall seeme
good in their discretions. It is therefore vpon speciall consideration thought very expedient for the preuenting and auoyding of the Infection of Sicknesse (if it shal please Almighty God) which is now dan∣gerously dispersed into many places within the City and Suburbes of the same: that these Officers following bee appointed, and these Orders hereafter prescribed bee duely obserued. Examiners to be appointed in euery Parish. FIrst, It is thought requisite and so or∣dered, that in euery Parish there be one, two, or more persons of good sort and credit, chosen and appointed by the Alderman, his Deputy, and Common Councell of euery Ward, and by the Iustices of Peace in the Counties, by the name of Examiners, to continue in that Office the space of two mo∣neths at least: and if any fit persons so ap∣pointed as aforesaid, shall refuse to vnder∣take the same, the said parties so refusing, to bee committed to prison vntill they shall conforme themselues accordingly. The Examiners Office. THat these Examiners bee sworne by the Alderman, or by one of the Iustices of
the County, to enquire and learne from time to time what houses in euery parish be visi∣ted, and what persons be sicke, and of what Diseases, as neere as thy can enforme themselues, and vpon doubt in that case, to command restraint of accesse, vntill it ap∣peare what the Disease shall proue: and if they finde any person sicke of the Infection, to giue order to the Constable that the house be shut vp: and if the Constable shalbe found remisse or negligent, to giue present notice thereof to the Alderman, or the Iustice of Peace respectiuely. Watchmen. THat to euery Infected house there be ap∣pointed two watchmen, one for the day and the other for the night: And that these Watchmen haue a speciall care that no per∣son goe in or out of such infected houses, whereof they haue the charge, vpon paine of seuere punishment. And the sayd Watch∣men to doe such further Offices as the sicke house shall neede and require: and if the Watchman be sent vpon any busines, to lock vp the house and take the Key with him: and the Watchman by day to attend vntil ten of the clocke at night: and the Watchman by night till sixe in the morning. Chirurgions. THat there bee a speciall care, to appoint women Searchers in euery parish, such
as are of honest reputation, & of the best sort as can be got in this kinde: And these to be sworne to make due search and true report, to the vtmost of their knowledge, whether the persons, whose bodies they are appoin∣ted to Search, doe die of the Infection, or of what other diseases, as neere as they can. And for their better assistance herein, foras∣much as there hath beene heretofore great abuse in misreporting the disease, to the fur∣ther spreading of the Infection: It is there∣fore ordered, that there bee chosen and ap∣pointed three able and discreet Chirurgions, besides those three, that doe already belong to the Pesthouse: amongst whom, the Citie and Liberties to be quartered, as the places lie most apt and conuenient: and euery of these sixe to haue one quarter for his Limit: and the said Chirurgions in euery of their Limits to ioyne with the Searchers for the view of the bodie, to the end there may bee a true report made of the disease. And further, that the said Chirurgeons shall visite and search such like persons as shall either send for them, or bee named and directed vnto them, by the examiners of euery Parish, and informe themselues of the disease of the said parties. And forasmuch as the said Chirurgions are to bee sequestred from all other Cures, and kept onely to this disease of the Infec∣tion: It is ordered, that euery of the said
Chirurgions shall haue twelue pence a bo∣dy searched by them, to bee paid out of the goods of the party searched, if he be able, or otherwise by the Parish. Orders concerning infected houses and persons sicke of the Plague. Notice to be giuen of the Sicknesse. THe Master of euery house, assoone as any one in his house complai∣neth, either of Botch, or Purple, or Swelling in any part of his bo∣dy, or falleth otherwise dangerously sicke, without apparant cause of some other dis∣ease, shall giue knowledge thereof to the Examiner of health within two houres af∣ter the said signe shall appeare. Sequestration of the sicke. AS soon as any man shalbe found by this Examiner, Chirurgion or Searcher, to be sick of the Plague, he shall the same night be sequestred in the same house. And in case he be so sequestred, then though he after∣wards die not, the house wherein hee sick∣ned, shall be shut vp for a moneth, after the vse of due Preseruatiues taken by the rest. Ayring the Stuffe. FOr sequestration of the goods and stuffe of the Infected, their Bedding, and Ap∣parell, and hangings of Chambers, must be
well ayred with fire, and such perfumes as are requisite within the Infected house, be∣fore they be taken againe to vse: this to be done by the appointment of the Examiner. Shutting vp of the house. IF any person shall haue visited any man, knowne to be Infected of the Plague, or entred willingly into any knowen infected house, being not allowed: the house where∣in he inhabiteth, shall be shut vp for certaine dayes by the Examiners direction. None to be remooued out of infected houses, but &c. ITem, that none bee remooued out of the house where he falleth sick of the infection, into any other house in the Citie, Borough, or County (except it be to the Pest-house or a Tent, or vnto some such house, which the owners of the said Visited house holdeth in his owne hands, and occupieth by his owne seruants) and so as securitie be giuen to the Parish whither such remooue is made, that the attendance and charge a∣bout the said Visited persons, shall be obser∣ued and charged in all the particularities before expressed, without any cost of that Parish, to which any such remoue shall hap∣pen to be made, and this remoue to be done by night: And it shall be lawfull to any per∣son that hath two houses, to remooue either his sound or his infected people to his spare
house at his choice, so as if he send away first his sound, he may not after send thither the sick, nor againe vnto the sick the sound: And that the same which he sendeth, be for one weeke at the least shut vp, and secluded from company for feare of some infection, at the first not appearing. Buriall of the dead. THat the buriall of the dead by this Visi∣tation be at most conuenient houres, al∣wayes either before Sunne rising, or after Sunne setting, with the priuitie of the Churchwardens or Constables, and not otherwise, and that no neighbours nor friends be suffered to accompany the Coarse to Church, or to enter the house visited, vp∣on paine of hauing his house shut vp, or bee imprisoned. No infected stuffe to be vttered. THat no Clothes, Stuffe, bedding or gar∣ments be suffred to be carried or conuey∣ed out of any Infected Houses, and that the Criers and Caries abroad of Bedding or olde Apparell to be Sold or Pawned, be vtterly Prohibited and restrained, and no Brokers of Bedding, or olde Apparell bee permitted to make any outward Shew, or hang forth on their Stalles, Shop-boords or Windowes, towards any Streete, Lane, common Way or passage, any olde Bedding or Apparell to bee solde, vpon paine of Im∣prisonment:
And if any Broker or other per∣son shall buy any Bedding, Apparell, or o∣ther Stuffe out of any Infected House, within two moneths after the Infection hath been there, his house shall bee shut vp as Infected, and so shall continue shut vp twenty dayes at the least. No person to be conueyed out of any Infected house. IF any person Visited doe fortune, by neg∣ligent looking vnto, or by any other meanes, to come or be conueyed from a place infected, to any other place, the Parish from whence such Party hath come, or beene con∣ueyed, vpon notice thereof giuen, shall at their charge cause the said party so Visited and escaped, to bee caried and brought backe againe by night, and the parties in this case offending, to be punished at the direction of the Alderman of the Ward, and the Iustices of the Peace respectiuely: and the house of the receiuer of such visited person to be shut vp for twenty dayes. Euery Visited house to be marked. THat euery house visited be marked with a Red Crosse of a foot long, in the middle of the doore, euident to bee seene, and with these vsuall Printed words, that is to say, Lord haue mercy vpon vs, to bee set close ouer the same Crosse, there to continue vntill lawfull opening of the same house.
Euery Visited house to be watched. THat the Constables see euery house shut vp, and to be attended with Watchmen, which may keepe them in, and minister ne∣cessaries vnto them at their own charges (if they be able) or at the common charge if they be vnable: the shutting vp to be for the space of foure weekes after all be whole. That precise order be taken that the Searchers, Chirurgions, Keepers and Bu∣riers are not to passe the streets without hol∣ding a red Rod or Wand of three foot in length in their hands, open and euident to be seene, and are not to goe into any other house, then into their owne, or into that whereunto they are directed or sent for, but to forbeare and abstaine from company, es∣pecially when they haue been lately vsed in any such businesse or attendance. And to this end it is ordered, that a weeke∣ly Taxe be made in euery Parish visited: If in the City or Borough, then vnder the hand of the Alderman of the Ward, where the place is visited: if in either of the Counties, then vnder the hands of some of the Iusti∣ces next to the place visited, who, if there bee cause, may extend the Taxe into other Pa∣rishes also, and may giue warrant of distresse against them which shall refuse to pay: and for want of distresse, or for assistance, to commit the offenders to prison, according to the Statute in that behalfe.
Orders for cleansing and keeping of the Streets sweet. The streets to be kept cleane. FIrst, it is thought very necessary and so ordered, that euery house-holder do cause the Street to bee daily pa∣red before his doore, and so to keep it cleane sweptall the weeke long. That Rakers take it from out the houses. THat the sweeping and filth of houses be dayly caried away by the Rakers, and that the Raker shall giue notice of his com∣ming by the blowing of a Horne, as hereto∣fore hath beene done. Laystals to be made far off from the City. THat the Laystals bee remooued as farre as may be out of the City, and common passages, and that no Night-man or other be suffered to empty a Vault into any Gar∣den neere about the Citie. Care to be had of vnwholsome Fish, or Flesh, and of mustie Corne. THat speciall care be taken, that no stin∣king Fish, or vnwholesome Flesh, or mustie Corne, or other corrupt fruits, of what sort soeuer, be suffered to be sold about the City or any part of the same. That the Bruers and Tipling houses be looked vnto, for mustie and vnwholesome Caske.
That order be taken, that no Hogs, Dogs, or cats, or tame Pigeons, or Conies be suf∣fered to be kept within any part of the City, or any Swine to be, or stray in the Streets or Lanes, but that such Swine bee Im∣pounded by the Beadle or any other Offi∣cer, & the owner punished according to the Act of Common Councell, and that the Dogs be killed by the Dog killers, appoin∣ted for that purpose. Orders concerning loose Persons, and idle assemblies. Beggers. FOr asmuch as nothing is more com∣plained on, then the multitude of Rogues and wandering Beggers, that swarme in euery place about the City, being a great cause of the spreading of the in∣fection, & will not be auoided, notwithstan∣ding any Order that hath been giuen to the contrary: It is therefore now ordered, that such Constables, and others whom this matter may any way concerne, doe take speciall care, that no wandering Begger be suffered in the Streets of this City, in any fashion or manner whatsoeuer vpon paine of the penalty prouided by the Law to be duely and seuerely executed vpon them.
Playes. THat all Plaies, Beare-baitings, Games, Singing of Ballads, Buckler-play, or such like causes or Assemblies of people, bee vtterly prohibited, and the parties offend∣ing, seuerely punished, by any Alderman, or Iustice of the peace. Tipling houses. THat disorderly Tipling in Tauernes Ale-houses and Cellers, be seuerely loo∣ked vnto, as the common sinne of this time, and greatest occasion of dispersing the Plague: and where any shall be found to of∣fend, the penalty of the Statute to be laid vpon them with all seuerity. And for the better execution of these Or∣ders, as also for such other directions as shall be needfull, It is agreed that the Iusti∣ces of the City and the Counties adioyning doe meete together once in ten dayes either at the Sessions house without Newgate, or some other conuenient place, to conferre of things as shall be needfull in this behalfe. And euery person neglecting the duety re∣quired, or willingly offending against any Article or clause contained in these Orders, he to be seuerely punished by imprisonment, or otherwise, as by the law he ought. God saue the King.
❧ By the KING. ¶A Proclamation for quickning the Lawes made for the reliefe of the poore, and the suppressing, punish∣ing, and setling of the sturdy Rogues and Vagabonds. WHereas many excel∣lent Lawes and Sta∣tutes with great iudge∣ment and prouidence haue been made in the times of Our late deare and Royall Father, and of the late Queene Elizabeth, for the reliefe of the impo∣tent and indigent Poore, and for the punishing, suppressing, and setling of the sturdy Rogues and Vaga∣bonds,
which Lawes and Sta∣tutes, if they were duely obserued, would be of exceeding great vse for the peace and plenty of this Realme, but the neglect thereof is the occasi∣on of much disorder, and many in∣sufferable abuses. And whereas it is fit at all times to put in execution those Lawes which are of so neces∣sary, and so continuall vse: yet the apparant aud visible danger of the Pestilence, (vnlesse the same by Gods gracious mercie, and Our prouident endeuours be preuented) doth much more require the same at this prsent. We have therefore thought it fit, by the aduice of Our Priuie Coun∣cell, by this Our publike Proclama∣tion, straightly to charge and com∣mand, that all our louing Subiects in their seuerall places, doe use all possible care and diligence as a prin∣cipall meanes to preuent the spread∣ing, and dispersing of that contagi∣ous
sicknesse, to obserue and put in due execution, all the said Lawes made and prouided against Rogues and Vagabonds, and for the reliefe of the truely poore and impotent people. And in the first place, Wee strictly charge and command, that in Our Cities of London, and Westminster, and Suburbs there∣of, and places adiacent thereunto, and generally throughout the whole Kingdome, that there bee carefull Watch, and Ward kept for the apprehending and punishing of all Rogues and Vagabonds, who either in the streets or high wayes, vnder the names of Souldiers, or Mariners, Glasse-men, Pot-men, Pedlars, or Petty-Chapmen, or of poore or impotent people, shall bee found either wandring, or begging. And Wee doe further strictly charge and command, that all Con∣stables, Head-boroughs, and other Officers, doe vse all diligence, to pu∣nish,
and passe away according to the Law, all such Wanderers, or Beggers, as shall be apprehended, either in the Cities, or places afore∣said, or in any other Cities, Towns, Parishes, or places within this Realme, and take great care that none passe under the colour of coun∣terfeit Passes. And that all Irish Rogues, and Vagabonds be forth∣with apprehended, wheresoeuer they shall be found, and punished, and sent home according to a former Proclamation, heretofore published in that behalfe. That all House∣holders of whose persons, or at whose houses any such Vagrants shall be taken begging, doe appre∣hend, or cause them to be apprehen∣ded, and caried to the next Consta∣ble, or other Officer to be punished, according to the Lawes. And that they forbeare to relieue them, there∣by to giue them incouragement to cōtinue in their wicked course of life.
That the Iustices of Peace in their seuerall places throughout this Kingdome be carefull either by Prouost Marshals, or by the high Constables, or otherwise by their good discretions effectually to pro∣uide, that all Rogues and Vaga∣bonds of all sorts be searched for, apprehended, punished and suppres∣sed according to the Law. And that once euery moneth at the least, a con∣uenient number of the Iustices of Peace in euery seuerall County and Diuision, shall meete together in some conuenient place in that diui∣uision, and take account of the high Constables, petty Constables, and other Officers within that Diuisi∣on, how they haue obserued the Lawes and Our commandment touching the Premisses. And that they seuerely punish all such as shall bee found remisse or negligent in that behalfe. And Wee doe hereby strictly charge and com∣mand
as well all and singular Iu∣stices of Peace, Constables, Head∣boroughs, and other Our Officers and Ministers, as also all Our lo∣uing Subiects of what estate or de∣gree soeuer, to vse all diligence, that all and euery houses or places which are or shall bee visited or infected with the sicknesse, bee carefully shut vp, and Watch and Ward kept ouer them, that no person or persons within those places doe goe abroad, or depart from thence, during the time of such Visitation. And We doe hereby command all and singu∣lar Our Iudges of Assize in their seuerall Circuits to giue speciall charge, and make speciall enquiry of the defaults of all and euery the Iu∣stices of Peace who shall not ob∣serue their meetings in the seuerall Counties and Diuisions aforesaid, or shall not punish such Constables or other Officers as being informed either by their owne view and
knowledge, or otherwise are or shall be found remisse or negligent in the Premisses, or in leauying such pe∣nalties & forfeitures as the Lawes and Statutes of this Realme re∣quire against the parties offending herein. And thereof to informe Vs or Our Priuy Councell, to the end that such due course may bee taken either by remouing out of the Com∣mission such negligent Iustices of the Peace, or otherwise by inflicting such punishment upon them as shall be due to such as neglect their owne duties, and Our Royall command published upon so important an oc∣casion. And We doe hereby will, require and command all and euery Our Iudges of Assize, Maiors, She∣riffes, Iustices of Peace, Consta∣bles, Headboroughs and other Our Officers, Ministers and Subiects whom it may concerne that they carefully and effectually obserue
and performe all and euery the Pre∣misses, as they will answere the neglect thereof at their vttermost perils. And whereas Wee haue lately commanded a Booke to be printed and published containing certaine Statutes made and enacted hereto∣fore for the reliefe of the Poore, and of Souldiers and Mariners, and for punishment of Rogues and Va∣gabonds, and for the reliefe and or∣dering of persons infected with the Plague, and also containing cer∣taine Orders heretofore and now lately conceiued and made concern∣ing health: All which are necessary to be knowen and obserued by Our louing Subiects, that thereby they may the better auoid those dangers which otherwise may fall vpon their persons or estates by their neglect thereof: Wee haue thought it fit hereby to giue notice thereof to all Our louing Subiects, to the end
that none may pretend ignorance for an excuse in matters of so great im∣portance. And wee doe hereby de∣clare, that whosoeuer shall be found remisse or negligent in the execution of any part of the Premisses, shall receiue such condigne punishment for their offence, as by the Lawes of this Realme, or by Our Preroga∣tiue Royall can or may be iustly in∣flicted vpon them. Giuen at our Court at White-hall the three and twentieth day of April, in the sixt yeere of Our Reigne of England, Scot∣land, France and Ireland. God saue the King.
Anno xliii. Reginae Elizebethae. ¶An Act for the reliefe of the poore. BE it enacted by the authori∣tie of this present Parlia∣ment, The Church∣wardens of euery Parish, & other substan∣tiall houshold∣ers yeerely to be nominated at Easter, to be Ouerseers for the poore. that the Churchwar∣dens of euery parish, and foure, three, or two substan∣tiall housholders there, as shall be thought meet, ha∣uing respect to the proportion and greatnes of the same Parish and Parishes, to be no∣minated yeerely in Easter weeke, or within one moneth after Easter, vnder the hand and Seale of two or more Iustices of the peace in the same Countie, whereof one to be of the Quorum, dwelling in or neere the same Parish or diuision, where the same Parish doeth lie, shall be called Ouerseers of the poore of the same parish. And they, or the greater part of them shall take order from time to time,Children of the poore to be set to work. by and with the consent of two or more such Iustices of Peace as is aforesaid, for setting to worke of the children of all such whose parents shall not by the said Churchwardens and Ouerseers, or the greater part of them, bee thought able to keepe and maintaine their
children. And also for setting to worke all such persons married, or vnmarried, hauing no means to maintaine them, vse no ordina∣ry and dayly trade of life to get their liuing by, and also to raise weekly or otherwise (by taxation of euery inhabitant, Parson, Vicar and other, and of euery occupier of Lands, Houses, Tithes impropriate, or Propriati∣ons of tithes, Cole-mines, or saleable vnder∣woods in the said Parish, in such competent summe and summes of money, stocke of axe & Hemp  to be raised. as they shall thinke fit (a conuenient stocke of flaxe, hemp, wooll, threed, yron, and other necessary ware and stuffe to set the poore on worke, and also competent sums of money, for, and towards the necessary reliefe of the lame, impotent, old, blind, and such other among them being poore, & not able to worke, & also for the put∣ting out of such children to bee apprentices, to be gathered out of the same Parish, accor∣ding to the ability of the same Parish and to doe and execute all other things, aswell for the disposing of the said storke, as otherwise concerning the premisses,The Church∣wardens and Ouerseers to meet together once euery moneth. as to them shall seeme conuenient. Which said Churchwar∣dens and Ouerseers so to be nominated, or such of them as shall not be let by sicknesse, or other iust excuse, to be allowed by two such Iustices of Peace or more, as is aforesaid, shall meete together at the least once euery moneth in the Church of the said Parish, vp∣on
the Sunday in the afternoone, after di∣uine Seruice, there to consider of some good course to be taken, and of some meet order to be set downe in the premisses, and shal with∣in foure daies after the end of their yere, and after other Ouerseers nominated as afore∣said, Account to be giuen by the Ouerseers to two Iustices of Peace. make and yeeld vp to such two Iustices of Peace as is aforesaid, a true and perfect account of all summes of money by them re∣ceiued, or rated and sessed, and not receiued, and also of such stocke as shall bee in their hands, or in the hands of any of the poore to worke, and of all other things concerning their said office, and such summe or summes of money as shall he in their hands, shal pay and deliuer ouer to the said Churchwardens and Ouerseers, newly nominated and ap∣pointed as is aforesaid, vpon paine that eue∣ry one of them absenting themselues with∣out lawful cause as aforefaid, from such mo∣nethly meeting for the purpose aforesaid, or being negligent in their office, or in the exe∣cution of the Orders aforesaid, being made by and with the assent of the said Iustices of Peace, or any two of them before mentio∣ned, to forfeit for euery such default of ab∣sence, or negligence, twenty shillings. And be it also enacted,Other Pari∣shes within the Hundred, to be taxed towards the reliefe of poore parishes. that if the said Iu∣stices of Peace doe perceiue that the Inhabi∣tants of any Parish are not able to leuie a∣mong themselues sufficient summes of mo∣ney
for the purposes aforesaid: that then the said two Iustices shall and may taxe, rate and assesse, as aforesaid, any other of other Parishes, or out of any Parish within the Hundred where the said Parish is to pay such sum and sums of money to the Church∣wardens and Ouerseers of the said poore parish, for the said purposes, as the said Iusti∣ces shall thinke fit, according to the intent of this Law. And if the said Hundred shall not be thought to the said Iustices, able, and fit to relieue the said seuerall Parishes not able to prouide for themselues as aforesaid; Then the Iustices of Peace at their gene∣rall quarter Sessions, or the greater num∣ber of them, shall rate and assesse, as afore∣said any other of other Parishes, or out of any Parish within the said County for the purposes aforesaid, as in their discretion shall seeme fit. And that it shall be lawfull aswell for the present as subsequent Churchwardens, and Ouerseers, or any of them, by warrant from any two such Iustices of peace as is afore∣said, to leuie aswell the said sums of money and all arrerages of euery one that shall re∣fuse to contribute according as they shall be assessed,How to leuie money of such as refuse to pay. by distresse and sale of the offen∣dors goods, as the summes of money, or stock which shall be behinde vpon any ac∣count to be made as aforesaid, rendring to
the parties the ouerplus, and in defect of such distresse, it shall be lawfull for any such two Iustices of the Peace, to commit him or them to the common Goale of the Coun∣tie, there to remaine without baile or main∣prise, vntill paiment of the said sum arrera∣ges and stocke.Punishment of such as will not work. And the said Iustices of Peace, or any of them, to send to the house of correction or common Goale such as shall not employ themselues to worke, being ap∣pointed thereunto as aforesaid: And also any two such Iustices of Peace, to commit to the said prison, euery one of the said Churchwardens and Ouerseers, which shall refuse to accompt, there to remaine without baile or maineprise, untill he haue made a true accompt, and satisfied and paid so much as vpon the said accompt shall be remaining in his hands. And be it further enacted, that it shall be lawfull for the said Churchwardens and Ouerseers, or the greater part of them, by the assent of any two Iustices of the Peace aforesaid,Poore children to be put ap∣prentices by the Church∣wardens and Ouerseers. to bind any such children as afore∣said, to be apprentices, where they shall see conuenient, till such man child shall come to the age of foure and twenty yeeres, and such woman childe to the age of one and twenty years or the time of her mariage: The same to be as effectuall to all purposes, as if such child were of full age, and by Indenture of
couenant bound him or herselfe, And to the intent that necessary places of habitation may more conueniently be prouided for such poore impotent people, Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawfull for the said Churchwardens and Ouerseers, or the greater part of them, by the leaue of the Lord or Lords of the Man∣nour, whereof any waste, or Common with∣in their Parish is or shall be parcell, and vp∣on agreement before with him or them made in writing vnder the hands and seales of the said Lord and Lords or otherwise, ac∣cording to any order to be set downe by the Iustices of Peace of the said Countie at their generall Quarter Sessions, or the greater part of them, by like leaue and agreement of the said Lord or Lords, in wri∣ting vnder his or their hands and seals. To erect, build and set vp in fit and conuenient places of habitation,Dwelling pla∣ces for impo∣tent poore to be built. in such Waste or Com∣mon, at the generall charges of the Parish, or otherwise of the Hundred or Countie as aforesaid, to be taxed, rated and gathered, in manner before expressed, conuenient hou∣ses of dwelling for the said impotent poore, and also to place Inmates or more families then one in one Cottage or house, One Act made in the one & thirtieth yeere of her Ma∣iesties Reigne, intituled, An Act against the erecting and maintaining of Cottages,
or any thing therein contained to the con∣trary notwithstanding. Which Cottages and places for Inmates shal not at any time after be vsed or imployed to or for any other habitation, but only for impotent and poore of the same Parish, that shall be there pla∣ced from time to time by the Churchwar∣dens and Ouerseers of the poore of the same Parish or the most part of them, vpon the paines and forfeitures contained in the said former Act made in the said one and thirtieth yeere of her Maiesties reigne. Prouided alwayes,Order for such as are geieue with any Sesse or Taxe. that if any person or persons shall finde themselues grieued with any Sesse or Taxe, or other Act done by the sayd Churchwardens and other per∣sons, or by the sayd Iustices of Peace, that then it shall be lawfull for the Iustices of Peace, at their generall quarter Sessi∣ons, or the greater number of them, to take such order therein as to them shalbe thought conuenient, and the same to conclude and binde all the sayd parties. And be it further enacted,Parents, &c. being able, shall maitain their owne poore. That the Fa∣ther and Grandfather, and the Mother, and Grandmother, and the children of e∣uery poore, old, blinde, lame, and impo∣tent person, or other poore person, not able to worke, being of a sufficient abilitie, shall at their owne charges relieue and main∣taine euery such poore person in that man∣ner,
and according to that rate, as by the Iu∣stices of Peace of that County where such sufficient persons dwell, or the greater number of them, at their generall quarter Sessions shall bee assessed, vpon paine that euery one of them shall forfeit twenty shil∣lings for euery moneth which they shal faile therein. And be it further hereby enacted, That the Maiors, Bailiffes, or other head Offi∣cers of euery Towne, and place Corporate, and City within this Realme, being Iustice or Iustices of Peace, shall haue the same au∣thority by vertue of this Act, within the limits and precincts of their Iurisdictions, aswel out of Sessions as at their Sessions, if they hold any, as is herein limited, pre∣scribed, and appointed to Iustices of Peace of the County, or any two or more of them, or to the Iustices of Peace in their quarter Sessions, to doe and execute for all the vses and purposes in this Act prescribed, and no other Iustice or Iustices of Peace to enter or meddle there.Every Alderman in the city of Londō  authority as two Iu∣stices of Peace. And that euery Alderman of the Citie of London within his Ward, shall and may doe and execute in euery re∣spect, so much as is appointed and allowed by this Act to be done and executed by one or two Iustices of Peace of any Countie within this Realme. And be it also enacted, That if it shall hap∣pen,
any Parish to extend it selfe into more Counties then one, or part to lie within the Liberties of any City, Town, or place Cor∣porate, and part without, that then as well the Iustices of Peace of euery Countie, as also the head Officers of such City,Iustices. &c. to meddle onely in their owne Liberties. Towne, or place corporate, shall deale and intermed∣dle onely in so much of the said Parish, as li∣eth within their liberties, and not any fur∣ther. And euery of them respectiuely within their seuerall Limits, Wards and Iurisdic∣tions, to execute the ordinances before men∣tioned concerning the nomination of Ouer∣seers, the consent to binding Apprentices, the giuing warrant to leuie taxations vn∣payed, the taking account of Churchward∣ens and Ouerseers, and the committing to prison such as refuse to accompt, or deny to pay the arrerages due vpon their accompts. And yet neuerthelesse,A double ac∣count to be made. the said Church∣wardens and Ouerseers, or the most part of them of the said Parishes, that doe extend into such seuerall Limits and Iurisdicti∣ons, shall without diuiding themselues, due∣ly execute their office in all places within the said Parish, in all things to them belon∣ging, and shall duely exhibite and make one accompt before the said head Officer of the Towne or place Corporate, and one other before the said Iustices of Peace, or any such two of them as is aforesaid.
And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, for . That if in any place within this Realme there happen to bee hereafter no such nomination of Ouerseers yeerely as is before appointed, that then euery Iustice of Peace of the County dwelling within the diuision, where such default of nomination shall happen, and euery Maior, Alderman, and head Officer, of City, Towne, or place Corporate, where such default shall happen, shall lose and forfeit for euery such default fiue pound, to be imployed towards the re∣liefe of the poore of the said Parish, or place Corporate, and to be leuied as aforesaid of their goods by warrant from the generall Sessions of the Peace of the said Countie, or of the same City, Towne, or place Corpo∣rate, if they keepe Sessions. And be it also enacted by the authority a∣foresaid, Penalties and forfeitures to bee employed to poores vse. that all penalties and forfeitures, before mentioned in this Act to bee forfeited by any person or persons, shall goe and be im∣ployed to the vse of the poore of the same Pa∣rish, and towards a stock and habitation for them, and other necessary vses and reliefe as before in this Act are mentioned and expres∣sed, and shalbe leuied by the said Churchwar∣dens and Ouerseers▪ or one of them, by war∣rant frō any two such Iustices of Peace, or Maior, Alderman, or head Officer of Citie, Town or place corporate, respectiuely with∣in
their seuerall limites by distresse and sale thereof, as aforesaid, or in defect thereof, it shall be lawfull for any two such Iustices of Peace, and the said Aldermen and head Offi∣cers within their seuerall limits, to commit the offendor to the said prison, there to re∣maine without baile or maineprise, till the said forfeitures shalbe satisfied and payed.Parishes to be rated at the ge∣nerall i∣ons. And bee it further enacted by the authori∣tie aforesaid, that the Iustices of Peace of e∣uery County or place corporate, or the more part of them in their generall Sessions to be holden next after the feast of Easter next, and so yeerely as often as they shall thinke meet, shall rate euery Parish to such a weekely summe of money as they shall thinke conue∣nient, so as no Parish bee rated aboue the summe of sixe pence, nor vnder the summe of a halfepeny, weekely to be payed, and so as the totall summe of such taxation of the Pa∣rishes in euery County, amount not aboue the rate of two pence for euery Parish with∣in the said County.Leuying of summes of money rated. Which summes so taxed, shall bee yeerely assessed by the agreement of the Parishioners within themselues, or in default thereof, by the Churchwardens and petie Constables of the same Parish, or the more part of them, or in default of their a∣greement, by the order of such Iustice or Iu∣stices of Peace as shall dwell in the same Pa∣rish, or (if none bee there dwelling) in the
parts next adioyning. And if any person shal refuse or neglect to pay any such portion of money so taxed, it shalbe lawfull for the said Churchwardens and Constables, or any of them, or in their default for any Iustice of Peace of the said limite, to leuie the same by distresse, and sale of the goods of the party so refusing or neglecting, rendring to the party the ouerplus, and in default of such distresse, it shalbe lawful to any Iustice of that limit, to commit such person to the said prison, there to abide without baile or maine prise, till he haue payed the same. And be it also enacted, That the said Iusti∣ces of the Peace at their generall quarter Sessions to bee holden at the time of such taxation, shall set downe, what competent sums of money shall be sent quarterly out of euery County or place corporate,Reliefe of the prisoners in the Kings Bench, Marshalsey, hospitals, &c. for the re∣leife of the poore prisoners of the Kings Bench, & Marshalsey, and also of such Hospi∣tals, and almes houses, as shal be in the said County, & what sums of money shalbe sent to euery one of the said Hospitals, and almes houses, so as there be sent out of euery Coun∣tie yeerely xx. s. at the least to each of the said prisons of the Kings Bench, and Mar∣shalsey, which summes ratably to be assessed vpon euery parish, the Churchwardens of e∣uery Parish shall truely collect & pay ouer to the high Constables: in whose diuision such
Parish shall bee situate, from time to time quarterly ten dayes before the end of euery quarter, and euery such Constable at euery such quarter Sessions in such County shall pay ouer the same to such two Treasurers, or to one of them, as shall by the more part of the Iustices of Peace of the County, be elec∣ted to be the said Treasurers, to be chosen by the Iustices of Peace of the said County, Citie, or towne, or place corporate, or of o∣thers which were sessed and taxed at fiue pound lands, or ten pound goods at the least, at the taxe of Subsidie next before the time of the said Election to be made.Treasurers for  to  vp their account at the yeeres end. And the said Treasurers so elected to con∣tinue for the space of one whole yere in their office, and then to giue vp their charge with a due account of their receipts and disburse∣ments, at the quarter Sessions to be holden next after the feast of Easter in euery yeere, to such others as shall from yeere to yeere, in forme aforesaid successiuely be elected Trea∣surers, L chiefe Iu∣stice▪ Knight Marshall. for the said County, Citie, Towne, or place corporate, which said Treasurers or one of them shall pay ouer the same to the Lord chiefe Iustice of England, and Knight Marshal for the time being, equally to be di∣uided to the vse aforesaid, taking their ac∣quittance for the same, or in default of the said chiefe Iustice, to the next ancientest Iu∣stice of the Kings Bench as aforesaid.
And if any Churchwarden or high Con∣stable, or his executors or administrators, shall faile to make payment in forme aboue specified, then euery Churchwarden, his exe∣cutors or administrators, so offending, shall forfeit for euery time the summe of ten shil∣lings, and euerp high Constable, his execu∣tors or administrators, shall forfeit for euery time, the sum of xx. s. the same forfeitures together with the summes behinde, to be le∣uied by the said Treasurer and Treasurers, by way of distresse and sale of the goods as aforesaid, in forme aforesaid, and by them to bee imployed towards the charitable vses comprised in this Act. And bee it further enacted, sur∣plusage shalbe bestowed. That all the surplusage of money which shall be remai∣ning in the said Stocke, of any County, shal by discretion of the more part of the Iustices of Peace in their quarter Sessions, be orde∣red, distributed and bestowed for the reliefe of the poore Hospitals of that County, and of those that shall sustaine losses by fire, wa∣ter, the Sea, or other Casualties, and to such other charitable purposes, for the releife of the poore, as to the more part of the said Iu∣stices of Peace shall seeme conuenient. And bee it further enacted, That if any Treasurer elected,Refusing to be Treasurer to giue the reliefe appointed. shall wilfully refuse to take vpon him the sayd office of Treasurer∣ship, or refuse to distribute and giue reliefe,
or to account according to such forme as shall be appointed by the more part of the said Iustices of peace, That then it shall be lawfull for the Iustices of Peace in their Qarter Sessions, or in their default, for the Iustices of Assize, at ye Assizes to be hol∣den in the same Countie, to fine the same Treasurer by their discretion: the same fine not to be vnder three pound, and to be leui∣ed by sale of his goods, and to be prosecuted by any two of the said Iustices of Peace, whom they shall authorize. Prouided alwaies, that this Act shall not take effect vntill the Feast of Easter next. And be it enacted,A former Sta∣tute for reliefe of the Poore. that the Statute made in the nine and thirtieth yere of her Maie∣sties Reigne, entituled, An Act for the reliefe of the poore, shall continue and stand in force vntill the Feast of Easter next. And that all Taxations heretofore imposed & not payed, nor that shalbe payed before the said feast of Easter next, And that all Taxes hereafter before the said Feast, to be taxed by vertue of the said former Act, which shal not be pay∣ed before the said Feast of Easter, shall and may after the said Feast of Easter, be leuied by the Ouerseers and other persons in this Act respectiuely appointed, to leuy taxati∣ons by distresse, & by such warrant in euery respect, as if they had been taxed & imposed by vertue of this Act, and were not paid.
Prouided alwayes,. that whereas the I∣land of Fowlenesse in the Countie of Essex, being inuironed with the Sea, and hauing a Chappel of ease for the inhabitants there∣of, and yet the said Iland is no Parish, but the Lands in the same are situated within diuers Parishes, farre distant from the same Iland, Be it therefore enacted by the autho∣ritie aforesaid, that ye said Iustices of peace shall nominate and appoint Inhabitants within the said Iland to be Ouerseers for the poore people dwelling within the said Iland, and that both they the said Iustices, and the said Ouerseers shall haue the same power and authority to all intents, conside∣rations and purposes, for the execution of the parts and articles of this Act, and shall be subiect to the same paines and forfei∣tures, & likewise that the inhabitants and occupiers of lands there, shall be lyable and chargeable to the same paiments, charges, expences, and orders in such manner and forme as if the same Iland were a Parish. In consideration whereof, neither the said inhabitants, or occupiers of land within the said, Iland, shall not be compelled to con∣tribute towards the reliefe of the poore of those parishes, wherin their houses or lands which they occupy within the said Iland are situated, for, or by reason of their said ha∣bitations or occupyings, other then for the
reliefe of the poore people within the said I∣land, neither yet shall the other inhabitants of the Parishes wherein such houses or lands are situated, bee compelled, by reason of their resiancie or dwelling, to contribute to the reliefe of the poore inhabitants with∣in the said Iland.The Defend∣ants plea in a suite com∣menced a∣gainst him. And bee it further enacted, that if any Action or Trespasse, or other suite shall hap∣pen to bee attempted and brought against any person or persons for taking of any di∣stresse, making of any sale, or any other thing doing, by authoritie of this present Act: The defendant or defendants in any such action or suit, shall, and may either plead not guilty, or otherwise make Auowry, Cognisance, or Iustification, for the taking of the said di∣stresses, making of sale, or other thing doing, by vertue of this Act, alledging in such A∣uowry, Cognisance, or Iustification, That the said distresse, sale, trespasse, or other thing whereof the plaintiffe or plaintiffes complained, was done by authoritie of this Act, and according to the tenour, purport, and effect of this Act, without any expres∣sing or rehearsall of any other matter of cir∣cumstance contained in this present Act. To which Auowrie, Cognisance, or Iustificati∣on, the Plaintiffe shall be admitted to reply, That the Defendant did take the said Di∣stresse, made the said sale, or did any other
Act or Trespasse, supposed in his declarati∣on of his owne worng, without any such cause alledged by the said Defendant, where∣upon the issue in euery such Action shalbe ioyned, to be tryed by verdict of twelue men, and not otherwise, as is accustomed in other personall actions. And vpon the triall of that issue, the whole matter to be giuen on both parties in euidence, according to the very truth of the same. And after such issue tryed, for the Defendant or non suite of the Plaintife, after appearance, the same De∣fendant to recouer treble dammages, by reason of his wrongfull vexation in that behalfe, with his Costs also in that part su∣stained, and that to bee assessed by the same Iury, or writ to enquire of the dammages, as the same shall require. Prouided al∣waies that this Act shall endure no longer then to the end of the next Session of Parliament.
Anno xliij. Reginae Elizabethae. An Acte for the necessary reliefe of Souldiers and Mariners. WHereas in the fiue and thir∣tieth yeere of the Queenes Maiesties Reigne that now is, An Act was made, inti∣tuled, an Act for the neces∣sary reliefe of Souldiers and Mariners: And whereas in the nine and thirtieth yeere of her Maiesties Reigne, there was also made another Act, intituled, An Act for the further continuance and explanation of the said former: Bee it enacted by authority of this present Parlia∣ment, that both the said Acts shall bee, and continue in force vntill the feast of Easter next, and shall be from and after the sayd feast discontinued. And forasmuch as it is now found more needfull then it was at the making of the said Acts, to prouide reliefe and maintenance to Souldiers and Ma∣riners, that haue lost their Limmes, and disabled their bodies in the defence and seruice of her Maiestie and the State, in respect the number of the said Souldiers is so much the greater, by how much her
Maiesties iust and honourable defensiue warres are increased: To the end therefore, that they the said Souldiers and Mari∣ners may reap the fruits of their good deser∣uings, and others may be encouraged to per∣forme the like endeauours: Be it enacted by the authority of this pre∣sent Parliament . that from and after the said feast of Easter next, euery parish within this Realme of England and Wales, shall be charged to pay weekly such a sum of money, towards the reliefe of sick, hurt, and mai∣med Souldiers and Mariners, that so haue bin as afore is said, or shal lose their, Lims, or disable their bodies, hauing bin Prest, and in pay for her Maiesties seruice, as by the Iustices of Peace, or the more part of them, in their general quarter Sessions, to be hol∣den in their seuerall counties, next after the feast of Easter next, and so from time to time at the like quarter Sessions, to bee holden next after the feast of Easter,taxation  parish. yeerely shall be appointed, so as no parish be rated aboue the summe of ten pence, nor vnder the summe of two pence weekely to be paid, and so as the totall summe of such taxation of the Pari∣shes, in any County where there shall be a∣boue fifty Parishes, doe not exceed the rate of sixe pence for euery Parish in the same Countie, which summes so taxed, shall be yeerely assessed by the agreements of the pa∣rishioners
within themselues, or in default therof, by the Churchwardens and the pety Constables of the same parish, or the more part of them, or in default of their agree∣ment, by the order of such Iustices, or Iustice of Peace, as shall dwell in the same parish, or if none bee there dwelling, in the parts next adioyning. And if any person shall refuse or neglect to pay any such portion of money so taxed,Refusing to pay the money taxed. it shall be lawfull for the said Churchwardens and pety Constables, and euery of them, or in their defaults, for the said Iustices of Peace, or Iustice, to leuy such summe by di∣stresse and sale of the goods or chattels of the party so refusing or neglecting, rendring to the party, the ouerplus raised vpon such sale. And for the collecting and custodie of the summes taxed in forme aforesaid.Churchwar¦dens shall pay to the high Constables the money taxed. Be it enac∣ted, that the Churchwardens, and pety Con∣stables of euery parish, shall truely collect euery such sum, and the same shall pay ouer vnto the high Constable, in whose diuision such parish shall be situate, ten dayes before the quarter Sessions, to be holden next be∣fore, or about the feast of the Natiuity of S. Iohn Baptist next, in the County where the said parish shall be situate, and so from time to time, quarterly within ten dayes before euery quarter Sessions. And that euery such high Constable, at euery such quarter
Sessions in such County, shall pay ouer the same to two such Iustices of Peace, or to one of them, or to two such other persons, or one of them, as shall be by the more part of the Iustices of peace of the same Countey elected, to be Treasurers of the said Collecti∣on, the same other persons, to be elected Treasurers, to be such, as at the last taxatiō of, the Subsidie next before the same electi∣on, shall be valued, & sessed at ten pounds in lands yerely, or at fifteene pounds in goods: which Treasurers in euery Countey so cho∣sen, shall continue but for the space of one whole yeere, and then giue vp their charge, with a du account of their receits & disburs∣ments, at their meeting in Easter quarter Sessions; or within ten daies after, to such others, as shall from yeere to yere in the forme aforesaid, successiuely be elected. And if any Church-warden,Churchwar∣dens, &c. fai∣ling to make payment. pettie Con∣stable, or high Constable, or his executors, or administrators, shall fail to make pay∣ment in forme about specified, their euery Church-warden, and pettie Constable, his executors or administratours so offending▪ shall forfeit the summe of twenty shillings. And euery high Constable, his executors, or administrators, the summe of fourty shil∣lings, to bee leuied by the Treasurers a∣foresaid, by distresse and sale in maner before expressed, and to be taken by the said Trea∣surers,
in augmentation of their stock, to the vses aforesaid. And if any Treasurer,A Treasurer failing of ac∣count, or neg∣lecting his charge. his executors or ad∣ministrators, shall faile to giue vp his ac∣count within the time aforesaid, or shall bee otherwise negligent in the execution of his charge, then it shall bee lawfull for the more part of the Iustices of Peace, of the same County in their Sessions, to assesse such Fine vpon such Treasurer, his executors or administrators, as in their discretion shall seeme conuenient, so it bee not vnder the summe of fiue pounds. And for the true and iust distribution and employment of the summes so receiued,To which trea∣surer the Soul∣dier shall re∣paire for re∣liefe. ac∣cording to the true meaning of this Act, Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that e∣uery Souldier or Mariner, hauing had his or their limmes lost, or disabled in their bo∣dies by seruice, being in her Maiesties pay, as aboue is mentioned, or such as shall here∣after returne into this Realme, hurt, or mai∣med, or grieuously sick, shall repayre, if he be able to trauell, and make his complaint to the Treasurers of the County, out of which he was pressed, or if he were no prest man, to the Treasurers of the County where hee was borne, or last inhabited by the space of three yeeres, at his election. And if he be not able to trauell, to the Treasurers of the County where hee shall land, or arriue, and
shall bring a certificate vnto any of the Trea∣surers aforesaid,Who shall make the Souldiers cer∣tificate. vnder the hand and Seale of the Generall of the Campe, or Gouernour of the Towne wherein hee serued, and of the Captaine of the Band, vnder whom hee ser∣ued, or his Lieutenant, or in the absence of the said Generall or Gouernour, from the Marshall or Deputie of the Gouernour, or from any Admirall of her Maiesties Fleet, or in his absence, from any other Generall of her Maiesties ships at the Seas, or in ab∣sence of such Generall, from the Captaine of the ship wherein the said Mariners or Soul∣diers did serue the Queenes Maiestie, con∣taining the particulars by his hurts and seruices,Allowance of the Certifi∣cate. which Certificate shalbe also allow∣ed of the generall Mustermaster, for the time being, resident here within this Realme, or Receiuer generall of the Muster Rolles, The Treasurer and Controller of her Ma∣iesties Nauie, vnder his hand, for the auoy∣ding of all fraud, and Counterfeiting: Then vpon such Certificate,Treasurers shall assigne reliefe to sol∣diers. such Treasurers as are before expressed, shall according to the na∣ture of his hurt, and commendation of his seruice, assigne vnto him such a portion of re∣liefe, as in their discretions shall seeme con∣uenient for his present necessity, vntill the next quarter Sessions, at the which it shall be lawfull for the more part of the Iustices of Peace vnder their hands, to make an In∣strument
of grant of the same, or like re∣liefe, to endure, as long as this Act shall stand or endure in force, if the same Soul∣dier or Mariner shall so long liue, and the same pension not bee duly reuoked or alte∣red, Iustices shall grant reliefe to Souldiers. which shall be a sufficient warrant to all Treasurers for the same Countie, to make payment of such pension vnto such persons quarterly, except the same shalbe afterward by the said Iustices reuoked or altered.How much re∣liefe shall be as∣signed. So that such reliefe as shall bee assigned by such Treasurers or Iustices of Peace to any such Souldier or Mariner, hauing not borne of∣fice in the said warres, exceed not the summe in grosse nor yeerely pension of ten pounds. Nor to any that hath borne office vnder the degree of a Lieutenant, the summe of fifteene pounds. Nor to any that hath serued in the office of Lieutenant, the summe of twentie pounds. And yet neuerthelesse,The Iustices may alter soul∣diers reliefe. it shall and may be lawfull to and for the Iustices of Peace and others, hauing authority by this Act, to assigne pensions to Souldiers & Mariners, vpon any iust cause, to reuoke, diminish, or alter the same from time to time, according to their discretions in the generall quarter Sessions of the Peace, or generall assemblies for Cities or Townes corporate, where the same pension shall be granted. And whereas it must needs fall out, that
many of such hurt and maimed Souldiers and Mariners,Souldiers ari∣uing far from the place where they are to haue reliefe. doe arriue in Ports, and places farre remote from the Counties, whence they are by vertue of this Act, to receiue their yeerely Annuities, and pensi∣ons, As also they are prescribed by this Act, to obtaine the allowance of their Certifi∣cates from the Mustermaster, or Receiuer Generall of the Muster Rolles, who com∣monly is like to abide about the Court or London, so as they shall need at the first, pro∣uision for the bearing of their charges, to such places: Be it therefore enacted, that it may be lawfull for the Treasurers of the Countie where they shall arriue, in their dis∣cretion vpon their Certificate (though not allowed) to giue them any conuenient reliefe for their iourny, to carry them to the next County, with a testimoniall of their allow∣ance, to passe on towards such a place. And in like manner shall it be lawfull for the Trea∣surer of the next County to doe the like, And so from County to County (in the direct way) till they come to the place where they are directed to finde their maintenance, accor∣ding to the tenure of this Statute. And for the better execution of this Act in all the branches thereof, Bee it enacted, that euery the Treasurers, in their seuerall Counties,The Treasu∣rers booke of Computation, and Register. shall keepe a true booke of compu∣tation, of all such summes as they leuie, and
also a Register of the names of euery such person vnto whom they shall haue disbursed any reliefe, And shall also preserue, or enter euery Certificate, by warrant whereof, such reliefe hath beene by them disbursed, And also that the Mustermaster, or Receiuer ge∣nerall of the Muster Rolles, shall keepe a booke, wherein shall be entred the names of all such, whose Certificates shall bee by him allowed, with an abstract of their Cer∣tificates, And that euery Treasurer re∣turning, or not accepting the Certificate brought vnto him from the said Muster∣master, shall write and subscribe the cause of his not accepting, or not allowing there∣of, vnder the said Certificate, or on the back thereof. And be it further enacted,A Treasurer refusing to giue reliefe. That if any Treasurer shall wilfully refuse to distribute and giue any reliefe, according to the forme of this Act, That it shall be lawfull for the Iustices of peace, in their quarter Sessions, to Fine such Treasurers, by their discreti∣ons, as aforesaid, The same Fine to bee le∣uied by distresse and sale thereof, to bee pro∣secuted by any two of them, whom they shall authorize. And be it also enacted,A Souldier begging, or counterfeiting a Certificate. that euery Souldier or Mariner that shall be taken begging, in any place within this Realme, after the Feast of Easter next, Or any that shall coun∣terfeit
any Certificate in this Act expres∣sed, shall for euer lose his Annuitie or pensi∣on, and shall be taken, deemed, and adiudged as a common Rogue, or Vagabond person, and shall haue, and sustaine the same, and the like paines, imprisonment and pu∣nishment, as is appointed and prouided for common Rogues and Vagabond per∣sons. Prouided alwayes and be it enacted, that all the surplusage of money which shall bee remaining in the Stock of any County,The surplu∣sage of the stock. shall by the discretion of the more part of the Iustices of Peace, in their quarter Sessions bee ordered, distributed and bestowed vpon such good and charitable vses, and in such forme as are limited and appointed in the Statutes made and now in force, concer∣ning reliefe of the poore, and punishment of Rogues and Beggars. Prouided alwayes that the Iustices of peace within any County of this Realme or Wales,Chiefe Offi∣cers in Corpo∣rate Townes. shall not intromit or enter into any City, Borough, Place, or Towne corporate, where is any Iustice of Peace for any such Citie, Borough, Place or Towne corporate, for the execution of any Article of this Act: But that it shall be lawfull to the Iustice and Iustices of the peace, Maiors, Bailiffes, and other head Officers of those Cities, Bo∣roughs, Places, & Townes corporate where
there is any Iustice of Peace to proceed to the execution of this Act, within the precinct and compasse of their liberties, in such man∣ner as the Iustice of Peace in any County may doe, by vertue of this Act. And that e∣uery Iustice of Peace within euery such Ci∣tie, Borough, Place or Towne corporate, for euery offence by him committed, contrary to the meaning of this Statute, shalbe fine∣able, as other Iustices of peace at the large in the Counties are in this Act appointed to be. And that the Maior and Iustices of Peace in euery such Borough, Place and Towne corporate, shall haue authority by this present Act, to appoint any person, for the receiuing of the said money, and paying the same within such Citie, Borough, Place or Towne corporate; which person so ap∣pointed, shall haue authority to doe all such things, and be subiect to all such penalties, as high Constables, by vertue of this Act should haue or be. And be it enacted,How the for∣feitures shalbe imployed. that all forfeitures to bee forfeited by any Treasurer, Collector, Constable, Church-warden, or other person, for any cause mentioned in this Act, shall be imployed to the reliefe of such Souldiers and Mariners, as are by this Act appoin∣ted to take and haue reliefe, And after that reliefe satisfied, then the ouerplus thereof, with the ouerplus of the stock, remaining
in any the said Treasurers hands, shall bee imployed as is before mentioned, to the cha∣ritable vses, expressed in the said Statutes, concerning the reliefe of poore, and for pu∣nishment of Rogues and Beggers, (ex∣cept the said Iustices, or the more part of them, shall thinke meet to reserue and keepe the same in stock for the maintenance and reliefe of such Souldiers and Mariners, as out of the same County may afterward bee appointed, to receiue reliefe and pensions.) And that the reliefe appointed to bee giuen by this Act, shall be giuen to Souldiers and Mariners, out of the County or place where they were pressed, so far forth as the Taxati∣on limited by this Act, will extend. And if the whole Taxation there, shall be before im∣ployed, according to the meaning of this Act, or that they shall not be prest men, then out of the place where they were borne or last in∣habited, by the space of three yeeres, at his or their election. Prouided alwayes,Pensions as∣signed, to stand in force, though the Statutc be repealed. and be it enacted, that euery pension assigned heretofore to any Souldier or Mariner, or that shall be assig∣ned before the said Feast of Easter next, not∣withstanding the discontinuance of the said two former Acts, shall stand in force, and shall yeerely from and after the said feast of Easter next, be satisfied and payed, out of such Taxa∣tions and forfeitures, as shall be made, col∣lected,
and leuied by force of this Act, so long as the said pension shall remaine in force, without such reuocation or diminishing, as is before in this Act mentioned. Which clause of reuocation or diminishing before mentioned, shall extend aswell to pensions heretofore assigned, as to such as at any time hereafter, before, or after the said feast of Easter, shall bee assigned to any person or persons. And bee it also enacted,Taxations made and not leuied. that all arrerages of Taxations heretofore made, by vertue of the said former Statutes, or any of them, which shall be or remaine, at the said feast of Easter next, vncollected, and not receiued, or leuied, shall, and may by authority of this Act, be had, receiued, and leuied, by such per∣sons, and in such manner and forme, as in euery respect, Taxations made by vertue of this Act, are appointed to bee collected, recei∣ued and leuied, and shall be imployed to the vses expressed in this Act, and no other∣wise. Prouided alwaies,If the rate be not sufficient for Souldiers in London. and bee it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if the said rate shall bee thought not to bee sufficient for the reliefe of such Souldiers, and Mariners, as shall be to be relieued within the City of London, That then it shall bee lawfull for the Maior, Recorder, and Aldermen of Lon∣don, or the more part of them, to rate and
taxe, such reasonable taxe, summe and summes of money, for the said reliefe, as shall be to them thought fit and conuenient. So as such summe and summes of money, so to be rated, doe not exceed three shillings weekely out of any Parish, and so as in the totall, the summe shall not exceed, or bee vn∣der twelue pence weekely out of euery Pa∣rish, one with another, within the said Citie and the Liberties thereof. This Act to en∣dure to the end of the next Session of Parlia∣ment and no longer. Anno xxxix. Reginae Elizabethae. An Act for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggers. FOr the suppressing of Rogues, Vagabonds & sturdie Beg∣gers, be it enacted by the au∣thority of this present Par∣liament, that from, and after the feast of Easter next com∣ming, All former sta∣tutes concerning Rogues, &c. re∣uealed. all Statutes heretofore made for the punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, or stur∣die Beggers, or for the erection or mainte∣nance of houses of correction, or touching the
same, shall for so much as concerneth the same be vtterly repealed: and that from, and after the said Feast of Easter, from time to time it shall and may be lawfull to, and for the Iustices of Peace of any County or City in this Realme or the Dominions of Wales, assembled at any Quarter Sessions of the Peace within the same County, City, Bo∣rough, or Towne corporate, or the more part of them, to set downe order to erect, & to cause to be erected one or more houses of Correcti∣on within their seuerall Counties or Cities:Iustices of Peace shall set downe order for erection and maintenance of houses of corre∣ction. for the doing and performing whereof, and for the prouiding of stocks of money, and all other things necessary for the same, and for raising and gouerning of the same, and for correction and punishment of offenders thi∣ther to be committed, such orders as the same Iustices, or the more part of them, shall from time to time take, reforme, or set down in any their said Quarter Sessions in that behalfe, shall be of force, and be duely performed and put in execution. And bee it also further enacted by the au∣thority aforesaid,Who shall be adiudged Rogues, Vaga∣bonds, and stur∣dy Beggers. that all persons calling themselues Schollars, going about beg∣ging, all Sea faring men pretending losses of their ships or goods on the Sea, going a∣bout the countrey begging, all idle persons, going about in any countrey, either begging or vsing any subtile craft, or vnlawfull
games and playes, or faining themselues to haue knowledge in Physiognomie; Palme∣stry or other like crafty Science, or preten∣ding that they can tell Destinies, Fortunes, or such other like fantasticall imaginations: All persons that be, or vtter themselues to be Proctors, Procurers, Patent-gatherers, or Collectors for Gaoles, prisons or Hospitals: All Fencers, Bearewards, Common Play∣ers of Interludes, and Minstrels, wande∣ring abroad (other then Players of Inter∣ludes belonging to any Baron of this Realme, or any other honourable personage of greater degree, to bee authorized to play vnder the hand and Seale of Armes of such Baron or personage) all Iuglers, Tinkers, Pedlars, and pety Chapmen wandering a∣broad, all wandering persons and common Labourers, being persons able in body, v∣sing loytering, and refusing to worke for such reasonable wages, as is taxed or com∣monly giuen in such parts, where such per∣sons doe, or shall happen to dwell or abide, not hauing liuing otherwise to maintaine themselues: All persons deliuered out of Gaoles that begge for their Fees, or other∣wise doe trauaile begging: All such persons as shall wander abroad begging, pretending losses by fire, or otherwise: And all such per∣sons not being felons, wandering and pre∣tending themselues to bee Egyptians, or
wandering in the habit, for, or counterfeit Egyptians, shall be taken, ad∣iudged, and deemed Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy beggers, and shall susteine such paine and punishments, as by this Act is in that behalfe appointed. And be it enacted by the authority afore∣said, The punishment of a Vagabond. that euery person which is by this pre∣sent Act declared to be a Rogue, Vagabond, or sturdy begger, which shall be at any time after the said Feast of Easter next comming, taken begging, vagrant, wandring or mis∣ordering themselues in any part of this Realme, or the Dominion of Wales, shall vp∣on their apprehension by the appointment of any Iustice of the Peace, Constable, Head∣borough or Tythingman of the same Coun∣ty, Hundred, Parish, or Tything, where such person shall be taken, the Tythingman or Headborough being assisted therein with the aduice of the Minister, and one other of that parish, be stripped naked from the mid∣dle vpwards, and shall bee openly whipped vntill his or her body be bloody? and shall be forthwith sent from parish to parish, by the Officers of euery the same, the next straight way to the parish where hee was borne, if the same may be knowen by the parties con∣fession or otherwise. And if the same be not knowen, then to the parish where hee or shee last dwelt before the same punishment by the
space of one whole yeare, there to put him or her selfe to labour, as a true subiect ought to doe: Or not being knowen where hee or she was borne, or last dwelt, then to the pa∣rish through which he or she last passed with∣out punishment. After which whipping,A testinoniall after punish∣ment. the same person shall haue a testimoniall subscribed with the hand, & sealed with the seale of the same Iu∣stice of the peace, Constable, Headborough or Tythingman, & of the Minister of the same parish, or of any two of them, testifying that the same person hath beene punished accor∣ding to this act, and mentioning the day and place of his or her punishment, and the place wherevnto such person is limited to goe, and by what time the said person is limited to passe thither at his perill. And if the said per∣son through his or her default doe not accom∣plish the order appointed by the said testimo∣niall, then to be eftsoones taken, & whipped, and so as often as any default shall be found in him or her contrary to the forme of this statute, in euery place to be whipped, till such person be repaired to the place limited: The substance of which testimoniall shall be regi∣stred by the minister of that parish, in a booke to be prouided for that purpose, vpon paine to forfeit 5. shillings for euery default there∣of, and the party so whipped, & not knowen where hee or she was borne, or last dwelt by
the space of a yeare, shall by the officers of the said Village where he or she so last past tho∣row without punishment, bee conueied to the house of Correction of the limit wherein the said Village standeth, or to the common Gaole of that County or place, there to re∣maine and be imployed in worke, vntill hee or she shall be placed in some seruice, and so to continue by the space of one yeare, or not be∣ing able of body, vntill he or she shall be pla∣ced to remaine in some Almeshouse in the same Countie or place. Prouided alwaies,Rogues which be dangerous, or will not be re∣formed. and bee it enacted, If any of the said Rogues shall appeare to bee dangerous to the inferiour sort of people where they shall be taken, or otherwise bee such as will not be reformed of their roguish kinde of life by the former prouision of this Act, that in euery such case it shall and may be lawfull to the said Iustices of the limit where any such Rogue shall be taken, or any two of them, wherof one to be of the Quorum to commit that Rogue to the house of corre∣ction, or otherwise to the Gaole of the Coun∣ty, there to remaine vntill their next quarter Sessions to be holden in that County, and then such of the same Rogues so committed, as by the Iustices of the Peace then and there present, or the most part of them, shall be thought fit not to be deliuered, shall and may lawfully by the same Iustices, or the
most part of them,Rogues to be banished the Realme, or committed to the Gallies. bee banished out of this Realme, and all other the dominions there∣of, and at the charges of that Countrey, shall bee conueyed vnto such parts beyond the Seas as shall be at any time hereafter, for that purpose assigned by the Priuy Councell vnto her Maiesty her heires or successors, or by any sixe or more of them, whereof the L. Chancellor, or L. Keeper of the great Seale, or the L. Treasurer for the time being to bee one, or otherwise be iudged perpetually to the Gallies of this Realme, as by the same Iustices or the most part of them it shall bee thought fit and expedient. And if any such Rogue so banished as a∣foresaid shall returne againe into any part of this Realme or dominion of Wales without lawfull licence or warrant so to doe,Rogues retur∣ning after ba∣nishment, to be reputed Fe∣lons. that in euery such case, such offence shall be Felony, and the party offending therein suffer death as in case of felony: The said felony to bee heard and determined in that County of this Realme or Wales, in which the offender shall be apprehended. And be it also enacted by the authority a∣foresaid that if any Towne,The forfeiture of a Constable &c. not doing his duty. Parish, or Vil∣lage, the Constable, Headborough or Ty∣thingman be negligent and doe not his or their best endeauours for the apprehension of such Vagabond, Rogue or sturdy Begger, which there shall bee found contrary to the
forme of this present Act, and to cause euery of them to bee punished and conueied accor∣ding to the true meaning of this present Act, that then the said Constable, Headborough, or Tithingman, in whom such default shall be, shall lose and forfeit for euery such default ten shillings. And also if any person or persons doe in a∣ny wise disturbe or let the execution of this Law,Disturbing the execution of this Statute. or any part thereof, concerning the pu∣nishment or conueying of Rogues, Vaga∣bonds, sturdy Beggers, or the reliefe or set∣ling of poore impotent persons in any maner of wise, or make rescous against any Officer or person authorised by this present Act for the due execution of any the premisses, the same person so offending shal forfeit & lose for euery such offence the summe of fiue pound, and shall be bound to the good behauiour. And bee it also further enacted by the au∣thority aforesaid,Bringing into this Realme of Irish, Scottish or Manniske Vagabonds. That no person or persons hauing charge in any voyage, in passing from the Realmes of Ireland or Scotland, or from the Isle of Man into this Realme of England, doe wittingly or willingly bring or conuey, or suffer to be brought or conuey∣ed in any Vessell or Boate from and out of the said Realme of Ireland, Scotland, or Isle of Man, into the Realme of England or Wales or any part thereof, any Vagabond, Rogue, or Begger, or any such as shall be for∣ced
or very like to liue by begging within the Realme of England or Wales, being borne in the same Realmes or Island, on paine of euery such person so offending, to forfeit and lose for euery such Vagabond, Rogue, Beg∣ger, or other person like to liue by begging .xx. s. to the vse of the poore of the said Parish in which they were set on land. And if any such Manniske, Scottish, or Irish Rogue, vagabond, or begger, be already, or shall at a∣ny time hereafter be set on land, or shall come into any part of England or Wales, the same after he or she shall be punished as aforesaid, shall bee conueyed to the next Port or Parish in or neere which they were landed or first came, in such sort as Rogues are appointed to bee by this present Act, and from thence to bee transported at the common charge of the County where they were set on land, in∣to those parts from whence they came or were brought. And that euery Constable, Headborough, and Tythingman, neglecting the due performance thereof, shall forfeit for euery such offence ten shillings. Be it further enacted by the authoritie a∣foresaid, Diseased per∣sons resorting to Bath and Buxton. that no diseased or impotent poore person shal at any time resort or repaire from their dwelling places to the City of Bath, or Towne of Buxton, or either of them to the Baths there for the ease of their griefes, vnlesse such person doe forbeare to begge,
and bee licensed to passe thither by two Iu∣stices of the Peace of the County where such person doth or shall then dwell or re∣maine, and prouided for to trauaile with such reliefe, for & towards his or her main∣tenance, as shal be necessary for the same per∣son, for the time of such his or her trauaile & abode at the city of Bath, and town of Bux∣ton, or either of them, and returne thence, and shall returne home againe, as shall be li∣mited by the said licence, vpon paine to be re∣puted, punished, and vsed as Rogues, Vaga∣bonds, and sturdy Beggers declared by this present Act. And that the inhabitants of the same City of Bath, and Towne of Bux∣ton shall not in any wise be charged by this Act with the finding the reliefe of any such poore people. Prouided alwayes,The Iustices within Towns Corporate shall only intermed∣dle. That the Iustices of Peace within any County of this Realm or Wales, shall not intromit or enter into any City, Borough, or Towns corporate, where be any Iustice or Iustices of the Peace for any such City, Borough, or Towne Corpo∣rate, for the execution of any Branch, Arti∣cle or sentence of this Act, for or concerning any offence, matter, or cause growing or ari∣sing within the Precincts, Liberties, or Iu∣risdiction of such City, Borough, or Townes Corporate, But that it may and shalbe law∣full to the Iustice and Iustices of the Peace,
Maiors, Bailiffes, and other head Officers of those Cities, Boroughes, and Townes Corporate, where there bee such Iustices of the Peace, to proceed to the execution of this Act, within the precinct and compasse of their Liberties, in such maner and forme as the Iustices of Peace in any County may or ought to doe within the same County, by vertue of this Act, Any thing in this Act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. Prouided alwayes, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to the poore people for the time being in the Hospitall,S. Thomas Hospitall in Southwarke. called Saint Thomas Hospitall, otherwise called the Kings Hospitall, in the Borough of Southwarke neere adioyning to the City of London, but that the Maior, Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City of London for the time being, shall and may haue the rule, order, and gouernment of the said Hospitall, and of the poor people therein for the time being, Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. Prouided alwayes,The Iurisdicti∣on of Iohn Dut∣ton of Dutton reserued. That this Act or any thing therein contained, or any authority thereby giuen, shall not in any wise extend to dis-inherit, preiudice, or hinder Iohn Dut∣ton of Dutton, in the County of Chester Esquire his heires or assignes, for, touching or concerning any liberty, preheminence, au∣thority, iurisdiction, or inheritance, which
the said Iohn Dutton now lawfully vseth, or hath, or lawfully may or ought to vse within the County Palatine of Chester, and the County of the City of Chester, or ei∣ther of them, by reason of any ancient Char∣ters of any Kings of this land, or by reason of any prescription, vsage, or title whatsoeuer. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid,In what sort the forfeitures shall be im∣ployed. That all fines and forfeitures ap∣pointed or to grow by this present Act, (ex∣cept such as are otherwise limited and ap∣pointed by this present Act shall wholly goe and be unployed to the vse of the reparations and maintenance of the said houses of Cor∣rection, and stocke and store thereof, or reliefe of the poore where the offence shall be com∣mitted, at the discretion of the Iustices of the Peace of the same limit, City, Borough, or Towne Corporate: And that all fines and forfeitures appointed or to grow by conuic∣tion of any person according to this present Act, shall by warrant vnder the hands and seales of any two or more of the Iustices of the Peace of the same County, City, Bo∣rough, or Towne Corporate, belied by di∣stresse and sale of the goods and chattels of the offender, which sale shall be good in the Law against such offender. And that if any of the said offences shalbe confessed by the of∣fender, or that the same shall be proued by two sufficient and lawfull witnesses, before
such two or more Iustices of the Peace, That then euery such person shall forthwith stand and be in the Law conuicted thereof. And bee it also further enacted by the au∣thority aforesaid,Iustices of Peace may heare and de∣termine the causes of this Statute. that any two or more Iu∣stices of the Peace within all the said seueral Shires, Cities, Boroughes, or Townes cor∣porate, whereof one to be of the Quorum, shal haue full power by authority of this present Act, to heare and determine all causes that shall grow or come in question by reason of this Act. And bee it also further enacted by the au∣thority aforesaid,Commissioners to enquire for mony gathered. that the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the great Seale of England for the time being, shall and may at all times hereafter by vertue of this present Act, with∣out further warrant, make and direct Com∣mission or Commissions vnder the great Seale of England, to any person or persons, giuing them or some of them thereby au∣thority, as well by the oaths of good & law∣full men, as of witnesses or examination of parties, or by any other lawfull wayes or meanes whatsoeuer, to enquire what summes of money or other things haue been or shall bee collected or gathered for or to∣wards the erection of any houses of Correc∣tion, or any Stockes or other things to set poore on work, or for the maintenance there∣of at any time after the seuenteenth day of
Nouember, in the eighteenth yeere of the Reigne of the Queenes most excellent Ma∣iesty, and by whom the same were or shall be collected or gathered, and to whose hands commen, and to what vse, and by whose di∣rection the same was or shall bee employed. And to call all & euery such person & persons, and their sureties, and euery of their execu∣tors or administrators to an accompt: And to compell them and euery of them by at∣tachment of their goods or bodies to appeare before them for the same, and to heare & de∣termine the same, and to leuie such money and things as they shal find not to haue been duly employed vpon the said houses of Cor∣rection, or stockes, or vpon other like vses, ha∣uing in such other like vses respect of things past by the said Commissioners to be allowed of, either by distresse & sale of the goods and chattels of such persons as they shall thinke fit to bee chargeable or answerable for the same, or by imprisonment of their bodies at their discretion: And that the said Commis∣sioners shall haue full power and authority to execute the same Commission according to the tenor and purport thereof: And that all their proceedings, doings, iudgements, and executions by force and authority there∣of, shall be and remaine good and auaileable in the Law: which said money so leuied by the said Commissioners, shall bee deliuered
and employed for the erecting or mainte∣nance of the same. Prouided alwayes neuerthelesse,A prouision for poore Sea-fa∣ring men. That e∣uery Sea-faring man suffering shipwracke, not hauing wherewith to relieue himselfe in his trauailes home wards, but hauing a Testimoniall vnder the hand of some one Iustice of the Peace, of, or neere the place where he landed, setting downe therein the place and time, where, and when he landed, and the place of the parties dwelling or birth, vnto which he is to passe, and a conue∣nient time therein to be limited for his pas∣sage, shall and may without incurring the danger and penalty of this Act, in the vsuall wayes directly to the place vnto which he is directed to passe, and within the time in such his testimoniall limited for his passage, aske and receiue such reliefe as shall be necessary, in, and for his passage. Prouided also,Glassemen not begging. that this Statute, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to any children vnder the age of seuen yeares, nor to any such Glassemen as shall be of good be∣hauiour, and doe trauaile in or through any Country, without begging, hauing licence for their trauailing vnder the hands and seales of three Iustices of the Peace of the same County where they trauaile, whereof one to be of the Quorum. And bee it also further enacted by the au∣thoritie
aforesaid, that this present Act shall bee proclaimed in the next quarter Session or Sessions in euery County,This Act to be proclaimed. and in such other market Townes or places, as by the more part of the Iustices of the Peace in the said Sessions shalbe agreed and appoin∣ted. This Act to endure to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament. ¶Certaine branches of the Statute made in the first yeere of the Reigne of King IAMES, concerning Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars. FOrasmuch as sithence the ma∣king of the Act of 39. Eliz. diuers doubts and questions haue been mooued and growen by diuer∣sitie of opinions, taken in and vpon the letter of the said Act: For a plaine declaration whereof, Be it declared and en∣acted, That from henceforth no Authoritie, to bee giuen or made by any Baron of this Realme,No authoritie giuen by any Baron, &c. shal free others from the of∣fence and pu∣nishment of the Statute of 39. Eliz. or any other honourable Perso∣nage of greater degree, vnto any other per∣son or persons, shall be auaileable to free and discharge the said persons, or any of them from the paines and punishments in the said Statute mentioned, but that they shall
be taken within the offence and punishment of the same Statute. And whereas in the said Statute,Glassemen brought within the compasse of the Statute. there is a Prouiso conteined, that the said Sta∣tute, nor any thing therein conteined, shall extend to any such Glassemen as shall be of good behauiour, and shall trauell in or tho∣row any Countie without begging, hauing Licence for their trauelling, vnder the hands and Seales of three Iustices of the Peace of the same County, where they tra∣uell, whereof one to bee of the Quorum, as by the Statute more at large appeareth: By reason of which libertie, many notorious Rogues and Vagabonds, and euill disposed persons haue vndertaken, and doe professe the trade of Glassemen; and by colour there∣of doe trauell vp and downe diuers Coun∣ties of this Realme, and doe commit many Pickeries, petty Felonies, and other misde∣meanours: For the auoding of which incon∣uenience, Bee it established and enacted by the Authoritie of this present Parliament, That from and after two moneths next af∣ter the end of this present Session of Parlia∣ment, all such person and persons, as shall wander vp and downe the Countrey to sell Glasses, shall be adiudged, deemed, and taken as Rogues and Vagabonds, and shall suffer the like paine and punishment in euery de∣gree, as is appointed to bee inflicted vpon
Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggers, by the intent and true meaning of the said Statute, made in the nine and thirtieth yeere of the Reigne of the said late Queene Elizabeth, and shall be set down limitted, and appointed by this present Act, Any thing in the said Statute of the nine and thirtieth yeere of her said Reigne to the contrary ther∣of in any wise notwithstanding. And forasmuch as one branch of the Sta∣tute of 39.Rogues brand∣ed with an hot yron R. Eliz. is taken to bee some what de∣fectiue, for that the said Rogues hauing no Marke vpon them to bee knowne by, not∣withstanding such iudgement of Banish∣ment, may returne or retire themselues into some other parts of this Realme where they are not known, and so escape the due punish∣ment which the said Statute did intend to inflict vpon them: For remedy whereof, Be it ordained and enacted, That such Rogues as shall after the end of two moneths next after the end of this Session of Parliament, be adiudged, as aforesaid, incorrigible or dangerous, shall also by the iudgement of the same Iustices, or the more part of them then present, in their open Sessions of the Peace, bee branded in the left shoulder with an hot burning Iron of the breadth of an English shilling with a great Romane R vpon the Iron, and the branding vpon the shoulder to bee throughly burned, and set on vpon the
skinne and flesh, that the Letter R bee seene, and remaine for a perpetuall Marke vpon such Rogue during his or her life,Glassemen brought within the compasse of the Statute. and there∣vpon bee sent by the same Iustices to the place of his dwelling, if he haue any, if not, then to the place where hee last dwelt by the space of a yeere, if that can be knowne by his confession or otherwise: And if that cannot bee knowne, then to the place of his birth, there to bee placed in labour as a true Sub∣iect ought to doe: And after such punish∣ment of any such Rogue as aforesaid, if any Rogue so punished shall offend againe in begging or wandring contrary to the said Statute, or this present Act, That then in euery such case, the party so offending shall bee iudged a Felon, and shall suffer as in Cases of Felony without benefit of Cler∣gie, the same Felony to be tried in the County where any such offender shall bee taken.
Anno primo Iacobi Regis. ¶An Act for the charitable reliefe and ordering of persons infected with the Plague. FOrasmuch as the Inhabi∣tants of diuers Cities, Bo∣roughs, Townes corporate, and of other Parishes and places being visited with the Plague, are found to bee vn∣able to relieue the poorer sort of such people so infected, who of necessity must be by some charitable course prouided for, lest they should wander abroad, and thereby infect others: And forasmuch as di∣uers persons infected with that disease, and others inhabiting in places infected, aswell poore people and vnable to relieue them∣selues, that are carefully prouided for, as other which of themselues are of abilitie, be∣ing commanded by the Magistrate or officer, of or within the place where the Infection shall be, to keepe their houses, or otherwise to separate themselues from company, for the auoiding of further Infection, do not∣withstanding very dangerously and disor∣derly demeane themselues: Bee it therefore enacted by the authoritie
of this present Parliament,Taxing o∣thers for the reliefe of the sicke of the Plague. That the Ma∣ior, Bailiffes, head Officers, and Iustices of the Peace, of euery City, Borough, Town corporate, and places Priuiledged, where any Maior and Bailiffes, head Officers, or Iustices of Peace are or shall bee, or any two of them, shall haue power and au∣thority from time to time, to taxe and assesse all and euery Inhabitant, and all Houses of habitation, Lands, Tenements and Heredi∣taments within the said Citie, Borough, Towne corporate, and places Priuiledged, or the liberties or precincts thereof, at such reasonable taxes and paiments, as they shall thinke fit for the reasonable reliefe of such persons infected, or inhabiting in houses and places infected in the same Cities. Bo∣roughs and Townes corporate, and places priuiledged, and from time to time leuie the same Taxes, of the goods of euery per∣son refusing or neglecting to pay the said Taxes, by Warrant vnder the Hand and Seale of the Maior and Bailiffes, and head Officers aforesaid, or two such Iustices of Peace, to bee directed to any person or per∣sons for the execution thereof. And if the party to whom such Warrant is or shall be directed, shall not find any Goods to leuy the same, and the party taxed, shall refuse to pay the same Taxe, That then vpon returne thereof the said Maior, Bailiffes, head Of∣ficers
or Iustices of Peace, or any two of them, shall by like Warrant vnder their hands and Seales, cause the same person so taxed to bee arrested and committed to the Gaole, without Bayle or Maineprise, vntill he shall satisfie the same taxation, and the Arrerages thereof. And if the Inhabitants of any such Ci∣tie, The Inhabi∣tants vnable to relieue the Infected. Borough, Towne corporate, or place priuiledged, shall finde themselues vnable to relieue their said poore infected persons, and others, as aforesaid, That then vpon Certificate thereof by the Maior, Bayliffe, head Officers, and other the said Iustices of Peace, or any two of them, to the Iustices of Peace of the Countie of, or neere to the sayd Citie, Borough, Towne corporate, or priuiledged place so infected, or any two of them to be made, the said Iustices of, or neer the said County or any two of them, shall or may taxe and assesse the Inhabitants of the Countie within fiue miles of the sayd place Infected, at such reasonable and weekely Taxes and Rates as they shall thinke fit to be leuied by warrant from any such two Iu∣stices of Peace, of, or neere the Countie, by sale of Goods, and in default thereof, by im∣prisonment of the body of the party taxed, as aforesayd. And if any such Infection shall bee in any Borough, Towne corporate, or piuiledged
place, where there are or shall be no Iustices of peace, or in any Village or Hamlet within any County, That then it shall and may bee lawfull for any two Iustices of peace of the said County, wherein the said place infected is or shall be, to taxe and assesse the inhabi∣tants of the said Countie, within fiue miles of the sayd place infected, at such reasonable weekely taxes and rates as they shall thinke fit for the reasonable reliefe of the said places infected, to bee leuied by warrant from the said Iustices of Peace of the same County by sale of goods, and in default therof, by im∣prisonment of the body of euery partie so taxed, as aforesaid: The same taxes made by the said Iustices of Peace of the County, for the reliefe of such Cities, Boroughs, townes corporate, & places priuiledged, where there are no Iustices of Peace, to be disposed as they shall think fit. And where there are Iu∣stices of Peace. Then in such sort as to the Maior, Bailifs, head officers, & Iustices of Peace there or any two of them shall seeme fit & conuenient. All which taxes and rates made within any such Citie, Borough, town corporate, or place priuiledged, shalbe certifi∣ed at the next quarter Sessions to be holden within the same Citie, Borough, Towne corporate, or place priuiledged; And the said Taxes and Rates made within any part of the said County, shall in like sort be cer∣tified
at the next quarter Sessions to bee holden in and for the said Countie, and that if the Iustices of Peace at such quarter Sessions respectiuely, or the more part of them shall thinke it fit, the said tax and rate should continue or be inlarged, or extended to any other parts of the Countie, or other∣wise determined, then the fame to be so en∣larged, extended or determined increased, or taxed and leuied, in manner and forme afore∣said, as to the said Iustices at the Quarter Sessions, respectiuely shall be thought fit and conuenient▪ And euery Constable, and other Officer that shall wilfully make de∣fault in leuying such money, as they shall be commanded by the said Warrant or War∣rants, shall forfeit for euery such offence ten shillings, to be employed on the charitable vses aforesaid. And be it further enacted,An infected person com∣manded to keep his house, disobeyeth. That if any person or persons infected, or being dwelling in any house Infected, shall bee by the Maior, Bayliffes, Constable, or other head Officer of any Citie, Borough, Towne Corporate, Priuiledged place, or Market Towne, or by any Iustice of Peace▪ Con∣stable, Headborough or other Officer of the Countie, (if any such Infection be out of any Citie, Borough, Towne Corporate, Priuiledged place, or Market Towne) commanded or appointed, as aforesaid,
to keepe his or their house, for auoiding of further Infection, and shall notwithstand∣ing wilfully and contemptuously disobey such direction and appointment, offering and attempting to breake and goe abroad, and to resist, or going abroad, and resisting such Keepers or Watchmen as shall be ap∣pointed, as aforesaid, to see them kept in, That then it shalbe lawful for such Watch∣men, with violence to inforce them to keepe their houses. And if any hurt come by such enforcement to such disobedient persons, That then the said Keepers, Watchmen, and any other their assist assistants, shall not bee impeached therefore.Infected per∣sons how Fe∣lons. And if any infected persons as aforesaid, so commanded to keepe house, shall contrary to such Commande∣ment, wilfully and contemptuously go a∣broad, and shall conuerse in company, ha∣uing any infectious Sore vpon him vncu∣red, That then such person and persons shall be taken, deemed, and adiudged as a Felon, and to suffer paines of death, as in case of Felonie, But if such person shall not haue any such sore found about him. Then for his said offence, to be punished as a Va∣gabond in all respects should, or ought to be, by the Statute made in the nine and thirti∣eth yeere of the Reigne of our late Soue∣reigne Lady Queene ELIZABETH, for the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds;
And further to be bound to his or their good behauiour for one whole yeere. Prouided, That no attainder of Felony by vertue of this Acte, shall extend to any attainder or corruption of blood, or forfei∣ture of any Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tene∣ments, or Hereditaments. And bee it further enacted by the Autho∣ritie aforesayd, That it shall be lawfull for Iustices of Peace, Maiors, Bayliffes, and other head Officers aforesayd, to appoint within the seuerall Limits,Attendants appointed vpon the in∣fected persons. Searchers, Watchmen, Examiners, Keepers, and Bu∣riers for the persons and places respectiue∣ly, infected as aforesayd, and to  vn∣to them Oathes for the performance of their Offices of Searchers, Examiners, Watch∣men, Keepers, and Buriers, and giue them other directions, as vnto them for the pre∣sent necessitie shall seeme good in their dis∣cretions. And this Acte to continue no lon∣ger then vntill the end of the first Session of the next Parliament. Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted by authority of this present Parliament, that no Maior, Bayliffes, head Officers, or any Iustices of Peace, shall by force or pretext of any thing in this Acte contained, doe or execute any thing before mentioned,The Vni∣uersities, Ca∣thedrall Churches, Caron, Win∣chester. with∣in either the Vniuersities of Cambridge or Oxford, or within any Cathedrall Church
or the Liberties or Precincts thereof, in this Realme of England, or within the Col∣ledges of Eaton or Winchester, But that the Vicechancellor of either of the Vniuer∣sities for the time being, within either of the same respectiuely, and the Bishop and Deane of such Cathedrall Church, or one of them, within such Cathedrall Church, and the Prouost or Warden of either of the said Colledges within the same, shall haue all such power and authority, and shall doe and execute all and euery such Act and Acts, thing and things in this Act before mentioned, within their seuerall Precincts and Iurisdictions abouesaid, as wholly ab∣solutely, and fully to all intents and pur∣poses, as any Maior, Bayliffes, head Offi∣cers, or Iustices of Peace within their seuerall Precincts and Iurisdicti∣ons, may elsewhere by force of this Act doe and execute.
In Camera Stellata coram Con∣cilio ibidem, vicesimo die Octobris, An∣no Regni Reginae ELIZABETHAE quadragesimo, &c. Praesentibus, Thoma Egerton mil. Dn̄o Cultod. Magni Sigilli Angliae. Dn̄o North. Dn̄o Buckhurst. Iohanne Fortescue mi∣lite Cancellar, Scac∣carij. Archiepiscopo Cantu∣ariens. Popham milite Capi∣tali Iustic. de Banco Regis. Anderson milite Capi∣tali Iustic. de Com∣muni Banco. THIS day Rice Griffin and Iohn Scrips were brought to the Barre, against whome Edward Coke E∣squire, Her Maiesties At∣tourney Generall, did en∣forme, That the said Grif∣fin had vnlawfully erected and built one
Tenement in Hog-lane in the Countie of Middlesex, which he diuided into two seue∣rall roomes, wherein were now inhabiting two poore Tenants, that onely liued and were maintained by the reliefe of the Pari∣shioners there, and begging abroad in other places: And that the said Iohn Scrips had in like sort diuided a Tenement in Shordich, in∣to, or about seuenteene Tenancies or dwel∣lings, and the same inhabited by diuers per∣sons of very poore and base condition, con∣trary to the intent and meaning of her Highnesse Proclamation, published and set out the seuenth day of Iuly 1580. in the two and twentieth yeere of Her Highnesse Reigne, whereby the same, and such man∣ner of buildings and diuisions, are altoge∣ther forbidden and prohibited, as by her Maiesties said Proclamation more at large appeareth. Moreouer, her highnesse said Attourney further informed this Honourable Court, that sithence the said Proclamation, sun∣dry Decrees haue beene made and this Court, aswell for the prostrating, pul∣ling downe, and defacing of diuers new buildings: as also for reformation of diui∣sions of Tenements: All which notwith∣standing, sundry wilful and disobedient per∣sons, continue in their contemptuous ma∣ner of buildings and diuisions: by meanes
whereof, the citie of London, and Suburbs thereof, are ouercharged, and burdened with sundry sorts of poore, beggerly, and euill dis∣posed persons, to the great hinderance and oppression of the same; So as the Magi∣strates and Officers in and about the citie, to whom the execution of the aforesaid Decrees and Orders chiefly appertaineth, cannot performe and doe the same, accord∣ing to the purport and tenour thereof: And in regard thereof: Her Highnes said Attour∣ney humbly prayed, that the said Griffin and Scrips might receiue, and haue inflicted on them, some condigne and fit punishment, and that at the humble petition of the Lord Maior and Aldermen of the Citie of Lon∣don, and other the Iustices of Peace of the Countie of Middlesex and Surrey, the Court would be pleased to set downe and Decree, some last and generall Order in this and in all other like Cases of new buildings, and diuisions of Tenements. Whereupon the Court grauely considering the great growing euils and inconueniences that continually breed and happen by these new erected Buildings and diuisions made and diuided contrary to Her Maiesties said Proclamation, and well weighing the rea∣sons of the said Lord Maior and Aldermen of the said city, and Iustices of the Counties aforesaid in that behalfe, greatly tendring
the ouerburdened and distressed estate of the inhabitants that dwell in sundry the Pari∣shes where the said new buildings and di∣uided Tenements are, being for the most part but of small abilitie to beare and su∣staine the great charge which is to grow there, by meanes of the poore placed in sun∣dry of the new erected and diuided Tene∣ments, Haue therefore by the whole and ge∣nerall consent of all the honourable presence here sitting, hearing the accusations afore∣said, and the answeres, defences, and allega∣tions of the said Griffin and Scrips, ordered and decreed, that the said Griffin and Scrips, shall be committed to the prison of the Fleet, and pay twentie pounds a piece for a Fine to Her Maiestie. And as for the pulling downe, or reforming of any house new built or diuided sithence and contrarie to the said Proclamation, within the Citie of London, or the compasse of three miles thereof, in which any poore or Impotent persons now doe, or hereafter shall dwell or abide, for that if the same houses should be pulled downe, destroyed, or reformed, other Habitations must bee prouided for them at the charge of the Parishes where they be, or shall be dwelling. The Court doeth as yet think fit to forbeare and respit the doing thereof, and haue ordered and adiudged that all and euery such poore and impotent per∣sons,
which dwell or shall dwell & in any new buildings, or diuided tenements erected & diuided, contrary to the effect and intent of her Highnesse said proclamation, and are or shall in any wise be driuen to liue by begging or to be relieued  with∣in the City of London, or any other place within the compasse of three miles thereof, shall and may during the time of his or their life or liues, abide and dwell in the same, without giuing or paying any maner of Rent seruice or other recompence vnto the Landlords or any other, for, and in respect of the same, and not be thence they shall after become able to liue of themselues, And that the said Landlord, owner, or any other that to, or for any Rent or Rents growing, arng, or payable for any of the said new Buildings, or diuided Tenements, to inhabited or to bee inhabited with poore people as aforesaid, shall enioyned, and vpon this  and Decree, take sufficient notice and war∣ning, that hee or they doe not encumber, disquiet, or moldst any of the said poore Tenants, for any Rents, Covenants, Conditions, promises or agreements, touch∣ing, or in any wise concerning the said Te∣nements, new buildings, or any of them, for the leuying or recouering of any Rent, ser∣uice, or other consideration in lieu of any
Rent. And for that the new, buildings and diuisions of sundry houses, within the Citie of London and three miles compasse there∣of contrary to the tenor of the said Procla∣mation, hath beene and is the occasion of great charges vnto the Parishes of the said City and Precinct aforesaid, whereby the said Parishes are still ouermuch burde∣ned with poore and impotent persons, It is therefore Ordered and Decreed, That all such Landlords or owners of such Buil∣dings or Diuisions whersoeuer they should dwell, shall contribute and giue such like ratable and reasonable allowance with the said Prishioners where such Buildings and diuisions are, towards the finding and maintaining of the poore of the Parish, in which such Buildings are, is, or shall bee erected or diuided contrary to the said Pro∣clamation, as should bee apportioned and allotted him or them to pay, if he or they were dwelling in the said Parish. And it is further Ordered and Decreed by this honourable Court, that after the death or departure of such poore people as doe or shall inhabite the same houses or diuided Tenements aforesaid, the houses thereby being become void, Then the Lord Maior and Iustices of Peace neere vnto the City adioyning, hereby are commanded to re∣forme the said diuided Tenements, and to
prostrate, pull downe and deface the said new buildings in such sort, as the same be no more left fit for habitation, and the tim∣ber and wood therof to be conuerted and dis∣posed in such manner as by the said Pro∣clamation is required: As also to take order in all other the premisses, That this De∣cree be duely obserued and kept: And if any shall be obstinate, then to binde such Land∣lords as that shall obstinately and wilfully disobey this sayd Decree, to appeare in this Honourable Court of Starre-chamber to answere their contempt therein. This Decree was afterward read in the Court of Starre-Chamber the 29. of Nouember 1609. and then confir∣med and straitly commanded by all the Lords present to be duely put in execution.
In Camera Stellata coram Conci∣lio ibidem, vicessimo nono die No∣uembris, Anno septimo Iacobi Regis. Praesentibus, Thoma Egerton milite Dn̄o Ellesmere, Dn̄o Canc. Ang. Comite Sarum Dn̄o Thesaurario Ang. Comite Northampton. Comite Exon. Dn̄o Zouch. Iul. Caesare milite Can∣cellar. Scaccarij. Archiepiscopo Cant. Fleming milite Capita∣li Iustic. de Banco Regis. Coke milite Capitali. Iust. de com. Banc. Yeluerton milit. Iustic. de banc. Reg. Williams milit, Iustic. de banc. Reg. Foster milite Iustic. de communi Banc. THis day Sir Henry Monta∣gue, Knight, Recorder of Lon∣don enformed this most hono∣rable Court, that where there haue been diuers Proclama∣tions
as well in the time of our late Soue∣reigne Queene Elizabeth, as also since his Maiesties most happy Reigne, and also di∣uers Orders and Decrees taken in this ho∣nourable Court for the restraining and re∣forming of the multitude of new erected and diuided Tenements, and taking in of Inmates, yet neuerthelesse the same doe so daily increase and multiply in euery place in and about this City of London and the Suburbs thereof, infinite number of peo∣ple being pestered together breeding and nourishing Infection, so that the same ten∣deth to the great imminent danger of the gouernement and safety of this Citie, and consequently to the perill of his Maiesties Sacred person, the Queenes Maiestie, and their Royall Issue, and the Lords of the State here ordinarily residing, with many other great enormities, if the same bee not carefully and speedily preuented. And therefore it was humbly desired, that this honourable Court would reuiue a Decree of this Court, made the twentieth day of October, in the fourtieth yeere of our said late Soueraigne Queene Elizabeth, taken and established for restraining and refor∣ming of such new erected Buildings and diuisions. And that the said Decree might bee put in present execution for the speedy refor-
of the said enormities, wherupon the said Decree being openly read, this honou∣rable Court, and all the whole Presence here sitting, taking tender care and consideration of the Good and Safety of the said City, and grauely fore-seeing the imminent danger and euils which doe growe and increase, and doe chiefe∣ly arise through ouermuch neglect in due execution of those former Proclama∣tions, Decrees and ordinances which are not looked into as they ought to bee, Doeth therefore Decree and Order, that the said former Decree taken the said twen∣tieth day of October in the said fortieth yeere of our late Soueraigne be presently, and from time to time hereafter, more seuerely looked into, and put in execu∣tion. And his Maiesties learned Councell, and also the Lord Maior, and Aldermen of Lon∣don, together with all Iustices of Peace, and other his Maiesties Officers whatsoe∣uer which the same may any way concerne, are hereby straitly charged and required, that they and euery of them doe from time to time hereafter diligently and strictly cause and see the said Decree to bee in all points duely obserued and put in execution, and Tearmely to make Certificate to his
Honourable Court of their proceedings therein, and of such persons as they shall finde to offend in that behalfe; Where∣upon this Court doth purpose to proceed against them for their contempts with very se∣uere punishment.{inverted ⁂} LONDON, Imprinted by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie Anno Dom. 1626.
