17494 99847562 12600
SELECTED EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL. Englished By THOMAS MAY Esquire. —Nec Crimenerit nec Gloria— LONDON, Printed for Thomas Walkley at Brittaines Burse. 1629.
To the Right honoura∣ble and truly Noble, HENRY Earle of Holland, Knight of the most noble Order of the Gar∣ter, one of his Maiesties most hon: privie Councell, and Chancellour of the famous Vniversitie of Cambridge, &c. My noble Lord, I Should not present, with∣out much Apologie, so
meane a Worke to a hand so ho∣nourable, did not a confidence in your true worth, and the cleare∣nese of mine owne thoughts, give me Encouragement. Therfore with the same modesti that the ingeni∣ous Author of these Epigrams pre∣sented some of them to Plinius Se∣cundus, a noble Roman of happy employment under Traian the Em∣perour (as a recreation onely to his howers of mirth and pleasure) do I offer these my poore Endeavours to your Lordship. With how much courtesie the noble Pliny in one of his Epistles doth acknowledge the respect of Martial, I doe no waies inferre, eyther to direct, or much
lesse to engage your Lordships ac∣ceptation; since I confesse the difference to bee great betweene so acute an Authour, and my selfe the vnworthy Translatour. Onely requesting humbly that you would be pleased in this lit∣tle to accept my true service. Of which (in mine owne iudge∣ment) I cannot make a fitter ten∣der than to such a Lord, to whose knowne Vertues so famous a Vni∣versitie as Cambridge hath yeel∣ded the Protection of her selfe. To which, and to all good lear∣ning, that you may long live a favourable Mecaenas, and (like Mecaenas) graced in the service
of our good, and great Augu∣stus, hee prayeth, that will ever continue Most humbly devoted to your Lordship THO. MAY.
To the Reader. THe Translation of these Epigramms is a thing (Reader) which I confesse for divers Reasons I was leath to publish: One is, because they are but a part of Martiall, and chosen out here and there; so that I am lyable to a double censure, and not on∣ly the skill in translating, but the judgement in choosing of them may be called in question. But in that case
not only Ioseph Scaliger, who published divers of these Epigramms, translated into Greek, but divers others, in other Languages, may in part excuse me for meddling with a part of a Booke. The second reason is, because it is more than probable, that divers Gentle∣men have exercised or pleased them∣selves in translating some of these, and may therefore peruse mine with a more rigid censure. but that I must re∣ferre to the goodnesse of their disposi∣tions. The third reason is, because that having already published two Translations, I was loath any more to vexe the Romane Poets (who shall sleep quietly in their Vrnes hereafter for me) though Translation bee a thing
which, I thinke, the ablest men doe not at all condemne. Some men there are who complaine of late that too much learning is brought into our na∣tive Language, and that that is by others attained at too easie a rate, which cost themselves more labour. Those (as I take it) are such pretty Schollers as have rather strived to get some skill in the Latine or Greeke tongues, than to furnish themselves with the substance of Art, which is contained in those tongues; and wan∣ting so much reall Learning as may commend them to the world, would faine bee applauded for the shadow of it: Like some unlearned or iniudicious Preachers in Countrey parishes, who
would rather be liked by the ignorant People for speaking of Latin sentences, than informing their knowledges with substantiall Doctrine, and have the fortune to bee praised by none, but those which doe not understand them: and indeed those which I have obser∣ved mis-likers of Translation, are nei∣ther perfect in the Latin, nor able in their native Language. There are many things (Reader) in this Worke I doe confesse, which must intreat a favourable excuse, and dare not stand a strict censure; especially the first Epi∣gramme of all, which is in the Latin both too full to be rendred in a Verse of ten Syllables, and subject to divers Constructions of sense: But being in∣treated which
by a friend of mine to doe all the Booke of Spectacles, I could not leave out the first of them. Some of them have lyen many yeares by me, and were not intended for the Presse, and many of them in loose Papers I have lost, and perchance thou wilt say (and I am of that opinion) it had beene no great matter if they had beene all lost.
Martial's Epigramms vpon the Spectacles of the Roman Amphytheater. He preferres the Amphytheater, begunne by Vespasian the Emperour, finished and dedicated by Titus his Sonne, before the ancient wonders of the World. LEt Memphis flame-like Towers no more be known, Nor men still strive in praysing Babylon; Nor those soft honors Phaebes Temple fame, Nor th' horny Altar boast Apollo's name, Nor let the Carians with immoderate praise Mausolus tombe from th' ayre t' Olympus raise. Let all to Caesar's Theater give place; One worke for all let fame for ever blaze.
Hee exells the gratious mificence of the two Empe∣rours, Vespasian and Titus; who demolishing the vast Pallace of Nero, had builded n the roome of it publicke workes, as the Colossus, the Amphitheater, the hot Baths, and common walkes of pleasure. HEre where the huge Colossus meets the skies, And in the mid way lofty Pageants rise, Once cruell Nero's envi'd Pallace shone, And in all Rome stood one proud house alone. Here, where the stately Amphitheater His bulke displayes, once Nto's fish-ponds were▪ Here, where th' hot Baths quick work we wonder at, Th' iniurious court dissis'd poor dwellers late. Where shade the Claudian Gallery doth lend, Thither proud Nero's Pallace did extend. Rome's to her selfe restor'd by Caesars reigne. What ioyes the Prince engros'd, the people gai
An elegant description of the generall acclamation of Spectators in the Amphitheater of all Nations be∣longing to the Roman Empire, in honour of Cesar. VVHat nation, Caesar, is so wilde or farre, But some spectators in thy citie are? From Rhodopeian Hoemus dwellers come Sarmātian horse blood drinkers leave their home. Those that on Thetis farthest shore are bred, Are here, and those that drinke of Nilus head. Hither th' Arabians, and Sabaeans hast, Cilicians here their owne sweet waters tast. Hither come knot-hair'd curl'd Sicambrians, And otherwise curl'd Aethiopians. Though different sounds, yet all in this agree When Romes true father thou art said to bee. Hee honoureth Titus for banishing the common accu∣sers, who in the time of Nero, and other Tyrants, were the ruine of honest men. THe peace disturbers, enemies to rest, That stil the goods of wretched men opprest, More than the Stage could hold, to Affrick now▪
Banish'd, receive what they did crst bestow. Th' accuser banish'd from the City goes, Her life to Caesar's grace the City owes. Among other spectales, ancient fables were acted a the Theatre, and among others, this of the queen P∣phë, who vnnaturally lusted after a Bull. BEleeve a bull enjoy'd the Cretan Queene; Th'old fable verifi'd we all have seene. Let not old times, Caesar, selfe-praised bee; Since what fame fings, the stage presents to thee. In the hunting of the amphitheatre, a woman (it seeme) had killed a lion, vpon which, he extolleth the exer∣cises of Caesar's theatre, before former times. THat Mars doth conquer, Caesar, at thy fights, Tis not enough, but tender Venus fights. The lion slaine in Nemean Vale of old, Fame as a great Herclian action told. Let old fame silent be; for since thy show, As much we saw a womans hand to do.
Men condemned to dy, did personate in their death some ancient fable vpon the stage, as this Prometheus. AS to the Sythian rock Promotheus bound Fod stil a bird with his breasts deathles woūd. Laureolus on no false gibbet here, So yeelds his brest t'a Calidonean beare His torne bloud-dropping members liv'd one wound▪ And in's whole body was no body found. Surche, that suffer'd thus, with impious sword Murder'd his Father, or had slaine his Lord; Or rob'd the temples of their sacred gold, Or fired Rome. What ere, that crime of old His crime surpast; for what they did invent Oftothers harme, was his true punishment. Vpon a Malefactor personating Daedalu. VVHen by a bear thou Daedalus, wer torne, How gladly then wouldst thou thy wings haue wr?
Of a Rhinoceros. THe fierce Rhinoceros, Caesar, in thy sight, More than he promis'd did perform the fight. How fierce in rage, how strōg of horn was he, Whose strength in th'aire made bulls like balls to flee? He praises the iustice of Caesar, who cōmanded a Lion to be killed on the Stage, for hurting or killing his Keeper. ATreacherous Lion hurt his Keeper late, Daring those well known hands to violate. But for his foule offence he pai'd full deare, In stead of stripes he felt a killing speare. Vnder a Prince, that teaches gentlenesse To beasts, what manners should his men expresse? Of a Beare caught with bird-lime on the Theatre. VVHilst ore the bloody stage a Beare so fast Doth roll, in bird-lime caught he lost his haste. Let cased hunting spears now vseless stand,
And iavelins fly no more from th'hunters hand. Let huntsmen in the aire pursue their prey, If beasts be caught after the fowlers way. Of a Sow chased ore the Theatre, and killed with a speare, who out at that wound farrowed  pigges. AT our Caesarian Dians cruell show, A flying dart had hurt a praegnant sow, When from the damms death-wound the pigges proceed. Cruel Lucina, this the way to breed? The dying sow would of mo wounds be glad To make sad way for all the pigs shee had. Deny not Bacchus borne by mothers death. A God might well, since so a beast tooke breath. Another of the same. A Breeding sow hurt with a mortall blow, At once lost life, and did new life bestow. What certaine aime the iaueline-thrower tooke? I thinke it was Lucinaes hand that strooke.
Her death the power of both Diana's try'd; Help'd as a dae, as hunting game shee dy'd. Another of the same. A So now great, the fruit of her ripe wombe Brought forth, a parent by a wound become. That lay not still, but runne when the dam feli. How witt in suddaine chances doth excell! e praises young Carpophorus, a favourite of Domitian the Emperour's, who to winne honour, fought with beasts vpon the stage, (as the custome was) he prefers him before Hercules and Meleager. A Bore, whose death gave Meleager name, But part is of Carpophorus his fame. He in a Beare, as great as any were Vnder the North, did sheathe his hunting speare. He slow a Lion of unusuall size, That might be held a faire Herculean prize: And a swift Libbard, yet his freshnesse such, When crown'd for this, he could have done as much▪
A spectacle, in which by an engine the image of Do∣mitian, arrayed like Hercules, seemed to bee car∣ryed by a Bull up into heauen; he compares it with the Bull that carryed Europa. THat from the Stage a Bull did mount the ske, It was no worke of Art, but Pietie. A Bull Europa bore through's Brothers Seas, Now to the sky a Bull bare Hercules. Caesar's and love's devices now compare; Though both bare equall loades, this highest bare. Of an Elephant adoring Domitian the Emperour. THat th' Elephant, whose might the Bull before So fear'd, thee (Caesar) prostrate did adore, Twas not his Keepers teaching, or commands; Even hee thy God-head, Caesar, understands.
Of a Tiger and a Lion. A hard-got Tiger from th' Hyrcanian Land, That us'd to licke his fearelesle Masters hand, Lately in rage (a thing not heard before) A mighty Lion all to pieces tore. He durst not doe within the Forrest thus, But grew more furious since he liv'd with us. Of a Bull and an Elephant. THe Bul, that late provoked on the stage By fire, did tosse the Bals up in his rage, Did fall at last by strength of horne, whilst so He thought in th' ayre an Elephant to throw. He flatters the wisedome of Domitian, who satisfied at once the desires of both factions of the People. WHile some Triumphus, Myrinus some crave, Caesar at once with both hands promise gave.
This merry strife who better could accord? Oh pleasant wit of an unconquer'd Lord! The Fable of Orpheus was presented on the Amphi∣theater. in which acondemn'd man was torue by a Beare, as Orpheius was by the Women in the sacrifice of Bacchus. WHat re of Orpheus Aemus vale did see, Thy stage, OCaesar, did present to thee. The Rockes did creepe, the Woods were running seene, Such as th' Hesperides were thought t' have been. Beasts after him both wilde and tame did throng, And sholes of Birds about the Poet hung. But he was slaine by an ungratefull Beare. This here was true, t' other was fained there. Of the Rhinoceres. WHilst long the fearefull Keepers did provoke Th' Rhinoceros, ere he his anger tooke,
They did despaire th' expected sight t' obtaine; At last his usuall rage return'd againe; For with his double horne he tost a Beare As high as Buls stuff'd Bals have tossed there. Of Carpophorus. HOw strong and sure, yet in his tender yeares Carpophorus throwes his Dorick hunting speares? Two mighty Bullocks easily he kill'd; To him the bugle and fierce Bull did yeeld. From him a Lion on the weapons ranne: Blame not the tarrying of the combate than.
A navall fight presented on the Theater (the water being suddenly let in by certain devices) made specta∣tors that were strangers beleeve it was the Sea; but that presently after they saw the water let out, and the Sword-players exercising in the same place. SPectator, thou that com'st from some far shore, And never saw'st these sacred showes before, Be not deceiv'd with Sea-like Pooles, that beare Whole navall fights; dry Land was lately there. Doo'st not beleeve? stay till the Fencers play By Land: here lately was the Sea, thou'lt say. The History of Leander, personated upon the water, let into the Amphitheater. in which he prayseth the emperour as more mercifull than Neptune; for this personated Leander was here saved; the true one was drowned in the Hellespont. THat this night-sea thy life, Leander, saves Cease youth to wōder, they were Caesars  av
When bold Leander swam to his faire Love, And gainst the swelling waves now weari'd strove, Thus the approaching illowes he bespake This life but going spare, returning take. Young men, skilfull in swimming, attired in the habit of Sea-Nymphs, played upon the water of the Theater. Which artificiall spectacle hee preferreth before the true Exercises of Thetis, and her Nymphs. ON Seas a well-taught Troope of Sea-Nymphs playde And various rankes on th' easie waters made. The threatning Tridēt, the crook'd Anchors there, The Ships, the Oares (we thought) did true appear; Th' Oebalian Twins, the Sailors saviours shin'd; Broad Sailes did seeme to swell against the wind. Who first such workes on liquid waters wrought? These sports here Thetis learn'd, or Thetis taught.
Of Carpophorus. HAd former ages bred Carpophorus, No Monsters, Caesar, had beene left for us. Nor had men fear'd the Nemean Lions rore, The Cretan Bull, nor fierce Arcadian Bore. By his arm'd hand Hydra one death had dy'd; He at one blow Chimaera had destroy'd. Tam'd Colchos Buls without Medaea's ayde, And freed Andromeda, and the Troian Maide. Count great Alcides praises, and to tame Twice ten wilde Beasts at once, is greater fame. He preferreth the Sea-fights, exhibited for spectacle by the Emperours Titus, and Domitian, before those of Augustus, Claudius, and Nero. TO ioyne two fleets, and with Sea-trumpets raise A navall fight, was great Augustus praise; More is our Caesar's; Galataea view'd, And Thetis too, strange Beasts in water shew'd. And Triton Sea-wett Chariots here hath seene,
And thought they had his Masters horses beene. For these fierce ships whilst he prepares a fight, Old Nereus would not from his Chariot light. What ere upon the circke or stage men see Caesar's rich water does present to thee. Let Claudius Lakes, and Nero's not be knowne To after times, but this Sea-fight alone. When two Sword-Players fought equally, and neyther yeelded, Caesar (though the People desired it) would not dismisse them, till at last both equally yeelded. Vpon which hee dismissed them both, crowned them both as Conquerours, and freed them from the ser∣vice of the stage by seading them Staves as the Custome was. WHen Verus here, there Priscus did prolong The fight; and both their strengths in ballance hung, The Peoples clamours oft dismission pray'd For both; but Caesar his owne Law obey'd Which was, the yeelder must his finger show; How er, he gif and unkets did bestow.
At last an end this equall combate found, Both fought alike, and both alike gave ground Caesar to both gave prize and libertie, All this became ingenious vertues fee▪ 'Twas never known, Caesar, before thy raigne, That two should fight, and conquest both obtain FINIS.
MARTIAL His Epigramms. Hic est quem legis—Epig. 1 Lib. 1. HEre whom thou seek'st, Reader, thou hast Martiall through all the knowne world grac'd For Epigrams of choysest wit. To whom alive, and knowing it, Reader, the favour thou hast showne Few Poets Vrnes have ever knowne.
Cum peteret Regem—Epig. 22. Lib. 1. WHen Mutius mist of his King-killing ayme, His willing hand he offer'd to the flame. But the milde Foe such Miracles abhorr'd, And safe from fire his Prisoner home restor'd. That hand, that Mutius from least fainting free Durst burne, the King could not endure to see. Thus happy errour greater glory wonne, And lesse this hand, if not deceiv'd, had done. Popeios iuvenes—Epig. 74. Lib. 5. EVrope, and Asia Pompey's sonnes interre, He tomb'd in Lybia lyes, if any where; No marvell tis, they scatter'd thus remaine, Since no one place such ruine could containe.
Coniugis audisset fatum—Epig. 43. Lib. 1. WHen Brutus death to Portias eare was brought, And weapons hid from her, her sorrow sought, Know ye not yet, quoth she, death's nere deny'd? Learn'd you not so much when my Father dy'd? This said, hot swallowed coales dispatch her life. In vaine, alas, have you deny'd a knife. Dum dubitaret—Epig. 32. Lib. 6. WHile civill Furies fate did doubtfull stay, And yet soft Otho might have wonne the day. Mars he condemn'd with blood already cloy'd, And his own life his certaine hand destroy'd. Though Cato's life than Caesars greater was, Not Cato's death could dying Otho passe.
Quod magni. Thrase,—Epig. 9. Lib. 1. THat great Thrasea's Sect thou dost maintaine, And dying Cato's, yet still safe remaine, Nor on drawne Swords thy naked breast hast run, What I could wish, has Decianus done. I weigh not him, whose glory death must raise. Give me the man, that living merits praise. Cum gravis—Epig. 73. Lib. 4. WHen sicke Vestinus drew his latest breath, And saw before his eyes approaching death. The Sisters drawing his last thread he prayes In that blacke taske to use some small delayes, Dead to himselfe he now lives to his friends. The Fates gave way to his Religious ends. Then parting his large wealth, he yeelds his breath, And thinkes himselfe now old enough for death.
Vu fieri liber—Epig. 53. Lib. . THou would'st be free, thou ly'st, thou would' not be But if thou wouldst, Ile chaul the way to thee At others Tables canst thou scorne to dine? Canst quench thy thirst with small Etrurian wi And cast on Cinna's Plate no covetous eye, And be content with such a gowne as I? Can a cheape Wench suffice thine appeite? And roomes, in wch thou canst not stand uprigh Couldst thou thy minde to this true temper bring, Thou shouldst live freer than the Parthian King. Nullos osse Deos—Epig. 21. Lib. 4. THat in the Heavens no gods there be Selius affirmes, and proves, cause h Still thinking so lives happily.
sse quid hoc—Epig. 10. Lib. 5. WHence ist, that men alive no praise can gaine▪ And that few Readers their own times maine∣taine? Thi, Regulus, is Envie's wonted guise To praise whats past, and present things despise. So we old Pompey's Gallery desire, And ulius Temple our old men admire. nnius Rome read, whilst Maro there resided. By his own times great Homer was derided. Fw Stages ownd Menander sounded forth. None but Corinna knew her Ovids Worth. But haste not you (my Bookes) for Fame, to whom is soone enough if after death it come. Sit cister mibi—Epig. 55. Lib. 3. A Vineyard at Ravenna; no a Well. For Water there than Wine doth dearer sell.
Callidus imposiat—Epig. 56. Lib. 3. THe Vinner cheated me, and pure Wine gave▪ Wine mixt with Water  desir'd to have. Callidus effracta—Epig. 43. Lib. 5. THieves may thy Coffers breake, steale coyne or plate; Thy house a sudden fire may ruinate. Debtors may Vse, and Principall deny, And dead thy seedes in barren Grounds may lye: Thy Steward may be cheated by a Whore; Thy Merchandise the Ocean may devour. But what thou giv'st thy friends, frō chance is free. Thy gifts alone shall thine for ever be.
COntinual showrs have so bedrenchd the vines, Though Vinners would, they could not sell pure wines. Of a Viper smothered in Amber. Flentibus Heliadum rai—Epig. 59. Lib. 4. WHilst on th' Heliades Amber-weeping Bowes A Viper creeps down, on the Worme it flowes. Who whilst amazde in this sweet Deaw it lyes, The Amber hardens, and the Viper dyes. Boast not, Aegyptian Queen, thy Tombe so brave, Since here a Viper findes a nobler grave.
Primos pass oos—Epig. 22. Lib. 4. BVt newly bedded, and scarce tam'd, from mee To a cleare Lake did Clopatra flee To hide her, but the water her betrayd, And to my sight her naked Limmes displayd. So in a glaffe are Lillyes plainly spyde, Nor blushing Roses can pure Chrystall hide. I, leaping in, a struggling kisse did get, But more the water would not there permit. Quisquis flaminiam—Epig. 14. Lib. 11. WHo ere dst passe Flaminiaes way, At this enobled Marble stay. Romes Love, Aegypts facetious Play. The Art, the Grace, the Sport, and Pleasure, The Roman Stages Griefe and Treasure, All Venus, and Cupid's here Are clos'd in Paris Sepulc.
Tanta tibi est—Epig. 6. Lib. 11. CAesr, as iust thou art, as full of grace As Numa was; but poore old Numa was. Tis strange, a minde not chang'd by wealth, to see That Croesus Master should a Numa bee. If those great names, the Roman Fathers shou'd Ascend from forth Elisium's empti'd wood, For thee Camillus freedome would forsake, And gold Fabritius from thy hand would take; Brutus would serve thee, to no hand but thine Would Sylla his Dictatorship resigne. Pompey would love thee, Caesar private still Would live; and Crassus wealth should serve thy will. Nay, if from Stygian gulfe Cato were free, Cao himselfe would a Caesarian bee. Bellaes, novimus, &—Epig. 65. Lib. 1. TH' art faire Fabulla, tis most true, Rich, yongue, there's none denies thy due.
But whilest thy selfe dost too much boast, Thy youth, thy wealth, thy beautie's lost. Frontibus adversis—Epig. 35. Lib. 4. WEe saw faint Deere with furious butts of late Each other meet, and dye with mutuall fate, The Dogs beheld their prey, the Hunts-man proud Admir'd no worke was to his knife allowd. Whence should faint hearts such furi entertaine? So fight sterne Buls, so valiant men are slaine. Dic mihi quem portas volucrum—Ep. 56. Lib. 5. TEll me, whō bearst thou, Queen of Birds? great love▪ Why wears he not his Thunder? he's in love. With whom? a Boy▪ Why dost thou turn thy beak So pleas'd to love? Of anymed I speake.
Casta suogladum—Epig. 14. Lib. 1. WHen to her Paetus Aria gave the Sword, Which had her own chast brest already gor'd, Trust me (she said) mine own woūd grieves not me; That wound's my grief, wch must be made by thee. Jrasci tantum felices—Epig. 37. Lib. 3. RIch friends' gainst poor to anger stil are pron It is not well, but profitably done. Quem recit men est—Epig. 39. Lib. 1. THe Booke thou readst, O Fidentine, is mine; But when thou ill recit'st it, it proves thine.
Flete nefas vestrum▪ WEepe, Nymphs, for your misdeeds all Lurine lake▪ Let Thetis feele your sorrow, & partake. Drown'd in the Baian waters, Eutychus Is lost, thy deare Companion Castricus. That knew thy thoughts, thy cares that gently eas'd The lov'd Alexis, which our Poet pleas'd. Perchance the wanton Nymph within the Lake Thee naked saw; and sent young Hylas backe; Or else the Goddesse moved with delight Of thy embrace, neglects th' Hermaphrodite. What ever caus'd thy sudden rape, to thee Let both the earth and water gentle bee. Semper eri pper—Epig. 82. Lib. 5. IF thou be poore, thou shalt be ever so; None now do wealth, but on the rich, beo▪
Tristis es & felix—Epig 79. Lib. 6. TH' art rich & sad; take heed lest fortune know; She 'll call th' unthankefull, Lupus, if she do. Profecit poto Mithridates—Epig. 77. Lib. 5. BY taking Poyson oft the Ponticke King Secu'd himselfe from hurt by poysoning; And, Cinna, thou by supping basely still Procur'st that hunger thee can never kill. Nscis, crede ihi, quid—Epig. 49. Lib. 4. THou know'st not, trust me, what are Epigrams, Flaccus, who thinkst them iests, & wantō games▪ wantons more, who writes what horrid meat
The plagu'd Thyestes, and vex'd Tere ▪ Or Daedalus fitting his Boy to fly, Or Polyphemus flocks in Sicily. My Booke no windy words, nor turgid needes, Nor swels my Muse with mad Cothurnall weedes. Yet those things all men praise, admire, adore. True; they praise those, but read these Poems more. Non donem tibi—Epig. 74. Lib. 5. THou wonder'st, Theodore, why I Entreated oft and urgently Refuse to send my Bookes to thee; I feare thou 'lt send thine owne to me. Frustra blanditiae—Epig. 72. Lib. 10. IN vaine ô wretched Flatterie, With bare-worne lips thou comst to me
To call me falsly Lord and God. Away; for thee here's no abode; To Parthia's mitred Monarchs goe; There falling prostrate, basely low, The gawdy Kings proud feet adore. This is no Lord, but Emperour, Of all the iustest Senatour. By whom from Stygian shades, the plaine, And rusticke truth's brought backe againe. Thou dar'st not, Rome, he Emperour, To flatter as thou didst before. Nubere Paull cupit—Epig. 8. Lib. 10. PAulla would marry me; I would not her Because she's old, unlesse she elder were.
Qui legis Oedipodas—Epig. 4. Lib. 10. WHat are, but Monsters, in the Theban bed, Thyestes, Scillaes, or Medea's read? What profits thee sleeping Endymion? Parthenopaeus, Atis, Hylas gone? Icarus drown'd▪ Hermaphroditus fe, Who now doth loves transforming waters hate? Why such vaine trash spendst thou thy time upon? Reade that, which truly thou mayst call thine own. There are no Centaures, Gorgons, Harpyes here; My page speakes only man. But thou dost feare Thy selfe, Mammurra, and thy crimes to know. Then read Callimachus his causes thou. Festinata prior decimi—Epig. 2. Lib. 10. THis my tenth Booke set out before too soone, Backe to my hands comes to be better done. Some old, but new corrected, thou wilt finde; The most are new; Reader, to both be kinde.
Reader, my wealth; whom when to me Rome gave, Nought greater to bestow (quoth she) I have. By him ingratefull Lethe thou shalt flye, And in thy better part shalt never dye. Wilde Fg-trees rend Messalla's Marbles off; Crispus halfe-horses the bold Carters scoffe. Writings no age can wrong, no theeving hand. Deathlesse alone those Monuments will stand. Quinque satis fuerant—Epig. 3. Lib. 8. FIve Books, or sixe, or seven, had bin now, Nay, Muse, too much; why further wantonst thou? Here nd for shame; fame now can adde no grace To me; my Bookes are read in every place. And when Licinius, and Messalla's high, Rich marble Towers in ruin'd dust shall lye, I shall be read, and strangers every where Shall to their farthest homes my Verses bear. Thus I, when thus the ninth Muse answer'd me, Whose hair & clothes still wet with oyntments be, Canst thou, ingratefull man, thy toyes forsake?
What better course (speake idler) canst thou take? Will thy low Verse ere fit the Tragicke vaine? Or thunder Warres in an Heroicke straine? That Schoole-masters, till they be hoarse, may read Thy lines, & Girles & Boyes thy name may dread? Let men more grave and sowre such Verses write, Who do by Candles spend the toylesome night; With Roman salt thy merry Bookes fill thou, Where men their maners may both read & know. What though thou seeme to pipe on humble reeds, Whilst others Trumpets thy small Pipe exceeds? Aeolidon Canace iacet hoc—Epig. 92. Lib. 11. WIthin this Tombe faire Canace is plac't, To whom her seventh Winter was her last. O dire mischance! Reader, why weept thou there? Tis not her short life, that requires thy teare▪ Deaths maner's worse than death; the dire disease Beset her face, her tender mouth did seize. The Monster sickenesse striv'd a kisse to have. Her faire lips went not wholly to the grave.
If fates so soone bad meant to stop her breath, They should have come some other way. But death Made haste her tongues sweet Musicke to prevent, Let that should make the linti Fates relent. Quod ta grande—Epig. 48. Lib. 6. THat flattering guests to praise thy words cōsent Not thou, Pomponus, thy feast's eloquent. Qui recitat lana fauces—Epig. 41. Lib. 6. HEe that recites, his throat close muffled, hee Showes he can neither speake, nor silent bee.
Si quid forte petam—Epig. 24. Lib. . To Caesar. IF my small fearefull Booke do begge of thee, Grant it, if not too bold my beggings bee; Or pardon, though thou grant not what I move; Incense and prayers nere offended ove. He makes not gods, who does their figures raise In gold and marble; but the man that prayes. Liber amicorum dulcissima—Epig. 77. Lib. 8. LIber thy friends deare care, worthy to live For evermore where sweetest Roses thrive, With flowers (if thou be wise) still crown thy head, Vpon thy haire Assyrian oyntment spread: Thy Chrystall glasse let blacke Falernum dy: Thy soft bed warme with pleasing Venery. Who ere lives thus, although but halfe his time, He makes more life than was bestow'd on him.
quem  tibi—Epig. 15. Lib. 9. THinkst thou his friendship ever faithful proves, Whom first thy Table purchas'd? no, he loves Thy Ovsters, Mullets, Bores, Sowes paps, not thee: If I could feast him so, he would love me. Laudas balaca—Epig. 20. Lib. 9, To Sabllus. THou prayset in three hundred lines Ponticus Baths, who richly dines; Thy minde to eate, not wash inclines.
Nno in Eis—Epig. 26. Lib. 8, To Domitian. NOt in the Hyrcanian woods, nor India Did ere mo Tigers the pale hunts-men aw Than did thy Rome, Germanicus, in sights Late shew; nor could she number her delights. The Indian Triumph was excell'd by thee, The wealth and conquest of a Deitie. For Bacchus with two Tigers was content When Captive Indians by his Chariot went. Munera qui—Epig. 27. Lib. 8. GAurus, th' art old & rich; who ere to thee (die. Gives gifts (conceive him right) he bids thee
Host cum fugeret—Epig. 80. Lib. . WHat Furie's this? his Foe whilst Fannius flyes He kils himselfe; for feare of death he dyes. Splendophorus Libyeas—Epig. 57. Lib. 9. TO Libya goes Splendophorus to warre. Cupid, thy shafts for this faire Boy prepare, Those shafts, which youths & tender virgins woūd; Light let thy speare in his soft hand be found. The breast-plate, helme and shield I leave to thee; To fight in safety, naked let him bee. No arrow, sword, nor dart could hurt in warre Parthenopaeus, whilst his face was bare. He, whom this youth shall wound, will dy of love, And happy too so sweet a fate to prove. Whilst yet thy chin is smooth fair boy come home; Grow not a man in Affricke, but at Rome.
In Tartessiacis domus est—Epig. 62. Lib. 9. A Well known house doth in that country stand Where Baetis waters Corduba's rich Land, Where Wool's their native mettals colour keepe, And growing goldfoile guilds the Spanish sheepe. In mid'st of th' house her gods ore-shadowing Does Caesars plaine-tree prosperously spring Planted by that victorious guest, from whose Imperiall hand the tender twigg arose; Which now it seems her Lord and founder knowes She spreads so fast her sky-aspiring bowes, Vnder that shade the Rusticke Dryades, And wanton Fauns thēselves with sporting please; And oft, as she by night from Pan doth fly This silent house doth Syrinx terrifie. There oft hath Bacchus kept his revelling. When wine has made the Tree more richly spring. There Roses grow t' adorne the drinking crowne; And none can say those Roses are his owne. Great Caesars Tree, to all the Gods most deare, No sacrilegious fire, nor hatchets feare.
Still mayst thou hope honour'd with leaves to bee; Twas no Pompeian hand that planted thee. Dixerat O mores, O tempora—Epig. 72. Lib. 9. OH times, O manners once old Tullv said, When Catiline his hellish plot had layd, When Wars did sonne and father in law divide, And Romes sad earth with civill slaughter dy'd. Why now O times, O manners cry'st thou man? What ist displeases thee Cecilian? No Generals rage, no swords of Traitors now; But peace and ioy do plentifully flow. Tis not the ages manners, but thine owne Have made the age to thee so hatefull growne.
Hic qui dura sedens— THis mighty God in brasse but little done, Whose Lions skin softens the harder stone, Who views the heavens, wch once his strength bore up, Whose left hand holds a clubb, his right a cup, Is no new peece, no glory of our dayes, But fam'd Lysippus gift, and worke of praise; This god once Alexander's Table shew'd, Who Conquerour lyes in th' earth so soon subdu'd. By him young Hanniball at th' altar swore; By his command sterne Sylla Rule gave ore. Griev'd at these severall Courts vaine terrours, he Now in a private house is glad to bee, And live with learned Vindex as his god, As once he grac'd Molorchus poore abode.
Cum faciem laude—Epig. 50. Lib. 3. To Galla. WHen ore I praise thy face, hand, leg; far more (Thou sayst) I'd like the, if all naked ore; Yet still thou hun'st the common Baths with me; Fear'st thou that I should not be lik'd by thee? Empta danus fuerat—Epig. 51. Lib. 3. TWo hundred pound thy house, Tongilian, cost, Which was by fire, a chance too frequent, lost. Ten times as much in lieu was gather'd thee. Didst thou not burne thy house in pollicie?
Cum dare non possim—Epig. 53. Lib. 3. WHen for a night thou cravest more than I Can give, twere plainer, Galla, to deny. Quod spirat tenera malum—Epig. 64. Lib. 3. To Diadumenus. WHat smell ripe Apples bit by Virgins faire, Or what Cilician saffrons fragrant aire, What blooming Vines with blossoms lately fill'd, Or springing pastures cropt by sheep do yeild: What Myrtles, chafed Amber, Easterne gumms, Arabian incense rising in palefumes: What meadowes lightly wet with summer showres, Or Nard in chaplets made of sweetest flowers: All this, faire Boy, thy frag ant kisses be. What would they, didst thou give them ful & fre?
Dum modo Causidicum—Epig. 64. Lib. 2. To Taurus. WHilst Rhetoricke now, now Law best pleaseth thee And thou resolv'st not, Taurus, what to bee, Old Priam's time, Peleus, or Nestor's runs, A time to leave off all professions. Three Rhetoricians dy'd within a yeare; Be thou one, if th' art bold, and skilfull there; If not; all Courts are full of brawles for thee; Even Maria's statue might a Lawyer bee. Delay no more. How long expect we thee? Thou 'lt doubt so long, till thou canst nothing bee. Ad caenam nuper—Epig. 78. Lib. 4. VArus invited me to supper late, Where litle meat there was, but store of plat▪ His men with gold, not victuals fill'd the bord, Feasts to our eyes, not stomacks to afford.
We came to feede no eyes, but bellies here; Keepe up thy wealth, or shew't in better cheere. Munera quod senibus—Epig. 56. Lib. 4. Against Gargilian. GIfts t' old rich men thou sendst, & widows all, Yet would'st be thought, Gargilian, liberall. Theres nought more sordid, nought more base than thee, To call thy snares a liberaliti. So to the greedy fish the hooke is kinde: Such favour, Beasts from cousening bates do finde. But wouldst thou know true liberlitie? e teach thee then; bestow thy gifts on me.
igis  nem nostros—Epig. 72. Lib. 4. To Quinctus. THou begg'st, that I'd bestow my Book on thee, I ave none; the Stationer can shew it thee. Shall I give coine for toyes, thinkst thou, and buy Thy Bookes? I am not such a foole; nor I. giti  semper, Lie—Epig. 66. Lib. 4. LInus, thou still a Country life didst live; Than wch nought can more cheap contentment give. Few Ides, or Calends ere in Rome did see Thee gown'd; one cloak ten Summers served thee; Thy groūds did yeild thee bores, & hares unboght; The woods fat Thrushes to thy table brought. The rivers gave thee fish; in pots of earth Thou drunkst cheap wine, which boasts no forreine birth. No beauteous high-priz'd Boyes of Greece did fill Thy wie, but plaine and rustick servants still;
Or else thy tenants homely wife did lye With thee, when wine had rais'd thy spirits high. No heats did spoyle thy crops, no fire burnt down Thy house; the sea no ships of thine did drown. No dice, or gaming tooke thy wealth away. For nuts, like children, was thy deepest play. Where's all the wealth thy mother left thee gone Linus, tis hard to do what thou hast done. Quae mihi praestiteris memini—Epig. 53. Lib. 5. To Posthumus. THy gifts to me I thinke of, and still shall. Why then do I not speake of them at all? Thou dost. Where ere i tell thy charitie, Tis answer'd straight, himselfe has told it me. This work befits not both; one is enough; If thou wouldst have me speake, be silent thou. For (trust me) wert thou nere so liberall, The givers talking would destroy it all.
asia da nobis—Epig. 34. Lib. 6. To Diadumenus. KIsse fully, fairest Boy. How oft (sai'st thou) The Oceans waves thou bidst me number now; Or shels upon th' Aegaean shor to count, Or bees, that swarme about th' Athenian mount; Or on the Theater the peoples cryes, And shouts, when Caesar first doth greet their eies. What number Lesbia to Catullus gave I beg not. Few would he, that counts them, have. Vatis Apollinei magno—Epig. 21. Lib. 7. Of Lucan. THis day so fam'd for Phoebus Prophets birth Returnes; yee Poets, sacrifice with mirth. This day deserv'd, which Lucan did bestow, That Baetis mixt with Helicon should low.
Ede tuos tandem—Epig. 26. Lib. 1. PVblish thy Bookes (Faustinus) yet, and shew Thy polish'd labours to the peoples view, Those Bookes, which Athens cannot dis respect, Nor our old Romans but with praie affect▪ Wilt not admit fame standing at thy doore? And take the fruit of all thy paines before? Fame to the Vrne comes late; let those Books live With thee, which after life to thee must give. Cum clamant omnes—Epig. 98. Lib. 1. To Naevolus the Lawyer. WHen there's most noyse, thou plead'st, thinking to show Thy selfe a Patron, & a Lawyer so. At such a time all men speake well▪ but now When all are silent, speake to th' purpose thou.
Non plenum modo—Epig. 100. Lib. . To covetous Calenus. THou once hadst an estate but small; But then so brave, free, liberall Thou wer, Calenus, that all we Did wish ten times as much to thee. Some God then heard what we did pray, And e seven Calends past away Foure deaths on thee bestow'd that summe; But thou, as if no meanes had come, But rather as much losse to thee, Fell'st to such wretched penurie, That even thy feasts most high and rare, Which once a yeare thou dost prepare, Thou mak'st for small summes of base coyne; And seven of us old friends of thine Cost thee a leaden halfe-penny. For this what shall I wish to thee? Ile wish thy wealth ten times as much. Thou 'dst starve our right, if it were such.
Qui pixit Venerem—Epig. 103. Lib.  To Lycoris. THat Painter sure, Lycoris, meant to shew Favour to Pallas, which thy  drew. Esse quid hoc dicam—Epig. 12. Lib. 2. Against Posthum. WHence ist, that still like myrhe thy kisses bee That stil thou bearst a borrowd sent with thee? I needes must censure thee for that sweet smell. He smels not well, that alwayes smels so well.
Quod querulum spirat—Epig. 26. Lib. 2. To Bithynicus. THat in thy bosome thy old wife doth lye Coffing, and groaning still, as like to dye Thou think'st th'art surely made, but thou wilt be Deceiv'd; she dooes not dy, but flatter thee. utua vigintisestertia—Epig. 30. Lib. 2. Against Caius. TWenty sesterces I'de have borrow'd late, Which, if bestow'd, had been a gift not great. hold. For twas a rich friend whom I ask'd, and old, Whose crowded chests would scarce his riches He cryes, rne Lawyer, and hou'lt thrive; I'de have No counsel, Caius, give me what I crave.
mi seu puerum—Epig. 44. Lib. . Against Sextus. WHen I a Boy, or gowne have bought, Or some small plate of silver wrought, Sextus the Vsurer, whom you To be my old companion know, Fearing I'de begge of him, thus hee Speakes to himselfe (ore-heard by mee) To Phoebus foure thousand, eleven Philetus, to Secundus seven Iow; and have at home no whit Of coine; welfare an old friends wit. Tis hard, when ask'd, thou shouldst deny; Harder before I aske of thee.
Vguent fateor—Epig. 12. Lib. 3. Against Fabullus. THou gav'st good ointment (tis confest) But little supper to thy guests. Tis an improper thing to be Perfum'd, and hungry. Well may he, That is anoynted, and not fed, Be thought a coarse, thats newly dead. Proscriptum famulus—Epig. 21. Lib. 3. Against a cruell Master; whose life notwithstanding a wronged slave of h did save at the Proscription. ABranded slave his proscrib'd Lord did save. Not life, but envie, to his Lord he gave.
Mentiris ivenem—Epig. 43. Lib. 3. Against Lentinus. THou dy'st thy haire to seeme a younger man, And turn'st a Crow, that lately wert a Swan. All are not cousen'd; hels queene knows thee grey. She'll take the vizor from thy head away. Occurit tibi nemo—Epig. 44. Lib. 3. Against Ligurinus. THat none would meet thee willingly, But where so ere thou com'st, all fly O Ligurinus, wouldst thou know it? The cause is th' art too much a Poet. That fault is wondrous dangerous. No Tiger robb'd of whelpes by us So much is fear'd, no Scorpion, Nor Dipsas basking in the Sun.
For who can ere endure such paine? Standing thou read'st, sitting againe; Running, and at the privy too. To th' bath I goe; there readest thou. I goe to swimme; thy Booke delayes me. I goe to supper; thence it stayes me. When I am set, thy reading makes me To rise; and when I sleepe, it wakes me. Behold, what hurt thou dost. None can Brooke thee a iust, good, harmelesse man. Et latet, & lucet—Epig. 32. Lib. 4. Of a Bee smoother'd in Amber. HEre shines a Bee clos'd in an Amber tombe As if interr'd in her own honey-combe. A fit-reward fate to her labours gave; No other death would she have wish'd to have▪
Hic est Pampine is—Epig. 44. Lib. 4. Of the hill Vesuvius buned by a strange fire. VEsuvius shaded once with greenest vines, Where pressed grapes did yeeld the noblest wines. Which hil far more thā ysa Bacchus lov'd, Where Satyrs once in mirthfull dances mov'd, Where Venus dwelt, and better lov'd the place Than Sparta; where Alcides Temple was, Is now burnt downe, rak'd up in ashes sad The gods are griev'd that such great power they had▪ Sum fateor, semper{que} fui—epig. 13. Lib. 5. Against Callistr atus. I'm poore, Callistratus, and ever was, But yet a Gentleman, free from disgrace, And read through all the world, and pointed at, And living finde what few finde after fate. An hundred columnes thy large house uphold;
Thy crowded chests can scarce containe thy gold. Much rich Aegyptian Land thou hast; but more, Thy flocks from Parma send thee fleeces store. Thus are we two; what I am thou 'lt nere be, The basest man by chance may equall thee. Sextantes, Caliste duos—Epig. 65. Lib. . To his servants. TWo cups, Calistus, of rich wine fill thou, Thou Alcimus, allay 't with summer snow. Let my moist haire with richest oyntment sweat; And sweet rose chaplets on my Temples set. Come, let us live; the Caesars tombes so nigh Teach us that even the gods themselves will dye
Antonni Phario—Epig. 70. Lib 5. Against Marcus Antonius the Trinvir. WOrse than Photius, and more odious grown▪ By Tullies death, than thy proscription, Why by thy sword should that brave Roman bleed? Fieree Catiline would have abhorr'd the deed▪ The impious Souldier gold corrupts, and nought But one tongs silence that great welth has bought. What boots that sacred tongues dear silence now All men will speake in stead of Cicero. Qui potuit Bacchi—Epig. 73 Lib. 5. Of Bacchus birth. WHo sayes that love was Bacchus mother, he As well may call his father Sle▪
Jurat capillos—Epig. 12. Lib. 6. Of Fabulla. FAbulla sweares her haire (which at a rate She bought) is hers. Is she forsworne in that? Dum Phaetonaea—Epig. 15. Lib. 6. Of an Ant drownd in Amber. A Namber drop from Phaetons branches wept Enclos'd a little Ant that under crept▪ That Ant not valu'd in her life at all Is now made precious by her funerall. Quod nubis Proculina—Epig. 22. Lib. 6. Against Proculina. THat Proculina's servant marries her Her husband now, late her adulterer
For feare the Iulian Law should taxe her, she Not marries, but confesses that was he. Amisit Pater unicum—Epig. 62. Lib. 6. To Apian. SIlanus only son is dead. Why, Apian, hast thou offered No gifts to th' sire? oh destinies What Vultur shall this carkasse seize▪ Mchum Gellia—Epig. 90. Lib. 6. Of Gellia. BV one Adulterer has Gellia now; Thats worst of all to be a wife to two.
Cltus tibi cum—Epig. 92. Lib. 6. To Amianus. WHen on thy cup a serpents shape is wrought By Myrons hand, & wine but small & nought Thou drink'st therein, ure tis a poyson'd draught. Frgmentum quod vile—Epig. 18. Lib. 7. Of a peece of the ship Argus. THis, wch thou thinkst base planks, & useles wood, Was once that ship that first the Ocean plowd. Which nor Cyanean Ilands, nor the rage Of Sythian Seas could breake, but powerful age Did ruine it; yet though to time it yeeld, Let this more sacred than whole ships be held.
Primum est ut praestes—Epig. 42. Lib. 7. Against Cinna. THe first love, Cinna, is to grant what I Request; the second quickly to deny. I love the one, the other hate not I; But thou nor grant'st, nor quickly dost deny. Commendare tuum dum—Epig. 45. Lib. 7. To Priscus. WHilst thou thy gifts to me in verse wouldst fain Commend, and striv'st to passe great Homers vein; Thy selfe & me thou too too long dost vex; While thou art studying, wants do me perplexe. Send rich men Verses, and high Elegyes; Poor men plaine gifts without a Verse will please.
Doctorum Licini celeberrime—Epig. 46. Lib. 7. To Licinius. LIcinius, fam'd for learning, best of men, Whose language brings th' old puritie agen. By what great gift of fate to us art thou (Neere tasting Lethes streame) restored now? Our feares were past, our sorrow freely wept, And had thy obsequies already kept. But hels sad King such envie could not brooke, And to the fates restor'd the web he tooke. How thy false death was wail▪d is known to thee; Thou now enioy'st thine own posteritie. Live as by stealth; seize ioyes that flying poast. Let not a day of this new life be lost.
Quod te diripiunt—Epig. 75. lib. 7. To Philomusus. THat great men court thee every where, At feasts, and at the Theater, And would, as oft as well may bee, Walk, bathe, or take the ayre with thee; Doe not admire thy selfe for it. Tis not their love, but their delight. Si meus aita—Epig. 86. lib. 7. IF Flacus love a long-ear'd  Bird. Harefoots sight, And Caniusin a Blackamore delight; If Publius fall enamour'd of a Bitch, And Cronus thoughts a Monkey can bewitch; If Marius prize a harmefull Indian Rat, Lausus a Py, that can salute and that; If faire Glacilla's neck her snake become, And Thelesine her Nightingale entombe:
Why should not I my faire Laycas love, When such strange Monsters their delights can move▪ Si quid upon uerit—Epig 91. lib 7. Against Bacchra. WEre I in want, I need not aske of thee Thus, Bacchra, oftentimes thou tellest me. My Creditors at my non-payment taunt. Thou hear'st, yet knowst not, Bacchra, what I want. My Land-lord rent doth openly demand; Thou hear'st, yet know'st not in what need I stand. My cloathes are old, worne bare vnto a thred. Thou seest, yet know'st not, Bacchra, what I need. My neede is no have thee strooke dumbe therefore, That thou mightst say, wert thou in need no more.
Conditus his eg s—Epig. 95. Lib. 7. An Epitaph vpon Vrbicus a Child. I Vibicus the griefe of Bassus, am Here tomb'd, on whom great Rome bestow'd a name. Sixe Moneths I wanted of two yeares, when to My threed of life did cruell fates vndo. What did my beauty, talke, or age auaile? Who ere readst this, my death vntimely waile. So may that man at Nestors age to grave Descend, whom thou wouldst thy surviver have. Sic placidum semper—Epig. 98. lib. 7. To Crisp. SO mayst thou still be favourd by our love, And gaine as well Romes an thy Memphis love, When thou my Verses read in Court shalt heare (For they sometimes enioy great Caesars eare) Say, like a candid Reader, this mans ries
Doe adde some honour, Caesar, to thy times, Not far from Marsus or Catullus best. This is enough; to love I leave the rest. Milo domi non est—Epig. 101. lib. 7. Of Milo. MIorides forth; his grounds, while he's from home, Ly wast: his wife still bears a fruitfull wombe. Why are the grounds, and she not, barren growne? His wife has tillers, though the grounds have none. Achetypis vet—Epig. 6. lib 8. Against Euctus. HOw odious Euctus antique gobblets are! In earthen pots twere better drinking farre, While he the mouldy ages of his plate (Palling the wine with talking) doth relate.
This cup belong'd to King Laomedon; For this Apollo's Harpe did wall the Towne. This pot in fight did furious Rhaetus vse Against the Lapithes; see, here's the bruise. This with two bottoms Nestor did delight: Twas Nestor's thumbe that wore this dove so bright. This cup Achilles in a ioviall vaine Drunke freely off, his friends to entertaine. In this faire Dido dranke to Bitias, When Troys lov'd Prince her guest at supper was. While thou these old engravings wondrest at, Thou drinkst Astyanax in Priam's plate. Principium des Jane—Epig▪ 8. lib. 8. To Jamis. THough, Ianus, thou begin swift years, that hast, And with thy looke call backe the ages past: Though thee all incense first, all prayers implore: All honours new, and purple gownes adore; Yet more thou ioy st to see what now is come, That in thy moneth our god returnes to Rome.
Egi, Sexte, tuam—Epig. 17 lib. 8. To Sextus. SExtus, thy cause I pleaded; for my fee Thou sentst a piece; for two did I agree. But thou complainst I did thy cause betray; More for the shame I suffer'd, thou shouldst pay. Aëraper tacitum—Epig▪ 32. lib. 8. Of Aretulla's Pigeon. TO Aretulla's lap a snowy Dove Descended gently through the aire above. It was no chance; for there the Dove did stay, And, though permitted, would not fly away. If that so good a sisters pious love, And Prayers may hope our earthly god to move, This Dove, from Sardos from her brother sent, Brings newes of his repeale from banishment.
Quantatua est probitas—Epig. 46. lib. 8. To Cestus. CEstus, so chast thou art, so wondrous fair That Theseus sonne may not with thee com∣pare. To bathe with thee would nak'd Diana ioy. Cybel for thee would leave her Phrygian boy. Iuno would let thee lye, for Ganymede, With love, and would not thy chast kisses dread. Oh happy Bride, whose maiden-head shall take Thy first fresh strength, & thee an husband make. Formosissima quae—Epig. 53. lib. 8. Against Catulla. OF all thy sexe thou fairest faire, But baser than the basest are, Oh how I wish, Catulla, thee Lesse faire, or else more chast to bee.
Tres habuit dentes—Epig. 57. lib. 8. To Picens. THree only teeth had Picens, and did spit Them out; as he before his tombe did sit. Then gathring his mouthes ruines up, he there Entombed them; so that although his heire Gather not up his bones, when he is gone; This funerall rite he to himselfe hath done. Qui Corcyraei vidit—Epig 68 lib. 8. To Entellus. WHo both hath seen, wil praise thy garden house More than the Orchard of Alcinoûs. Where, lest the purple grapes sad winters frost Should burne, and Bacchus gifts by cold be lost; Clos'd in transparant stone thy Vines do live, And to the eye, though hid, their lustre give. So pebble stones in Chrystall brookes are spy'd,
And Maides white skins through tyffeney descry'd. What would not nature let wit reach unto, When barren▪ Winter Autumn's workes must do? Miraris veteres—Epig. 69. lib. 8. Of Vacerra. VAcerra, thou approv'st of none For Poets, but are dead and gone. Pardon; for so much do not I Esteeme thy praises as to dy. Dic verum mihi, Marce—Epig. 76. lib. 8. Vpon Gallcus. I Prithee, Marcus, tell me true; There's nought I'd rather heare from you; Thus, when thy Bookes thou dost recite, Or when thou pleadst thy clients right,
Still, Gallicus, thou begg'st of mee. Twere hard I should deny it thee. Then heare whats true as true can be; Thou dost not heare truth willingly. Qua iam superis—Epig 4. lib. 9. To Domitian. OF what thou, Caesar, to the gods hast given, If thou wouldst now exact repayment even, Although in Heaven an out-cry should be made, And the gods forc'd to sell what ere they had; Atlas were bank-rupt; love could not compound, Though thou would'st take five groats in every pound. What can he pay for his Tarpeian crown? What for his Capitoll, re-built, when down? How much for her two temples luno owes! Pallas I passe, for she thy businesse does, Why should I name the Flavian Temples now? What Laedas sonnes, Alcides, Phoebus ow? Caesar must needs forbeare, or give them day. For loves chest has not where withall to pay.
Caees anthare cum—Epig. 11. lib. 9. Against Cantharus. WHen thou at others cost cat'st still, Thou roar'st, thou threaten'st, & speak'st ill. Such pride and fiercenesse sits not thee: Thou canst not sharke, and be so free. Cappadocum saevis—Epig 31. lib. 9. Of Antistius Rusticus. IN Cappadocia did Antistius dy. Oh guilty land in such a Tragaedy? Nigrina, when her deare Lords bones she brought Home in her lap, too short the iourney thought. When th' nvy'd tombe the sacred Vrne receiv'd, She seem'd againe of her dear Lord bercav'd.
Jupiter Jdei—Epig. 35. lib. 9. In praise of Domitian. WHen love great Caesars Flavian Temple y'd His fabulous Cretan tombe he did deride. And when at table he did freely supp Nectar, and gave to Mars, his sonne, the cupp; Looking on Phoebus, and bright Phoebe, where Faire Maiaes sonne, and great Alides were. You rais'd me Cretan monuments, quoth he, How much more Caesars Father tis to be! Si credis mibi—Epig. 53. lib. 9. To Ovid. WHat thou deserv'st, if thou beleeve, I do to Aprils Calends give For thy birth, Ovid, what I doe To March, to which mine own I owe. Both happy dayes, with whitest stone
Both to hee mark'd by me; by one A friend: by tother life I have. The greater gift thy Calends gave. Lector & auditor—Epig. 82. lib 9. To Aulu. REaders and hearers, both my Bookes renowne▪ Some Poets say th' are not exactly done. I care not much; like banquets, let my Booke Rather be pleasing to the guests than Cookes. Dixerat Astrologu—Epig. 84. lib. 9. To C▪ CInna, th' Astrologer fore-told that the Shouldst perish soone, nor did he For loath to leave ought here, when th , Thou spent'st thy goods in iot speedily.
And all thy treasure in one yeare is gone. What is this, Cinna, but to perish soone? Juter tanta tu—Epig. 85 lib. 9. To Domitian. MOngst all the wonders, Caesar, of thy stage Aequal'd by no, or former Prince or age. The eye owes much to thee; but more the are▪ That they who once did act, now sit and heare. Quadringentorum reddis—Epig. 105. lib▪ 9. To Phoebus BOnds of foure hundred thou giv'st back to me; I'd rather have one hundred lent from thee. Boast such vaine gifts to some man else; I say Ths mine already which I cannot pay.
Que nova tam—Epig. 106. lib. 9. Of two alike faire Brothers. WHat other Laeda such like twins hath bred? What other swan some Spartan dame did tred Asillus Castors, Hierus has the face Of Pollux; both have Hellens lovely grace. Had Laedaes sons been of so faire a hew, When Venus gift, though worst, the rest Helen had stay'd behinde; Paris had then With two stolne Ganymeds return'd agen. Jam placido —Epig. 23. lib. 10. Of Antonius primus. ANtonius Primus to his blest content Seventy five years of life can number spent. His former yeares secure he lookes upon, And feares not Lethes streame now nearer grown. No day, thats past, seemes sad or grievous yet,
No day, which he would study to forget. Thus good men to themselves long life can give, I' enioy our former life is twice to live. Ve Parethonias—Epig. . lib. 10. Of Varus. VArus, which as Romes Tribune didst cōmand An hundred men, tenownd in Aegypts land. Now as a stranger Ghost thou dost remaine On Nilus shore, promis'd to Rome in vaine. We could not dew with teares thy dying face, Nor thy sad funerall flames with odours grace, Yet in my Verse eterniz'd shalt thou bee. Of that false Aegypt cannot cousen thee.
O Sulpitiam—Epig. 35. lib. 10. Of Sulpitia. LEt all chast Virgins, that would we One man alone, Sulpitia read. Let all good men, that love the bed Of one chast Spouse, Sulpitia read. She sings not of Medaea's spels, Nor dire Thyestes banquet tels. Scylla, and Bibli stories lyes She counts; pure loves, and chastitis, Sweete sports, and harmelesse she relates, Her Verse who ere well aestimates, Will say that none are holier. Such iests, I thinke, Aegeriaes were In that moist Cave to Numa's eare. Brought up with her, or taught by her, Chast, and more learn'd had Sappho beene. But flinty Phao, had he seene▪ Them both, had lov'd Sulpitia sure, (Although in vaine) for she more pure Would not exchange Calenus love For Bacchus, Phoebus, or great love.
—Epig. 71. lib. 10. Vpon the tombe of Rabiriu his Parents. THou that dost wih thy parents lives should prove Both long & blest, this tombs short title love. Wherein Rabiris dead deare parents rest. No age with happier fate was ever blest. Wedlocke of threesoore years one night untwines, And in one funerall flame both bodies ioynes. But he, as they had dy'd in greener yeares, Still weepes. What iustice is there in those teares? Non Vrbana mea—Epig. 3. Lib. 11. Of his Bookes. TIs not the City only doth approue My Muse, or idle cares my Verses love. The rough Centurion, where cold frosts oresprcad The Scythian fields, in war my Bookes doth read. My lines are sang in Brittaine far remote;
But yet my empty purse perceives it not. What deathless numbers from my pen would flow▪ What wars would my Pierian Trumpet blow? If, as Augustus now againe doth live, So Rome to me would a Mecaenas give Aedes emit Aper—Epig. 35. Lib. 11. Of Aper. APer a cottage bought, which not an Owle Would deigne to own, it was so old & fowle. But Maro's sumptuous house, and walkes excell. Aper will richly fare, not richly dwell. Ignotos mihi cum—Epig. 36. Lib. 11. To Fabullus. WHen many guests strangers to me Thou bidst, and then I failed thee
Thou chid because I made not one I do not love to sup alone. Viida cum poscis—Epig. 43. lib. 11. WHen living Epigrams thou crav'st of me, Thou giv'st dead arguments. How can that be? How canst thou have Hytian hony flow, And Corsick thyme  Athenian Bees allow▪ Quod ii laudas—Epig. 57. lib. 11. Against Chermon. THat thou, Cheraemon, death dost est desire Thou wouldst have us thy valiant mind admire▪ This high resolve comes from an carelesse pot, A chimney without fire to keepe it hot, A bedstod eat with wormes, ugs course & light▪ One short bare gown o weare both day & night.
How brave a man art thou canst want such geere As straw, course bread, and lees of vineger▪ But if a woven purple coverled, And fine french lawne adorn'd thy downy bed, Hadst thou a Boy, whose rosie lips would fire As wine he fils; thy lustfull guests desire: Then thou to live thrice Neors years wouldst pray▪ And wouldst not lose an houre of any day. In poore estate tis easie scorning death; Valiant is he dares draw a wretched breath. Nil mihi das vivus—Epig. 68. lib. 11. Against Maro. ALive you give me nought, you say you will At death: you know my wish if you have skill.
Paarogas magnos—Epig. 69. Lib. 11. Against Matho. THou begg'st small gifts of great ones, which they yet Deny. To be lee sham'd, begge gifts more great, Clamabat tumidis audax— THus bold Leander cry'd ith swelling Maine Then drown me waues when I returne againe.
Mutari melius Taro—Vpon the picture of Europa's rape. THen rather, Iove, should'st thou have chose to bee A Bull, when Iô was a Cow for thee. FINIS.
