18810 99848743 13856
A NEW HAND∣LING OF THE PLA∣NISPHERE, DIVIDED into three Sections. IN THE FIRST IS A PLAINE AND sensible explication of the circles of the Sphere, and such termes as appertaine vnto the do∣ctrine de primo mobili; after a Me∣thode not heretofore vsed in any language. THE SECOND SHEWETH HOW VPON any plaine, being Paper, Pastboord, or a Latten plate, ha∣uing one circle diuided into degrees, and crossed vvith tvvo Dia∣meters at right angles, most Conclusions of the Astrolabe may for all Latitudes or Countries be readily and exactly performed onely vvith Ruler and Compasses. IN THE THIRD, BEING A SVPPLEMENT OR∣ganicall, is contained the making of certaine easie instruments for the perfecter working the former Conclusions, as to know what de∣grees and minutes be in any circumference giuen, with other necessarie matters about the Meridian line and the height of the Pole. Pleasant and profitable generally for all men, but especially such as vvould get handines in vsing the Ruler and Compasse, and desire to reape the fruite of Astronomicall and Geographicall documents, vvithout being at the charge of costly Instruments. Inuented for the most part, and first published in English by THOMAS OLYVER. AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Simon Waterson and Rafe Iacson. 1601.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR IOHN PETER KNIGHT, at Thornedon in Essex. KNowing well (right Worship∣full) after the dispatch of much weighty busines, which for the good of others you willing∣ly vndertake, and, by report of the shire, with very great dis∣cretion, and all vprightnes per∣forme, that as it were for your recreation, you perused often bookes of Geogra∣phie: some while since I sent the manner how three or foure problemes Geographicall might bee wrought vpon a plaine with Ruler and Compasse only. At my leisure afterward taking that subiect in hand againe, I followed it so farre, that I deuised af∣ter the like way to handle most conclusions of the Astrolabe, or problems Astronomicall concerning the Primum mobile. When I had almost brought my purpose to effect, it was my chaunce to light vpon Clauius his Astrolabe, where I found as much pro∣mised, and performed euen by Ptolomeis Analomma,
the very modell of Iohannes de Roias his Planisphere, as learned Guidus Vbaldus hath fully proued, and al∣so the ground vpon which I haue framed much of my worke. Notwithstanding, perceiuing (as by comparison euery one may see) that except the 5. and 28. taken out of Manrolycus, the 14. and 23. out of Commandine and Vbaldus, my constructions were very farre differing from Clauius, amending those defects which Gemma noteth in Roias his worke, be∣sides taking the matter to be commodious, and not vnpleasant for trauellers, and all such in generall as delight in Astronomicall and Geographicall deui∣ses, I set light the reproachfull name of an English Scribler, and tooke courage by publishing it to the view of the world, to hazard my selfe to euery rea∣ders censuring. Vpon this resolution I am bold to vse your Worships name in the front of this booke, testifying therby the earnest and vnfained affection which I beare, and long haue borne both to you and yours: in regard whereof making no doubt, but that this little mite shall be gently accepted, with remembrance of my dutie to your Worship I take my leaue. S. Edmunds Bury in Suffolke, 6. Ian. 1600. after our English accompt. Your Worships in all dutie most affectionate, THOMAS OLIVER.
To the Reader. SEeing the matters here entreated of admit no eloquence, but must in plaine attire be simply offered to the view, though I could (gentle Reader) I would not flourish with thee, in pleading for my selfe or this treatise: therefore referring all to thy friendly censure, I will spend this voide paper in aduertisements for the better vn∣derstanding, and easier performing of that which is deli∣uered. The fittest matter, whereupon you may worke these con∣clusions following, will be a plate of brasse, and the Com∣passe, Pritchet, Pointer or Steele, wherewith you must draw your lines, would be either of the same substance, or els Iron rather than Steele: for if you make not your strokes verie deepe, by rubbing the plate with a wet Pumice, you may ea∣sily take all out when you will, and thereby also tarrish or darken it in such sort, that you may presently at your ease, and very exactly draw, and worke vpon it againe. When you begin to practise, it will helpe very much to work one conclusion by it selfe, and to note the lines, as you draw them, with the characters, that are named in the pe∣culiar construction: but when you are something perfect, this shall not neede. You may also, hauing a quadrant diuided, make any paper serue the turne for these purposes. Opening your Com∣passe to the distance of 60. degrees, at that distance discribe a circle, and subtending foure times in it a line equall to that line, which subtendeth the quadrants circumference,
if you ioyne the opposite points, it shall be crossed with per∣pendicular Diameters, then transferring the circumfe∣rences giuen or found from the quadrant to the circle, or from the circle to the quadrant, you may finde the quanti∣tie of any circumference as well, as though your circle were diuided into degrees. Where you desire exactnes, you must rest neither on this way, nor on the instrument in the beginning of the se∣cond section, but vse that quadrant which you are taught to make in the beginning of the third section, by it you may know the iust content of any giuen circumference in de∣grees and minutes exactly, and let this be a generall war∣ning for all conclusions. I haue barely set downe the constructions without de∣monstrations, as the fittest for their capacities, whose good I specially aime at: yet is there nothing here propounded that hath not demonstratiuely been examined: and for experimentall triall the working by these conclusions may be compared with tables calculated for the same purpose, which, if handines and diligence be vsed, will agree. Since my writing of the second section, I haue found how the conclusions therein omitted may bee perfectly wrought without the helpe of any Elleipsis, and all contai∣ned within the compasse of the limbe: but at this time I thought not good to adde them. Thus much (gentle Reader) I thought meete thou shoul∣dest be aduertised of: and so desiring thee to pardon the escapes of my penne, if thou meetest with any, I com∣mend thee and thy honest studies to our Lords holie direction. Thine THOMAS OLYVER.
A new handling of the Planisphere. THE FIRST SECTION, WHERE∣in is contained a plaine and sensible declaration of the circles of the Sphere, and the termes vsed in the doctrine de primo mobili, after another Me∣thode than is yet in any other language. THE circles of the Sphere haue more than once alreadie bin writ∣ten of in English: notwithstan∣ding I think it wil not be accoun∣ted labour lost, though it were only for the better vnderstanding of the conclusions following, here to handle them againe as princi∣ples in the beginning of this trea∣tise. Aristotle and Ptolomey for proofe of some matters here propounded, haue vsed many exquisite arguments, which I meane not to prosecute, but hoping from the testimonie of sense in such manner to deduce the positions, that any meane capacitie may haue so reasonable a conceit of them, that with probabilitie they may easily be admitted, I will referre their exact and more subtile demonstration, with the reproofe of such as impugne them, to some others hand∣ling, or to some other place. Therefore requiring first the reader not to cast vntimely doubts, nor hastily to iudge of any part by it selfe, before he hath considered, and in some
manner vnderstood the whole discourse, I will according to Hippocrates his counsell begin with the notablest and easiest things. Whosoeuer doth but cast vp his eyes vnto heauen, presently perceiueth that it compasseth him round about in manner of halfe a globe or an Hemisphere: and if he stand vpon some high place, or be at Sea farre from land, where nothing can be séene but water and the Skie, his eye, if he turne himselfe about, will represent vnto him at the lowest bounds or limits, which he seeth, the fashion of a circle, vpon whose plaine, as vpon a base, this visible Hemisphere seemeth to be placed: therefore that Circle was first in Gréeke, and is now commonly in English called the Horizon, that is to say, bounding or limiting, vz. the compasse of your sight. The largenes of this Circle, euen as it falleth vnder view, is of so great a compasse, as you neede not restraine the center thereof, according to the precise Mathematicall definition, to one determinate, exquisite, indiuisible, and very poynt, or pricke, but with∣out sensible error, as your eye will plainly testifie, any one at pleasure may bee taken in the place where you stand. From a center so taken, if there be, or be imagined, a plumbe line or line perpendicular to the plaine of the Horizon extended vnto the heauen, the place, which there it toucheth, is commonly called by an Arabian name the Zenith, being in truth the pole of the Horizon, and the line it selfe his Axis. By this Axis, and any lines crossing it, if plainnes be euery way extēded reaching vnto heauen, they marke out their circumferences, or semicircles, cut∣ting one another in the Zenith: but in the Horizon their sections are right lines, cutting one another in his center. Those circles are named Azimutes, and are imagined by Astronomers to be cut by other circles parallel to the Ho∣rizon, which they terme Alinicantars and circles of Alti∣tude, because the portion of the Azimute, which is be∣twéene the Horizon and the Parallel, sheweth how his aboue the Horizon that poynt of the Parallel is, by which
the Azimute passeth. Furthermore, in a cléere night be∣holding the bright shining Starres, you shall euidently perceiue how they change their places continually, some to rise and shew themselues, other to goe downe vnder the Horizon, and to be hidden from your sight, onely if you place your selfe so, that your right hand be towards their rising, and your left hand toward their going downe, loo∣king right foorth, and somewhat vpward, you shall behold certen Starres, which are all times of the night to bée seene, and ne∣uer depiction of constallations Charles Wayne. pole star. Little Beare go down; amōgst some of which pla∣ced after this fashion, there is one com∣monly called the Pole star, which being the last in the tayle of the constellation called ye little Beare, lyeth in māner di∣rectly as it were in a right line, with those two in the hin∣dermost whéeles of Charles his wayne. This Starre seemeth little or nothing to remoue out of his place, and indeede not farre from it there is a poynt, or pricke, which remaineth in one and the same place alwaies immoueable. The Azimute passing by the Horizons Axis, and a right line drawne frō this immoueable point, or the pole starre, is properly called the Meridian circle; the common section of it and the Horizon, being a right line, is the Meridian line, or the line of North and South; the right line, which crosseth this Meridian line at right angles in the center of
the Horizon, is called the line of true East, and true West, or simply the line of East and West, which poynts the ends thereof extended directly fall vpon. The Ari∣mute standing vpon this line, Ioannes de Roias, & others, specially such as write of Dyalling, as it were for digni∣tie and preheminence, doe call the Verticall circle: which name being common to all Azimutes, because they passe by the Zenith, in Latin called Vertex. or punctum eregione verticis: for a distinction Gemma Frosius hath named it the Circle of the East. The other Azimutes haue no pro∣per names, but are measured or determined in the Hori∣zons circumference. That, and so likewise all other Cir∣cles, Astronomers doe imagine to be diuided into 360. equall parts, which they name degrées, that is to say, eue∣rie quarter or quadrant into 90. degrees: euery degrée they further diuide into 60. minutes, euery minute into 60. seconds, euery second into 60. thirds, and so continue some∣times vnto tenths, and may goe further if they will. By these degrees, minutes, &c. which are betwéene that point, where any Azimute cutteth the Horizon, and the Meri∣dian line, or the line of East and West, the Azimute is de∣termined, assigned, or said to be giuen. Vpon the points where the Verticall circle cutteth the Horizon, which poynts are the true poles of the Meridian, and the precise East and West, if by often and diligent viewing you shall see two Starres, the one in the East, and the other at the same time right against it in the West, in winter time euen in one night, you may behold that which is in the East first ascending, and then againe descending at length to come into the West, and that which was in the West being till that time hidden from your sight, then to ap∣peare againe rising in the East: all this while continually the like shape of an Hemisphere being still represented to your eye, without any chaunge or alteration, whereby you may gather the heauen to bee a perfect Globe, or Sphere, hauing that part vnder the Horizon equall and
like to that which you sée aboue it, and that the place where you stand is the very center thereof. A line drawne from the pole Starre, or rather from the poynt immoue∣able before mentioned, called the Articke, or North pole, a line (I say) drawne, or imagined to be drawne from that poynt to the place of your standing, is called the Aris of the world, and extended to the other side of the celestiall Sphere, which is vnder vs, falleth there vpon the South or Antarcticke pole, which in these our countries neuer appeareth. These things, being but a little héedily consi∣dered, be so manifest and apparant, that neither example nor figure is greatly requisite for the perfect vnderstan∣ding of them: yet in this beginning to remoue all difficul∣tie, and to make euery thing as plaine as may be, doe thus much: In some plaine ground, or rather vpon a poste, or stone, or some such like thing made exactly smooth, and ly∣ing very flat, without any manner of leaning or decli∣ning, which you must warily and diligently trie by your leuel, and your plumbe line, take the center A, vpon which describe a circle B C D E, representing the Horizon, whose circumference you may diuide, or imagine onely to be di∣uided into degrées, and from A, the center thereof, erect a Stéele or wier, standing plumbe vpright, or perpendicu∣lar to the flat of the circle A B C D, by triall of your plumbe rule: then take a boord made precise square, ha∣uing the side somewhat longer than the semidiameter of the circle B C D E, and set one corner thereof in the cen∣ter A, so that one of the sides containing it, may agrée iust with the Stéele or wier, and the other with the circles plaine: then looking along the vpper edge, or through two sights set vpon the edge, and continually lifting it vp without swaruing, till the side that lay vpon the flat of the circle agrée with the Stéele: the line of your sight, or the line drawne from the center (for in respect of the hea∣uens mightie distance, the difference betwéene them is not sensible) shall, howsoeuer the square be placed, describe
sky chart an Azimute. And if staying the edge of the square at one height, the corner be continually kept in ye center without slipping, by turning it round about the Stéele, you shall describe an Almicantar, parallel to the Horizon. In this manner, carying the square about, & lifting it vp & downe, till you see the Pole starre, or if you can aime at it, the of∣ten spoken of immoueable poynt, staying it fast in that situation, either of the edges without sensible error may bee taken for the Axis of the world, which extended fal∣leth on both the Poles, that which is seene being the Arc∣tick Pole, and the Antarctick that which is vnder the Ho∣rizon. In lifting it vp and downe, you shall in the heauen poynt out the Meridian circle, and bringing it iust to the flat of the circle B C D E, the edge will there shew the right line B D, which is the Meridian line. The line C E, in A
crossing the line B D, is the line of right East, and right West: the Azimute standing vpon C E, is the Vertical circle, or the circle of the East: the Azimute standing vpon G F, is sometime said to be of so many degrees, as are be∣twéene B the North poynt of the Horizon, and G, where the Azimute standing vpon G F cutteth the Horizon, vz. the circumference B G, denominateth the Azimute stan∣ding vpon G F, and sometime that circumference G E, which containeth the number of the degrées betweéene the same poynt, and the line of East and West E C, which bée the very poles of the Meridian. Working by the Pole starre, these things will somewhat varie from exactnes, which some helpe by awayting the time, when the starre next the whéeles of Charles wayne, commonly called the filler or hill horse, is directly ouer or vnder the Pole star, so that the square, being lifted vp and downe close by the Stéele, passeth by them both. But howsoeuer, this may suffice for some conceit of these termes, hereafter shall be taught other most precise waies, to discribe and take them most exactly. To returne againe therefore to our princi∣pall purpose, in beholding of the Starres, how they conti∣nually rising in the East side of the Horizon, ascend vnto the Meridian, and so from thence descend vnto the West side, you shall obserue, that alwaies they kéepe their di∣stance from the Pole starre, or the true pole vnchaunged: as if you mark the two hinder whéeles of Charles waine, you shall finde, howsoeuer they be situated in the heauen, that their distance from the Pole starre is alwaies one, and the same not néerer or further of at one time then an other, and therefore euery starre or poynt, by such motion in a Globe or Sphere, his superficies describeth the cir∣cumference of a circle: so that the whole heauens must seeme to turne vpon the poles, and make a circular motion or reuolution. This motion in diuers respects hath diuers names, called sometime the Diurnall motion, sometime the motion of the first moueable heauen, sometime Notus
captus. Againe, euery Starre or peynt by this conuersion describing a circle, if you take some starre, or poynt, which lieth betwéene the poles iust 90. degrées from either of them, that will describe a circle, passing by the poynts of East and West, which for some reasons hereafter to bee expressed, is called the Equinoctiall. The other poynts or starres describe circles parallel to the Equinoctiall circle, which be called circles of declination, because, if from the poles of the world, by any point taken in any of the paral∣lels, a greatest circle be drawne to the Equinoctiall, that portion of it, which lieth betwéene the Equinoctiall and the Parallel, is called the declination of the poynt so ta∣ken. Some of these Parallels towards the North, descri∣bed by reuolution of the poynts or starres, that neuer set, are whole aboue the Horizon, and one of them, which some name the Arctick circle, toucheth it onely: about the Antarcticke pole there be some wholy vnder the Horizon, and one, which some call the Antarcticke circle, only tou∣cheth it in the South poynt: other betwéene these two touching Parallels, which arise and set or goe downe, cut the Horizon, whose portion lying betwéene that poynt and the true East or West, is called the Amplitude or Latitude of the rising, or the setting of the poynt descri∣bing the Parallel. These things hitherto rehearsed, tra∣uellers may euery where and in all countries obserue: and besides, in their iournies Southward or Northward, they shall see sometimes more, and sometimes fewer stars neuer to goe downe: more in going Northward, fewer in going Southward, yet alwaies without alteration kée∣ping one and the same distance one from another. Mary the Pole starre or the true pole, proportionablie to the length of the way trauelled, altereth his distance from the Horizon, and the Zenith appearing, the further you goe Northward, the higher, & the further you go Southward, the lower, and so accordingly that portion of the Meri∣dian, betwéene the Equinoctiall and the Zenith, which is
sky chart called the Latitude of the countrie, being alwaies equall to that which is betwéene the Horizon and the Pole, cal∣led his height, or eleuation, is of necessitie greater or les∣ser: so that your situation is apparantly chaunged in re∣spect of the heauen, but yet stil you kéepe the same distance from it, wherby you may easily inferre the figure or shape of the Earth to bee like and answerable to the celestiall Sphere: and that how vast and huge soeuer it be in it self, yet in comparison of the large compasse of the heauen, it is iustly counted for no more but a small poynt, or pricke: for it neuer hindreth you from seeing the precise halfe of the celestiall Sphere, which, were the bignes thereof any thing of accompt, it would of necessitie doe. For better vn∣derstanding of these matters, imagine the circle B C D E,
described on the center A, to represent the Meridian, and vpon the line E C, a semicircle erected perpendicularly to represent the Horizon, whose Pole, or the Zenith, the poynt B is, and let H be the North pole. From H to A the place of your standing (being the center of the Horizon and the whole Sphere, and so consequently of al the grea∣test circles in the same Sphere described) from the pole H to the center A draw a right line, and extend it vnto I: the line H I is the Axis of the world: the poles be H the North, and I the South, or Antarcticke pole. Let the poynt G, ta∣ken in the Meridian, be iust 90. degrees from either pole, so that the circumferences G H, G I, be iust quadrants: by the reuolution of the Sphere vpon the poles H I, which is the Diurnall motion, the line G A shall describe a circle passing by the center of the Sphere, and perpendicular to the Meridian: therefore it must passe by the poles there∣of which be in the Horizon, the points of East and West, as the circle set plumbe vpon the Diameter F G will doe. Other poynts, as S, N, V, describes circles parallel to that standing vpon G F, of which that which standeth vpon C S, doth onely touch the Horizon, and is wholy aboue it: the other beyond it to the pole-ward, as V, W, be wholy aboue it, and come not néere. So likewise E, T, is alwayes vnder the Horizon, and only toucheth it: the other beyond it towards I, are vnder it, and neuer come néere it. Now if in going Northward the pole H grow higher, the Equi∣noctiall must go further from the Zenith: for seeing B C and G H be equall, that is the iust quarters of the same circle, if you take away the circumference B H common to them both, the residue G B, the distance of the Equinoctial from the Meridian, which is the Latitude of the countrie, whose Zenith is B, is equall to H C, the height of the pole aboue the Horizon, or the eleuation of the pole, and as the pole riseth higher, so is the circle S Cremoued from the Horizon further and further: whereby you see, that by that meanes more starres neuer set. The circumferences
of the Meridian G N, G S, G V, are called the declinations of the points N, S, V, taken in the parallels N Z, S C, V W, and the portion of the Horizon betwéene the point of true East, and the poynt, where the parallel standing vpon N Z, cuteth the Horizon, is the amplitude or latitude of rising of the poynt L, or any other taken in the parallel, standing vpon the Diameter N Z. These things being well conceiued, let vs consider againe, that as apparantly as any starre, the Sunne making his reuolution, ariseth on the East side of the Horizon, and mounting vp vnto the Meridian, at which time it is high noone, descendeth againe vnto the West side, which time of his continuance aboue the Horizon is called the artificiall day, then being hid from our sight, the night beginneth, which continueth till the Sunne, passing by that part of the Meridian, which is vnder the Earth, when it is midnight with vs, retur∣neth againe vnto the East side, making vp the naturall day, which is the space of time from the Sunne rising to the Sunne rising againe, and may bee indifferently recko∣ned from Sunne set to Sunne set, as the Iewes doe, or from midnight to midnight, which is our common ac∣compt. The obscure light before the Sunnes rising, is called the dawning and breake of the day: after his setting is called the twilight, Crepusculum in Latin is a common name to both times. Although in the Sunnes daily reuo∣lution we obserue all this, yet is it not without much va∣rietie and chaunge: his rising and setting is not alwayes in one place of the Horizon, nor his height in the Meridian alwayes the same at noone. In the middest of winter, a∣bout the 12. of our December, when the daies be shortest, and the nights longest, it riseth & setteth most Southerly, and is lowest in the Meridian at noone: towards the Spring, as the dayes waxe longer and longer, in rising and setting it continually groweth from the South, and mounteth higher and higher in the Meridian, till about the 11. of our March, making the day and night equall, it
riseth and setteth iust East and West, comming at noone to the common section of the Equinoctiall and the Meri∣dian: then, as Summer commeth on, the dayes encrea∣sing, it riseth and setteth more Northerly, mounting still higher and higher in the Meridian at noone, till in the middest of Summer, the dayes being at the longest, about the 12. of our Iune, it be at the highest in the Meridian at noone, and riseth and setteth furthest North: then, as the dayes shorten, it returneth backe againe, growing conti∣nually lower at noone, and rising and setting lesse Nor∣therly, till the dayes and nights become equall againe, a∣bout the 13. of our September, when it riseth and setteth precisely East and West againe, and at noone will be in the common section of the Equinoctiall and the Meridian. From that poynt it groweth lower and lower at noone, rising & setting more and more Southerly, as the nights encrease, till about the 12. of our December the dayes be∣ing at the shortest, it becommeth lowest againe at noone, and in rising and setting most Southerly, as it was be∣fore. Of this returning from the highest in Summer, and the lowest in winter, the two Parallels, which it then describeth by the Diurnall reuolution, bee called Tro∣pickes, and the Equinoctiall was so named, because in March and September the Sunne comming to it, the day is made equall to the night. By these varieties it was ea∣sily gathered, that the Sunne made a peculiar course be∣side his Diurnall reuolution, in a greatest circle touching the two Tropicks, and declining from the Equinoctiall, which it diuideth (as all greatest circles doe one another) into two equall parts, or semicircles. This declining circle, because when the Sunne and Moone either méete or be opposite in it, there happeneth an Eclipse, is called the Eclipticke, and sometime the Zodiacke: but the Zo∣diacke properly is a superficies like a fillet or a girdle, laid vpon this circles circumference, comprehending on either side of it sixe, or (as some say) eight degrées. The poles of
this circle, which decline from the poles of the world, as the circle it selfe declineth from the Equinoctiall, descri∣beth by the Diurnall reuolution two Parallels, which some, in stead of them afore described, take for the Arctick and Antarcticke circles. That section of the Equinoctial and the Eclipticke, which the Sunne commeth to in the Spring time, is called the Vernall section: that which is opposite to it, by which the Sunne passeth in the end of Haruest, is the Autumnall section: the poynts which touch the Tropickes, bee commonly called Solstitiall poynts. The greatest circle, passing by the Equinoctiall sections and the poles of the world, is the Equinoctiall Colure: that which passeth by the poles of the world and the Solstitiall poynts, is called the Solstitiall, or Tropi∣call Colure, the portion thereof lying betwéene the two Tropickes, is the distance of the Tropickes, whose halfe is the Sunnes greatest declination, otherwise called the Obliquitie of the Zodiacke, which by obseruation made with large instruments, is in this our age found by great Artes-men to be 23. degrées and 30. minutes, whose re∣port it shall be sufficient to accept of, and commit to me∣morie, without taking or trying it by any small instru∣ment: though some writers of the vse of the Astrolabe haue made that one of their speciall conclusions. The E∣quinoctiall and the Eclipticke, are circles of chiefe ac∣compt: the first being the rule and measure of the first mo∣tion, or the motion of Primum mobile, otherwise called the Diurnall reuolution: and the other as it were the Standard, whereby all secondarie motions are exami∣ned: therefore the degrées of these circles haue peculiar names, called in the Equinoctiall Tempora, times, because they be the first measures of time, euery 15. degrées ascen∣ding making an houre, and so the whole reuolution of 360. which is performed euery naturall day, make 24. houres. Astronomers begin to accompt the parts or de∣grées, as well in the Equinoctiall, as in the Eclipticke,
from that poynt common to them both, which is called the Vernall section: and though in the Equinoctiall there be no chaunge of names, yet in the Eclipticke or Zodiacke euery thirtie degrées is called a signe, and hath a peculiar name. The first 30. immedtatly following the Vernall section, is called Aries: the next 30. Taurus, the third 30. Gemini, the fourth 30. (whose first point begin a new qua∣drant, and toucheth the Summer Tropicke) is termed Cancer: the fift 30. Leo, the sixt Virgo. These sixe Signes make vp the semicircle of the Zodiacke, which leaneth or declineth from the Equinoctiall toward the North pole. The first 30. after this semicircle, beginning at the Au∣tumnall section, make the seuenth signe, named Libra: the next or eight 30. is the signe Scorpio: the ninth 30. is Sa∣gittarius: the tenth 30. (beginning a new quadrant with the first poynt, which toucheth the winter Tropicke) is Capricornus: the eleuenth 30. is Aquarius, and the twelfth 30. is Pisces. There be characters vsed to expresse euery Signe with, which are found in euery Almanacke. The Sunne passeth in the Ecliptick from poynt to poynt, ma∣king his continuall reuolution in it, without swaruing to the one side or the other: other Starres for the most part decline from it, but yet haue their places determined by Longitude and Latitude in respect thereof thus: By any poynt or Starre, a greatest circle being drawne from the pole of the Ecliptick to his circumference, the section there made, or the portion of the Ecliptick betwéene that section and the Vernall section, is the Longitude of the poynt, or Starre, by which the greatest circle is drawne: his Lati∣tude is that portion of the same greatest circle lying be∣twéene the Starre and the Eclipticke. The Sunne being in any poynt of the Eclipticke, and the poynt it selfe, with all other Starres, wheresoeuer placed besides, are in like manner compared to the Equinoctiall, and in respect ther∣of, not onely their declination, which hath béen touched before, but also their right Ascension is considered. A
greatest circle being drawne from the Poles of the world to the Equinoctiall, by any poynt or Starre, his right As∣cension is that portion of the Equinoctiall, taken betwéen that poynt where the greatest circle cutteth, and the Ver∣nall section. The declination is the portion of the grea∣test circle so drawne, which lieth betwéene the Equinoc∣tiall and the Starre, which (as before was noted) is also determined by a Parallel to the Equinoctiall, passing by the Starre. The right Ascension is so called, because vn∣der the Equinoctiall, that is, in a Situation where the E∣quinoctiall passeth by the Zenith, and the Horizon by the Poles of the world, the Horizon (by which once in 24. houres euery poynt ascendeth) doth the office of any grea∣test circle so drawne, as is appoynted, and agréeth with it most exactly. This Situation is called Sphaera recta, the right Sphere; and the Horizon in that Situation, Hori∣zon rectus, the right Horizon: but when the Equinoctiall declineth from the Zenith, and the Poles bée one aboue, the other beneath the Horizon, that Situation is called the Oblique, or Declining Sphere; and the Horizon, the Oblique Horizon, which neuer agréeth with the foresayd greatest circle, drawne by the Poles of the world: and therefore with the Starre there is another poynt of the Equinoctiall in the Horizon, betwéene which and the Vernall section is contained that portion of the Equinoc∣tiall, that is called the Starres Oblique Ascension, and the portion of the Equinoctiall betwéene the ends of the right and Oblique Ascension, is called the Difference Ascensio∣nall. But for helping the conceit of these things, I will vse a linearie example, taking the former figure, where E C is the Meridian line, and the Diameter on which the Horizon standeth, now in the middest of winter the Sun being lowest in the Meridian, in the point K, by the Diur∣nall reuolution, describeth a Parallel standing vpon the Diameter K M, which cutteth the Horizon from the East towards the South: it continually groweth higher and
sky chart higher in the Meridian pan, & riseth in the Horizon néerer and néerer the East, till about the 11. of March at noone it commeth to G, the section of the Equinoctiall and the Me∣ridian, and then by the Diurnall reuolution describeth a circle iust answering the Equinoctiall, which passing by the poynts of East and West in the Horizon, standeth vpon the Diameter G F: from thence, a Summer com∣meth on, it ascendeth in the Meridian, and riseth more Northerly vpon ye Horizon, til about the 12. of our Iune, being at the highest in N, it describeth a Parallel standing vpon the Diameter N Z, in which it riseth vpon the Hori∣zon furthest frō the East to the Northward: from thence it descendeth againe by G, to K, and passeth in the Horizon by the true East to the furthest Southward, then it ascen∣deth
againe till it come to N, continually returning from the highest to the lowest, & from the lowest to the highest: whereof the two Parallels standing vpon the Diameters K M, L N, be called Tropickes. By these changes it was easily gathered, that the Sunne (besides the Diurnall re∣uolution) made another proper to it selfe in a circle stan∣ding vpon the Diameter K L, drawne from Tropicke to Tropick by A the center of the Sphere: by reason where∣of, this circle, called the Eclipticke, and the Equinoctiall, diuide the one the other into two semicircles. The Eclip∣ticke is sometimes called the Zodiacke, though properly the Zodiacke be a superficies lying on either side of it, as you sée the superficies O P Q R, parted by the line Z K. The common Diameter of the Equinoctiall and the Ecliptick standing in A, perpendicular to the plaine of the circle B C D E, the poynts K and L being the Solstitiall poynts, the circle B C D E is the Solstitiall Colure. The circle stan∣ding vpon I H, and passing by the perpendicular Diame∣ter, or the Equinoctial section, is the Equinoctiall Colure: the circumference K N is the distance of the Tropicke, the one halfe thereof G K, or G N, is the obliquitie of the Zo∣diacke, or the Suns greatest declination, for it groweth lesse & lesse as it cōmeth néerer the Equinoctiall section: where it hath no declination at al, it neuer declineth from the Eclipticke or circle standing vpon K Z, but make his motion in it, his place is named of the poynt wherein it is. Other Starres or poynts without the Eclipticke (as for example, S) haue their place determined by a greatest circle B C D E, drawne from X, the Pole of the Zodiacke, by S o K, a poynt in the Ecliptick circumference, the por∣tion of the Ecliptick betwéene the Vernall section and K, or the poynt K is the Longitude of S, and the circumfe∣rence S K, is his Latitude. In like manner, if by any starre or poynt Y, and the Poles of the worlde H I, there bee drawne a greatest circle B C D E, cutting the Equinoctiall in G, the portion of the Equinoctiall betwéene the Ver∣nall
section and G, is the right Ascension of Y, and the cir∣cumference G Y is his declination. Now if G, the section of the Meridian and the Equinoctiall, be the Zenith of a∣ny place, the Horizon must stand on I H, and passe by the Poles of the world, which situation is called the right Sphere, and the Horizon the right Horizon, wherein, by the Diurnall reuolution twice in 24. houres, the circle B C D E must ioyne close with it. But if G, the section of the Equinoctiall and the Meridian, decline from B the Ze∣nith, which situation is called the Oblique Sphere, and the Horizon then standing on E C, being an Oblique Ho∣rizon, by the Diurnall motion made vpon the Poles H I, the circle B C D E can neuer agréene or match euenly with the Horizon: therefore of force some other poynt of the Equinoctiall, and not G, must be in the Horizon with Y: the circumference of the Equinoctiall betwéene that point in the Horizon, and the Vernall section, is the Oblique Ascension of Y: but the portion that lieth betwéene that poynt and G, is the difference Ascensionall. That poynt of the Zodiacke, where it is cut off the Meridian, is called Medium coeli, mid heauen; Culmen and cor coeli aboue the Horizon, & Imum coeli vnder the Horizon, the lesser angle, made by that section, is called the Meridian angle. The poynt of the Eclipticke, that is in the East side of the Ho∣rizon, is called the Ascendent, and the Horoscope, the sec∣tion there make the angles, of which the lesser is called the Horizontall angle: the quantitie thereof is equall to the Nonagesimus Gradus of the Eclipticke, which is pecu∣liarly giuen to that poynt of it, which is iust 90. degrées from the Ascendent. There be moreouer other greatest circles to be considered, which are called circles of posi∣tion, or circles of Station, sixe of them diuiding the hea∣uen in twelue portions, which are called houses or Sta∣tions, though many times those names be restrained on∣ly to such parts of the Zodiack, as be intercepted by those circles. Though the Horizon be alwaies taken for one,
and the beginning of the first house: yet are the rest by diuers diuersly drawne. Some will haue them all to haue the Meridian line for their common Diameter, and yet agréeing in this make difference in placing them. Campa∣nus and Gazulus diuide the Verticall circle into twelue equall parts, and by euery two opposite sections draw a circle of position. Regiomontanus diuideth the Equinoctial into twelue equall parts, and will haue euery circle of position passe by two of those opposite sections: both these waies kéepe the Horizon and the Meridian for circles of position. Other diuide the Zodiacke into twelue equall parts, beginning at the Ascendent, and two of those oppo∣site sections draw from the poles of the Zodiacke their circles of position: these kéepe the same Ascendent that the former doe, but must differ many times in the tenth house, or the Cardo medij coeli, though Gemma writeth that all agrée about the foruer Cardines, that is the Horo∣scope, seuenth house Culmen, and Imum coeli: for they can∣not haue alwaies the Meridian & the Horizon for circles of position. Other draw these circles from the poles of the world, and that diuersly: but the thrée former wayes are in greatest estimation. A circle of position differeth from an angle of position, which (after Prolomey) is an angle at the Zenith, subtended of that portion of the Horizon, which lieth betwéene the Meridian and the Azimute, passing by the Zenith of the other place, vnto which the position belongeth. Gemma Frisius maketh it a right lined angle in the center of the Horizon, subtended of the same circumference: by it Topographicall descriptions are made, wherein sometimes the distance of two places is measured by a right line lying betwéene them, but in a Sphericall superficies by the portion of a greatest circle, because that is the shortest that can bee drawne in it. These things may be easily conceiued without linearie explication, if the former matters bee well vnderstood: therefore as it were besides the principall purpose, setting
downe how by supputation you may readily gesse some∣what néere the Suns place, being a thing for many pur∣poses to be had in a readines, I will end this first section: the thing is taken out of Clauius, but fitted to our com∣mon, or the Iulian yeere. Parergon primum. What moneth, and what day of it, the Sunne en∣treth euery signe of the Zodiacke. FIrst tell the moneths vpon your fingers, seeking In∣nuarie on your thumbe, Februarie on your forefinger, and so the other in order, till you come to your moneth, which marke on which finger it falleth: in like manner tell the Signes, beginning with Aquarius on your thumb, Pisces on your forefinger, and so the rest in order, till you come to the finger, on which your moneth fell: the Signe which falleth on that finger, the Sunne entreth that mo∣neth. Then learning these two verses by heart: Inclyta Laus Iustis Impenditur, Haeresis Horret Garrula, Grex Gratus Faustos Gratatur Honores. In like manner set Inclyta on your thumbe, and word by word in order, till you come to the finger, on which your moneth fell: then telling from A in the crosse row, till you come to the first letter of your word, take that num∣ber and subtract it from 20. the residue is the day of the moneth, when the Sunne entreth the Signe. For ex∣ample: I would know what Signe the Sunne entreth in October, and what day it entreth, telling from Ianua∣rie vpon my fingers the meneths in order: at the second going ouer I finde October on my little finger: then ta∣king the Signes, and telling from Aquarius, at the second going ouer my fingers, Scorpio falleth on my little fin∣ger, so I say that the Sunne entreth Scorpio in October: then taking the verses, and setting the words one by one
in like manner on my fingers, I finde in the second going ouer, Faustos on my little finger: now telling in the crosse row the letters from A to F, I finde sixe: this sixe I sub∣tract from 20. so rest 14. which the day of October the Sunne entreth Scorpio. Parergon secundum. To know the Sunnes place in the Zodiacke vpon any day giuen. FInde the Signe answering your moneth, and the word likewise, then to the day of the moneth put ten, and the number the first letter sheweth in the crosse row: if this be lesse then 30. the number is the degrée of the Signe next before that, which the Sunne entreth in your moneth; if more, cast away 30. and the residue is the de∣grée of the Signe entred in your moneth. Example, I would know where the Sunne is the 9. of October, I finde in October he entreth Scorpio, and the word for it to be Faustos, whose first letter F is the sixt in the crosse row, I take ten and 6. vz. 16. which I put to, 9. there is made 25. therefore I say the Sun is in the 25. degree of the Signe before Scorpio, which is Libra. If I would know for the 18. day, putting 16. to 18. there would amount 34. from which abating 30. the 4. remaining sheweth me, that the Sunne is in the 4. degrée of the Signe belonging to October, which is Scorpio. Parergon tertium. The place of the Sunne being giuen, to finde the day of the moneth. TAke the day and moneth the Sun entreth the Signe giuen, the number of the degrées giuen put to the
day, wherein the Sunne entreth the Signe, that product being lesse than the dayes in your moneth, shew the day: but being more, cast away the dayes of your moneth, the residue is the day of the moneth following. Example, I finde the Sunne in the 4. degrée of Scorpio. I would know what day of the moneth it is; I finde that the Sunne en∣treth Scorpio the 14. of October, I put 4. to 14. there a∣mounteth 18. so I say it is the 18. day of October. Againe, let it be in the 25. of Libra, I finde that the Sunne entreth Libra 13. Septembris: I put 13. to 25. there amounteth 38. from which I take 30. the dayes of September, and there remaineth 8. the day of October. These are but gesses, as you may see much after the way commonly taught by the backe of the Astrolabe. Let him that desireth exactnes, seeke the Sunnes place in some Ephemerides, or in the Regiment of the Sunne, published by E. W. painfully calculated vpon his owne diligent and exact ob∣seruations. The end of the first Section.
THE SECOND SEC∣TION OF THE NEW HANDLING THE PLANISPHERE; SHEWING HOW THE CON∣clusions of the Astrolabe may readily and exact∣ly for any Countrie be performed onely with Ruler and Compasses. ALthough for working the conclu∣sions following any circle diui∣ded, or to transferre out of any di∣uided quadrant, the giuen circum∣ferences would be sufficient: yet for the easier dispatch, I would a plate of Latten to be prouided, ac∣cording to the figure which you sée on the other side. There, vpon one center A, be sixe circles described one within another, of which the two outtermost cōtaineth the narrowest space, which must be diuided into 360. equall parts or degrées, as the common manner is. At euery 30. degrées, in the space contained vnder the second and third circles, make diuisious, and beginning at E write Ari, or Aries: at the next, Tau, or Taurus, and so for the rest of the 12. Signes: this circle shall be called the Zodiacke. The third space, contained vnder the third and fourth circle, must bee di∣uided
sky chart at euery 15. degrées: beginning at B you must set downe 12. at the next diuision toward C set downe 1. at the next 2. and at euery diuision the numbers in order, till comming to D, you are to set downe 12. againe: and so in the other semicircle DEB, set 1. at the diuision next D, at
the second 2. till comming to the next before B, you are to set downe 11: this fourth circle shall be called the houre circle. The fourth space, contained vnder the fourth and fift circle, must be diuided at euery 10. degrées: at the first diuision from E towards B set 10. at the second 20. and so encreasing continually at euery diuision by 10. till you come againe to E, where you are to set downe 360. this circle shall be named the Equinoctiall. The space contai∣ned vnder this and the sixt, or innermost circle, must from E by D vnto C, haue diuisions at euery 20. degrées, and at euery diuision a number set encreasing by 10. til you come to 90: in the quarters B C, B E, you must make diuisions at euery 10. degrees: at the first, from B towards E, set 10, and likewise at the next vnto C towards B, at the next 20. and so in order, till comming to E and B, you are there to set 90: this inner circle shall be called the limbe. If you will set two sights on the outter edge, so that the line, drawne from lope to lope, be parallel to the line subten∣ding the arch B C, and hang a plummet from B, you may by your plate begin. The first Conclusion. To take the height of the Sunne, or any Starre, a∣boue the Horizon. TVrning your plate towards the Sunne, lift it vp and downe, till his beames shine through both the lopes of your sights, or (if it be a Starre) till you see it through them: the thréed sheweth in the semicircle E D C, how many degrées the Sunne or Starre is aboue the Ho∣rizon.
The second Conclusion. To finde the distance of the Sunnes or any Starres Azimute, from any determinate poynt in the Horizon. LEt your plate be fixed leuell with the Horizon, and di∣rect E to any poynt: then a ruler being turned and lift vp by a stéele or wier, standing plumbe vpright from the center A, till you see the starre, by the edge of it, or rather through two sights set vpon the edge, or if it be the Sun, till his beames passe through the lopes, then without stir∣ring the end next your eye bring it close to the center, the edge sheweth in the Equinoctiall the distance of the Azi∣mute from the poynt respected by E. The Azimute is sayd simply without adition to bee giuen, when his distance from the Meridians North end is giuen. The third Conclusion. From a point giuen in the circumference of a circle, at any side assigned, to applie or subtend a di∣stance or a right line not greater than the Dia∣meter. LEt the poynt giuen be C, from which vpon the side towards D, I am to applie a line equall to A Q, draw the Diameter C A E: now if the line A Q be equall to the Diameter, I haue done that which is required: but be∣ing lesse, I take the distance A Q with my Compasse, and setting one foote in C, with the other I marke Q in the limbe, and so vnder the circumference C Q, I haue subten∣ded a distance equall to A Q, which was required.
The fourth Conclusion. From a point giuen in any circles circumference, to take at any side assigned, an arch equall to any arch giuen in the same, or any equall circle. FRom the poynt giuen C, draw the Diameter C A E: now if the arch giuen be a semicircle, the circumferēce C D E, taken at the side assigned D, is the arch desired: but if it be lesser, as F G, I take the distance F G, and setting one foote of the Compasse in C, with the other towards D, I marke 3 in the limbe, the circumference 3 C is that, which is desired: but if it be greater than a semicircle, as 6 G, I take in like manner with my Compasse the distance 6 G, and setting one foote in C, on the other side towards B, not on that which was assigned towards D, I marke in the limbe with the other foote L, the circumference C D L is that, which is required. The fift Conclusion. The heights or Almicanters, together with the di∣stance betweene the Azimutes of any two Stars giuen, or taken by obseruation, to finde the di∣stance one from another. VPon the center A describe a circle B C D E, and let the Diameters B D, C E, bee perpendiculars one to another. This construction shall bee alwaies assumed herafter without further expressing: from E to H reckon the distance of the Azimutes, and draw the line A H: then taking the circumference E F, equall to the greatest alti∣tude, and making E G equall to it, vpon F and G laying a ruler, it will cut A E in N: againe, taking H I equall to the other altitude, make H K equall to it, a ruler layd on I
and K, will cut A H in P, take the distance N P, and setting one foote of the Compasse in A, with the other in A B mark Q: againe, taking the distance F N, and setting one foote in A, take the line A S: againe make the line S T equall to the distance P I, opening your Compasse to the distance T Q, setting one feote in C, with the other in the limbe mark 4, the circumference C 4 is the distance sought. This con∣struction is generall, but in some cases may be abridged: for if the Altitudes were equall, it should suffice to applie the distance N P in the limbe without any more adoe: if both were in one Azimute betwéene the Horizon and the Zenith, as E F being the greater, and F L the lesser, the distance should be L E: but if the Zenith were betwéene the height, whereof E M were the one, laying a ruler on M and A, it would cut the limbes beyond A in 6. then to∣ward B, taking the other height 6.1. the distance shall be E B. 1. The sixt Conclusion. In any Countrie vnknowne to finde the Diameter of the Parallel of the Sunne, or any vnknowne Starre. THrée times in one day, or for any Starre in the night, take the height and distance of the Azimute from any certaine poynt, whereby you may haue the distance of e∣uery Azimute from other, by the former conclusion: take the distance of the poynts obserued one from another, which let bee C 6. 6 B and B K of thrée lines equall to the chords, of those circumferences, make a triangle C B A, and about it describe a circle A B C, whose Diameter A C is the Parallels Diameter.
sky chart The seuenth Conclusion. The Diameter of the Sunnes, or any Starres parallel being giuen, to finde the declination. FRom C on either side applie a distance equall to A C, as C 1. C 2. vpon 1 & 2 a ruler layd, will cut A C in R:
vpon R, as a center at the distance A R, describe a semi∣circle A B C (a semicircle thus described, hauing one angle in the center A, and his Diameter the Semidiameter of the limbe, as A C is, shall hereafter be called the Synicall arch of the limbe). Now from C towards D apply at 12 a distance equall to A C, the Parallels Diameter giuen, vp∣on C and 2. laying a ruler it will cut the Semicircle A B C in D, then laying a ruler on A and D, it will cut the limbe in 5.5 C is the declination sought for. In the Sun you may know, by the time of the yéere, whether it be Nor∣therly or Southerly, and to what quadrant it belongeth, sauing when he is néere the Tropickes, or Equinoctiall sections: for distinguishing thereof, make your obserua∣tions two, or thrée, or foure sundrie dayes: then the Sun being about the Tropickes, comparing two obseruations, if the declination encrease, the first obseruation was be∣fore it came to the Tropicke: but if it decrease, the second was after it came to the Tropicke, the Tropicke will shew North and South, from Aries by Cancer to Libra North, from thence by Capricornus to Aries South. About the Equinoctiall sections, if the declination encrease, the Sunne is past the section: if it decrease, it is not come to it, and so you may know certainly vnto which quadrant the declination belongeth. You may finde whether the Starre you obserue, declineth North or South, thus: Ob∣serue two Starres, of which by marking the situation of Charies wayne, and the Pole starre, you may determine the more Southerly, or the more Northerly: then if you finde their declinations equall, the more Southerly hath South declination, and the more Northerly, North de∣clination: but if they be vnequall, the more Southerly, be∣ing lesse, it declineth Southward: but if it haue the grea∣ter declination, the more Northerly declineth North, which is to be vnderstoode of obseruations taken on this Northside of the Equinoctiall: but you may make this doctrine generall, thus: If that which is neerest the bid∣den
pole be lesse, it declineth toward that pole: if greater, then that, which is néerer the apparant pole, declineth toward the apparant pole. This distiction shall not al∣waies be precisely obserued hereafter. The eight Conclusion. The declination of the Sunne, or any Starre being giuen, together with the Azimute and anie height, to finde the Meridian height. LEt the circumferences E F, C G, be made either of them equall to the height giuen, and laying a ruler on F and G, it will cut A B in P: make the circumference E X equall to E F, and laying a ruler on P and X, it will cut A E in Y: vpon Y, as a center, at the distance Y A, describe a semicircle R V A (a semicircle thus deseribed, hauing one angle in the center A, and the Diameter equall to the se∣midiameter of another circle, as R A equall to F P, which is the semidiameter of the circle, whose Diameter is the distance F G) this semicircle shall be called the Synicall arch of that line, or distance, as R V A is the Synical arch of the distance F G. Let the distance of the Azimute from the East, and that in this figure Southward, be the cir∣cumference E W: vpon A and W, laying a ruler, it will cut the semicircle R V A in V, take the distance R V, and setting one foote of your Compasse in P, with the other in the line P F, marke a poynt O. Now let K L be the Dia∣meter of the Sunnes parallel, and diuide K L so in O, as the greater segment O L may be to O G, the greater seg∣ment of F G, as F O, the lesser segment of F G, is to the lesser segment K O (how this may be done shall be taught hereafter:) then opening your Compasse to the length of the segment lying toward the quadrant E F B, as name∣ly to O K, set one foote in O, and with the other marke in
the quadrant E F B the poynt K, the circumference E K is the Meridian height. A Lemma. Betwéene F O and O G, by 13. P. 6. take a meane pro∣portionall H N, and to that meane proportional giuen, in K L finde the two extremes, K O, O L, by the addition of Peletarius to 13. P. 6. but in the English Euclyde the figure is drawne wrong, & the demonstration distorted: you may helpe your selfe in the same author, where 17. p. 10. you haue out of Campane the same matter truly propounded. The ninth Conclusion. In any Countrie vnknowne, two different heights with the Azimutes of the Sunne, or any knowne Star being giuen, to finde their Meridian height, and declination. LEt the two heights giuē be E F, and E H, make C G e∣qual to E F, and C I equall to E H, draw the lines F G, and A I, cutting A B in the poynts P & N: let the semicircle R V A be the Synicall arch to F G, and S T A, the Synical arch to H I. Moreouer, let E W be the distance of the Azi∣mute, belonging to the height E F, from the East South, and E X, the distance of the Azimute, belonging to the height E H: likewise from the East South, a ruler layd on A and W, will cut the semicircle R V A in V: take the distance R V, and setting one foote in P, with the other in P F marke O: againe, laying a ruler on X and A, it wil cut the semicircle S T A in T: take the distance S T, and setting one foote in N, with the other in the line N H, marke a poynt M: vpon M and O laying a ruler, draw the line K M O L, which is the Diameter for the parallel of decli∣nation, whereby you may know the declination, and E K is the Meridian height.
sky chart The tenth Conclusion. The Meridian height & declination of the Sunne, or any Starre being giuen, to finde the latitude. FIrst you must know whether the height be Northerly or Southerly, which Nonnius thinketh the magnetical Index, or Compasse will shewe readily, and exactly e∣nough:
Clauius determineth of it, by marking on what hand the rising or East side of the Horizon is: but in the night it may be certainely knowne, by looking vpon the starres about the North pole, then must you marke, whe∣ther after the height taken, the Starre grow higher, or lower. Now let the Meridian height being Southward and highest, be E K, from K towards the pole, which the declination respecteth not, as if the declination be North, then South ward: if South, then Northward: and here supposing the declination Northward, from K towards E, if must be taken, as K Z, the circumference Z K B is the latitude, if the height bad béene lowest, the declination should have béene taken at the other ende of the parallels Diameter, betwéene B and C, for so it should haue béene aboue the Horizon wholy. The eleuenth Conclusion. The declination of the Sunne or any knowne Starre being giuen, in a Countrie of knowne latitude, to find the Meridian height. IF the complement of the Starres declination, or the di∣stance from the Pole be lesse then the latitude, there be two Meridian heightes, one highest, and the other lowest. Let the latitude giuen, be K Z, and let the declination be Z K, opening your Compasse to the distance B C, kéepe one foote in B, and with the other towards K, marke in the lymbe the point E, the circumference E Z K, is the Meridian height. The twelfth Conclusion. The Meridian height of the Sunne, or any Starre being giuen, in a Countrie of knowne latitude, to finde the Declination. LEt E K be the Meridian height, opening your Com∣passe to the latitude giuen, set one foote in B, and with
the other from the pole, marke in the lymbe the point Z: Z K is the declination sought for, taking denomination of that Pole, betwéene which, and Z, it is placed. The thirteenth Conclusion. In a Countrie of knowne latitude, the declination, and height of the Sunne or any knowne Starre being giuen, to finde the Azimute. LEt the height giuen be E H, make the circumference C I equall to E H, and draw the lyne H I, and let S T A be Synicall arch of the lyne H I, let the latitude gi∣uen be B Z, vpon Z and A laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe on the other side in Q, make eyther of the circum∣ferences Z K, Q L equall to the declination giuen, and laying a ruler on K and L, it will cut N H in M: with your compasse take the distance N M, and setting one foot in S, in the semicircle S T A take with the other foot a point T, vpon A and T laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe in X: the circumference E X is the distance of the Azimute from East, or West: Southward, because M fell in the quadrant B Z E, whereas if it had fallen in the quadrant B I C, it should haue béene Northward, whether it be to be accompted from East or West, the rising in height, or decreasing will shew. The fourteenth Conclusion. In a Countrie of knowne latitude, the Azimute and declination of the Sunne, or any Starre beeing giuen, to finde the height. LEt K L be the Diameter of the parallell of decli∣nation, cutting A B axis of the Horizon in Q, and let B D, be equall to the Azimutes distance from the East, or West towards the South taken in the quadrant B E, if it were Northward, it were to be taken in the
quadrant B C: betwéene D and B take any point 1, and make the circumference D 3 equall to 1 B, laying a ruler vpon 3 and 1, draw the line 2 O, then making A P equall sky chart to 2 O, vpon O and P, laying a ruler, draw the line P O F, a ruler layd on A and D, will cut O 2 4: in P F take a line P 6, equall to the distance A 4, then laying a ruler
vpon Q and 6, it will cut the lymbe in H, the circumfe∣rence E F H is the height desired. In some cases this con∣struction will not be contayned within the lymbe, but it is generally true. The fifteenth Conclusion. In a Countrie of knowen latitude the Azimute, and height of the Sunne, or any Starre being giuen, to finde the declination. LEt B Z be the latitude giuen, and let the altitude be E H, make C I equall to E H, and drawe the line H I, cutting A B, in N: let the distance of the Azimute from the East be E X; and let S T A be the Synicall arche of H I: now laying a ruler on A and X, it will cut S T A in T, take the distance S T, and setting one foote in N, with the other in N H, because the Azimute is Southward (otherwise in N I) take a point M, vpon M and A laying a ruler it will cut the limbe in 5, make Q 7 equall to Z 5, & draw the line A 7, make A 8 equal to A M, vpon M and 8, laying a ruler, draw the lyne K M 8 L, the circumference Z K, or Q L, is the declination sought. The sixteenth Conclusion. The Sunnes declination being giuen, to finde his place in the Zodiacke. LEt E H be the Sunnes greatest declination, videl. as I said in the first section, to be receiued vpon their cre∣dite, which by obseruation made with large instruments, affirme it in this our age to be 23. degrées, 30. minutes: draw the line A H, and let eyther of the circumferences, E F, C G, be equall to the declination giuen, vpon F and G laying a ruler, it will cut A H in K: in E M A the Synicall arche of the lymbe, apply from E at M a distance equall to A K, vpon M and A lay a ruler, which will cut the lymbe
in O, a circumference taken in the quadrante, to which the declination belongeth, from the next Equinoctiall se∣ction, equall to E O, as E O in the quadrante D E, sheweth the place of the Sunne, accounting from E, the beginning of Aries by B and C, to O. The seuenteenth Conclusion. Another way to finde the Sunnes place by his de∣clination giuen. VPon I, and H, the Sunnes greatest declination rec∣koned from E, and C, lay a ruler, which will cut the line A B in P, vpon A as a center, at the distance A P, de∣scribe a circle Q P R: now let either of the circumferences E F, C G be equall to the declination giuen, vpon F and G lay a ruler, which will cut the circle Q A R in S, and like∣wise on the other side in W, but imagining the declination to appertaine to the Quadrant E H B, take S, the point in it, and vpon S and A laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe in T, reckoning from E the beginning of Aries to T, you haue the Sunnes place you sought for. The eighteenth Conclusion. The Sunnes place in the Zodiacke being giuen, to finde his declination. FRom E towardes D take a circumference E O equall to the Sunnes distance from the Equinoctiall section, that is nearest to his place, and let E M A be the Synicall arche of the limbe, E H, C I equall to the Sunnes grea∣test declination, and drawe the lines H A, A I, then laying a ruler on A, and O, it will cut E M A in M: make A K equall to the distance E M, and A V equall to A K, then laying a ruler on K and V, it will cut the limbe in F, and G, eyther of the Circumferences E F, C G, are the de∣clination sought for.
The nineteenth Conclusion. Another way to finde the Sunnes declination by his place giuen. VPon T the Sunnes place, and A lay a ruler, which will cut the circle Q P R in S: make the circumfe∣rence R W, equall to Q S, and laying a ruler on S and W, it will cut the limbe in F and G, either of the circumferen∣ces E F, or C G is the declination sought for. The twentith Conclusion. The Sunnes declination being giuen, to finde his right Ascension. LEt eyther of the circumferences E F, and CG, be equal to the Sunnes declination giuen, vpon G, and F lay∣ing a ruler, it will cut A H in K, and B A in X, let Y L A be the Synicall arche of the distance F G, and from Y to L ap∣plite in the Semicircle Y L A, a distance equall to X K; vp∣on L and A laying a ruler, it will cut the limbe in N. In the quadrant, to which the declination belongeth, from the next Equinoctiall section, a circumference taken equall to E N, as E N in the quadrant E N D, sheweth the right ascension from E by B to N. The 21. Conclusion. The right ascension of any point in the Zodiake be∣ing giuen, to finde the Meridian angle. LEt E O be equall to the distance of the right ascension frō the nearest Equinoctial section, vpon A & O a ruler laid will cut E M A te Synical arche of the limbe in M, in the lines H A, A I take A K, and A V equall to the distance E M, vpon K V, laying a ruler, it wil cut A B in X: in Y L A the Synicall arch of the distance F G applie at Z, from A
sky chart a distance equall to X V, a ruler laid on A and Z, cutteth the limbe in 4, the circumference E 4 is the Meridian angle.
The 22. Conclusion. The right ascension of the Sunne being giuen, to finde his place in the Zodiacke. LEt E O be equall to the right ascensions distance from the nearest Equinoctiall section, and make D 3 equall to D O▪ and draw the line O 3, let the Meridian angle ta∣ken by the former conclusion be E 4, and make D 5 equall to D 4 a ruler laid vpon the points 4 and 5 will cut A D in 7, open your compasse to the distance A 7, and keeping one foot in A, with the other towards 3, in the line O 3, marke a point 6, a ruler laid on A and 6, cutteth the lymbe in 2, the circumference C 2 is equall to the distance of the Sunnes place from the Equinoctiall section, in the qua∣drant, wherein the right ascension was. The 23. Conclusion. The Sunnes right ascension being giuen, to finde his declination. FRom D and B towardes E, take circumferences D O, B T equall to the distance of the right ascension from the nearest Equinoctiall section, & laying a ruler on O and T, it will cut the lines AE, A H in the points B & Q: in A B take A D, equall to the distance B Q, and drawe the line D C, in it take a line C 8, equall to C A, and then ta∣king the distance A 8, set one foote of your compasse in E, and with the other in the quadrant E B, marke a point F, the circumference E F, is the declination sought for. The 24. Conclusion. The declination of any starre being giuen, with his latitude, which neuer altereth, to finde his longi∣tude or place in the Zodiacke. LEt L be the pole of the Zodiacke, B the pole of the worlde, and make the circumferences L H, L I e∣quall
to the complement of the latitude giuen, that is, let them be equall to that portion of a quadrant, whereby it exceedeth the latitude, draw the line H I. Againe let ei∣ther of the circumferences E F, C G be equall to the decli∣nation giuen, a ruler laid vpon F and G, will cut H I in K: againe a ruler laid on A and L, will cut it in M: with your compasse take the distance M K, & in the semicircle 6 N A, which is the Synicall arch for the line H I, from 6 apply at N a distance equal to M K, a ruler laid vpon ye points A N, will cut the limbe in O: a distance equal to E O, applyed in the quadrant C D, to which I suppose the declination be∣longeth, from C the Equinoctiall section, vnto P, sheweth in the Zodiacke from E by B to P the place of the starre. The 25. Conclusion. The declination of any starre being giuen, with his latitude, which neuer altereth, to finde the right Ascension thereof. AS before let L be the pole of the Zodiacke, B, the pole of the world, L I, L H, the complements of the starres latitude, E F, CG, equall to the declination, draw the line H I, and lay a ruler on F and G, which will cut A B in Q, and H I in K; let the semicircle A R S be the Si∣nicall arch for the distance F G, and from S in the semicir∣cle A R S, applie at R a distance equall to the distance Q K, a ruler laid on R & A, will cut the limbe in T, the distance, C T, in the quadrant, to which the declination belongeth, applied from the Equinoctiall section, sheweth in the E∣quinoctiall the right ascension sought for. The 26. Conclusion. The longitude and latitude of any starre being gi∣uen, to finde the declination and right Ascension thereof. LEt the poles & latitude be as before, & let E O be equal to the distance of the stars place from the nearest E∣quinoctiall
section: a ruler laid on A and O, will cut the Cir∣cumference 6 N A, which is the synical arch to the line H I, in the point N; againe a ruler laide on A & I, will cut H I in M, take the distance 6 N, & setting one foote in M, with the other towards I, if the place be nearer the pole B, or towards H, if nearer D, but here supposing it nearer B, in M I marke K, vpon A and K laying a ruler, it will cut the limbe in V, make the circumference B W equal to B V, and draw the line A W, and in it make A X equall to the di∣stance A K, a ruler laid on X and K, will cut the lymbe in F and G, and the line A B in Q, eyther of the circumferen∣ces E F, C G is equall to the declination. Now in the se∣micircle S R A, which is the Sinicall arch for the distance F G, apply a distance equall to Q K from S to R: vpon A, and R laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe in T, the cir∣cumference C T, is the distance of the right ascension, from the Equinoctiall section, taken in the quadrant, to which the longitude belongeth. The 27. Conclusion. The declination and right ascension of any starre being giuen, to finde the longitude and latitude thereof. THis differeth not in working from the former, onelie change the names, let L be the pole of the worlde, B the pole of the Zodiacke, H I ioyneth the complements of the declination giuen, E O is equall to the distance of the right ascension, from the nearest Equinoctiall section, 6 N A the Synicall arch for H I, is cut in N by a ruler laid on O and A, make M K equall to 6 N, vpon A and K a ru∣ler laid cutteth the limbe in V, ye circumferences B V, B W being equall, and the liue A W drawen, A X must be made equall to A K, a ruler lying on X and K cutteth the limbe in F and G, so either of the circumferences E F, C G be e∣quall
sky chart to the latitude sought for. In the Synicall arch of F G, which is A R S, a distance equall to M K applyed from S to R, and then a ruler laid on A and R, cutteth the limbe in T, so is C T the distance of the longitude, from the nea∣rest Equinoctiall section taken in the quadrant, to which the right ascension belongeth.
The 28. Conclusion. The longitudes and latitudes of any two starres, or any two places in the earth being giuen, to finde the distance of the one from the other. IF they be both on one side of the Equinoctiall, or of the Eclipticke what case soeuer fall out, you shall take their latitudes, as heights aboue the Horizon, and the difference of their longitudes, as the distance of their Azimutes; by which working, after the 5. Conclusion, you shall finde their distance: but if one be on the one side of the Equino∣ctiall, and the other on the other, or, of the Eclipticke, then if they differ not in longitude, from E towardes B, take one latitude E L, and make L K equall to the other lati∣tude, the circumference E K in the Equinoctiall sheweth their distance. If they differ in longitude a whole semicir∣cle, from E towards D take E M one latitude, and laying a ruler on M and A, it will cut the limbe on the other side in 6, take 61, the other latitude, and from E to 1, in the E∣quinoctiall, you shall finde the distance: but let the diffe∣rence of the longitudes be E H; and drawe the line A H, let the circumference F E be equall to the greater latitude, H I to the lesse, then making E G equall to E F, and H K e∣quall to H I, vpon F and G a ruler laide, will cut A E in N, likewise laide on I K, it will cut H A in P. In the line A B take A Q equall to the distance N P, and in A C make A S equall to F N, and S W equall to I P, in the quadrant C D from C vnto 3 applie a distance equall to Q W, the Cir∣cumference C 3, is the distance sought for. The 29. Conclusion. The Latitudes and distance of any two Starres, or a∣ny two places in the Earth being giuen, to finde the difference of their Longitudes. LEt the places first be on the one side of the eclipticke, or the Equinoctiall, and let the distance giuen be C 4,
let the greater Latitude be E F, the lesser E L; make the Circumferences E G equall to EF, and E M equall to E L, then laying a ruler on F and G, it will cut A E in N, and laide vpon L and M, it will cut it in O, make A S equall to N F, and S V equall to L O, then opening your compasse to the distance C 4, set one foote in V, and with the other marke Q in the line A B, taking the distance A Q, set one foote in N, and with the other describe an arch at P, then opening your compasse to the distance A O, and kéeping one foote in A, with the other crosse the arche at P, a ruler laide on A and P, cutteth the limbe in H, the Circumfe∣rence E H is the difference of their Longitudes; when the Circumferences méete in the line A, they differ not in Longitude, otherwise the construction is generall in this case. But if one be on the one side, and the other on the o∣ther, then must you make S W equall to L O, and opening your compasse to the distance giuen, which suppose were C 3, set one foote in W, and with the other, in the line A B, marke the poynt Q, and then on N, as a Center at the di∣stance A Q, describe an arch at P, which being crossed with another arch, described vpon the Center A, at the distance A O, a line drawne from A by P to H, sheweth E H, the dif∣ference of their Longitudes. The 30. Conclusion. The Longitudes and Latitudes of any two Starres, or any two places in the Earth being giuen, to finde the angle of Position, or the bearing of the one from the other. BY the Longitudes and Latitudes you may finde the distance, and first let both the Latitudes be on the one side of the Eclipticke, or the Equinoctiall, & their distance lesse then a Quadrant, as B L, and E F the Latitude of the place from which the other beareth; the complement of the other place whose position is sought C 4, make E G equall
to E F, and E M equall to E L, which is the complement of the distance B L, that is giuen: laying a ruler on G and F, it will cut A E in N, in A C take a line A S equall to F N, then laying a ruler on L and M, it will cut A E in O, make S V equall to L O. Now take the distance C 4, which is the complement of the Latitude belonging to the other place, and setting one foote in V, with the other marke in A B, a poynte Q. taking ye distance A Q. set one foote of your com∣passe in N, and with the other make an arch at P, then vp∣on A as a center, at the distance A O, describe an arch at P, crossing the former, a ruler layde on A and P, will cut the limbe in H, and so E H is the angle of position sought for. But if the distance be greater then a Quadrant, as for ex∣ample D L, then making E M equall to L E, the excesse of the distance aboue a Quadrant, vpon L and M lay a ruler, which will cut A E in O, then hauing taken in A C, a line A S equall to the distance F N, take also in S C a line S W equall to L O, and the other Latitude being D 3, take the distance C 3, subtended vnder the complement thereof, and setting one foote in W, with the other marke in the line A B a poynt Q, opening your compasse to ye distance A Q, vpon N as a center, describe an arch at P, which crossed with ano∣ther arch described on ye center A, at ye distance A O, a ruler laid on A, and the crossing at P, cutteth from the limbe the circumference E H, which is ye angle of position sought for. But now let one Latitude be on the one side, and the o∣ther on the other of the Eclipticke, or Equinoctiall, and let the distance be lesse then a quadrant, thē must you take the lines A S, and S V, as in the first case, but in stéed of C 4, the complement of the other Latitude D 4, you must take E D 4, compounded of the Latitude D 4, and the Quadrant E D, and opening your compasse to the distance E 4, set one foote in V, then take a poynt in A B, and so prosecute the construction as in the first case. But if the Latitudes being one on the one side, and the other on ye other of the eclipticke, or equinoctial, ye distance
sky chart be greater then a Quadrant, then must you, as in the se∣cond case, make A S equall to F N, and S W equall to L O, and taking the distance E D 3, subtended vnder E D a Quadrant, and D 3, the Latitude giuen, and setting one foote of the compasse in W, with the other take a poynt in the line A B, and so procéede forward as hath béen taught both in the first and second case.
The 31. Conclusion. The Latitude of one Starre, or one place in the Earth being giuen, with the distance, and angle of position, or bearing towards another, to finde the Latitude of this other, and the difference of their Longitudes. LEt the angle of Position be equall to the Circumfe∣rence H E, and let the Latitude giuen be E F, and the distance being lesse then a Quadrant, let his complement be H I, make the Circumference E G equall to E F, and H K equall to H I, a ruler laide on F, and G, will cut A E in N: againe laying a ruler on I and K, it will cut A H in in P, in the line A B take A Q, equall to the distance N P, and in A C take a distance equall to Q V, which being lesse then a Quadrant, is the Latitude of the other Starre or place, and on the same side of the Eclipticke, or Equinoc∣tiall that the former Latitude is: but if it had been grea∣ter, then a Quadrant as E D 4, then should D 4 the excesse aboue a Quadrant, be the Latitude sought for, and on the other side of the Eclipticke, or Equinoctiall: thus hauing the two Latitudes by them and the distance giuen, you may finde the difference of their Longitudes. But if the distance be greater then a Quadrant, as 6 B H is, then must you take H I, the excesse of it, aboue the Quadrant I B 6, and making H K equall to H I, and E G equall to F E, the Latitude giuen, lay a ruler on F G, which will cut the line A E in N, and on I K, which will cut A H in P, then make A Q equall to N P, and A S equall to F N, and S W equall to I P, then in the lymbe from C, applie at 3 a distance equall to W Q, the Circumference C 3, being lesse then a Quadrant, the Complement there∣of D 3, is the Latitude sought for: but if it be greater then a Quadrant, as E D 3, then is D 3 the excesse of it aboue a
Quadrant, the Latitude sought, but on the side contrarie to the Latitude giuen, as it was on the same side being lesse then a Quadrant. Adnotandum. PTolomey in the first booke of his Geographie, Chap. 3. promiseth with his Meteoroscopium, by the Latitudes of two places giuen, and the angle of Position to finde the difference of their Longitude, which as Nonnius hath truly noted, cannot possibly by any instrument be perfor∣med, no nor by any tables, though Regiomontanus Tabul. prim. mob. Prop. 46. hath vndertaken it: this 31. Con∣clusion expresseth a generall truth, and Regiomontanus in his treatise de Meteorosc. quite digressing from Ptolo∣mey, hath in like manner expressed it. A Caution. IN these foure last Conclusions, following the construc∣tion here set downe, the circle will not be sufficient to containe the lines required, which you may helpe by the Synicall arch of the lymbe, applying your lines in the limbe from the concourse thereof and the Synicall arch, it would be too tedious to exemplifie all particulars, there∣fore for your better vnderstanding I will onely set down for. The 32. Conclusion. Another way to finde the distance of two Starres, or places in the Earth, hauing their Latitudes, and the difference of their Longitudes giuen. LEt the Semicircle A B C be the Synicall arch of the lymbe, and from the concourse of it and the lymbe C, applie at 7 a distance equall to N P, a ruler laide on C
sky chart and 7 will cut the Semicircle A B C in Z, take the distance C Z, and setting one foote in A, with the other in the line A B marke a poynt X, againe making A S equall to F N, and S V equall to I P, applie from C to D a distance equall to V A, a ruler laid on C D will cut A B C in Y, make T V equall to C Y, and from C in the arch A B C applie at B a
distance equall to T X, a ruler layd on C B will cut the limbe in 4, the Circumference C 4 is the distance sought for: the other cases may be all handled after this fashion. The 33. Conclusion. The longitudes and latitudes of any three Starres, or any three places in the earth being giuen, to knowe whether they bee in one greatest circle or no. TAke the distance betwéene the first and the middle∣most, which let be E L, & likewise betwéen the middle∣most and the third, which let be L I, and let the distance betwéene the first and the third be E G, now if E G be e∣quall to E I they be in one greatest circle, otherwise not. The 34. Conclusion. Any vnknowne starre being seene, to find the right ascension and declination of it. HAuing thrise obserued the Azimute, and Almicantar or height, you may by the seauenth conclusion finde the declination of it, then take the distance of it, from any knowen starre, by the declinations taken as latitudes and their distance, you may finde the diffe∣rence of their right ascensions, as the difference of their longitudes, which added or substracted accordingly from the knowen starres right Ascension, yéeldeth the right Ascension of the vnknowen Starre. Gemma Frisius his chapter answering this conclusion, includeth Co∣metes, but their Parallaxis being neglected, which he re∣gardeth not, neither his working nor this conclusion, no lesse exact then his working, can duelie performe that hée propoūdeth. In the Moon besides her Parallar, the swift∣nes
of her motion, will be also a let, although Ptolomeye Almag. lib. 7. c. 2. Regiomontanus in Epit. and Copernicus lib. 1. c. vlt. by their Astrolabe or Armillae which Pappus Comment in 5. Alm. calleth Meteoroscopion, take the place of the Moone to finde the longitude of the stars, and peraduenture the methode vsed of Copernicus lib. 2. c. 2. is fitter for that purpose. The 35. Conclusion. The latitude or amplitude of the Sunnes or anie knowne Starres rising being giuen with their de∣clination, to knowe the height of the Pole. ON the land it is casie to marke in what points of the Horizon the Sunne or any starre riseth and setteth, and it is a common practise at Sea, to set the Compasse with the Sunne, at his rising, and going downe, the halfe of the circumferēce intercepted betwéen those two points, is the amplitude of rising, reckoned from the Meridian. In the Sunne about the Equinoctiall sections some little errour may happen, which although M. Digges in Scal. Mathem. thinketh worth the correcting, may in handling these common instruments be nothing regarded. But to the conclusion: let E F, and C G, be eyther of them equall to the declination giuen, and draw the line F G, let the cir∣cumference E H, be equall to the amplitude of rising, coū∣ted from the East, a ruler laid on H, and A, will cut E I A the Synicall arche of the limbe in I, with your Compasse take the distance E I, and setting one foote in A, with the other toward G, or F, it skilleth not which, take a poynt K, a ruler laide on A and K, will cut the lymbe in L, the circumference B L, is the height of the pole.
The 36. Conclusion. In a Countrie of knowne Latitude, the declination of the Sunne or any Starre being giuen, to know the amplitude or Latitude of rising. LEt the Circumferences E F, C G be equall to the de∣clination giuen, and B L the height of the Pole, a ruler layd on A and L, will cut F G in K, in E I A the Synicall arch of the lymbe, applie from E to I a distance equall to A K, and laying a ruler on A and I, it will cut the lymbe in H, the circumference E H, is the distance of rising from the East Northward, if G F fall betwéene the Equinoc∣tiall and the North Pole South ward, if betwéene the E∣quinoctiall and the Antarticke Pole. The 37. Conclusion. In a Countrie of knowne Latitude, the Amplitude or Latitude of the Sunnes or any Starres rising being giuen, to finde the Declination. LEt B L be the height of the Pole, and drawe the line A L, let the distance of the rising from the East, be E H, a ruler laid on A and H, will cut E I A, the Synicall arch of the lymbe in I, take the distance E I, and setting one foote in A, with the other in the line A L, marke K, then make B M equall to B L, and draw the line A M, in it take A N, equall to A K, a ruler laide on N and K, will cut the lymbe in F and G; either of the Circumferences E F, C G are the declination sought for. The 38. Conclusion. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude, the declination of the Sunne or any Starre being giuen, to finde the Semidiurnall arch, or halfe the time it conti∣nueth aboue the Horizon. LEt the height of the Pole be L B, either of the Circum∣ferences E F, C G, equall to the declination giuen,
sky chart drawing the line G F, on A and L lay a ruler, which will cut G F in K, take the distance O K, and from R in R P A the Synicall arch of G F, applie at P a distance equall to O K, a ruler laid on A and P, cutteth the lymbe in Q, if the line F G be betwéene the Equinoctiall and the apparant pole, the Semidiurnall arch shall be B E Q, but if it be be∣twéene the Equinoctiall and the hidden Pole, the Semi∣diurnall
diurnall arch shall be Q D, you may easilie sée in the houre circle, what houres they containe. A Corollarie. THe poynt Q. if the line G F, be betwéene the appa∣rant Pole and the Equinoctiall, sheweth the time of the rising: but if it be betwéene the hidden Pole and the Equinoctiall, it sheweth the setting: if from C to∣wards D, you take in the lymbe a distance equall to E Q, that poynt will shew the setting, when F G is betwéene the apparant Pole and the Equinoctiall, and the rising, when it is betwéene the hidden Pole and the Equinoctiall. The 39. Conclusion. The declination and Semidiurnall arch of the Sun, or any Starre being giuen, to finde the height of the Pole. LEt the Circumferences E F, C G, be equall to the de∣clination giuen, and let B E Q, or D Q, be the Semi∣diurnall arch, a ruler laid on A and Q will cut R P A, the Synicall arch of the line G F in P, make O K equall to the distance R P, and laying a ruler on A and K, it will cut the lymbe in L, the Circumference B L is the height of the Pole. The 40. Conclusion. By two knowne Starres, whereof the one is in the Meridian, the other in the Horizon, to knowe the height of the Pole or Latitude. LEt the declination of that which is in the Horizon, be equall to either of the Circumferences E F, C G draw the line G F, cutting the Axis A B in O, and let R P A be the
Synicall arch of the line GF, and let the right ascension of that, which is in the Meridian, be distant from the néerest Equinoctiall section, so much, as Q is from E; now laying a ruler on A and Q, it will cut R P A the Synicall arch of the line F G in P, make O K, or ON, it skilleth not which, equall to R P, a ruler laid on K and A, will cut the lymbe in L, the Circumference B L is the height of the Pole. The 41. Conclusion. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude, the height and declination of the Sunne being giuen, to knowe the houre of the day, or what it is a clocke. LEt the Circumferences E F, C G be equall to the de∣clination of the Sunne, and B L and D T the height of the Pole, make either of the Circumferences L S, T H, e∣quall to the height giuen, a ruler layd on S and H, will cut F G in V, in R P A the Synicall arch of F G, applie from R to W, a distance equall to O V, a ruler laid on A and W, will cut the lymbe in X. Before Noone the obseruation being taken, and if the Axis of the world fall betwéene V and the Horizon, then in the quadrant C D, taking from C, a Circumference equal to EX, you shal haue ye houre poin∣ted forth, but if V fall betwéene the Axis and the Horizon, then take in the Quadrant B C from C, a Circumference equall to E X, and the houre shall be poynted out. The ob∣seruation being taken after Noone, you must vse the Qua∣drants E D and E B in like manner. A Caution. BEcause when the Sunne draweth néere the Meri∣dian, you cannot perfectlie discerne, whether it bée before Noone, or after Noone, you must helpe that matter thus. Take two Obseruations with some pretie distance betwéene, and if the last be greater then the first, thou
was the first before Noone, but if the last be lesser, then was the last after Noone. The 42. Conclusion. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude, the Azimute and declination of the Sunne being giuen, to find the houre of the day. BY the Azimute and declination giuen, you may by the 14. Conclusion finde▪ the height thereof, that being had by it and the declination you shall by the former con∣clusion finde the hower. The 43. Conclusion. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude, the height and declination of any Starre being giuen, to find the houre of the night. LEt the Circumferences E F, C G, be equall to the declination of the Starre, drawe the line F G, cut∣ting B A in O; let either of the Circumferences L B, D T bee the height of the Pole, and make the Circumferen∣ces L S, T H equall to the height giuen: on S and H lay∣ing a ruler, it will cut F G in V: in R W A applie from R to W, a distance equall to O V; and laying a ruler on W and A, you shall cut the lymbe in X, if the obseruation be taken before the Starre come to the Meridian, which you shall know by the caution of the 41. Conclusion, then take a Circumference equall to EX on the one or the other side of C, according to the falling of the poynt V shewed in the 41. Conclusion, and so shall you haue the distance of the Starre from the Meridian, or the howre of the Starre, which imagine you finde to be poynted out by T: from T toward the poynt E, take a Circumference
sky chart TEG, equall to the Starres right ascension, and from G towards B take a Circumference G M equall to the Suns right ascension, a ruler laide on A and M in the howre cir∣cle poynteth forth the howre.
The 44. Conclusion. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude, the Azimute and declination of any Starre being giuen, to know the houre of the night. THe Azimute and declination being giuen, you may by the fourtéenth Conclusion finde the height, then by the height and declination by the former Conclusion you may finde the houre. The 45. Conclusion. Any day of the yeare in a Countrey of knowne La∣titude, to finde the beginning, continuance, and ende of the Crepusculum, that is, the dawning in the morning, and twy-light in the euening. LEt B L be the height of the Pole, and either of the Cir∣cumferences E F, C G, equall to the declination of the Sunnes place for the day giuen, draw the line F G, vpon A and L laying a ruler, it will cut F G in K, and the lymbe on the other side in T: from L and T take vnder the Hor∣zon, that is towards C and D, the Circumferences L Y, T Z of eyghtéene degrées apéece, vpon Z and Y laying a ruler, it will cut F G in 2: in R P A the Synicall arch of F G, applie from R to P a distance equall to O K, againe from R to 4 applie in R P A a distance equall to O 2, now a ruler layd vpon A and P, will cut the lymbe in Q, but layd on A and 4, will cut it in 6, the Circumference Q 6 in the houre circle will shew the continuance of the Cre∣pusculum. This added to the Sunnes rising, which you are taught to know by the 38. Conclusion, Cor. sheweth, when it beginneth in the morning, and added to the time of his setting, sheweth when it endeth in the euening: I néed not tell that it endeth in the morning with the rising
of the Sunne, and beginneth in the euening with his go∣ing downe. The 46. Conclusion. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude any day in the yeare at any houre assigned, to know the height of the Sunne. LEt B L be the height of the Pole, and the Circumfe∣rences E F, C G equall to the Sunnes declination for the day giuen, and let E X be the houres distance from sixe, on X and A laying a ruler, it will cut R P A the Synicall arch of the line G F, in W: with your compasse take the di∣stance R W, and setting one foot in O, marke in the line F G a point toward G, if in the morning it be before sixe, or in the euening after sixe, but if it be after sixe in the mor∣ning, or before sixe in the euening, then towards F, as here it is supposed in the morning after sixe, and therefore let it be V, on A and V laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe in 5, make the circumference T 7, equall to L 5, and draw the line 7 A; in it take a line A 3 equal to A V, and laying a ru∣ler on V 3, it will cutte the lymbe in S and H, either of the circumferences L S, or T H are the height desired. The 47. Conclusion. In a Countrie of known latitude, for any day of the yeere, to finde in what Azimute the Sunne is in. BY the former conclusion you learned how to finde the height for the time assigned, in the 13 conclusion was taught by the height and declination giuen in a countrie of knowne latitude to finde the Azimute, and so by these two conclusions you may performe that, which is here pro∣pounded.
The 48. Conclusion. In a countrie of knowne Latitude any day of the yeare at any houre assigned, to know how far any determinate point is distant from the Meridian. LEt the houre assigned be M, and from M by B East∣ward take a circumference M B G equall to the sky chart
Sunnes right ascension for the time giuen, againe from G by E take a circumference G E T equall to the right ascen∣sion of the point or starre giuen, the circumference T D is the distance thereof from the Meridian, which you de∣sired. The 49. Conclusion In a Countrey of knowne Latitude at any houre as∣signed any day of the yeere, to know the height of any knowne Starre. TAke the distance of the point or starre at the time gi∣uen from the Meridian, and so consequently from the houre of sixe, which let be E X, and let E F, C G be equall to the starres declination, draw the line F G, cutting A B in O, then vpon A and X laying a ruler, it will cut R W A, the Synicall arch of F G, in W, with your compasse take the distance R W, and in the lyne F G from O towards G, if the distance from the Meridian be more then sixe houres, but if lesse then sixe houres, as here it is supposed, then to∣wards F take V O, equall to R W, then laying a ruler on A and V, it will cutte the lymbe in 5, make the circumfe∣rence T 7 equall to L 5, and draw the lyne 7 A, therein take A 3 equall to the distance A V, and laying a ruler on V and B, it will cut the lymbe in the points F and G, ey∣ther of the circumferences E F, C G is equall to the height you desire. The 50. Conclusion. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude at any houre as∣signed any day of the yeare, to know the Azimute of any knowne Starre. BY the former conclusion you knaw how to finde the height for the time assigned, and by the height and de∣clination,
the 13. conclusion will teach you to finde the A∣zimute as you desire. The 51. Conclusion. In a Countrie of knowne Latitude, to finde the dif∣ference Ascensional, or the difference of the right and oblique ascension of any poynt of the Eclip∣ticke or any knowne Starre. LEt E W be the height of the Pole, and let either of the Circumferences W I, and W H be equall to the com∣plement of the declination giuen, draw the line HI, cutting the Horizon E C in Y, and the Axis of the world A W in 4, let 6 Z A be the Synicall arch for the line H I, and therein from 6 to Z, applie a distance equall to 4 Y, vpon A and Z laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe in 5, the circumference E 5 is the difference Ascensionall which you require. The 52. Conclusion. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude to finde the ob∣lique ascension of any poynt of the Eclipticke, or any knowne Starre. LEt the right ascension of the poynt taken by the 20. Conclusion, be the Circumference E B G, accoun∣ted from E, the beginning of Aries, and the difference as∣censionall of the poynt, whose line of declination is H I, let be E 5: now if H I be betwéene the apparant Pole and the Equinoctiall, take from G towards E a Circumference G 1, equall to E 5, and E B 1 shall be the oblique ascension: but if H I be betwéene the Equinoctiall and the hidden Pole, then from G towards C, take the Circumference G 3 equall to E 5, and then shall E G 3 be the oblique as∣cension sought for.
A Corollary. IF you adde a semicircle to the oblique Ascension found, that is, if you lay a ruler on 1, or 3 and A, it will in the opposite quadrant E D, poynt out the oblique descension of the poynt, that is opposite to the poynt whose oblique As∣cension you looke. Another Corollary. YOu may also finde the oblique descension of any point by this Conclusion, if you adde, when here you are ap∣poynted to subtract, and subtract when you are appoynted to adde. The 53. Conclusion. The oblique Ascension of any poynt of the Eclip∣ticke, or any knowne Starre being giuen, to finde the Latitude. LEt W be the Pole of the world, W I and W H the complements of the poynts declination, draw the line H I, cutting A W the Axis of the world in 4, and let the difference Ascensionall (which you may knowe by comparing of the right and oblique Ascensions) be E 5, a ruler layde on the Center A and 5, will cut 6 Z A the Sy∣nicall arche of the line H I in Z, in the line H 4, take Y 4 equall to the distance 6 Z; then laying a ruler vpon A and Y, it will cut the lymbe in E, the Circumference E W is the height of the Pole, or the Latitude sought for.
sky chart The 54. Conclusion. In a Countrey of known Latitude, any day assigned to knowe what poynt of the Eclipticke is in the Meridian in the morning. TAke the oblique ascension for that poynt of the Eclip∣ticke, wherein the Sunne is that day which is assig∣ned,
as for example the poynt V, then opening your Com∣passe to the distance B C, set one foote in V, and with the o∣ther from the West towards the East, or according to the succession of the degrées or times of the Equinoctiall marke in the lymbe T, that poynt is the poynt of the Equi∣noctiall which is in the Meridian: now if by the 22. Con∣clusion you take the poynt answerable to that right ascen∣sion in the Eclipticke, it shall be the same that is in the Meridian. The 55. Conclusion. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude any day of the yeere, at any houre assigned, to finde what poynt of the Eclipticke is in the Meridian. LEt the right ascension answering the degrée of the E∣clipticke, which serueth the day giuen, be E B V, ac∣counted from E the beginning of Aries, now take the houre distance of the Sunne from the Meridian, which let be B W: if the Sunne be not yet come to the Meridian, from V towards C, or from West towards East, according to the succession of the degrées of the Equinoctiall, take a Circumference V 7 equall to B W, 7 sheweth the poynt of the Equinoctiall, that is in the Meridian, the place of the Zodiacke answerable to the right ascension, is also in the Meridian with it. But if the Sunne be past the Meridi∣an, you must take a Circumference equall to B W, contra∣rie to the succession of the Equinoctials degrées, as from V the Circumference B V, and then the poynt of the Eclip∣ticke, which answereth the right Ascension B, shall be in the Meridian, and the same is to be vnderstoode of the op∣posite poynts.
The 56. Conclusion. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude any day of the yeere, to know what time any poynt of the Eclip∣ticke, or any knowne Starre riseth or setteth. TAke the oblique Ascension of the poynt, which let be E B G, and the right Ascension answering the poynt, wherein the Sunne is the day giuen, which let be E B T, from the houre of the Sunnes rising according to the suc∣cession of the houre circle, take a Circumference equall to G T, and it shall poynt out the houre, when the Starre commeth to the Horizon. The 57. Conclusion. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude to know with what poynt of the Eclipticke, any knowne Starre commeth to the Meridian. TAke the right ascension of the Starre, and then the poynt of the Zodiacke that is answerable thereunto, and that shall be the poynt wherewith the Starre com∣meth to the Meridian. The 58. Conclusion. The oblique ascension being giuen, to know the si∣tuation of the Equinoctiall sections in respect of the Meridian. LEt the oblique ascension giuen be E B 1, with your com∣passe take the distance B C, and setting one foote in 1, with the other marke a poynt L, which is the poynt of the Equinoctiall in the Meridian: now for as much as E is be∣yond the Meridian, it is in the West quarter aboue the Horizon, if it had fallen betwéene L and 1, it should haue béen in the East, the opposite section is alwaies in the op∣posite Quadrant.
sky chart The 59. Conclusion. In a Countrey of known Latitude to know the Ho∣rizontall angle, made by the Section of the Hori∣zon and Eclipticke in any poynt giuen. TAke the oblique Ascension of the poynt giuen, and by it finde the situation of the Equinoctiall section. Now
if the Section be on the East side of the Meridian, take the complements of the oblique ascension, and the poynt gi∣uen as Latitudes; the Sunnes greatest declination is the difference of their Longitudes, and by the 30. Conclusion séeke the Horizontall angle, as the bearing of the oblique ascension from the poynt of the Eclipticke, that is in the Horizon, and so haue you the Horizontall angle, but if the Equinoctiall Section be on the West side, you must take the complements to the opposite poynts of the Eclipticke, and oblique ascension, and with them worke by the Con∣clusion as is aforesaide. To the Reader. THere remaineth for perfecting this Section almost 20. Conclusions more, wherof many depend vpō this probleme: viz. In a Countrey of knowne Latitude, any oblique Ascension being giuen, to finde the poynt of the Eclipticke Coascending, which yet I haue not found how to perfourme generally, otherwise then by taking such helpe of an Eleipsis, as is vsed in the fouretéenth Conclusi∣on: in which manner of working the construction will very often exceede the compasse of the lymbe, for which and some other causes I omitte it and the rest at this pre∣sent. Notwithstanding if I perceiue hereafter, that those matters be much desired, they shall be adioyned at the next impression: the meane while I must intreate the reader to take thus much in good part. The end of the second Section.
THE THIRD SEC∣TION OF THE NEW HAND∣LING OF THE PLANISPHERE; WHICH IS A SVPPLEMENT Organicall. CHAP. 1. To make a Quadrant, whereby you may readisie know what Degrees and Minutes are contained in any Circumference giuen. VPon the Center A, describe a qua∣drant A B C, whose lymbe you must diuide, as the common man∣ner is, into 90. equall parts or de∣grées, & euery degrée into halfes; in the lymbe take the quantitie of 30. degrées, which let be C D, and drawe the line A D. In either of the lines A D, or A C, take some reasonable distance from the lymbe, as A E, or A F; and vp∣on the Center A at that distance, describe the Circumfe∣rence F E, then inlarging your compasse a little, describe another Circumference, as you sée at F and E: againe, ope∣ning your compasse somewhat larger, describe another Circumference G H, then extending or contracting the di∣stance of your compasse, describe a Circumference néere it, as you sée at G H. In like manner describe two other Cir∣cumferences somewhat néere together, and distant from
sky chart G H, as you sée at I K; and so make betwéene E C, F D 30 such lists, as you sée at F E, G H and I K. Then take an arch of 59 degrées, which you must diuide into 60 equall parts, the sixtie part of which diuision, will diuide two de∣grées into two vnequall parts: take ye two degrées next D, and from that poynt towards D, take a Circumference e∣quall to the greater segment you made by diuiding 59 de∣grées in 60 parts, and vpon that poynt and the Center A laying a ruler, where it cutteth the lyst next the lymbe, as that beneath L M is, drawe a line, diuiding the lyst be∣neath
L M, and from that deuision applie so many degrées in order, as the circumference will admit, till you come so neare 1, as you can. Then take 58 degrées, and deuide that circumference into 60 equall parts, the sixtie part of this deuision, falling betwéene two degrées deuideth them into two vnequall parts, againe taking 2 degrées next D, from that point towards D, take the greatest portion, and laying a ruler on that point and A, where it cutteth the se∣cond lyst from the limbe, draw a line cutting that lyst, and from that deuision marke so manie degrées in that lyst, as the residue of the circumference will receiue, then deuide 57 degrées for the third lyst, 56 for the fourth lyst, and so the degrées in order, till you come to thirtie degrées, and the thirtieth list, although if the limbe be deuided into halfe degrées, the thirtieth lyst, & the deuision of thirtie degrées is néedles. Hauing thus deuided 30 lystes, in the space without the quadrant to the side A C draw two parallell lines including two spaces, & extend one circumference of euery fift lyst to the vttermost parallell, in the space next the side of the quadrant A C, at the lyst next the limbe, set one, or 1. at the next circumference extended from the fift lyst set fiue, or 5 in the same space, vnder that which is extended from the tenth, set 10, and so increasing by 5 to thirty, then descending in the second space, at the fift list, set 35, at the tenth 40, and so in order by 5 to 60: then may you thus vse the quadrant. To finde what degrees and minutes are contained in any circumference giuen. VPon the center A, describe in the quadrant A B C, an arch N P O, hauing A N, the semidiameter equall to the semidiameter of the circumference giuen, & take from it, so manie degrées, that you haue a remainder lesse then thirtie, that is take from it so manie times 30 degrées as you can, and if the remainder lesse then thirty, haue a por∣tion
of a degrée greater then halfe a degrée, taking that re∣maines with your compasse, set one foote in Q, and take Q P equall to your remainder; then laying a ruler on A and P, marke the lyst by whose deuision the edge passeth most exactlie, then in the vtter space, on the outside of A C telling the numbers answering that lyst, you shall haue the number of minutes aboue the iust degrées. But if your remainder excéed iust degrées by lesse then halfe a de∣gree, then taking that portion with your compasse, set one foote in N, and with the other marke P, making N P equall to the circumference giuen, then laying a ruler on A, & P, marke the lyst whose deuision is cut by the edge of the ru∣ler, and then in the space next A C tell the number of that lyst from the lymbe, the number so found is the number of minutes, aboue the iust degrées. If the semidiameter of the circumference giuen be greater, then the semidiameter of the quadrant, vpon the center of the circumference gi∣uen, describe another, hauing the semidiameter equall to the quadrants semidiameter, & laying a ruler on the cen∣ter, and the point giuen, marke where it cut the circumfe∣rence, hauing the semidiameter equal to the quadrants se∣midiameter, and instéed of the circumference giuen, trans∣fer that circumference into the limbe of the quadrant, and then by it prosecute your construction, as is before ap∣pointed. Thus may you make one quadrant serue instéed of many vsed by Clauius in his Gnomonia and Astrolabe, and supplie with 30. diuisions those 60. which in his con∣struction of the like quadrant out of Iacobus Curtius he appointeth. CHAP. 2. To describe a triangle for enlarging or contracting of Scales, and assigning any parts, or proportion giuen in any rightline. DRaw o he out side of the quadrant, two lines pa∣callell to A B, & deuide the outward space into what
number of equall partes you will, which you may doe at pleasure before you describe the limbe of the quadrant, and in the space next A B at euery fift deuision write 5, 10, 15, & so forth, according to your number of deuisions, where∣by you may readily tell from A, the parts contained in the deuided space, then drawing the line D B you shall vse it thus. To cut from a right line giuen any part appointed. LEt the partes be these, which are contained in A 2, and make A R equall to A 2, draw the line R 2, now the line giuen is either greater, or lesse thē A 2: first suppose it lesse, & let it be equall to R Y, make R W equall to R Y, draw the line W Y, now laying a ruler on R and 1, one of the parts contained in A 2, it will cut W Y in X, the line X Y is contained in the line W Y, so often, as the line A 1, is contained in the line A 2. But if the line giuen be grea∣ter then A 2, then make A S equall vnto it, and A R equall to A 2 contayning the parts assigned, draw the lines 2 R, and in 2 R take 2 V equall to A 1, one of the parts giuen, then laying a ruler on A, and V, it will cut S 3 in T, the line 3 T is so often contained in 3 S as 1 A is contained in A 2: and so in both cases you haue cut off from the line gi∣uen, the part which was required. A Corollary. IF any proportion giuen in a right line as the proporti∣on that is betwéene 1, 2 and 2 A, you may in like man∣ner finde in any line giuen, for both W Y is to X Y and S T to T 3, as 2, 1, is to 1 A.
sky chart Another Corollary. IN like manner you may inlarge, or contract any Scale at pleasure: first taking the halfe, third, fourth or what part else you will of it, by this probleme, and then againe diuide that part so taken into the parts whereinto the Scale is diuided, and by this Scale so contracted you may make a plat, whose sides correspondent to the sides of the first plat, shall be halfe or a third or a fourth part, or any number you first tooke, likewise by the second case you may enlarge them at your pleasure.
You may also diuide any line giuen into more parts then are in the side A B, which how to performe with some cautions for auoyding error in mechanicall practise, I will reserue till another edition. CHAP. 3. Of the Meridian line, the variation of the Compasse and the height of the Pole. A lemma About a Circle giuen to describe a Quadrant. LEt the Circle giuen be B C D E, whose center let be A, and let the Diameters B D, C E be perpendicular one to another, then extending one of them, namely B D, make A G equall to the distance B C, vpon G as a Center at the distance G B, describe an arch F B H, and from G draw two touch lines G L F, and G M H: I say that G F H is a Quadrant, circumscribed about the circle B C D E, vz. the lines F G, G H, & the circumference F B H, do only touch it. If you make the semidiameter of the quadrant to ano∣ther line, as D B the Diameter of any circle giuen, is to the distance B C, subtending a quadrant of the same circle, the excesse of the Dameter aboue that line, is the semidiameter of the circle to be inscribed in that quadrant. The vse and making of an instrument tractable as well at Sea, as at Land, wherein the shadow of the Sunne shall at one instant poynt out his magneti∣call Azimute and height. VPon the center A, describe a circle B C D E, and by the former Lemma, about it describe a Quadrant G F H: and draw the lines A L, A M parallell to the sides F G, and G H, then diuide the lymbe F B H into 90. degrées, beginning at F, this being done, cut out a circle somewhat
lesse then the circle B C D E, but concentricke vnto it. Then take an Isoscheles triangle G H O; hauing the angle at H aright angle, and either the sides including it equall to the semidiameter of the Quadrant, this triangle must be placed vpon the line G H, in such manner, as the poynt G agrée iust with the center of the quadrant, and so that the plaines of the quadrant and traingle be perpendicular one to the other: then must there in some place of the line F G be set a standerd or plate (it will be best betwéene L and G) so that one of the edges standing iust vpon the line G F, be perpendicular vnto it, and the whole plate it selfe parallell to the forenamed rectangle triangle. On this standard, or some where in the triangle on that side, which respecteth F, you must hang a plumbe line, and if you will set another plate vpon F G, some where about F, making his section with the quadrant in the line G F, and also per∣pendicular vnto the plaine of the quadrant, you may by a plumbe line hanged vpon this plate, or standard, and the other plumbe line holde the quadrant G F H, both at Sea and Land preciselie leuell with the Horizon. Besides this you must make a round boxe, hauing the circle in the bot∣tome diuided into 360 degrées, or euery quadrant into 90, as you like best, which boxe must be fastened vnto the qua∣drant in such manner, as the two Diameters crossing one another at right angles, haue the one, one end directly an∣swering the poynt L, & the other another end likewise pre∣cisely answering the point M; in the center of this bore, you must set a pinne to beare a néedle touched with a very good Loadstone, making the néedle of such length, as it may fréely play in the boxe; this bore must be couered with a glasse to kéepe it from dust and other hurt, as in dials and compasses is vsed. The standards and the triangle may be so shouldered to the quadrant, that you may take them off, and put them on when you will; the manner how, I néed not to stand vpon, euery workeman can easily deuise how, and also supplie euery particular circumstance in the ma∣king
sky chart of this instrument required, which I very willinglie referre to their handines and skill, onely I must warne them very carefullie to place the triangle precisely perpen∣dicular to the quadrant, with the poynt of the acute angle agréeing with the center, and that the endes of the Dia∣meters in the bottome of the boxe, doe very exactly respect the poynts L and M in the sides of the quadrant, you shall vse this instrument thus. Holde the quadrant by the plumbe lines leuell with the Horizon, and turne the tri∣angle towards the Sunne, till the shadowe of the plate or Standard that is next G, doe fall precisely vpon the line G F, or (if you will place it so) vpon some line parallell vnto it, the shadowe in the lymbe of the quadrant will cut off, accounting from F vnto it, a circumference equall to the height of the Sunne. At the same time if you marke the poynt M, and the circumference that is betwéene it and the South ende of the néedle, that is the distance of the Sunne from the South of the Magnet, or the Mag∣neticall Azimute of the Sunne reckoned from the South.
By the instrument now described, at noone tyde in any Countrey to finde the Meridian line, the va∣riation of the Compasse, and (hauing the Sunnes declination giuen) the height of the Pole. ALthough it be a matter not very easie to finde pre∣cisely when it is noone, or the Sunne at the hyest, yet may you gesse when it commeth somwhat néere it, as it is commonly practised by Sea-men, which vse at that time with their Astrolabe or crosse staffe, to make foure or fiue sundry obseruations, and amongst them take the hiest for the Meridian height: in like manner when it draweth to be about nooue, make sundrie obseruations with this in∣strument, marking the height of the Sunne, and his Mag∣neticall Azimute, as was euen now shewed in the vse of the instrument, the greatest height is the Meridian height, and the Diameter A M doth precisely answere the Meridi∣an line, the circumference intercepted betwéene it and the south poynt of the néedle, is the variation of the com∣passe, whether East of West, is easilie determined by the side of A M, on which the néedle resteth. Now the Meridi∣an height being giuen, with the declination, you haue been taught in the tenth Conclusion of the second Section, how to finde the Latitude or height of the Pole. The common manner of finding it by adding or subtracting of the decli∣nation is more artificiallie handled by Nonnius lib. 2. cap. 9. de Reg. Nauig. then hath to my knowledge béen hitherto published in English, and therfore I thinke it not amisse to translate his words, which be thus: We must obserue the sunne, when he is highest aboue the Horizon, which is at noone, then if the shadowes of bo∣dies perpendicular to the Horizon be cast that away, that the Sunne declineth, in the day of your obseruation, you must adde the complement of his greatest height to the de∣clination
so haue you the degrées and minutes of the lati∣tude, North, if the Sunnes declination be North, South, if it be South. But if the shadowes be cast to the contrarie part, then you must compare the Sunnes declination with the com∣plement of his height, which if you finde equall, the Ze∣nith is in the Equinoctiall: but if they be vnequall, sub∣tract the lesse from the greater, & the remainder is the la∣titude, named of the declination, if the declination be grea∣ter, but if lesse, of the contrarie part or side. When the sunne hath no declination, the complement of his greatest height is the latitude, and toward that part or pole, towards which the shadowes are cast: you may know by the Mariners Compasse whether the shadowes be cast North or South. When the Sunne is in the Ze∣nith, the declination, if it haue any, is the latitude: thus much Nonnius. By the same instrument two obseruations being ta∣ken; when the Sun hath equall altitudes, to finde the Meridian line, the variation of the compasse, and (the Sunnes declination beeing giuen) the height of the Pole. THe Sunne doth not alwaies shine at noone, & there∣fore at other times you may helpe your selfe thus. Make an obseruation with your instrument marking the height of the Sunne, and the circumference intercepted by the point of the néedle, and that diameter, which is perpen∣dicular to that side of the quadrant, on which the triangle standeth, and doe this if you will foure or fiue times be∣fore noone: in the after noone marke, when the Sun com∣meth againe to the same height, which it had anie time, when you made your obseruations in the forenoone, and againe how many degrées are betwéene the Diameter
that is perpendicular to the side of the Triangle, and the North point of the néedle, then compare that found in the fore noone, with that you found in the afternoone: if they be both on the same side of the néedle, subtract the lesse frō the greater, and the halfe of the residue pointeth forth the right North, to which if you adde the excesse of the greater magneticall Azimute aboue the lesse, you haue the variati∣on of the Compasse, Eastward, if the first obseruation were lest, Westward, if the second. But if the one be on the one side, and the other on the other, then adde both the circumferences together, & of them both take the half, that point determineth the precise north: with this halfe com∣pare the last obseruation, and if it be greater, the variati∣on is Eastward, but Westward if it be lesse. Now the Meridian line being found, you know the Azimute, where∣in the Sunne was at the time of your obseruation, and you also tooke his height, which two being giuen with his declination, you may finde the latitude, as was shewed in the 8 and 10 conclusions of the second Section. By the same instrument three obseruations beeing taken, whereof two bee, when the Sunne hath e∣quall altitudes, to finde the Meridian line, the va∣riation of the Compasse, the declination of the Sunne, and the height of the Pole. YOur thrée obseruations being taken as is required, you haue two of them when the Sunnes heights be equall, by which you are taught in the former probleme how to finde the Meridian line, and the variation of the Compasse, the Meridian line being found, you may knowe the distance of both those Azimutes from it, which haue different Altitudes, by which two Azimutes and their altitudes, the ninth and tenth Conclusions of the second Section wil shew you, how to finde the declination of the Sunne, and the Latitude.
sky chart By the same instrument three obseruations being ta∣ken howsoeuer, to finde the Meridian line, the va∣riation of the Compasse, the declination of the Sunne, and the height of the Pole. HAuing taken by your instrument in thrée obseruati∣ons, the heights and distances of their Azimutes:
from any quarter of the lymbe, whose Diameter you must account for the first Azimute, number the distance of the second, and from that poynt so taken, the distance of the third, and let those poynts of the Azimutes be E F G, drawe the lines F A, G A; againe, let E H be the height be∣longing to the Azimute E, and E K the height for the Azi∣mute F, and E N the height for the Azimute G; now laying a ruler vpon B and H, it will cut A E in I, againe laying a ruler on B and K, it will cut A E in L, in A F make A M e∣quall to A L, againe laying a ruler on B and N, it will cut A E in O, in A G take A P equall to A O, now vnto the thrée poynts I, M, P, finde the center, which let be Q, on A and Q laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe in R, that point R is the right North, or South, and so haue you the di∣stance of the Azimutes from it, that is E R is the distance of the first, F R of the second, G R of the third, the diffe∣rence of these Azimutes, and the Magneticall Azimute be∣longing to euery of them, is the variation of the Compasse: by any two of these Azimutes, so their height be different, in the second Section you are taught to finde the declina∣tion and height of the Pole, which two things in the pro∣bleme required, Nonnius, from whom thus much is bor∣rowed, Lib. 2. Nauig. c. 16. prosecuteth after a farre diffe∣rent manner, yet sutable to the construction here set down alreadie: but for that his construction will seldome be con∣tained within the compasse of the lymbe, I thought good to omit it: this finding of the Meridian line, being very inge∣nious and commodious, though it sometime will incurre the like inconuenience, I thought worthie to be knowne. Clauius hath another way to performe the things requi∣red, but nothing easier then this of Nonnius. For both of them aboute the Equinoctiall will produce the constructi∣on hugely without the compasse of the lymbe, and in Non∣nius his way, the Sunnes parallell will differ little from a right line, so that you must vse a peculiar instrument for to describe it, and yet are you nothing the nearer for fin∣ding
of the center. Therfore if at Sea the Azimutes and al∣micanters of the Starres might be taken, Nonnius his construction would be of farre more vse: for then work∣ing by such stars as be neare the Poles, their Parallelles would easily be described. I haue thought of an instrumēt for that purpose, as to vse a quadrant with an index, and sights, insteade of the triangle, or to fit your boxe with the needle, at the lower end of the Marriners Astrolabe, for want of experience I dare not affirme much, but I think that Arte, handinesse, and diligence might doe some thing with such instruments, the better consideration whereof, I willinglie referre to the Seamans experience. The Sunnes declination beeing giuen with the height of the pole, to finde the Meridian line by one obseruation. PLacing your quadrant with the triangle vppon anie plaine made leuell with the Horizon, turne it as is ap∣pointed for the finding of the height, and by the side, on which your standardes are placed, drawe a right line: by the height, which you then finde, in a countrie of knowne Latitude the Sunnes declination beeing giuen, you are taught in the second section Conclusion 13, to find the A∣zimute, which being done, describe a circle vppon a center taken in the former line, and from the line taking accor∣dingly a circumference answering the Azimute, the line which ioyneth that point, and the center, is the Meridian line. Clauius hath two other waies to do this: one Gno∣mon. lib. 1. cap. 23. the other in his Astrolabe lib. 3. Can. 12. and a third I haue found, but none to be preferred be∣fore that which is here propounded, notwithstanding if this booke bee printed againe, those thrée also shall bée adioyned.
sky chart CHAP. 4. Of Mappes or Chartes and Nauticall directions. Anie line being giuen, to finde another line, vnto which the line giuen shall haue that proportion, that the Meridian hath to any Parallell. VPon the center G describe a semicircle F H Y, and let H G be perpendicular to F Y. Let F B, Y Z be equall to the distance of the Parallell from the Equi∣noctiall, and draw the lines B G, G Z: let G A be equall to the line giuen, and in G Z take G S, equall to G A, laying a ruler on A, and S, it will cut G H in M, drawe the line A M. I say G A, or the line giuen hath the same proporti∣on to A M, that the Meridian hath to the Parallell, whose distance from the Equinoctial is F B, which was required to be giuen. I thought good to set downe this exacte and
readie way, because that, which Mercator describeth in the proeme of his reformed tables for Ptolomey, is more troublesome, and lesse exact. To deuide any line, or the side of your quadrant, or your ruler as that line is deuided, which in Ge∣rard Mercators Generall mappe, and his directo∣rium doth answere the Meridian. DEuide the line you take for the ground of this worke first into 10 equal parts, and then euery one into fiue parts, imagining euerie one of the fift partes to be deuided into twentie: besides take euerie fift part for a degrée in longitude: then to finde the degrées of latitude answera∣ble vnto it doe thus: in G Y the semidiameter of the qua∣drant GH Y take G I equall to one degrée of longitude, and by I, draw the line I P parallell to G H; then laying a ruler on G and euery degrée of the limbe, accounting from Y marke where it cutteth I P, the line intercepted betwéene those sections and G doe answere the correspon∣dent degrée: as for example, I take a degrée at Z, vz. the 45 degrée, then I lay a ruler on G and Z, which cutteth I P in 2, the line G 2 in the Meridian answereth the point Z, or is the 45 degrée: Now hauing marked these sections for euerie degrée in the quadrant, transfer them one after a∣nother into your ruler, or the side of your quadrant, that is at one end of your quadrant, take a line equall to that, which answereth one degrée, adde to it, that which answereth the second, to that put that, which answereth the third, and so till you come to the end of that line, which not being able to receiue all, draw another line, and prose∣cute the like construction in that, and so in the third, and forth till you haue transferred all the lines answering your degrées. If in this transferring, your deuisions agrée not iust with the ends of your lines, you must take onelie the ouerplus of the last deuision in the beginning of the
next line, and so procéed as is aforesaid. Now hauing your lines thus deuided, and another deuided to the same parts that the side of your quadrant is, being parallell to them, & all perpendicular to one right line, you may readilie know what equall partes are contained betwéene any two of your degrées taken howsoeuer, whereby you may per∣forme all the vses of Mercators Directorium. Thus for example. The Longitudes and Latitudes of any two places being giuen, to finde their direction, commonlie called the Rumbe. TAke the equall parts contained, as well in the diffe∣rence of the latitudes, as in the diffrence of their lon∣gitudes, and see whether both be lesse then the side of your quadrant, or no: first suppose they be lesse, and let the gea∣ter be X G, the lesser G M: draw the line X M, deuide G X into two equall parts in V, then opening your Compasse to the distance V G, and kéeping one foote in V, with the other marke T, in M X; on T and G laying a ruler, it will cut the limbe in 4. Now if the difference of the Latitudes be lesse then the difference of the longitudes, 4 Y is the distance of the rumbe from the Meridian, but if the diffe∣rence of the longitudes be lesse, then is 4 P the distance of the rumbe from the Meridian. But now suppose that one or both the differences, be greater then the side of your quadrant, then by the rule of proportions, you must finde a line, vnto which the lesser is, as the greater is to the side of the quadrant, or make the side of the quadrant to ano∣ther line, as the greater is to the lesser, namelie let G Y be vnto G Q, as the greater difference is to the lesse, and draw the line Q Y: deuide G Y into two equall partes in W, then opening your Compasse to the distance W G, and kéeping one foote in W, in Y Q marke R, a ruler laid on G and R, will cut the limbe in 3: now as before, if the dif∣ference
sky chart of the longitudes be the greater, then is H 3 the distance of the rumbe from the Meridian, South, if the place respected be South, North, if it be North, and so like∣wise East, or West.
CHAP. 5. Of the backe of your plate. To inscribe in the backe of your plate the fixed stars according to their Longitudes and Latitudes, or declinations and right ascensions, as you please. LEt the vtter edge of the backe side of your plate be de∣uided into 360 degrées, which you may vse for the Zodiacke, or the Equinoctiall; the Zodiacke, if you in∣scribe the Starres according to their Longitudes and La∣titudes, or the Equinoctiall, if you will place them accor∣ding to their declinations and right ascēsions, which is the best, for those are oftnest in vse, both are done after one manner thus. From the beginning of Aries reckon the right ascension, as from E by B vnto T, and draw the line A T, then from B to V, reckon the declination B V, laying a ruler on V and A, it will cut the Synicall arch of the limbe A S C, in S, in the lyne A T take A Q equall to the distance A S, and the point Q is the place of the starre ac∣cording to his right ascension and declination: this being done, set downe by it the name, and S or N, to signifie, whether it decline North, or South. This may be done so sleightlie, that you may rub it out when you will with a wet pumice, and yet déepe enough to continue a great while for your vse. To finde the longitude and latitude, or the declina∣tion and right ascension of such stars as bee pla∣ced on the back of the plate. VPon the center of the plate, and the point of the star lay a ruler, where it cutteth the limbe, is the right as∣cension reckoned from the vernall Section, or the longi∣tude, if they be placed for the Zodiacke. As for example:
sky chart Place this figure in steade of the figure in folio 35.
lay a ruler on A and Q, it will cut the limbe in T, the circumference E B T is the right ascension of Q. Now if in A S C the Synicall arch of the limbe, you applie from A to S, a distance equall to A Q, and lay a ruler on A and S, it will cut the limbe in V, the circumference B V is the declination of the starre placed at Q, or the latitude, if they were placed according to the longitudes, & latitudes: by the letter S or N you shall know whether it bee North, or south. And that you may be furnished for these two last problemes, I haue set downe on the other side a table out of Clauius, contayning certaine fixed starres, both with their longitudes and latitudes, and their declinations and right ascensions, calculated for this yeare 1600. And thus much at this time, for the Planisphere, which hereafter I meane to increase with more conclusions, & problemes, and could haue now enlarged it with handling mensurati∣ons, Synicall calculations and dialling: but those thinges séemed somewhat farre from my principall purpose, and therefore I will intreate the reader to accept thus much onely as now is deliuered, and so for this time I end. The end of the new handling of the Planisphere.
A Table of fixed Starres out of Claius, calculated for the yeere 1600. compleat. Bignes Names. Place in the Zo¦diacke or Lon¦gitude Their Lati¦tude The part The de¦clinati¦on. The part. The righ Ascen∣sion 3 The Rams former horne. Aries 28 5 7 20 N 17 39 N 23 20   Medusaes head. Taur 21 5 23 0 N 40 5 N 40 55   Bulles eye. Gem. 4 5 5 10 S 15 56 N 63 6   Orions right shoulder. Gem. 23 25 17 0 S 6 21 N 83 41   The Goate. Gem. 16 25 22 30 N 45 9 N 72 6   The great dogge. Can. 9 5 39 10 S 15 4 S 97 19   Hydraes bright Starre. Leo. 21 25 20 30 S 5 4 S 137 19   Lions hart. Leo. 23 50 0 10 N 13 44 N 146 19   Lions tayle. Virg. 15 55 11 50 N 16 26 N 171 49   The Virgins spike. Lib. 18 5 2 0 S 8 58 S 195 55   Arcturus. Lib. 18 25 31 30 N 21 49 N 209 23   Scorpions heart. Scor. 4 5 4 0 S 24 57 S 241 16   Harpe. Cap. 8 45 62 0 N 38 40 N 275 15   Last in Aquarius water. Aqu: 28 25 23 0 S 33 24 S 339 56   Swannes tayle. Pisc. 0 35 60 0 N 44 8 N 307 22   Pegasus legge. Pisc. 23 35 31 0 N 25 44 N 341 0 Errata. Page 3. line vlt. Analemma. p. 6. l. 6. Maurolycus. p. 10. l. 9. Frisius. p. 13. l. vlt. Motus raptus. p. 14. l. 33. Zenith, appearing. p. 16. l. 33. from the Zenith, which. p. 17. l. 2.5.7. for Z make L. p. 22. l. 1. blot out pan. and l. 11. N L. p. 23. l 13.25. for Z make L. ibid. l 20 Tropickes. p. 24. l. 26. there makth angles. p. 25. l. 12. and by two of those. p. 26. l. 9. setting Ianua∣rie. p. 32 l. 26.27. for Q make 7. p. 33. l. 10. for 3 & 3: make 8 & 8. ibid. l. 13. for G make E. p. 34 l. 4.5. for T make V. l. 13 for F make E. l. 27. which let be C 1, 1 l, and l K. l.: 8: 29. for B make P. p. 26 l. 2.7. for B make P. l. 5. for 12. make 2. l 8. for 2. and D make P. p. 38. l. 18. and H l, cutting. p. 40. l. 23. for K make B. in the figure of the 39. page place 3. on the o∣ther side of D.
