19237 19080.5 99839188 10781
The good Fellowes best Beloved: Now if you will know what that should bee, Ile tell you 'tis called good Ipse hee: 'Tis that which some people do love in some measure, some for their profit and some for their pleasure. To the tune of Blew Capp. AMong the nine Muses if any there be that unto good fellowship friendly adhere, Let them give asistance this time unto me, for I in this ditty intend to preferre A thing that's beloved of rich and of poore, It is well approoved, there's reason therefore, My due approbation shall evermore be In the commendation of good ipse hee. All sorts and conditions the high and the lowe, although not alike yet all in some measure, Vnto this my theame their affection will showe, according, as they have time, stomack, or trea∣sure: There's few live in purely, but they now and then Will sip it demurely both women and men, Both marryd and simple doe joyntly agrée, To fuddle their noses with good ipse he. Both Lawyers & cliants that come to the terme, how e're the case goes of one thing I am sure, Before any businesse can be setl'd firme, good liquor & money the meanes must procure, A Taverne barre often, makes peace ere they part, Canary can soften a plaintiffes hard heart, Their glasses they sup off, and make merry glée, Such power hath a cup of good good ipse he. The Taylor coms rubbing his hāds in the morn, and calls for a cup of the But next the wall, Be it of the Grape or the Barley Corne, hée'le drinke out his breakfast his dinner & all, Hée sayes call and spare not, Ile goe thorough stitch, Hang pinshing I care not for being too rich: Iohn Black's a good fellow, and he alowes me To make my selfe mellow with good ipse hee. The merry Shoo-maker when 'tis a hard frost, sayes he cannot work for his waxe it is frozen, Fayth what shall we doe, let us goe to our Host and make our selves merry with each a halfe dozen, With this resolution, they purpose to thrive, But ere the conclusion, that number proves five, They sing merry catches, few frades men that be, Are Shoo-makers matches at good ipse hee.
The second part, To the same tune. THe Mason and bricklayars are somer birds, the Winter to them is a time of vacation: Then they & their laborours live on their words, unlesse (like the Ant) they have made prepara∣tion, And yet though they have not, they ne'rethelesse thinke, Tush what if we save not, must we have no drinke, Wéele pawne tray and shovle, and more if néede be, Our noses to fuddle with good ipse hee. Grim Vulcā the black-smith is chief of all trades then think you that he'l be in drinking inferiour No truely when hée's with his merry comrades, héele laugh and sing ditties you never heard merrier, He cryes out hée's hot, and still this is his note Come gi's t'other pot: héer's a sparke in my throate, Hée calls and he payes, there is no man more frée, He seldome long stayes from good ipse hee. The Tanner when he comes to Leaden-hall, after a hard journey wil make himselfe merry, He will have good liquor and welcome with all, the Bul for good béere and the naggs-head for shery, No bargaine shall stand, but what liquor doth seale, Quite throughout the Land, thus most tradesmen doe deale, In Taverne or Alehouse most matches made be, The first word's where shall us finde good ipse hee. The London shopkéepers that cry what doe lack when they have sold wares & money have taken, They'l give their chapman a pint o'th best sacke, the price of it out of their money abating, The proverb observing they that money take Must pay all the charges, this bargaine they make, Thus Liquor makes all men, most friendly agrée, Both lowe men and tall men, love good ipse hee. The honest plain Husbādman when that he goes to fayre or to market with corne or with cattle: When he hath dispatcht he remembers his nose, how that must be arm'd as it were to a battle, Then like to a gallant to drinking he falls, Yet though hée's not valiant, he payes what he calls: He scornes reputation in that base degrée, His chiefe recreation is good ipse hee. The generous Servingment méeting each other as wel as their masters somtimes wil be merry, He that's a good fellow is lov'd like a brother, with making him welcom they nere are weary Hee that is a clowne, as a clowne he may goe Quite thoroughout the towne, such a fellow theyle know: But those that are right will in union agrée, By morn or by night at good ipse hee. In briefe thus it is which both women and men, so déerely affect that before they will lack it: Theyle pawne all they have nay & so now & then, gown, kirtle, or wastcoate, cloake breeches and jacket, Although they want victuall if they can get chinke, Bée't never so little, 'tis most on't for drinke: The rich and the begger, the bond and the frée Will oftentimes swagger at good ipse hee. London Printed for Iohn Wright iunior, dvvelling on Snow hill, at the Signe of the Sunne. M. P. FINIS.
