19203 99855328 20815
A COPIE OF THE FIRST ARREST OR DECREE OF THE Parlament of PARIS, against the Booke of Santarellus the Iesuite; Commanding it to be burned, and the Provincial of the Iesuites, with others, to come to the Court the next morning to be heard. WITH, The Parlaments demands, the Iesuites answeres, their Declaration of their detestation of the said Booke, with the Censure of the Sorbon Doctours against the same. Translated into ENGLISH, according to the French Copies, Printed at Paris with the Kings Priviledge. LONDON, Printed by R. BADGER, and are to be sold at the Black Beare in Pauls Church-yard 1634.
A COPIE OF THE FIRST Arrest,See the French Mer. tom. 11. ad Ann. 1626. p. 87. & seq. or Decree of the Parla∣ment of PARIS, &c. THe Court of the great Cham∣ber, Criminall, and of the Edict assembled, having seene a booke printed at Rome in the yeare 1625. in∣tituled, Antonij Santarelli, &c. containing in the 30. and 31. Chapters many propositions against the Soveraigne powers of Kings, ordained, and establi∣shed by God, the peace and tranquillity of their States. Conclusions of the Kings procuratour Generall, and all considered. The Court hath declared, and doth declare the Propositions, and Maximes of the said booke, to be false, scandalous, and seditious, tending to the sub∣version of Soveraigne Powers ordained, and establi∣shed by God, to the insurrection of Subjects against their Prince, withdrawing them from their obedi∣ence, inducing to attempt against their Persons, and States, to disturbe the publike peace, and tranquilli∣ty; and the said Booke, as such, to bee torne, and burned in the Court of the Palace by the Executio∣ner
of High Iustice. Injoyneth, and forbiddeth under paine of Treason all Booke-sellers, and Prin∣ters to print, sell, utter, and all Persons of what state, and condition soever they bee, to have, keepe, re∣taine, and communicate, to print or cause to bee printed, or to publish the said Booke. Commandeth all those; who have Copies thereof, or shall have notice of those, who shall have them in their hands, to notifie forthwith to the Ordinary Iudges, to the end that Inquisition be made by the diligence of the Substitute of the Procuratour Generall, and to proceed against the offenders according to Iustice. Ordaineth, that this present Arrest shall be sent to the Bailywikes, and Stewardships subject to the Iu∣risdiction of this Court, to be published, kept, and observed according to the forme, and tenour there∣of. And to be signified to the Syndicke of the Book∣sellers to make it knowne to the rest, to the end that they pretend not cause of ignorance. Ordaineth, that the Provinciall, three Rectours, and three Ancients of the Iesuites shall bee commanded to come to morrow betimes in the morning to the Court for to bee heard, Made, and executed the thirteenth of March, 1626. Articles of the Parlaments Demands to the Iesuites, with their Answers. THe twenty fourth of March 1626. the Iesuites being present in the great Chamber,See the French Mer. p. 8. & seq. the Parla∣ment
asked them, Doe you approve the wicked Booke of Santarellus? P. Coton, Provinciall of the province of Paris, accompanied with three others, answered: Mes∣sieurs, it is so faulty, that we are ready to write a∣gainst it, and to disprove all that he saith, and in ef∣fect there are come to our Houses ten Copies of them, all which we have suppressed. The Parlament, Suppressed, Is it your duty to deale so? The Iesuites. We thought, that we could not doe otherwise then so. The Parlament. Why brought you not them to Monsieur the Chancellour, or to Monsieur, the First President? The Iesuites. Messieurs, we are obliged, and bound to many other obediences, then are other Religious. The Parlament. Doe not you know very well, that this wicked Doctrine is approved by your Generall at Rome? The Iesuites. Yea Messieurs, but we that are heere can not be so imprudent, but we disprove it with all our might. The Parlament. Well then, answere to these two things, Do you beleeve, that the King is all Power∣full within his Estates, and do you thinke, that any forraigne Power can, or ought enter in, or any then in the Person of the King can disturbe the peace of the Gallican Church? The Iesuites. No, Messieurs, we beleeve him all Powerfull, as for Temporall. The Parlament. As for Temporall, speake plain∣ly,
and tell us, if you beleeve, that the Pope can Excommunicate the King, free his Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, and expose his King∣dome to spoile? The Iesuites. O Messieurs, to Excommunicate the King, he that is the Eldest sonne of the Church will be carefull to doe nothing, which may ob∣lige the Pope to that. The Parlament. But your Generall, who hath ap∣proved that booke, doth hold for infallible as a∣bove. Are you of a different beliefe? The Iesuites. Messieurs, Hee who is at Rome, could doe no otherwise, then to approve that, which the Court of Rome approveth. The Parlament. Is it your beleefe? The Iesuites. It is quite contrary. The Parlament. And if you were at Rome, what would you doe? The Iesuites. We would doe, as they doe there. The Parlament. Well then, answere to that, which we have demanded of you? The Iesuites. Messieurs, we humbly beseech you, to give us leave to conferre together. The Parlament. Goe into that Chamber. They being there halfe an houre returned backe againe to the Parlament. The Iesuites. Messieurs, we will bee of the same opinion with the Sorbon, and will subscribe to the same things with the Messieurs of the Clergie. The Parlament. Make your Declaration there beneath. The Iesuites. Messieurs, wee most humbly en∣treate you, to give us some dayes to conferre a∣mong our selves.
The Parlament. Goe your wayes,See the French Merc. pag. 92. the Court giveth you three dayes. A Copie of the Iesuites Declaration against the Doctrine contained in the book of Santa∣rellus the Iesuite, in that which concerneth the Person of Kings, and their Authority, exhibited to the French King two dayes after. VVE underwritten doe declare, that we dis∣allow, and detest the wicked Doctrine contained in the book of Santarellus, in that which concerneth the Person of Kings, their Authority, and their States, and that we acknowledge their Majesties to depend immediately upon God, that we are ready to shed our bloud, and expose our lives in all occasion for the confirmation of this Truth. Promising to subscribe to the Censure, which shall be made of this pernicious Doctrine by the Clergy, or the Sorbon, and never to professe opinions, or Doctrine contrary to that, which shall be held in this matter by the Clergie, and the Vniversities of the Realme, and the Sorbon. Made in Paris by the undernamed Religious of the Company of Iesus, the sixteenth day of March, 1626. P. oto. Ign. Arman. Ch. de la Toure. I. Souffren. F. Garasse. F. Godullon. Dion. Gaiatrin. Fr. Grandillon. Dion. Petau. I. Fillault. I. Brossault. Est. Guerry. Lud. Neyran. Iac. Alemant. Pierre Royer. Est. Louys.
A Copie of the censure of the Sacred Theo∣logicall Facultie of Paris,This Censure is printed at Paris in Latine by Ioseph Bo∣villerot, and see it in French in the French Merc. ubi supra pag. 95. of a booke in∣tituled Antonii Santarelli, &c. IF any one perchance make doubt, that the ends of the world are come upon us, as the Apostle speaketh,1 Cor. 1. let him but consider these latter times, and compare them with the former, and hee will then acknowledge, that the enemy of mankinde hath left nothing unattempted, which might serve not only to hurt, but also to cleane overthrow both the Ecclesiasticall, and also the Civill policie. There have beene wicked men, who presuming to blaspheme against Heaven, have imployed their pens, and swords against the Church, the Spouse of CHRIST IESUS. But some witlesse men per∣ceiving, that it is not without reason, that the Se∣cular power be armed with the sword, have assaul∣ted the Civill Policie by an other way; and have at∣tempted to extirpate, and annihilate hereby execra∣ble bookes, putting in execution by such ambus∣cado's more covertly their pernicious designes. The marke which S. Iude propoundeth to us to know these men by; is, that they despise Dominion, and blaspheme Majesty. And would to God, that they had rested content only with despisall, and re∣viling speeches; but so great is their fault, that con∣trariwise these damnable Writers, under a pre∣tence of establishing in the Church, a certaine tem∣porall
power, doe teach, and affirme; that it is in the power of those, who have in their hands the government of Ecclesiasticall affaires, to depose Kings from their Thrones, and the same for very small and ridiculous causes, and to put in their pla∣ces other Supreme Magistrates either Annuall, or Iournall; as they shall thinke good. For this cause the Theologicall Facultie of Paris perceiving, that they intend to overthrow by this meanes all Civill Policies, especially this of the French Mo∣narchie, which is governed by our most Christian, most Clement, and most Iust KING, Lewis the XIII. To follow the steps of Her Predecessour, in testifying the affection, which Shee beareth to His Majesty, and the whole Realme, and to satisfie also the generall desire of all good men, hath cho∣sen out among other bookes one newly come forth, intituled, Antonii Santarelli Iesuitae de Hae∣resi, Schismate, Apostatia, &c. And in the Gene∣rall Congregation held extraordinarily the sixe∣teenth day of March last past Shee committed to certaine Doctours, whom Shee particularly named, to read, and examine the same. But for as much as it treateth of many things, which doe no way appertaine to that, which principally is now que∣stioned, Shee thought good, that they should exa∣mine only two Chapters, to wit, the thirtieth and thirtie one of the Treatise de Haeresi. Therefore the first day of April, 1626 af∣ter Masse of the HOLY GHOST the As∣sembly being kept after the accustomed manner in the Hall of the Sorbon Colledge, hath read the rela∣tion of the Doctours appointed by the Facultie,
who have declared, that in those two Chapters are contained these propositions following: That the Pope can punish Kings, and Princes with temporall punishments, depose, and deprive them of their King∣domes for the crime of Heresie, and free their Sub∣jects from their obedience, and that this hath ever been the custome in the Church. And not only for Heresie, but also for other causes; to wit, for their sinnes. If also it be expedient: If Princes be negli∣gent: If they bee unable, and unprofitable. More∣over, that the Pope hath power ouer spirituall things, and also over all temporall. And that by the Law of God there is in him both spirituall, and temporall power. That we must beleeve, that to the Church, and her Supreme Pastour power is given to punish with temporall punishments, Princes who offend against divine, and humane lawes, especially if the crime be Heresie. They said also, that the same Santarellus affirmed in that booke. That the Apostles were subject to Secular Princes de facto, but not de iure. And also, that as soone as the Pontificall Dignitie was ordained, all Princes began to bee subject to it. To be short, they related, that he expoundeth those words of CHRIST, Whatsoever thou shalt binde upon earth,Matth. 16. &c. Not only of spirituall, but also of temporall power. And that he corrupteth the text of Saint Paul in cutting of the negation [Not] and imposeth upon Authours things,2 Cor. 10. Our Lord hath given us power to edification, and not to de∣struction. which they never thought of. And they concluded, that as well these things, as many others, which they related, doe worthily deserve the Correction, and censure of the Facultie. Wherefore the matter being by Monsieur the
Deane brought into deliberation, after the opini∣ons of all the Doctours were heard, and their voi∣ces collected, the Facultie hath disproved, and condemned the doctrine contained in these propo∣sitions, and the conclusions of the said heads, as new, false, erroneous, contrarie to the word of God; making the Pontificall dignitie to be odious; opening the way to Schisme; which dependeth only upon God, hindering the conversion of Infidell, and Hereticall Princes, disturbing the publike peace, and overthrow∣ing Kingdomes, States, and Common-wealths, and in briefe, with drawing Subjects from the obedi∣ence, which they owe to their Soveraignes, and indu∣cing them to Factions, Rebellions, and Seditions, and to attempt against the lives of their Princes. Made in the Sorbon, the day, and yeare above na∣med, and reviewed the fourth of April, 1626. By the commandement of the Messieurs, the Deane, and Doctours of the sacred Theolo∣gicall Facultie of Paris. Ph. BOVVOT.
