19848A 99851154 16414
A FAMOVSE Cronicle of oure time, called Sleidane's Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion and common wealth, during the raigne of the Emperour Charles the fift, with the Argumentes set before euery Booke, conteyninge the summe or effecte of the Booke following. Translated out of Latin into Englishe, by Ihon Daus. ¶ Here vnto is added also an Apology of the Authoure. ✚ CHE SARÀ SARÀ. ❧ blazon or coat of arms
✚ To the right honorable, and his singular good Lord, Fraunces, Earle of Bedford, Lord Russel, one or the Quenes highnes, most honorable priuy counsel. Ihon Daus his daily oratour, wisheth helth, peace, and cō¦solatiō. In Christ Iesu, with thincrele of honor and digntiy. AMonges all other wryters, that compile Bookes for the knowledge and instruction of others (right honorable and my singular good Lord) thei in my opinion) deserue best of the common welth, which commit to wrytinge, stories, wherby men maye learne by thexamples of others set before their eies, how to guide and gouern theyr life, what thinges to embrace or eschue, and to iudge by matters past, what shalbe the consequent, and end of things to come. For which cause the most eloquent orator Cicero calleth an history, the mystres of māners, the guid & light of life, the sercher out of vertues, & driuer away of vi¦ces, with many such other like goodly titles, which he attri∣buteth to the same: And certenly if ther wer euer any story written: whereof men might reape frute and commodity, or worthy to be had in hand, & practised in the common vse of mans life, ether for the worthines ofihargumente, which is concerning the state of religion, and common wealth, or for the report of things done lately of fresh memorye: it is thys same work of Sleidane. For he treateth not only of thenter∣prises of men, with the casuall chaunces of things that hap∣pen.
But climing higher, and auauncing the minde of man vp vnto heauen, constraineth the same to maruel at the wō∣derful prouidence of the liuing God, touching the gouerne∣ment of the Churche: And induceth men to wonder at the vnsearchable counsel of God almighty, who hath preserued the same in somany troublesome stormes, and tempestes ful of pearil and daunger. And as concerninge the author, the dilligence and fidelity that he hath vsed, deserueth doutles to be highly commēded of all men: for so much as he, hauing more respect to the common wealth, than regard to his pri∣uate commodity, hath wholy imploid him self to consecrate the best and most excellent matters that maye be to euerla∣sting memory. It is said how Thucidides was so desyrous of the verity, and so doubtfull and scrupulous in wryting of his story, that he gaue a great some of monye, euen to his enne∣mies, to haue the truth of matters, & to know how all thin∣ges went. Assuredly the same may we say also by Sleidan: who (as he him selfe confesseth) not content to go by heare say, or by common report of people, hathe fished for the cer∣tenty of his Story out of common recordes, or at the least by report of men worthy credit, and herein hath spared nether cost nor paine. For although he hath wrytten many thinges which he him self hath sene in Germany, Fraunce, Italy, & other places, yet muste he of necessitye be holpen herein with the eies and eares of many, to compact an history of so many seuerall nations, and places so far distante one from an other. Seing therefore that thys story of Ihon Sleidane is compiled of matters of so singuler and excellent perfection, worthy of perpetuall memory.
J haue thought it expediēt for sondry causes to present your honoure with the same. And that as wel for the great good wil & zeale that your good Lordship beareth towards ler∣ninge & christen religion, and common wealth of your na∣tiue country. As also for the place and dignity, to the which (by the iudgement of al mē) you are most worthely called, cōsidering how it shalbe neither vnprofitable nor vnnedeful for your honor to vnderstand the state of other realmes and cōmon welthes, with the tormoils of the church in the same, which things do here aboundantly and sufficiently appear. And to thend it may be easely knowen, in what place euery matter may be found, I haue set before the beginnyng of e∣uery boke, the some or argumēt conteining the most matters comprised in the same, most humbly beseching your honour to accept this simple translatiō, dedicated to your good Lord ship, and wrytten for the vtility of our common coūtry, into your honorable tuition, that throughe your good Lordships authority, the tonges of euil speakers being repressed & put to silence, all others that are disposed may receiue commodi¦ty and profit by readinge of the same. For doutlesse a more profitable boke than this is, hath not ben setforth in theng∣lish tong now of many yeres. Thus the liuing God preserue and increase you in honor, and so replenish your noble mind with the light and grace of his holy sprite, to perswade and treat with the Quenes highnes moste honorable in such wise, that all thinges ther condescended and agre∣ed vpon, may wholy redownd to the glory of Gods holy name. The Kalendes of August, Anno. 1560.
❧ The. Translator to the Boke. GO forth my painful Boke, Thou art no longer mine: Eche man may on the loke, The shame or praise is thine. But seke thou for no praise, No thanke nor yet reward: Nor eche man for to please, Haue thou no great regard. The labor hath bene mine, The trauell and the paine: Reproches shalbe thine, To beare we must be fain. Yet hath my study bene, To profit others mo: Some men thereby to win, And trust it shalbe so. For as to pleasure many, I haue bene euer glad: Right so to displease any, I wold be loth and sad. But if thou please the best, And such as be of skill: I passe not for the reast, Good men, accept good will. Thou mightst with me remaine, And so eschue all blame, But since thou wouldst so faine Be gon, goe in Gods name.
¶ To the most excellent Prince Augustus, Prince Electour, Duke of Saxon, Lantzgraue of Turing, Marques of Meissen, high Mareschall of thempire, his singuler good Lord, Ihon Sleidane wisheth health. DIuers authors (most excelleut prince) haue setforth vn∣to vs many and sondrye alterations of kingdomes: And God him self wold that we shuld be taught these thin∣ges, as it were with his mouth long before they shoulde come so passe. And of those foure greate Monarchyes of the worlde, of theyr greate aulteration and succession, he taughte vs by the Prophette Daniell. Whose Pro∣phecies for the mooste parte of them, are alreadye made euidente and manifest vnto vs, wyth a certaine know∣ledge most pleasaunt and ful of consolation. And of the alteration and contention that shoulde be about Rely∣gion and Doctrine, both the same prophet hathe spoken before, and S. Paule comminge after him prophecieth also manifestlye. But in what sorte the same shalbe, it is setforth and declared by mo than one or two. Howe be it the alteration that hath chaunced in this our time, is most notable of all others. The Romain Empire, whyche should both be the last, and also much greater then the rest, the prophet said shuld be deuided, and brought from that huge and vnmeasurable great quantity, to a right small thing, as it is now manifest, whiche only consisteth within the limites of Germany, and hathe bene manye times in great hasard and daunger, partly by reason of domesticall euils, and partly throughe the factions of forain enemies. But at the length God hath geuen vs such an Emperour, as a more mighty hath not bene these many hondreth yeres: For vnto him haue descended mooste ample realmes and prouinces: which as they be most ritch and welthy, so also be they mooste commodious for the doing of thinges in sondrye places bothe by sea and lande. And like as he him self excelleth in power all other Emperors of Germanye, that haue bene sence the tyme of Charles the great, so also, by reason of the thinges that haue chaunced in his time and gouern∣ment, is he most famous and notable. But amonges all other thinges, the alteration of Religi∣on hath the chiefest place: whiche with the beginninge of his raigne toke her originall. For at that time, whan the Emperour Maximilian departed out of this present life, that matter had not ben in hand aboue .xiiii. monthes: but what time the Princes electours chose this manne Emperour, in a manner the self same time Luther beinge prouoked came forthe to reason the matter, and disputed openly with Eckius at Lipsia, and than fell men to theyr study on ether side. Wherefore thempire of this man ought to be considered dilligentlye, and waied with the memory of former times. For god hath at euery time stirred vp certain great princes more no table thā the rest, whē ether the state of religion or comon welth shuld be altred, of the which sort was Cirus, Alexander of Macedonie, Iulius Caesar, Constantine, Charlemaigne. Also Ot∣tous of Saxonie, and now he, of whom we speake, Charles the fift. And certenly this alteratiō is of such sort, wherof we now make mention, that no man, that knoweth the thing perfectly, can thinck theof without great maruel and wonder. For the beginning was ful small, and in manner to be contemned, and one man alone susteined the malice & violence of all the world: And yet might he him self haue ben appeased and quieted, in case his aduersaries would haue, taken the condition, which at the beginning he offred them. For he promised to kepe silence, so that they would do the like: But when they refused that, and prescribed him a recantation, and herein perseuered, and he said, that vnlesse they could first shewe his erroure, he coulde not
chaung his opinion, the dissention increased, & the matter was brought before the counsell of thempire, & now is come to such a great maner, as we se. And by what meanes it came so to pas, what thing the Bishops of Rome, what, the vniuersities, what Kings & Princes haue at tempted, how he him self hath pleaded his own cause, before themperour and counsell of prin∣ces, how diuers men of excellent learning, haue ioyned them selues with him, howe the matter again hath ben debated in thassembles of thempire, howe meanes of reconcilement haue bene assaid, how oftentimes the Bishops of Rome haue bene in hand with the Emperour and other Kinges, how oft they haue put them in hope of a reformation and of a counsel, what persecu∣tion and burning ther hath ben, what leagues and conspiracies haue hen made, how this same religiō hath ben setforth, not only in Germany, but in other places also, how diuers haue reuol¦ted, and others remained constant, what tumultes, warres and battels haue risen by this occa∣sion: these I say, so great and sondry things to leaue vnspoken, and not to commit them to me∣mory by wryting, I think ther is no man, but would iudge it blame worthy. Moreouer it is not to be passed ouer in silence, what was the state of the common wealthe, during this mans Empire, by the space now of six and thyrty yeres, what wars he hath kept, what commotions and tumultes haue ben in the meane season, and what things haue chaun∣ced in all realmes and prouinces. Neuerthelesse, thordre that in this argumente shalbe obser∣ued, hereafter shalbe declared. For like as this Emperor raigneth ouer moste large and ample dominions, so hath he had also most strong and puissant enemies. Wherfore the matters haue ben wonderful great, that haue chaunced in this our memorye, and duringe the raigne of thys Emperor. And therfore certen yeres past, diuers worthy and wel lerned men, when they chan∣ced to talke of such matters, began to perswade with me, that whosoeuer had chanced in these dais, especially, touching the cause of Religion, I shuld put in wrytinge: And here vnto dyd exhort me, not for that I could do this best, or for that ther wer not others much more mete for this purpose, but because they saw me delite much in that same kinde of exercise, and therefore supposed, that through acerten natural inclination to the thing, I should not bestow my time and labor amisse: I my self doubtlesse, who knew wel enough, what a daungerous sea I muste enter into, and how that case required an other maner of man, endued with a greater wit, & eloquence: Albeit, I was almost in despair, that I could bring the thing to passe, yet vanqui∣shed by theyr auchority, which had that opinion in me, I determined to assay the thing: And beginning from the time that Luther began to inuey against the selling of pardons, & bryn∣ging the matter still vnto the disputation of Lipsia, appoynted by Duke George, that same, that I hadde so composed, I sente vnto them that were my setters on, at Woormes, where that time was the counsel of thempire, ten yeres past, to read and peruse ouer. They afterward by their letters, & by mouth also did more importune me, that I should procede: but not longe after ther chaunced a sorowfull time to Germany, whan there arose warre, which as it was a great let and hindraunce to study & learning, so did it also disturbe and let all my purpose & doings. For nether could I procede, as I desired, & many times must I tarye, and make delay: but so sone as I was relieued from those euils, & especially those iii. yeares paste. I imploide all my study and trauel herein, and neuer reasted, till I came to thend wished for. And surely this worke is made chiefly and principally concerning Religion, neuerthelesse for obseruynge an order, I thought good also to put in polliticke matters. Now as touching the whole narra∣tion, after what sort that is, euery man by reading shall easely perceiue. Nothing becommeth an history better then truth & sidelity. And doubtlesse I, least any man should finde lacke in me in this behalf, haue traueled diligently: For I haue written nothinge by lighte reportes or by hear say, but I haue compiled my worke of publick records, which I haue gathred vp dilli∣gently, of the verity, wherof no man nodeth to dout. I had also the aid and helpe of a worthye and noble man, lames Sturmie, who hath ben occupied in publicke and waighty affaires these xxx. yeres and mo to his commendation, who of his gentlenes shewinge me frendship, whan I somtime doubted and sticked fast on the rockes and shelues, he as an expert sailer, many times brought me again into the right course & void of dāgers, & the most part of the work, he red ouer at my request, before his sicknesse, wherof he died, & admonished me diligently of suche things as wer nedeful. Here is also much mention made of forein matters, especially french &
Englishe. And therein haue I also folowed the same ordre, and haue put in nothing, but that which was tried & certenly knowne, and the French matters for the most part I my self haue sene, in these .ix. yeres that I dwelt ther. For diuers executions and burnings, whereof is men∣tion made, again many decrees made, and actions commenced by the diuines of Paris, againste certen ministers of the Church, and shortly after articles of religion setforth, & factions of the court, chaunced at the same time, whan I was in those parties, but warlike matters, & suche other like affaires, I do not omit, for that I mighte in no wise do. Yet haue I not professed to to treat of them expresly. For as I said a little before, this laboure was purposed chiefly to the cause of religion. Therfore wold I haue the reader warned, that whan he shal come vnto such places, he loke for no long discourse of those affaires. For nether is it mine intent, & they may read it in other mens works, which haue taken in hand to wryte of that part, so much as here∣in shalbe wanting. An other thing that I said is to be obserued in a history, is fidelity or vp∣rightnes, that is to wit, that nothing be told of affection: which although it some very harde, because it is of few performed, and albeit that perauenture I shall not perswade all men, that I haue ben dilligently ware of the same, yet I require them instantly, that I be not burthened with any suspition before there be cause. This worke of mine, is wholy compiled, as I sayde, of publick recordes, collected with great dilligence, wherof also a great part was setforth in print before, partly in the Latin, partly in the vulgare, some in Italian, and some also in French. And it hath many orations, and demaunds, and answers, and diuers accusations and consuta∣tions also: All these thinges I recite plainly, simply and truely as euerye thinge was done: For neither I adde to any thing of mine own, or speak mine own iudgement, but leaue that to the reader free, neither vse I also any collour of Rhethorick, nor wryte any thing in the hatred or fauor of any man, I frame my stile only, and vse mine own words, that the speache may be al∣waies like and equal, and I bestow eche thing in his place, as they followed in ordre. In those first yeres Bishop Leo and Adrian spake many thinges bitterly againste Luther: from whose wrytinges, as I take away nothing: so likewise do I adde nothing vnto Luthers answers, ney∣ther make I their complainct worsse, nor yet his defence better. The Bishops that succeded thē Clement and Paule, and this man especially, whan Luthers dostrine was now spred abroade farre and neare, making digression from his person, haue inueyed most spitefully against prin¦ces also and cities: Here I follow the same ordre, and throughout the whole volumne kepe the self same trade. Wherfore I beseche the reader, that he lay a part all disliking, and know firste the matter it self, and tender my laboure, which hath surely bene very great, with theyr good wil and fauor. For certenly vnlesse the same causes, which moued me to write at the first, had not eftsones allured me to procede, & deuour all tediousnes, I had long since forsaken my en∣terprise, when ther appeared so great variety & much a do: but my stomack & strength came to me, first, because I supposed, that the same shuld concern the glory of God, who had opened in this our time his omnipotency, & wonderful counsel: And again the comon vtility moued me. For euen in Germany few remember the things past, & forain nations know no certenty at all, & many mennes mindes disposed to dislikinges, thinck farre otherwise of many matters than they ought. Furthermore I had a respect to posterity, if at the leaste wise my wrytinges may abide light and continuaunce: besides this also, many things of the like fort are by others put in wryting, nether truely nor modestly. And ther is one of our natiō, that setforth a boke vi. yeres since at Mentz, moste full of lies and slaunders, trisling & rayling wordes: And in these last yeares past came forth two tomes at Florence, the authour wherof handleth in dede, in most larg and ample wise the history of his time, but wherso euer he speaketh of Germain matters, especially concerning Relegion, he bewraieth the disease of his mind: For the things be vntrue, false, and sclaunderous, what so euer he wryteth, as it may be euidently proued. I omit here so manye Orations, Epistles, Prefaces, whiche are setforthe in rinte, whan they touch these matters, they do handle all things not only of hatred and mallice, but swarue also most far from the truth. For these causes I say, I thought good to proceade, and not to permit that the ordre of actes done should be vntruely set out, ether for this present age, or els for the time to come. For in this kind of thing, what is more vile or les to be suffred, thā that the same things which shuld make the reader more expert, shuld wyth false tales & lies be depraued. Assuredly the Magistrate ought to foresee that nothyng be done herein licentiously. And thys faulte is vsed in oure dayes, that verye manye of those wryters,
seke to pike a thanke, and whilest they induour to please and gratifye one man, they deserue euil of many, and induce mo into errour. Doutlesse I for my part, whiche yet I would shuld be spoken without ostentation, am so affected herein, that if I knew ther wer anye thing in this work vntruely wrytien, I my self wold scrape out the same, and frankly warn the reader, that be should geue no credit to it. But I trust assuredly, that no vntruthe can be obiected to me. For what study, paines, and dilligence I haue taken these certen yeres, that I might know eche thing exactly, both manye good men can witnesse, and as I trust also the thing it self shall de∣clare. Notwithstanding, although I comprise those thinges that haue chaunced in thys Em∣perors gouernement, al be it he be yet aliue, and hath the gouernment, although many thynges mo, yet may fortune in his daies, yet forsomuch as these former actes do chalenge the first, chie∣fest and greatest part vnto them, I wold not that the same should be longer wanting, so many learned men, not only of Germany, but also of foreine nations instantly requiringe me, that I wold gratify them herein. There be comming doubtlesse moste greuous commotions, and won∣derful alterations. Which thing also the holy Scripture dothe nether doubtfullye nor daroklye Prognosticate, and the present state of thinges doth plainly signify, so that such as will applye theyr minde here vnto, shall not want matter to wryte of: but, the same cause that moued me to wryte, that is publicke vtility, the self same perswadeth me nowe also, that some thinges as I haue written, and be comprised in these xxvi. bookes. I shoulde suffer to come abrode into o∣thers mens handes. And this my labor and all my pains taken, I wil dedicate whole vnto you, moosie excelient Prince, whiche are descended of that noble house and familie, whiche fyrsto gaue harborow and refuge to thys Religion, whose father did earnestly imbrace the same, whose brother for the education of youth in true Religion and learning, imploied a wonderful substaunce, whose father in law for the self same cause hath a famous name among kinges. And for so much as you also walke in these theyr fotesteps, to your great commendation, this worke which I hope wil profite many, I trust will be to you also not vnpleasaunt. The liuing God preserue your highnes, safe and healthful. Geuen the .x. Kalends of April, in the yeare of our Lord. 1555.
The first Boke ❧ The firste Booke of  Sleidans Commentaries, concer∣ning the state of Religion, and the common wale, during the reigne of the Emperour, Charles the fyfte. The argument of the fyrst Booke. THe Pardons graunted by Byshop Leo, Luther reproueth by preachyng and wryting of proposicions and Letters, sent to Tharchbishoppe of Ments, the which are fyrst un∣pugned by Frete Tckell and Eckins: and after by Siluester Prier as, & Hogestrate. Upō this the Pope sendeth Cardinal Caietane, taduertise Thēperour Maximilian, & to cite Luther to Rome: but Fridericke Duke of Saxon founde the meanes, that Luther aunswe∣red Caietane at Auspurge. The Cardinal what with threatenynges, and what with thalli∣gations of decrees, mainteyneth thauthoritie and supremacie of the Pope. Luther at his de∣pertynge thence, set by an Appellation. Caietane solliciteth by letters the Duke of Saxon, but in vaine, whiche the Pope perceyuing, publisheth a new remission of synnes by pardons. And to wynne Duke Fridericke, sendeth him a goldē Rose. In the meane tyme dieth Ma∣ximilian, and great suite and meane was made taspire vnto thempire: whiche in fine Char∣les of Austriche atchieued, and word was sent him into Spaine. The golden bulle, & lawes of Thempire are here recited. Erasmus commendeth Luther. And at the same time that the disputacion was at Lipsia, Zwinglius preached at Zuricke, and (as Luther had don) resisteth a per∣doner there one Samson agraye Frere. THE Bishoppe of Rome, Leo, the tenth of that name, a Florentine borne, after the vsurped auethoritie of his predecessours, which he pretēded to haue ouer all Chur∣ches, had sent forth into al realmes, vnder his Bulles of Lead, indulgēces & pardōs, wherein he promysed cleane remissyon of synnes, and euerlastynge saluation, to all suche as would gyue money for the same, for the leuiyng wherof, he sent his Collec∣tours into all Prouinces, who gathered together, and heaped vp great treasures in all places, but speciallye in in Germanie. And affirmed their doynges to be good, bothe in wordes and writyng (which pardons the Papistes call by an olde accustomed terme, indulgences) Grauntyng moreouer for money, licences to eate whitmeat and fleshe, on daies prohibited: The same time was Martin Luther an Augustine Frere, and pro∣fessed diuinitie in the Uniuersitie of Wittemberge, who beynge not a little tickled with the preachinges, & fonde bokes of these collectours, for that he sawe, howe the simple people beleued the thinges to be true, that they bragged of, began to admonishe men to be more ware and cir∣cumspecte, and not to bie their marchaundise so dere: For that the same, which they bestowed vpon such trifles, might be much better emploied
This was in the yeare of our lorde a thousande fiue hondreth and se∣uentene. And to thintent he might woorke the thynge to more effect,  he wrote also to the Archebyshop of Mentz the firste of Nouembre, signifying, both what they taught, and also lamenting that the igno∣raunt Luthers let∣ter to the B. of Mentz. people should be so far abused as to put the whole trust of their saluation in pardons, and to thinke that what wickednes so euer they had committed, it should by them be forgeuen: And that the soules of them that were tormented in Purgatory, so soone as the mony were cast into their boxe, should straight wayes flie vp into heauen, and fele no more payne: he sheweth him how Christ cōmaunded that the Gos∣pell should be taught, and that it is the propre office of a Byshop to see that the people be rightly instructed. Wherfore he putteth him in remē∣braunce of his dutie, and prayeth him that for the authoritie whiche he beareth, he would eyther put those prattelinge pardoners to silence, or els prescribe them a better order in teachinge, lest a further inconue∣nience might growe vpon the same, as doubtles there wil doo, vnlesse they be inhibited. The cause why he wrote vnto him, was that for so muche as he was also Byshop of Maydenburg, the care of al such mat∣ters B. of Maydē∣burgs charge belonged vnto him. And with these letters he sent certen questiōs whiche he had lately set vp at Wittenberg there to be disputed, to the nombre of foure score and fiftene: In the whiche he reasoneth muche of purgatory, of true penaunce, of the dutie of charitie, and of their in∣dulgences Luthers. 95 questions at Wittenberge. and pardōs at large, and inueigheth against their out rage∣ouse preachinges, only of a certen desyre to boulte & trie out the truth. For he prouoked all men to come to that disputation, that hadde anye thinge to saye, and such as could not be there present, he desyred to send their myndes in wrytinge, protesting that he would affirme nothing, but submitte him selfe and the whole matter to the iudgement of holy churche. Neuerthelesse he sayd, how he woulde not admitte Thomas of Aquine, and suche other lyke writers, but so farre foorth as they be Luthers ex∣ception. consonaunt to holy Scripture, and decrees of the auncient fathers. To this the byshop aunswered not a woords. But shortly after Iohn The B. of Mentz clence Tecela Frere Dominick, set vp other conclusions at Franckford, quite contrary to those of Luthers, wherin he extolleth the supremacie of the Ihon Tecell ft. do. concl. at frankford. Byshop of Rome, with the frute of his pardōs and other lyke thinges, in so muche as he compareth him with Peter the Apostle, & the crosse whiche he commaundeth to be set vp in churches, with the crosse that Christ suffered vpon. But where as no man of the cōtrary parte wold repeare to the disputacion at Wittenberge, & the questions were suche as many were destrous to reade: Luther wrote a longe exposition of the same, and sent them first to Hierome, byshop of Braundenburge, and to one Stupice Prouinciall of the Austen Freres, desiring hym to cause them to be sent to the byshop of Rome: And he him self in the mo∣neth
of Iune wrote vnto Leo the tēth, partly complayning of his par∣doners  whiche through their owne auarice abused his auethoritie: And partly purging him selfe, knowing for a suertie that they had com¦playned Luters letters to Pope Leo. on him for the same matter, but affirmyng that they did hym wrong: For he was inforced, by reason of the fonde Sermōs & bokes of the Collectours, to set vp certain questiōs only for ye matter of dispu∣tation, whiche he woulde now more playnly declare: beseching him to geue no credit to sclaunderous reportes: alledging that Duke Frede∣ricke Duke Frede∣ricks wisdom the Prince electour of Saronie, was a man of suche wisdome & honour, that in case suche thinges had been true that his aduersaries reported of him, he would not haue suffered his countrey to beare such an infamie: And that the vniuersitie of Wittenberge was of lyke con∣sideration, and so submitted vnto him both all his workes and his lyfe also, not refusing death if it should seme good vnto him. For whatsoe∣uer should procede from him, he would take as an oracle that flowed from Christe him selfe. Amonges others of Luthers aduersaries. Iohn Eckius wroote a Echins booke against Luth. little booke against him at the same tyme. To the whiche Luther aun∣swereth that he neyther bringeth Scripture for hym, nor any thinge out of the auncient Doctours, but certein dreames of his owne, recei∣ued of scoolemen by an vnallowable euill custome. After Eckius, one Siluester Prierias a freer Dominicke, master of Siluester pri∣ers dialogue. the holy palace (as they terme it) wrote against him a dialoge with the preface to Leo the tenth right stoutelye: saying that he woulde proue whether Luther be so inuincible that he can not be confuted or van∣quished: For if he can answer this, thē wil he set forth greater thinges with moste exacte diligence. Then speaketh he vnto Luther, exhorting him to amende, and before he commeth to his disputation, he propoun∣deth certain Themes, that the Byshop of Rome is head of the whole Silue. priers Themes. churche, and that the churche of Rome is the firste and chiefest of all others, and can not erre in matters of faythe and religion. Neyther that the generall counsell can erre, where the byshop of Roome is pre∣sent. Moreouer that the holy Scripture taketh all his force and au∣thoritie of the churche and byshop of Rome, as of a moste certain rule. And he that beleueth other wyse to be an heretike. This foundation ones layd, he beginneth to debate the matter. Afterward doth Luther Luth. answer to Sil. priers. make answer to ye same boke: And in his preface to this Siluester saith that he wōdreth at his questions rather than vnderstādeth the same. Then takyng of him example, for the defence of his cause, putteth forth also certen themes, but suche as are taken out of holy scripture, wher∣in he sheweth that we ought not to geue credit to euerye doctrine of man, but to way euery thing exactely, and to embrace that thing only, whiche is consonaunt to goddes worde: And none other doctrine to
be receiued, but that which is left vs by the Prophetes and Apostles, Scriptur and choldewriters only to be also wed. although it haue neuer so goodly an apparence: Neuerthelesse thauto∣ritie of those writers whiche were next after them to be allowed, but for the rest to be well ware what they wryte. And as concerning the indulgences, that it is not lawfull for the Collectours to inuente anye newedeuise herein, but to followe in the same the order of the Canon Iudulgences to be vsed af∣ter the Canon lawe. law. After this he obiecteth that he alledgeth no testimony of scriptur, but reciteth only the opinions of Thomas of Aquyne, who treated in a maner of al things, at his pleasure without thauthoritie of scripture. Wherfore he reiecteth both affirming that he doth the same, not onely by the commanndement of saint Paule, but of S. Austen also. Emōgs the Ciuilians it is commonly sayd, that it is not lawfull to pronounce The Ciuiliās vse of citing. any thyng, but after the prescript of the lawe: Much lesse in diuine mat∣ters ought that thing to be suffered that is spokē without the testimo∣ny of scripture. It is S. Paules precept, that suche as be appointed to instruct the people, should be furnished, not with Syllogismes or son∣dry decrees of men, but with holsome and sounde doctrine, lefte vs by godly inspiration. But for so muche as many haue contemned this pre∣cepte great blyndnes hath been induced, and an innumerable sorte of vnprofitable questions hath flowed ouer the worlde. What tyme he hath thus made his waye he commeth to the confutacion, and aboute thende therof sayth, howe he is nothinge affrayed of his manasinge wordes which are set forth for a brauery: For albeit he shuld dye ther∣fore, yet Christe liueth and is immortall, vnto whome all honoure is dewe. And therfore if he list to come to a further trial in this matter, he must fight with stronger weapōs, or els his authour Thomas and he are lyke to goo by the woorse. Againe this Syluester writeth Luther an aunswer, and saythe it deliteth him muche, that he submitteth hym Silut. prier. seconde auns∣wer to Luth. selfe to the iudgemēt of the byshop of Rome: wyshing also that he spake it with his harte vnfainedly. Luther had charged him with ambition and fllatterie, but he purgeth him self therof as muche as he may: And defendeth right stoutly the doctrine of Thomas, affirming it to be in suche sorte receiued & approued by the churche of Rome, that it ought to be preferred aboue all other writinges: And blameth him sore, that hath spoken of so worthy a man so vnreuerently: accomptyng it an ho∣nour to him selfe to be called a Thomiste: Notwithstanding he sayeth howe he hath red other mens woorkes also, whiche shall hereafter ap∣pere. After this preface he setteth forth a little booke: wherin he cōmen∣deth exceadinly the aucthoritie of the byshop of Rome, in so much that he clerely preferreth him before all counselles and decrees, affirminge that all the strength of Scripture dependeth vpon his authoritie. This Thomas comming of a Noble house, gaue him self wholy to learning. And leauing Italy went first to Collyn, and after to Paris,
and proued best learned of al men in his time, wryting diuers workes in the whiche he treated of matters of diuinitie and Philosophie. He was a blacke frere, the disciple of Albertus Magnus. Whan he was Thomas of Aquine. Albertus mag¦nus scollar. dead Iohn byshop of Rome the .xxii. of yt name; made him a sainct; a∣bout fifty yeāres after he lefte his lyfe. He was a great mainteiner of the byshop of Romes authoritie. For he attributed vnto him the supre∣macie ouer all other byshops, kynges, and churches vniuersall with Thomas of Aquine a salt. both Iurisdictions aswell sacred as ciuile: affirming it to be a necessa∣ry thyng vnto saluation, that all men be subiect vnto him, that he hath full authoritie in the churche, and that it appertaineth to him to call Thomas of Aquin geueth authoritie to the Pope. counsell, and to confirme the decrees made there: Moreouer he sayeth howe men may iustlyappeale from any generall counsell. Finallye he ascribeth vnto him all thinges: onely this he excepted that he can not make newe articles of our faith, neither abolishe those whiche are left vs by the handes of the Apostles and auncient fathers. Of iudulgēces and pardons, he wrote very muche also. And in graunting of the same maketh the byshop of Rome a great Prince, he died (as it is saide) in 1274. Thom. of Aq. died. the yeare of our lorde, athousand two hundreth thre score and fortene. And is cōmonly called thangelical doctor, for the subtiltie of his witte. This booke of Syluesters, Luther aunswereth onlye in an Epistle Luth. seconde answer to Sil¦uester prier. to the reader, saying it is so compacte altogether of lyes and terrible blasphemies of Gods holy name that it should appeare that the deuyl himselfe was the aucthour therof: Wherfore if the Byshops and Car∣dinalles be of the same opinion, and that suche doctrine be taughte at Rome the seat of Antechrist. Rome, then is it no longer to be doubted of, but that Rome is the very seate of Antechrist. Then happy is Grece, and happie is the lande of Grece and Bo∣hemes happi∣nes. Boheme, yea fortunate are all those that haue made a diuorcement wt her, and miserable are they that haue to doe with the same. Wherfore vnlesse the bishop will see him punished, and compell him to recante, he Lut. his forsa¦kīg of Rome. protesteth that he wil dissente frō him. And not only forsake the church of Rome, but also to take it from henceforth, as a most filthy synke, and puddell of all wickednes. For there be daylye inuented newe prayses for the Byshop of Rome, suche as the lyke haue not been heard of, for this subtile ende and craftie polycie, that a lawful counsell should take no place: And therfore do his flatterers preferre him aboue al counsels, and affirme that the vnderstanding of all Scripture must be fetched The caus wh ye By. of Ro∣me is extold. at his hande, as of a mooste certen iudge. Wherefore if they holde on their madnes, and with their iuggelinge castes mocke all the worlde after this sorte: other remedy is there noone, but that the ciuile magi∣strate must se them punished: Theues and murtherers, and such other malefactours, are punished with death, but it were a great deale more Princes of ne¦cessitie must reforme Ro. right, that these whiche are muche more hurthfull enemies to the com∣mon wealth should with the common assent and trauell of men be sup∣suppressed.
For the bishop of Rome is in the same state that al other mē The bishop of Rome bounde as other to Gods com∣maundement. be, and is no lesse bounden to the obseruation of Goddes commaunde∣mentes, than is the poorest man liuing. And such as teache otherwyse do the greatest iniury that may be to the diuine maiestie. At the same tyme also Iames Hogestrate a blackfreer, wrote a∣gainst Luther full bitterly, exhorting the Byshop of Rome to fyre and Iames Hoge∣strate wrote a¦gainst Luther sworde: whome Luther aunswering in very fewe wordes reproueth his cruell and bloudy mynde, scoffing merely at the mans ignoraunce, & admonishing him so to procede: for that it is the chiefest way to wyn true fame, what tyme a man is blamed of vnlearned and euil men: but at Byshop Leo his handes he saith, he looketh for better thinges Whi∣lest these matters were thus handled on either parte after the maner of scolemē, Themperour Maximiliā calleth an assemblie at Ausputg, Thassembly at Ausputge by Maximi∣lian. whether also Leo the tenthe sendeth afterwarde his Ambassadour, Thomas Caietane Cardinall. At this assemblie were present all the seuen Princes electours, so called bycause they haue the authoritie to electe and create Themperour. They treated here of warre againste the Turke: For Solyman Emperour of the Turkes, hauing lately sub¦dwed the Sultane, had conquered all Syria and Egipte. Wherfore the Cardinall made an exhortacion, promysing in his maisters name The treaty of warre against the Turke. the treasures of the churthe to be employde vpon this warre. And re∣quired herein the ayde and assistaunce of Maximilian as defendoure of the churche. At this selfe same tyme Leo the tenth created Albart Archebyshop of Mentz Cardinall. And in this assemblie cōmaundeth Caietane to cōsecrate him with the ceremonies and rytes accustomed: Albert archb. of Mentz ma∣be Cardinall. Whiche thing being doone accordingly, Themperour leadeath home the newe Cardinall from the churche, and sendeth him presentes, that is to saye a Princelyke horselitter, wythe horses, and manye ryche and costly hangynges. And the Byshop of Rome gaue him also an hat set with golde, pearle, and precious Iwels, and a swoorde with a gylt skabarde. For the moste part of al the bishoppes in Germany be as wel Ciuile as Ecclesiasticall Magistrates: Howbeit it was thoughte that The cause of his Cardinal∣ship. Leo preferred him to this dignitie, to theude that the church of Rome myght haue a defendour in Germany, suche a oue as was both in no∣bilitie of birth and in authoritie also right famous as the lyke vnto this man could not be founde there. For besydes that he was of the noble house of Brandenburg, in that he was archebyshop of Mentz, he was the chiefest of all the Princes electours, and as it were consull for euer. And albeit that all byshops are bondē to the Byshop of Rome, yet such as are made Cardinalles be muche more bonden. Maximilian being aduertised of the controuersie of Luther, in the Maximilians lettre to Pope Leo cōcerning Luther. moneth of August writeth his letters to the byshop of Roome, signifi∣yng that he hath heard in what sorte Luther hath reasoned many mat∣ters,
and preached also some thinges that seme to be hereticall: And he is the more sory for that he defendeth his doctrine styfly, and hath very many fauorers of his opinion, emonges the whiche there be diuers of hygh estate, he exhorteth hym therfore that he for his hyghe authoritie that he beareth, would abolyshe all suche Idle and vnprofitable que∣stions, and inhibite all sophisticall contencions of wordes, for so much as they that applie their study that way do not a little hurt the christē cōmon weale. Where as their intent is only, that the thing whiche they haue learned, should bee praysed and receyued of all men, alled∣ging that in tyme past there was great diligence shewed in appoyn∣tinge ayt preachers to the intent ye al Sophisticall contention myght be eschewed, howbeit this order by lyttle and lyttle felle into cōtempt, so that it is no maruell that suche as should haue taught others, haue oftentimes erred thē selues: And this to be the cause therof, for somuch as the auncient writers, and interpretours of holy scripture haue now a long tyme been layde a syde, and filled more full of lyes. It maye bee imputed to them also that so muche contention is reysed in these oure daies about matters of learnyng, and this laste daungerouse contro∣uersie now about pardons. Certeinly the weightines of the thinge re∣quireth a remedie betyme, lest the disease runne to farre: for in delaye is daunger. What so euer he shall determine therin, the same wyll he al∣lowe, and see that it shall take place throughout all partes of Them∣pire. There was mencion made before howe Luther and Syluester wroote one against an other. Nowe had he being in office at Rome, so aggrauated Luthers matter, that Leo cited him tappeare at Rome, Luther is ci∣ted to Rome. and that vnder a great penaltie: Afterwardes the .xxiij. day of August he wryteth his letters to Caietane his Ambassadour in Germany, sig∣nifiyng howe he is aduertysed that Luther holdeth certein opinions that be wycked and against the iudgement of the churche of Roome, whiche is the maistres of faith and religion: And that he of a fatherly loue desyrous to represse his rashenes, hath geuen in commaundement to Hierome byshop of Ascula, vnto whome this thing properly apper∣teyneth to somone hym to Rome, that both he might aunswere to mat¦ters that he is charged with, and might also make a declaraciō of his fayth. The byshop of Ascula executed his commaundemēt: But he did not only comme to any amendement, but stubbernly persistinge in his heresy, did set forth muche more pestilent workes than he did before, to the great grief and vexation of his mynde: wherfore let him fynde the meanes, that he may be brought to Auspurge, and herein requiring the ayde of the Emperour and Princes of Germany, & whā he is brought thither that he be apprehēded, and sent to Rome: wherfore if he repent of his owne accorde, and desyre remission of his offence, than let hym be pardoned and restored to the churche, whiche is neuer wont to ex∣clude
a true penitent if not, let him be excommunicated. He commaun¦deth moreouer that all men shall obeye these his letters, and they that shall do otherwyse, if they be ecclesiasticall persones, he confiscateth all their goodes and promotions, and therwith taketh awaye all hope & possibilitie to obtaine any more hereafter: And others that be in ciuile office to be depriued of al honours, offices, and other commodities and finally to want christen buriall. But vnto all those that shall dooe him faithfull seruice herein, his pleasure is they shall haue eyther that com∣mon and ful remission of sinnes, or haue also some rewarde geuen thē. And to this precept he byndeth all men (the Emperour only excepted) but in no wyse wylleth that any other mās fredome or priuilege shuld be of any force herein. The same day also he writeth to Frederick Duke The Popes letters to the duke of Saxō of Saxon, who was the same tyme at Auspurg, howe that emonge o∣ther ornamentes of the house of Sarony, this was euer propre vnto it, greatly to fauour Religion: wherfore (he sayeth) it is not lyke, that any of that noble familie should so farre degenerate from his elders, as to mayntayne any man that would impugne the same: notwithstan∣ding he harde dayly greuous cōplaintes of Martin Luther, who bea∣ryng him selfe highly on his princes fauour, and forgetting both his or¦dre and profession, doth many thinges wickedly against the churche, regarding the authoritie of no mā: and albeit he doubteth not, but that he braggeth of his Princes fauoure falselye, yet he thought it good to wryte vnto him herein and to admonishe him, that being euer mynde∣full of his owne honour and dignitie of his auncestours, he myght es∣chewe not only the crime it selfe, but also the lest suspicion of the same: for (he sayeth) he is well assured that he teacheth manye wicked and pestilent heresies, whiche he and the maister of his palace haue dyly∣gently noted: and that same is verely the cause, why he hath cited hym to appere at Rome, and written to Cardinall Caietane his Ambassa∣dour, what he would haue furthermore donne in the matter, and for so muche as this is a matter of Religion, and doeth appertaine properlye to the churche of Rome to examine euerye mans faythe, he requyreth hym and neuerthelesse chargeth and commaundeth hym that beynge requested here vnto by his Ambassadour, he doe his endeuoure, and brynge to passe that Luther maye bee delyuered into his custodye, wherein he shall bothe dooe GOD hygh seruice, and also the thynge that shall be to hym selfe and to all hys familie ryght honourable. And in case there shall bee founde no faulte in hym. Whan he shall be examined at Roome, he maye retourne home safe and sounde, but in case there bee founde Crime worthie punishemēt, than shal the duke whiche wold no longer suffer such a pestilēt fellow be clere of al blame: And for his own part he was of such clemēcie yt neither wold he oppres
an innococent, nor exclude out of his fauour one that were willyng to amende. Thus sought he all meanes possible to oppresse Luther. The The Popes letters to Ga∣briel veneius. same yeare moreouer he wrote vnto Gabriel, prouinciall of Thaustine fryers, that he should spedely seke the redresse of Martin Luther a fri∣er vnder his iurisdiction, who soweth newe opinions in Germany, & quickly to quenche the flamme newly kyndled, lest in proces of tyme takyng force and strengthe it be paste remedy and so set all on a fyre. For this disease increaseth dayly, neyther is there any thynge so much to be feared as delaye. Therfore he must applye this thynge with all study, labour, deuise and diligence, for so muche as he hathe authoritie ouer hym. Whan Luther perceiued him selfe to be cited to Rome, he laboured muche to haue his matter heard in Germany before some indifferent iudges, and in a place not subiect to iniury. But when he coulde by no meanes bryng it to passe, the vniuersitie of Wittenberge in their let∣ters The vniuersi∣tie of Witten¦berg writeth for Luther. to the byshop of Rome, written the .xxv. of Septembre, gaue hym a maruelouse good reporte both of his lyfe and learnyng. They saye, howe he is cited to Rome for certain questions, howbeit by reason of sickenes and daunger of his lyfe he is notable, they beseche hym to haue none other opinion of him, than of a good man. He propownded certen thinges to dispute of only and not to determine, whiche his ad∣uersaries haue interpreted in the woorse parte, and haue exasperated ye matter: They proteste, howe they wyll admitte nothinge against the churche, and being requested of Luther, they coulde not but geue hym this testimony, to the whiche they beseche him to geue credit. With these letters they sende others also to Charles Meltice a Germaine, and Chamberlaine to byshop Leo, vnto whome they declare how Lu¦ther without any of his desertes was brought into great hatred with the byshop, in so muche as being cited to Rome, he could not yet fynde so muche fauour that his cause might be herde in Germany. They saye howe they be so affected not only toward religion, but also towardes the holy churche of Rome, that in case there were any cryme or wicked errour in Luther, they would not beare with him, but he is a man of suche learnyng and honestie of lyfe, and hath so well deserued of them & of the whole vniuersitie, that they can not faile him in this case. Ney∣ther would Duke Frederick being so faithful and wittie a Prince, vn¦lesse he iudged him to be an honest mā, suffer him so long vnpunyshed. Wherfore they require him, that through the fauour and estimacion yt he hath with the byshop, he would bryng to passe, that some indifferēt iudges might be appointed him not at Rome, but in Germany: And they doubte not but that he will declare him selfe lyke a Christen man and a good diuine, & that he hath not rashely or without cause sought the occasion of strife. And this they require him the more earnestly for
so muche as they haue conceiued a greater hope of him, that he whiche is a Germain him selfe wil naturally for the coūtrie sake, in so honest a matter, be helpfull to an other Germaine that is in a maner oppressed and in daunger of his lyfe. Besydes this intercession of his frendes, Duke Fredericke deuised so with the Cardinall at Auspurge that Lu∣ther should not nede to trauayle to Rome, but should come and pleed Luther is cal∣led to Auspurg his cause before Caietane there. Who comming thether in the begyn∣nyng of October, remayned there thre dayes before he spake with the Cardinall. For after Duke Friderick was gone homewarde, he was aduised by his frendes not to come in the Cardinalles fyght before the Emperour Maximilian had graunted him a saufe conduicte, whiche obtayned, he was gently receyued of the Cardinal, who sayd, that he would not contende with him in disputacion, but frendly appease the controuersy. And according to the Byshops of Roomes commaunde∣mente he propoundeth two thinges: first that he should come to amē∣dement, and reuoke suche errours as he had published: secondlye that from henceforth he abstayne from suche wrytinges as disturbe the trā quillitie of the churche: Hereunto doeth Luther make aunswer, that he is priuie to no errour, but if he hath erred in any thyng, he desyreth His conferens with Cardi∣nal Caietane. it maye be shewed him wherein: There the Cardinall chargeth hym that he affirmeth in his questions, howe the merites of oure sauioure Christe, consiste not in the treasures of pardons, whiche sentence (saith he) is against the decree of Clemēt the syxte: Moreouer that vnto those that come to receiue the Sacramēt, faith should be necessary, wherby they myght be assured that their synnes were forgeuen, neyther is this true (sayeth the Cardinall.) Luther aunswered, how he had read that decree of the Byshop, & shewed what his mynde is touching the same, and where as mention was made of Thomas of Aquine, he affirmeth that the authoritie of Scripture is to be preferred farre aboue hym: Than the Cardinall extolling the Byshop of Romes authoritie, prefer∣reth him aboue all Scriptures and counselles, recityng howe the coū∣sell whiche had determined the contrary was abrogated, he condem∣neth also Gerson of Paris, and the fauourers of his opinion. Contrari∣wyse Luther denieth the authoritie of the byshop to be aboue the coū∣sell, alledging emonges others the diuines of Paris to be of his opiniō. After long disputacion, where as they could not agree, Luther asketh some deliberation: The next day he retourneth. And in the presence of the Secretary and certain other witnesses, and foure also of the Em∣perours counsell, he protesteth that he beareth all dew reuerence to the holy churche of Rome: And if he haue spoken any thyng against the sa∣me, he wyll not haue it ratified: Howbeit for as much as he is admoni∣shed and commaundeth to forsake his errours, and to abstayne from henceforth, he supposeth that he hath spoken nothing that swarueth ei∣ther
from holy Scripture, or the opinions of the auncient fathers, the decrees of the byshoppes, or also from ryght reason. Yet will he not de¦nye but that he may erre and be disceiued, for so may euery man: And therfore he committeth the hearing to the lawfull and holy churche, re∣ferryng the whole matter to the iudgement of the same: And not that only, but he wil also rendre a reason of his doctrine in any place: If this may not suffise, he wil make aunswere in wryting to such argumentes as may be brought against him, and will not refuse to stande in iudge∣ment herein of the vniuersities of Germany and Paris. The Cardinal charged him againe, as he had done the daye before, with the decree of Clement, as though it made muche for him: In fine he permitteth hym to deliuer vp a wryting, theffect wherof was this. What time he set vp his questions, and after wrote an exposition of the same had red the decree of Clement before, but his mynde was not therewith satisfied: For although it be established that the decrees of the Byshop of Rome should be aswell receiued as the voyce of Peter the Apostle: Yet ought this so to be taken, in as muche as thei be consonaunt to holy scripture, and agreable to the decrees of the auncient fathers. There is no doubt but the voyce of Peter is sacred and holy, yet was he soore rebuked of Paule, neyther coulde his doctrine be receiued tofore the consente of the Churche (whiche was than at Hierusalem) hadde establyshed it: The wordes of all men may be hearde, but all thinges must be refer∣red to the wordes of Christ, who only can not be disceaued: That de∣crees is against sondrye places of Scripture, and that was the cause whiche he at that tyme brought in the same question, and afterwarde was not affraied to make an exposition to the same. Euer synce that tyme he was fully resolued to stire vp no further disputation concer∣nyng that matter, but rather to heare the opinion of others: but now, albeit he had leuer be instructed of others, especially of the Byshop of Roome. Yet for as muche as he is constrained of necessitie to defende his owne, he wyl proue and do the best he can to make the same decree and his questions to accorde. Whan he had made this preface before him, he goeth to the matter if selfe, and by a certain expositiō made, she∣weth howe that decree maketh for his purpose, but yet so as he would neither that the Bishoppes authoritie, nor his owne estimation should be therby infringed. After this he commeth to the seconde parte of hys accusation, and alledging for his purpose, many places of Scripture, declareth playnly, howe it is faith that maketh vs iust before GOD. Wherfore he desyreth him to deale fauourably with him, & shewe hym his errour. For the force of thinges whiche he had alledged out of the scriptures, was so muche, that he beleueth them to be sufficiently groū∣ded vpon their owne truthe, whiche he can not forsake, for so much as we ought rather to obey God then mē. And therfore he requireth that
may be released of the harde burthen of recantynge, for he came not in to this contencion vpon any arrogancie or desyre of vayn glorie: Yea he would wyshe for nothing more than that the truthe might be ope∣ned, and that any man els myght bryng that were moore learned and godly: her of he beseched him, yt he may not be cōpelled to hurt his own conscience. The Cardinall receiued this wryting offered vnto him by Luther, and whan he had red it, estemed it lyghtly: yet he promysed to sende it to the Byshop of Rome. Than he vrged him muche to recant, And vnlesse he so doe, he threateneth him with the punishment appoin¦ted already by the byshop: And also commaundeth him out of his sight and vnlesse he amende his maners, to come no more in his presence. After this threatening, whiche was the .xvij. day of Octobre, Luther wrote vnto him gentle letters ful of good wil and dutie. For Caietane after he had thus chidden Luther, & sent him away, wrought secretly with Iohn Stupice Prouincial of the Augustine freers, that he shuld induce him to recant of his own accorde. Wherfore Luther in the same letters maketh mention what Stupice did with him: verely omitting nothing that becōmeth a faithfull and frendly man to dooe: he geueth him thankes for his beneuolence towardes him whiche he perceiueth well by the talke of Stupicious, wherby doubtles he was much com∣forted, so that nowe he would gratifie no man more rather than hym: he graunteth that he was ouer quicke, and had to little regarde to the Byshop of Rome his authoritie: Howe be it the same is to be imputed to the importunitie of the Collectours: he desyreth to be forgeuen this fault, and promyseth to be more modeste hereafter, and affirmeth also that he wyll in his sermons satisfie the Byshops request And as cōcer∣ning indulgences he wil speake no more therof, so that his aduersaries may be lykewyse commaunded to silence. How be it to reuoke his sen∣tence already taught and defended, he can not with a safe conseience, tyll suche tyme as by the testimonies of holy scripture he be cōdemned of errour. He therfore requyreth that the hearing of the matter may be referred to the Byshop of Rome: for there is nothing ran dooe hym more pleasure than to heare the voyce of the churche. Whan the Car∣dinall would make none aunswere to these letters, and had manased him in wordes, through the counsell of his frendes, he departed thence two dayes after leauing behind him an Appellation to be openlye set Luther appe∣leth. vp about the tyme of his departure. And or euer he went, he wrote a∣gayne to the Cardinall: that he hath done what he was able, howe he came on foote being sickly a longe iournaye to Auspurg, to the intent he might declare his dutie towardes the Byshop of Rome: And nowe hauing litle monye left, and being lothe to be longer chargeable to the house of the white freres (his host) he is dryuen to retourne, and the ra¦ther for that he can not abyde his sight, and hath forboden him his pre∣sens.
Wherefore all his freindes in a maner had counsailed him, to ap∣peale from him to the Bishoppe him selfe, whiche he woulde not haue done, but by the aduise of his freindes, And chifely because that he sup∣poseth that Duke Friderick had also rather that some appellatiō were made, than that any thinge should be rashely or vnaduisedly reuoked. The appellation was made muche after this sort. How that same que∣stion touching Indulgences, hath bene diuersely handled of many, but neuer throughly determined: And that in suche doubtefull questions, it hath bene alwayes lawfull, namely for Diuines, to reason: which thing also he did at the selfe same time, whan certein clamorous Pardoners, did not onely write and teache rashely and vncircumspectlye, but also polled the people exceadingly, and yet did he this not to affirme anye thinge, but to trie out the trueth: he committed also the whole contro∣uersie to the iudgemente of learned men, and euen to the Bishoppe of Rome, but his Pardonars haue inuented such sclaunders against him, and haue complayned so sore to the Byshoppe, and brought the matter to suche passe at the last, that the matter was committed to the Bishop of Ascula & Syluester Prierias: by whō he was cited to Rome: but for so much as both these wer suspected, the one of thē also vnfit to be iudge in such a matter: Moreouer, if he shold haue gone to Rome no mā dou∣ted but he shold haue ben in great daūger of his lif: And last for that he was cōmaūded by his prince to remain at home: for these causes, & also for such feare as may come vpō the most cōstant mā liuing, he had desy∣red duke Friderick, to bring to passe, yt the hearyng of the matter might be referred to some skilful and fitte men in Germany, in a place not sus∣pected, nor subiect to iniurie. Wherfore the Bishop of Rome hath com∣mitted ye whole matter to his Ambassador Cardinal Caietane, whiche doubtles was done at the instaunce of his aduersaries, whiche knewe alreadye the mynde and wyll of the Cardinall. And all thoughe he myghte (not wythoute iuste cause) be suspected: yet dyd he obey, but the Cardinall by and by at the fyrste metynge commaunded him, to reuoke his workes: whereunto he aunswered, that he woulde iustifye that, that he had done, eyther in present disputation, or by writinge. And yet would submit the whole matter not onely to the vniuersities, but also to the iudgement of the churche of Rome: But he, with al these thynges beynge nothing satisfied, commaunded him styll to recante. And where he coulde not bringe on the same, he threatened with gre∣uous punishment bothe him and others also, that were of his opinion. Therfore where as he findeth him selfe sore greued with suche preiudi∣ces, he doeth appeale from the Byshoppe of Rome not well infourmed in this matter, to the Bishop yt shal be better instructed in the same. And this he protesteth openlye. Furthermore that same decree of Clement is to be founde in that parte of the Cannon lawe, that is called extra∣uagaunte.
There Clemente appoynteth the yere of Iubile, which Bo∣niface the eight had ordained euery hundreth yeare, to be nowe euerye fiftithe yeare, and speakinge of the benefite of our sauioure Christe, he The wel∣spring of Par∣dons. sayeth, howe that one droppe of Christes bloud had bene sufficient to haue redemed all man kynde, wherefore the ouerplus he hathe left as a treasure wyth Peter and his successours to dyspose and distribute vpon penitente personnes that confesse theyr synnes lyke good Ste∣wardes, and so to releue them from Temporall punisshemente dewe vnto them for theyr synnes. Moreouer and besyde, the merittes of the Uirgin Marie, and of all Sainctes, belonge vnto thys place, (saieth he) so that the matter and power of remyttynge synnes is vn∣measurable. Wherefore vpon this decree Caietaine groundeth the au∣thoritie of pardons. But Luther sayth howe that there was nothyng committed to Peter and hys successours besydes the keyes and mini∣stration of the worde, wherein Christ commaundeth that through the trust in him the remissiō of sinnes shold be shewed to the beleuers: And this to be the true sence & meanyng of Scripture. And if the decree of Clement meane thus, he can be content: otherwise he can not alow the same. And that whiche is spoken moreouer of the merites of Saintes, is wholy agaynst the holy Scriptures. For men what soeuer they be can not onely not do more than they oughte, but also not so muche as they are bounden, neither are they saued by their owne merites, but by the sole and mere mercy of God: for all men must pray dayly, that God the father will forgeue vs our offences, and that he stand not in iudge∣ment agaynst vs lest we be damned. Touchynge that whiche the Car∣dinall inferreth for the authoritie of the Byshoppe of Rome, thus stan∣deth the case. It was enacted in the fourth and fifte syttyng of the coū∣sell of Constaunce, that the Bishop of Rome him selfe should obey the decrees of the Synode. The same was afterwarde established and re∣peted The pope vn∣der the Coun. in the seuententh and eyghtenth syttting of the Counsel of Basil. But wheras Eugenius the fourth would not come to the Counsell at Basill, although he were oftentimes warned and cited thither, he pro∣nounced the same to be frustrate, and called an other at Farrare, whi∣ther came Iohn Paleologe the last Emperour of Grece saue one, and with him Iosippe the Patriarche of Constantinople, and a numbre of Bishoppes in the yeare of our Lord M.CCCC.xxxvij. And from Far∣rare they remoued to Florence where as by the consent of the Grekes, it was decreed amonges other thinges that the church of Rome should haue the supremacie, & yt the bishop of Rome was the successor of Peter, the prince of thapostels, & the trew vicar of Christ, the head of ye whole church, ye father, & doctor of al christiās, & that to him was cōmitted by Christ the ful power to fede & gouerne the church vniuersal. This is the
decree whereby Caietanus woulde preferre the Bishoppe of Rome be∣fore, and aboue all generall Counsels. For syxe yeares before, whan he was yet no Cardinall but maister of the blacke Frieres, he made an Oration in the seconde syttynge of the Counsell Laterane, wherof we shall speake hereafter, and inueiyng muche agaynste certeyne Cardi∣nalles that had forsaken the Bishop of Rome, he taunteth by the waie the Counselles of Costauntz and Basil, for that the fathers at the same tune toke to them selues aucthoritie ouer the Byshoppes. Wherefore (saieth he, it was wel done of Eugenius, that he suppressed that factiō, and suffered not his aucthoritie to be diminished. This oration did Iu∣lius the seconde (in whose fauoure these thynges were spoken) com∣maunde to be recorded. And Caietane was made Cardinall by Leo Gerson of Paris. the tenth. Gerson of whom we spake, was a Diuine of Paris right fa∣mouse, and wrote diuers worckes: he was presente at the Counsell of Constans, and in bookes written he commendeth hyghely the decree whereby it is agreed that the Byshoppe of Rome should be subiecte to the Counsell. And sayeth how the thing is worthie to be written in all Churches and publike places, for a perpetuall memorye. For he saieth they be pestilent Flatterers whiche brynge thys Tyrranny into the Churche, as thoughe the Bishoppe of Rome ought neither to obey the Counsel, nor be iudged by the same, as though the Counsell should take all his force and aucthoritie of him, as thoughe it coulde not be called, but at his pleasure, as though he were bounden to the obseruation of no lawes, nor none accompt myght be taken of his doynges: certeinly these monstruous sayinges muste be vtterly reiected which are against all lawes equitie and reason. For all the aucthoritie of the Churche de∣pendeth of the generall counsell, and it is lawefull to appeale from the pope vnto it: and those which inquire whether the Byshop of Rome or the Churche be greater, make as wise a question as if they should aske whether the part be more, or the whole, for it aperteineth to the coūsel, to constitute, to iudge, and to depose the Byshop of Rome, as lately it was declared at Constaunce, for where as some semed to doubte in Pope Iohn is deposed. the matter, and attributed ouermuche to the Byshoppe, this question was there determined, before Iohn the three and twentith was depo∣sed from his Seate. These and many other thinges writeth Gerson to to the same effecte. And therefore is he nowe reiected of Caietane. He died in the yere of oure Lorde .M.CCCC.xxix. And the vniuersitie of Paris holdeth the same opiniō, and includeth the vnmesurable vsur∣pation of the Romishe Byshoppes, as it were wyth in these boundes: and but a fewe monthes before that Luther wrote of Indulgences, the same Uniuersite appealed from Leo the tenthe for abolyshyng of a law whych was very profitable for studentes in Fraunce, and opened the waye to promotion.
After Luthers departure from Aspurge, the Cardinall writeth let∣ters to ye Duke of Saxonie the fiue & twentye daye of October, signi∣fiynge how Luther in dede came to Auspurge, but spake not with him Caietan wri∣teth to ye duke of Saxonie. till he had obteined themperours safeconduit He marueileth greatlye that so little credit is geuen to him. After much treaty aboute the mat∣ter, he, of a certaine fatherly loue admonished Luther to amende. And albeit he waxed more stubberue, yet did he deuise with Stupice and others, a waye of reconcilemente: And that in suche forte, as ney∣ther the Churche of Rome shoulde lose her dignitie, nor he his estima∣tion. And wheras there was a good foundation of this thing already laid, they went preuely away, first Stupice and after Luther, whiche chaunced muche contrary to his expectation. Luther pretendeth that he treateth of these matters onlye by the waye of reasonynge and of disputation, but in his sermons to the people he affirmeth all thynges whiche maye in no wise bee permitted: for so muche as hys Doctrine bothe swarueth from the churche of Rome, and is also verye parni∣cious: as it is certainlye to be proued. Wherefore he dothe admonishe him to regarde his owne honour, and his conscience, and either to sēd Luther to Rome, or els to banishe him his countrye. For it can not be that so pestilent a thinge shoulde longe continue: neyther is there anye doubt but they wil procede in iudgement againste him at Rome, and that he hath accordinge to his duetie signified to the bishop the whole matter and the clokynge of the same. He prayeth hym therefore to geue no credit vnto suche as commended Luthers doinges, neither to suffer so greate an euill to spot and blemishe that noble house of Saxo∣nie, like as he had oftentimes promised. To the whiche Epistle exhibi∣ted The dukes letters to the Cardinall. the ninetene daye of Nouembre, Duke Fredericke maketh aun∣swere the eighte daye of Decembre, that he promised to sende Luther to Auspurge, whiche beinge perfourmed, they can require no more of him, And that he promised him likewise, to let him frendly departe. And nowe that he woulde dryue hym to recante before hys matter were hearde, he can not a lyttle maruell. For there were dyuerse well learned men aswell in other partes as in his Countrye, whyche dyd not condemyne his Doctrine: And suche as were hys aduersa∣ries, were blyneded wyth Auarice, and corrupted wyth filthye lu∣cre: but in case hys erroure hadde bene detected, than woulde he whi∣che seeketh bothe the glorye of God, and the safetye of hys owne con∣science, haue done all readye herein the duetye of a Christen Prynce. And therefore where he wryteth that processe shall passe againste the sayde Luther at Rome, that is beyonde all hys expectation: And when he desyreth moreouer, that eyther he shoulde be sente to Rome or elles into exile, it is not lawfull for hym so to do: Firste, because he is not as yet detected of Heresye. Secondely, for because that the same
shoulde be a greate losse to the Uniuersitie of Wittemberge, whiche he had lately founded, whereof Luther was a certeine lyghte, and an ornament. Unto whome he sent his letters, that he myght reade them. And he offereth him selfe (as before) to be readye to dispute the mat∣ter in anye indifferente place, and to be iudged by anye indifferente hearers, or elles to aunswere the matter in wrytynge: Whiche re∣quest, because it is reasonable, and for so muche as he wyll defende none errour wyllyngly, he thynketh it meete to be graunted him, that at the length it maye appeare, wherefore he shoulde be accompted an Heretike, and what he him selfe myghte chieflye folowe. For lyke as he wyll maynteine no errour willyngly, and as he woulde be verye lothe to swarue from the Church of Rome: euen so can he not condemne him for an Heretike tofore he be detected of errour. Nowe Luther who had sene the Cardinales letters, (as before is sayed) wrote againe to hys Prince immediatlye that where as he wente not to Caietaine before he had obtayned the Emperours saufeconduit, it was done by the ad∣uise of his freindes: And that the Cardinall would haue had him to re∣cante suche thynges as he had wrytten touchynge Pardons and faythe to be necessarye in the Sacramentes: for the fyrste he dyd not muche passe: but to denye the other, wherein consisteth the effecte of our saluatiō, he might in no wise cōsēt: After he declareth what places of scripture the Papistes do depraue and wraste into a wronge sense: he reciteth also what was done euery day, and howe at the length the Cardinall began to threaten him: vndoubtedly he wisheth for nothing more, than that it might be shewed him wherein he erreth. But in case they at Rome shall refuse to take so muche paine for so poore a man as he is, at the least wise let them write hereof to the Duke him selfe or to Themperor, or to some great Bishoppe of Germanye: or elles appoynt somwhere a free disputation: whiche thinges all they haue denyed him hitherto. And if they will thus perseuer, than is it easye to be iudged, whether the faulte be in him: or in them. And where they exhorte him to crueltie, he oughte not to be perswaded by their woordes. For they that will seme to note errours, might muche more easely sende them in writyng into Germany, thā he to his great charges and present daun∣ger of his life, trauaile to Rome, there to vnderstande his errours. Fi∣nally wheras he boasteth, that iudgement shall passe againste him at Rome, vnlesse he eyther come thither or be exiled, he refuseth not to be an exile: although he knoweth full well, that he can be in no place safe, hauynge so many aduersaries liynge in waite for hym: Moreouer it should be great griefe vnto him, that any man shoulde for his sake in∣curre any daunger. Wherefore lest they should attempte any thing, he will departe out of the limittes of the whole countrey, whither soeuer
it shall please God to leade him: Wherfore he geueth him thankes, and prayeth for his prosperous health: And reioyseth to him self that it hath pleased God, that he should suffer some thinge for the glorie of Christes name. Thē dyd the Uniuersitie of Wittenberge in the moneth of No∣uembre The Uniuer¦sitie of Wit∣tenberge wri∣teth for Lut. write vnto the Duke theyr fauourable letters in Luthers be∣halfe. Nowe they vnderstode by Luther (of Cardinall Caietanes let∣ters) bothe what his request was, and also what offer Luther made him at Auspurge: where Luther therefore requireth that his errour maye be shewed him, and submitteth him selfe to the holy Churche of Rome: They beseche him, that he will see to it, that they do him no o∣pen wronge, but shewe him if he be in erroure, the way, oute of holye Scripture. He him selfe hopeth well in the gentlenesse of Bishop Leo, but he feareth lest his aduersaries so flatter him, that they will abuse him and the name of the Churche. For albeit the Duke did not accom∣plishe the Papistes requestes, but semed rather to defende Luther, as tofore it maye appeare: yet had he neuer read any of hys woorkes nor as yet hearde him preache, as he him selfe witnesseth in letters writ∣ten at Auspurge to Raphell Riare a Cardinall, who for olde acquain∣taunce had frindely admonished him, that he shold not take vpon him the defence of Luther. Whilest these thinges were in doinge, Leo, fea∣ringe some alteration, establissheth his Indulgences with a newe de∣cree, New pardōn sayinge that this is the doctrine of the Romaine Churche, which is the maistres of all others, that the Bishoppe of Rome, the Succes∣sour of Peter, and Christes Uicare, hath authoritie to graunte this so great a benefite, in suche sorte as they shall profit, not onely the quicke, but also the deade in Purgatorie. And this doctrine muste all men re∣ceyue and beleue, vnlesse they will be sequestred from the Felowshippe of holy churche. This decree he sent to Caietane, that it mighte be pu∣blished vnto all men: who folowyng his commaundement, publisshed the thinge at Lintz a towne in Austriche by the Riuer of Danubye or Tonoware, and in decembre sendeth out copies to the Byshoppes of Germany, commaunding them in Leo his name, vnder a great penal∣tie, that they should immediatly set it foorth euery man in his Dioces, and commaunded it to be reuerently kept and obserued. But Luther perceiuing by the Cardinals letters, that sentence shoulde be geuen a∣gainst Luther appea¦leth from the Pope to the Counsell. him at Rome, putteth vp an newe appellation the .xxviij. day of Nouembre, wherin was conteined that he would not diminishe thau∣thoritie of the Bishoppes of Rome, thinking rightly muche lesse dissent from the Churche: notwithstandyng for so muche as the Byshoppe is in the same state that other mortall men be in, it maye be that he maye erre and offende, neither ought this to be attributed vnto him, that he alone cannot erre nor be disceiued. He proueth this by the exemple of Peter, who, for that he erred in sounde doctrine, was sharpely & open∣lye
rebuked of S. Paule: But and if the aucthoritie and riches of the Bishoppe of Rome be so great, that he may commaunde and do what he liste, and careth for no man, than suche as thinke they haue wronge at his hande, haue onely one remedie lefte them, that is to appeale. Af∣ter he reciteth howe he was inforsed throughe the ouer muche asperi∣tie of Cardinall Caietane, to appeale to the Bishop of Rome, in whose humanitie he had thought to haue founde some fauoure, for asmuch as both he offered most reasonable cōditions and promised to do al thin∣ges (the errour beyng taken away.) But nowe sins that this Appella∣tion is condemned, the offers dispised, lookynge for no more helpe nor health at the Bishoppes hande, as he might learne by the Cardinalles letters written to the Duke of Saxonie, beynge broughte thorow ex∣treme necessitie, he appealeth from the Bishoppe of Rome to the nexte general Coūsell, which by al meanes ought to be preferred before him. After this the Bishop of Rome sendeth Charles Meltice his Cham∣berlaine The Pope sendeth a gol∣den Rose to the duke of Saxonie. into Germanye, to presente Duke Fridericke with a golden Roose, which the Bishoppe yearely is wonte to consecrate, with many Ceremonies, and great pompe and solemnitie. And after as a token of singular freindship to geue it vnto some mā. He wrot also to Degenart Phesfinger a noble man of the Dukes counsell, praiyng him also that he woulde further his suite to the Duke his maister, that Luther (the childe of Sathan) might be punished, that the noble house of Saxonie might not thorowe him be blemished. And to the same effecte also he wrote to George Spalatine, whom the better to perswade, he said he was wholy geuen to plucke vp euillwedes out of Christes felde. And after the same sorte, wrote his vice Chauncelour also to degenart, desy∣ring him to moue Duke Fridericke to the imitation of his auncestors, that he commit nothing vnworthy their famouse memory. Whā Meltice was come into Saxonie, and had exhibited his Rose, he folowed his suite right stoutly. Whiche thynge once knowen, Lu∣ther  the thirde day of Marche writeth to the Bishop of Rome letters full of submission, wherin he declareth howe greuously he is complai∣ned vpon vnto the Duke, whose displeasure is no smal grief vnto him: besydes that he is stil called vpon to recāte, which if it might be for the honoure and dignitie of the Churche of Rome, he will not refuse: But since that in Germany therbe many wittie & wel lerned men, that are hable to iudge of the controuersie, it should be rather a blotte and hin∣deraunce to the Churche of Rome, than anye furtheraunce or dignitie, for he hath done no iniurie therunto. But those Collectours and Par∣doners who for couetousnes vttered shamefull thynges to the people, haue complained, and accused him without deserte, for he beareth such an affection towardes him, and the Churche of Rome, that he will at∣tempt nothinge againste it: And the power thereof to be so great, that
Christ onely excepted, there is nothinge in this worlde more excellent: He besecheth him, not to credite his enemies: And of Pardons he wyll make no further mention, so that hys aduersaries maye be lykewyse commaunded to kepe silence: He wyll also admonishe the people in his Sermons, to thinke well of the Churche of Rome, that they do not ascribe vnto it the auarice of others, nor yet folowe his example, who, thorowe the Impudencie of his aduersaries was enforced to treate it vnreuerently: briefely to do all thinges for a quietnes, so that no er∣rour or false parswasion remayne in the mindes of men. Before Meltitius came into Germany, Themperour Maximilian The death of Maximilian. was departed out of this life in Austriche, the vij. daye of Januarye. That time wer Princes Electours, Albert of Mentz, Herman of Col∣lon, Rycharde of Treuers, Archebyshoppes: Lewes the Palsegraue, Fridericke duke of Saxonie, Joachin Marques of Brandenburge: the kingdome of Boheme had Lewes kinge of Hungry. These beynge called to an assemblie by the Archebyshop of Mentz after the custome of the Empire, in the month of June, mette at Franckefourt, a towne by the Ryuer of Moene, all, except the kinge of Boheme, who sent thi∣ther his depute Ladislaus Sterneberge. The Archebyshop of Mentz beginneth an oratiō, who speakyng much of the weightie importaunce of the thing, exhorteth them vnto concord, declaryng by many exāples, what an heape of euilles the dissention of the Princes Electours had brought into Germany within their fathers memorye: And that they should nowe be all of one mynde and consent, it is so muche the more requisite, for that the greater daunger hāgeth ouer them by the Turke and others, which seke the spoyle of Germanye. Two did aspire to the dignitie of thempire, Charles Archeduke of Austriche who had three yeres before succeded Ferdinando kinge of Spaine, his graundfather on his mothers side: And Fraunces the Frenche kynge, whiche foure yeares past had vanquisshed the Heluetians at Marignane, and pos∣sessed the Dukedome of Millan. And the kynge of Spaines Ambas∣sadoures were comen alreadye to Mentz, whiche is fyue miles from Franckefurt: And the Frenche Ambassadours staied at confluence, a Towne of the Archebishoppes of Treuers, where the Rhine and Mo∣selle mete. From whence either partie by letters and messagers com∣mended eche their prince to the Electours with the beste reasons they had to perswade: Especially the Frenche mē who perceiued their cause to be lesse fauoured, for that they differed frō the Germans in lāguage, lawes, and maners. They sente therefore to the Heluetians, praiynge them to further the matter to the Princes, who notwithstandyng dyd cleane contrarye, exhortyng them not to chose him but some one prince of Germany. And the Swises also wrote to Leo the tenthe, praiynge him that for asmuche as it was hys parte to inueste and confirme the
Emperour beyng once chosen, he woulde se that it should not be geuen to any foreine Prince. And he aunswered that he heard say there was one laboured for it, that might not haue it by the lawe: for the kynges of Naples are tributaries to the Bishoppe of Rome, and haue promy∣sed their faith, not to couet the Empire, but to be content with the one or the other: and that he hath admonished the princes hereof alreadye. He ment in this tale Charles of Austriche: for he fauoured more the Frenche kynge euer syns he subdewed the Heluetians, and led awaye Maximilian Sfortia Duke of Millan captife into Fraunce, whiche was the yere of our Lorde .M.D.xv. aboute the Ides of Septembre, The swisses banquished. with whome in Decembre folowinge he mette at Bonony, and there made a perfecte league of amitie with him. Touching the kingdome of Naples, thus it standeth. What time Manfredus the Bastarde sonne of the Emperour Fridericke the seconde made warre agaynste the Churche of Rome, Clement the fourthe Byshoppe of that name in the yeare of oure Lorde M.CCCCC.xv. to thentent to represse hym, did that, whiche his predecessor Urban the fourth was aboute to doo: And sent for Charles the Erle of Gaunte & of the Prouince in Fraunce Kinges of Naples paye tribute to Rome. into Italy, and made him kynge of Sicilie and of Naples, yet vnder this condition, fyrst, that for suche a benefite receiued, he should pay ye∣rely to the churche of Rome fortie thousand Ducates: Moreouer that he shoulde at no time sewe to be Emperour, nor yet take it vpon him beynge offered freely. When the Princes were comen to consulte, the Archebishoppe (after he had talked seuerally with Fridericke Duke of An oration of the Archeby∣shop of Mēiz. Saxonie, whose Authoritie was verye greate) begynneth the matter, whiche, he saieth is diuided into three questions. Whether that Fraun∣ces the Frenche kyng, or Charles the king of Spaine, or els some Ger∣mane be chosen Emperour. Touchinge the French kynge (saieth he) I suppose we are prohibited both by our lawes and our othe also, wher∣by it is prouided that the dignitie of the Empire should not be aliena∣ted to straungers: And I thinke there is no man that doubteth but that he is a foreine prince: And albeit that were no let, yet were it not for the commune weale. For he seketh all meanes to enlarge his king∣dome, he hath ioyned to it Millan, he will attempte the same in Ger∣many: he will warre vpon Charles, whome he hateth: yea and hathe proclamed it already, Germanye shall be tormoiled with vprores, and we ought to forese, that we styrre vp no Ciuill warres. If he inuade Austriche, as suerly he will do, shall we leaue them in the Breres? hath Themperour Maxilimilian deserued thus of vs, and of the Empire. And if those countreis be ouer runne, howe longe thinke you shall our libertie continewe? We maye not truste their fayre promises: for often∣times couetousnesses and ambition cary awaye men headlonge from doyng theyr dewtie. In times paste, there were many noble houses in
Fraunce. Which nowe be but fewe in nombre: for the kinge in maner hathe all in his owne handes: They say, he is a stouce prince: the more like to brynge all to a Monarchie, but we seke to maintaine this pre∣sent state of nobilitie, he promiseth great aide agaīst the Turke: which in dede is a thinge to be wished for, that Germany mighte ioyne wyth Fraunce and Italy: but first he wil bend his power againste the house of Burgundy, and warre vppon Flaunders and Naples, and shall we aide him in these enterprises? And least any mā should say, I propheci∣ed of dreames and doubtfull matters, he is now in leuying his armye. Forasmuche therfore as we are letted by oure lawes, othe, and loue of our natiue country, I protest and iudge him vnmete to be elected. And nowe to the rest of the parties: I suppose that some of you thyncke it vnmete that Charles shoulde be chosen, because Spaine is so farre of, and that through his absence, it should not go well with Germany, ei∣ther for the Turkishe warre, or for ciuile dissentions. Which thinges I do not onlye graunte to be true, but also, when I consider depelye, I am so moued, that in maner, I quake for feare: for I waye this also: If the emperour, at any time come into Germany in displesure, and bring with him the Spaniardes, we shalbe in daunger to lose our liberty. I consider moreouer that it may be, that the Spaniards wil hardly at a∣ny time restore vnto vs again this dignitie of thempire. And, if by their force and power they recouer Millan, they will kepe it hereafter to them selues: So that almost it semeth better, to create one of our owne nation that is fit for it, after the example of our elders whiche passinge ouer foreine Princes haue chosen an inhabiter of the contrie. This wil not I deny, but the state of that tyme was thē farre otherwise and the worlde a great deale better. But nowe if the Emperour be of small po∣wer, thinke you that Austriche and other countries will obey him? Or if the Frenche kinge warre vpon Charles, as without doubte he wyll do, eyther in the lowe countrey or in Italie, shall he geue them the lo∣kyng on? or shal our new Emperour suffer straunge nations to spoile a great parte of the Empire. Yea, and as the world goeth now a daies, it is to be thought that the Princes of Germany, contemnynge theyr Emperour, will ioyne them selues, some with the house of Austriche, and some with the Frenchemen. When Fridericke the third was Em∣perour, Charles the Duke of Burgundie warred in Germany. And Philip Maria Duke of Millan in Italy, and no mā did represse them, but the same was to our dishonour: Moreouer a greater shame whan the Emperour was beseged in Austriche: Yea, and driuen then oute of his owne countrey by the Hungarians. And yet at the same time dyd the lande of Boheme take his parte: and so did also my graundefather Albert Marques of Brādēburge, & the Duke of Saxonie of the same name. If it chaunce so, thē you see what is like to ensew at these daies,
when some princes are addicted to others for stipendes. I leaue of to speake, howe many incidente causes maye chaunce, for the whiche the Princes and Cities maye refuse to shewe their obeidience. Moreouer, now we are like to haue great tumultes & troubles for religiō. For ther are spronge vp disputations of indulgences, & the authoritie of the By∣shoppe of Rome, and of the Ecclesiasticall lawes, whiche seme as yet curable, but or euer it be longe they will cause a great Ruine and alte∣ration of the Churche: For manye do subcribe, and myghtye Nations maynteine the cause, the Saxons and the Heluetians: neither can this mischief be holpen but by a generall counsell. And howe shall an Em∣perour of small power eyther call a counsell or defende the same, especi∣ally if other kinges be agaynst it? there remayneth the Turkish warre, the which we must not onely defende, but make also, to recouer that is lost, and restore Grece vnto libertie: for the doynge whereof we haue nede of the aide of many and sundry nations: which, if the Emperour haue but small power and litle authoritie, howe shall he gather greate Armies of mē? For which causes I iudge it mete to chose some mightie Prince, and Charles of Austriche to be preferred before all other Prin∣ces of Germanie. And if any incommoditie should put you in feare so to do, I thinke it is a great deale lesse then that will be, which shall ensew in case the gouernement be committed to anye other: For he is bothe a Germayne borne, and hath many countries holdynge of the Empire, and will not see his owne countrey brought in bondage: besydes that, he shall sweare neither to alienate nor diminish thempire, nor to break or infringe our liberties. And albeit these be great causes which I haue here mentioned, yet should they not moue me one whit, vnlesse his to∣wardnes were wel knowen: For he loueth Religion, Justice, and cha∣stitie, he hateth all crueltie, and hath a good witte: which vertues shall euer admonishe him to mainteine the comonwealth. They that know him throughly, do muche commende him: And if we consyder well hys father Philippe, and his graundfather Maximilian, we can not doubt of him. He is of no great age, but yet fitte and ripe to gouerne: He shall haue his graundefathers counsellours, and certeine Princes of Ger∣many chosen for the purpose. And whereas I said before that the worst were, if he shoulde be longe oute of Germany, we shall condition with him for that matter, and for asmuche as he hathe greate possessions in Germany, it can not be, but that some time he will come see them. So shall the Turke be driuen out of Hungary, and the Frenchemen oute of Italy: the Church shal be refourmed and established, and many others holpen: which thynges when I cōsyder, I care the lesse for his absens: for his owne naturall courage, the loue of his countrey, and the verye necessitie of thinges, shall prouoke him to come ofte amonge vs. When The oration of the Archbi. of Treuers. the Archebyshop had ended his Oration, and had exhorted the rest to
speake their myndes: the others after they had talked a litle together, desired the Archebishoppe of Treuers to succede. Who for his syngular witte and experience, was of muche estimation. And he began his tale of a prophete that sayd Maximilian should be the last Germaine Em∣perour: Nowe (saieth he) me thinketh it is almost comen to passe, foras∣muche as my Lorde of Mentz (who hath spoken many thinges witte∣ly, hath gon aboute to perswade vs to commit the gouernement of the Empire to a straunger. But I maruell muche, why he preferreth the Spaniarde before the Frencheman? Certes I lament the state of Ger∣many: For if we folowe the steppes of oure elders, we shoulde nede no forayne helpe: But nowe seyng that we seke vpon straungers, what o∣ther thinge do we, then procure our owne bondage? But leauynge of this complainte, I will folowe the same order that my lorde of Mentz hath done, and speake fyrst of the lawe and of oure othe. And the chiefe cause and ground of the law I suppose to be this, lest, if a foreine prince should be chosen, that had no certen habitation in Germany, the digni∣tie of thempire shoulde by litle and litle be alieuated to straungers. If this be the meaning of the lawe, then can no more the Spaniarde be chosen, then the Frencheman. But now, if Charles may be created, be∣cause he hathe landes lyinge within the Empire, of necessitie, the same must be of force also in Fraunces, which hath Millan and other mem∣bres of our common weath. Wherefore of two thinges propounded, let Fraunce and Germani wer ted. vs see whether is better. Certaynly, whā Fraunce was vnited to Ger∣many, then did our Empire most florishe: in so muche that the remem∣braunce of that time doth not a litle delite me, when I chance to reade the stories therof. And now is the like occasion offered vs, whiche cer∣tainly would not be let slippe. Foreyne nations are also of this opinion the bishop of Rome, the venetians, all the Princes and cities of Italie. For the Frenchmen come of the same ofspringe that we do, and vse al∣most the same lawes and maners, shewyng all loue and gentlenesse to our men: And for the vicinitie therof are very necessary for the Italiās and vs. If any tumult shall arise, straight waies shall an armye be rea∣dy, and Fraunce shall paye their wages. And if the Turke shall inuade either Hungary or Italye (as verelye I thincke he wil), shal it not be a goodly matter to haue so nere and so florishing an Emperoure, fourni∣shed with the strength of either nation? As for the Spaniards, though they be accompted warlicke, what notable thing did they euer in Ita∣lye without the healpe of the Germanes? Furthermore because they be so farre from vs, We can loke for no helpe at their handes in time: And though they would neuer so faine yet can they not healpe vs greatlye: For Spaine is so wasted with continual sayling, that it can send forth no great nombre of men. Moreouer we shall haue the Frenchmen our fellow souldiours) and companions of our trauell and paines: But the
Spaniardes, if any thing be wel done, will haue al the praise to them selues, they will enioye our boaties, and rule our countries. Then shal we bewaile our bondage all to late. But I will leaue this compari∣son, and come to the election. If we chose the kynge of Fraunce, there shalbe none occasion of warre in Italy. For he hathe Millan nowe in possession, and we shall perswade him that he shall attempte nothinge against Naples: nether against the base countreis of Flaūders & Ar∣tois, so yt they wil be quiet. And yet I see not why we shoulde thincke that these countreis ought to be defended of vs. They be in dede oure neigbours, but we haue no league wt them, neither do they obserue the lawes of thempire, nor geue any thing towardes our cōmon charges, no more thē doth Englād or Scotlāde: Seing than yt the Frēch kīges power is greatest, & that he hath Lūbardy in quiet possessiō, & is furni∣shed wt al thinges necessary, he wil attempt greater enterprises & more honorable, & moue warre namely against the Turke, & bend al his po∣wer thither wardes, yt the cruel enemie expulsed out of Hūgary & Ita∣ly, Germany maye liue at rest. But in case we preferre Charles before him (O liuing God) what tumultes shall we raise vp in Italy? He wil recouer Millan, & that wilbe a long warre, & whilest this goodly coū∣trey shalbe thus tourmoyled, the Turkes will inuade Hungary with theyr whole power. Who I praye you shall resiste them? Or be able to bringe a sufficient Armie agaynst them? These thinges would be con∣sydered more diligently, and not passed ouer lightly Nowe, what the end of the Italyan warre shalbe, it is vncerten. If the Frenche kynge conquere, he will couet Naples, and it maye be that the Byshoppe of Rome throughe his impulson will vndo oure Election: what trouble will arise thereby, euerye manne perceyueth righte well. Agayne if Charles get the better hande, let vs not loke to haue Italy restored a∣gaine, the Spaniardes will kepe that to them selues foreuer. And not onely that, but wyll hardely let out of theyr handes this our Empyre. About the kepyng of Naples, the possession wherof, it is wel knowen how they came by, what misery haue they suffered? they may not ther¦fore be brought into Italy. Now will I speake some thinges of either king. I doubt not but king Charles is of a milde and gentle dispositi∣on, for so is he reported of many, but being but a yonge man, howe can men discerne such vertues in him as be required in a mightye prynce? The common welth had nede of suche a one, as besides other thinges could establish & reforme the state of the church, as my Lord of Mentz here did wittely admonishe. This verely can king Fraunces performe best of all men: for he hath both a good wit, and a good iudgemente, & hath oftentimes conferens with lerned men, of religion, and readeth muche him selfe. Moreouer the state of this presente time requyreth a Prince and captaine skilfull in warres, payneful and lucky. But who shall in this behalf take the price away from Fraunces: for his vertue
is rightwell tried and knowen: Of king Charles we haue noue expe∣riment, but that his towardnes promiseth some thinge: but the other in prowes and dedes of Armes doeth farre excell all his auncestours. For he hath latly ouercome in battaill the Swisers, a mighty nation and neuer subdued syns Iulius Cesars time: A yonge man therefore oughte in no wyse to be preferred before so worthye a Capitayne. My lorde of Mentz doeth accompte it a discommoditie, if thēperour shold be longe out of Germanye, but yet he biddeth vs take no thoughte for that matter: But I thinke it a matter full of greate daunger, to haue an Emperour absente farre withoute the borders of the Empire. For who shall resiste the inuasions of the Turkes? Who shall represse the sodayne insurrections and Ciuile vprours? And there arise a tempest, Who shall saue the Shyppe that wanteth her Master? He shal know no certentie of oure affayres beynge absent: many thynges shalbe told him vntruely: he shall haue no Germaines of his counsell, but Spani∣ardes onely: he wyll make many decrees, and send them vnto vs farre out of tyme and season. Afterwardes, if he beynge tyckled wyth false complaintes and sklaunders, should come into Germany at anyetyme an Armye of foreine souldiours. In what state thinke you shall be our wyth Empire then? Wherfore if you thinke it good, and that it be oure destinie, that a foreine prince shall at this time weare oure Crowne vpon his heade, certenly I thinke mete to preferre the Frenche kynge before the Spa∣nishe: But if the lawe do prohibite vs to chose the Frenchekinge, letthe same take place in the Spanishe kinge, and let vs not throughe a sub∣till interpretation accompt king Charles a Germanie, but let vs espie out amonges all the Princes one, whiche hath no mansion but in Ger¦many, which is a Germanie in birthe, language, maners, and dispoti∣tion. My lorde of Mentz supposeth that suche an Emperour shoulde for his small abilitie be dispised: but if we chose a mete man, Germa∣nie is riche and stronge enough to beare vp this burthen. Raffe the xj. Themperour Raffe. Emperour before Maximilian, was a man but of Small power, but he excelled in vertue. And he restored Thēpire that was ful weak, and sore afflicted with great warres, in such sorte that all the kinges about him did feare him. What a good opinion had also foreine princes, and amonges others, Lewes the xij. king of Fraunce: of themperor Maxi∣lian, onely for his wit & vertue, I suppose you knowe righte well: For doubtles the princes of Germany haue bene euer of muche estimation: And as yet their noble fame is not extinguished, but florisheth stil. And amōges others at this day, there be thre principal houses in Germani, the house of Bauar, Saxonie, & Brādenburge: And of these houses al∣so diuers worthy mē. Wherfore if we chose one of thē, & assist him with our aides, as surely we are boūden, we shal nede to feare no straūgers.
so that we be all of one minde and will, althinge shalbe in saftie. Ther∣fore setting a part straungers, let vs create some one of our owne coū∣treymen: & it shal proue right wel: for there be many domestical exam∣ples of vertue, wherof I shall recite one. Matthias kinge of Hūgary a stout warriour & a fortunate, proclaimed warre vpon a time againste your father (my lord of Saronie) but whē he perceiued a sufficient ar∣mie prepared againste him: his anger was sone pacified. So mighte now also the meanes be founde, that an Emperor of our owne nation being elected might mainteinehis estate and authoritie both at home, and a broad. Thirdly spake ye duke of Saxonie, who, after he had pro∣ued the Frenche king to be excluded by the lawe, & king Charles to be a Germayne Prince, & to haue an habitation in Germany he said the common weale had nede of some mightie prince: but he knew noue to be compared with Charles: therfore he was contented that he should be declared Emperor, but yet vpon certen conditions, that Germany shall reteike her libertie, and that those daungers which were menti∣oned, should be eschewed. Finallye when the rest had approued this sentence, the Archbyshoppe of Treuers sayde I see the fatall destenye of Germany, and the alteration euen nowe at hande: not withstan∣dynge, for asmuche as it semeth so good to you; I will confourme my wyll vnto your iudgemente. This was the xxviij. daie of Iune, when it was darke night. Wherfore they departed, and mette agayne the next daye. There they began to treate, what conditions should be pro∣pounded to the Emperour: the matter was in debating certein daies: at the lengthe when they were agreed vpon, they were written out, and sent to his Ambassadours to Mentz. Whan they had receiued them, all theyr voices were committed to writinge as the maner is, and sealed the daye before thempire was offered to Friderick duke of The duke of Saxo. refu∣seth to be Em¦perour. Saxonie, but he with a stout courage refused it, & gaue his voice vnto king Charles, whose Ambassadours for his so doynge, offered hym a great sūme of money, which he vtterly refused, & would not suffer his mē also to take one farthing. After this, tharchbishop of Mentz calling the nobilitie & comon people into the church of Saint Bartholomew, in his sermō declareth Charles Archduke of Austrich, & king of spaine, Charles is de¦clared Empe∣rour. to be king of Romanes in ye stede of Maximiliā departed. And for yt he was chosen wt such a cōsent, he saieth they ought to geue God thankes, exhorting thē to shew to him all fidelitie & obeysaūce, & speaking much in his praise, he declareth why they chose him before all others. Than thambassours, which were comen with in a myle, were sent for. Those were Matthew ye Cardinall of Salisburge, Erarde Bishop of Liege, Barnard Bishoppe of Trent, Fridericke countie Palatine, Casimire Marques of Brādēburge, Henry Erle of Nasso, Maximiliā of Sibe∣bouge, & certē others of his coūsel. Whē they were comē, they cōsulted
howe the common wealth be gouerned, vntill suche tyme as he came him selfe into Germany. Howe Casimire the Paulsgraue should leuie a force of men, place them in garisons, and foresee that the state take no harme. Afterwardes the Princes Electours sente Ambassadours with their letters to king Charles, to declare the whole matter. The chief of thē was Fridericke the Paulsgraue. Howbeit in ye meane time Friderick the Paulsgraue sent into Spaine. diuerse messengers went into Spaine, & amonges other one went frō Franckefurth to Barcelona in nine dayes. The Countie Palatine ar∣riued there at the ende of Nouembre, & deliuereth the Princes letters, the content wherof was this. That he would receiue thempire offered him, and all delaye sette a parte, repaire into Germany so soone as he mighte. He aunswereth ryght curtesiye by the mouthe of Mercurine Cattinar, that all beit there was muche trouble towardes him, what by the Turkes, and what by the Frenche men: yet this not withston∣dyng, he sayd, he neither coulde nor woulde faile the common countrie chiefly, syns that so noble Princes had such an opinion of him, & requi∣red him so to do. Wherfore he receiueth their honour offered him right thankefully, & so shortly as may be will imbarke him self to come to the borders of thempire. And in maner with the same wordes he writeth to the Princes Electours, and sendeth home Fridericke honourably rewarded. Thus was he made Emperor the fift of yt name, being than xxj. yeres of age. The Frenche kyng toke the repulse the more greuous∣lie, for that he perceiued a greater daūger to hang ouer his state, seing the power of his enemie, whom before he suspected, herby to be muche increased: for he had rather any man els had bene chosen, than he. He had geuen great sommes of money to haue bene cōsydered: And so did they of Flaūders in like case as it is reported, but herein I can affirme nothing certenly. Here will I declare the Petiegre of kinge Charles. Charles the fift (surnamed, wise) king of Fraūce, gaue the Dukedō of Burgūdy (which fel vnto him) to Philip his yongest brother, which Philip maried afterwards ye lady Margaret thonly daughter of Le∣wes Erle of Flaūders, & had by her a sonne called Iohn. And he had a sonne named Philip, the father of Charles the stoute warriour, which was slaine before Nancey: leauing a daughter called Mari, an inheri∣tour of many great coūtreis: She was maried to Maximiliā sonne to thēperor Friderick the .iij. & brought forth a son called Philip: He ma∣ried ye lady Iane ye daughter of Ferdinādo kig of Spaine, & had by her ij. sons, Charles & Ferdinādo. Whan this lady was wt child, she went into Flaūders, & was brought abed of Charles at Gaūt, in the yeare of our Lorde M.D. the xxiiij day of February. And here is some thynge to be sayd of Ferdinādo, thēperours graūdfather by his mothers side, 1500 The byrth of the Emperor. who was king of Aragonie and Sicilie, & had to wife Elizabeth the daughter and heyre of Iohn the seconde kyng of Spaine, & in fine had
also the kingdome of Naples: He begotte of her fyue children, Iohn, Isabel, Iane, Mary & Katherine: Iohn and Isabell deynge without Issewe, the inheritaunce by the lawes of the Realme came vnto Iane the next syster. By this meanes all yt the duke of Burgūdie had, which was exceding much, & whatsoeuer Ferdinando king of Spaine had: came wholy to Charles the sonne of the lady Iane: For the landes of the house of Austriche in the diuisiō of thinheritaūce, went to Ferdinā∣do his brother. Wherfore of a long time Germany had not an Empe∣rour of greater power. His father died whā he was but sixe yere olde, and his graūdefather Ferdinādo, whan he was sixtene. At the whiche tyme he wēt into Spaine, & there remained til he was elected Empe∣rour & came into Germany as shalbe declared herafter. And now for∣somuch as we arecome to this place, it shal not be much out of purpose to speak some thing of the creatiō of themperor Charles, kinge of Bo∣heme ye iiij. Emperor of that name, made a law herofin the yeare. 1356. called comenly the golden Bull: wherof this is one thing, yt thēperour being dead, tharchbishop of Mentz so soone as he knoweth therof, shal immediatly signifie the same to the residew of the prices Electors, and The manes of chosing he Emperour. appoint thē a day within .iij. monthes to mete at Frāckfourt, either in their owne parsons, or to sende their deputies wt their ful authoritie, to elect a new Emperor or king of Romanes. And if it fortune yt the saide Archbishop do neglect it, yt yet neuertheles the rest shall there assembe within the time prescribed: accōpanied euery mā with .ij .C. horse & not aboue whā they enter into the towne, &. 50. of thē to be in Armure. He that neither cōmeth himselfe, nor yet sendeth his Ambass. or depute to∣fore the busines be ended, shall lose his right of Electiō for yt time: The officers of Frākefurth shal shew al fidelitie to thelectours, & duringe the time of thelectiō suffer nomāto enter besides the princes & their fa∣milies: After yt all be cōmen together, they shal haue a messe of the holy Ghost, in the church of s. Bartholomew: & thē euery mā sweare yt they shal do nothing in yt matter, for any bargain, bribe, reward, or promise: Afterward to come to the electiō, & not to depart thēce before thēperor be chosē: And if the thing be differred aboue .xxx. daies, thē to haue no∣thing geuē thē, but bread & water: whō the more part shall chose, to be of as muche effect as if he were chosen wt the cōmen assent of almē: and that themperor thus elected shal first of all cōfirme al their priueleges, and whatsoeuer apperteineth to their honor, dignitie, libertie, & fredō. Moreouer it is prouided and ordeined how one shall suffer another to passe through his coūtrey, what place eche of thē shal haue in the consi∣story, in what sort they shall giue their voices, and what office euery of thē shall haue, what time Thēperor either dineth abroade, or doth any thig opēly. Furthermore yt durig ye vacatiō of thēpire, the coūtye Pala∣tine shal haue the gouernemēt in Sueuelāde, Frākeconie, & about the
Rhine: & the duke of Saxo. in such places as they vse the lawes of Sax¦nie: That when a prince elector is departed, his eldest sonne shal succed him, or his brother Germayne: that if the Electour be vnder .xviij. yea∣res of age, his next kinsman shall supplie the rowme til he come of age: that the electours mete euery yere once, to consult of the comē wealth: That Frankefurth be the place of election, and Agnon in the base con∣trey the towne where he shalbe inuested. I spake before of the conditi∣ons prescribed by the princes, and ratified by the Emperours Ambassa∣dours, puttyng in a Caution, as the maner is, and writinges made of the same in his name, whiche were these. That he shall defend the chri∣sten comen wealth, the Bishoppe, and churche of Rome, whereof he is aduocate: that he shall minister the law vprightly, and seeke to mayn∣teine peace: That he shall not only confyrme and establish al the lawes of thempire, and chiefely that which is called the golden Bulle, but al∣so by theyr aduise, when time shall require encrease the same: That he appointe a Cenate or counsell within the empire chosen of Germaines onely, which shall minister the comon wealth: That he shall not breake or diminishe the lawes, priueledges, the dignitie of the Prynces, and states of thempire: That it shalbe lawful for the electoures when nede shall requyre to assemble and to consult of the common welth: And he shall be no let hereunto, nor take it in euill parte: That he shall abolishe all confederacies and conspiracies of the nobilitie and commōs against their Princes, and prohibite by a law that there be no such made here∣after: That he make no league nor compacte with strangers, touching the matters of thempire without the assent of the .vii. Princes: that he neither alienate nor lay to pledge anye parte of thempire, or deminishe the same: and that such goodes or landes of the Empire, as other nati∣ons haue plucked away, and do occupy, he seeke forthwith to recouer, yet so, as he infringe not the lawes or priueleges: Also if he him selfe, or any of his house do possesse any parte of thempire, vnlawfullye gotten, that he restore the same, beinge required of the .vii. princes: that he kepe peace and amitie withall Christen Princes, and that he attempte no warre for the affaires of the empire, without the consent of al ye states, but chiefly of the Princes electours, either within the empire or wyth∣out, that he bring no straunge souldiours into Germany without their assent: And if any man moue warre against him or thempire, that then it shalbe lawfull for him to vse what aide he can. That he cal none assē∣bly of the Empire, nor commaunde any taske or tribute, but by the con∣sent of the Electours: And the same also to be within the limittes of the Empire: And that for publike affaires he appointe no Foreyners but Germaines, and that of the nobilitie. And that all writinges be made in Latin, or in the Duche tonge. That no man be sommoned to appere in any court with out the bondes of thempire: And forasmuch as many
thinges are done at Rome contrary to couenaūtes made in time past with the Bishoppes therof, that he deuise with the Bishop, that there be no fraude vsed towardes the preuileges and liberties of thempire: that he impose no custome or droicte with out ye assent of thelectours: neither that through his letters he diminish the custome of thelectors that dwell by the Rhine: If he haue any action agaynst any man, that he shall trye the lawe, and vse no force to suche as will aunswere to the lawe, but stande to the ordre of lawe. The goodes of the Empire, whiche shall chaunce to be vacant, he shall geue away to no man, but a lotte them to the publicke Patrimo∣nye: If he shall wynne any foreine countrey throughe the aide of the states of Germany he shal annexe it to thempire: if he shal recouer any publike thinge by his owne force and power, he shall restore the same to the common welth: that he shall ratifie that which was done in the vacation of thempire, by the countie Palatine, and the Duke of Sar∣onie. That he take no counsel to vnite Thempire to his house and po∣steritie, as his propre inheritaunce, but that he leaue to the seuen Prin∣ces fre Election according vnto the lawe of Charles the fourth, & pre∣script of the Canon lawe: if he do any thinge otherwise, to be frustrate and of none effect: That so shortly as may be, he repaire into Germany to be inuested. What time the Ambassadours had approued these thin∣ges with an othe in his name, they deliuered vnto eche of the electors writinges therof sealed. That whiche is here spoken of the Cannon lawe, is conteined in the Epistle decretall of Innocentius the thyrde, which testifieth that the seuen Princes electours haue fre authoritye to create themperor. And that thempire goeth not by succession but by election. Which Innocētius liued about the yere of our Lord .M.ii.C. Nowe let vs retourne to Luther. About this same time, Erasmus of Erasmus iudgement of Luther. Roterdam wrote letters from Andwarp to Frederick Duke of Sax∣onie, wherein amonges other thinges he maketh mention of Luther: saying that his bokes are ioyfullye receiued and red of good and well learned men: and moreouer that his life is of no man reprehended, for that it is farre from all suspicion of auarice or ambition: But that the deuines of Louain hearinge that he is greatly oppressed, with thauc∣thoritie of the Cardinall Caietan, do nowe triumphe. And in all theyr sermons and bankettes, raile vpon him, callynge him Heretike, and Antichrist: declaringe with mo wordes the same to be much con∣trary to theyr profession, so to slaunder any man, before he be comiicte of Heresye. He wryteth also in a maner with the same woordes, to the Archebishop of Mentz and to Cardinall Campegius, tauntyng these sophisticall Diuines, and Monkes whiche can not abide the studye of tonges and of eloquens, nor of any good learnynge. He writeth also to Luther very frendly from Louain, and sayth howe he hath receyued
receiued his epistle, whiche declareth both the excellencie of his witte, and also his christian hert, shewinge him what a Tragedie his bokes haue styrred vp their, and what hatred and suspicion he ronneth in∣to of the Diuines, and that he can preuaile nothinge by excusynge the the matter: And howe there be many in Englande of great Estimati∣on, whiche thinke rightwell of his workes? And that he himselfe hath tasted of his Cōmentaries vpō the Psalmes, & trusteth that they shall profit many, for they like him very well: but of one thing he would ad∣monishe him, that a man shall more preuaile with a certeine ciuile mo∣destie, then if he be to vehement: And that he muste rather thunder a∣gainst them which abuse the bishop of Romes authoritie, then against the Bishoppes themselues: with certeine other good counsels, whiche he gaue him, exhorting him to procede as he hath begonne. Luther ha∣uing thus manye aduersaries, there was a disputation appoynted at Lypsia, a towne of Misnia, belonging to George Duke of Saxonie, The disputa∣tis at Lypsia. Uncle to duke Friderike. Thither came Luther, & Melanthon which read the Greeke Lecture at Wittenberge. Thither came also Iohn Eccius a Diuine bothe stoute and bolde, who the fourth day of Iulye began the disputation with Luther touching the supremacie of the bi∣shop of Rome, affirming that they which said that the church of Rome was not the fyrst and chiefest of all others (euen before the time of Cil∣uester) did erre, for he that hathe the Seate and faith of Peter, was e∣uer taken for his successour, and Christes Uicar in earthe. For Luther had setforth one contrary to the same: that suche as dyd attribute the supremacie to the Churche of Rome, did ground themselues onely vpō the Bishoppes decrees, whiche were made foure hundreth yeres syns. Which decrees are cōtrary to all Histories written a thousande yeres past, contrary to the holy scripture, and to the counsell of Nice most fa∣mous of all others. But Eccius mainteyneth the supremacie of the Bi∣shoppe of Rome, and called Luther which dissented from the same, a Bohemer, because Iohn Husse was in times past of the same opinion. Luther aunswereth that the Churche of Christe was spreade abroade farre and nere twentie yeres before Peter came to Rome to establishe the Churche there: therfore is it not the fyrst nor the chiefest by the law of God, as he saieth: then they disputed of Purgatory, of Indulgēces, of Penaunce, of Remission of synne, and of the authoritie of Priestes. And ended their disputation the fourteneth day of Iuly, whiche was not appointed for Luther, but for Andrewe Carolostadius & Eccius. But Luther comming onely for the company of Carolostadius, and to here: was drawen forth by Eccius, which had got him a saufe cōduict of Duke of George, so that he muste nedes dispute. For Eccius was of a lustie courage by reason of the matter it selfe, Wherein he thoughte him selfe assured of the victorye. At the whiche
disputation Luther set forth afterwardes. And of the wordes & wry∣tinges of his aduersaries, throughe his wittye obseruation he collec∣ted diuerse articles of doctrine, altogether (as he termeth them) here∣ticall to thintent he mighte playnely declare, howe they, whilest they speake and write all thinges in the fauor of the Bishop of Rome, and of a desyre to maynteine theyr cause, straiynge farre a broade, do con∣founde most thinges, which beynge nerer looked to, conteyne ofte ty∣mes great errours & wickednes. At the same tyme Ulrichus Zwin∣glius taught at Zuricke, and shortly after the Byshop of Rome sent thither a Pardoner, one Sampson a Graye Frere of Millan, to gather vp money, whom Zwinglius stout∣ly resisteth, declarynge him to be a disceyuour of the people. ¶ The seconde Booke of Sleidans Commentaries. ❧ The argument of the seconde Booke. AT the motion of Charles Miltice, Luther wryteth to the Pope: and dedicateth vnto him a Boke of the Christian Libertie. Themperour hauynge passed throughe Englande, came into his lowe countreyes. Luther writeth a Boke of Fouretene Images of consolation: of confession: of Uowes: prouyng that the Lordes Supper ought to be permitted to all mē vn∣der both kyndes. There was obiected the Counsell of Laterane vnder Iuly the .ii. where∣vpon by the way is spoken of Iuly his actes, and of the sayd counsell. In the meane while the Di∣uines of Louayne condemne Luthers Bokes. In his defence, the articles of Picus Erle of Mi∣randula, the Questions of Ockam, and the controuersie of Rewcline with the same Diuines are re¦cited. Seyng him selfe assayled with so many enemies, he writeth to themperour, and shortely after to tharchbishoppes of Mentz and of Marseburge. Duke Fridericke beyng aduertised, that he had cuill will at Rome by reason of Luther, he maketh his purgation by letters, & Luther in lyke case. And yet this notwithstanding, the Pope by an extreme Bulle doeth excommunicate Luther, who (contrary to a decree of Mantua by the waye recited) maketh his appellation, hauinge set forthe in Print a Boke of the captuitie of Babilon. The emperour at the same tune goeth to be crowned at Acon, the solemnities and maner whereof be there recited. The Pope beginneth agayne to sollicite Duke Fridericke agaynst Luther, but nothing preuailyng he cau∣seth Luthers workes to be burnt, and likewise Luther burneth the Popes Decretals. and sheweth the cause why, afterwarde he aunswereth Ambrose Catarine, who had written agaynst him. WHen Charles Meltice, that was sent from Leo the tenthe vnto Duke Fredericke with the gol∣den Rose, perceiued howe Luthers doctryne was so farre spreade abroade, and so highly este∣med of many, that it shoulde be hearde, and al∣most vnpossible to quench it, he sought all mea∣nes possible to heale the wounde with a plaster of reconciliation: Wherfore after longe confe∣rens
with Luther and his frendes, at the last the meanes was foūde, that Luther should write his letters to the Bishop, reportyng of hym muche honour. And so did he at the request of his Frendes aboute the 1520 Luters let∣ters to the Pope. syxte day of Aprill. The tenure of his letters was this: that albeit he had appealed from him to the Counsel. Yet neuerthelesse he ceased not to make his prayers vnto God for his healthe: And for as much as he is sore blamed, to haue hurt and offended his name and dignitie: he is hartely sorye to be so charged, and this to be the cause of his writinge at this present: signifiynge that in dede he hathe bene earnest in rebu∣kyng of vice and errours, but hath euermore written of him right ho∣norablie, as it is to be sene in his bokes: And in that he doth so franke∣ly taunte false doctrine, he doeth it by the example of Christe, his Pro∣phetes, and Apostles: but that such reprehensions, and holsome admo∣nishementes can as yet take no place, to be long of naughtie flatterers which tickle men in the eares: And that he regardeth gods glory, and The court of Rome is vn∣turable. seeketh onely that the truth might appere: if he may this obtaine, to be willinge ynough to giue place in other matters: but to leaue of the professyng of Gods veritie, he can by no meanes. Then commeth he to the Court of Rome, as they call it, and sayeth it is more corrupt & wic∣ked, then euer was Sodome, or Babilon, and that there cā be no more mischiefe wrought then is there, no not of Antichrist him selfe, where∣fore he is sory that he is there as a Lambe amonges manye Wolues. For Rome is not worthy to haue so good a man to gouerne it: that it were muche better for him to be content with a meane benefice, or to liue of his owne landes and reuenewes farre from suche pestiferous slatterers, whiche to serue their owne lust and ambition, do depraue his name and dignitie: he addeth that Barnarde bewailed the state of Eugenius, when Rome was better then it is at this present: but now for asmuche as it is the most filthy sinke of al the places in the Uniuer∣sall worlde, and a rakehell heaped of all mischief, he ought much more to be lamented: And this to be the cause, why he inueighed so soore a∣gaynst it: whiche appertayneth nothing to his reproche, but rather to his saluation: and he would wishe that all learned men woulde set on with touch and nayle to ouercome that Monstre. Touching the thing it selfe, whan he had set forth certeine litle bokes, and sawe that his at∣tempt was vayne, he was willyng to haue left of his enterprise, & im∣ployed all his frudye to the profite of his bretherne in the same house: but than rose vp Eccius, who disturbed all these quiet cogitations and desyred leasure wherin he did nothing els but more aptely disclose the shame & wickednes of Rome. After he toucheth in fewe wordes howe he was vsed before Cardinal Caietane, who (he saieth) might haue ap∣peased all the matter if it had pleased him, vnto whom the faulte is to be imputed, if any thinge be a misse, & not to him: And that afterwarde
came Charles Meltice, who had quieted the kinge, had it not bene for the importune disputation of Eccius, whiche prouoked him to reason matters agaynst his will, and is in dede his enemie, which fyrst of all men kindled this fyre. And nowe for asmuch as he was requested, by Conditions propounded by Luther. Melticius & others his betters, to write to him in the waye of submis∣sion, he would refuse nothing that appertained to reconcilement First therfore he required him that his aduersaries might kepe silence, & not raile vpon him as they did: secondarely that he were not driuen to re∣cante, or bounden to interprete the scriptures after the prescript of mā: for the doctrine of the Gospell, which bringeth libertie to the myndes of men, can not be bounden within any certen limites: if these thynges may be graunted him, he is content to do any thinge: so that it lyeth in him nowe to ende the strife, if he will vnderstande the matter, & com∣maunde either partie to silence: But herein he must chiefely beware of Flatterats must be es∣chewed. flatterers, and with a deafe eare, sayle besydes theyr songes as the en∣ticementes or daungerous rockes of the Sirenes, which ascribe vnto him a godlines, and affirme him to be the head of all the world, prefer∣ring him aboue all generall counselles: for there is nothing more pesti∣ferous than is this kynde of Parasites: but that he credite them rather which admonishe him of his dewtie; and put him in remēbraunce that The part of a true frende. he is a man, and this to be the dewtie of a very frende. Finally he dedi∣cateth to him his booke which he had lately written of Christen liber∣tie, commendinge the same in fewe wordes, for that it conteyned the summe of trew doctrine. In the begynning of the springe time, Them∣perour taketh shippinge in Spaine to sayle into Englande, where he was royally receiued of kynge Henry the eight, who had maried hys Aunte Katherine, which amonges other kyndes of his princelike libe∣ralite builded a goodlye lodginge purposely for him vpon the Riuer of Themse, called Bridewell, and from thens he sayled into Flaunders, where he was ioyefully receyued of almen. About the same time duke Fridericke fell sore sicke: Wherfore Luther compiled a boke to cōforte him, and in his letters to him, he saith it is the cōmaundemēt of Christ, Luth. boke to the duke of Saronie. that amonges other workes of Charitie, whiche we oughte to do one for another, we shoulde also comforte the sicke: therfore he which for so many causes was so greatly boūden vnto him, had for his sake gathe∣red this litle boke, beyng not otherwise able to comfort him: signifiyng that like as in mans body: if the head do ake, it greueth the rest of the membres, taking the same to apperteine priuatly to euery of them: so nowe that he lieth sicke, the people not with oute iuste cause, are all in teares and mournyng: For the greatest part of Germany doth depēde vpon him, and reuerence him as their chiefe ornament and refuge. Af∣terwarde he maketh a booke of confession: where he teacheth that we Confession of synnes. ought not to leane to the trust of confessiō, but to the promise of God,
whiche forgeueth oure sinnes. And that firste of all we muste confesse vs vnto God, that who so confesseth him, muste hate sinne, and couet to amend his life. That therehersall of euery sinne particularly is not necessary, nor possible to be performed wt diuers other things, and last of vowes, wherof he wrote a seueral work afterwardes. In an other certaine boke he had said that he thought it expedient if by the autho∣rity of the counsel it might be permitted that all men shuld receiue the The supper vnder bothe kindes. whole supper, or as they vse to speke vnder both kindes. Which saying for that it was contrary to the decrees of the last counsel of Laterane, did offend many, and among others, Ihonbishop of Misene, who cō∣maunded to be taught throughoute his dioces that the whole supper was comprised, vnder one kinde, and condemned Luthers boke, whi∣che thing he vnderstanding maketh answer in such sort, that he layeth not the fault thereof in the bishop, but in certaine other vnlearned and troublesome persons vnto whome he saith, that this wishe of his, that such a decre might be made by the counsell, deserued no iust reprehen∣sion, no more then if he had wisshed that by a decree of the counsell, it The wishe of Pope Pius. might be lawfull for pristes to haue, wiues, whiche Pius the seconde Bishoppe of Rome, saide and wished: Wherefore he oughte not to be blamed for wishyng the same: He graunteth this to be a Decree of the counsell of Laterane: But yet neuertheles the same to be contrarye to the fyrst and eldest counselles, and the aunciente maner of the churche: Agayne we dispraise the men of Boheme because they receaue vnder bothe kyndes, wheras we kepe vs to the one halfe onely, and yet haue they to make for them, the institution of Christe, and the maner obser∣ued in the churche from the Apostels time til it was now of late daies: And we haue nothing to aledge against them, but the counsels of La∣terane: whiche is a lighte and verye weake reason: for what maner of coūsel yt was, it is wel knowen, & euen laughed at of the Romanes thē selues: And thoughe it were of neuer so greate aucthoritie: Yet for as The counsell of Latherane. muche as they can not proue the thinge by any reason of more antiqui∣tie it is but a very mockery. But concernyng the counsell of Laterane thus it was. Iulius the seconde when he was elected Byshoppe, pro∣mysed by a solemne othe, with in two yeares space to holde a generall counsell, this was in the yere of our Lorde a thousande fyue hundreth and three. But whilest he made warre one while against the Frenche kynge, another while against the Uenetians, and nowe with the duke of Farrare, and nowe with others, and troubled all Italy. Nine Car∣dinalles departed from him and came to Millan, and called a general The counsel of Pisa. counsell at the Citie of Pisa, the .xix. day of May, the yere of our Lorde a thousande fiue hundreth and eleuen, to begynne at the kalendes of September folowyng, the chiefest of these was Bernardinus Crucei∣us, William of Preneste, Fraunces Cossentine, wyth whome were
annexed the Ambassadours of the Emperor Maximilian, and of Le∣wes the Frenche king, which intended by the same counsell to depose him from his bishopprike which he had got by briberye. And nowe for as muche as he had broken his othe, in that he had bene Bishoppe so many yeres, and called no counsel, nor pourposed to do, they could suf∣fer the christian common weale to be no lenger deluded. And because these letters coulde not saufly be conueighed vnto him, they set them vp in all his Townes in Italy, admonishinge him to appeare there in parson at the daye appoynted. Iulius, vnderstandynge the matter, maketh answere the fyrst of August. That what time he was Cardi∣nall, he desyred nothing more than a generall counsell, whiche is well knowen to kinges and princes, & to the whole College of Cardinals: For euen for this cause was Alexāder the syxt sore offended with him: And that he is still of the same minde also: Howe be it that the state of Italy hath of late yeres bene so troublesome (and was so lefte by By∣shoppe Alexander) that there coulde be no counsell called in suche ad∣uersitie of time: After he cōfuteth their appoyntment for the shortnesse of time, and the discommoditie of the place. For Pise was a Towne torne and defaced with the warres of former yeres, and all the coun∣trie aboute layde waste. Neyther that men can safely repayre thither by reason of the warres betwixte the Florentines and them of Seue. Moreouer, howe they haue none Authoritie to call it, and that theyr causes alledged be most vntrewe. Wherefore he commaundeth vnder the paine of excommunicatynge, that no man obeye them. Then called he a Counsell agaynste the nexte yeare, to begynne at Rome, vpon the ninetenth daye of Aprill, in the Churche Laterane: The Popes Shifie. Where vnto subscribed one and twentie Cardynalles. For this (they saye) is euer the Byshoppes policie, when they are afrayde of a Coun∣sell, to appoyncte an other in some place mete for theyr purpose. After this he warneth the Cardinalles, that were agaynste hym, to leaue of theyr enterprise, and come to Rome, offerynge them pardon: but after they would not come, he bannished them the xxiiij. of Octobre, and na∣mely those thre which I spake of, as Heretykes, scisinatykes, and trai∣tours, sendynge the copie of theyr prescription to Maximilian, and alother kinges. And because many Byshoppes of Fraunce had ioyned them selues with these Cardinalles, he bannisheth them also, vnlesse they forsake them, and within a certeine tyme make their pgation. Againe, when the cardinals had diuerse times rised him to the coun∣sell in vaine, and had sytten eyght tymes, they suspends him from al, as well ciuill, as Ecclestasticall iurisdiction, commaunding all mē inge∣nerall, that hereafter they obey hym not. Thys was in the yeare of our Lorde, a thousande, fyue hundred and twelue, the one & twentye of Aprill: The same tyme at Pauie, was Philippe Decius a Euntian,
excellently well learned, who set forthe a Booke in the defence of the Cardinalles cause againste the Byshoppe of Rome. Afterwardes Maximilian forsakyng the Cardinals, made a league with Iulius, and with Fardinando kinge of Spaine, and sent to the Counsell at Rome, Mathew Lang Byshoppe of Gurce: which at the sametime was made Cardinal. But Lewes kynge of Fraunce which persisted styll in his purpose, and had lately ouerthrowen the Bishops armye at Bauenna, was striken with the thonderbolte of cursing and hys Realme gyuen ouer to be spoyled. But after he had sytten in the Counsell fyue tymes, he died the .xxi. daye of February the yeare of our Fraunce is of∣fered to the spoile. Lorde a thousande fyue hundred and thyrtene, and Leo the tenth dyd succede him. Who continewed the counsel, and restored the Cardinals to theyr former dignitie. The counsell ended the .xvi. daye of Marche, in yeare of our Lord .M.D.xvij. In this counsell was debated, of the At Rome they doubt of the immortalitie of the Soule. Turkishe warre, of the reformation of the Churche; of the Immorta∣litie of the Soule, which was doubted of at Rome, and howe they of Boheme shoulde be reduced from theyr errours, whiche is the thynge that Luther speaketh of here, for they receyued vnder bothe kyndes. Whilest these thinges were done in Saxonie, the Diuines of Louain and Collen, condemne Luthers workes, written to Syluester Prie∣rias, also of Penaunce, of excommunication, of indulgences, of Prepa∣ration Luth. Bookes condemned at Louaine. vnto death, as prophane, wicked, and worthy to be brente, and the Aucthor of them to be compelled to recante. Whiche thynge beyng knowen, Luther aunswereth to euerye article of his doctrine. And in the preface lamenteth theyr state and condition: For before, what time Capnio. Rewcline. they condemned Capnio, he had yet some hope of them: But nowe se∣yng there endeuour, to extinguishe the clere lyght and doctrine of the Ghospell, and growe euery day wourse, God doubtles must nedes be greuously offended: for in case they shoulde thus procede, and no man should bridle them of this lybertie, they would shortely condemne all bokes of Scripture, and decree what they liste at theyr owne plea∣sure: which thinge when he considereth, he can thinke no lesse, but that eyther Antichrist doth now reigne, or els will come very shortly: For theyr doctrine conteyneth no sounde, nor certen thynge, but is waue∣ringe in diuers opinions: he saieth moreouer that Williā Ockam was in time paste also condemned by the Uniuersitie of Paris, but now he Ockam. is receiued, and set bye. And lykewyse Picus Mirandula, and Lawrens Ualla, whyche Picus miran∣dula. Lawrence Ualla. are nowe had in estimation: moreouer, sayeth he, the Iewes were in tymes paste, the peculiare people of God, but when they fledde from the lyghte of the Ghospell, and refused the benefyte of Christ, they were forsaken, and so gaue place to the Gentyles: So lykewyse is it nowe a dayes, that such as be Byshoppes and Diuines, which do
chalenge and take vpon them the greatest authoritie in the Churche, haue in dede no thinge elles but a vayne title, but others that be farre from the lyke ostentation, more ryghtely maye chalenge that name: Brieflye howe they haue thus vexed at all tymes, all good and well learned men, yet dyd they neuer contende wyth the same, wyth anye sounde or trewe reasons, but rather by very disceipte, crafte, and ty∣ranye: As they dyd with Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prage, the me∣mory wherof shal endure for euer. But he marueleth at their rashenes that they can not be ware by so many examples to blemishe thē selues, and other Uniuersities for euer. For althoughe they had neuer so sure a grounde, and alledged neuer so stronge reasons agaynst those other famouse men: yet touching his matter, they haue dealt bothe wicked∣ly, and maliciously. For if he had ought offended, they might haue con∣sidered that to be the parte of a man, and haue vsed a certen leuitie in iudginge of hys doctrine: But where they be moued with fury to cō∣demne althinges without respecte, herein they bewrey theyr malici∣ouse myndes, and spitte oute the poyson of theyr hatred. They make great accompt of Aristotle, and will defende him what soeuer he sayeth, be it neuer so contrary to our religion, they will make Aristotle. an excuse and a gloe for him: but they depraue his worckes agaynste all charitie, where as they be consonant to the trweth, to declare their malicious and cankred hertes, where they oughte fyrste to haue she∣wed his faulte, admonishynge him gently to haue reformed the same, and if he had not, then they might haue proceded as Christ hath gyuen in commaundement: But nowe they do no small iuiurie to the By∣shoppe of Rome, to condempne a Boke dedicated vnto him, and with a certeine preiudice to reproue his negligence, but to be no newes, nor maruell that they committee suche a faulte agaynste the Bishoppe, se∣ynge that they moste malapartely do contemne the lawes of God. This Wylliam Ockam (that he speaketh of) flourished in the tyme of the Emperour Lewes the fourth, aboute the yeare of oure Lorde Williā Ockā. a thousande three hundred and twentie, and amonges other thinges, he wrote of the power of the Bishoppe of Rome, and in the same boke, he handleth eight Questions diuerslye. Whether the office of the highe Bishoppe, and of the Emperor may be executed by one and the same parson? Whether themperor hath his authoritie of God only, or also of the Bishop of Rome? Whether christ gaue aucthoritie to the Bishop & church of Rome, that they should cō∣mit to themperor and other Princes their iurisdiction? Whether yt the Emperor beyng once chosen, hathe thereby full aucthoritie to gouerne the common wealth? Whether that other kynges besydes the Empe∣rour, and kynge of Romanes, for so much as they be crowned by Prie∣stes do receyue anye aucthoritie of them?
Wherfore the same kinges be in any subiection to suche as do inueste them. Whether that if they vsed newe ceremonies and crowned them¦selues, they should lose their regall power, whether the election of the seuen Princes can geue as muche authoritie to the emperour, as doth the lawfull succession to other kynges. And debatyng manye reasons on both partes, he determineth cōmonly with the ciuile Maiestrate. And vpon this occasion mentionynge of Iohn the two and twenteth Byshoppe of that name then lyuynge, who had made the lawes extra¦uagauntes, as they terme them, and had placed them wyth the Ca∣non lawe, whiche, saieth Ockam are reprehended of many as altoge∣ther false and full of Heresyes, and recyteth the errours, maruelynge that men of witte will geue any credit to them: howe beit this is the tyme, saieth he, that Paule wrote to Timothe, for the moste parte of men nowe a daies, seke not for the doctrine of Christe, of his Apostles, and the auncient fathers, but hearken what the Byshoppe of Rome willeth or commaundeth. As concernyng Capnio Rewcline, thus standeth the matter, Iohn Phefercorne a Iewe that professed Christianitie had sued long to the Emperour Maximilian, that all the Bookes of the Iewes myghte be abolished, for that they were wicked and full of superstition, and were a hynderaunce, that they were not conuerted to Christianitie: And therefore, that they shoulde be suffered to kepe none, but the Bible. Maximilian at the length commaundeth Uriel Archebyshoppe of Mentz, that he shoulde appointe certeyne Uniuersities, and Iames Hogostrate the inquisitour, and Iohn Reucline to searche and consult The story of Reuchliue. whether it were mete and expedient for oure Religion, that, excepte their Bybles, all other Bookes shoulde be burned. This was in the yere of our Lorde a thousande, fiue hundred and ten. Reuchline which was both a lawier, and right skilful in the Hebrewe tongue, when he had receiued the Archbishoppes letters, he wrote againe his mynde, and said how the Hebrewes bokes were of three sortes, there were Hi¦stories, Hebrew bokes of thre sortes. Bookes of Phisicke, and of Prophecies, and these laste to also of dyuers sortes, in the whiche, albeit there were many fonde and supersticiouse thinges, yet are they for this purpose profytable for that they will serue well to confute their Errours and their dotages. This his opinion he sente to the Archebyshoppe sealed: After that Phefer∣corne knewe this, he made not a lytell a doe, but set oute a Booke a∣gaynste him, callinge hym the fautoure and defendour of the Iewes. Reuchline in the defence of his estimation, aunswereth him with an∣other, by the which he offended certein vniuersities, but especially Col¦len: in the which were then of moste reputation, Iames Hogostrate, and Arnolde Tōgre: who wrot an Inuectiue against him in like case as Phefercorne had done, dedicating ye same to thēperor Maximiliā.
And after that they wente to the lawe with him before the Archeby∣shoppe of Mentz, and Hogostrate was plaintife, whome Reuchline, as his ennemy resused: And first aunswered the vlatter by attourney, and in fine came him self to Mentz accompanied with diuers gentle∣men and other learned men, whiche Ulriche Duke of wirtemberge had sent with him: but after they had soughte, meanes to haue quie∣ted the matter, and coulde not, he appealeth vnto Rome. The Bys∣shoppe of Rome committeth the hearyng therof to George Palatine Bishop of Spires, commaunding that no mā els shoulde medle with all. This notwithstandyng they of Colon condēned Reuchlines boke and burned it in the moneth of February in the yere .M.D.xiiij. This did the Bishoppe of Spires take in maruelous euil part: And because the Plaintife beynge called at seuerall tymes, as the maner is, ap∣pered not, he geueth sentence with Reucline, approuynge his Booke to be good, and condemneth this Hogostrate in costes and domage. But he, to the intent to make this sentence frustrate, trauayleth to Rome. In the meane time his fellowes at home labored and wrot to Paris, and to Lewis the Frenche kinge, by the mediation of Erarde Marchiaue Byshoppe of Liege, who was at the same tyme greate with Lewis the twelfeth. Wherofore the Uniuersitie of Paris after longe debatynge of the matter condempned the booke also, as wor∣thye to be burnte, and the author to be dryuen to recant, and those He∣brews bokes to be brent in like maner as they haue bene in times past. This was in Auguste followynge. The Duke of Wirtemberge had intreated them by his letters. And Reucline him selfe wrote vnto them gentely, for that he had bene there studiēt, and sent them the Copie of the Sentence pronounced by the Bishoppe of Spires, but all was in vaine. When this Hogostrate had sued at Rome three yeres, and could not preuaile, he retourneth home againe, as he wente. For diuers of the Cardinalles vnto whome Leo committed the hearynge of the matter loued Reuchline intierlye for hys excellente learnynge, and amonges others Adrianus that wrote a booke of the Latin tounge. He was also commended vnto them by Erasmus of Roterodame, whose Epistles in hys behalfe do yet re∣maine. Before the menne of Louaine hadde publyshed theyr sentence of Luther, they tooke theyr aduise of Adriane Cardinall of Derthuse in Spayne, a Hollander borne, and brought vp amonges them at Lo∣uaine, by whome they were boldned to do it. Wherefore when Luther had so manye and so greate ennomyes, Luthers let∣ters to the em∣peror. he wrote an Epistle to the newlye created Emperoure Charles the fifte, and fyrste crauynge pardone, that beinge a manne of so lowe degree, he shoulde attempt to write to so highe a Prince, he saithe the matter is weightye, that causeth him to doe it, and altogether suche
as appertaineth to the glory of Christ: signifying how he had written certaine bokes, whiche had procured him the displeasure of manye, through no desert of his: for he was broughte into this contention by his aduersaries agaiust his wikhe had muche rather haue setten still, but this hath bene his chief and only studye, that the pure doctrine of the go spell might appere, against the false traditions of men: and that many good, and excellent learned men can beare witnes of the same: And this to be the cause of all the hatred, disdaine, reproches, pearils, and displesures, that he hath bene in these thre yeres: that he had done as much as lay in him that the matter might be taken vp: But the oft∣ner that he sought quietnes, the more were his aduersaries offended: and where he hath oftentimes required them, to shew him wherin he had erred, and to teach better thinges, hitherto they haue aunswered in maner nothing, but by railing wordes, and cruell iniuries: sekinge only how to quench both him and the doctrine of the Gospell: For the which causes he is now constrained to vse the last remedy, and after the ensamples of Athanasius to flie vnto him for succour: besechynge him; to take vpon him the tuition of the christian doctrine, and to de∣fende him againste all violence and iniurie, till the matter be further knowen: that he will desyre no defence, in case he be proued to mayn∣teyne an euill cause: but desyreth onely that the thing may be tried and knowen, and nothing to be determined before: That this apperteineth to his office, and for this cause hath he this highe power geuen him of God, to minister Iustice, and to mainteine right and equitie. And to defende the pore and weake, agaynst the iniuries of the stronger. In like effect he writeth after that, to all the states of the Empire, reciting in fewe wordes, howe vnwillynge he was to fall into this contention howe desyrous he hathe bene, to haue it taken vp, what conditions he hath offered, and yet doeth the same. Not longe after he writeth to Luth. letters to the archbi∣shop of Mētz. the Archebishop of Mentz, Cardinall, with greate submission beynge sory, as he saieth, that he is complained vpon to him, by suche as were wont to praise his doinges. But he admonisheth him to gyue no credit to talebearers, and to beware of Flatterers, by the example of kynge Dauid, disceaued by the flatteter Siba, that he would set a part all si∣nistrall suspicion of him and of his workes, vntill suche time as he had leasure to reade them him selfe: for there were two kindes of men that condemned his writinge, one was of them that neuer red them, ano∣ther of suche as read them in dede, but with a malicious minde, & these did depraue his doynges: wherin if any man coulde fynde any errour and teache him that were better he woulde be glad to folowe it, and hathe oftentymes so protested: And for asmuche as he trusted well in his great humanitie, and was borne and brought vp in the same pro∣uince that he hath cure of, he coulde not but write thus vnto hym.
The Cardinall aunswered againe, that it pleased him well, in asmuch as he promised not to defende his doynges obstinatelye, but that he His annswere to Luther. would willyngly gyue place vnto suche as coulde reache better thin∣ges: And albeit he delighted muche in Religion, yet had he no leasure hitherto, to reade his workes, and therfore wouldiot Iudge of them, but leaue it vnto others that had taken the thinge in hande: Neuer∣thelesse he would wishe that bothe he and other expositours of scrip∣ture, should handle euery thing reuerently and modestly without any How scripture must be hadled reproche or enuie: he is sory to heare that men dispute openly of the su∣premacie of the Byshoppe of Rome, of Frewill, of the Supper of the Lorde, and suche other questions, full of daunger: for his part he could be contente that learned men should conferre of these matters frendly amonges them selues, & would not blame him for teaching the truth, so it be done without bitternesse and contempte of the Ecclesiasticall power. For if he professe the trueth of a good zeale it will continewe: but if he do it of presumpsion, or of malice, it can not be permanent, nor longe endure. For he that abuseth Gods giftes, heapeth vp doubtlesse sore vengeaunce vpon him selfe. Luther wrote also to the Bishoppe of Mersebourge the same thing Luth. letters to the Bish. oy Merseburge. in effecte, that as touching his doctrine, he was of a clere conscience: for he taught none other thinge than Christ and his Apostles did. But because his maners and lyfe did not Aunswere to his professyon, he wisheth that he were remoued from the office of preaching: He seketh for no lucre, nor desyreth any vaine glory, but this thing onely that the euerlastyng veritie myght be knowen to all men. Such as condemne his workes, are moued with a maruelous hatred, and abuse the By∣shop of Romes name to fulfyll their owne affections: Whereas many learned men of foren nations haue writtin to him letters reioysyng at his writinges and geuing him thankes for the same: whervpon he be∣leueth the rather, that he hath taught a sounde doctrine. Wherfore he requireth him to deale fatherly with him, & to shewe him his faulte, if he be out of the way: For hitherto coulde he not obteyne so muche as that the matter might be hearde, notwithstandyng that he hath with His aunswers to Luther. ernest prayer required it: And now also a man should do him no grea∣ter pleasure, than to take from him his errour. Whereunto the Bishop aunswereth, that he hath bene oftentimes very carefull for him, & how he is not a litell sory that he hath written amonges others a Boke of the Lordes Supper, wherwith are many sore offended: And that the people vnder his cure are greatly inflamed with that doctrine, for the which he is chiefly sory. After he reprehendeth in him the sharpenes of his writing, & saith that albeit straungers like it, yet can not he allow the same: but wisheth that he woulde bringe a Christian minde, voide of all affections to the handlinge of the matter: furthermore he char∣geth
him to haue spoken vnreuerently by the bishop of Rome, which thing neither becometh him, nor is mete to be suffered. Wherefore he admonisheth him to applye the dexteritie of his wit to dthirthynges that may profit the common wealth more, and to leaue all thys bitter contention. Last of al, where he requireth that his error may be shew∣ed him, and promiseth to be tractable, he saith how he can not answer therto by wryting: but au other time when they shal mete, he wil talk with him more at large. Duke Fridericke at the same time had cer∣taine rtes at Rome, which he had commended to Ualentine Ditleb a Germane. He sent worde that his matters were not well hearde at Rome; by reason of the rashnes and leud demener of Luther, who had written many thinges bitterly and spitefully againste the bishop, and the church of Rome, and all the college of Cardinals, which fellow he nourished and maintained, as moste men affirmed. Whan the Duke had receiued these letters, he aunswereth, that it was neuer his intent to defende Luthers doctrine by his maintenaunce, neither dothe he take vppon him any iudgement of the thinges that Luther teacheth: He heareth in dede that his doctriue is well allowed of learned men that can iudge therof, and that he hath long since made this offer, that if he may haue a sure sauf conduicte, to rendre a reason of his Doctrine before the Bishoppes Legate, what so euer he be: and then if hys error can be shewed him to be moste ready to forsake hys opinion, and thus hathe protested openlye. And althoughe thys myghte appeare to be sufficient, yet being admonished of hym long sence; he wold haue forsa∣ken the country, had not Charles Meltice aduised him to the contra∣ry: For he thought it better that he should remaine here stil, then to go to an other place, where perauenture hauing more libertye he mighte setforth worse thinges then hitherto he hath done: wherfore there can be no iust cause alledged to suspect any euil of him: and trusteth to fare neuer the worse at the Bishops handes therfore. For he wold be right hartely sory that any erroure spronge vp in his time, shoulde be said to be defended and established by him. After this he deuiseth wt him more familiarely howe the contention began by reason of Eckius & others, what excellent wittes, what good learning and knowledge of tōges do florishe nowe in Germanye, what desire the common people haue to read the scriptures, how Luthers doctrine is infixed in many mens mindes, so that if he be vsed otherwise then well, it is like to styrre vp suche tumultes in Germany, as will turne nother the bishop or no mā els to any profit. When the Duke had thus written at the Kalends of Aprill, he receiued the, vi. day of Iuly letters from the bishop of Rome, wherin he reioysed not a little, that he wold haue nothing to do wyth Luther that wicked man, affirming that he had euer a very good opi∣nion of him before this: But now forasmuch as graue mē haue aduou∣ched
it to be true, the good wil, that he bare him before, is hereby not a little encreased: For this thing doth rightwel become him, and all hys house, which hath euermore done great honor to the church of Rome: And that his singulare wisdome doth also herein appeare, that he per¦ceiueth him, not to be sente of Christe, but of Sathan the ennemye of almankinde. Whiche, for a mad kinde of ambition reyseth vp agayne the Heresyes of Wiclife and Husse before condemned, whiche seeketh the fauoure of the people, and vayne glorye, whichs by the false enter∣pretatiō of Scripture, giueth to the simple an occasion to sinne, which dispiseth Chastitie, and speaketh againste Confession and Penaunce, which beareth fauoure to the Turkes, and raileth against all the disci∣pline of the church, which lamentech the punishemente of Heretikes, & to be briefe turneth all thinges vpside down, which is growen to such a pride and arrogancie, that contemning the aucthoritie of Counselles and Bishoppes of Rome, he woulde haue hys owne oppinion to take place against the iudgement of mē: Wherfore it is wittely done of him to haue, no familiarytie with so pestilent a fellowe, nor to alowe hys errour. In the whiche thinge all graue and wise men do muche com∣mende his vertue: And chieflye he giueth God hertie thankes, that he hath giuen him suche a mynde: affirming moreouer that he hath suffe∣red and borne with his rashenes a while, to see if he woulde amende: but now for asmuche as he hathe nothinge preuailed with gentle ad∣monishmentes, he is compelled to vse an extreme remedy, fearyng, lest throughe his contagion, he shoulde infecte many: Wherfore callyng a counsel of Cardinalles and learned men to debate the matter, he hath made a decree, by the instinction of that holy spirite, whiche neuer fai∣leth the Churche of Rome, the copie wherof he hath sent vnto him, to the intent he might see what monstrouse errours that minister of Sa¦than The pope cur∣seth Luther. defendeth: he wilieth him therfore, that, vnlesse he do openly and solemnely recant with in the daye prescribed, he should commit him to¦ward: for so shall he put away all shame from his house, and from Ger¦many, wynne muche honor, and do God highe seruice. The decree is ouerlonge, but the summe is this. Fyrst the Byshoppe Leo callynge vpon Christe, Peter and Paule, and other sainctes, to tourne awaye the daunger hangynge ouer the The Bulle of Leo. Church, most lamentably complayneth that now there should spring vp a doctrine, conteinyng bothe the Heresies already condemned, and also newe errours, and great wickednes: And that in Germany, that was wont to do so muche for the Churche of Rome, bothe longe sins, and of late dayes, concernyng Husse and thē of Boheme: But because the numbre of Christians throughout the vniuersall worlde, are com∣mitted vnto his charge by Christ, he can no lenger wyncke at so great a matter: After, reciting Luthers opinions, saieth, that they be against
Christian charitie, and the reuerens that all men owe of duetie to the Churche of Rome, and agaynste the counsell of the aunciente fathers: Wherfore by the consent of his Cardinalles, he condemneth both him and his works to be brought forth and burned, and by the aucthoritie whiche he saieth he hath, he commaundeth all Magestrates, namelye in Germany, to se the thing executed accordingely: Then commeth he to Luther, shewyng with howe fatherly a loue he sought to refourme him, howe he cited him to Rome, and promised him to beare his char∣ges: And howe in contempte therof, he appealed from him to the coū∣sell, contrary to the decrees of Pius and Iulius: And all be it he had The decree of Pius & Iuli{us}. hereby deserued the punishement condigne for Heretikes: yet did he of his clementie gyue him a longer time, if happely) as the prodigal child amended) through his owne misery, he would retourne to the bosome of the churche: And to be yet also of this minde, yea and moste hertely besecheth him and his adherentes to trouble the church no more, pro∣mysing them great good will, if they wyll cease from theyr errours. Notwithstandynge he commaundeth Luther to teache no more, pre∣scribynge him .lx. dayes, wythin the whiche time he shoulde amende, burne his owne bokes, and recante his doctrine openlye: if he did not, he condemneth him as an Heritike, & to suffer accordynge to yt lawes, he suspendeth him out of the Church, commaunding al men to eschew his talke and his company, vnder the lyke penaltie: and this decree to be red in all Churches & assemblies of people at certen dayes appoin∣ted. Touching Pius and Iulius, thus it standeth. This Pius hilde a Counsell at Mantua, in the yeare of our Lord .M.CCCC.lix. chiefely because of the Turkisshe warre: And there a∣monges other, he made a decree that no man should appeale from the Byshoppe to the Counsell, for that vnder the Coope of heauen, he said there coulde nothinge be founde better then Christes Uicar: And not longe after he suspended Sigismunde duke of Austriche, for takinge the Cardinall of Cusane prisoner: The duke appealed from him to the counsell: Wherfore the Byshoppe did excommunicate George Heim∣burge the worker herof, commaunding the Senate of Norinburge to banishe him the Citie, and to spoile him of his goodes. Whiche decree was after renewed by Iuly to maynteyne him selfe agaynst the Car∣dinalles that swarued from him, agaynst kynges and princes, and the vniuersitie of Paris, whiche vsed ofte suche refuge. This Bishop Pi∣us (called before Aeneas Siluius) was at the Counsell of Basill, wrot Aeneas Silui∣us. euery thing, praysing the decrees that there were made exceadyngly: But when he was auaunced to this highe degree of dignitie, he chaū∣ged his opinion, and would haue the counsell subiecte to the Byshop. Honors chāge maners. When Luther hearde that he was condemned at Rome, he goeth to his former appellation, wherin he appealed from the Bishoppe to the
counsell: And nowe forsomuche as the Byshoppe perseuerynge in hys Luth. impug∣neth the popes censure. wicked tyrrannye, hath proceded so farre to condemne him, nether cal∣led, nor heard, nor yet conuicte of Heresye, he saieth, howe he appealeth from him againe to the counsel, chiefly for foure causes, for that he hath condemned him at his pleasure, not hearyng the controuersie: for that he cōmaundeth him to denie faith to be in sacramentes necessary: that he preferreth his owne decrees and dotages of men; before the Scrip∣tures: and for that he leaueth no place to anye Counsell. Wherefore he calleth him Tyrran, a proude contemner of the Churche, and fynallye Antichriste: affirmynge that he will shewe and proue al these thinges, whensoeuer it shall please his superiours. And therfore prayeth them∣perour and other Magistrates to accepte this his appellation, for the defence of Gods glory, and the libertie of the counsell, that they would bridell his tyrranny, and thynke that the decree made concerned no∣thynge, nor that they would styrre nothinge, tyll the cause were law∣fully decided. Before he had thus appealed, about the .xvij. day of No∣uembre, he had written a boke of the Captiuitie of Babilon, in the pre∣face, Luth. booke of the captiuitie of Babilou. wherof he saieth howe he profiteth dayely more and more in the knowledge of holy Scripture: And howe a fewe yeares paste he set forth a booke of the Byshoppes pardons, and that tyme wrote rene∣rently, because he stoode than in great feare of the Romisshe tyrranny, and had it in great estimation: but now his iudgement is farre other∣wise, and beynge styrred vp by the prouocation of his aduersaries, he hath lerned that the See of Rome, is nothynge els but the kyngdome of Babilon, and the power of the stronge Hunter Niutroth. After∣wardes he disputeth of the Sacramentes of the Churche, and holdeth that there be but three onelye, Baptisme, Penaunce, and the Lordes Thre Sacra∣ses. Supper, and then treateth also of the other foure, confirmation, or∣der, Matrimonye, and Unction. But these he calleth no Sacramen∣tes because they haue no sygnes annexed to the promesse, other sacra∣mentes, Which are properly called Sacrament. which haue no promise to thē ioyned (he saith) are but vare sig¦nes, & therfore thinketh that Penaunce can not be coūted in the num∣bre of thē, if we wil properly & exactly speake, accordyng to the difini∣tion of the word, because it wāteth the visible signe, & heauēly institu∣tiō. But after yt he had hard of the bishops decre besides the appellation before mentioned, he setforth thā another work, wherin he confirmed and mayteyned all his opinions, whiche Leo had condemned: In the meane time the Emperor in Flaunders hauinge set all thinges in or∣dre, appointeth the Princes Electours to mete him at Acon the sixte daye of Octobre, there to be inuested: but the priuces arritsing at Col∣len ten miles from Acon heard of a sore plage there, wherevpon they wrote to the Emperour beynge that tyme at Louaam, that he woulde chouse some other place: but the Townes melt whiche had bestowed
great coste in preparyng of theyr houses, and victualles, with wordes did extenuate the force of the plage, encouraginge him to come, wher∣fore the Emperour perceuereth styll in the same mynde, saying that he can not so lightly alter and breake the law of Charles the forth, which had thus ordeined it. Wherefore the xxi. daye of Octobre come thirther the three Archebyshoppes of Menty, Collen, and Treuers, with the Ambassadours of the Duke of Saxonie, and of the Marques of Brā∣denburge. For the duke of Saxonie lay sicke at Collen. The next daye they rode forthe to mete the Emperour, whom, lyghting of theyr hor∣ses, they receiued honorably by the mouthe of my Lorde of Mentz: he answereth them as gently by the Cardinal of Salisburge. Thus ioy∣nynge together, they marched towardes the towne: Before the gate mete him the Paulsograue. The Princes Electors had about a thou∣sande and syre hundred horses, some demy launces, some archers. The Emperour had two thousand, al in gorgeous apparell. Iohn the duke of Cleaue had foure hundred horsemen fayre Armed, they contended muche with the Saxons, whether should go before other, in so muche that the prease beyng great, the companies fayre and many, suche as the lyke hath bene seldome sene in Germany, the night came vpon thē before they could entre the Towne, on eyther syde the Emperour rode the Archebishoppe of Collen and Mentz: next after folowed the Am∣bassadour of the kynge of Boheme, also the Cardinal of Sedune, Sa∣lisburge, and Croye, and the Ambassadours of other kynges & Pryn∣ces: The Ambassadour of the Byshoppe of Rome, and of the kinge of Englande were onely absent, whiche was thought to be done of a set porpose lest they goinge after the Princes of Germany, should seme to diminishe the dignitie of them that sent them. The Emperour was broughte into oure Ladies Churche, where after he had made hys prayers, he talked with thelectors a part, and so went to his lodgyng. The next daye they met againe at the church: where was suche prease of the people, that haruesed men had muche a do to kepe them backe. In the middes of the Churche hangeth a large crowne: the floore vn∣derneth was covered with clothe of Arras: vpon the which Thempe∣rour The maner of the Coronatiō laye downe gruflynge, whilest my lorde of Collen said ouer hym certaine prayers: whiche ended, the Archeby shoppes of Mentz and of Treuers, toke him vp and led him to our Ladyes anltar. Here falleth he downe agayne, and when he had sayd his praiers, he was led into his seate fayre gilted. Tharchebishoppe of Collen goeth to Masse, and when he had a litle proceded, he demaūdeth of him in Latin, whether he wil kepe the Catholicke faith, defende the church; ministre Iustice, restore the Empire, defende the widowes, the fatherles, & such others as be in distresse? Whether he will gyue dewe reuerence to the Bishop of Rome? After that he hath assented, he is led vnto the aultar, and ta∣keth
his othe vpon the same, and so retourneth to his seate againe. Af∣ter this the Archebishoppe of Collen asketh the Princes, whether they will perfourme and gyue him theyr faythe and allegeaunce? Whiche thing promised, and againe certein praiers finished, he annointeth his Brest, head, the boughtes of his Armes, and the palmes of his hādes: This done, the Archebishoppes of Mentz and Treuers, lead him into the reustry, and there apparelled like a Deacon, bring him agayne to his chayre. And after more prayers sayde, Collen accompanied wyth the other two, delyuereth hym a Sworde drawen, and commendeth vnto him the common wealth. And againe, puttinge vp the Sworde into the skabarde, he putteth also a rynge on his fynger, and aboute him a Roobe royalle: Moreouer, he reacheth hym a Scepre, and an Appell of Golde, representynge the shape of the rounde worlde. Then all three Archebishoppes together set the Diademe vpon hys head: And so led to the Aultare, he sweareth agayne that he wil do the dew∣tye of a good Prince: Afterwardes they followe conueing him vp into an higher place, and set him in a seate of stone: There tharchebishoppe of Mentz speakyng in the vulgare tounge, wisheth him great prospe∣ritie, commendynge vnto him moste diligently him selfe, and his Pe∣res, with all the states of the Empire. Likewise do the Prebendes of that Churche, for he is chosen flowe of their Colledge by an olde cu∣stome: When all this is done, the Organes, and the Trompetes blow vp myrthe and Melody. All these thynges behelde the Lady Marga∣rate his Aunte, yt was egent of Flaunders. Whan Masse was done, and themperour had receiued the Lordes supper, he dubbed as many knyghtes as were willyng. Which honor in times past, was wont to be gyuen onely to suche as had foughten manfully agaynst theyr ene∣mies, and was the rewarde of valeauntnes: And nowe the maner is, that kynges with the swordes drawen, shall strike softely, the shoul∣ders of them that desyre the ordre, whether they be of the nobilitie, or Marchauntes, that couet honour. From the churche they came, to the Palace, most sumptuously hanged and arayed, where the Emperoure dined, and the Electours also, euery man by him selfe. For in the same hall were diuers tables set on eche syde the Emperours table. And the Archebishoppe of Treuers was placed right ouer against themperor, accordyng to the lawe of Charles the fourth. That day of an auncient custome there is roosted a whole Oxe, farsed wyth other Beastes: A piece whereof is serued to the Emperours table, the rest haue the common people: Moreouer all that day there runne two Conduictes wyth Wyne, free for all men. After diuer thēperor retornyng to his lodging, deliuereth to tharch∣bishop of Mentz ye seales of thempire: the next day he maketh a supper
for the Princes Electours. And the daye that folowed, reparynge to the Churche, when he had hearde Masse, he worshipped the reliques of Sainctes, and amonges others, as they say, a cloth that our Saui∣oure was lapped in when he was in his swaddlynge cloutes: After this, the archbyshop of Mentz pronounceth that the Bishop of Rome approuynge his Creation; doeth commaunde him hereafter to vse the name of Cesar. The electours beyng departed out of that contagious place, Cesar taketh also his iourney and arriueth at Collen, aboute the fyrste of Nouembre: from whence sendyng letters throughe out Ger∣many, he calleth an assemblie of the Empire at Wormes agaynste the syxte daye of Ianuarye. Themperor calleth a coū¦sel imperial. As concernyng that which the Archebishop of Mentz spake howe the Bishoppe of Rome had confyrmed the Emperours creation, thus haue they tourned Totnam into Frenche of late yeres. For in tymes past the Bishoppes of Rome were wonte to be approued by thempe∣rours, when they were but pore: but encreased in wealth, they did not onely begyn to rule at theyr pleasure, but also at the length brought it vnto this passe, after muche strife and contention, that in dede they The Pope was subiecte to themperor permitted that the seuen Princes of Germany might electe hym, but saye, how it lyeth in theyr power onely to cōfirme and ratifie the same And this Authoritie haue they vsed many tymes, in maner throughe all realmes, but chiefly in Italy, Fraunce, and Germany, what tyme they haue put downe kynges, and substituted others in theyr place. For besides other places of the Canon lawe, in thepistles decretall of Gregory the ix. Innocentius the iij. affirmeth, that the aucthoritie of chosyng themperor, was by the benefit of the Bishoppes and Churche of Rome conueighed from the Grekes to the Germanes in the tyme of great Charlemaigne, and howe it is theyr partes to know & iudge, whether the person be mete. And yet not cōtēted with that, they haue also extorted his faithe by an othe from the highest Magistrate of the whole vniuersall worlde. Whiche thynge hathe bene often tymes the cause of great warres, and muche other mischief. And in fyne Clemēt The lawe of Clement. the fift bounde them to it by a lawe, who lyued in the yere of our lorde a thousande and thre hundred. For wheras Henry the seuenth Empe∣rour of that name, of the house of Lucemburge, woulde not after thys sort be bounden, for that he said it was a matter newly inuented, ney∣ther vsed in former time: Clemēt for them that should come after, ope∣neth the matter at large, declarynge what is in same othe conteyned, (that is to say) that themperour shoulde defende the Church of Rome, that he banish Heretikes, and haue no company with wicked mē, that he by al meanes possible mayneteine the Dignitie of the Bishoppes of Rome, yt he defend & kepeal priuiledges graūted to the church of Rome at any tyme, but especially such as were geuen by Cōstantine, Charle∣maigne,
Henry, Otto the fourth, Fridericke the secōd, and Rodulphe, that he chalenge no parte of the landes and possessions of the Church of Rome, by any maner of title or pretence. In these thinges (saith he) the Emperour is bounden to him. And that Henry also by messengers promised hym no lesse, howe soeuer he dissembled afterwarde: Thys decree came forth after the death of the Emperour Henrye. The same Clement was the first of all, that called forth the Cardinals frō Rome to Lyons, and kept his Court in Fraunce. Syns the whiche time the The courte of Rome in Fraunce. authoritie and power of Emperours hathe decreased in Italy daylye more and more. And the power and dignitie of Bishoppes bene aug∣mented, in so much that at these our dayes, and a lytle before our time, Emperours haue supposed, that they owe this faithe and obediens to them euen of bounden dewtie. But the chiefe of the Bishoppes yt haue molested oure Emperours are these: Gregory the seuenth, and the .ix. Alexandre the thyrde. Innotentius the thyrde, and the fourth. Nicola∣us the thyrde, Bonisace the eyght, and Clement the fyste. Nowe let vs retourne to our pourpose. In the meane tyme that Cefar was yet at Collen, the Byshoppe of Rome sent Marinus Carracciolus, and Hierome Aleander to encense The duke of Saro. incen∣sed againste Luther. the Duke of Saxonie againste Luther, who speakynge fyrste in the praise of him and his familie, than tellynge of the daunger that hāged ouer all Germany for the deuilishe workes of Luther, demaunded of him in fine two thinges. Firste that he would commaunde all his bo∣kes to be caste in the fyre, secondarelye that he woulde eyther see hym executed, or send him bounde to Rome: This was before Peter Bon∣homme of Tergeste, and Barnarde of Trent, Bishoppes. They had also commission that Cesar, and all other Princes of Germany, beyng required of ayde, should accomplishe the Byshoppes request, who had committed, as they sayde, to this Aleander and doctor Eckius the he∣rynge of the matter. Duke Fridericke because it was a matter of im∣portaunce, axynge a tyme of deliberation, the fourth daye of Nouem∣bre The answer of duke Fri∣derike. maketh them aunswere by hys counsell for that he hym selfe was otherwise occupied in the presence of the Bishoppe of Trent. Howe it is farre beyonde his expectation, that the Bishoppe of Rome shoulde demaunde anye suche thynge of him, who hathe alwayes indeuoured him selfe, to do nothing vnworthy the vertue and dignitie of his aun∣cestours, to do his faithfull seruice to the Empire, and his dewe obser∣uaunce to the Churche. And howe he hath heard, that whilest he hath bene frō home, Eckius hath gone about to bring in trouble, not onely Luther, but others also, of his dominion, cōtrary to the order & maner of the Canon lawe, whiche thinge as righte is, he taketh in euil part, that a priuate mā should take vpō him to medle so muche in any other māsiurisdictiō: What Luther or others, haue done in his absence, sins
the Byshoppes decre was brought; he knoweth not, but he had neuer any thinge to do with his matter, neyther nowe will haue: Howebeit if he teache not rightly, he is the more sory: Two yere past through his labour and meanes, he was broughte to Cardinall Caietaine at Aus∣purge: But when they had spoken together, they coulde not agree, in so muche that Cardinall Caietane wrote vnto hym letters of com∣plaint, which he so answered at the same time, that he thought he had satisfied him, yea, and to take awaye all suspicion, he would than haue put Luther from him, if Miltitius had not letted the matter. Moreouer howe oftener that, that the Archbishop of Treuers was appointed to heare the matter, and howe Luther wyll appere in any place when so euer he is commaunded, so that he may be assured, and maketh so large and great an offer, that no more can be required. This is the opinion of good and well learned men, that he hathe thus farre proceded, not of his owne accorde, but pricked forwarde of his aduersaries: as yet he hath neyther bene so heard of the Emperor, or of any others, that his workes should be so conuicte of Hercsye, that they ought to be burnt: or els would he already haue done the duetye of a good Prince. He requireth them therefore that they woulde not deale after this sorte, but rather fynde the meanes that some Godlye learned menne maye be chosen, that shall frendely and quietlye heare the whole matter: that Luther maye haue a good safeconduicte, and that his bookes be not burned, before he hathe pleaded his cause. And if he can by the testimonies of Scripture, and sownde argumentes be conuicted, than will not he holde with hys doynges: And although that bothe he and his cause shoulde take the foile: yet woulde he trust that the Byshoppe would requyre him to do nothyng but that might stande with his honoure. In all other thynges throughe Gods helpe he would do as shoulde become a Prince of the Empire, and an ob∣dient childe of the church: What tyme this answere was geuen them, After some deliberation, they began to recite howe many thynges the Byshoppe of Rome had done, and suffered, that Luther mighte at the length retourne into the right way: but that he hath kepte no parte of his promyse. And that it lyeth not nowe in the Archbishoppe of Tre∣uers to here the matter, for so muche as the Bishoppe of Rome hathe taken to him selfe the same, to whom onely it apperteineth to be iudge in suche causes, the conclusion of theyr talke was, yt they said how they must procede according to the Bishoppes decree. And so not longe af∣ter they burned Luthers workes. Luthers bo∣kes are br. Aleander was an Italian borne, right skilful in the Hebrew tonge: he was sometyme a Reader in Paris, commynge to Rome, he grewe in estimation, and was first made Archebistoppe of Brunduse, & after that Cardinal. To the same degre of dignitie came also Carracciolus.
When Luther vnderstoode this, he calleth forthe all the studentes of Wittenberge, and in the presens of many learned men, he burneth the Luther bur∣neth the Ca∣non laws. Byshop of Romes law and the decree lately published openly, the tēth day of Decembre: And the next day in his lecture admonisheth al men that regarde theyr saluation, to beware of that Bishoppes kyngdom. Afterwarde he set forth a boke, wherin he sheweth the causes, why he burned the Canon lawe. First that it hath bene an olde custome obser∣ued at all times that naughtie and Pestilent bokes should be burned, a testimony wherof is yet in the actes of the Apostles: Moreouer that it concerneth his dewtie, that is baptised in Christe, whiche is a pro∣fessour and an open teacher of holye Scripture, to impugne wycked doctrine, and to teache men that is holesome, and to plucke out of mēs mindes false and erronious opinions. And that the same apperteineth also to many others. And although yt they bryng letted eyther through ignoraunce, or for feare of perill do not that they oughte to do, yet can that be none excuse to him, vnlesse he do his dewtie. Moreouer the Bi∣shoppe of Rome, and all his rable are so obstiuate and shamelesse, that not onely they wyll heare no good admonitions, but also condempne the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and compell men to committe open Idolatry Furthermore he supposeth howe these booke burners Booke bur∣ners. haue no commission to burne his bookes, no more than had the Diui∣nes of Collen and Louain of the Emperour. Finally for as muche as his workes beyng burnt, and the brute therof spread abroade ouer all countreis, many will growe to be weaker and doubtfull, supposynge they were not caste into the fyre withoute cause: therefore dyd he, se∣ynge his aduersaries past all remedy, burne theyr Bookes also, that he might therby erecte & confyrme the mindes of men. Wherfore he bese∣cheth all men that laying a syde thambitiouse and proude titles of his aduersaries, they would looke nerer to the thinge, that is, howe wic∣ked and pestilent opinions are conteyned in those bokes of the Law. Which thinge that it maye be the better perceyued, of innumerable, he hath gathered a fewe thynges, whiche belonge to the reproche of al∣mightie God, to the iniurie of the ciuill magistrate, and to the establis∣shing of their owne tyranny: to the numbre of thyrtie places whereby he sheweth that he had iuste cause to burne them. Than prouoketh he them to shewe the reasons wherfore they burnt his workes. And the cause why fewe or none haue in diuerse ages past attempted anithing agaynste the tyrannye of Antichrist, he saieth, hathe bene, for that the Scripture hath prophecied, howe he shoulde destroy his aduersaries, and haue the kynges to assist him. Seyng therfore that the Prophetes and Apostles haue tolde vs before of suche tyrrible thynges to come, it is easye to consydre howe greate it behoueth hys crueltye to be. For so commeth it to passe ordenarily in worldly matters, that of the
best begynnynge of thinges procedeth the worste ende. Whiche after he hathe proued by diuerse examples, he inuergeth agaynste the Citie of Rome, whiche beyng indewed of God with many benefites and or∣namentes is vtterly gone out of kynde, and with her contagion hathe infected a great part of the world, that this the Byshoppes ordinaūce is agaynst the lawes, agaynst good customes, nether is he to be suffe∣red, for that he fleeth from lawful iudgement, for that he affirmeth him selfe to be aboue all lawes and iudgementes. I tolde you in the fyrste Boke, how Syluester Prierias, wrote agaynst Luther: whan he had answered him sharpely, Ambrosius Catarinus an Italian toke in had to defende him: setting forthe a booke of the dignitie of the Bishoppe of Catarinus writeth a∣gainst Lut. Rome: to the whiche Luther aunswereth at large, and interpretynge certen places of Daniell, teacheth that the Byshoppes Tyrrannye is there paynted out, and proueth that suche thinges as he hathe prophe∣cied of the kyngdome of Antichriste, do altogether concerne the See of Rome. After this was Catarinus made Arch∣byshoppe of Cossent.
The thirde Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the thirde Booke. DUke Fridericke obteyneth letters of safeconduict for Luther to come to Wormes, there to defende his opinions and writinges before themperor, and the other states, and perseuereth constantly, although themperor threateneth him wyth banishment, and the Pope had cur∣sed hym in the Bulle of the Lordes supper. And the Prynces seuerally soughte to peruerté him. The counsell of Constaunce was set before his eyes, vpon which occasion mention is made of Wyclese, of Iohn Hussc, and of ʒ ischa a Bohemer, the Sorbonistes condempne Luthers bokes. Whilest the Pope and the Frenche kynge made a league with the Swisses, ʒ wmglius di∣swadeth thē from takyng Pensions of thē. Luter beyng exiled by letters patentes, auoydeth. The kynge of Englande writcth agaynst him. Pope Leo dyeth, Adrian succedeth. Solyman the greate Turke hathe luckie successe in Hongary. Commotions in Spaynè, themperor couetyng to appease them, after he had treated wyth Englande, goeth thyther. The Byshoppe of Constance persecu∣teth ʒ wynglius. Troubles at Wittenberge, The Annabaptistes aryse, for the which, there is an assemble at Norinberge. The Pope sendeth thyther letters and Ambassadours. The Turke taketh the Rhodes. ʒ winglius hauyng set forth hys doctrine by certeyne Articles, is assayled by the Papistes, but in fyne the Ghospell is receyued at ʒ uricke. DUke Fridericke accompaniynge the Em∣perour The Empe∣rour sent for Luther to Wormes. to the assemblie at Wormes, had obteyned that Cesar sayde he would call for Luther, and heare his matter, whiche Luther vnderstanding by the Dukes let∣ters, wrote agayne aboute the latter ende of Ianuary, that he was exceadyng glad,  that the Emperor would vouche saufe to heare this matter, which in dede is a com¦mon cause: And that he shalbe content to do any thing that he may do with a saufe consciēce: Wherfore he besecheth him to prouide so, that he may be out of all daunger, that good and well learned men may be chosen for him to dispute with, that he be not condemned, before he be conuicte of He∣resie, that in the meane time his aduersaries may refraine theyr won∣ted rayling, and cease from burnynge of his Bookes. And that in case he shall nede hereafter to enterprise anye thinges els for Gods glorye and the trouthes sake, that he be not by the Emperor impeched herin, promisyng not to fayle, but to come to Wormes whan he shall haue receyued themperors sauffeconduit. Where he trusteth in such sorte to demeane him selfe and his cause before indifferent iudges, that all the worlde may vnderstande, that he hath done nothing by rebellion, but for the common wealth, chieflye of Germany to haue taken al this tra∣uell
to reduce men from many grosse errours to the sownde and pure doctrine. He desyreth him moreouer that the Emperor and he woulde haue a regarde to the horrible bondage and miserable estate of Chri∣stientie oppressed throughe mere Papistrie. Wherfore Cesar Collicted The Empe. writeth to Luther. by the Duke, wrote vnto Luther the syxte day of Marche. That for so muche as he had setforth certeine bookes, he was determined to heare the matter him selfe before the princes: wherfore these be to signifie vn∣to him that he hath free libertie to passe and repasse safely without any daunger, as more plainely doeth appere by the saufe conduict sent here with: he commaundeth him therfore to take his iorney spedely and not to fayle to be with him within one and twentie dayes. The Byshoppes of Rome haue accustomed on Thursedaye in the Passion weeke solemnely to curse and banne certeine kyndes of men. The Bul of cursyng. Fyrst Heretikes, secondarely Pirates, then suche as eyther Reyse vp new customes, or extorte that is forboden: Also suche as coūtrefeit the Bulles or Iustrumentes of the courte of Rome: Moreouer they that sell any Armure to Turkes or Sarasyns, and suche other vnlawfull wares: They that let or hinder corne to be brought to Rome: they that hurt any man suyng or belongynge to the Courte of Rome. Further∣more all suche as worke any damage or violence to the possessyons or neighbours dominions of the Churche of Rome, as namely the Citie of Rome, Sicilie, Naples, Cardinie, Corf, Hetruria, Spolete, Sabi∣ne, Ancona, Flaminie, Campanie, Bononie, Farrare, Beneuent, Pe∣rusie, Auenion. The former Bishoppes haue named for Heretikes the Garasians, Pateronians, the pore menne of Lions, the Arnoldistes, Speronistes, Wicleuistes, Hussites, and the Fratricelles. Leo the tēth put to also the Lutherians, and curseth them full blacke, this curse is commonly called the Bull of the Lordes Supper. Which Luther got afterwardes, and translated it into Duche, not without much myrthe and pastime. When Luther had receued the Emperours letters, he went to Wormes with the same Heralt: but when he came almooste there, there were diuerse that diswaded hym, puttynge him in mynde howe his bokes were brent, which was a certen preiudice of his con∣demnation, and howe the same might chaunce to him, as ded to Iohn Husse: but he with a stoute courage, contemned all perill, sayinge that it was plainely the Deuyll that woulde put him thus in feare, seynge The constā∣cie of Luth. that his kingdome should quayle by the confession of the trewth in so notable a place, so came he to Wormes the syxt day of April. The next day he was brought before the Emperour and the whole counsell of Lut. cōmeth to Wormes Princes. Where as by the Emperours commaundement Eckius the the Lawyer spake vnto him on this, wise. There be two causes, Mar∣tin Eckius to Luther. Luther, for the whiche the Emperor by the consent of the Princes and all the states, hath sent forth, commaundyng me to enquire of thee
the same. First, wherther thou wilt acknowledge these Bookes to be thine, and made by thee: Againe, whether thou wilt reuoke any thing in them or stande to the defence of all that is written therin? Luther had brought wt him a lawies of Wittenberge one Hierome Schurffe: Lu. pleadeth his cause be∣fore thempe∣rour and the whole Em∣pire. he had that the titles of the Bokes should be read and shewed: which done Luther briefly repeting the questions propoūded, as concerning my Bookes, saieth he, I confesse and acknowledge them to be myne: but whether I will defende all that I haue written, to the intente I make trewe aunswere, and do nothyng rashely, and forsomuch as the thinge is of weightie importaunce, I require a time to take delibera∣tion. When the thing was debated. Albeit (saieth he) that thou mygh∣test easely haue knowen by the Emperours letters why thou waste sent for, & therfore nowshouldest seke no delay to answere, yet Cesar of his clemencie graunteth thee one dayto take aduisement, commaun∣ding thee to be here to more we this time, do declare what thou wilte do herein, by mouthe, and not by writynge. For that he made this de∣lay, many supposed that he would not be constant. When he came the next daye, Eckius sayde vnto him: yesterday thou wouldest not aun∣swere to the seconde demaunde, but required a time, whiche myghte ryght well haue bene denied the: for euery man ought to be so certen of his fayth, that he should aunswere therto at al times: much lesse should a great diuine doubt or premeditate an answere: but what so euer the matter be. What sayest thou nowe? wilt thou defend thine owne wri∣tinges? Then Luther addressyng his aunswer to the Emperor and the Counsell of the Princes, besought them to heare him paciently, and if he should ought offende them, eyther in wordes, maners, or gestures, vnsemely for suche a presens, to beare with him: and pardō him for the kinde of lyfes sake that he hath bene brought vp in, for of my selfe (saith he) I can witnesse nothinge els, but that I haue taughte syncerly hi∣therto, those thinges, whiche I beleue, do concerne the glorye of God, and the saluation of men: And as concernyng my bookes I answered yesterday that they were made & written by me, but if any other hath added to any thyng, that will I not take for mine: Now to the secōde question. The bokes that I haue wrytten, be of sundrie argumentes. For some apperteine onely to the doctrine of fayth and vertue, whiche myne aduersaries them selues do commēde. If I should abiure them, I should not play the parte of an honest man: others there be wherein I reprehended the Byshoppe of Rome and hys doctrine, whereby he hath sore afflicted the Christian common wealth. For who seeth not how pitifully mens consciens are vexed with his lawes and decrees? Or who can deny howe craftely and disceiptfully he robbeth all coun∣treis, and chieflye Germany, and maketh not yet an ende of hys raue∣nynge? If I should abolishe these bokes, I shoulde confyrme their tyr∣rannye:
And it shoulde be the greater preiudice, to be done nowe by the authoritie of the Emperour and the Princes. The thirde kynde is written agaynste certeine priuate men, whiche woulde defende the Romishe wickednes, and seke euery where to in trap me in the which I confesse to haue bene more vehement then became me, but I ascribe to my selfe no holines, nor my profession is not of life or maners, but of trewe doctrine: Yet wyll I retracte nothynge in these same: for in so doyng I should set open a windowe to the arrogancie of manye: And yet I would not be so taken, as thoughe I toke vpon me, that I could not erre: but for so muche as it is the propertie of a man to erre and be disceaued, I take for the defence of my cause that saying of our sauior, who, speakynge of his doctrine what time he was striken of a seruāt, sayeth: If I haue spoken euyll, beare wytnesse of euyll. Wherefore if Christ which is all perfection, refused not the witnes of a most vile ser∣uaunt, Iohn .xviii. against him. Howe muche more I that am a synner by nature, should come whan I am called, to here if any man can testifie or bring forth any thing against my doctrine? Wherfore I desyre you for the ho∣nour of God, if any of all you, haue any thynge to obiecte agaynste the doctrine that I professe, he would not hide it, but come forth and shew the errour by the testimony of Scripture: whiche thinge done, I will be so lytell obstinate, that the fyrst of all men I shall caste myne owne Bokes into the fyre: And hereby maye a man iudge that I am not led rashely or like one that were rauished of his wittes, but to haue waied diligently the weightines of the thinge, and the troubles that are in∣gendred by this doctrine. And I reioyse greatly, whā I perceyue that my doctrine is cause of so great offences. For Christ him selfe saith how it is the nature of the gospell to styrre vp strife and contention, euen a∣monges suche as be ioyned most nere in bloud. Nowe therfore (O no∣ble men) ye ought grauely and with greate deliberation to consyder: and to foresee leste in condemnynge a doctrine throughe the syngular beuefyte of God offred you, ye be not cause of muche incōuenience that may therby chaunce vnto you and all Germany. You muste haue re∣specte also that this newe Empire of the yonge Emperor here present be not made vnlucky and vnfortunate by some vngodly and vnprofi∣table example for our posteriti. For it is to be proued by diuerse places of the Scripture, that there haue Empires fallen into greate perils, what tyme the common wealth hath bene gouerned onely by counsel and mans wisedome. Notwithstandyng (most wyse and honourable Princes) myne intent is not to shewe you what you haue to do: but I speake this for the zeale I beare to Germany, which is our natife coū∣trie, and ought to be derer vnto vs than oure owne lyues. For the rest I besethe you to receyue me into your tuition and protection agaynst the forse of myne enemyes.
What tyme he had made an ende, Eckius with a stowning comu∣tenaunce sayd vnto him: Thou answerest nothing to the purpose, noy∣ther is it thy part to call agayne in question such thinges as haue bene determined intimes past, by the aucthoritie of Counsels: Thou shoul∣dest make a playne and directe answere, whether thou wilte abide by thy writynges? Then sayd Luther, for asmuche as it is your commaud dement (most mightie Cesar, and most noble Princes) that I shall an∣swere directly, I will obey: This therfore is myne aunswere, that vn∣lesse I be conuinced by the Testimonies of holy Scripture, or by ma∣nifest reason, I can not reuoke any parte of that, whiche I haue writ∣ten or taught: for I will neuer do that thynge that should hurte myne owne conscience: And as for the Bishoppe of Rome, and the Counsels onely I do not beleue, nor admitte their authoritie: for they haue erred Pope & Cost sell may erre often tymes, and set forthe thinges contrary one to another. And they may erre and be disceaued. When the Princes had layde theyr heades together touchyng this aunswere: Then sayd Eckius, thou aunswerest Luther, more vnreue∣rently, then it becommeth thee, and not sufficientlye to the matter: of thy Bookes thou makest a difference: but in case thou woulde retract those, which conteyne a greater part of thyne errours, Cesar woulde suffer no iniurie to be done vnto suche as be well written: Thou dispi∣sest the Counsell of Constaunce, wheras were manye noble and well learned men of Germany, and renewest the errours therein condem∣ned, and wilt be conuinced by holy Scripture: Herein thou doest not well, but art farre abused: for loke what thinges the Church hath once condemned, the same maye come no more into any newe disputation: for if euery man will seke for a reason of eche thinge, and he that spea∣keth against Counsell must be reproued only by the Scriptures, there shall be nothyng certeinly determined. For the whiche cause the Em∣perour wyll haue thee to pronounce openly, what thou determinest of thy Bookes. I beseche you (saieth Luther) gyue me leaue to kepe my conscience safe and sounde: I haue answered playnely, and haue none other thinge to say: for vnlesse myne aduersaries can shew me by trew argumentes taken out of the Scripture, and take away my errour, I can not be quiet in my minde: for I am able to shew that they haue of∣tentimes, and shamefully erred: And for me to swarue from the Scri∣pture, whiche is manifest and cannot erre, were a very wicked dede? the other sayd it could not be proued that euer generall counsel had er∣red: But Luther sayd he both could and would, and so they departed at that time. The next day the Emperour sent letters to the Princes, syttyng in Counsell: signifiyng, that his progenitours had both profes∣sed the Christian Religion: and euermore obeied the Church of Rome: And now seing that Luther doth impugne it, perseueryng obstinately
in his opinion, hys dutie requireth that folowynge the steppes of hys auncestours, he defende the Christian Religion, and succor the church of Rome: Wherfore he wyll banishe Luther and his adherentes, and vse other fitte remedies to quenche this fyre: but touching his promise, he will kepe it, that he may retorne home agayne safe and sound: This Epistle was muche debated, and skanned amonges the Princes: And there were some that saide there was no promise to be kept with him, according to the decree made in the Counsel at Constance, but against that were manye others, and namely Lewes the Countie Palatyne, Prince Elector, affyrminge that it would redounde to the perpetuall shame of Germany. Wherupon diuerse thought mete, not only to kepe theyr promise, but also not to condempne him rasshelye, for that it is a weightie matter, consyderyng how themperor, at these yeares is soone moued and exasperated agaynst Luther, by the Byshoppe of Romes ministers. A fewe dayes after the Bishoppe of Treuers appoynteth Luther, to come to him, the .xxiiij. daye of Aprill: There were present Joachin, Treuers & other Prin∣ces threate∣neth Luther. Marques of Brandenburge electour, George Duke of Saxonie, the Byshop of Auspurge, & other nobles. And whan Luther was brought in by the Archebishoppes Chapplaine, and the Emperours Heraulte, Ueus a Lawyer of Badon sayde vnto him: Where these noble Prin∣ces haue sent for thee (Martin Luther) it is not to enter into any dispu¦tation with thee, but to treate frēdly with thee, and priuatly to admo∣nishe thee touching thine owne profyt. For the Emperour hath geuen them leaue so to do. And fyrst it may be that counsels haue taught dy∣uerse thinges, but not contrary: And albeit they haue erred, yet is not theyr authoritie so decaied herby that euery man may treade it vnder foote. Thy bokes (if it be not well loked to) wyll styrre vp greate trou∣ble. For many interprete the same which thou hast written of Christen libertie, after theyr owne affections, to the entent they maye do what they lyste. This worlde is nowe more corrupte than it hath bene here tofore. And therfore men must worke more warely. There be some of thy workes that can not be reproued: but it is to be feared, lest the De¦uill in the meane tyme petswade thee, to set forth others agaynste Re∣ligion and godlines, that so thy bokes may be altogether condemned. For those that thou hast set forth last, declare ryght well, how the tree is to be knowen by the fruites, and not by the blosome. Thou art not ignoraunt, how diligently the Scripture warneth vs, to beware of the noone Deuill, and the fliynge Arrowe: that enemye of mankynde ceaseth not to lye in waite for vs, and many times vnder a Godly pre∣tence, intrappeth and leadeth vs awaye into errour. Therefore thou oughtest to consider bothe thine owne saluation and other mens, and it would become thee to foresee, lest suche as Christ hath through hys
death redemed from death euerlastynge, beyng through thy faulte, bo∣kes, and prechinges seduced from the Churche perishe againe, the dig∣nitie of the which Church all men ought to acknowledge reuerently. For in all the world is there nothing better, thā the obseruation of the lawes. And lyke as no cōmō weale consisteth wtout lawes: euen so vn∣lesse the moste holy decrees of our forefathers be reuerently kept, there shall be nothing more troublesome than the state of the Church, which should be most quiet and stable. These noble and vertuouse Princes here present, for the singular zeale they beare to the commō weale, and for thy cause and wealth also, thoughte good to admonisshe thee of all these thinges. For doubtles if thou wylte perseuer thus obstinatlye in thine opinion, and not relent, the Emperour wyll bannishe thee out of the Empire, and wyll forbyd thee to haue anye restynge place of Ger∣many, to the ende thou maiest the better consyder thine owne state. Wherunto Luther replied: For this your great good will and gen∣tlenes Luthers an∣swer to the Princes. (most noble Princes) shewed vnto me, I gyue you most hertye thankes: for certenlye I am a man of a baser sorte than that it shoulde beseme so noble men to take suche paines for me: But as concernynge the Counsels, I do not reprehende all, but chiefly that of Constaunce, and haue iuste cause so to do: For Husse defyned the Churche to be the fellowshippe of Gods electe, bothe this and that saying of his, he bele∣ued the holy Churche, they condemned also, more worthy them selues to be condemned: for he spake bothe truely and like a Christen man. Therfore I will suffer any punishement, yea spend my life sooner than I will swarue from the manifest worde of God: for we muste rather obey God then men, touching the offence that connneth by my bookes I neyther can, nor ought to eschewe. For the offences of Charitie and The offenca of Faith and maners. of faythe differ much, wherof that which consisteth in life and maners must in anye wyse be auoyded: but thother whiche cleaueth to Godes worde is not to be regarded: for the trewth, will, and commaundemēt of the heauenly father must be accomplished, though the whole world should be offended: The Scripture calleth Christ himselfe the stone of offence. And the same appertayneth also likewise to all suche as preach the Gospell: I knowe that we ought to obey lawes and Magistra∣tes, and so haue I euermore taught the people also, & my writinges do sufficiently beare witnes howe muche I do ascribe to the dignitie of the lawes. But as touchyng the decrees of the churche, there is an o∣ther consideration to be had. For if Gods word were taught sincerely if the Bishops & pastours of the church did their dewtie, like as Christ & his apostles haue ordeined, it nede not to impose vnto mēs mindes & consciēces yt heauie & intollerable burthē of mens traditiōs. Moreouer I am ignorāt not how ye scripture admonisheth vs to refrain our own affectiōs, which thīg is truely spoken, & I wilbe glad to perfourme it,
neither will I do any thinge obstinately: so that I may onely professe the doctrine of the gospel. Whan he had sayd thus, he was cōmaunded to depart. Whan they had consulted of the matter, Ueus amonges o∣ther thinges began to perswade him to submitte his writynges to the knowledge of the Emperour and the princes: content (saith he) I wil neuer seme to refuse the iudgemēt of Cesar, and the states of thempire, so it maye be done by Scripture, and Gods worde, whiche maketh so much for me, that vnlesse the same do reproue my errour, I can not for∣sake mine opinion: For Paule commaundeth not to beleue an Aungel comming from heauen, if he bringe an other doctrine. Wherfore he be∣secheth the Princes, that he might kepe a saufe conscience, which if by theyr mediation to the Emperour he mighte obtayne, he was content to do any thing. Then said the Marques of Brādenburge: Wilt thou not geue place except thou be conuict by Scripture? No in dede (saieth Luther) or els by manyfest reasons. Wherfore when the counsell was broken vp, the Archbishoppe of Treuers toke him a parte, and began to admonishe him againe, but it might not preuaile. The next day also he moued him to commit the iudgement vnto Cesar, and to the senate of Princes, without conditiō: But it was in vaine. At the after noone the Bishoppe and certeine others required him at the lest, to submitte his workes to the nexte generall counsell. He agreeth therunto, so that the matter be handled by the Aucthoritie of Scripture. After this the Archbishop in priuate talke with him alone, demaunded of him what remedy would helpe this greuous disease? (He sayde) the best counsell is, that Gamaliel in tymes past gaue to the Scribes, and Phariseis, and not to contende with God. In fyne when he coulde not preuaile, Actes .v. he letteth him depart gently, and sayd he would deuise for him, that he should retourne home by saufeconduicte. And not longe after commeth Eckius the Lawier, and saieth vnto him: For asmuche as thou hast refused the admonishmentes of Cesar, and the Princes, the Emperour from hence forth will do as to his of∣fice apperteineth, and now commaūdeth thee, to depart hence imme∣diatly, graunting thee one and twentie dayes for thy retourne: & looke what promise he made thee, the same wil he kepe vnbroken: charginge thee moreouer yt in thy retourne home, thou styrre vp no people by the way, neither by word, nor writing. On this wise beyng suffered to de∣part, Luth. sent a∣waye scom Wormes. he gaue the glory vnto God. By the way he wrote to thēperour, and to the residew of the Princes & states, repeting the whole actiō at few words, requiring thē that for so much as he hath, & euer wil seke a quiet agrement, & desireth nothing els, but yt the matter maye be indif∣ferently heard & iudged by Scripture: they wold defende him frō the force of his enemies, for yt it is not his priuate cause, but cōmō to al the world, & namely Germany, whose weale he estemeth more thā his life.
For as muche as oftentimes mention hath bene made of Husse, of the Counsell of Constaunce and of the Bohemers, I shall brieflye de∣clare the matter. Iohn Wickliffe liued in Englande about the yere of Iohn Wi∣clffe an En∣glishe man. our Lord .M. CCC .xciij. Who wrote many thinges agaynst the See of Rome, which were brought afterwardes into the lāde of Boheme. Prage was thē a noble Uniuersitie: And there flourished Iohn Husse a Doctor of Diuinitie, who in his lectures and sermons set forthe and Iohn Husse a Bohemer. taught Wicliffes doctrine, to be holesome and godly; beyngt accused of the same to the Byshoppe of Rome, Alexander the fyfte, he is cited. He by his procurers sheweth causes why he coulde not come: Wencelaus also the king, entreateth for him, and requireth that he would send his Legates into Boheme to vnderstand the matter: but yt was in vaine. Wherefore Husse condemned at Rome for an Heritike, setteth forthe a writing, wherin he appealeth from the Bishoppe, to the Iudge Christ. The church of Rome was yt time full of trouble, for the Cardinals Husse appea¦leth from the Pope. beyng deuyded, had chosen three Byshoppes at once, Gregory the .xij. Benedicte the .xiij. and Iohn the .xxiij. Which thinge Themperor Si∣gismside, & other kynges were right sory for. And caused Bishop Iohn to sommon a counsell at Constance: And Sigisinunge the brother of kynge Wencelaus, called thither Iohn Husse sendyng him a safe con∣duicte The Coūsel of Cōstaūce. in moneth of Octobre, in the yere .M.CCCC.xiiij. Whereupon Husse accompanied with diuerse gentlemen, come vnto Constance the thirde day of Nouembre: But three weekes after when he came to the priuate talke of the Bishop and his Cardinalles, he was deteined pri∣soner. Thēperour was then absent, which beyng certified of the thing came thyther in greate displeasure: But when they had borne him in hande, that there is no promise to be kept with Heretikes, he was not onely content (albeit that the Bohemers made oftentimes greate sute to him) not to kepe his promise, but also was the fyrst that spak bitter∣ly against him. Finally the syxt day of Iuly in the yere followynge the Synnode condemned him as an Heretike and a sedicious parson, his his workes also to be bursit. And thus beyng condemned he was deli∣uered Iohn Husse & Hierome of Praga burned. to thēperour and burned. And his ashes were cast into the riuer of Rhine, lest any reliques of him shold remayne. After him Hierome of Prage a Scolar of his was in lyke maner executed. In this Counsell besydes Themperour were the Ambassadours of sondry kynges, thre Princes Electours, Lewes countie Palatine, Raffe duke of Saxonie and Fridericke Marques of Brandenburge: And a greate numbre of other Princes: Three Patriarches, of Aquileia, Antioche, and Cōstan∣tinople .xxviij. Cardinalles, and an .Civ. Byshops, Diuines & Lawiers very many, Italians: Germaines, Frēchmen, Englishmē, Hūgariās, Polonians. Here was the doctrine of Wicliffe condemned, & a decree made that his body in Englande should be taken vp, and brent.
Furthermore it was decreed that priestes onely should receiue the hole supper of the Lord, al others to be content with one kind. Which thinge Husse had impugned. There was also a lawe made, that there should be no promise kepte with Heretikes, or suspected of Heresye, al∣beit that they came to the counsell to be examined, by the Emperours saufeconduicte. Fynally the three Byshoppes were deposed, and by cō¦mon Thre Popes deposed. assent was chosen Martin the fyfte of that name. Whan it was reported in Boheme of the death of Husse and Hierome, there arose a tumulte, and after, also a verye bloudy and crewell warre, by the con∣duicte of Iohn Zischa, in so muche that Sigysmunde was constray∣ned to require the aide of the Empire. But their moste crueltie was wrought against pristes, for the hatred of the Bishop of Rome, whose tirranny they had shaken of, and receiued the doctrine of Husse. About this time, the Diuines of Paris condemned Luthers Bokes, gathe∣ryng out of the same certein titles as be these, of the Sacramentes, of The Diui∣nes of Paris condempne Luth. bokes. thecclesiastical lawes, of vowes, of contrition, absolution, satisfaction, Purgatory, frewyll, and suche like, admonishyng all men that professe Christ, to beware of suche Heretykes, which vnder flattering wordes exhibite present poyson, as Wiclyffe, Husse, and Luther, as thoughe it were like that they could see more then all others, or that it were to be thoughte, that Christe woulde haue suffered his onelye spouse to haue wandered so longe in the darkenes of Errours. And so in recytyng of his bokes, they shew in which opinions, what Heretikes Luther folo∣weth, wherfore (say they) seyng it apperteyneth chiefly to our professiō, to suppresse the errours that spring vp, finding his doctrine to be perni¦cious, we cōdēne his Bokes to be brent, & him self to be forsed to recāt. To this decree of theyrs aunswereth Philip Melanchthon, and af∣ter Thauthori∣tie of the Di¦uines of Pa∣ris. that Luther him selfe, but skoffyngly. Notwithstandyng the Diui∣nes of Paris take vpon them herin to be the chiefe in all Europe: they haue two principall Colledges, Sorbone and Nauare. The Bache∣lars of Diuinitie are exercised in disputations all the somer time, & by the space of .xij. houres, must they answere to all mēs argumētes. Here be maruelous cōtentions, & for the most part either of very trifles, or of thinges farre exceadyng mans capacitie, they be clamorous aboue measure, but their strife is cōmonly ended by the hissyng & clapping of theyr Auditors, what time the one of the disputers is either to fōde or to tedious, The Doctors of Diuinitie stāde in the latesse windowes, & hearkē, they are called magistri nostri, they be the Cēsours, & iudges of all doctrine, & plainely possesse a kingdō. For no man dare publishe any thing touching Diuinitie, but through their permission, Leo the .x. had The Swys∣ses make a league wyth the Frenche kynge. already made a league wt the Swyses, yt if he had nede at any time he shold haue theyr aide. The kīg of Fraūce in like case, which before had cōcluded a peace with thē, laboured thē to aide him wt mē for his mony
Zwinglius in his sermons diswaded them from the same, declaringe vnto them howe vile, and howe wicked a thing it is to serue a foreine Prince for money, he exhorted them therfore to folow the frugalitie of their elders, whiche kepte cattel and occupied husbandry, and yet had done many goodly exploictes, but all this was in vaine. For the chiefe of them corrupted wyth bribes, perswaded the reste to make a league also with the kinge, and aide him with men. Saue they onely of Zu∣ricke perswaded by Zuinglius, refused it, and made an othe, that they would neuer take wages nor stypende of anye Prince, to serue him in his warres. After this was borne the kynges sonne Charles, whome Thirtene townes of Swysses. the Swyces sendynge theyr deputies, Christened at the Fontestone. The Heluetians or Swicesse, consiste of thirtene Townes, Zuricke, Bernes, Lucerna, Ura, Swite, Unterualde, Tugie, Glarea, Basille, Solodure, Friburge, Schafusiane, and Apecelle. These are ioyned in a most straite leage by an othe, vsynge one and the same law, and go∣uerne as it were in common theyr common weale. The fyrst of all that made this leage, were the Uranites, the Swy∣ces, and Unterualdians, what tyme they expulsynge their nobilitie The libertie of the Swys¦ses. (vnder whome they were oppressed) procured their owne libertie. This was in the yere of our Lorde .M.CCC.xv. After came vnto thē they of Lucerne next them the Tugians, in the syxte place the men of Zuricke, and last they of Bernes and of Basille. Than ioyned wyth them in societie (but not in the same lawes nor so great frendshippe) the Rhetians, Lepontians; Sedunites, Ueragrites, Sangallians, Mullusians, and they of Rotuuille. The Emperour beyng now past one & twenty yeres of Age, bani∣sheth Luther by a common decree, the eyght day of May, takyng the begynning therof, of his owne parson, for that it was his part and of∣fice, Luib. is ont∣lawed by the Emperour. not onely to establishe and augment the Empire, but also to forese that no blemishe nor Heresye should springe vp within the limittes of the same. And that his Progenitours in dede haue bene diligent men herin. Wherfore it is mete that he, vnto whō God hath giuen so large and ample dominiōs, should folow their steppes: for vnlesse he should punishe nowe the Heresyes lately spronge vp in Germany, he shoulde bothe hurte his owne conscience, & in the beginning now of his reigne sore blemisshe his name and dignitie: that it is well knowen vnto all men, what wicked doctrine Luther hathe spread abroade nowe these three or foure yeres, agaynste the Byshoppe and Churche of Rome, a∣gainst the decrees of the auncient fathers, and namely against the coū∣sel of Constance, to the great reproche of thēperor Sigismūde and the Princes of Germany yt were there present: Wherfore syns that in hys bokes is nothing els conteined but sedition, discorde, warre, murther, and mischief, so yt he appereth not to be a man that wrote thē, but ra∣ther
a Deuil in a mans likenes: He for the zeale that he beareth to the common wealth and the dignitie of the Bishoppe of Rome doth con∣demne, and proscribe him as aucthor of Scismes, as a manyfest and an obstinate Heretike, commaundynge all men vnder a great penal∣tie so to accepte him, and after thre weekes wherin he gaue him leaue to retourne, to apprehende him, and bringe him vnto him: and al such as shall fauour or aide him in his doynges, he banisheth in like case: he commaundeth also his Bokes should be brent, appoyntynge a greate penaltie herafter for the Stationers, commaunding this decree of his which he sayeth was made by the common consent, and assent of the Princes, to be well obserued. Men say how this decree was made by a very fewe, for diuerse of the Electours confessed that they were not made priuie to it, as shall be declared hereafter of the Archebyshoppe of Collē. The Archbishoppe of Mentz beyng Chauncelour of the Em∣pire maye do muche in such matters. But how so euer it came to passe the Emperour hereby wanne muche fauoure, in so muche that the Bi∣shoppe of Rome, cleane forsakynge the Frenche kynge, made a league with him, as shall be declared hereafter. From the tyme of this publication, Duke Fridericke appointed cer¦tein of his nobilitie, whom he especially trusted, to conueighe Luther Luth. is con¦uetghed out of daunger. out of the way, in to some secrete place, that he might eschewe the daū∣ger, whiche thinge was done bothe diligently and closelye. In this carefulnes Luther wrote diuerse epistles to his Frendes, and also bo∣kes, concernyng the abrogating of the priuate Masse, whiche he dedi∣cateth Sunday bo∣kes of Luth. to his brethren the Austen Freres: of Religious Uowes, to his father Iohn Luther, and a booke agaynst Iames Latomus a Doc∣tor of Louaine. The Austen Freres beganne nowe fyrste of all men to leaue of Massyng, and for that cause Luther compiled this Booke for them, that he might encourage the weake, and confyrme the skylfull, exhortinge them muche to perseuer in the same purpose. Whiche thinge knowen, Duke Friderick fearing that some great trouble or commotion should arrise therof, commaunded that the opi∣nion of the whole Uniuersitie herein should be knowen and brought vnto him: The Uniuersitie chose iiij. for the same purpose, Iustus Io∣nas, Of themasse to be abolis∣shed. Philip Melanchthon, Nyclas Amstorfe, and Iohn Dulce. Who conferryng with the Austen Freres, brought worde what theyr intēt was. And furthermore declared what an iniury was done to the lor∣des Supper. Wherfore they beseche the Prince that he would abolish so great a wickednes, not out of one Churche onely, but also in all pla∣ces, and set vp the trew vse of the Lordes Supper, accordyng to Chri∣stes commaundement, and the maner of the Apostles, stoutly contem∣nyng al the reproches of the aduersaries: for it hath euerbene sene, that who so taketh in hande to maynteine the trew doctrine of the Gospel,
must suffre many thinges: and that he ought greatly to foresee, that he accept reuerently this present gifte of God, wherwith he is chiefly ad∣orned, by reason of the lyght of Ghospell; spronge vp amonges his peo∣ple. Wherunto the Duke answered, that he would leaue nothing vn∣attempted that might be for Gods glory: but for so muche as the thing is ful of difficultie, he thinketh good not to beto hastie, for litel it is that so fewe can bringe to effect: but in case the matter be grownded on the Scriptures, they shall doubtles haue mo to take theyr parts. And thē shall that alteration, which shall seme both Godly and necessary, more conueniently be brought to passe: For he him selfe which is ignoraunt in the Scriptures, cā not tel what time this accustomed vse of masse, which you reproue came vp, or when, yt maner that the Apostles vsed, was lefte: But as he taketh it, the most part of Colledges and Chur∣ches, were fownded for Masses, whiche if they should be put downe, and the landes taken awaye, that were geuen for the same purpose, e∣uery man might well consyder what hurly burly would follow vpon the same: Wherfore his aduise shalbe, that they go, and consult further of the matter with the rest of good and well learned men of the vniuer¦sitie, that all theyr heades leyde together, suche meanes may be foūde, as maye kepe a Godly quiet. These men, after more deliberation had, make him answer, admo∣shing him as before, to put downe thē Masse, that the thinge maye be done without any tumult. And thoughe it coulde not, yet that whiche is righte and godlye, woulde not therfore be lefte vndone: that they be fewer in numbre, it is no newes: For euer syns the worlde began, the greater part of men haue resisted the trewe doctrine: moreouer yt those The best thiges please fewest men. onely shall receiue this ryght vse of the Lordes Supper, vnto whome it shall be gyuen from aboue. Furthermore, that Colledges were fyrst instituted, not for Masses, but that youth myght there be vertuousely brought vp in learnynge. And the landes gyuen to fynde some to teach, and some to learne, and the reste to the vse of the pore. And this vse to haue continewed in ma∣ner to the time of Barnarde: But aboute foure hundreth yeares syns this Marchaundise of Masses began, whiche is vtterly to be taken a∣waye: And albeit the originall thereof, were yet more auncient, yet is not so great a wickednes to be suffered. And in case any busynes shold come therof, the same ought not to be ascribed to the doctrine, but to the wickednes of them, which for their owne lucre will impugne the truthe, against their conscience. And that we ought not to regard such inconueniences, but to procede constantlye what trouble so euer shall come therof: for all these thinges were shewed before of Christ. Thys yeare Themperours brother Farnando Archduke of Austriche, mari∣eth the lady Anne, sister to Lewes the kinge of Hongary. Emonges so
many aduersaries as Luther had, Henry the eyghte, Kynge of Eng∣lande wrote soore agaynst him. And fyrst he confuteth his iudgement, Henry kyng of Englande writeth a∣gainst Luth. touching Indulgences, and defendeth the Bishops authoritie. After he reproueth all his disputations, concerning the Sacramentes of the Churche, taking the occasion of writing, out of his boke intitiled, of the captiuitie of Babylon. Whan Luther knewe therof, he answered most vehemently, shew∣ynge that in the defence of this cause, he did not one whit respecte the highnes or dignitie of any parson. For this cause the Bishop Leo gaue the kynge an honorable title, callyng him, the defendour of the faith. Howe kynge Charles was chosen Emperour, it is here to fore de∣clared: And wheras euer syns certen priuate dyspleasures did growe Themperor hath warre with Fraūce betwixte hym and the Frenche kynge, it brake out into warres. But fyrst in the borders of Spaine, and of Flaunders. The same tyme the Frenchmen kept Parma and Placence in Italy: which the Bishoppe Leo was right sory for. And when they had also of late attēpted Rhe∣gium, he vtterly forsoke them, and entred into league with the Empe∣rour, wherof the chief condicions were these. That the dignitie of the Churche of Rome should be defended, that suche Townes as the Frenchemen of late had taken from him, should be recouered, that Frances Sfortia, that time a banished man, should be restored to his fathers seat and to the dukedome of Millan. Thus ioyning their powers together, they recouered of the frenchmen Par∣ma and Placence, and by force toke the citye of Millan and droue the French king out of Lumbardy, which he had kept in quiet possession fullye .vi. yeares, and afterwardes restored Sfortia, by the conduit of prosper Columne, & Fernando Daualle marques of Piscare. And not lōg after these newes wer brought, Leo departed not without the su∣spicion of poysening. He was sōne vnto Laurens Medices and had to The death of Leo the .x. his great grandfather Cosmus, that was yt great honor of that house. Leo was made Cardinall when he was but .xiii. yeares old: he liued not past seuen and forty: his successor was Adriane the sixt a Hollāder who had bene tutor to the emperour. About the same time Soliman Adrian succe¦deth Leo. lately created Emperour of Turkes moued warre vpon Lewes king of Boheme and Hungary, which had maried the Lady Marye them∣perours sister, and besides many other townes and Castels, he tooke The Turke taketh Bel∣grade. Belgrade the chief fortresse of Hungary, and placed therin a garrison. Whilest Cesar maketh his abode in Flaunders and Germany, greate seditions arose in Spaine: Wherfore to the intent he might remedye the thing in time, hauing first appoynted a coūsel to minister the law, Commotfôs in Spaine. and to see to the affaires of thempire, he saileth againe into Spaine. But before he toke his iorney, the states of Thempire were all readye assembled at Norinberge concerninge diuers matters, but chieflye the
Turkyshe warre: And Cesar sending forth his proclamation at the la∣ter ende of Marche, warneth chiefly all ecclesiasticall parsons, to pray  and make theyr supplications vnto God: Afterwardes the fyrste of Maye, was aide graunted to kynge Lewes. Themperour in his re∣tourne, goeth agayne to see the kynge of Englande, whom to haue his assured frende agaynst the Frenche kynge, he promyseth to geue hym yerely, a hundreth and three and thyrtie thousande Duckates. For so muche did the Frenchkynge paye yearely, to the kynge of Englande, and to his syster Mary the French quene Wherfore vnlesse he mighte be saued harmeles, he would attempt nothing against him. This trea¦tie was made the thirtene day of Iune in the Castell of Wyndsore .xx. myles from Lōdon: And for a more entiere loue and frendship, it was agreed, that the Emperour shoulde take to wyfe, the lady Mary the kynges daughter by his aunte Quene Kataryne, and marry her whē The lady Mart assured to thēperor. time should serue, for she was then but seuen yeares of age: Whether∣soeuer brake of, to pay to the other foure hundred thousande crownes. The Frenche kynge bendeth all his force towardes Italy, to recouer that he had lost: you haue heard before of Zuinglius: and now Hugh Byshoppe of Constance, within whose prouince Zuricke is aduerti∣sed the Senate, what complaintes he heard of Zuinglius, and what a kynde of newe doctrine he had broughte in: he defendeth hys cause before the Senate, whome he satisfied. After the Byshoppe wrote his letters to the College of Canons; wherof Zuinglius was one, & spea∣kyng muche of new doctours that troubled the Churche, he exhorteth them to take hede and beware of them: And for so muche as Leo the Bishop of Rome, and the Emperour also haue by most streigth procla¦mations condemned thys doctrine, he warneth them that they obey the same, and neyther alter nor chaunge any thinge, till they that haue Authoritie, should decree some thinge by a generall counsell, this was in the moneth of Maye. When this Epistle was read in the Colledge, Zuinglius whome it concerned, wryteth agayne to the Byshop, that he vnderstondeth right well by whose motiou he doeth this: He ad∣monisheth him not to folow theyr counsell, for the trueth is inuincible, and can not be resysted. Afterwardes with a longer letter he answereth those, whiche styr∣red vp the Bishoppe to write. Then Zuinglius and certein others in∣treate the Bishop by their letters, that he would not hynder the doc∣trine of the Gospell, nor suffer any longer that filthy and sklaunderous life of pristes, but permitte them to marrye: And of the same effecte he writeth to all the Heluetians, admonishyng thē not to stop the course of the trewe doctrine, nor to worke any displeasure agaynste maryed Who is au∣thor of sin∣gle life. priestes, for of the single life, the Deuill him selfe was author. In many of theyr Townes it is the maner, that whan they receyue a newe mi∣nister
of the churche, they bidde him take a Leman, lest he attempt to defyle honest women, whiche custome althoughe it be laughed at of many, yet was it wittelye diuised as the tyme serued, and in so greate darkenes of doctrine depraued. And the same that they did touchinge theyr concubines, ought nowe to be euery where receiued for lawfull wines. In the meane tyme Luther, who had kepte him selfe closse cer∣certein monethes, retorneth to Wittenberge, & fearinge lest the duke Lut. rotaur∣neth to Wit¦tenberge. should it take in euyll part, he writeth vnto him in Marche, signifiyng that where as he is retourned without his commaundement, he dyd so, of no euill wyll or contempte: he knoweth that some will beare him in hande, that the same shall be daungerous for his grace, for asmuche as he is condemned, bothe by the Bishoppe of Rome and themperour. Whose powers bothe are great: this did he consyder before longe and ofte: but there be three causes, of his retourne, fyrst that he was often∣times requested by sundrye letters of the Churche of Wittenberge to retourne, whose desyre he coulde not but accomplishe, for that the same people are properly committed to his charge of God, & ought not to be neglected. And albeit that some are muche offended with this refour∣mation of doctrine and reporte euill therof yet knoweth he moste cer∣tenly, that this his profession is vnto God most acceptable. Secondarely in the tyme of hys absence, throughe the crafte of the Deuill (who can not abyde this lyght of the Ghospell, there was styr∣red vp trouble in his churche, whiche vnlesse he him selfe were present, coulde not be well appeased, which matter was so great and weightie that it might be in no wise neglected, for if the thinge might haue bene dispatched by letters, he coulde righte easelye haue forborne Witten∣berge. Thyrdely, he sayeth, he feareth and doth in maner foresee, a wō∣derfull great tempest in Germany, which so racklesly doeth contemne Luther fore∣seeth the teni pest cōmyng. this present benefite of God: For many in dede do embrace the trewe doctrine, but in their liuyng they sklaunder it, abusynge the libertie of the spirit, after theyr carnall appetit. Others be wholy gyuen to quēch and oppresse the worde, they rare not howe, whiche contempte of his word, God must nedes punnishe with one plage after an other, as he did in times past the Iewes and theyr citie Hierusalem: Wherefore it is his part and suche others as he is, to admonishe all men hereof with their whole force and diligēce: for albeit they should trauaile in vaine, and be laughed at, yet may not they therfore leaue theyr office vndone, seyng that it pleaseth God, who hathe committed vnto them the cure of soules: wherefore he prayeth him not to be offended, that he is thus retourned, beyng neither called nor commaunded of him: for sythe it is altogether Christes cause, his trust is, that he shall sustayne no displea∣sure or perill for his retourne. The trouble whiche in his absence (he sayde) was in his Churche,
was this: Andreas Caralostadius, in the meane tyme that Luther was absente, preached contrary doctrine, and disorderlye styrred vp the people, to caste the Images oute of the Churche: For the which cause Luther beyng called againe of his frendes, dis∣praiseth the rashenes of Carolostadius, shewyng that fyrste the Ima∣ges should haue bene remoued out of the peoples harts, being instruc∣ted, that God is not pleased with Images, but with faith onely: And then if they should be taken away, the same to be done by the Magi∣strates, and not by the tumulte and rage of the common people. The same tyme began a secte of them, that saide, they had talke with God, who had commaunded them, that sleyng all wicked men, they should begin a new world, wherin onely the holy and innocent people should lyue and beare rule. These kepte them selues priuelye in that parte of Saronie that lyeth by the riuer of Sala, whose opinion (as saith Lu∣ther) Carolostadius also fauoured: And when he could not bringe hys matters to passe at Wittenberge, beynge defaced by Luthers auctho∣ritie, he went from thens vnto them: Of this sorte of men was Tho∣mas Muncer, whiche styrred vp the people against theyr magistrates in Thuringe and Franconie, as shall be recyted in his place. Luther hearyng yt in the lande of Boheme there were some whiche in common assemblies counseiled to receiue agayne the Bishop of Ro∣mes Luther wri∣teth to the Bohemers. aucthoritie, or elles there shoulde neuer be ende of contention and controuersies, he wryteth vnto them in the moneth of Auguste, that their name was in times past odiose, and hated of him, before such tyme as he knewe the Bishop of Rome to be Antichriste: But nowe, syns God hath restored to the worlde the lyght of the Gospell, he iud∣geth farre otherwise, and so hath professed in his workes, in so muche that nowe the Byshoppe and all his Clientes are much more offended with him, thē they are with them: His aduersaries haue many tymes saied, howe he was fledde into Boheme, and in dede he hath ofte wis∣shed to go thyther, but lest they shoulde call his iourney a runnynge a∣waye, he hath altered his purpose. And nowe is the matter brought to suche a passe, that there is good hoope, howe the Germaynes, and the Bohemers shall professe the gospell & the same Religion together. Where many be sory that they be deuided into sectes, they are not gre∣ued without iuste cause, but if they reuolte vnto Papistrie, they shall not onely not take awaye theyr sectes, but increase and swarme in the Many sectes in the popish kingdome. same. For there is no where mo sectes than is in the Romishe kyngdō, as is to be sene by the graye Freres which differ much amonges them¦selues: And yet are all suche thinges done and mainteined by the By∣shop of Rome, whose kyngdome throughe mens discorde, is nourished and establsshed. For this is the verye cause, whye he setteth Princes together by the
eares, and seketh alwaies to styrre vp matters of grudge and displea∣sure. Wherfore let thē take goodhede, lest whilest they go about to abo¦lish those lesser sectes, they fal into more pernicious, as al those Romish be vtterly vncurable. Frō the which now thorow Gods benefit Ger∣manye is latelye delyuered. And howe there is no better medicine to take awaye euill, than if the Pastours of the Churche woulde setforth the doctrine of the Gospell purely and syncerely. And in case they can not reteyne the weake people in theyr dewtie, but that they wyll re∣uolte, at the lest wyse let them indeuour to kepe styl the Lordes Sup∣per wholy, and the memoriall of Husse and Hierome of Prage vndeti∣led. For it may be that the Bishop will attempt to take these two thin¦ges from them chiefly. Wherfore if any of them relent, and graunr the tyrant bothe, it shall not be well done of them. Howe be it though  Boheme do reuolte, yet will he set forth and commende the doctrine of Husse vnto all posteritie. Wherfore he praieth and exhorteth them  perseuer in that state of Religion, whiche they haue defended  with muche bloud and valeauntnes, neither through their yng blemishe the gospell, that nowe florisheth. And all beit that al thinges be not wel established amonges them: yet will not God fayle them, but whan he seeth time he will styrre vp some faythfull minister to reforme Religion, so that they wyll be con∣stant, and vtterly refuse the fylthines and wickednes of the Romisshe Bishoppe. As concernyng the Bohemers thus it standeth. After the death of Iohn Husse, the people of Boheme wer deuided Three sectes of the Bohe∣mers. into three sectes. Oue part toke the Bishoppe of Rome for the head of the Churche, and the Uicar of Christ. Another sorte receyued the Lor∣des Suppes in both kyndes, and in their Masses had certeine thyn∣ges rehersed in their vulgare tounge, differing in nothing els from the Papistes. The thyrde sort were called Picardes, they call the Bishop of Rome Antichriste, and the whore of Babilon, described in the Re∣uelation: they admitte nothynge but the Bible, they chose theyr owne priestes and Bishoppes: they forbid no man to mary: they pray not for the dead, as for holy dayes and ceremonies, they haue but very fewe. After this Luther compiled a Boke againste the false named order of Lu. writeth againste the Bishoppes. Bishops, in the preface wherof (he saith) it is to them great shame that so many of them as they be with their great liuinges and honourable titles, prosessyng them to be maisters of the whole Scriptures, yt they dare not come to dispute with him onelye before indifferent Iudges, beyng so ofte prouoked therunto. Wherfore (he saieth) that from hence forth, he will no more submitte his writynges vnto them, as he dyd at Wormes, for the Doctrine is not his, but Christes. Who lyueth and reigneth for euer, who will once restraine theyr madnes, and bluddye enterprises.
By the decrees of the Bishop of Rome, and thēperor, the name and marke of that great Beast is taken from him, for the which he thāketh God highly, that hath deliuered him out of the stiking dōgeon of most filthy errors, and wicked doctrine, and lightened him with the trewe knowledge of his worde, wherof he is so certein, yt he will not herafter submit his doctrine to the iudgement, no not of any Angell, but by the testimony therof, to iudge both him selfe, and all them, and the Angels also. Wherfore, he warneth thē to put no trust in theyr tyrany, for the more that they swell in theyr malice and enuie against hym, the more boldely will he proceds in his purpose, for Christ liueth and reygneth, which can, and will, confounde their cruell and bloddy enterprises: he would wishe in dede theyr amendment, but if yt wil not be, he wil haue such continual warre with thē, as shall neuer be recōciled: And where as they charge him, that his franke rebuking of thē, shuld styrre vp the people against him, in that they do him muche wronge: for it is to be proued by the Scriptures, yt such reprehēsions are necessary, when the pastors of Churches bevnlearned, wicked, & obstinate, neither doynge their dutie thēselues, nor permitting others to do, yt would, & can do it right well. Now to the coūsel at Norinberge, Lewis king of Hūgary sent his ambassadors, who lamētably cōplaining of the Turkes great crueltie, desyred strōge & cōtinual aide. Thither sent also Adriā Bishop Adrian wri∣teth to the duke of Sa. of Rome Hierome Rorare, one of his chāberlaines with letters to duke Friderike signifiyng yt he was right glad to heare of thassēbly at Nor∣inberge, trusting yt there shalbe some thing done, yt shall cōcerne the cō∣mon weale for the which cause, he hath also determined, by the cōsent of his Cardinals tosēd his Ambassador thither. And in yt meane while thought good to sēde this mā before, to signifie vnto him, whō he hath euermore loued derely, his good will & affectiō towardes the common wealth, as he shall better know by his Ambassador yt foloweth: he ex∣horteth & praieth hi, yt he which is a price of thēpire, in the tuition of the which Empire the church of Rome cōsisteth, wold trauaile & cōsult di∣ligētly, for the things yt cōcerne the dignitie of thapostolical church and the trāquilitie of the cōmon weale, & to folow herein the steppes of his noble progenitors: desyringe him to giue further credite to Ierome, in suche thynges as he hath wylled him to debate wt him. Farnādo Arch∣duke of Austriche was a straight executer of the sentēce giuen the yere before against Luther, & in the Dukedome of Wittenberge, which he helde at the same time, he set forth a sore proclamation the .xxvj. day of Nouēbre, promisyng rewardes to the promotors, & in all his own pro∣uinces he punished extremely all those yt obeied not the Popes lawes. Reucline dieth. This yere departed Reucline, a pure aged man: whō Erasmus of Ro∣terodame commended with a goodly Dialoge, attributyng vnto hym immortalitie, and the excellencie in the knowledge of all three tonges.
At the latter ende of Nouembre, Adrian Bishop of Rome sendeth let∣ters to the whole assemblie at Norinberge: That sins the time he was The Pope writeth let∣ters to at the princes of Germany. first chosen to thoffice of Apostleship, he neuer wished for thinge more, than yt he might in euery cōdition accomplish the dewtie of a good pa∣stour, suffring no one shepe of his flocke to go farre a stray, for asmuch as might be done through his vigilant eye, and carefulnes: And herof he taketh God to be his witnes, who hath auaunced him vnworthy, to this dignitie, which he neuer loked for: And to the intent he might more easely atteine to his purpose, he hath greatly exhorted all kynges and princes, to absteine frō ciuil warres: And if they will nedes make warre, to bende all theyr forse and power againste the enemies of the Christian faith: And the same yt he assaied to perswade others, he hathe performed him self: hauing sent a great sum of money to the knights of the Rhodes, which at this present are in great daunger of thēperor of Turkes: Afterwardes calling home his remēbraūce of forein periles, & loking more narrowly vpō domestical euils, he heareth, to his great discōfort, yt Martin Luther (who hath oftētimes bene gently, & father∣ly admonished) at the length, whan there was none other remedy, cō∣demned & banisshed by certein Uniuersities, by Leo his predecessor, & also by themperor, by the cōmon cōsent, is not yet put to silēce, but styll at libertie, setting forth dayly new bokes, by the which the christiā reli¦giō, & al honest liuing is sore decaied: Which thing greueth hi so much the more, for that he heareth saye, howe diuerse of the nobilitie fauoure hym, and that the matter is so farre gone, that Ecclesiasticall parsons are in daūger to lose both lādes & dignitie, through out Germany, tou∣ching ye which things, certein haue already styrred vp ciuil war: It is 1. Corin. . trewly spokē of Paule, yt iiedes there must be Heresies, but as thinges stād now, it chaūseth most out of ceason. But the deuill is disposed to wrap vs in sondry calamities at one time: for through his instigation, the fury of the Turkes, & the Heresie of Luth. oppresse vs both at once: And although it were for vs possible to discōfite the foreine enemie: yet so lōg as this domestical aduersarie is vnuāquished, it should litel pre∣uaile. What time he was yet in Spaine, he hearde muche of Luthers false opinions, & albeit it greued him yt such an euyl shold spring in the countrey where he was borne, yet did he comfort him self wt .ij. things. Fyrst, for that his truste was, that so trifelynge and wicked a doc∣trine should haue bene dispised of all men. Secondely, that suche pestilente plante broughte out of an other place, should not lightly take roote in that countrie. Whiche had al∣wayes ingendred the roters out of Heresyes. But where it hath chaū∣sed otherwise, whether it be by the iust iudgement of God, or throughe a certeine negligence, and racklesnes of suche as shoulde haue redres∣sed it in tyme.
Uerelye they had nede to looke to it, lest whilest they worke slowlye herin, they appere eyther to haue forgotten their olde vertue, or els to approue this wickednes, alledgyng amonges other thynges, what a shame it were for so stronge and so constaunt a nation to swarue from that religion, whiche Christ and his Apostles haue lefte vs, whiche so many Martyrs, and notable persons, which also our forefathers haue kept and obserued, at the motion of a sory Frere which hathe folowed and professed the same him selfe many yeres. As thoughe we had erred Luthers Frere. so many hundreth yeres. As though Christ which hath promised to be euer amonges vs, woulde haue suffered his churche to remayne so lōg in errours. As thoughe he were onely wise, and styrred vp of God for this intent, to open the errour of the whole worlde: which thinges are doubtles to all that wise be, a very mockerye, and be laughed at: But they haue a deuilish purpose, that vnder the pretence of Christiā liber∣tie, they may contemne all lawe, rule, and aucthoritie, and work what outrage they lyst: for seyng they haue already cōmitted sacrilege, & vn∣reuerently handled the lawes of holy Bishoppes and counsels, yea cast they them in the fyre: thinke you that they wyll knowe or obey any ci∣uill Magistrate? but as they haue begon to sley Priestes, and to enter vpon their possessions, so wil they in fine, ende theyr mischeuous enter∣prises with the Princes themselues, theyr wiues, childrē and families: Wherfore he praieth and exhorteth them, and for the aucthoritie, and office that he beareth (as the successour of Peter, and Christes vicar) also chargeth and commaundeth them; that layinge all displeasure a part with newe reconciled mindes, they come wholye together, and quenche that cōmon and domestical flāme, punishing Luther, if he do not amende according to that new decre made by thēperor and them. Folowyng herin thexample of theyr elders at the coūsell of Cōstance, which burned there Iohn Husse, & Hierome of Prage, as they wel de∣serued, whose vertu in case they nowe would imitate, God should not faile thē, & then might they also be in the more hope to giue the repulse to the Turke, with all his violence: Then wil he bestowe all his trea∣sures, yea and hys lyfe also, for the flocke committed to his charge, the rest, as concernynge Luther, they shall knowe of hys Legate Fraun∣ces Cheregate Byshoppe of Aprutia, vnto whome he prayeth them to gyue credite. The ciuill warre that he spake of, was betwyxte Ry∣charde The warre of Treuers. Archebyshoppe of Treuers, and Fraunces Sickynge, a noble man, that fauoured Luther very muche: notwithstandynge the cause of that warre was not for Religion, but for bicause the Bishop would not suffer two men wythin hys Iurisdiction, for whome he became suertie, to aunswere to the Law: for so mentioneth the writyng, wher∣in Fraunces sente hym defiaunce, aboute the latter ende of Auguste. Byshop Adrian wrote letters of the same effect to certein others also &
after he had greatlye detested the doctrine of Luther, he required the Senate of Strasbourge, that they should suffer no Bookes of his nor The Popes letters to Strasburge. of his adherentes to be Printed, and that suche as were set forthe al∣ready, they shoulde not onely suppresse, but burne also. For he heareth say, howe suche maner of Bookes are put in Print by theyr men, and the contrary workes refused. Whereunto vnlesse they obey, he threate∣neth them with the wrath and vengeaunce of God: For although they perseuer neuer so much in the olde Religion: yet vnlesse they take from others the libertie to offende, and the occasyon of errour, let them not loke to scape vnpunished. But where he saieth, that whilest he was in Spaine, he hearde of Luther, thus it standeth. The stocke of Aorian. This Adrian was a poore mans sonne of Utrecht, in the egge of Hollande, who for his learninge, whiche he gote in the Uniuersitie of Louain, was called to be Scolemaster to Charles that nowe is Em∣perour. And afterwardes beyng sent Ambassadoure into Spaine, he obteyned the Bishopricke of Derthuse, of the kyng Ferdinando, after whose death, when the gouernement came vnto kyng Charles, he re∣mayned there as chiefe of his counsel. At the same time Bishoppe Leo Dissention betwixt Leo and his Car¦dinals. fell at variaunce with his Cardinals (which had conspired his death) in so muche as he dispatched so many, what with exile, and what with imprisonnement, that he made one and thirtie newe Cardinals at one tyme, partly for his owne defence, and partly to get money, amonges whom this Adriane was one: Who afterwardes whilest the Empe∣rour wēt to be crowned in Germany, had the gouernemēt of Spaine in his absens. And whan Leo the tenth died, wheras Iulius Medices and Alexander Farnesius, laboured excendyngly for it, Adriane beyng absent and vnknowen, was chosen Bishoppe the .ix. daye of Ianuary in the yeare of our Lorde, a thousande fyue hundred twenty and two. Who hearinge thereof, wrote letters of thanckes to the Colledge of Cardinalles, for the good opinion they had of him. And whereas iii. Cardinals were appointed to be sent to him Ambassa∣dours into Spaine, he willeth them to spare theyr paynes, for so short∣ly as may be, he will come to Rome him selfe. He writeth moreouer to the Senate, and people of Rome (who were not a litel displeased that a straunger shoulde haue that dignitie) promisinge them, what soeuer pleasure he could shew them. And a fewe monethes after chaunsynge on a fayre wynde, he ta∣keth shyppynge into Italy, and arryueth at Rome, in the monthe of August. And all beit that at the same tyme Cesar was commynge out Flaunders (to appease the rebellyon) was arryued in Spaine, yet de∣parted he, and neuer bad hym fare well, but wrote vnto hym gentell letters, signifiyng that he had great hast.
At the which time Soliman Emperor of Turkes, had besieged the Rhodes three monethes, and in the seuenth moneth, when the knigh∣tes of the same had defended them selues most valeauntly, beyng than destitute of all aide & succor, he toke it by cōposition, the .xxv. of Decē∣ber, not onely to oure great losse, but shame also. At that self same time Cheregate the bishop of Romes Ambassador, came to Norinberg, and vpon new yeres day he sent frō thens to the Senate of Strasbourgh the Bishoppes letters, offering his seruice, in case they would writ an answere. Whilest many bare grudge towardes Zuinglius, & diuerse as well within the citie as without, preched against his doctrine as wicked, and swaruing from the faith, especially the black Freres. And he againe affirmed it to be agreable to the Scriptures, & that he was able to proue, the senate of Zuricke called a cōuocation of all the prie∣stes A disputatiō at Zuricke. within their Jurisdiction at the .xxix. of January for the contro∣uersie about Religiō at what time all men shalbe heard there, so much as shalbe requisite. They require also very louingly by theyr letters the  Bishop of Constance, yt either he would come him selfe, or sende his de∣putie. Where thefore there came many at the dai appointed, & amōges others Iohn Faber the Bishoppes deputie. The Borowmaster spea∣keth these wordes. Forasmuche as great dissention is rysen about Re∣ligion, therfore this assemblie is called, to the intēt that if any mā hath ought to say against yt doctrine of Zuinglius, he may speake the same frely: Now had Zuinglius before comprised his doctrine into certein common places and Themes to the nūbre of .lxvij. and had published The questi∣ons of Zuin¦glius. the same in all places, to the intent men might come to the disputation fournished and prepared. And what time the Borowmaster had done speakyng, he propoūded the same againe, desyring them to ioyne with hym in disputation. There, whan Faber had shewed the cause of hys commyng, he goeth about to perswade, that the place was not mere, to decide matters of Religion, but that the same apperteineth to a gene∣rall counsell, whiche he trusted should be shortely. But Zuinglius re∣quired him to dispute, and if he had any thinge to saye, not to dissemble the matter: he said he would confute his doctrine by writyng. After many wordes had betwixt them, when neither he, nor any o∣ther would come forth to dispute, the Senate, breakynge vp the assemblie, commaundeth, that throughe out their domini∣ons (the traditions of men, layde a syde) the ghospell should be taught syncerely out of the Bokes of the olde and new Testament.
❧ The fourth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion and the common Weale, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the fourth Booke. POpe Adriane by his Ambassadoure vttereth manye thinges, and confesseth the wickednes of Rome. The Princes of Germany answere him: and propounde conditiond of the counsell. An alteration is in Denmarke. Christierne the kyng sleeth. He speaketh of the impostes o∣uer Germany, of the fyrst fruictes, and the tenthes. Of the dere Mantel of the Archbishops. Of the burning of two Austen Freres. Of the decree of Norinberge expounded by Luther, and of certeine bokes written by him. Of the complaint made of him by the kyng of Englād. Adri∣ane dieth, Clement succedeth him. Trouble in Swysserlande for ʒ uinglius doctrine, & at Stras∣bourgh for the mariage of Priestes. At the assemblie of Norinberge, Cardinall Campegius came Ambassadour from Clemente, who prayeth Duke Friderike to be there. After hauinge spoken to the Counsell, the princes make him aunswere and replie. Troubles arrise in Swiserlande againste them of ʒ uricke: who rendre a reason of theyr doctrine to the Ambassadours sent by the other Cā∣tons. The Byshop of Constance defendeth Images, and yet not wythstandyng his wrytyng, I∣mages were beaten downe, through out al the dominion of ʒ uricke. To the foresaid assem∣blie of orinberge, themperor sent his Ambassade. They of Strasburgh and their Byshop vtter theyr controuersie to Campegius. After the sayde assemblie, Kynge Ferdinando and others make a league agaynst the Gospell. The warre of the Bowres. BEsides the former letters, Bishop Adrian The request of Adrian to dispatch Lu. had prescribed to his Ambassadour, what he should furthermore saye, and expressed the same in writing: Fyrst, that he should accompt before the Princes, what a grief it was to him, that Luther shoulde styrre vp this trouble and sedition, for that the thing concerned the losse of soules, and de¦struction of the flocke committed hym of Christ to kepe: secondly, that it hath chasi∣sed in the same cuntreye, where he hym∣selfe was borne, which nation was euer furthest of from all suspecion of Heresye. Wherfore he desyreth greatly, that they would helpe to re∣medye the matter so soone as might be, lest through longer delaye, the same thinge happen vnto Germany, as dyd to the lande of Boheme. Affyrmyng that he wyll neyther spare cost nor labour herin, beseching them that they will euerye man after his power, do the lyke, there be∣ynge many weightye causes whie they so oughte to do. Fyrste, for the glory of Gods holy name, which throughe this Here∣sye is chiefly obscured, the Rites and Ceremonies of the Churche de∣faced, and in maner quite abolished: the loue of oure neighboure (vnto
whom Charitie bindeth vs) to shewe the right waye. For Germany, which was wont to haue the chiefe prayse for Religion, now by reason of this reuolting, theyr fame and estimation groweth in contempt and ignomie. For where they might easely haue dispatched Luther, & also quenched his heresies, they would not, degenerating herin from their auncestours, which left a notable example of theyr vertu at Cōstance. Is it not a most open wronge that he doeth both to them, and also to theyr elders? For where as they folowed the Religion of the catholick churche of Rome, nowe by his iudgement, that condemneth the same Religion, they are all damned. Let them wey and consyder with them selues, what these fellowes do purpose and intende: Uerely vnder pre∣tence of the libertie of the Gospel, to subuerte and take away al lawes and Magistrates. And albeityt Luther semed in the begynning to impugne onely the ecclesiastical power, as tyrranical & wicked: yet is this his intent, that after he hath once perswaded that Christians are by no lawes boun∣den to obeye the Magistrate, he maye open the waye vnto all men, to worke what mischief they liste. And therfore greate daunger hangeth ouer them also. Hitherto they do craftely and traiterouslye hyde theyr purpose, and flatter the Magistrate, to the intent they may frely vtter theyr malice vpon the clergie: but when they be oppressed, they wyll doubtles attēpt further: For they may see already by experience what grudge, hatred, tumultes & offences, this Heresie hath alreadi brought into the common wealth. Whiche euyles vnlesse they be suppressed in time, it is to be feared lest God (who hathe gyuen them the power of the sworde) wyll plage this theyr so great negligence, bothe with their owne priuate, and also with the common destruction of all Germany. Luth. compa¦red with Ba¦homet. For Luther differeth not muche from the secte of Mahomet, which permitteth men to mary many wiues, and after to forsake the same, by the whiche policie that mischieuous man bewitched, and allured the greatest part of the worlde: whiche thing thoughe Luther permitteth not, yet doth he aduise all them to mary, which haue vowed chastitie, gyuing the reignes of lybertie to mans lust and concupiscens, that he maye haue the mo of his confyderacie, to the vtter destruction of the common wealthe, namely of Germany. He sayd therfore to be theyr partes to put in execution the decrees of Leo and Cesar, to the intent they may auenge Gods glorye, auoyde the sklaunder of the countrey, and eschewe the present daunger, yt han∣geth ouer their owne heades. Furthermore, if there be any yt say, howe Luther was condemned before his matter was heard, or that it were reason, the thing shold be debated, before he were executed, they thinke not well: for Christ hath taught vs the rule of faith & Religion (whose authoritie we must folowe, and not reason of the articles of our faith,
nor inquire the cause of this or that precept: He is in dede to be hearde when he is examined, whether he spake this thinge or that in hys ser∣mon: whether he setforth this boke or that: but touching faith and the Sacramentes, we may not permit him to reason or defend those thin∣ges whiche he hathe written thereof: for in this we muste folowe the vse and custome of the Church, and in no wise swarue from the same. Againe, sith hys doctrine is suche as hath bene heretofore condemned by generall counsels, there is none accompt to be made therof. Moreouer, there should be no ende of cōtention, if it might be law∣full for euery priuate man, to call in question those thinges, which wit∣tie and great learned men haue with muche deliberation established: wheresoeuer is any assēblie or felowship of mē, there be certein lawes which all they are bounden to obserue: howe muche more oughte the same to be done, what time anye thynge is openlye establisshed in the churche? But seyng these men do not onely contempne the lawes and decrees of counsels, and auncient fathers, but also burne them, they ought suerly to be punished as breakers of the common peace & quiet∣nes. Neuertheles he confesseth howe that God, which is the reuenger of all wronge, doeth thus plage his churche for the synnes of the mini∣sters therof, as the Scripture saieth. The iniquitie of the people pro∣cedeth Iniquitie procedeth frō the Priestes. from the priestes and elders: for certenlye (saieth he) they haue synned at Rome, these many yeres full greuously, by sundry wayes, e∣uen from the highe Bishoppe to the lowest Ecclestasticall parson, and not one to be excused: for the which cause, callynge mekely to God for The synne of Rome spred ouer al the worlde. pardon. He wyll endeuour to redresse the thing, and see that the court of Rome, which perchaunce hath bene the occasion of all this mischief, be fyrst sharpely refourmed: And that as it hathe bene the example of vice, so it may be the begynning of amendement, and Patron of vertu. which (he saieth) he must do by lytell, and litell, for that al sodayne mu∣tations be daungerous, and as the common prouerbe is, He that blo∣weth his nose ouermuche, shall wringe out bloude. This writing dyd Luther translate in to the vulgare toungue, and set to his notes in the Lut. expoun¦deth the Po∣pes saiynge. margente, and where he sayeth by lytell and lytell, Luther affyrmeth that to be the space of many mens liues. But in that he so frankely be∣wrayed the vicious lyuyng of the court at Rome, he gote no great loue of the Cardinals (as it is reported) Neuertheles this (they say) is euer the bishop of romes policie, when he wil deferre the coūsel, or delay the hearynge of the matter, he will promise largely: that whilest men trust The meane to let coūsels vpon his promyse, he maye fynde the meanes, what by the fauoure of Princes, and what by force of Armes, to mainteine hys power & dig∣nitie, which is like to fall in some daunger, by fyre and generall coun∣sels: Whilest the Byshoppes Ambassador declared thus, the Princes complained that the leagues, which they had made in times past with
Byshoppes of Rome, were broken there diuerse wayes. Whereof the Byshoppe beyng certifyed by the letters of his Ambassadour, answe∣reth them by the same, that suche thynges as his predecessours dyd, it lieth not in him to helpe, but he misliked the handelyng of the matters at Rome, when he was but a priuate man, and purposed no lesse, but to refourme the same thoughe no man had spoken therin, and to suffer no man to susteine any wronge, muche lesse them, whom for the com∣mon countrey sake, he coueteth chiefly to gratifie: And where they de∣syre that their actions commenced might be retourned in to Germany so soone as the Iudges and aduocates, whiche are fled oute of Rome for the Plage, shall retourne, he will inquire of the case, and do therin that which shall seme resonable. He commaunded moreouer his Am∣bassadour, to require an aunswere of the Princes, what (in theyr opi∣nion) were the best way to destroy this pestiferous secte, that he maye vnderstande in time, what shall be his part to do therin. These thinges beyng declared to the counsel, the Princes and other The answer of the prices. states make aunswere. Fyrste, in recityng briefly his demaundes, they say they are ryght glad that it hath pleased God to place him in the go∣uernement of the church, which in this perilous time had nede of such a Pastour, who beareth suche a zeale to the common wealthe, and ta∣keth suche paynes to set kynges at quietnes, and emploieth hys trea∣sure to the repressing of the Turkes violence, whiche thynges they re∣ioyse to heare of: for by these ciuill warres thempire is decaied, and the Turkes power increased, where no man prepareth any Armye to re∣sist him. Here be the Ambassadours of the kyng and Princes of Hun∣gary, which not without great lamentation haue recited, what cruell thinges they haue suffered, and what daunger they stande in dayely: Wherfore they desyre him which is the father & Pastour of all others, that he will perseuer in this most holy purpose and trauaile, yt eyther a suer peace, or els a long treuce may be taken, yt in the meane time they may make preparation, to withstande the Turkes violence, and reco∣uer the countreis of the Empire, which are loste: Whereunto they pro∣mise their aide bothe of men and money. As concernyng Luther, if any displeasure be growen in Germany by the meanes of his doctrine, they are right hartely sory therefore, as it becommeth them no lesse, and desyre also to remedy the euyll, know∣yng it to be theyr duetie to obey both him and themperour: nother wil Why Luth. was not pu∣nished. they degenerat from their progenitours herein: where he complaineth that he is not already punished according to the Emperours decree, it is vpon no lyght consyderation omitted: for all degrees do complayne most heinously of the courte of Rome. And in maner al men are so wel instructed by the preachinges and bokes of Luther, that in case the de∣cree should be put in execution, it would doubtles styre vp great sedi∣tion,
and many would so coustre it to be done for this intent, that the trueth should be oppressed, and the lyght of the Ghospell extinguisshed for the mayntenaunce of suche open crymes, as were not to be borne withall: which perswasion most certeinly would styrre vp a rebellion of the people against the Magistrates: for it tan not be denied, and he himselfe graunteth also, that they lyue dissolutely & vitiously at Rome, to the great decay of Religion: Wherefore in that he dyssembleth no∣thing, nor clooketh the disorder of the court at Rome, but promyseth a reformation, it deseruith muche praise, especially if he performe in dede the thing which he hathe promised by wordes and writynge: whiche they earnestly require him that he would do, for otherwise there is no certein or longe quietnes to be loked for. Germany is muche impoue∣rished with warres and other charges, and with tributes that be ex∣traordinarie, so that it is hardely hable to susteyne the necessary char∣ges of the Common wealth, and to gyue aide to the Hungarians and others against the Turke: Nowe in what sorte the Germanes certein yeres past, did permitte, that their Bishops and others of the Clergie, should for certein time be tributaries to the Bishop of Rome: they sup∣pose he is not ignoraunt: they cōditioned at the same tyme, that al that money when tyme serued, should be employed vpon the warre against the Turke: But nowe bothe the tyme is expired, and his predecessors, Bishoppes of Rome, haue not put the money to the same vse that they ought to haue done: for the whiche cause, nowe that a subsidie is to be gathered in all countreis of the Empyre for the Turkishe warre, men do grudge and mutine. And think that those great summes of money, which haue bene leuied in many yeres, & kepte for the same purposes, should now serue the tourne, and they to be no further charged: They desyre therfore that from hence forth he demaunde not anye suche tri∣bute, but permitte the same to be broughte into the common treasure house of the Empire: For thus shall many men be quieted in Germa∣ny, and when nede shall require, there shall not want money, to ayde foreine nations agaynst the force and violence of the Turkes: where he areth their counsell in this alteration of Religion: consydering that the matter consisteth not onely in Luthers doctrine, but also in many other abuses and errours crepte into the Churche, and mayntened by longe custome of men that be of a corrupte life and iudgemente, as he him self cōfesseth: They cā see no better way, to redres al these things. Than by a free generall counsell, whiche the Emperour and he beyng The maner of a free coū∣sell. the chiefe Magistrates in Christendome, may sommon in some citie of Germany. As Mentz, Straseboroughe, Metz, or Collen: whiche they thynke also good for the cōmon wealth, to begyn as shortly as mighte be, and at the furthest within ayere. Yet vnder this condition, that as many as shal be there present, of what estate, or degree so euer they be,
shall take their othe to speake frely and not to hyde, what so euer shall seme to make for the glory of God, and the profit of the cōmen wealet or els it shalbe suspected, and do more harme then good: And that this may the rather be done accordynglye, they will see that Luther in the meane time shall write no mo bookes doubtinge not, but that Fride∣ricke the noble Duke of Saxonie wyll assiste them herein: And that the Preachers shall teache the Gospell syncerely and reuerently, after the interpretations approued by the Churche, and that the Printers shall Print nothinge but the same shall be fyrste perused and aucthori∣sed by certeine learned men, appointed by the Byshoppes and all mat∣ters of controuersie to be reserued for the counselles. And where amonges other thinges, his Ambassador spake of prie∣stes that maried wiues: forsomuch as there is no punishment appoin∣ted for them in the Ciuill lawe, they thinke it not a misse that suche as haue offended, shoulde be punished after the Canon lawe: Finally they beseche him to take in good part theyr opinion touching euery thyng: for it doeth procede of a syncere minde, which both tendereth the com∣mon weale, and fauoureth also his dignitie. In the same tyme chaunsed a great alteration in Denmarke. And thus befel the case. Christierne the fyrst of that name king of Dēmarke An alteratiû in Denmark Norweye, and Suecia, had two sonnes Iohn, and Fridericke, Iohn did succede his father, and had warre with the Suecians, whiche re∣belled, notwithstandynge by composition the matter was appeased. This Iohn had a sonne named Christierne, who, whan he was but syxe yeres of age, was proclamed kynge, his father yet lyuing, and syxe and twentie yeres after that, whē his father was dead, he was crow∣ned in the yeare of oure Lorde .M.D.xiiij. Durynge whose reigne the Suecians rebelled againe, and set vp Steno Stura, to haue the go∣uernement. Christierne made all his power agaynste them, and after many battels and sondry sieges, he subdueth them, commaūdyng that this Steno, which was slayne in battell, and buried; shoulde be taken vp and brent. This was in the yeare .M.D.xx. the Suecians beynge thus vanquished, Gustauus Erixonius, a noble man hauing aide; as it was thought, of the Lubeckes, stirred them vp to a new rebellion, and had good fortune. He pretēded fyrst to haue done it for Steno his chil∣dren, and for the more assuraunce, maried his daughter. when the king had lost this prouince, and was euill beloued at home (for he gouerned the common welth eruelly, and offended all men, when also his vncle Fridericke, and they of Lubecke moued warre against him: fearynge lest this broile at the length would tourne to his vtter destruction, fled The king of Denmarke flecth. away with his children and his wife Isabell, syster to Charles them∣perour, whan he had reigned .ix. yeares; and fyrste aryued in Selande themperours prouince. Immediatly the states of the realme, callynge
a counsell, do create his vncle Fridericke duke of Holse an aged man, kynge, beyng aided herin by thē of Lubecke. And then sending abroad theyr letters, to the Emperor, to the Byshoppe of Rome, and the other Princes of the Empire, they rendre a reason why they dyd so, they ac∣cuse him of most greuous crimes, and say, howe he is banisshed by hys iuste deseruinges. The same thinge also doeth Fridericke and the Ci∣tie of Lubecke, which is of most aucthoritie and power in al those par∣ties. But Christierne fyndynge a good wryter, Cornelles Scepper, a Flemmyng very well learned, aunswereth to these crymes and desy∣reth Cornelles Scepper. the states of the Empire (assembled at Norinberge) of aide & suc∣cour. He had one sonne, whom the Emperour toke vnto him: and two doughters, Dorothie and Christine. The same yere his frendes attēp∣ted warre, to haue restored him, but it was in vaine. The Emperour beyng intangled with the Frenche warres. The Ambassodor of Rome had complained of the preachers of Norinberge, that they should teach euill doctrine, and required that they might be layde faste by the feete: But the Princes supposed how he was misse infourmed: for the Prea∣chers saye, they are had in greate estimation with the people. And if ought should be done to them, all men would take it to be done of a set purpose, to oppresse the trueth: whiche thinge myght cause a rebellion. Notwithstandyng they wyll appoint certein men that shall make in∣quisition of the whole matter, and therin do as shall be reasonable. What tyme the Princes had answered to all the Bishoppe of Ro∣mes demaundes, they gather into certeine articles, suche thynges as they would haue done by him and other Bishops in Germany, which were such as infringed their liberties, made Germany bare of money, and keptmen in great bondage, which they said plainely they would no longer suffer, but in case they were not reformed with spede, they wold seke a redresse thē selues. Concernyng the tribute of the Clergie, thus it was. Amonges other meanes to gather vp money, this was one, that Byshoppes and other spirituall parsons shoulde paye to the Byshoppe of Rome, after the rate of the benefice, a certeine summe of The begin∣nyng of the first fruictes and tenthes. money, commonly called, fyrste fruites and tentes. Some do ascribe this deuice to Iohn the .xxij. others vnto Boniface the .ix. The pretēse was fayre and goodly, that ther might be Treasure ready at all times against the Turkes and Saracenes. And for as much as at that time the aucthoritie of the Bishoppes of Rome was growen great, and estemed holy, it was easely graunted. Englishmen only refused to pay, namely for theyr smal benefices. This continued till the counsel of Basil, where it was put downe, & brought vp againe by Eugenius the fourth, who made that counsell frustrate, and so hath continued euer syns, but yet not with out much repining. For in the yere of our Lorde, a thousande and fine hundred, what time
the Emperor Maximilian held a counsell at Ausrge about the Tur∣kishe warre, it was decreed that Ambassadors should be sent to Alex∣ander the sixt, that he should aide the common wealth. And geue those yerely reuenewes vnto this vse that were graunted for the same pur∣pose. But tharchebishops or Metropolitanes, receane of him a certein signe of honor and dignitie made of Flaxe & wolle, they call it a Palle. For the which they must paye a great piece of money to the Byshoppe A Romishe Palle. of Rome, and that in a short space: For he maye admit none other By∣shoppe till he haue receiued his Palle, whiche he weareth alwayes at Masse: but before it be deliuered to him, he must take his othe to owne him his faith and obeidience. And the sixte day of Marche the Princes at Norinberge set forthe a writinge of the thinges before mentioned, charging all men to obserue the same, vnder a great penaltie, whiche decree was published in the Emperours name. For he had establisshed the Senate and iudgement before he retorned into Spaine. And Fri∣dericke Countie Palatine was his deputie in that assemblie. Two freres brent at Bru¦sels. About this tyme were taken at Bruxels two Monckes of S. Au∣stens order, Iohn and Henry. Hogostrate a Frere Dominicke, had thē in examination. They were asked what they beleued? They made an∣swere: howe they beleued the bokes of the Olde and New testament, and the Crede of the Apostles, that conteined the Articles of our faith. Againe, whether they beleued the decrees of the Counsels, and of aū∣cient fathers? Such of them as are agreable to the Scriptures. Whe∣ther they thinke it deadly synne, if a man breake the decrees of the fa∣thers, and of the Bishoppe of Rome? It is only ascribed to Gods com∣maundementes to condemne or saue. Whē they perseuered herin, they were condemned to dye: But they gaue thankes to God yt they should suffer for the glorie of his name. When they were brought forth to suf∣fer, The Cere∣monies of dis¦gratyng. all men marueyled to beholde theyr constancie, so were they burnt the fyrst day of Iuly. But before they wer executed, they were disgra∣ded, which thing is done vnto priestes onely. For beynge condemned Heresye by an Ecclesiasticall Iudge, he hath put vpon him an albe and a Uestement, and deliuered into his handes a Chalice with wine and water, also the gilt Patent with a singing Cake. And so knelyng vpon his knees, the Bishoppes deputie taketh from him the thynges before named, commaundynge hym that he shall no more saye Masse for the quick, and the dead. And with a piece of glasse he skrapeth his fingers in ioyninge him that he neuer herafter halowe any thing. After he ta∣keth the rest of the thinges from him, with certein curses ioyned ther∣unto. Whan he is exempted thus out of the numbre of Priestes, he is also put from ye rest of the ordres by the which he came vnto priesthod. Then he is he torned naked and decked againe with a laymans apparell and so deliuered to the magistrate, whom the bishoppes chaunceloure
entreateth yt he wold determine no harme against his life nor body, for they vse this Ceremony, lest they beynge holy men, shoulde seme to be the Aucthors of death or bloudshed. Whan the decree of the Empire made at Norinb. was of many ta∣ken diuersely, of some also cōtemned. Luth. Writinge his letters to the Luth. inter∣preteth the  of the Princes. Princes, doth aduertise them yt he hath read it reuerently & with great pleasure: First where they cōmaunde the gospell to be taught after the interpretatiōs approued by the church, some in dede vnderstād it to be after ye accustomed maner of Thomas of Aquine, Dūse, & suche others as the Bishops of Rome haue allowed, but he taketh it to be mont of more aūcient writers, as Hilary, Cypriā, Austē, & such others. And yet not so much credit to be giuē vnto thē, nothing like, as to the scripture. The Bible to be prefer∣red before all others. Thus he doubteth not but they mēt it, & so doth he take it: which is the cause yt certen of the chiefest nobilitie wold not subscribe to it, nor suffer it to be proclamed in theyr coūtreis. Secondly, where bishops should appoint mete mē to be present at sermōs, which should geue gentle ad∣monition, if any thing were a misse (he saith) the decre is good, but that the Bishops though they wold can not obserue the same, for yt they wāt learned men, & haue no other but suche as haue learned nothinge elles but sophistrie. And where they prohibite yt no bookes be printed before learned mē appointed therunto haue first perused thē, he wil not be a∣gainst it so yt it cōcerue no bokes of scripture, which in no wise oughte to be inhibited. Finally where they haue decreed yt priestes which ma∣ry wiues or forsake their order shalbe punished according to the Canon law: yt to be to ouer hard a thig: For as they cōfesse, if the gospel be prea¦ched sincerely, thā must the Canō law be much qualified. Afterwarde he bewalleth the miserie & frowardnes of our time, yt in so clere a light of the gospel, yt extreme law that prohibiteth mariage, is not abolished which hath geuen thoccasion of so many great euils: yet are they much to be praised, which are content wt the punishmēt prescribed in the Ca∣non law: but such as wold kill the priestes yt marie or leaue their ordre, after they haue by prison & all kind of punnishement tormented thē, are greatly to be abhorred. Wherfore he besecheth the Princes, that for so muche as theyr aduersaries will not obeie the decre which they mighte and ought to obserue: the pore priestes might be pardoned for yt thinge ech not in their power to performe, for euery man hath not the gift of chastitie, and the vowes made be foolishe. After this he set forth a boke of ordeining of ministers to the Senate Lut. wrot to the Senate of Prage. of Prage, and ioyneth with it a writynge wherein he declareth howe the Church hath power and authoritie to iudge of euery doctrine, and to appoint ministers. But fyrste, he defyneth the Churche to be where so euer the Ghospell is syncerely taught. And the Byshoppes he calleth Images, and heades without braynes, wherof there is not one yt doth
his duetie in any place, namely in Germany. And not longe after, he wrote of the eschewynge of mens doctrine, Luther wrot of eschewing the doctrine of men. wherin (he saieth) he holdeth not with them, which do in dede contēne the lawes and traditions of men. And yet do nothynge which belon∣geth to the dwetie of a trewe Christian. After this he prescribeth how the Masse and Communion should be vsed in the Churche of Witten∣berge. And saieth howe he hath hitherto wrought slouthfullye, by rea∣son of mens infirmitie, and to haue had a care one lye, howe he myghte plucke wicked opinions out of mens myndes: but nowe that many be confyrmed, it is time to suffer vngodlines in the churche no longer, but that all cloking and simulation set a parte, sincere workyng maye en∣sewe vpon pure doctrine. And to this he addeth an other wrytyng of holy ceremonies to be obserued in the Churche. And againe, of the ab∣homination of the priuate Masse, which they call the Canon. Wherin he exhorteth ye people to flee frō the accustomed sacrifices of the masse, as they woulde do from the Deuyll hym selfe, for the demonstration wherof, he reciteth in order the Canon of the Masse, declaryng howe full it is of blasphemies againste God. Amonges other learned men of Germany that fauoured Luther, Ulriche Hutten, a noble man borne, The death & workes of Hutten. was one, who died this yere not farre from Zurick. There be certein workes of his remaining which declare his excellent witte. In the iij. boke I shewed you how Luther made answere to Henry king of En∣glande. Whiche after the kynge had read, he writeth his letters to the The king of Englande writeth to the princes of Saxonie. Princes of Saxonie Fridericke, and John his brother, & to his vncle George, and greuously cōplaining of Luther, he sheweth them what daunger hangeth ouer them, and all Germany, by reason of his doc∣trine: And that it is not a thinge to be contemned or neglected: for the great crueltie of the Turkes, which is nowe spred so farre a broad, had his beginning of a naughtie man or two: And Boheme hard by them, may be a warning for them, to see the thing reformed in time: he admo¦nisheth thē also, that they suffer not Luther, to translate the newe Te∣stament into the Uulgare tong: for he is wel knowē to be such a prac∣tisioner, that there is no doubt, but suche thinges as are well written he with his euill translation, wil corrupt and depraue. Unto these let∣ters The answer of duke George. Duke George answereth very frendly, blaming also Luther exce∣dingly, whose bokes (he saith) he hath banished out of al his dominiōs, as the most hurtfull enemies that can be. Moreouer howe he is righte sory that he hath written so extremely against him, and hath giuen cō∣maundement throughe out all his countrey, that no man reade it, nor sell it, and howe, he hath punished the Printer that brought the fyrste Copie thyther. In the assemblie at Norinberge, besydes matters of Religion, the Princes entreated of peace, and lawes, of the punnisshe∣ment of those that obeyde not the lawes of the Empire, of continuall
aide againste the Turke. Which two last were not agreed vpon. And al the cities of thempire, because certein thinges were enacted, which they sowe should be preiudiciall to them, sent theyr Ambassadours in∣to Spine to the Emperour. Which ariuynge at Ualolet the sixt day of August. The thyrde day after declared theyr message: Unto whom the Emperor aunswered gently and frankely: Notwithstandynge (he sayde) the Byshoppe of Rome had complained to him in his letters of Strauseborough; Norinberge, and Auspurge, as fauorers of Luthers doctrine, he trusted it were not trewe, yet woulde he not hyde it from them, to thentent they might obserue the Byshoppes decrees and his: (as he thinketh they will do.) These Ambassadors pourge them selues, faiyng: that they do what they can, to accomplishe his will and plea∣sure. In the meane time dieth Byshoppe Adrian at the Ides of Sep∣tembre, Adrian the Pope dyeth. Clement suc¦cedeth. & in his place was chosen Clement the vii. of the house of Me∣dices. They of Zuricke onely folowed Zuinglius doctrine, the rest of the Suices hated the same: Wherfore in a cōmon assemblie had for the fale purpose at Bernes, some accused Zuinglius that he preached openly, howe that suche as made league with other nations, dyd sell Zuinglius is broughtin hatred. bloud, and eate mens fleshe: Zuinglius heringe therof, wrote that he spake not so, but that he said in generall, howe there were some which abhorred as a wicked thing to eate fleshe, beyng forbidden by the Bi∣shoppe The eatyng of Fleshe. of Romes lawe, which thinke it none offence to sell mens fleshe for gold, and destroy it with weapon: But herin he named no nation: And seyng that vice doeth nowe so muche abound, it is his dewtie to rebuke it: but the same doeth nothing concerne the good and innocent parsons. Zuinglius amonges other things, taught that images shuld be had out of the Church, and the Masse to be put down as a wicked thing. For the which cause the Senate called a new assemblie in their A new dispu¦tatiō at Zu. Citie, whither came great resorte, in the moneth of October. And the disoutation cōtinued thre daies. About this time in sundry places, and namely at Strausburgh: Priestes maried wiues, which thinge made Priestes ma¦ried wiues. muche contention. For being accused for so doyng, they answered that they had done nothinge agaynste Gods lawe, permittinge all men to marie indifferently. The Senate of Strausburghe had muche a do with the Bishoppe in this case, who called them the .xx. day of Ianua∣ry  to appeare before hym at the towne of Sabernes, to heare what sentence shoulde be gyuen agaynst them for contractyng of Matrimo∣nye, wherein (he saieth) they haue broken the lawes of the Churche, of the holy Fathers and Byshoppes of Rome, of the Emperoure also, and of the Empire, and haue done great iniurie to the order, and offē∣ded the diuine Maiestie. When the Priestes had receiued this Citati∣on, they make suite to the Senate, to haue theyr cause hearde before them. And refuse not to suffer death, if they be founde to haue done
any thing againste the cōmaundement of God. The senate intreateth the Bishoppe, that for as much as they refuse not to come to theyr aun∣swere, & if he should punish them, it were like to brede much trouble, cō∣syderinge that the reside o kepe Harlots openly, and are nothynge saied to he would at the lest defferre it to thende of the imperial coun∣sell. Which was than at Norinberge, where doubtles suche like cases should be decided. To this later coūsel holden this yere at Norinberge Clement the Bishop of Rome sent his Legate, Cardinal Campegius, Pope Cle∣mēt sendeth Campegius to duke Fri. who had his letters moreouer to Friderike duke of Saxonie, written very friendly in Ianuary. Signifiynge howe he reioysed to heare of this assemblye, where he shoulde be presente him selfe, trustynge that some thynge shoulde be there enacted that mighte helpe the Common  for the which cause he hathe sent thither Cardinall Campegius  man of excellent vertue, who can enfourme the Princes of his care∣fulnesse and  towardes the Common weale, and deuise with him priuately of the meanes of peace and quietnesse, whereunto he exhor∣teth him  gyue his mynde, for the same thyng concerneth the prosperitie and dignitie of al magistrats. And how he beareth a great good will vnto Germany, hauynge good hope that they wyll not fall from their auncient vertue, but helpe to eschewe publike daungers. Wherfore he requireth him to shewe all good will and fauoure to hys Legate, of whome he shall heare all thinges more at large. At the sixe and twentie day of Ianuary, the Heluetiās called a con∣uocation A decree of the Suyses. at Lucerne. There was a decree made that no man shoulde mocke or contemne Gods worde, whiche had bene taught these thou∣sande and foure hundred yeares, nor the Masse wherein the bodye of Christ is consecrated to his honor, and comfort of the quicke & the dead that suche as be of lawfull age to receyue the Lordes supper, do cōfesse them selues to the priestwise in the Lent season, that al men absteine from fleshe on daies forbidden, and in Lent also from egges and chese. That nothing of Luthers, or any newe doctrine be taught priuely nor openly. That suche as cary about the reliques of the holy gost, the vir∣gin Reliques of the holy gost Mary, or of S. Anthony be not laughed at, and yt they do obserue all other olde customes, they that offende herein to be presented to the Magistrates & punished. Whē Cāpegius was cōmen to Norinberge, The Cardi∣nall writeth to the Duke of Saronis. Duke Friderike was departed thence, wherefore he wrote vnto hym the laste daye of February, and sendinge also the Bishoppes letters, he lamenteth that vnhappye chaunce that he can not speake wyth him presently, hauyng many thynges to talke with him from the Bishop of Rome, whiche can not so well be done by letters and messengers, and be of suche sorte as maye abyde no delaye: But seynge it will be no better, after muche gretyng made in the Bishops name and his own, he saieth, that albeit the reporte be great that he should be a fauorer of
these newe spronge vp Heresyes, yet can not the Bishoppe hitherto, nor he be so perswaded, for the manyfold and excellent vertues which they perceiue to be in him. And especially, for that he hath bene euer a great fauourer of Religion, and of the Apostolicall Churche: whereupon he will not truste the iudgementes of others, nother leaue the good opi∣nion that he hath of him, before he shall see cause, and know it him self: Germany hath bene wonderfully altered with in these fewe yeres cō∣cernyng Religion: but he vnderstandeth howe muche the commō peo∣ple do differ from the nobilitie and Princes, the rulers of the lawes, a∣monges whom he is as principal, aswel by his own, as also by deserte of his aūcesters, which haue euermore done great honor to the church of Rome: Wherfore the Bishop requireth him that in these daūgerous dayes, he woulde after the example of his elders declare his vertue of stoutenes, not onely in mislyking this lybertie of the people, but also in extremely punishing the same: for vnlesse theyr licentious boldnes and malapertenes be restrained, it will bring the lyke miserie and confusi∣on into Germany, that it did before tyme into Boheme and Hongary, which are not yet quieted: For they that do stubberuely contemne the sacred Lawes, and Ecclesiasticall Magistrate, will also vndoubtedly worke their violence against the Ciuil Magistrates, whom they loue not: Manye are nowe glad to see the Pastours of Churches, and the Courte of Rome thus troubled and dispised: whiche perceaue ful litel, what daunger they them selues stande in: But the Byshoppe, whiche as the master of a shyppe sitteth watching at the Healme, doeth foresee this storme approching, and hath sent hym, to warne all the Princes, and him especially, to beware of this tempest, which is like to distroy, not onely the citie of Rome, but also Germany it selfe. And for the same cause also, hath sent letters by him, and willed him to treate diligently with him of all these matters, to the intente the tranquilitie and qui∣etnes of Germany might be recouered: For he is purposely sent, to lifte vp them that are fallen, and to receiue vnto grace, such as are penitēt. Whereunto albeit he is not very fit, yet trustynge vpon his gentlenes, he wil attempt it with al diligence: wherfore seing that he hath taken this wery and painefull iorney, he praieth him that he maye not want his helpe and fauor herein. And that he woulde write agayne shortly, what he thinketh best to be done: And he will do for him againe what he can in the worlde. After in the Counsell of the Princes, he fyrste declareth howe that no man was willyng at Rome to take this voiage into Germany, at Campegius oratiō to the Princes at Norinberge. the last was he appointed, as one, that may thanke the Germanes for all his promotions, hauing two thinges to treate of, Religion, and the Turkishe warre: And fyrst he marueleth muche, that so manye greate and worthy Princes can beare with this alteration, & suffer the same
Religion, Rites, and Ceremonies, wherin they were borne & brought vp, and theyr fathers also and progenitours dead in, to be thus defared and set at naught. Which thing if it be not spedely reformed, wil styre vp doubtles, great commotions and rebellion of the people agaynste theyr magistrates. This the hyghe Bishoppe fearing and consyderyng, hath sent hym to deuise a way with them, howe to remedie this matter. Whose dili∣gens herein, if it be refused, which as a good father and pastour, wis∣sheth well to all his Children and shepe, there is no cause hereafter, to laye any blame in him: As touchynge the Turkes, he denieth not, but that there was money gathered for the same purpose, and brought to Rome, which albeit it was not employed all that wayes, yet may not the cōmon welth therfore in this calamitie of time be neglected: what hurt that cruell enemie hathe done, it is not vnknowen: for by the ne∣gligens and cowardise of our owne men, he hathe taken the Rhodes, and the chiefest foretresse of Hongary. The Rhodes endured an harde siege many monethes; and at laste, wantynge all thynges necessarye, whan they saw no aide would come, they yelded: the like chaūce was in Hongary. Which if he should subdew wholly and bringe vnder his subiection, it is to be feared, lest they wyll become our enemies, muche worse than be the Turkes: But vnlesse this contention procedynge of this new doctrine, be fyrst taken away, the other part of the common wealth can not (in his opinion) be well holpen. Hereunto the Princes answere, that wheras he beareth this good The princes aunswere. will vnto Germany, they are glad that he came thither, and amonges them all, they wyll chose certeine to conferre with him, supposing that he hath some order prescribed him of the Bishoppe and his cardinals, which they haue willed him to folow, knowyng the matter so wel as they do, for the laste yere, what tyme another Ambassador was here, they wrote vnto him theyr mindes, howe the daunger of this altera∣tion should be foreseen and remedied. And also what they required of him to be done for his parte. Wherof if he haue brought any aunswer, they desyre him to vtter it, to the intent they may the better procede in the cause. And as touching Turkishe matters, they confesse to be as he hath sayd, notwithstandyng that great warre doth not only concerne The Empire, but all together, kynges and princes of Christendome in like maner: For vnlesse that they be at peace amonges them selfes, and giue their aide, ther can nothing be done to continew: But for asmuch as the Turke nowe, maketh great preparation vnto warres, both by sea and Lande, they would also knowe his opinion herin. The Legate said againe, that whether there were any such way by them deuised to appease the strife aboute Religion, or whether it were deliuered to the Bishoppe and Cardinalles or no, he can not certeinly
tell: but the Bishoppes good wyll is muche, who hathe gyuen him full aucthoritie in all suche matters: but they whiche knowe the men, the maner and custome of the countrey, must fynd out that way, that may lead them to the ende wished for. In the counsell at Wormes, the Emperor (by theyr common assent) The decre of Wormes re¦peted. made a decree to haue bene executed thorowout all Germany, which some obeied, and some not: Wherefore this great diuersitie should be in the Empire, he knoweth not: But he thinketh good before any thynge be determined, to consulte howe it maye be executed: he is not comen thither to styrre vp fyre and dissention (as some reporte) but all his de∣syre, and the Bishoppes in like case is, to make peace and concorde, to thentent that suche as haue erred and straied, may be reduced into the waie, that the decrees of the counsels. Themperors and Princes pro∣clamations might be obserued: concernynge their requestes, whether they were made to be sent to Rome, he knoweth not: But three copies were brought thither to priuate men, whetof he had one, but the By∣shoppe and the Colledge of Cardinalles coulde not be perswaded, that they should be made by the Princes, but thought rather that some pri∣uate men had deuised for hatred and malice, that they bare to the citie of Rome: Wherin be diuerse thinges that deny the Byshoppes autho∣ritie, smell of Heresye, and be suche as he can not meddle withall. But for others that are not against the Bishop, such as are grounded vpon equitie and reason, he will not refuse to treate of: Howe be it it semeth vnto him, that the demaundes should haue bene propounded wt more modestie, if they had ought to say to the highe Bishop. For so dyd lately the Spaniardes, which sendyng an Ambassade to Rome, declared gē∣tely what theyr request was. But wheras they be printed and publis∣shed abrode, he thinketh that ouer muche: And yet there is no doubte, but that the Bishoppe of Rome, wyll do for Germany what he can. Moreouer what power the Turke hath, and what preparatiō he ma∣keth the bishop hath good intelligence. And hath alredy great treasure The pope is wel monied. in a readines, and will haue more. And for so muche as the concorde of Christen Princes is very requisite, he hath done what he can, that the Emperor, the Frenche kynge, and the king of England, hauyng peace together might set vpon the Turke on all handes, and he will employ therupon all his treasure. This doeth the Bishoppe as a good sheperde foresee and care for peace and quietnes. But in case the shepe wyll not folowe the voyce of the Sheperde, he can do no more, but take it paci∣ently, and commit the whole matter vnto God. Amonges the Suyces encreased dayly cōtention for Religion. And The Suises are offended with them of Zuricke. the rest of townes, sendynge theyr Ambassadors to them of Zurycke, shewed theyr grief. How that in tymes past, all thinges were at a god∣ly quiet, and no contention of Doctrine at all: But nowe through the
meanes of Luther that fyrst began, and Zuinglins, and Leo Iude, that preached amonges them, interpretinge Godes worde after theyr owne iuste and appetite: that godly peace and quietues of the churche and the common weale, is nowe tourned into trouble and dissention: And besydes that these incommodities do ensew: vpon fastyng dayes they eate bothe Egges and Flesshe: Religious folkes, aswell men as women, forsaking theyr profession and orders, do marrie. Gods seruice is laide downe: they singe no more in the Churche, they neglect confes∣sion and penaunce, the Masse is railed on, our Lady and the sainctes, dishonoured, theyr Images pulled downe and broken, the sacramen∣tes had in contepte, in so muche that nowe a daies, the sacred holy host Yeare for the Hoste. that representeth Christes body, can skarsely be safe in the Priestes hai¦des. These are thinges to be lamēted, and to be auenged also with the losse of life and goods: Wherfore they desyre them to leaue their newe doctrine and perseuer in the olde religion of their fathers: for they can beare this gere no longer: But in case there be any thinge wherin they fynde them selues offended with the Bishop of Rome, Cardinals, By∣shoppes The Mar∣chaundise of the clergie. and suche others, whan they entre into benefices, choppe and chaunge them, and gather vp all the money in the countrey, vsurping, and taking ouer muche vpon them, if these and suche other like things do molest and greue them, they will not refuse to helpe to reforme the same, for they do mislyke them very muche them selues. The Senate of Zuricke, aunswered the .xxi. daye of Marche, that The answer of them or zuricke. their ministers of their church had preached there fyue yeares. Whose doctrine at the begynnynge semed vnto them newe, because they had not heard the like before: but after that they vnderstode how the ende therof was to shewe Iesus Christ the aucthor of saluation, who dyed for ye sinnes of the world, who a loue deliuered vs wretches frō death euerlasting, being the onely aduocate of mankinde to God the father, they could not but wyth feruent desyre embrace so ioyful newes: there was great agrement and concorde in times past betwixt the Apostles and those which after theyr time embraced Christes doctrine: the same they trust, shall be nowe also amonges such as giue their minds here∣unto. And if Luther or any other do so teache, it is well done, neyther ought Gods word to be called his doctrine: And although they do ho∣nor Christ only: yet do they no iniurie therfore to the virgin Marye, or other saints: For al they being here in earth, loked for eternall saluatiō, by the onely name of Christ, and nowe is there such a light giuen, that in maner all men within their citie do reade ye Bible diligently: so that the ministers can not wrast a wrye, that is so continuallye in all mens handes: wherefore there can be no secte obiected vnto them, but that name accordeth to them, which to mainteine their lucre and dignitie, wraste Gods worde whither they list. They are said to be in an error,
but no man can shewe it: they haue often times required herin the Bi∣shoppe of Constaunce, of Basill, and of Courtes certeine Uniuersities, and them also, but vnto this day ther is nothing done: Therfore, their Ministers gyue none occasion of diffention in the commō wealth, but Authors of Scismes. the Bishoppes and suche, as for their owne profit, teache that which is contrary to Godes worde: For they deceiue the people & offende God greuously, which feare to lose any of theyr commodities, and wer loth to forsake theyr pride and auarice: As touchyng the eatyng of Egges and Fleshe: Albeit it be free and not forbidden by Christ, yet haue they made a lawe to auoide offence and rashenes: God is the Aucthour of Matrimonie lawfull for all men. Matrimony, and hath ordeined it for almen. S. Paule also commaū∣deth that the minister of the church should be the husband of one wife. And sins that Bishoppes do permit priestes for money, to kepe Concu∣bines and Harlots by a filthy example. And they neither can nor wyll be without women, they thinke it not good to resist God, who ordey∣ned holy wedlocke, sufferyng them that haue not the gifte of Chastitie, to marrie, rather than in singlenes to lyue a fylthy lyfe. Colledges and such other places were fyrst founded for the pore, but now for the most part they possesse them, which haue enough besides. And often times it is sene that one hath as much as wold find many. Wherfore they think it reasonable, that suche goods were againe con∣uerted to the vse of the poore, wherin notwithstandyng to vse this mo∣deration, that suche as be in possession already, be permitted to enioye the rente, during theyr liues, leste any man shoulde haue cause to com∣plaine. That the Iewels of the Churche apperteine not to the trewe What ne∣deth gold in the churche. worshipping of God. But this to be more acceptable vnto God, what time the pore and nedye are releued. The order of Priesthode is not of them dispised, but muche set by, in case they do their dewtie, and teach syncerely. But as for the rest of the rabble yt doeth no good, but harme: If it be by litell and litel diminished; without offence, and theyr posses∣sions put to some godly vse, there is no doubte but the same woulde be vnto God most acceptable. For whether that God do accept their sin∣ging and seruice in Latin, it is muche to be doubted of. For many of them vnderstande not what they say, and yet are they hired to do the same. The order of Monkes is the inuention of man, and not the ordi∣naunce of God. Howe muche Auricular confession is of valewe, that numbreth the sinnes, they wil leaue vndiscussed, but that, wherby trewe penitentes, What is true cōfessiō, haue accesse vnto Christe theyr mediator, they iudge not onely profita∣ble, but also necessary, for consciences troubled, and pressed down with the burthen of sinne. And this to be trewly to repent, when a mā doeth amende his life: The Sacraments which were instituted of God, are not of them contemned, but had in great reuerence, notwithstandyng
they must be vsed accordyng vnto Gods worde, and the Lordes sup∣per not to so applied, as if it were an oblation or a sacrifice. And if the Clergie that thus complaineth, can fynde out any error amonges thē, or prone that they be hindred or empeched by thē, they will make them amendes: if not, it were reason that they should be commaunded to do theyr dewtie, that is, to teache the treuth, and to abstaine from sklaū∣dering of others: Where as they desyre to be deliuered from the pillage and vsurped Howe the yoke of the Papistes is to be shaken of. aucthoritie of the Bishoppe of Rome and his clientes, they are excea∣dyng glad to heare it: whiche thinge can be done by no meanes better than if Godes worde may be throughly receiued: for so longe as theyr lawes and decrees shall take place, let vs looke for no deliueraūce. For it is onely the preaching of Gods word, that shaketh theyr power and dignitie: For the force of the Gospell and veritie is suche, that they di∣strusting theyr owne strength, seeke forthe aide of kynges: Wherefore if they should in this case vse the helpe of Scripture, it is requisite that the same be done lyke wise in all other thinges, that all that God is of∣fended with, may be abolished: for the reformation whereof they wyll be glad to bestowe not onely theyr trauaile & counsel, but their goods also: for this would haue bene done longe syns: Wherefore they desyre them to accept this in good part, and to weighe it diligently: They co∣net nothing more than peace and quiotnesse, and will do nothing con∣trary to theyr league: But in this case, which concerneth theyr euerla∣styng saluation, they can not otherwise do, vnlesse theyr errour can be detected: they desyre them therfore, that if they thinke theyr doctrine to be against the Scriptures, it maye be shewed them before the ende of Maye: For so longe will they tary for an answere, from them and frō the Byshoppes, and also from the Universitie of Basill. In the meane while the Bishoppe of Constaunce, calling a conuo∣tion, The Bishop of Cōstance maketh a booke in de∣fence of Ima¦ges. made a boke to answere them of Zuricke, the ende wherof was to declare that where the Scripture speaketh againste Images, it is to be vnderstand onely of the Idoles that were amonges the Iewes and Gentiles. And that the Images receyued of the churche are to be kept styll. Then treateth he of the Masse, the which he proueth by ma∣ny testimonies of Bishoppes of Rome, and theyr coūsels, to be an obla∣tion and a sacrifice. This boke sendeth he to Zuricke the fyrst daye of Iune, exhortynge the Senate with many weightie wordes, that they neither take downe theyr Images, nor abrogate the Masse, nor suffer the people to be taught otherwise. The Senate make the answere the eighteneth day of Auguste, howe that they are glad, that he hathe set∣forth this booke: for now it shall appere, whether partie defendeth the iuster quarell. After they declared the mindes of theyr learned menne, teaching the contrary by the Scriptures.
But before they wrote an aunswer; the Senate had commaunded throughout theyr incisdiction, all Images to betaken downe & brent. Images brēt at Zuricke. Yet without any trouble, this was in the moneth of Iune, and within a fewe monethes after the Canons of Zuricke make a compact with the Senate, and order was taken how the landes and goods of their Colledge should be imploied. The Emperor sent to the Counsel at Norinberge, Iohn Hawnart, and complainyng that the decree made at Worines by their common assent and counsell, was broken to the great losse of Germany, he com∣maunded that from hence forth it should be diligentlye obserued. The Princes answer, that they wyll do herein what they can. Finally the .xviij. of Aprill, it was there decreed, that by the assent of The decre of Norinberge. the Emperour, the Bishop of Rome so shortly as might be, shoulde all a free counsel in Germanye, in some place conueniente. That the esta∣tes of the Empire do assemble at Spires, the xi. of Nouember, there to consult, what they shall folowe, vntill the begynninge of the counsell. That the Princes shall assigne certeine good and well learned men in euery Prouince, to gather out of Luthers bookes and others, all que∣stions disputable, and exhibite them to the Princes at the next assem∣blie, that they maye procede more spedely when they shall come to the counsell. And that by the meane and diligens of the magistrate, the go∣spel may be purely taught and soberly) according to the interpretatiōs approued by the churche: Moreouer that herafter therebe set forthe no mo famous Libelles and Pictures: Finally that suche thinges as the Princes haue to charge the court of Rome and the Clergie, be treated of and discussed in the next assemblie at Spires. For the counsel, Cam∣pegius dyd vndertake, and promysed the Princes to declare it to the Byshop diligently. The Princes at this assemblie, were Lewes coun∣tie Palatine, Wylliam, and Lewes Dukes of Bauare, Friderike Pa∣latine, Casimire Markes of Brandenburge, Byshoppes of Treuers, Bamberge, Wirciburge, Trent and Brixine, and Albert of Branden∣burge, master of Pruselande. I tolde you howe the Senate of Strasebrough intreated the Bi∣shoppe therof, for the maried priestes whome he had cited to appeare at Suite be∣twixt the Bi¦shop & senate of Strauso. Sabernes: which came not at theyr day appointed, wherfore the Bi∣shop writeth to the Legate Campegius complaynyng of the Senate, by whom (he saith) he is letted so that he can not execute his office, nor punisshe them that haue maried contrarie to the Byshoppe of Romes lawes. Thomas Murner a Graie Frere was the messager, who com∣plained greuously of the Senate to the Cardinall: But the Ambassa∣dours Thomas Murner. of the same Towne beynge present at Norinberge, came before him, and made their purgatiō, that they neither had, nor would be any let to the Bishoppe, but had signified vnto him by their letters, yt looke
what actiō he had against the maried priestes, agreable to Gods law, that he might come and execute it. And they would assiste him, but he called them out of the liberties, contrary to an ordre that was takē be∣twixt him and them And whereas they claimed theyr liberties, they were condemned, theyr cause neyther hearde nor knowen. They sayde moreouer how the most part of the Clergie at Strausb. liued vicious∣ly, kepīg strōptes at home with thē after a lewd example: And yet the Bishop doth not punish one of thē: Wherfore if the Senate should per∣mit him to handle these extremely for not obseruing the Bishop of Ro∣mes law, & let the cōmon whoremonges that breake the lawc of God, escape vnpunished, doubtles the people would grudge & styre thereat: To this Cāpegius answered, yt what cōpaet or bargaine was betwixt thē he knew not, but surely theyr act was manifest, & neded no greate triall in the law: for they wer sequestred frō the felowship of the church by the dede doyng: And for bycause others kept harlots, & lyued disho∣nestly, yt doeth not excuse theyr cryme: he knoweth it to be the maner of the Bishops in Germany to permit theyr priestes for money to kepe lemans, which is euil done in dede, & they shal yeld an accōpt for it one day: Neuerthelesse, it is a greater offence for priestes to Mary than to Campcgsus raileth agai holye Matri∣mony. kepe at home with them many harlots: for they are perswaded yt they do well. And these do acknowledge theyr synne: for all men are not so chaste as Iohn Baptist: yet was it neuer sene that they myght lawe∣fully refuse the sole life, no not amonges the Grekes, which in theyr ri∣tes and customes differ much frō vs: Wherfore he praieth them to giue theyr aide to theyr Bishoppe in this matter. The Ambassadors say that if he would fyrst punishe the whoremongers, than might the Senate assiste him the better in correcting of these others; But he was in hand with them againe. First, to assist theyr Bishop: And than if he woulde not punishe whoredome, he would come thither him selfe and see them punished accordingely. After the assemblie at Norinberge, Fernando, Campegius, the Cardinall of Salisburge, the dukes of Bauare, yt Bi∣shops A decree of Papistes a∣gainst gos∣pellers. of Trent, & of Regenspurge, also thambassadors of the Bishops Bāberge, Spires, Straus. Auspurge, Cōstance, Basil, Frisinge, Pas∣same, & Brixine, mette at Ratisbone, & agreed vpon this opiniō the sixt day of Iuly. For as muche as Themperor, folowing herin the Iudge∣ment, and request of Leo the tenth cōdemned at Wormes by a publik decree the doctrine of Luther, as wicked. And for that it is likewyse decreed in the assemblie at Norinberge aswell fyrst as last, that al men should obey the same as much as in them lieth: they therfore, at the re∣quest of Cardinall Campegins, who hath ful auethoritie of the Bishop of Rome concernynge that matter, will and commande that the fore∣sayde decree, and the decrees made in the laste assemblies be obserued and kepte wythin theyr iurisdictions: That the Ghospell and others
Scriptures be taught in churches after the interpretation of the aūet∣ent fathers, which in puritie of life excelled, & through theyr great ver∣tu, confyrmed theyr doctrine by martyrdome: they that teach any He∣restes already cōdemned, or any thing els to the reproch of Christ, our Lady, or the saints, or the which may be an occasion of sedition, let him be punished according to the tenure therof: That no man be admitted to preach, without he haue the Bishoppes license. Such Ecciesiastical lawes as cardinal Cāpegius hath writtē by cōmō assēt, to take away vice, & to reforme maners, whē they be ons published, shalbe obserued. Touching the Masse, Sacramēts, and al other things, let nothing be altered: But done as hath bene accustomed by oure forefathers. They that receyue the Lordes supper, wtout confession & absolutiō, they that eate fleshe on dayes forbiddē: Also Mōcks or Nones yt ron out of their ordre: Priestes, Deacōs, or Subdeacōs yt marrye, shalbe punished. Let nothing be put in Print, but by the cōsent of the Magistrate: Namely of Luthers, & his cōpanions, let nothing be set forth nor sold: That such as be of theyr iurisdiction studying now at Wittēberge, wtin thre mo∣nethes after they shall heare of this decree made, retourne home, or go some where els, wheras Luth. poison taketh no place: They that shall do otherwise shalbe depraued of theyr benefices, & lose theyr inheritāce: And all those that shall cōtinew in the Uniuersitie of Wittēberge shal neyther enioy benefice, nor haue the charge to brynge vp youthe: That certeine fit men be chosen in euery place to see these thinges executed. That the offenders so many as can be taken, be committed to warde, the rest yt shall be banisshed to haue no place of refuge, so farre as theyr rule or dominiōs do rtretche: if any cōmotiō or sedition should fortune to arrise, by reason of this decree wtin any of theyr limittes, that the rest shall come & aide him. The Ecclesiasticall lawes, whiche Campegius had deuised were these: Let the priestes liue honestly, go comely appa∣reled, nother by nor sell as marchantes, haūt not the Tauernes, let thē not be couetous, nor for theyr ministration extorte money gredelye: let such as kepe Cōcubines be displaced: let the nūbre of holye dayes be in measure: These woulde Campegius haue enacted in the counsell of the Empire: But when he could not bring it to passe, he held this assembly a part. Whan Luther vnderstode that the Emperoure, and diuerse Princes woulde practise the decree of Wormes, he bewaileth the state The lamen∣tatiō of Lut. of Germanye, whiche beynge so ofte admonisshed, neglecteth her own wealthe: And calleth vpon the Princes them selues, that beynge so o∣penly and wickedly disceaued of the Romishe Byshoppes, they mayn∣teyne neuertheles theyr dignitie, and seke all his distructiō, which wis∣sheth best vnto them: Wherfore (he saith) for this great ingratitud, and frowardenesse inexcusable, there hangeth a most terrible Plage ouer Germany: He warneth them also, that they attempte not rasshelye to
warre vpon the Turke, who in counsell and moderation doeth farre excell our Princes: And liuing as we do, we may hope of no victorye. Furthermore, he calleth it a mockery, that thēperour and the kynge of Englande (which can not lengthen theyr lyues one momēt) should cai them selues defendors of the Church and the faith: He besecheth God, to sende suche Magistrates, as will seke and tendre Gods glory: The golden Rose, which the Pope had lately consecrated (as is at∣customed, The golden Rose sent to the kynge of Englande. Erasmus boke of Free will. three weekes before Easter) he sendeth to Heury the eyghte kynge of Englande, as a notable token of his singular good wyll and beneuolens: Aboute this tyme came forth Erasmus boke of Freewill. Wherunto Luther aunswered with a contrary tytell, of Bondewyll. The kynge of Englande, and the Cardinal of Yorke caused Erasmus to write his booke, as he him selfe confesseth in a certeine Epistle to the Cardinall, which is in printe: About this time also, Anthony, Duke of A decree of the duke of Loraine. Loraine, made this decree: For so muche as Luthers Doctrine is con∣demned of the Bishop of Rome, of the Emperor, & of famous Uniuer∣sities, he commaundeth that none of his do preache any such doctrine. And that all suche as haue any bokes set forthe by Luther do exhibite the same within a certeine day, appointynge a penaltie to suche as dyd disobey: This yere Henry Zutphā was put to death with exceadinge Henry Zut∣phan. paines and torment for the doctrine of the gospel, by thē of Dietmary, which is in the marces of Germany: for beyng called he went thither, after he had taught two yeres amonges the Bremers. I tolde you before of a coūsell that should haue bene at Spires: the The Empe∣ror biameth the Princes. same was altered, and themperor when he knewe, writing his letters out of Spaine to the states of thēpire, at the Ides of Iuly, doth blame them exceadinly for the decree made. For wheras certeine yeres paste, in the counsell at Wormes, by the common assente of all states he had with moste weygtie wordes condemned Luthers doctrine, as Here∣ticall and pestilent: where also the Byshoppe of Rome had after dewe examination condemned his Bokes, commaundyng them to be brēt: he marueyleth greatly and is sory also, that they shoulde forbed onely his sclaunderous Bookes, or skornefull Pictures to be sold, as though that decree at Wormes were not ryghtly and orderly made. And moreouer, he is not a lytell moued, that they woulde both haue a counsell holden in Germany, and haue spoken to the Legate Cam∣pegius, that he would write to the Byshop herin, as thoughe the same concerned not more the Bishoppe or him, than it doeth them: for if they thought it so expedient for Germany to haue a counsel, why made they not him preuie to it yt he might haue obteyned the thing of the Byshop. And nowe albeit he perceiueth rightwell howe muche the Bishoppes authoritie and his also, is by this decree diminished: yet consyderynge that the waye shal not be vnprofitable for the cōmon wealth he appro∣ueth
the counsell also, yet so, that it may be done by the Bishoppes au∣thoritie, and in tyme and place conueniente, so as he maye be presente there him selfe, as he is fully determined. And whereas they haue ap∣poynted an assemblie agaynste the .xi. day of Nouembre, to establisshe Religion, till the begynnyng of the counsell, where they haue also cho∣sen certeine learned men to gather the summe of a Doctrine, he ney∣ther can, nor wyll consent therto in any wyse. But accordynge to hys office, in so muche as he is the defendor and protectour of the Byshop of Romes Churche, he doth by all meanes prohibite this decrre, lest he Themperor defendour of the Romishe churche. should procure to him selfe the displeasure of God, & of the Bishop also: for what greater cōtumelie cā be wrought against the christiā church, thā if the reuerēs dew to the highest power should be thus shakē of? if Germany, which hath bene euer most cōmended for vertu & obeidiēce, should a lone alter yt religiō, which no Princes, nor the bishop of Rome him self euer durst do: Which neuer man forsoke hitherto, but he felt of Gods vengeaunce for his wickednes? if they should forsake & abolish, that hath bene of so long cōtinewaūce in all Christendō, at the craftye perswasion of Luther, who endeuoureth wt painted words to disceaue Lut. cōpared with Maho∣met. & abuse mē, as in times past, did Mahomet, what plages of god might they loke for? He besecheth God, to loke mercifully vpon Germany, and not to suffer so great a mischiefest to take place ther so lōg as he liueth. Wherfore let thē obey the decre of Wormes, vnlesse they will smart for it, & defer all matters of religiō, till a general coūsell may be had, at the Bishop of Rome, & his appointmēt, which are theyr chief magistrats. After the selfe same sorte writeth he also priuatly to certein states, & a∣mōges others to the senate of Strauso. And thus was the decre of the next assēblie abolished: for themperor hauing both his hands full of the Frenche warres, sought to winne the Bishop of Rome by all meanes The duke of Bourbō be∣sieged Mar∣felles. possible. This sommer, Charles duke of Bourbon, Cōstable of Fraūce which the yere before, partly by his owne accorde, & partely laboured by themperor, fell frō the French king, beseged Marselles, but in vain. Whom departing thence into Italy, the kyng foloweth with great ex¦pedition, and taking many holdes in Lūbardy, & the citie of Millan it selfe, towardes wynter he besegeth Pauie, a towne by the riuer of Ti∣cine. In the moneth of Nouembre, the countrey people of Suelande, began to ryse against theyr lord, the countie Lupse, for charges, wher∣with The begyn∣nynge of the rustical war. they complayned to be ouer muche burthened. Lykewise others in other places nere vnto the same, rebelled against theyr magistrats, in so much yt the counsel of thēpire, which gouerneth the cōmon welth in themperors absence, beyng then at Eslinge, sent theyr ambassadors & appeased certeine cōtrouersies: But this broile ceased not, as shalbe told herafter. This was yt begining of the greatest & most daūgerous cōmotion, yt pearsed afterwards throughout a great part of Germany.
What tyme Luthers doctrine was set forth in all places, ye Clergie did resist it with all their forse, fearyng to lose all theyr goodes and be∣nefices. The Papi∣stes fight for their bely. And certein of Straceborugh complained to the senate of the Empire of the townes men, that they did infringe theyr liberties and priueleges diuerse waies, howe they had appointed maryed priestes, and Monkes, as Capito, Bucer, & others to haue the gouernement of their Churches. that they receiued the Lordes supper vnder both kin∣des, yt they had rasshely cast the Images out of theyr churches. For the which cause, two of the chiefest counselors of thempire, Friderick coū∣tie Palatine, and Philip, marques of Baden, in their letters written frō Esling, in the moneth of Ianuary, admonishing the senate to leaue of theyr chaūge, & restore eche thing to his place. Diuers of the Swi∣ces  namely the Schafusians, & they of Basill, where Oecolampadius then taught, begā by litel & litel to giue ouer theyr displeasure towards them of Zuricke, but in maner al the rest could by no meanes be paci∣fied. And whā the Captaine of Turege, wherunto Zurick belongeth had taken a priest in the night, & was cariyng him awaye, he makinge an outcry & calling for helpe of his neighbours, reised vp a sodē tumult and euery man gote him to his weapons. Whan they of Zuricke had suffered this and many other iniuries, the fourth day of Ianuary, they wrote theyr letters to al theyr confederates and felowes, complaining on this wise. Christ (say they) cōmaundeth that to him yt stryketh thee, The cōplaīte of them of Zuricke. on the one cheeke, thou shalte offer the other: And we folowinge this his doctrine, haue suffered many thinges, and that patiētly: But now sith ther is no ende nor measure of iniuries, we are inforced to flie to yt same, which Christ him self vsed. And if we haue done any euill, we de∣syre yt the same may be taught & shewed vs. Undoubtedly for as much as we susteine suche hatred and malice, and are euery where euill re∣ported of all men, the thynge it selfe requireth and constreineth vs to to make answere. Wherfore we wil declare the cause of al this malice, The cause of theyr hatred. confute the sclaunders, and shewe howe we be affected towards our common countrey. And fyrste in dede, wheras Fraunces the Frenche kyng had made great and long suite to enter into league with vs, and had your consent therto: we, notwithstandynge that you were ofte in hande with vs, did vtterly refuse the same. And that for diuerses cau∣ses, but chiefly, for that the maner liked vs not, to witte, that we shold To serue fo∣reine princes is vile. sende our strength and souldiours vnto straungers, which for money, should be hired to warre on them, that neuer did them harme, to bring vp suche an euill example, and maineteine them in Idlenes: whiche if they should die in the warres: theyr wiues and childrē should come to extreme miserie: For we iudged it an vusittynge thynge to oure owne great losse and hynderaunce, to serue the kynges torne, and to brynge our countrey men into suche a bondage to him.
And therefore haue we iudged it best, to retaine and kepe the same li∣bertie both of bodie and goods, which our elders with great valeaūt∣nes, and blouddy handes haue gotten vs, wyth like vertue and con∣stauncie. And this is al the matter, this is the very cause, and as it wer the welspringe and begynnyng of all the displeasure: for if we woulde haue ratified the league, we thinke there should haue rysen no displea∣sure at all: For when you were often tymes in hande with vs, that we should not forsake your league, we shewed you our mynde (that was to kepe amitie with the kynge, accordynge to the composition of peace¦tions of our olde league that was made for the wealth and preserua∣already established: And moreouer that we would obserue the condition of our com∣mon Countrey. And because we perseuer herein, we haue gotten displeasure abroade. For syns the lyghte of the ghospell sprange vp, we haue shaken of our shoulders that moste weigtie burthen, whiche the Bishoppe of Rome, and his adherentes, had laide vpon vs, & aboli∣shed manifest errours. This occasion haue some of you taken of late, and by your Ambassadors sent, haue intreated vs that we should con∣uerte and amende. And we aunswere thereunto (as before) that we worke after the prescripte of Goddes worde: if any man can shewe vs, that we be in errour, we will alter our purpose: if not, surely it is more reason to obey God than men. Than stode vp Egly the Captein of Lu∣cerne, threatenyng vs, that vulesse we forsake the doctrine of Luther, and Zuinglius, the Lucernates, Uranites, Switensians, Unterual∣dians, Tugiaus, and they of Friburge, will sit no more in counsel with vs from henceforth. And not longe after that they had confyrmed this thing amonges them selues by a law, the Captaine of Turege had ta∣ken in the night season Iohn Oxeline, a preacher of the ghospell in hys owne house, and caried him away prisoner. Which vnto vsis a double iniurie, in that our owne man, is taken out of our owne liberties. And whereas many ran oute the same night, of al parts at the outcry, and did many thinges wickedly, all the blame was layde vpon vs and our men, that happened to be amonges them. Nowe the seconde matter that you charge vs with all procedeth of that assemblie, whiche Ferdinando Archeduke of Austriche helde the last yere at Regenspurge, with the rulers of his countrie, also with the Bishoppes and suche others as hate the doctrine of the Ghospell. But The erat of, the Papistes what they endeuor and go about, it is not vnknowen, verely to make dissention amonges vs, and to plucke vs a sonder. Which thinge gre∣ueth vs the more, that you will credite suche, as in time past you haue knowen, at the leaste some of them to be lewde and wycked parsous, whome we also, vnderstandyng theyr craft and treason, haue banished out of our limittes. Euen they nowe, for so muche as we woulde gyue
no eare to them, are fled vnto you, and accuse vs nowe, as though we had brokē the league that was made with the house of Austrich. They say how we sent aide to them of Walsute against theyr Prince Ferdi∣nando, but that is vntrew: For whers the Walsutensiās were in daū∣ger, for theyr Religion, and could not be suffered to speake for them sel∣ues, a fewe of our men (against our knowledge) ran thither to saue the harmeles men from iniurie and violence. Whom, so sone as we knew therof, we called backe againe. Therefore is the grounde of theyr accusation vntrewe. And Ferdi∣nando haue any thing more to shewe that the league should be brokē, let him bring it forth, and he shall be aunswered in suche sort as al men may plainly see, whether parte hath kept couenauntes. Where there∣fore you haue had secret talke with Ferdinando his Ambassadours, a part from oures, we can not a litell maruel, for if you treated of tholde league, than ought our mē to haue bene made priuie to the same: but if it were of Religion, whye than deale you not wt vs after the same con∣ditions which we haue many times offered you: The report góth that you haue conspired to destroy the secte of Luther, whiche althoughe it were trew, yet for so much as we are ioyned in league aswel with him as with you: Moreouer, because we folow not the steppes of Luther, but of holy Scripture, we ought not to be accompted in that numbre: But in as muche as we knowe not what is done amonges you, and be complained on to you by malicious parsons, as though we had spo∣ken for the aide of certeine cities, we protest it to be a false sclaunder. Of like sort is that, where they say, howe we wil sodainly by the so side of a dromme cause men to take Armure, and so to surprise Baden, and certeine other places. Which lies are deuised for this entente and pur∣pose, that you might take those Townes and laye in them garuisous against vs. Which thing (if it were done) they doubt not but that some greater tumult would therby arrise, which might kindle amonges vs domesticall and ciuile warre. And besydes these there go manye other sclaunderouse reportes of vs, as this is one. Howe we shoulde teache, that Mary the mother of Christe had mo sounes, and that the yonger, Iames an Apostle, died for vs, and not Christ him selfe. These & suche other like thinges would we haue cōfuted at Lucerne, but you wold not suffer our men to speake vnto the people. What tyme also that Eckins promised to come and shewe Zuin∣glius his errours, we were right glad therof, & sent, not onely him, but Ecksuc thē Popes cham¦pion. also others a Safecouduict, exhorting him earuestly to come, and pro∣misyng to shewe him all fauour. Finally (as we heare say) the plucking downe of Images, hath procured vs no finale displeasure: But hereof we haue declared the cause and reason before. Wherfore, seyng we haue doné nothing against the conditions of
our league, seyng, we refuse no perill for the safgarde of oure common countrey, and beare you the lyke loue that we haue done alwayes, in case you will permitte vs for to do. Why suffer we this diuisyon to be The pouer∣tie and boun¦dage of the Swices. made amonges vs? It is knowen in what state and condition some of our Auncesters were, which content with a poore liuinge that they gote with sore labor for them and their householde, were oppressed of the nobilitie with extreme bondage: But God looked mercyfully vp∣on them, for they expulsed the tyrrauntes, and gote libertie. And after they were inriched with the substaunce of suche as they The riches and libertie of the same. had driuen oute, they fortified them selues with a league, by the force wherof they were able to defende theyr coūtrey from the inuasions of all forein power, and had many times the victory ouer theyr enemies. For many they were ye sought to seauer, and break that societie, but yet in vaine. And what aide and power oure elders prepared at the same time: we doubte not but you haue in remembraunce. And these fewe wordes may suffice touching the begynnyng of our league. For as for the faith, indeuor, and diligence that hath bene shewed of vs euer sins in amplifiyng the dignitie of our common countrey, nede not to be re∣cited. And doubtles the same mynde and good will that we haue she∣wed euer hitherto, remaineth styll in vs. And seynge it is thus, it gre∣ueth vs exceadingly, that you should through the perswasiō of others, that seke theyr owne commoditie therby, be so incensed against vs. Call rather to your remembraūce, what amitie hath bene alwaies betwene vs, what time in sundry places, aswel at home as a broad, we haue abiden the like chaunce of warre, and done many thinges ryght worthely. Assuredly the memoriall hereof, ought not onely to bynd vs, but also our posteritie, with a most streight bonde of amitie. If ye cause of Religion, or any other facte of oures do offende you, why do we not reason the matter quietly, and frendly amonges our selues as becom∣meth felowes and frendes knitte together in a brotherlye league? we wyll neyther be frowarde, obstinate, nor vntractable, but as we haue alwayes saide, wilbe content and glad to be reformed by suche as can teache vs better thinges. And for so muche as the profession of the ghospell, for sakynge of the Frenche league, and moreouer many sclaunders inuented against vs, haue torned your good willes from vs, and altered your former min∣des, we must write these thinges of necessitie in defence of oure owne estimation. For as we haue often saied, vnlesse our errour canne be she∣wed The constā∣cie of them of Zurieke. vs by the Scripture, we may not forsake our religiō, what force so euer be bent against vs for the same. Aboute the middes of February, the Senate of Strausburge aun∣swered the letters that were sente them from the chamber imperiall, and confuted all thynges that those three accusers (for mo say they can
not be founde) had charged them with, whom they reporte to be trou∣blesome parsons, which are fled out of the citie to styrre vp strife & con∣tension. And therefore require them to gyue no credyte to them, but to haue the same opiniō of the Senate, as is mete to be had of thē which after the example of theyr elders, seke the concorde and wealth of the Empire. Also the Preachers thēselues wrote the same time vnto those counselers. And in a longe oration declare the reasons of theyr doyng. And for so muche as they haue committed nothyng againste Goddes lawe, they require them moste humbly, to geue no credite to theyr ad∣uersaries, nor determine any thing agaynst them, before the matter be knowen. That time the warre in Italy waxed hote betwixt the Emperor The Frēche kyng taken prisoner. and the Frenche kynge, who after he had beseged Pauie all winter a∣boute the later ende of February, was taken in battell, and caryed to the Emperour in Spaine. In this warre the Bishoppe of Rome Clement, was secretly, of the The vncon∣stācie of Cle∣ment. Frenche parte, but after this chaunge of fortune, he gaue vnto them∣perors Captaines a greate summe of money to paye theyr souldiours. Anthony Lena kept Pauie with garnisons of Germanes and Spa∣niardes. The kyng had a wonderfull great armye, in so much that the Imperialles beyng in dispaire of Lumbardie, consulted howe to con∣ueigh their armye, and to kepe Naples: but encouraged throughe the oration of Fernando Daualle, marques of Piscare, they gate the bat∣tell, and wanne the felde, and by takyng of a most mightie kinge, they The victors of themper¦alles. obteined a noble victorie, and riche spoiles. The Chirstaine was Char¦les de Lanoy a Bourgonion. He pretendyng at the fyrst as if he would haue led the kyng to Naples, takyng shypping, he chaūged his course, and sayled into Spaine, that the matter might the sooner be pacified. The Battel was foughten the same day that the Emperor was borne on, the foure and twenteth of February. In the begynnyng of the spring time, began a newe commotion in The cōmo∣tion of the bulgare peo∣ple. Sueuelande, and that parte of Germany yt lyeth by the riuer of Tho∣nawe, of the bulgare people against the Prelates of the Churche, pre∣tendyng a cause as thoughe they would defende the Gospell, & brynge them selues out of bondage. The magistrates promised to heare theyr complaintes and to reforme that was a misse, but they perseuered still and encreased dayly. And set forth certeine demaundes, to the numbre Theyr de∣maundes. of xii. wherin they would be satisfied. Which commynge to the handes of others, styrred vp newe commotions in sundry places. Whylest these thinges were a brewing, Ulriche duke of Wirtem∣berge, The duke of Wirtember¦ge attēpte warrs. whom certeine yeres before they of the confederacie of Suelād had driuen out of the coūtrey, got an armie of Swices, thinking to re∣couer his dukedome, but beyng resisted by Fernandoes captains, that
kept the townes therof, and by others of the foresaid confederacy, and last of all wantyng money, he gaue ouer his enterprise. In the meane tyme the hoste of the Bowres was much increased. And the power of the Princes, which had giuen the repulse to the Duke of Wirtēberge and recouered the townes that he had taken, went against thē to Ul∣mes, which had gathered three armies, whereof one had pitched nere vnto Biberake, an other in Algouia, and the thyrde by the lake of Cō∣staunce: There was muche intreatye for peace betwixte them, by them of Rauesbourge, and Campodune. Also the Senate of thempire being carefull for the state of the common welth, sent to Ulmes, Simon Pi∣stor, which was for duke George of Saxonie. And Iames Sturmnus a noble man of the Senate of Strausburge to treate of peace wt the counsellours of the Princes confederated, commaundyng eyther par∣tie in the Emperours name, to withdraw theyr warre, vnder a greate penaltie. But when neyther peace nor trewce could be taken, certeine bandes of horsemen wente from Ulines, to Elchinge whiche is by the Riuer of Danubius, and slewe a great numbre of the Bowres, and The fyrste slaughter of Bowres. brought many prisoners backe into the citie. After that George Truc∣kese, chiefe capitaine of the Sueuical league, marching forward with his army, came to Lippene a little towne by Danubius two miles be∣neth Ulmes, where was a great numbre of Pesauntes, who neyther taryinge for the footemen, nor for the Munition, gaue the charge with his horsemen, and slewe the mooste parte of them, the rest toke the Ri∣uer Another slaughter. and were drowned, the towne beyng gyuen vp was taken & spoy∣led, and many therin beheaded. When Truckesse after this victorie would haue gone agaynst the resydew, the fotemen whiche were lead by Wylliam Furstemberge, would not forward before they wer paid, as though they had fought a battell, but the Captaine saide it was no battell, and that the enemies were discomfited or euer they came, yet longe it was before they could be pacified. Then was there a new en∣treatie of peace. But when nothing could be concluded, and this Ar∣mie marched against them that wer in Algouia, who would haue had all men a lyke, what tyme they should ioyne in battel, some ran away, the rest yelded them selues at the Ides of Aprill. But in this meane while in another parte of Sueuia there assem∣bled an other great numbre about Hala, and Franckonie, which vpon The great crueltie of the Bowres Easterday, beyng the .xvi. of Aprill, toke the towne of Winsperge, and slewe diuerse noble men therin. And amonges others, Lewes Erle of Helfestene, in a most cruell sorte, runnyng them through with speares, and him so muche the more cruelly, for that they did it in the sight of his wife, which was bastarde daughter to themperour Maximilian, who cariyng a yonge childe in her armes, fell downe at theyr feete lamen∣ting and wepyng most miserably to beholde, axing pardon for her hus∣bande
and father of the same childe; whom they spurned at, and vtter∣ly reiected. But Capitaine Truckesse (who had discoinfited the other three Armies before mentioned, marched streight vpon them also, and slew two or three thousande of them, putting the rest to flighte: punishynge greuously the prysoners, namelye those whiche had fleyne the Countie A most cruel maner of bur¦nynge. Helfestene, where one he tyed to a stake with a longe chaine that he might ronne vp and downe, and with a fyre made rounde about him, burnt him: others of the nobilitie do the like. After he fyreth the towne of Winsperge, and cōmaunded that it should neuer be builded againe. Another troupe of them went into Franckonie, and burned there two hundreth castels and aboue, besydes Abbeis and noble mens houses. And taking the citie of Wirciburge, they beseged the castell. But Truc∣kesse commynge vpon them throughe the Countrey of Wittemberge, vanquished them also and put them to flight. After he recouereth Wir¦ciburge and reskeweth the castel beseged, beyng aided by Lewes coū∣tie Palatine, which was there in his owne parson. And out of Germany this broile went into Loraine, in so much that The warre of Bowres in Loraine. Anthony duke therof, accompanied with his brother Claude Duke of Guise, who had gathered vp the remenaunt of the Frenche armye dis∣persed at the battel of Pauie, when the kyng was taken, went to Sa∣bernes, wheras muche people was assembled, as well of Lorayne, as of Alsate. And wheras no Bowres resorted to aide ye others, he made out certeine horsemen and fotemen against them, who at a village cal∣led Lupfsteine, slew of them to the nūbre of a thousand & fyue hūdred, the residew escaped by flyght. The nexte daye he made a great slaugh∣ter of those that were at Sabernes. Where notwithstandyng he kept not promise. For commaundyng them to laye downe theyr weapons, and promisyng them all pardon, when they had done accordyngly go∣yng home wardes without any weapon, they were slayne by the horse men and fotemen the most part of them: After the towne and the Bi∣shoppes The slaugh∣ter of Bow∣res. Castell were spoiled by the lewde foldiours, and the Citizens also slayne all without any respecte or mercie. When the Duke retour∣ned home from this slaughter, an other armye of Bowres had encam∣ped in the valley of Willers, kepinge the streightes that he shoulde not passe: but when they ioyned in battel, they were slaine aboue .iiii. thou∣sande: in the same conflicte, he lost the Erle of Iserburge: And thus he retourned home with much spoile and many prisoners. There were slaine (as it is thoughte) in these three places, aboute an eghtene thou∣sande: This was in the monthe of May. The like successe had others in all places. And at Petersheme besydes Wormes a great numbre were murthered by the soldiours, what time they had rēdred thē selues, and layde a parte their weapons. At the which slaughter were present the
Countie Palatine, and tharchbishop of Treuers. The Countie did the best in his power to stay and pacifie the soldiors: the other did not on∣ly The crueltie of the Arche∣bishop of Treuers. allow theyr doynges, but also killed many with his own hands, as it was crediblie reported. Notwithstādyng in sundry places, through the policie of the Magistrates, the thing was appeased quietlye, as at Friburge in Brisgoye, whither the Senate of Straus. at the request of Gnest, Marques of Baden, that had great lands there, sent Iames Sturmius and Conrade Iohame, ambassadors, by whose perswasiō, and the Ambassadors of Basill together, all those yt encamped at Lara foure miles from Straus. were appeased the .xxv. day of Iuly: Where yet fidelitie fayled: For many after they came home, were executed. Likewyse the Heluetians appeased an other rebellion in Sontgauia, a Prouince belongyng to kinge Fernando and the house of Austriche, declaringe vnto them, what was the dewtie of a Magistrate, and of the people also. All theyr requestes wer euery where a like, beginning in Suelāde and passing so vnto others, reaching from Thuringe and the borders of Saxonie, vnto the toppe of the Alpes, and into the coū∣trey about Salisburge, whither, after the rebellion appeased in Frāc∣konie, came also the armye of the Princes, confederated, and distroied Geismer cap¦taine of the Bowers. and banished many, amōges whom was theyr captein Geismer, who passed through the Alpes by streyght passages with a part of his hoste to the Uenetians, of whom he had an yerely stipende, and dwelled at Padwey, wheras after he was slaine by treason. And this was thend of the Bowres warre, in the whiche were slaine in one sommer, at the least, fiftie thousande. The league of Swelane. The Princes that were of the confederacie and league of Swelād so oft mentioned werethese, Cesar as Prince of Austriche, and his bro∣ther Fernando, tharchbishop of Mentz, the Palsegraue, the Bishoppe of Salisburge, Bamberge, Wirciburge, Aistet and Auspurge, Wylli∣am and Lewes brethren, Dukes of Bauar, Otho Henricke & Philip, brethren Counties Palatine, George Marques of Brandēburge, and Albert his nephewe, Philip the Lantzgraue of Hasse, & diuers others, both of the nobilitie and Clergie. Moreouer the most part of all the ci∣ties in Sweuia, and amōges other Norinberge. About the eight day of Aprill, the Masse was put downe at Zuricke, by the commaunde∣ment The Masse abolisshed at Zuricke. of the Senate, aswell within the citie as without. And in stead of that was instituted the Lordes Supper. Lykewise all Cere∣monies abolished, the Doctrine of Godes worde taketh place, and a lawe made, againste Fornication, and adulterie, and Iudges appointed to heare the causes of Matrimony.
✚ The fyfthe Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common We ale, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the fyfth Booke. MUncer by his newe doctrine, teaching goodes to be had in common, inflamed the rage of the people, hauinge Phifer to his companion. Duke Fredericke departeth, the princes assemble against Muncer. Who, perswading the people to resist is discomsited, and after executed. Lu∣ther had written against him toye senate of Misshuse, the requestes which the wurs made at ye begin¦ning are here recited. Wherunto Luther answereth & sheweth their disordre, exhorting ye magistrate to destroy such wicked men. Themperor vnderstanding these troubles, appoynteth a counsel at Aus∣purge. Carolostadius exiled from Wittenberg goeth about to make his purgation. Luther marieth a nonne, ʒ winglius and he meete at Marseburge to conferre of theyr controuersie of the Lordes supper. Whilest the French king was prisoner, Pope Clement, receiuing letters from the kynges mother, solliciteth the parlamente of Paris to make persecusion. Faber was constrained to flee, wherof the king wing aduertised, causeth such suites, and actions against learned men to surcease, the common welth of Pruse is altered from the Knightes of Ger∣many to a Duke donie, and receiueth the Gospell. AGreat occasion of this terrible Warre Muncer a great ana∣baptists. came by rashe & lewd preachers, wherof Thomas Muncer was principall: who leauing of the preaching of the Gospell, set forth a new kind of doctrine in Alstet atowne of the Dukes of Saxonye in Thuringe, and taughte not only against the byshop of Rome, but against Luther also, contendinge that bothe their doc∣trines were vyle and naught: the byshop byndeth mens consciences with straight and ouer harde lawes: whiche bondes he saide, Luther in deede hath lowsed but offended in the contrary parte in geuing ouermuche liber∣tie, and not teaching those thinges, that are of the spirite. The bishops decrees we maye fafely contemne, for that they helpe nothynge vnto saluation: whiche to obtayne saith he, we must first eschewe open cry∣mes, as murther, adultery, blaspheming of gods name, the body must be chastened and made leane with fasting & simple apparel, the coūte∣naunce must be framed vnto grauitie, speake seldome & weare a long beard. These & such other like thigs he called the crosse, ye mortifiēg of ye flesh & a discipline, wherwt he yt was furnished he said, must get him out of cōpany, & thike oft of god what he is, whether he hath any care ouer
Whether Christ died for our sakes? Whether our religion be better thā the Turkes: Moreouer to axe of God a sygne wherby he maye testifie, that he careth for vs, and that we be in the true Religion: And albeit, he shew not a token by and by, yet must we neuertheles procede, praie still, yea expostulate and braule with God, that he dealeth not well wt vs: For seyng that the Scriptures promiseth, that he will graunt such thinges as be demaunded, it is not righte, that he doeth not exhibite a Muncer will haue a token ared of God. signe to a man that seketh the true knowledge of him: This expostula∣tion & anger (saieth he) is of God well accepted, for that he perceiueth herby our earnest minde and zeale: And than no doubt but being thus instantly sollicited, he will declare him selfe by some notable signe, and quenche the thirste of our minde, dealinge with vs as he did intymes paste with tholde fathers. He taughte moreouer that God opened hys minde by dreames, wherin he builded the foundation of his intēt, and loke whose dreame he could interprete, him would he praise openly in his sermon. And when he had by this meanes allured many to him, then began he to take stipulation of them, and wrot theyr names that promised him by an othe, to ayde him in his pretensed mischiefe: For he said, he was commaunded of God to distroy all wicked Princes, and subsistute new in theyr places. He taughte moreouer, that all thinges should be cōmon, & al mē of like fredom & dignitie. wherupon ye cōmon He teacheth that all thin∣ges should be common. people leauīg theyr daily labor, toke such things as they neded of others yt had store, euē agaist their wils. The dukes of Sax. had banished him what time he begā fyrst to preach seditiously: thence wēt he to Norin. & frō thēce to Mulhuse, wherhe altered the senate, droue out the Mō∣kes, & entred into theyr possessiōs, takig vpō hi, not only as a preacher, but also as a Senator, determining al matters as he list. For he sayd, how he had all thinges shewed him by reuelation, & loke what he said was to thē sacred & holy. These partes plaied he for the space of two or thre monethes: And whē the Bowres were vp in Swelande & Fran∣konie, to the nūbre of fourtie thousand, & had discomfited a great parte of the nobilitie, taken, spoyled, & fyred many holdes & castels as before is mentioned, thē began he to set hāde on, seing the time seruing so well Muncer ma∣keth gonnes for his purpose, he cast felde peces in the Gray friers, and gote a won∣derfull numbre of people out of the Coūtrie, thinking to get some thīg. He had of his counsell one Phifer, a bold and a desperate felow, which Phifer his companion. was much gyuen to dreames and visions in the nighte, who dreamed that he sawe in a certeine stable, an innumerable sorte of Myse, which he put to flight al: This toke he, as yt God had cōmaunded him to lead forth his armie against the Nobilitie, & to scatter them: Muncer, albeit he had made sedicious sermons, was not yet so hote as to hasarde all before the whole coūtrey were vp in armure: And therfore sent letters into al places, namely to such as digged in the Mines in the coūtrie of
Maunsfelde, exhorting thē in any wise to set vpon theyr princes with∣out any respecte, for shortely should all those yt were vp in Franckonye come into these parties. In the meane while Phifer yt could no longer Phifers en∣terprise. abide maketh a roode with his company, and spoyleth the countrye of Isefelde hardely, sacketh Castelies and Churches, discomfiteth many gentlemen, and casteth some into fetters: And so retournynge wyth a great buttie, encouraged mens herts excedinly. And Mūcer supposing that all men were than in a redynes, departeth out of Mulhuse wt thre hundreth, and ioyned with them of Francuse. At the same time depar∣ted The death of Fridericke the noble duke of Sax. Fridericke Duke of Saxonie without Issewe: for he was neuer maried, leauing his brother Iohn to succede him. Nowe had Alberte Countie Mūsfelde, hearing of a sturre in his countrey, leuied spedelye certeine bandes of horsemen, and gyuynge the charge, slewe two hun∣dreth. Which thinge put them in suche a feare, that they remayned still at Frāckuse, tariyng for more company, and durst procede no further. The princes make a po∣wer. And in the meane time, the Dukes of Saxonie, Iohn Prince elector, and George his vncle, Philip Lantzgraue of Hesse, & Henrye Duke of Brunswike, leuied a thousande and v. hūdreth horsemen, and certeine bandes of foote men, and marched towardes them. The rebelles had incamped them on a Hill a litell without the towne, and had so fensed them selues with Carriages that hardely coulde they be inuaded: But they were neyther sufficiently furnished of Munition nor weapōs, nor skilfull in the warres. Wherfore the Princes hauing compassion, sente vnto them, aduised them to deliuer theyr captaines only, and lay aside theyr weapons, & they should haue theyr pardon, & retorne home. But Muncer fearing him selfe, came forth with a sower countenaūce, and A seditious oration of Muncer. made this oration. You se my felowes and brethren not farre frō you, Tyrraūtes, which albeit they haue conspired our deathes, yet are they so discouraged in their mindes, that they date attēpte nothing against vs: And they offere you suche condicions as be foolishe, that is to torne you out of your weapons. Now know you right well that I haue not attempted this thinge of my owne braine or priuate aucthoritie: for I was neuer experienced in suche matters: But by the commaundemēt of God. And seyng it is so, it shal be my dewtie and yours to obey, and not to depart of this grounde, were God him selfe hath placed vs. In tymes past he commaūded Abrahā to offer vp his sonne: And although he was ignoraūt what shold be thēde, yet folowyng the cōmaūdemēt, he refused nothing: And therfore God bothe preserued his sonne, & also rewarded his faith wt great benefits: so likewise ought we, yt stād in the The saith of Abraham ob¦teined of god great bene∣fites. same case to cōmit the successe of the thig to god: And nodoubt we shal haue our desire: you your selfes shal se the helpe of god manifestly: For we shal discōfit our enemies in al places: God hath promised in sūdrie places of the scripture, to helpe the pore & toppresse the wicked. Which
saying apperteineth vnto vs, for we are poore & afflicted. And because we seke to setforth and mainteine the true knowledge of God, we can not doubt of the victory: Again, let vs cōsider the state of our enemies, Muncer rai leth on the Princes. they are called in dede Princes, but they be very tirātes, they care not for you, they take your goods, & spende thē wickedly in pride, riot, and voluptuousues: And for light causes, moue wartes, which destroye all that the pore haue lefte, these be theyr Princelik Uertues. In the place of the Widow and Orphane, they mainteine the Bishoppe of Romes aucthoritie, and wickednesse of the Cleargie, where youthe shoulde be brought vp in learnyng, and the poore releued, they establishe the mar∣chandise of massing, and other abhominations. Thinke you ye God wil suffer this any longer: No truely, but euē as he droue out the Canani∣tes: so wil he now expulse these also. And as Christ whipt out the biers A blouddy Preacher bloweth the Crompet. and sellers forth of the Temple, so will he do nowe likewise with these priestes, theyr Patrones & mainteiners. Wherefore play you the men, and gratifie God, in distroiyng this vnprofitable people. For surely there is no suerer waye to pacifie the matter: For they will not forsake theyr olde wont, they wil not restore vs vnto libertie, nor permit vs to haue the true Religiō, & seruice of God. And I wis we ought rather to die, then to allow theyr wickednes, & suffer the doctrine of the gospel to be taken frō vs: For I promisse you most assuredly, ye God wil aide and strengthen vs, and that the Uictorye shalbe oures: For he him selfe did so promise me, he him selfe that can not lye nor be disceased, commaū∣ded me to procede on this wise, to punishe the Magistrate. For herein is Gods power chiefly declared, whan a stronge Army is destroied by a smale handfull, as appeared by the example of Gedeon, & Ionathos, Gods power appeareth in sewest men. Iud vii .i. Sam .xiiii. and .xvii. and Dauid, that killed Goliah that greate Gyaunt so tyrrible to looke vpon: And no doubt but this present day shal be notable by a like spec∣tacle, and spoken of whilest the worlde goeth about: For albeit we are not well fournished wyth weapons and other thynges necessarye for our owne defence, yet shall this engine of heauen and earth be chaun∣ged rather thā God shal forsake vs: so was the water of the Red Sea, chaunged in tymes past, that the Israelites beyng persecuted by Pha∣rao, might passe through. Therfore feare you nothing but fight māful∣ly against your wicked enemies, & be not a fraide of theyr Gunnes: for all the pellettes yt they shall shoute, I will receaue them with my cote. Beholde, se you not howe mercyfull a God we haue? beholde a signe & token of his euerlastyng good wyll towardes vs, lift vp your eies and see the Reinebow in the skie: for seing we haue the same painted in our enseigne, God declareth plainely by the similitude that he sheweth vs Muncer dis∣ceaueth the people by the Rainebowe. on highe, that he wyll aide vs in battell, and distroye the Tyrrauntes. Wherfore nowe set vpon them wyth a bolde courage, moste assured of Godes helpe.
When he had made an ende, they were all for the most part afraide of the great daunger, but yet there were amonges them many lewde Fearein Mū¦cers Campe. and desperate persons, ready vnto all mischief, which beynge inclined of theyr nature to euyll, and perswaded by his oration, and chieflye by the celestiall signe, supposyng it to be a most sure token of victorie, more ouer hauing no smalle company, to the numbre of eight thousande, and the place mete ynough to be kept: Cried oute that all men shoulde take theyr weapons, and fight with a stout courage against their enemies: singing a sōg, wherby they called for helpe of the holy gost: Ther was A messenger slaine agaist the lawe of Armes. sent vnto them before a noble yong man: Whom Muncer (against the lawes of Armes) had slayne, wherwith the princes being more displea∣sed caused the trompettes to soūde to the battel & set their mē in order. Thā Philip Lantzgraue of Hesse, though he were yongest of them all, An exhortaci on of the Lantzgraue. ryding vp & downe frō one cōpany to another; exhorted the soldioures to be valcaūt. And although the thinges were trew wherof they were accused, yet were it not lawfull for the subiectes to rebell against their princes or magistrats, vnto whom God hath giuen the sword & wold haue them obeyed, as may be proued by sundry places of Scripture. He wente not aboute to execuse eyther his owne faultes, or any other Princes, but to confesse theyr fault, & graunt that many thinges ought to be amended, yet ought the people neuerthelesse to absteyne from all seditiō. For where they alledge that they are not permitted to haue the doctrine of the Gospel, it is no iust cause to make any rebellion. Whan Peter stroke with the sworde, he was rebuked of Christ, if any Prin∣ces do persecute the trew religion, they ought to beare with them, yea suffer death rather than to resist by force of Armes. They take ye name of the gospell for a cloke, but theyr intent is in dede to take other mens goods, to sley the Magistrates, to force other mens wiues, that no cri∣mes should be punished: and for asmuche as they pretende the name of holynes in these so shamefull deedes, there is no doubte but God wyll plage their Hypocrisie, and reuenge the blasphemie of his holye name, When he had with these and suche other like wordes encouraged hys men to fyght, they gaue the charge on theyr enemies, and fyrst wente of the ordinaunce. And the other poore wretches standyng all amased and as men rauished of theyr wittes, neither defended them selues, nor The mad∣nes of the Munceriane sought theyr saftie by flight, but songe in Duche mytre, requiringe the aide of the holy ghost: For many trustyng to Muncers promise, looked for helpe from heauen. When the greate peces were shotte of, and that they entred theyr campe and had slayne many, at the laste they fled to∣warde the towne of Franckuse: others went againe to thother syde of the Hill, and in the valley beneth skirmished wyth certeine horsemen, and slewe two or three of them: For the Horsemen scattered them sel∣ues, when theyr enemies fledde, and folowed the chase oute of a raye.
But when they missed of their company, they wer in such a rage, that to reuenge theyr felowes death, they slewe fyue thousand. And imme∣diatly after the battell, was the towne taken, and thre hundreth there beheaded. Muncer was fled into the Towne and hyd him selfe in a house not The slaugh∣ter of the Mū¦cerians. farre from the gate: Hither by chaunce came a gentleman, and his ser∣uaunt goyng vp to see the house, founde in a chamber aboue, one lying in his bed. He asketh what he is, and if he be not one of the rebels that fled: He sayd nay, he had layue there sycke a good whyle of the Ague. His Purse (as it chaused) laye vpon his bed: that chatcheth vp the o∣ther thinkyng to haue a pece of money: After he had opened it, he foūd letters which Albert Countie Mansfelde had sent to Muncer, admo∣nishynge him to cease from his enterprise, and styrre not vp the people to rebellion. When he had red the letters, he demaunded of him, whe∣ther the letters were written vnto him. He denied it, thother threate∣ned him, then he desyred him to be content, and confessed that he was Muncer: Then was he led to duke George of Saxonie, & to the Lātz Muncer is ta¦ken. graue, and beynge demaunded of them: why he had thus abused the poore and simple people: He aunswered that he had done nothinge but his dewtie. And that the Magistrates, whiche can not abyde Godes His cruell answere. word, ought thus to be punished. The Lantzgraue replied and proued to him by Scriptures, howe God hath commaunded the Magistrate to be honoured and obeyed, He is repro∣ued of the Lantzgraue. howe he hath forbidden all sedition, and that it is not lawfull for anye Christian to reuenge his owne wronge. Wherunto he aunswered no∣thing: And beynge examined vpon the Racke, when he cried oute for paine. The duke said vnto him: thou art nowe Muncer in payne, but remembre againe the losse of so many men, as beyng wickedly abused, thys day, haue bene distroied: Then with a greate laughter (he saide) they would haue it so. The vnrea∣sonable laughter of Muncer. Afterwardes being led to Helderunge, a towne of the coūtie Mās∣seldes, vpon the Pymebanke there he appeached many companions, confederats of his conspiracie, which were beheaded at Mulhuse, and amonges others, Phifer before mentioned. When he should be execu∣ted, he was not hable to receite his belefe, but as Henry duke of Brūs∣wicke, saide it before him: But when he shoulde die, he acknowledged At the houre of death he repenteth. his offence and error. And beynge inuironed with soldiours, he exhor∣ted the Princes, that they would shewe more mercy to poore men, and reade ouer diligently the bokes of Scripture, that are written of kyn∣ges: He had no souer spokē thus, but the sword was in the neck of him, and for an exāple his head set vp on a pole in the middes of the feldes. What time he was banished out of Saxonie (as I saide before) wan∣deryng from place to place, and at the last (as it was reported) purpo∣sed
to come to Mulhuse: Luther hearing thereof, wrote his letters to the Senate, admonishyng them in no case to receiue Muncer: For he was a sedicious parson, and imagined nothing but murther and mis∣chiefe, signifiyng what thinges he had attempted at Alstet, and other places: Moreouer his doctrine to be fonde and pernicious, whereof he wylled them to beware, for shortly would his craft be knowen, with other frendly wordes, which (he saide) if they contempted, and fell af∣ter into misery, he shold be without blame that had so diligently war∣ned them, and they should repente them to late. Likewise before anye tumolt was in Germany. And yet all thynges lyke to come to suche a passe, Luther set forth a boke, wherein he warned all men to abstayne Lut. diswa∣deth thē from sedition. from sedition, declaryng that the same is not the way to refourme the tyrrany of the Clergie, which shall fall and be confounded by no force of men, but by the spirite of God, and commyng of our Sauior Christ, as appere in Daniell, and sainct Paule. This to be the grounde of hys ii. Thess .ii. opinion, and to be right well assured, that they that seke to redres the thinge by force of Armes, shall trauaile in vayne: Yet for so muche as some great tumult and daunger hāgeth ouer the Cleargie, & the thing requireth counsell, he wyll Franckly declare his opinion. And fyrst to be the Magistrates dewtie, to foresee that the people The dewtie of a good Ma¦gistrate. susteine no hinderaunce through the fault of others. And that trew re∣ligion be not defaced by false doctrine: This to be theyr propre office to vse all theyr power that is giuen them, to the glory of God, and welth of the people. But for as muche as they do the contrary, and let one an other, and some of them also mainteine the false doctrine, they shall not escape vnpunished. It was neuer his purpose that the Papistes should be oppressed wt How the Ma¦gistrate shold deale wyth the Papistes force of Armes, but that the ciuill Maiestrate shoulde compell them to do theyr dewtie, and herin to extende theyr right and aucthoritie: And that they neyther with theyr lenitie, nor yet with dissimulation, should confyrme their boldenes and lewde doynges. And as touchyng the cō∣mon people, they muste be earnestly admonished, that they styrre not, except the Magistrate commaunde them. For that way they labore al together in vayne, and God wil auenge the thing, and that with some greuous punishment. And wheras the Magistrates worke so slowely herin, where they beare and suffer so many vnworthy things, and are Gods wrath is slowe, but yet sore. not moued with so manifest iniuries, and mockeries of the Cleargie, that is done throughe Gods permission, that he alone myghte auenge all the matter, and powre out all his indignation vpon them. But in case this matter should come to a tumult, and that God could be con∣tent with so light a punishment: yet were all this maner of procedyng not onely discommendable, but also vnprofitable. For in a seditiō there is no reason to be had, and for the most part it chaunceth that thinno∣cent
parsons are plaged soner than others. Moreouer there is no man Thauthors of rebellion are wythout excuse. that stirreth vp rebellion, yt can be excused, be his matter neuer so iuste. And in a great cōmotiō of people, the good wt the bad, the honest with the wicked of necessitie must perishe together. Wherfore let them haue an eye to the Magistrate, and so long as he styrreth not, let there be no priuate attempt. For all sedition is against the cōmaundement of God, who cōmaundeth that all the controuersies of priuate men shouldebe lawfully decided before a Iudge. But consyderinge yt Rebellion is no∣thyng What thing rebellion is. els, but a priuate reuengement, no man nede to doubt, but ye god disaloweth & abhorreth the same. And that this sedition which is like to coine, is reised by the Deuill hym selfe the enemye of all mankynde, who, for that he can not abyde the lyght of the treweth, styrreth vp tu∣multes by men that professe the gospell, that he might bringe in cōtēpt and hatred the trew doctrine that hath bene (through Gods benefite) in these former yeres restored: as though it proceded not of God, which semeth to geue an occasion to so many euils. This do the aduersaries of the gospell already bragge of: But theyr iudgementes are to be cō∣temned. Whom he vtterly dispiseth herin: For he hathe neuer written nor spoken that thing that might kindle any sedition. Now vnto such as will question & obiect what shall we than do? Howe longe shall we suffer theyr enormities: seyng that the Magistrate winketh therat? I How wicked dominion is to be shaken of. answer, yt they ought to folow this order. Fyrst let them acknowledge theyr faultes: wherwith God beyng offēded, hath suffered the tyrrany of the Clergie to continew so long, and to stretche so farre as it doeth for their wicked & cruell gouernement is the reward of our offences: From the which if we wyll be deliuered, we oughte fyrste to reconcile our selues vnto God through thamendement of life: And than wt ear∣nest prayer to desyre gods aide against the popish knigdome, by the ex∣ample The best way to ouer threw the po¦pes authori∣tie. of king Dauid, who praied God many times to breake ye power and prid of the wicked. Finally that the doctrine of the gospel be prea∣ched and set forth, and the iuggelinges of the Papistes made manifest to the world, that theyr errors beyng detected and the trueth knowē, men may esteme lightly and clerely contemne what so euer shall pro∣cede from them. And this to be the rediest way to ouerthrow theyr au∣thoritie: by strength and forse of Armes, ye can preuaile nothinge: and commonly it chaunceth that throughe warre they are made stronger. But in case you cōpare Christ wt the Pope, & the gospel wt his doctrine, than shall it openly appere, what difference there is betwixt the lighte of the sunne, & mere darkenes: and howe great a benefite of God it is, Lu. did more with yt word thā cold haue bene don by force of Ar∣mes. that the way vnto the knowledge of him is made open, al lettes being takē away: Thā slideth & faleth downe all their force and estimation, which thing may appere by his example, which hath more afflicted the popishe kingdome, than any force of armes could haue done.
And therfore there is no other rebellion to be wished after For on∣ly this preachyng of the gospell, which is raised vp of Christe him selfe, is mightie and sharpe ynough to ouerthrow all Papistrie. Hereupon let them fixe theyr eyes and mindes also, and loke for no other meane, Furthermore, not to be his owne matter, wherin he is so muche occu∣pied, for so great a weight exceadeth the strength and capacitie of mās witte. And that it is more than he loked for, yt the matter is brought so farre forth as it is: And therfore he putteth no doubt, but that he which hath laide the foundation of the worke, and hath gyuen increase to the same, will bringe it also to the conclusion and ende, maugre the heads of all his aduersaries. He saieth howe the Deuill knew longe before of this great alteration, and how he went about to let it, and by certein It appereth by the Pro∣phecies of Briget and others. men prophecied of these tymes, to the intent he might driue men farre from this holsome doctrine. But where he seeth his attempte to be in vaine, he seeketh a newe waye, and styrreth vp men to rebellion, to let that there should be no reuolting from the Bishoppes kyngdome & his But yet shall he faile of his purpose. For through the preachinge of the pure doctrine their kingdome shall more and more be confounded. In which true doctrine we must styll perseuer, declaring howe mens de∣crees helpe nothinge at all vnto saluation: Moreouer, howe men must be warned that they suffre not them selues to be bounden to Monkish vowes, and suche as are intangled already, to forsake the same. Furthermore, that they giue no money to vaine and foolish vses of the church, as for Tapers, Belles, Tabels, Uessels, Armes, Workes, & Ornamentes, and suche other like thinges. For the lyfe of a Christian, consisteth not in these thinges, but in faith and Charitie. Thus if the people be taught, there is no doubt, but that the aucthoritie and kyng∣dome of the Bishoppe and all his adherentes will fal in a fewe yeares. But in case this doctrine be not taught nor therrours plucked oute of mens myndes, Papistrie shal continew though neuer so many con∣spiracies be made against it. Let them nowe consyder and pōder with him, what he, in litel time brought to passe by his doctrine only, which his aduersaries can testifie, that wanted their wonted commodities. Wherby it may be easely perceiued, what would haue come therof, in case this doctrine might haue had free course but two yeres longer. Wherfore the Deuill that smelleth out all the matter, doeth nowe bestyrre him, & goeth about to let this enterprise through sedition, but The Prac∣tise of the de∣uill. we must worcke wisely, and commēde this benefite of God with high prayses, which hath set vp this light of his knowledge before our eies. The Iuggling of the Papistes are bewraied, theyr ignoraunce, bribe∣rie, tyrrany, and all theyr fylthynes, wher with they haue so longe dis∣ceaued the world, be nowe disclosed, and they whiche heretofore haue bene feared of all men, are nowe broughte to that exigente, that they
But where they nowe appeare in theyr likenes, and are beholden na∣ked with the eies of all men, what vncleanes they haue hid hertofore, The popishe kingdō maie not long in∣dure. and are nowe driuen to force of Armes, it can not be, that their state should longe endure: And if there chaunce any part of theyr power to remaine, which this doctrine of the ghospell shall not infringe, all that shall be abolished by the commyng of Christ. We must therfore applye it manfully, and procede in the same course, but yet it muste be done in order. For some are farre out of frame, which being not furnished with learnyng, after they haue heard two or three Sermōs, by and by take muche vpon them, callyng them selues Lutherianes, and reproue bit∣terly some that as yet knowe nothing. Wherin they do much offende, for so ought they not to do: And he requireth that no man vsurpe hys name: But rather indeuour, that seing we professe the name of Christ, we may rightly chalenge that to ourselues, that we may be surnamed Christians. And he that teacheth, hath nede to be wel ware, what they Preachers ought to be circumspect. be that he dealeth with: For some be obstinate and froward, that both wyl contemne sounde doctrine, and also bring others into errour: such must they quite eschew, & after the precept of Christ, to cast no pearels before Hogges. But wheras they not cōtented eyther with theyr own ignoraunce or obstinacie, do seke to seduce others, and bringe them frō the crew doctrine, thā must they be sharpely withstande: not for theyr owne sakes, but that same of the multitude might at the least be saued. Agayne therebe others not obstynate but symple and without know∣ledge: with whom they must deale gently and not hastely or rashely: shewyng them in order wherein the saluation of men consisseth: And accordyng to theyr smalle capacitie to applye all theyr speache, tyll by lytle and lytle they increase and be confyrmed. In the last boke I shewed you of the Bowres yt were vp in Swe∣uelande, before Muncer came forth into the felde. These people hand∣led the matter with more attempraunce at the begynning, declaringe by articles written what thinges they would haue reformed by theyr Princes and Magistrates. And in case they were abused in any thing, they would not be styfe nor wilfull, but promised to folowe better coū∣sell: theyr requestes were these: Fyrst, that they might chuse them suche ministers as should preache Theyr de∣maundes. Gods worde sincerely, without any mixture of mens traditions: Se∣condarely, that herafter they would pay no tithes, but of corne onely: and the same to be distributed by the discretion of good men, partly to the Ministers of the Church, partly vpon the pore, and partly aboute commen affaires: Thyrdly that they haue bene hitherto vnworthelye kept in bondes, consydering howe they are all made free in the bloude of Christ, they refuse not to haue a Magistrate, knowyng that he is or∣deyned of God, and wyll obey him in all honest thinges, but they can
not abyde to be any longer bounde, vnlesse it be shewed reasonable by the testimonies of Scripture: Againe, that it standeth not with equitie that they are forbidden to Huntinge, Haukyng, & Fishyng pro¦hibited. Hunte, Hauke, and Fishe, and that in many places they may not be suf¦fered to chase the wilde beastes out of the corne. Seynge from the be∣ginnyng of the world, God hath gyuen man right & rule ouer all kinde of beastes: we desyre that some equalitie herein maye be had, & that ra∣ther the commoditie of a multitude, than of a fewe mighte be consyde∣red: Moreouer wodes be in few mens handes, to the great discommo∣ditie of the people, wherfore theyr minde is to haue all suche common both for fewel and also for building, as be no priuate mans inheritāce: And for other woddes to be frendly vsed by the owners: Furthermore they be sore burthened diuerse waies dayly more and more: Wherfore they desyre the Princes to moderate the same, after the rule of the gos∣pell, and charge them no further, than in times past hath bene accusto∣med: They would also that such, as haue goods, landes, or possessions, by the benefite, or graunte of Princes, or Magistrates, be no further charged, than was couenaunted at the beginninge: lykewise some of them pay more rent yerely than theyr Fermes be worth, wherfore it is reason that the lordes remit some part therof, to the intente they ye tyll the grounde, may reape some fruite of their trauaile, and not liue in ex∣treme pouertie: Brieflye in paimentes of money, they woulde require more equitie, for dayly are diuised new lawes and meanes to get mo∣ney of them for no amendement, but oftentimes the thing is hādled by fauour or displeasure, or some one or other pertialtie. Wherfore they re∣quire that all affections set a part, this thing be vsed from hence forth, as the maner was first prescribed. Finally that some haue taken in lā∣des and Meddowes that are common, which they will redresse, vnles they be agreed withall: last of al, that wheras the goodmā of the house departeth, the wife and children are wont to paye some what, whiche because it is vnreasonable, they would that the Magistrates shoulde vtterly take it away. Unto these Articles beyng once published: answereth Luter (vnto Lut. answer to the Bow∣res. whom they had referred their matter) And framing his stile vnto thē: It is trew (sayeth he) I graunt you, that suche Princes as do not ad∣mit the preaching of the Gospell, and oppresse the people diuerslye, are worthy whom God should thrust out of gouernement: for they haue none excuse: And albeit this be trew, yet must you take heede that you bring hither a pure and vnspotted conscience: or els shall you suffer the losse bothe of body and soule: neyther ought you to consyder what po∣wer you are of, or howe much your aduersaries are to be blamed, but howe iust the quarel is, that you defende. Take diligent hede therfore, and beleue not the preachinges of all men. For Sathan hathe at this
tyme vnder the pretence of the Gospell, styred vp many sediciouse and bloudy doctours. I wyll counsell you ryghtly and truely as I am bō∣den: it shall be your parte to geue eare and mynde to heare it. Nether shal it moue me one whitte, though many shal reporte euyll and rayle vppon me: It shall suffice if at the lest wyse I may delyuer some from Goddes vengeaunce, for the rest of them I passe not, and as they con∣tempne me, so shall not I feare them: But for the purpose, you take to The Bours vse Godlye titles. your selues an holy name, and call your selue a Christian felloweshyp and bragge that you wyll followe in all thinges the lawe prescribed of God. But you know certenly that the name of God may not be ta∣ken in vayne, nor vntrewlye: for God threateneth a punyshemente, Gen. 7 Gene. 19. whiche remayneth dewe vnto you also, if you handle not this busines ryghtly he that drowned the whole worlde with a flud, he that swal∣lowed vp Sodome with a fyrie shoure, the same can easely destroye you also, what power someuer you haue. But it is to be proued easely that you take the name of God in your doinges falsely: Wherfore it is not very harde to coniecture what the ende will be. For he disceaueth not, that sayed they shoulde dye of the sworde, Math. 26. whiche toke vnto them selues the sworde (that is) which by their bold∣nes vsurped the aucthritie of correctyng others. Where as Paule not withstanding commaundeth all men gene∣rally Roma. 13. tobey the Magistrate with reuerence and feare: What wyl you aunswere vnto this, whiche will seme to followe the prescript of gods lawe, and yet laye holde on the sworde, and resiste the Magistrate, whome God hathe ordeyned, is not this to take the name of God in vayne? But you wyll saye the Magistrate is suche as is vntollerable, for they take from vs the doctrine of the Gospell, & in all other thinges they oppresse vs vnreasonably. I admitte it be so, yet maye not you therfore styre vp commotions and seditions: for it is not euery mans pacte to punishe malefactours, but this appertayneth to him only, vn∣to whome is geuen the right and power of the sworde, as the Scrip∣ture planely teacheth: Againe not onely the lawes wrytten, but also the lawe of nature printed in mennes myndes, sheweth that no man ought to be iudge in his owne cause. For we be all faulty and blinded with the loue of oure selues. Neither can it be denied, but that this tu∣mult and sedition of yours, is a priuate reuengement: for you take vpō you the determination of matters, & the iniuries that you thinke are done vnto you, you seke to reuēge by your own aucthoriti. but the same is against Gods lawe, the lawe of nature, finally against equitie and iustice. And seing it is so, you are by no meanes able to defend this fact of yours, or if you haue any commaundemēt of God concerning your doinges, the same of necessitie must be declared by some notable my∣racle. But it taketh place in you that Christe spake: you can see mani∣festly
that is to be rebuked in others, but you consider not what wye∣kednes is in your owne cause. The Magistrate doeth naught, but you doe muche worse, whiche We are all blind in our own cause. contempnyng Gods commaundement, doe entre in to an other mans iurisdiction, whiche leaue vnto the Magistrate nothing, for what re∣mayneth whan you haue taken a waye his power and authoritie? the hygher powers take your goodes or possessions, they doe wrong. But you take away their iurisdiction, in the whiche thynge consisteth all The state of a magistrate wherin it cō¦sisteth. their state both of body and goodes. Nowe whether is he more wicked that taketh some parte of your goodes and spareth your lyfe, or he that taketh lyfe and goodes also? Waye well what is sayde, and you shalbe founde more wicked. But we desyre not their lyfe nor their goodes, you wyll saye, let hym be∣leue you that lyst I wyl not. Who so taketh awaye the chiefest thyng, wyll not be afrayde to take the rest also, whiche dependeth vpon the same, but let it be as you saye, let them enioye their goodes and their lyfe in safitie: That whiche you haue done already, exceadeth all mea∣sure, whan you takyng from them all their authoritie wyll be Lordes and Rulers your selues. Waye it with youre selues I beseche you, in case your enterpryse The Magi∣strate is as necessary as the seune to the worlde. should be commended and take place, there should be no place for iud∣gement, no Magistrate at all, eche man myght vse an other as he thought good, and what wold followe therof, but robbyng and mur∣therynge one of an other? for so sone as one shall thynke hym selfe to haue receyued wrong of another, he wyll couet to reuenge hym selfe at his pleasure: Whiche if it be amysse and not to be suffered in any man, muche lesse should it be permytted to any vnlawfull assemblye, or if it maye be suffered, it is also to be borne with, in all others. But what say you, if in your assemblye the cause should requyre that euery man woulde pryuatlye auenge his owne cause, tell me what woulde you doe? Doubtlesse he should be constrayned to stand to the publique iudgement appoynted by you. What thyng doth than excuse you that contempne lawes & iudgementes, and reiecte the Magistrate whom God hym selfe hath appoynted ouer you? This lawe wherof we speake nowe is impryuted in all mens hartes, The law of nature alo∣weth a Ma∣gistrate. and is obserued also of the moste barbarous people: for els should ther be a wonderfull confusion in all thynges: whiche lawe all beit you did obserue neuer so dilygently, yet shoulde you be nothynge better, than Turkes or suche other lyke people that knowe not our religion: For to be ruled by lawe and Magistrates maketh not a man a good chri∣stian: for necessitie byndeth them to it maugre their heades. Wherfore seing that you do breake this lawe whiche is ingryft in
the mynde, and common to all men, ye are a great deale worse then the Heathen people: and farre vnworthy of the name of Christians. Whiche tytle because you doe vsurpe to your selues, and doe iniury to Goddes name, beynge not worthy in deede to be called Turkes for breakyng of the lawe of nature, howe shall you stande before the face of Christe, what tyme he shal iudge vs al? For see therfore agayne and agayne, what maner of men your preachers be, for I feare lest some blouddy butchers be crept in amonges you, whiche perswade you to this in their Sermons, to the intēt that they may through your ayde beare Rule and reigne, being carclesse for your saluation. God cōmaundeth that all vengeaunce be lefte vnto him. the scrip∣ture teacheth vs to obeye the Magistrate, though he be frowarde, you ought therfore to be obedient: otherwyse you shall Reyse a cōmo∣tion in dede, but the same shall lyght in your owne neckes: for GOD wil not permytte youre lycencious outrage to be vnpunyshed. And whylest you seke your lybertie, you shall procure to your selfe the losse of lyfe, goodes, and soule also. For the wrath of GOD is kyndled agaynst you: And the deuyll ennemye of almens saluations, hath sent into your felloweshyp false teachers: followyng therfore my counsell, beware and amende in tyme. Nowe wyll I speake of the Christian lawe, or the lawe of the go∣spell: The christiā lawe. For as muche as you chalenge to your selues that surname, is mete it shold be tryed and knowen what your lawe is in this behalf. And first Christ cōmaundeth vs not to resist harme, but when we are stryken on the one cheke, to offer also the other, and to hym that ta∣keth awaye your coote, he byddeth you to delyuer also your cloke: he commaundeth vs both to praye and doe for our enemyes. And in the Math. 5. same sense are also many other places of Scripture. Nowe consyder with me, howe this your enterpryse agreeth with Christes commaundement: see howe farre youre Doctours haue lead you astraye. For it is the parte of Christians to suffer and beare the Crosse, not to resyste, not to reuenge, not to stryke with the sworde: And what lyke thyng appeareth in you. The profession of a Christian man is exceadynge harde, and verye The christē profession is harde. fewe doe perfourme in deede that whiche they are bounden to. And to make the thyng more playne, I shal bring you an example out of the same lawe. Peter to defende his Lorde and Maister, stroke the by∣shoppes seruaunt: Was it not a iuste cause? seynge they dyd not onlye seke the lyfe of Christe, but with that to take a waye also from his dis∣sciples the doctryne of the Gospell, wherin consisted their saluation. But suche lyke cruell iniury hath not yet touched you: but what sayde Christe to this?
He commaunded Peter to cease frō his defence, geuing a sore sentence against them that stryke with the sworde, that is to saye, whiche con∣cempning the Magistrate, will auenge their owne cause. What dyd he, when he was nayled to the Crosse, when he was prohibyted to exe¦cute his office committed vnto hym of God the father? Uerely, toke it The nature of veritie. paciently, committyng the whole matter, to GOD his father, vnto whome he maketh intercession for his persecutors: these steppes must be folowed of you, or els must you leaue and laye asyde the goodlye name and tytle of Christianytie. But in case you woulde followe the example of Christ, the power of God would appeare: And as after the moste vnworthie death of his onlye sonne, he set forth the Gospel farre and nere against the wyll of all his aduersaries: so would he vndoub∣tedly loke vpon you also, and send his holsome doctrine aboundantly: But now, consydering the matter is attempted by force of armes, you shall neyther obtayne your purpose, nor escape in the daye of battell. Now wyl I speake sūwhat of myself also. I had the whole worlde a∣gainst me with all their force and myght: And yet the more and grea∣ter that theyr violence was, the better successe had my doctryne. How so? I vsed no force I styred vp no commotion, I was not desyrous of vengeaunce: But I obeyed the ciuyle Magistrate with reuerēce, and wrote in his commendation, and set hym forth as muche as lay in me, and that whiche was pryncipall, committyng my cause into Goddes handes, I rested wholy in his protection: And thus haue I bene pre∣serued vnto this daye, though the Byshop of Rome with al the reste, stampe and stare at it: I haue decayed his kyngdome more, then any force of armes could haue done, and my doctryne is spread ouer son∣drye nations. But you rushe forth headlong vnaduisedly, and whylest you thynke to further the thynge, you consyder not howe muche you hynder the same. Wherfore in this quarell you must set aparte the na∣me and tytle of Christiās, for though it were neuer so iuste, yet for so muche as a Christen man maye not fyght nor resiste iniury, I maye in no wyse graunte you that tytle and surname. And yet I speake not this to defende or pourge the Magistrates: for I confesse them to doe many thynges vniustly, notwithstandyng your doynges, are here farre from the profession of Christianitie. In so muche that in case you wyll obstinatly kepe styll that name, and with this colour shaddowe your euell cause, I protest to be your en∣nemie, for because vnder the pretence of the Gospel, ye doe that is clean contrary to Christes doctrine. Therfor wyll I pray vnto God, that he wyll mercyfully loke vpon you, and subuerte your enterpryse. For I perceyne this euydently that the deuill goeth about, in asmuche as he coulde not hytherto oppresse me by the Byshop of Rome, to destroye
me now by the bloudy preachers. Wherfore I wyll praye, notwith∣standyng The craftes of the deuill to oppresse the Gospel. that I had leuer you would so demeane youre selues, that I should not nede to make my prayers against you. For al be it I am a synner, yet hauing so iust a cause to pray, I doubt not but my praier shalbe heard. For GOD wyll haue his name to be sanctified, and so hath he commaunded also that we should praye. Wherfore I exhorte and beseche you, that you despise not the pray∣ers of me and others, lest ye fele to your vtter vndoing, what they can bryng to passe. but you can haue in your prayers no suche lyke faythe or affiaunce, for the Scripture and your gylty conscience doe declare your proceadynges to be prophane and vngodly. But I praye you howe many of you haue prayed vnto God in this cause? I suppose not one. For you put your whole truste and affiaunce in your great armie. But assure your selfe, for as muche as you so doe, all youre at∣attemptes at the last, wyll tourne to your owne destruction. Nowe as concernyng your demaundes they are easely answered, Aunswere to the demaun∣des of the bo¦wers. whiche though they were grounded vpon equitie, and were agrea∣ble to the lawe of nature, yet touchyng theyr Pryncipall parte, they stande not vpryghte, because you wyll extorte them by vyolence from the hygher powers whyche is agaynst all lawe and equitie Agayne he that deuysed them for you, is no good man. For the pla∣ces of Scripture, whiche he alledgeth to incense you and brynge you into daunger, he reciteth no wholy nor truly, which if you loke better vpon them, make nothing with you, but against you. But al your bra∣uery No mā may be kept from the Gospell. is about the Gospell, that it is taken from you: but that can not be, for if it be restrained in one place, you may repare to an other wher it is frely preached. For the place maye not be kepte by force, but we must forsake it, and flee to another, as Christe hym selfe hathe taught vs. Your firste demaunde for ordeynyng of Ministers is not amysse, so it be done in dewe order: For if the landes or possessions that fynde the mynister were geuen by Magistrates, then it is not lawefull for the people to gyue them to whome they lyst. But first muste the Ma∣gistrate Howe mini∣sters shoulde be ordayned be required to place one: whiche if he refuse to do, than shal the people chuse one, and maintaine him of their own charges: if the Ma∣gistrate wil not suffer this, than let the minister chosen by the people, flee, and with him who so lyst: if it be done otherwyse, it can not be wt∣out wrong or mischief. That of the tenthes, is most vnreasonable. For Tithes must be payde. what other thing is this, thā to take away al rule & power. You must be liberal, but of your own, not of an other mans: but nowe ye vse the matter as if you had al authoritie in your own hādes, wherby it is ea∣sely perceiued what your intent & purpose is. you wold again haue all Christianitie taketh not a∣way bōdage men free, why had not Abrahā & other holy mē, bondmen? reade Paul
he shall instructe you touchynge bondemen: wherfore this request is full of violence and robberye, and striueth with the Gospell. For he that is a Seruaunt, may neuerthelesse be deuoute, and vse Bondage is not let to christen liber¦tie. the Christian lybertie, as well as he that is sycke or kepte in pryson. You shoote al at this marke, to haue all equalle, and of one state and condition, whiche is fonde and absurde. For this ciuile lyfe and go∣uernment of the publyque wealth can not endure, vnlesse there be a difference of persones, that theremaye be some free, and some bounde, some to rule, and some to obeye. The rest concerning wylde beates, wooddes, waters, pastures, paymentes of money, and suche other lyke, I leaue to be disputed of Lawyers, for they touche not my dutie, whiche is to instructe the myndes of men in Godlynesse. And nowe ye men and brethren, this is my mynde, and counsell Luters office whiche you desyred to knowe: Nowe shall it be your partes, for as muche as you saye ye wyll obeye the Testimonies of Scrypture, to hearken vnto the same. And not by and by so soone as it shall comme to your handes to make an outcrye, as though I flattered the Ma∣gistrates, and taught you not ryghtly but ponder the whole matter and waye all my reasons dylygentlye. For certenly the cause is your owne. And aboue althinges be ware of those preachers that pricke you forwarde, I knowe that sorte of men ryght well: they leade you head longe into daungers, that they myght get preferment and ryches through your peryll. The cause why Luther doeth so muche caste in their tethe the false The false ti∣tle of the bo∣wers. tytle that they bragged of, was this, for that in all their lettres that they wrote to prouoke and allure others to their felloweshyppe they made their boaste, that they toke armure vppon them for Gods com∣maundement, and for a certen loue and zeale to the common wealth, to the intent the doctrine of the Gospell myght be set forth, augmented and mayntayned, that truthe, equitie, and honest lyuyng myght re∣ingne and floryshe, and that they myght so prouyde for thē and theirs, that hereafter they be not oppressed with any violence, and whan thei had thus at fewe woordes declared the cause of their enterpryse, they woulde than commaunde their neighbours by and by to put on Ar∣mure, and come vnto them immediatly and helpe them, if not, than would they threaten to come vpon them withall their power. What tyme Luter had thus aunswered the commotioners, admo∣nyshyng also the Princes and the nobilitie by wrytynge sayeth, vnto them: All the trouble and busynes that is at this daye is altogether longe of you, chieflye that beareth the Tytle of the Churche, whiche cease not yet at this daye for all my preachynge to persecute the
doctrine of the Gospel, and that again your conscience, secondarely you that are Prynces and cyuyl Magistrates beyng wholly addicted to exacte and gather vp money, you care not by what meanes, so that the poore people are no longer hable to beare the burthen, and al to main∣teyne your ryot, pryde, and voluptuousnes. Wherfore there hangeth assuredly a wounderfull daunger ouer you, as a sworde dependynge ouer your neckes by a twhyne threde. And yet are you in the meane tyme so carelesse, as though no man were hable to displace you: but this securitie wyll doubtles hurte you one daye: for God powreth out some tyme his indignation vpon Prynces, as it is read in the Psal∣mes. I haue oftentymes admonyshed you to beware therof, but no warning wyll serue. Wherfore Gods whrath wil fall upō your heads, Psal. 107. vnlesse you amende your lyues. The signes and wounders that are seene in all places, doe pretende no good. We maye easely coniecture that Gods anger boyleth against vs, for that he permitteth false doc∣tours to be so muche estemed amongst vs, to the intent we beinge lead by them into errours and darkenes, myght be plaged worthely. Moreouer this rebellion of the people, whiche wyll vtterlly destroye Germany, vnlesse God, moued wt our Prayers, send some remedy. And your gouernment is at this daye after suche a sorte, that men neyther can nor wyl, nother ought in dede to suffer it any longer. You must be cleane altered, and gyue place vnto Goddes worde: And if the people bryng it not to passe at this tyme, others shal succede: for albeit you kyl vp these, yet God wil reise new, which worketh this, warreth against you, and seketh to plage your wickednes. Dyuers of you haue made your boaste that you would spende al the goodes and lādes you haue, vpon condicion that Luthers doctrine myght cleane be taken away: And what is not the thing brought no we to the effect? God forbydde I should ieste in these weyghty matters. The Iewes in tymes paste, sayde, how they had no kyng: but at the last the state of their common wealth came vnto that passe, that they want a kyng for euer, for many of you not content with your former faultes, woorke a newe iniury to the Gospell, affirmyng that all this hurly burlye is the fruicte that spryngeth of my doctrine. Well go to, rayle on styll hardely: you wyll not knowe what my doctrine is, nor vnderstand the voyce of the Gos∣pell, The Gospel is sclasidered with rebelliō whiche is the signe of an obstinate and a malicious minde, I haue euer from the beginnyng taught quietly, and haue abhorred all sedi∣cion. I haue earnestly exhorteth the people to be obediēt to the hygher powers, nay rather I haue admonyshed thē to beare with your Ty∣ranny and wicked gouernment: And hereof you your selues can beare witnes. Therfore hath not this sedition proceaded of me, but those The rasers of tumultes. bloudy Prophetes, no lesse ennemies to me, than to you, haue brought in this mischief seducing the people, & haue ben about this, thre yeares
and more, and no man hath resisted them so muche, as I alone. If god hath now for your synne permitted sathā, by those bluddy prophets, to styrre vp the rage and fury of the people against you, and that it shall not lye in me to let or appease the storme, say, I pray you, what faulte can be layde in me or the Gospell, whan this doctrine, whiche I pro∣fesse, hath not only borne with your crueltie hitherto, but also prayed vnto God for you, hath commended your authoritie and state to the people, and maynteined the same with high commendacion? But and if I coueted nowe to auenge the iniuries that you haue done me, I myght laughe in my slyue, and be a loker on this cruel tragedy or assist the furious people, and as the common saiyng is, increase the flamme with oyle, and be as sharpe nayle in the sore, wherfore (noble Princes) I require you earnestly, that you despyse not myne admonition, nor set lyght by this same sediton: Not for that I feare left they shoulde be able to destroye you, for I would not you should dreade that: but that the Ire of God should be be fearfull vnto you. For if he intede to plage you worthely whiche thynge I feare you shall not escape the daunger, although the power of your ennemies be neuer so small. Therfore if a∣ny place as yet remayne for counsell I pray you, gyue place vnto fury, and appease this matter wittely: And for so much as the end is vncer∣ten, The part of a wyse man. and Gods wyll vnknowen: it shall be mete for you firste to trie al∣wayes, and to take hede that there be not such a flamme kyndled, that shall set all Germany on a fyre. For certainly our offences wherewith we haue styrred gods wrath agaist vs, are so manifest, that we ought to be afrayde of euery lyttle sturre, muche more whan so great a num∣ber of ennemies are assembled to offer battell. Lenytie and gentlenes can tourne you to no losse, and if it should, yet after it wyll restore you the same with the aduauntage: but if you go to it by force, it shal perad∣uenture be in great hasarde. And where as you may preuayle more by other meanes, why wyll you venter with so great daunger. Their re∣questes be twelue, wherof some be so agreable to reason and equitie, that you maye haue good cause to be ashamed. They demaūde first of all, that the minister of the churche may be ordeyned lawfully suche as can preache gods worde. And albeit they haue a respect herein to their owne priuate commoditie, in asmuche as they would pay hym his sti∣pende of other mens tythes: Yet is it against reason, it shold be denied, for it is lawefull for no magistrate, to keepe their people from the doc∣trine of the Gospell. Others that concerne seruices, droictes, and such lyke thinges are grounded also vpon reason. For it is not the parte of a The dutie of a Magist. Magistrate, to vexe orpille the people: but rather to maynteine and preserue their wealth and substaunce. But now there is no ende of pil∣lage, and howe should this continue? Certainly ye ought to leaue this exaction, and refraine your prodigalitie and riot, that the poore maye
haue some thyng more to releue their great mysery. When he had thus admonyshed eyther parte seuerally, he wryteth an epistle common to both. And for so muche as eyther partie maynteyneth an euyll quarel, he aduyseth them to laye downe their weapons, and put it to arbitre∣ment, declaryng vnto the Magistrates howe cruell euer and howe bloudy the ende of Tyrauntes hath ben, and agayne to the people how vnfortunate, and myserable hath bene the successe and wyndyng vp of The ende of tyranny. commotioners, whiche haue taken armure and standen in a defence with the hyghe powers. One thynge he lamenteth exceadyng, that se∣ing they warre on eyther syde with an euyll conscience, the Princes to establyshe their Tyranny, the others sediciously to accomplyshe their wycked desyre, they should lose their owne soules, so many as peryshe in this warre. After he bewaileth the state of germany, which through this ciuile warre should vtterly be destroyed: for to begyn warre is an easy matter, but we can not so wel ende the same when we wolde. He admonysheth them therfore to absteyne, and not to leaue to their poste ritie the state of the common wealth so full of trouble & bloudshed: by force of armes can nothing be done to continewe, by the amendemēt of lyfe very much. he exhorteth them to committe the whole matter to the hearyng and determening of certayn good mē chosen for the same purpose. That the Princes would remitte somewhat of their ryght: & that the people againe should followe good coūsell, and leaue out some of their demaundes. This to be his aduise and counsell, whiche vn∣lesse they woulde folowe, he would gyue them the lokyng on: for to be on eyther syde were vnlawfull: seyng the people moue warre agaynst their Prynces as the oppressours of their wealth and ryches: And the Princes agayne with the people as with theues and murtherers, that do also iniury vnto the name of Christ. In this ther obstinate fiercenes he wyll praye vnto God that eyther he would shewe some waye to ac∣corde them, or els to subuerte their counsell and all their enterpryses: Howe be it after all these wonders, he feareth that the wrath of God shall no we no more be mitigated, than what tyme he declared by Ie∣remy that his wrath and displeasure should not be aswaged, no not at the instaunt prayers of moste holy men, but that he woulde plage the Iewyshe nation: wherefore he would wyshe for nothyng more, than that they would amende and serue God in feare and tremblyng, that Of Not, Da¦niel, and ob at the lest wyse, the plage hangyng ouer vs, myghte be differred and aswaged. Whylest he endeuoured thus to appease the tumulte, they yt were in Franckony and indiuers other places, marchynge forewarde sodainly warred not only against the papistes, but against the nobili∣tie Luther blo∣weth the trō¦pet against the boures. also, and did muche mischief as is she wed before. Then Luther in an other wrytyng, exhorteth all men that they would come to destroye these wycked theues and paracides in lyke case as they woulde come
to quenche a commen fyre, who haue moste shamefully broken their fayth, to their Princes, taken other mens goodes by force and cloke al this abomination & wickednes with the couer of Christianitie, which is the vylest and moste vnworthiest thing, that can be imagined. And after that he hath confuted their reasons, as is before rehersed, he byd∣deth the Princes not doubte nor feare to set vpon and destroye that se¦ditious Ther can be nothig worse then sediciō. Rabble: for it apertayneth chiefly to their dutie, and not they only, but also euery pryuate mā may kylle a seditious persone by what meanes he can, for that there can be no more pestilent thyng in the pu∣blique wealth than sedition. so long as they protested not to be obsti∣nate, but to be reformed by the testimonies of Scrypture, or by them that coulde instructe them with better thynges, he durst not be bolde to condempne them: but nowe sythe the thinge it selfe declareth that they dyd nothyng but dissemble, he must also chaunge his style. And therfore he ryngeth a larme and admonysheth all men to set vpon thē and destroye as if they were so many wylde beastes. This booke dyd many discommende in all places, as to earnest and Lut. to vehe¦ment. cruell, but he aunswereth in the defence therof, maintaining his opiniō that none of them ought to be pardoned, no not they whiche were cō∣strayned by others, if they haue done any thynge sediciously, sauynge those only, whiche beyng ones admonyshed were content to rendre & yelde them selues. I tolde you before howe the Emperour by his let∣ters Thēperors letters to the princes of Germany. sent out of Spayne, did inhibite the assemblye of the Empyre, that shoulde haue bene the laste yeare in Nouembre at Spyres: but nowe hearyng of the trouble some state of Germany, and of the great preparation that the Turke made to inuade Hongary, he sent his let∣ters agayne from Toleto, appoynting a counsell of the whole Empire at Auspurge, to begynne the first daye of October, for the causes aboue An assemble called at Auf. mentioned, but chiefly for ayde agaynst the great Turke. sygnifyinge that in case he can not be there present hym self, he wyll appoint others to supplye his place: whiche letters beyng wrytten the .xxiiij. of May, were not delyuered in Germany tyll the .xiij. of August, wherfore by the aduyse of Ferdinando and others, it was differred tyl saint Mar∣tyns daye the .xj. of Nouembre, that suche as dwelt farre of, might pre∣pare them selues to come in dew reason. Carolostadius dissenting frō Luther, and therfore departing from Wittenberge, as before is men∣tioned, had kept familiaritie with those secrete teachers that fayned themselues to see visions, and to haue talke with God. for the whiche causes the Dukes of Saxony had banyshed hym out of his countrey: And he had set forth bookes against Luther and his fellowes callyng Carolosta∣dius writeth against Lu. them newe flatterers of the Romyshe byshop, and suche as taught a∣mysse concernyng the masse, confession of synnes, Images, and other thinges: And those wordes of Christ: This is my body, he interpreted
thus here sytteth my body, and rayleth on the Duke for exylyng hym, but layde all the blame in Luther. Whereunto Luther aunswered at large defendyng his opinions, and affirmed the cause to be iust, wher∣fore the prince had banyshed him. Now after this sedition was opres∣sed, the armies of the commoners discōfited, and many executed dayly in al places: Carolostadius beyng afrayde of his own parte, cōpyleth a booke wherin he pourgeth him selfe ryght dilygentlye, affirmynge Carolosta¦dius maketh his porgatiō that they doe vnto hym great iniurye that reporte hym to be one of the authors of this seditiō. And writīg his letters to Luther desyreth hym earnestly to set forth this same booke, to defende his innocensie, that he be not vniustly condempned, and neuer come to his aunswere. Lu∣ther wryting an epistle, that all be it he dissented much from hym, yet for asmuche as in this distresse he fleeth vnto hym for sucour, he sayeth he would not disceyue his expectacion herein, considering chiefly that this is the very dewtye of a Christenman. Wherfore he desyreth the Magistrates, and all others in generall, that in so muche as he vtter∣lye denyeth the thyng that is layde to his charge, and refuseth not to come to his answere before any lawful iudge, the same might be graū∣ted him, whiche standeth both with equitie and iustice. After this Ca∣rolostadius sendeth Luther an other boke, wherin he protesteth, that suche thinges as he wrote of the Lordes supper, was not to defyne or determine any thing, but by way of disputatiō to searche out the truth Luther admitteth the excuse, but he warneth al men to beware of his opinion, for so much as he is doubtful in it him selfe, or els if thei doubt in lyke case, to suspende their iudgement, tyl such tyme as it be certenly knowē what to beleue therin. for in thynges that we must beleue, we ought not to doubte or wauer, but to be so certen, that rather than to Faith ought not to vauer forsake our opinion, we should not refuse to dye a thousand tymes. In those dayes Luther maried a Nunne; wherby he gaue occasion to his aduersaries to speake euyll of hym. For than they sayd playnly he was Luther ma∣ried a Nūne. madde, and became the seruaunt of the deuill. At this tyme, Zwyn∣glius the minister of the congregation at Zurick, agreing with Lu∣ther in all other thynges dissented from him, touching the lordes sup∣per. For those wordes of Christ, this is my body, Luther vnderstode barely and symply after the texte of the letter, admitting none other in¦terpretation, affirming the bodye and bloude of Christe to be verely in the bread and wyne, and so to be receyued with the mouthe also: but Zuinglius taketh it to be a trope or a fygure, as many others mo are to be found in the Scriptures and expoūdeth the wordes thus: This signifieth my body. Wherunto subscribed Oecolampadius, a preacher at Basill, interpretyng it thus: This is a signe of my body. The mat∣ter was hādled on eyther syde with much contention & wryting. The Saxōs held ye opiniō of Luther, the Zwicers of Zwynglius. There
followed others which did expoūd it otherwise, but they all agreed in this opinion, that the body & blud of Christ is receiued spiritnally, not corporally, nor with ye mouth, but wt the hart. This cōtention endured the space of .iii. years: at the last, by the meanes of the Lantgraue, they Luther and Zwynglius met at Mar∣purge. came to a cōmunication at Marburg, as hereafter you shal here. Also the coūsel of thempire appointed a litle before at Auspurg, because few came thither, by reason of the tumultes in Germany, was proroged to the first of May in the next yeare folowyng, at the which time Ferdi∣nando put thē in hope that the Emperour would be there him self, and the place was appointed at Spyres. Neuerthelesse it was decreed, yt in the meane tyme, the preachers should expound the scriptures to the people, after the mindes of the doctours whiche the churche had recei∣ued, and not to teache sediciously, but so, as Gods name may be glory∣fied, & quietnes maintained. Whilest Fraunces the French kyng was prisoner in Spayne, Ales his mother had the gouernment: Who to kepe in the byshop of Rome, signified vnto him by letters & messagers what a zeale and affection she bare towardes him and the churche of Rome. Wherupon Elemēt the seuenth writing to the court of parlia∣ment The Popes letters to thē of Paris. in Paris, signifieth how he vnderstode by her, that certen here∣sies began to spring vp in Fraunce, against the auncient faith and reli¦gion & how they haue (wittely forseing the thing) chosen certen men to punishe such offendours, whiche thing he confirmeth also by his autho¦ritie, wyllyng them to be diligent herein, both for Gods glory and also for the welth of the Realme. With many other faire wordes of exhor∣tation to perseuer in so doing. Which letters being dated at Rome the xx. day of May, were deliuered to the Senate at Paris the .xvij. daye of Iune. Moreouer in the kinges absence the diuines of Paris, had so Faber driuē out of Paris euill entreated Iames Faber of Stapulles who hathe written dy∣uers workes both of Philosophie and diuinitie that they droue hym out of Fraunce. Wherof the kyng being certified by the lettres of his sister Margaret, which loued Faber for his vertue, writeth to the Se¦nate of Paris in his behalfe, geuyng him a Godlye testimony for his learnyng and vertue, and that he is in much estimation amonges the Italians and Spanyardes, wherfore he wileth them to surcease, and let the action falle, till his retourne, or his pleasure further knowen, beyng assured that it is by euyl wyll commenced against hym by the doctours of Serbone, for the matter was heard before his commyng from home. These letters being dated at Madricea town in Spayn, The kynges letters for Faber. the .xij. of Nouembre, were delyuered at Paris the .xxviij. of the same moneth. It was a thyng geuen to the deuines in tymes paste, to rayle vpon learned men: the cause was that they sawe their ignoraunce di∣spised. This yeare was the state of the common wealth altered in the lande of Pruse, the vttermost prouince in Germany, bordering on the
We shall repete the matter from the beginninge, In the Empyre of Henry the syxth, the sonne of Frederick Barbarosse, what tyme the Christians warred to recouer Hierusalem, there was instituted an or∣der of Knyghtes of Germany, whiche because they fought for religiō, did weare the whyte crosse on their garmēts as a badge of their pro∣fession. This was the yeare of our Lorde .M. C. and foure score and The story of Pruse. ten. The first maister of that order was chosen, as it is reported, in the Campe before the cytie of Ptolomais. After wardes dyd they subdue Pruse lande,, when Frederick the second was Emperour. And after they had kept warres of long tyme with the kynges of Polande, be∣yng vanquyshed in battell they became subiect, geuyng their fidelitie by an othe to Casunire kyng of Pole, the father of Sigismund. From the first maister, to the Marques Albert of Brandēburg, were thritty and thre. This Albert being chosen the yeare of our Lorde .M.D.xi. kept great warres for two yeares together with Sigismunde kyng of Polle. And in the yeare .M.D.xxi. there was a trewce takē for .iiij. yeares. In this tyme Albert sued oft to the Emperour and the states of the Empyre, for ayde and commyng to the councell at Nurrenberg, wherof we haue ofte tymes spoken, had his place amonges them as a Prynce of the Empyre. For the cause of the warre was, that he wold not be sworue to the kyng. But what tyme the Emperour was empe∣ched with the Frenche warres, and the Turke inuaded Hongary, and Germany was so tourmoyled with the sedition of the communaltie, that no ayde was to be looked for from thence, and the tyme of the trewce was expyred, he maketh peace with the kyng of Pole, geuyng hym him his faythe as to his suprome Magistrate, & receyue the doc∣trine of the Gospell, & alteryng the order, he taketh Pruse for his own. And he that before was maister, no we by the kynges assente, is called Duke of Pruse: And shortly after, he maried Dorothe the daughter of Frederick kyng of Denmarke, and foundeth the vniuersitie of Con∣ningsberge, called the kynges mount. Wherby he had the displeasure of all the order: for al be it he kept the countrey, and was supported he∣re in by the kyng of Pole, yet by a common assent was chosen in his rowme, Walther Cronberge, which shold represent the aunciēt name and dignitie: who after in all assemblies complayned vpon hym gre∣uously. Againe he defended his cause by wrytyng, declaryng howe he was dryuen by extreme necessitie beinge vtterly forsaken of the Em∣pyre, to submytte hym selfe vnto the kyng. There is an epistle of Leo the tenth to Sigismunde and Alberte, exhorting them vnto concord, and eyther to committe their matter to his legate, whiche he wold sende, or to the counsell of Laterane: for that it is moste conue∣nient, that the cōtrouersies of Princes shold be decided and determined by generall counselles.
✚ The syxthe Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the syxth Booke. LUther wrote to the kyng of England, and to Duke George: but thei both reiected the same. Christerne kyng of Dēmarke, had moued Luther to do so: the sycknes of the Frenche king duryng his imprysonment, hasted the treaty of Madrice. The king being deliuered, his two Sonnes were geuen as pledges. Whylest the estates were assembled at Spyres aboute matters of Religion, the Turke entreth into Hongarry. A disputation was hoïoen at Ba∣den in Swycherlande. Pope Element, and the Frenche kynge, make a league. The Emperour and the kyng complayne sore the one of the other. Rome is sacked by the Duke of Burbon. The Frenche kyng sendeth Lawtrecke into Italy. The secte of Anabaptistes beginneth. A disputa∣tion is kept at Bernes, for a reformation. A contention betwyxt Ferdinando and the Uayuode. Paccius is beheaded at Andwarpe. The Emperour, and the Frenche kyng offer them selues to the combat. The Masse is abolished at Strasburge. Troubles at Basyll for relygion. The Cā∣ous Papistes make a league with Ferdinando. An assembly is holden at Spyres, where the name of Protestauntes hath his begynning. Ciuile warre emonges the Swychers: a treate of peace at Cambray. Uienna beseged of the Turke. The sweatyng sycknes. The Protestantes make a league. YOu haue heard heretofore howe the kynge of Englande wrote agaynst Luther, and Luther Lut. letters of submissiō to the kynge of England. agaynst hym: But when he had hearde certen thynges, that sounded muche to the kynges cō∣mendation, delighted with that reporte, he wri∣teth to hym with great submission. Doubting not but he had sore offended his hyghnes, by set∣ting forth his booke: neuerthelesse he dyd it not so muche of his own accorde, as by the instiga∣tion of others. And where as he is so bolde to trouble hym with hys letters at this present, it proceadeth of his Prynclyke humanitie, whiche is hyghly commended of manye. Moreouer for that he vnderstandeth howe the bookes set forthe agaynst hym, were not of hys owne doynge, but wrytten of certen Sophisters, whiche full craftely tooke an occasion. And speakynge here by occasion of the Cardinall of Yorke, he calleth hym the plage of Englande: And that he heareth moreouer to his great comforte, howe that his grace mislyketh that naughtye sorte of men, and gy∣ueth his mynde to the knowledge of the truthe: Wherfore he bese∣cheth hym to pardon hym that one facte: And that it woulde please hym to remembre, that syns he is a man mortall, he ought not to beare ennemytie immortall.
And if he shal commaunde him, he wyl confesse his faulte openly, and commende his pryncelike vertues in an other worke. After he exhor∣teth his maiestie to gyue no eare to sklaunderous tales, that reporte him to be an heretyke: For the chief point of his doctrine is, how al we The chief point of Lu. doctrine. must be saued by fayth in Christ, whiche bare the punyshement of our synnes on his necke, shoulders, and al his body, who dyed for vs, rose agayne, reigneth with his father for euer: And this to be the doctrine of all the Prophetes and Apostles: This foundatiō ones layde, he tea∣cheth the dewty of charitie, what one ought to do for an other, howe we must obey the magistrate, and applye our whole lyfe to the profes∣sion of the Gospel: If there be anye errour or wyckednes in this doc∣trine, why do not his aduersaries shewe it hym? Why do they condēp∣ne and banyshe him, beyng neyther examined nor conuicted? where as he writeth against the byshop of Rome and his adherentes, he doeth it, for that they teache contrary to Christ & his Apostles, for their owne The ende of the Papistes doctrine. gayne and lucre, to the intent they may cōmaunde all men, & lyue lyke gluttons in all voluptuousnes: for vnto this ende, tende all their deni∣ses and doinges, whiche thing is so well tryed and knowen, that they them selues can not deny it: but in case they wold amende their liues, and not leade this idle & beastly lyfe, to the losse & iniury of manye, the stryfe myght sone be quieted. Diuers prynces and cities in Germany, haue embraced his doctrine, acknowledging it reuerently to be Gods benefite: and he woulde gladlye wyshe, that he myght also be accōp∣ted in that nombre. And where as the Emperour and certen others, do attempte thynges agaynsthym, it is no newes. For Dauid hathe prophecied longe synce, that kynges and other people should conspire, and imagine many thynges agaynst the Lorde, and his annoynted, reiectyng his lawes and commaundementes. So that when he con∣sidereth suche places of Scripture, he maruayleth that there is anye Prynce, that should fauour the doctrine of the Gospell. Fynally, he re∣quyreth hym that he may receyue a gentle aunswere. And not longe after, he wryteth also to George Duke of Saxony, signifyinge howe God hath accustomed in the beginning to chastise mē seuerely & shar∣pely, Luth. letters to George Dake of Saxon. but after gētly & louīgly to embrace the same. he was aterrour, & a feare to the Iewes, whā he gaue thē the law by Moses, but after by the preachig of the gospel, he shewed thē great ioye & gladnes, & that he hath followeth the same maner, in hādling some ouer roughly, & euen him for one: but yet since hath he writtē other thingesful of fruite & cō∣solatiō: wherby it is easy to se, yt he taketh al this payn to profit others of no euil will, but of a zeale he beareth to the truth. And where as he Duke Geor∣ge hateth the Gospel. heareth yt he relenteth nothing in the displeasure that he beareth hym, but increaseth his malice against him daily more and more, that is the cause whye he nowe wryteth vnto hym, desyryng him to surcease to
persecute his doctrine, whiche is consonaunt to the writinges of the Prophetes and Apostles: he admonysheth him also to haue no respect to the basenes of his persone, for the matter is not his but Gods almi∣ghty. Al be it that all men should fret & fume therat, yet shall this doc∣trine continue for euer. And therfore it greueth him the more, that he is so muche offended with the same, which he may in no wise forsake: and yet for that he seketh to gratisie him, he desyreth to be forgeuen, if he hath spoken any thing sharpely against him, & he wil agayne craue pardon of God for him, in that he hath persecuted the Gospel, & doub∣teth not but he shal obtein, so that he leaue of in time, & seke not to extin gwishe that great lyght of the Gospel, that appereth nowe vnto al the worlde. For if he so procede he will pray for Gods helpe against him, & doubteth not but his prayer shalbe heard, whiche he taketh to be strō∣ger than all the craftes of the deuyll: which alwayes is his refuge and moste assured defence. Whan the kyng of Englande had receiued Lu∣thers letters, he made a sharpe aunswer & defendeth his boke, whiche he sayeth is well accepted of diuers good and well learned men: And where as he hathe rayled on the reuerend Father the Cardynall of Yorke, he marueyleth nothing therat, which can not abstayne frō the contumelies both of men & sainctes: he sayth the Cardinall is a neces∣sarye instrument, for hym and his whole Realme: And where he hath loued hym before dearelye well, nowe wyll he set by hym ten tymes more, consyderyng that he myslyketh hym. For amōges other thinges this doeth he forsee with great dylygence, that none of his Leprosye, contagion, and heresye, do infecte any parte of his Realme. After he casteth in his teeth his incestuouse marryage, whiche is a Thomas wulley Car∣dinal a But∣chers sonne. vyce moste detestable. This Cardinalles name was Thomas Wul∣sey, a Buchers sonne of Ipswyche, but in hyghe authoritie wyth hys Prynce. Lykewyse Duke George made Luther suche an aunswere, as a man myght well perceyue what mortall hatred he bare hym. When the Ambassadours of Fraunce, whiche were sent into Spayne for a peace, amonges whome was Margaret the Frenche kynges syster a wydowe, could brynge nothyng to passe, Ales his mo∣ther whiche had the gouernaunce, for her ayde and defence founde the meanes to bryng into her league and amitie, Henry the kynge of Englande, whiche was done in the moneth of Auguste. A league be∣twene Eng∣lād & Fraūce The fyrst and chiefest poynt of this league was, that the violens of the Turkes, and the pestiferous secte of Luther, should be dryuen & kept out, which is no lesse daungerous, then the Turkes be. The Car∣dinal of England (whiche might do al at ye tyme) was thought to haue perswaded ye king vnto this league. for he bare ye Emperour no great good wil, for yt he toke him to haue bene thonly let yt he was not chosē bishop of Rome after the death of Adriā, as in dede certē of thēperours
haue expressed in their writinges. Whan Luther red the kyng of En∣glandes aunswere in printe, and sawe that he ascribeth to him vncon∣stancie, as though he had chaunged his opinion, considering how this did not concerne his owne priuate iniurie, but the professiō of the go∣spel, he toke the matter heuely that to gratifie his frendes, he made so humble a submission. In lyke maner, he intreated gētly both by word, and writing, Christerne kyng of Denmarck, that he wold receiue the pure doctrine, trusting to haue preuayled with gentlenes, and nowe he perceiued how farre he is abuse: The lyke thinge happened vnto him in Cardinal Caietane, in George Duke of Saxonie, in Erasmus of Roterdame, vnto whome he hath written frendly, at the request of others, and hath obtayned therby nothynge els, but made them more fierce, & cruell, to be fondely done of him, to thinke that he coulde haue foūde godlines in the courtes of Princes, that sought for Christ, wher Godlines is not to be sought for in the court. sathan ruleth, or loketh for John Baptist, amonges thē that were clo¦thed in purple Wherfore, seing that he can not preuaile by this gentle and frēdly kinde of writing, he wil take an other order frō henceforth. The frenche kyng, for that the treaty of peace toke not place, through a great thought, and pensiuenes, fel syck: but comforted again by the gentle talke of the Emperour, who bad, he should be of good chere, he began to be somewhat better. The Emperour also waying with hym selfe what a pray he should lose, if any thyng chaunced vnto him other wise then wel, inclyned his mynde to peace daylye more & more wher∣fore the .xiiii. daye of January, then concluded of all thynges at Ma∣drice, in the whiche wryting emonges other thynges, is this recited, The peace of Madrice. that the Emperour & the kyng, haue this respect chiefly, that the enne∣mies of the christian religion, and the heresies of Luthers secte, should be extyrped, and that the peace being concluded, they shall set an ordre in the common welth, and moue warre against the Turkes and He∣retikes that be out of the communion of the churche: for this is verye nedefull, and the byshop of Rome hath often warned them, and bene in hande with them, to applye this thing diligently: wherfore the ra∣ther to satissye his request, they are determyned to entreate hym, that he would appoynte a certaine daye in some place conuenient, for the Ambassadours of all Prynces to assemble in, hauyng ful power & au∣thoritie, to agree vpon all suche thynges, as shalbe good and requisite, as well for the Turky she warres, as also for the wedyng out of Here∣tikes. In this peace makyng, was Elenor ye Emperours syster which The lady E∣lenor. had bene maryed to Emanuell kyng of Portugall, beyng espoused to the Frenche kynge, the Emperour promyseth to gyue hym for her do∣wery, two thousand ducates, & certen landes in high Burgundy. For the which they were at controuersie. And the kynge shall within two monethes after he is retourned home, restore to the Emperour the
Duckdome of Burgundy, whiche the kynges of Fraunce haue kepte in their possession syns the death of Charles Duke of Burgundye, by the space of fyftie yeares: Moreouer he shall renounce, Naples, Mil∣lan, Gene, Aste, and Flaunders: He shall gyue no ayde to Henry kyng of Nauarre, Charles Duke of Gelders, Ulryche Duke of Wirtēberg, nor to Robert Erle of Marche. He shall attempte no secrete deuises or counsels in Italy. When the Emperour wyll go into Italy by Sea, he shall assiste him with a nauie of sixtene Galleis vitayled and four∣nyshed with all thynges sauing soldiours, and also two hūdreth thou∣sand crownes, to arme them. The yerely pension that the Emperour is bounden to paye to the kynge of Englande, all shall the Frenche kynge paye to the kynge of Englande. He shall restore Charles the Duke of Burbon and his fellowes, to all their ryght, landes, and goodes, permittyng them to vse the same, dwellyng where they lyste. For suche action or title as the Duke of Burbon hath to the Prouince of Marseilles, the kyng shall abyde the ordre of the lawe at any tyme. When he had gyuen the Emperour his fayth to obserue these condi∣tions, he was set at lybertie, to retourne home. And departyng out of the borders of Spayn, leaueth behind him his two sonnes Fraūces & The kynges sonnes are pledges. Henry, verey yonge, for pledges, as it was agreed vpō. And vnlesse he obserue couenauntes, he promyseth to yelde hym self prysoner agayn. After this the Princes of Germany, assemble at Spires, as I told you in the last boke, it was appointed. Emonges whome was Duke Counsell at Spyres. Iohn electour of Saxony, and Philip Lantgrane of Hesse. The Em∣perour deputes here, were Ferdinando his brother, Barnarde By∣shop of Ttent, Casimire, Marques of Brandenburge, Philip Mar∣ques of Baden, William Duke of Bauarre, and Ericus Duke of Brunswyck. When they had begunne the counsell the .xxv. daye of June, and had declared the causes of that assemblye, they added this moreouer, that the Emperour aboue all thynges wylled and com∣maunded that the states of the Empyre shoulde with common assent take order, howe the Christian religion and auncient custome of the church of lōg tyme obserued, might be still reteyned in his former esti∣mation of al men, and how they are to be punyshed that will attempt the contrary, and also to be resisted, if they make any force in the mat∣ter to the intent that both Cesars decre made at Wormes, and publy∣shed fyue yeres syns, and the decre of this assembly also may be obser∣ued of al men and put in execution. When certen were chosen of all degrees to treate of these matters, and emonges them also the Lant∣graue, Iames Sturmius of Straisborourgh, and Cressus of Norin∣berge: The Emperours deputes call an assembly of all states the .iii. daye of August, and saye how they vnderstande that they haue cho∣sen a certayne nombre to conferre of these matters propounded:
Who, as they suppose, wyll first consulte of religion: But to the intent that the Emperours pleasure may be accomplyshed, and that they in∣treate of nothing, which they can not determine, but be a losse of time, and a lette and hynderaunce to other matters, therfore wyll they let them vnderstande what the Emperours commaundement is in this behalf. After this, they read the Emperours letters, dated at Hispale the. xxiii of Marche. Wherof the some was this. Howe he intended to The Empe∣rours letters go to Rome to be inuested, and also to treate with the byshop for a ge∣nerall counsell: but in the meane tyme he wylleth and commaundeth, that the states in this assemblye decree nothynge, that shall be in anye wyse agaynst the olde custome, lawes and Ceremonies of the church, and that in theri dommions they do establyshe all thinges, according to the decre made at Wormes by their common assentes: And take well in worth this delay, tyll he haue deuised with the hyghe Byshop concernyng a generall counsell, whiche shalbe very shortly: for in such priuate assemblies, there is not only no good to be done, but also er∣rours and licenciouse lybertie of the people more cōfirmed. About this The Turke inuadeth Hū¦gary. tyme, the Emperour of Turkes settyng foreward with his armie frō Belgrade, whē he was passed ouer the riuers of Danubie and Saue, he marched the ryght way into Hongary. Wherfore king Lewys sen∣dyng agayne his Ambassadours to Spyres, requyreth ayde. Further A league be¦twene the venetians, Pope, & Frē¦che kyng. more out of Italy came certen newes, that Clement byshop of Rome and the Venetians, hadde made a legue with the Frenche kyng, that was lately retourned home out of Spayne, to warre vpon the Empe¦rour, as you shall heare afterwarde. Whan the Emperours letters before mentioned, were read in the assemblie, the cyties for the moste parte, namely, of hygh Germany, put vp their aduise in writing: decla∣ring how they desyred by all meanes to obey and gratifies the Empe∣rour, nowithstanding the controuersie about religion encreaseth day∣ly, especially touchyng ceremonies and mens traditions: hitherto the decre of Wormes, could not be well obserued for feare of sedition and vprores: but nowe is the daunger muche more, as in the laste assem∣blye, before the Legate of Rome, it was also wel declared. In so much that if the Emperour him selfe were here present and infourmed of the state of thinges, he could iudge none otherwyse. He maketh promyse in his letters of a counsell, but what tyme they were wrytten, the By∣shop and he were frendes, and nowe it is farre otherwyse, seynge the byshop hath altered his mynde, & leuied an Armie against hym: wher∣fore it can not synke into their heades, that in this trouble some tyme they should haue any generall counsell: wherfore they thynke it beste to sende ambassadours to the Emperour, whiche maye informe hym of the whole matter, and of the state of Germany, and howe daunge∣rous a matter it is also, to delay the cause of relygion any longer, and
no lesse perilous to put in vre the decree of Wormes: And therfore to entreate hym, that for the auoydynge of a further inconueniencie, he would permitte them to holde a counsell prouinciall of Germany, to treate of all matters in controuersie: Whiche thyng was agreed vpon at Norenberg, and the place appoynted here in this same citie, & many of the states had made preparation for the same: But when it was a∣gayne defeated by the Emperours countremaundemēt, it opened the waye to rebellion, sedition, and to ciuile warres, al the which thinges myght easelye haue bene eschewed, in case at the same tyme, the cause of relygion had bene heard indifferently: And if he wyll not allowe a counsell of Germany, than to entreate him to differre the execution of the decree of Wormes, vntyll the generall councell: for otherwyse it wyll come to passe, that the wounde newly healed, wyll waxe rawe agayne, & another that shalbe worse, breake out. Furthermore in this discorde so long as euery man is carefull for his owne estate, it wylbe very harde and paynefull to collecte any money for the ayde of others. Besydes this wrytinge, exhibited to the Prynces the fourthe daye of August, they put vp also an other, wherin the pouertie cōplayned that they were in all cities and townes ouermuche burthened wyth beg∣gyng Freres: For that whiche should be a helpe vnto them to susteyn Against false Freers. their life, was preuēted & caught vp by them: and not only that, but of∣ten tymes also there came to their handes, throughe flattrye, great landes and legacies, to the losse and hynderaunce of many: wherfore their deuyse was, that they should not be suffered to make anye moo Freres when these are dead, and to permytte them that wyll take an other kynde of lyfe vpon thē, to depart out of their cloyster, with some annuall stypende: And the rest to be geuen to the poore mens boxe. Moreouer they thynke it not reason, that the clergie should be frelye exempted from al charges and paymētes, for that priuilege was graū∣ted them in tymes past, by the lyberalitie of kynges and Prynces, but yet at such tyme as they were both fewe in nombre, and had but small lyuynges: But nowe that they be so many, & growen to such a welth, there is an other consyderation to be had, for the cause of their inuni∣tie beyng taken away, the benefite also employed taketh place no lon∣ger, for they do enioye the benefytes and commodities, as muche as o∣ther The nōber of holy days men, or more, for the whiche tribute, custome, and all other mony is payde: agayne to haue ouermany holye dayes, whiche hynder the people sore, wherunto they are bounden vnder great penaltie, and do not only leaue their necessary workes vndone, but also in those idle daies offende God diuerse wayes: They thynke it also mete to abolish the lawe that is made for the choyse of meates, to leaue vnto all men their owne ceremonies tyll the counsell, and in no wyse to stoppe the course of the euāgelical doctrine. But after the byshoppes vnderstode
the Emperours pleasure, they woulde not proceade in matters of re∣ligion, but thought in this great dissention bet wyxte the Byshop and hym, to deferre the thynge tyll some better oportunitie serued, when there arose great stryfe among the men chosen, whiche were contrary in Relygion, the Duke of Saxon, and the Lantgraue, all consulta∣tion layde asyde, ment to go home, and commaunded their company to make them ready to take their iournaye. That seyng Ferdinando, the Archebyshop of Treers, and others, & consyderynge what daunger it were in so peryllous a tyme, yf they shoulde thus breakynge of in displeasure conclude vppon nothynge, but departe wyth grudge and malyce: Founde the meane to Salue this wounde: For wherof the commotion in the yere before, and what dissention so euer is nowe in Germany, sprange vp altogether of the controuersye that is in Relygion, they thoughte good to remedye the thynge in tyme. Wherfore to appease certen mens myndes, at the laste they made A decree for Religion. a decre, that for the establyshynge of Religion, and mayntenaunce of the common peace and tranquilitie, it was necessarye to haue a law∣full counsell, eyther prouinciall, or generall, to begyn within a yeare at the furthest: And to the entent there shall be no let nor delaye in the same, to sende Ambassadours to the Emperour to entreate hym that he woulde consyder the myserable and troublesome state of the Em∣pyre, and to repayre shortly in to Germany, to holde there a counsell. And touchyng the decree made at Wormes, thei were contented that untyll the counsell were begonne, all men shoulde so demeane them selues in their prouinces, as they woulde yelde an accompte of theyr doynges, bothe to God and to the Emperour. Before this decree was made, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, enter in to talke with the Ambassadours of Strausborough, Norenberge, and Auspurge, The begyn∣ninge of the Protestātes league. whiche they sawe fauoured the Gospell, concernynge a league, that for as muche as they knewe not what the Byshoppes and theyr ad∣herententes intended, if it fortuned anye to stande in daunger for Re∣lygion, that one myght helpe an other: And for as muche as they had a good opinion of them of Frankeforth, and Ulmes, they woulde not refuse to breake wyth them also in the matter. The Ambassadours make aunswere that they had no commission touchynge anye suche matter, neuerthelesse, they would wryte home ryght diligently. The Duke of Saxon had his preachers, George Spalatine, & Iohn Isle∣bie, and the Lantgraue had also his. The residewe of the Princes, re∣quested that they might not preache for feare of any sturre, but it was in vayne. Fardinando also calling before him the Ambassadours of all cities, and accomting vnto them the benefites of his auncesters, and
the house of Austriche, exhorted them to be obediēt to the Emperour, and not to be caried away, by the counsell and perswasion of others. They decreed also here to sende ayde to the kynge of Hungary: but at what tyme the assemblye was finished, which was about the ende of The kynge of Hungary slayne. August, the Turke was entred into Hungarye, and had vanquyshed kynge Lewis in battell, who was also slayne in the chase. At this assemblye were all the Prynces electours, sauinge onlye the Marques of Brandenburg. The Emperour this sommer maried Isa¦bell, The Empe∣rour maried a wyfe. daughter to Emanuell kyng of Portugall, syster to Iohn whiche had succeded his father. What tyme the assemblye was at Spyres, thetwelue townes of the Neluetians or Swycers, kept a disputatiō at Badene. Thether came the chiefest diuines of the byshop of Romes A disputatiō at Baden. syde, Faber, Eckius, and Murmer. And the byshop of Constance, Ba∣sill, Courtes, & losanna, sent thither their Ambassadours. There were theames set vp, whiche Eckius defendeth ryght boldely. That the ve∣ry body and bloud of Christe is present in the Lordes supper: that it is a trewe oblation for the quicke and dead, that the vyrgin Mary and other saynctes, must be prayde vnto as intercessours: that Images ought not to be taken downe: And that after this lyfe there is the fire of purgatory. Oecolampadius, and others, did impugne thē: Zwyn∣glius was absent, and in his letters to the Heluetians, he declared the cause of his absence, and confuted the opinions of Eckius by writing. For Zwynglius dred bad measure suspecting bothe the men and the place. They concluded thus. That all men should perseuer in the same religion, that they haue obserued hytherto, and receyue no newe doc∣tryne, but followe the authoritie of the counsell. The byshop of Con∣staunce, A Priest burnt. had a litle before caused one Iohn Huglie a priest, to be brent at Merspurge, for that he woulde not allowe the byshops of Romes doctrine in all thinges. When Lewys the king of Hongary was thus myserably slayne, Ferdinando contended that the kyngdome was Discorde in Hongary. dewe vnto hym, by a certen composition, but he had an aduersarye Iohn Sepuse, the vayuode of transsyluania. Of the whiche dissentiō, when all the nobilitie & states were deuided, there arose warre right noysome and hurtfull to the Germanes, & other nations that dwelled nere. For afterwardes the Emperour of Turkes, receyuing the Uay∣uode into his fayth and protection, established hym kyng, as his tri∣butarye and client, and had Buda delyuered vp into his handes. The Frenche kyng whiche was retourned home, leauing his children for The Frēche league agaist the Emper. pledges in Spayne, sayde the conditiōs of peace were vnreasonable. Wherfore sendyng Ambassadours to and fro, the byshop of Rome and the Uenetians, enter into league with hym: the effect wherof is this That for the defence and quietnes of Italy, they shall fynde an armye of .xxx. thousand fotemen, of men at armes, and lyghthorse men syxe
thousande: They shall also prouide an Nauie of two and thirtye gal∣leys with Shippes of bourthen: that what tyme they shall haue van∣quyshed the enemy in Lumbardye, and Italye, they shall muade the kingdome of Nayles, both by sea and lande, which beyng ones wōne to remayne in the power of the churche of Rome, yet so as .lxxv. thou∣sande duckates be payde yerely to the Frenche kyng, which claymeth a tytle in it: That the dignitie of the house of medicees be maynteyned in the citie of Florence. The Frenche kyng leaueth the Duckdome of Myllan to Fraunces Sfortia, whome the Emperours men besegyng in the Castell of Millan, constrayned to rendre, and promiseth him his owne ayde, and the Swycers to helpe hym, & also a wyfe in Fraunce of the bloud royall, yet vpon this condition, that he shal paye vnto him therfore yeare fyfty thousande crownes, and fynde his brother. Maxi∣milian, whiche is prysoner in Fraunce. After this the byshop of Rome The Popes benefites to the Emper. wrytyng his letters to the Emperour, recyteth his benofites towards hym, what goodly offers he refused at the Frenche kynges handes for his sake, howe that when the kynge was taken, he gaue a hondreth thousande Duckates to his captaynes, vpon certayne conditiōs, that he hath vttered vnto hym oftentymes, the coūsels of his enemies, that what time his men dyd besege Frances Sfortia in the Castel of Mil∣lan, and certen men of great power moued hym to ioyne in league a∣gainst hym, he would not heare them: For all the whiche thynges he is full euyll recompensed: For his souldiours haue wrought suche in∣iuries, shame, and mysery to hym and the churche of Rome, as hathe not bene hearde: moreouer that neyther the condicions are fulfylled, nor his money restored, how it appeareth what good wyll he beareth hym, whiche woulde not make hym prinie vpon what conditions he concluded with the Frenche kynge, that he vtterly reiected his suite & intercession made for Sfortia, howe he sent the Duke of Burbon frō the siege at Marseilles to reyse vp a newe kynde of warre in Italye: for the whiche causes, he is of necessitie constrayned to make a league with suche as loue the quiet and wealth of Italy: Wherfore if he wyl also be content to embrace peace, well and good, if not, he shal not wāt force and power to defende Italy, and the common wealth of Rome. In this league was comprysed the kyng of England, and with great promyses was desyred to be the protectour therof. Unto this epystle Cesar aunsweryng at Granato, the .xviii. of September, reaccomp∣teth The Empe∣rours āswer his desertes and benefites done vnto hym. Howe that by his sute and meanes he was made byshop of Rome, howe before that tyme he gaue hym an yerely pension of ten thousande duckates out of the reue∣newes of the Archebyshop of Toledo, when he was legate to byshop Leo, notwithstandyng that he had conspyred against hym, with Al∣bert prince of Carpes, to haue dispossessed hym of Naples, and Sicily.
When the Frenche men were dryuen out of Italy, by the conducte of Bourbon, he could not deny him, but that he myght warre in Fraūce, or els where, to recouer of the Frenche kyng his owne: he graunteth the kyngdome of Naples to be holden of hym, not withstandynge in The kyngdō of Naples. case sayeth he, you should make any warre there, you shoulde thereby lose all your right and tytle: for euen for the same causes that the Cli∣ente loseth the benefite graunted, for the selfe same also doth the Pa∣trone A point of yt lawe. lose his prerogatiue. Before the kyng was taken, you entreated of a peace, but it was to the intent you might haue inioyed the Duke∣dome of Millan. And therfore the Uenetians and Florentines, with∣drewe their ayde, through your motion, from my captaynes, against their league. For the Frenche kyng confesseth openly, howe throughe your prouocation he entred into a newe league before he went out of Spayne. And I knowe by certayne reporte, that you haue dispensed with him for his othe, wherby he is bounden to me: Furthermore you haue moued warre, before the letters (wherein it was proclaymed) were vnto me deliuered, seking not only to dryue me out of all Italy, but also to depose me from the dignitie of the Empyre: For all this am I able to proue by the letters of Ferdinando Daualle, Marques of Pistare, whome you would haue entysed in to your league, promising hym the kyngdome of Naples. I haue tytle to Millan by mo wayes than one, yet for the quiet of Italye, I suffered Sfortia to enioye it: And whan he was greuously syck, I would haue placed in his steade the Duke of Bourbon, for that I sawe it pleased you well and dyuers others in Italy. And the cause why Sfortia was besieged in the Ca∣stel of Millan, was that he had committed treason against me, by ioy∣nyng in league with you, wherof beyng detected, he would not dely∣uer to my captaynes, the Castelles of Cremone and Millan, neyther make his pourgation, nor come to any talke in the matter. Your re∣quest was, that I should forgyue hym altogether, whiche I neyther coulde nor in deede ought to doe, lest by an euyll example I shoulde gyue an occasiō vnto Clientes, to offende against their patrones. Tou∣chyng the peace concluded with the Frenche kyng, I kept nothing se∣cret from your Ambassadours: for the condicions be suche as I would not haue concealed, for they tende to a publique peace, and to the resi∣staūce of Christes ennemies. But se, the vnworthines of yt thing. Ther commeth more money yearely to Rome out of my Realmes and pro∣uinces, than doth from all other nations. That is to be proued by the requestes of the Prynces of Germany, what tyme they complaynyng greuously of the court of Rome, desyred a reformation. Whose cōplaint Rome is the treasure hou¦se of yt whole worlde. at that tyme I neglected, for the zeale I bare to the churche of Rome. Whiche thynge considered, and for as muche as I haue geuen you none occasion of offence, I do instantly requyre you to lay down your
armies: And I wyll doe lykewyse. And seynge we are bothe appoyn∣ted of God, as two great lyghtes, let vs endeuour our selues so as the The Pope & the Emper. are two gret lyghtes. whole worlde maye be lyghtened through vs, and not that by reason of dissention, there should aryse an Eclypse: Let vs regarde the publi∣que weale, and attempt to dryue out the Turkes, to quenche the secte and errours of Luther: For this appertayneth vnto Gods glorye, and hereof ought we to begynne, and after to debate other controuersies, you shall haue me ready vnto all these thynges, which if I can not ob∣taine, but that you wil nedes perseuer to play the man of warre: I do The Pope is a warrier. proteste here, that I appeale to a general counsell, in the same maye all griefes be decyded, and I requyre that the same maye be called so shortlye as may be. Where he speaketh of two lightes, he followeth herein the wordes of Innocentius the thyrd, which applieth the two great lyghtes, that God created, the one to guyde the day, the other ye nyght, to the byshops and princelyke dignitie. But that whiche mini∣streth Godly thinges to be muche more excellent then that which go∣uerneth polytike matters only: And loke what different is betwyxte the sonne and the mone, so great a diuersitie is there betwyxt the office of the high byshop, & a kinges office. Whan Cesar had made this auns∣were to Clemēt, he wryteth also to the coledge of Cardinalles, the sixt day of October, signifiyng that he is not a little sory to heare that by∣shop Clement is confederated with the French kyng, who reneweth warre agaīst him afreshe, & how the bishop hath sent him letters of de∣fiance, which he supposeth were writtē by their cōmon assent. wherat he marueleth not a little, considering there is no kyng yt beareth more loue and affection to the churche of Rome, than he: Witnes Parma & Placence, whiche being cities of the Empyre, and plucked from it of late, he hath not withstanding restored to the churche, all be it he was by no ryght bounde so to do: And the princes and states of Germanye cōplayned vnto him at Wormes, of sondry iniuries done by the courte of Rome, and required a recompence, but he for a singular loue, & natu¦rall inclination towardes the churche of Rome, passed ouer their re∣questes with deaf eares: And where as great sedition and trouble en∣sued therupon through out all Germanye, and the Princes there had appointed another counsel, he for the indemnitie of the bishop & church of Rome, countremaunded the same vnder a great penaltie, and to ap∣pease A counsell promysed. their myndes he put them in hope of a general counsell to be hol∣den out of hande: Wherfore the byshop hathe done hym great iniury, whiche hath done so muche for his sake, that he hath by the same mea∣nes lost the good wylles of the princes of the Empire: he desyreth them therfore to admonyshe the byshop of his duty, that he appointe a coun∣sell, and perswade hym to incline his mynde to peace, rather then to warre: whiche if he refuse, and wyll differre the counsell, that then
they would call it, for if the christian cōmon wealth susteyne any losse, or dammage, eyther for the want of a counsell or for long delaye of the same, it ought not hereafter to be imputed to him. After the newes ca∣me out of Hongary of the great ouerthrowe there, the prynces set for∣ward their Ambassade appointed at Spires to the Emperour, with the great spede. And for the more expedition, they intreate the Frēche kyng, to graunt them a saufeconduicte, to passe into Spayne through Fraunce: whiche he graunted, prescribing them a certen tyme to passe in, and toke an occasion hereby to wryte vnto them the .vj. of Octobre. The frenche kyngs leters to the pryn∣ces of Ger∣many. That for the losse of Hongary, the death of Lewis the kynge, and the daunger that approched Germany, he had conceiued an inwarde so∣rowe in his minde, and nothyng lesse lamented yt the publique wealth also peryshed through ciuile warres: it was not surely lōg of him that Christome is not quiet, but this to be the Emperours faulte, who re∣fuseth al honeste, and reasonable conditions of peace: And for so much as he is neither moued, with the cōmon losse & destruction, nor with the moste vnworthy death of his brother in lawe king Lewis, nor yet with the miserable estate of his owne sister now a wydowe, nor cōsi∣dereth not in what daunger standeth Austriche, they shal do wel & ac∣cording to their dutie, if they can exhorte & perswade him vnto peace, to kepe loue & amitie with kinges that dwell nere hym, and refrayne this vnmeasurable couetousnes: for this should be more honorable for hym, than if he styll endeuour to get other mens landes, and possesse all him selfe alone: his progenitours kynges of Fraunce, haue often ti∣mes fought many battelles with the ennemies of christentie: the same myght nowe be done with their powers ioyned in one, if the Empe∣rour be so mynded: wherfore in case they can deuise to bring this thing to passe, he wyll bestowe on the Turkyshe warre al his force, and him selfe also: but if not, no man blame hym, if he assaye to recouer by force of armes, suche thynges as by good wyll he can not, for it stādeth him vpon rather to seke for peace, which is nerer the Turkes daunger thā he is. Whan Cesar was aduertysed of these letters, the .xxix. of Nouē∣bre, The Empe. confuteth the letters. he writeth to the Princes, and first he rehearseth howe mercyfully and gently he vsed the Frenche kynge prysoner, howe he set hym at ly∣bertie, howe he gaue hym in marriage his eldest syster, to hym in de∣gree of succession the seconde. And where as he, all thynges beyng quyeted, as he supposed, was takynge his iourney into Italye, to the entent he myghte bende hys whole force agaynste the perpetuall en∣nemyes of the Christiane Religion, he breakynge his fidelitie, and makynge a league wyth Byshop Clement and certen others, and deuydynge emonges them the kyngdome of Naples, whiche they had alreadye in hope conceyued to be theyr owne: Renewed mortall Warre. By meanes whereof he coulde not delyuer the countrey of
Hongary from the violent fury of the Turkes being forced to defende his owne limites. And where as he pretendeth to lament the death of kyng Lewis, and destruction of Hongary, it is a playne dissimulatiō, to the intent he myght by some meane put to silence such as founde his letters, and do constantly affirme, that the Turke attēpted this warre through his instigation. When he was in Spayne, and synce his re∣tourne home also, he confirmed by his letters the obseruation of conue nauntes: but for as muche as he hath his kingdome, liyng in the mid∣des of all Europe he is carelesse, and seketh warres & contention, ther∣by to make his profite. Besides the wrytinge before mentioned, there came forth in the French kinges name an Apologie in his defence, de∣claring An apologie for the frēch kyng. the causes, why he stādeth not to the peace of Madrice. Wher∣unto an answere was made in the Emperours behalf at large. For as muche as the Turke had Buda with a great parte of Hongary, & op∣pressed the people miserably, being a great terrour to Germany: Certē princes of the Empire consulted at Eslyng, to write spedely to the Em¦perour, The princes letters to the Emperour. intreating him to repaire into Germany as shortly as might be, in consideration to the great daunger, that than hanged ouer the Empire. in these letters, written the .xix. of Decēbre, they make mentiō of the Ambassade that they were determined to haue sent vnto hym: but because they should haue trauailed through Fraunce, & the kynge wold graunt them saufe conduict, but only for .iiij. monethes, wherof one was past, & before the Ambassadours should mete together, the ti∣me wold be much shortned. Therfore to auoyd the daunger, they haue determined to differ the same vntil the next assemblie of the Empyre, whiche they haue appointed at Regensburg, the first day of April next folowyng, to treate of the Turkysh warre, trusting ye either by yt time, An assemble at Regens∣burg. they shal haue some better occasiō to sende, or yt he shal haue some intel∣ligence of the thing in ye meane time. Al be it that Cesar wrote thus to the byshop of Rome & his Cardinals, yet wold it preuaile nothing, but the cōfederatours sending vnto him Ambassadours, as was agreed vpō, require him to depart frō his armies, to restore Sfortia Duke of Millan, to receiue the money for his raunsome, & send home the kyngs sonnes whome he deteineth as pledges, & to repay the money, that he borowed of the kyng of England, hereunto answered the Emperour, at Ualolete the .xij. of February. That he cā not dismisse his armies in any short time: notwithstāding he wil not refuse to take truce for thre yeres or more, & to sēd the armies on both partes agaīst the Turke our cōmon ennemie, & in ye meane time to treate of peace. Sfortia holdeth his landes of the Empire, and is accused of treason, he can not ther∣fore be restored, before his matter be examyned. Wherfore let hym an∣swere to the lawe and his accusers, and he wyll appoynt hym indiffe∣rent iudges: To restore the kynges chyldren vpon the receipte of the
money, he can not, and the same is agaynste the kynges promesse, othe and fidelitie. Where they require him to repaie the kinge of Eng∣land his money, he marueleth not a litle, consydering they haue no cō∣maundement of him in this matter, for the kyng & he be such frendes, as a mony matter can not breake their frendshyp: Wherfore seinge the requestes be vnsitting, he willeth them to bryng forth others: for his part he wyl do nothyng obstinatly, but shalbe content to beare with many thinges for the cōmon wealthes sake. Wherfore the Ambassa∣dours thus departing without any thing concluded, they renewe the warres againe wt all their force & power. In those daies Iohn Frede∣rick sonne & heire to the prince electour of Saxony, married Sibille Iohn Frid¦marrieth Si¦bille of Cle∣ue. daughter to Duke Iohn of Cleaue. the lady Catharine yt Emperours yongest sister, was promysed him, & writinges made of the same: But when this alteratiō of religion chaūced in Saxony, they swarued frō their couenauntes. And Hawnart which was then Emperours Am∣bassadour in Germany, sayd plainly, that there was no promise to be kept with Heretikes following herein (as I suppose) the fote stepes of the coūsel at Constance, as in dede the Duke of Saxony reciteth in a certen writing. Emōges others of themperours captaines was Char∣les Duke of Bourbon, who going with a certen power to Naples, by the way toke the citie of Rome, & sacked it the next daye after he there Rome is sac¦ked. arriued, being the sixt day of May. Clemēt the byshop, the Cardinals and other prelates, fleing in to Castell aungell, were beseged a certen tyme, being trenched in on euery syde: whiche after they had endured siege seuen monethes, were at the laste deliuered by the Emperours commaundement. It is harde to expresse with wordes the great cru∣eltie and oultrage of the Germanes and Spanyardes at Rome. For besydes the cruell slaughters, destruction, spoyling and raueshynge of women, they left of no kynde of contumelious reproches & mockinges of the bishop and his Cardinalles. The Emperour excused the facte di∣ligently, affirmyng that it was not done by his commaūdement. And chiefly he wrote therof to the king of England: that albeit he supposeth the thyng to haue happened vnto hym by the iust iudgement of God, who auenged the wronge and iniurie done vnto hym: yet he sayeth, he wil so vse the matter that this same calamitie, shalbe the beginning and occasion of the helth of the common wealth. Whan newes were brought into Spayn of the sackīg of Rome, Cesar immediatly cōmaū¦ded to cease frō playing of pageantes & interludes whiche were thē set forth for ioy of his son Philip, newly borne. The king of Englād answe The king of Englande. red nothīg to themperours letters: and the bishop of Rome being cap∣tiue, vnto whom he bare a great zeale & reuerence, & themperours po∣wer increasing daily, he fixed his mind vpō warre, sending ye Cardinal of yorke ambassadour into Fraunce. To the coūsel of Regēsburg came
the Prynces, but sent their Ambassadours only. Wherfore there was nothing cōcluded, sauyng that they sent letters to the Emperour, the xviij day of May, signifiyng that for diuers causes his presence were requysite and nedefull. In this tyme sprange vp a newe kynde of doc∣tryne, of suche as are called Anabaptistes. They condempne the bap∣tisme of infantes, and are baptysed agayne them selues, teachyng that The begyn∣ning of Ana¦baptistes. all thynges should be common. Against these wrote Luther, Zwyn∣glius, and diuers others. And the magistrates punished in euery place. They boaste of visions & dreames, and at Sangal a town in Swy∣cerlande, one of them cut of his brothers head, in the presence both of father and mother, whome he had perswaded, that God had cōmaun¦ded hym so to do: but being apprehended of the magistrate, he suffered the lyke punyshment. Now, how muche they increased, and what cō∣motions they styred vp in Germany, hereafter shalbe declared. This yeare the Senate of Strasborough decreed that none shoulde from henceforth be buried within the citie, and appointed certen places for the buriall of the dead without their citie. When the Frenche kynge heard that Rome was taken, makyng league with the kyng of Eng∣lande, he sent a great armie into Italy, by the conduicte of Lautrech The Frēche Armye. a Gascon, to rescewe the byshop. Who comming into Lumbardy, and ayded by the Uenetians, taketh first Alexādria, and after Pauie, part∣ly by force, and partly by composition, but the souldiours in their rage and fury, for that the king was there taken, after a woūderful slaugh∣ter of the townes men, spoyled the citie. The .xxvij. day of Iuly, Char∣les Duke of Burbon, lately stayne in the assaulte at Rome, was con∣dempned The Duke of Baurbon conoempned at Paris. at Paris, by the court of parliamēt of treason, his name and memoriall accursed, his Armes plucked downe, and his landes and goodes confiscated. Anthony Prate Chauncelour, gaue the sentence. This Duke bare a mortall hatred to the kynge, and what tyme he went to besege Marseilles, as is mentioned before in the fourth boke, for because at the same tyme the kynge of Englande toke the Empe∣rours parte, he wrote to the Cardinall of Yorke, emonges other thin∣ges that he would spare no paynes nor peryll, that kyng Henry might by his helpe recouer the ryght and tytle that he hath to Fraunce. For Englyshe men doe clayme all Fraunce to be theires, for a two hun∣dreth Englande hath title to Fraunce. yeares since and aboue, especiallye Normandye, Gascoyne and Gwyne: In these letters therfore did Bourbon prouoke the kynge to clayme and chalenge his ryght. Whiche letters the Frenche kyng af∣terwardes chauncing vppon, conceyued muche more hatred against Leonarde Cesar. hym. There was in the dukedome of Bauarie one Leonarde Cesar a professour of the Gospel, who being apprehended by the cōmaundemēt of the byshop of Passauie, defendeth these opinions. that faythe onlye doth iustifie: that there be only two Sacramentes, Baptisme and the
Lordes supper: the Masse to be no sacrifice, not to profite the quicke nor the dead. The confession of Syns to depende of counsell and not of commaundement: that Christe only hath made satisfaction for syn∣nes: That the vowe of chastitie byndeth not: That the scripture ma∣keth no mention of Purgatory: That there is no difference of dayes: That the dead be not intercessours for vs: That in diuine thinges mā hath not free wyll. When he was examined, he woulde haue declared these thynges to the people more at large, but he coulde not be suffe∣red. Emonges other there was Eckius, who reasoned altogether in Latin, that the people should not vnderstand, but the other answered him in the vulgare tongue, neither yet coulde he cause him to doe the lyke. In fyne, being condempned by the byshops owne mouthe for an heretyke, he was burnt the .xvj. of August, by the commaundement of William Duke of Bauar, vnto whose iurisdiction he was cōmitted, after his condempnation, for the byshop lest he shoulde in deede defile Hopocrisy of byshops. the sacred thynges, and become prophane and irregular, gyueth not sentence of lyfe and death. What tyme Ferdinando who was the Emperours depute in Ger∣many, was after the death of kyng Lewis created kyng of Boheme, and contended with Uaynode of transiluania for the kyngdome of Hongary, Philip of Baden, substituted in his place, appointed a coun∣sell of the Empyre in Cesars name, cōmaunding them to be at Regēs∣burg, at the beginning of Marche in the yeare followyng, to consulte of Religion, and the Turkyshe warre. The senate and people of Ber∣nes, whiche are of moste fame and power emōges the Swycers, cō∣sydering The power of Bernes. howe the dissention about religion encreased daily, and that the Ministers of the churche not at all one doctrine, doe assigne an o∣ther disputation within their Citie, at the .xvij. of Decembre: And set∣tyng it forth in wryting, called vnto the same all the byshops nere a∣bout them, as the byshoppes of Constance, Basyll, Sedune and Lo∣sanna. Warnyng them to come them selues, and brynge their diuines with them: or els to lose all their possessions, that they haue with in the precincte of their lymites. After this, they nombre the clergie with in their iurisdiction, appoyntyng that the Scripture onely of the olde and newe Testament, shoulde be of force and authoritie: To all that wyll come thether, they graunt saufe conduicte: And make this lawe, Lawes of their disputa¦cion. that all thynge be done quietlye wythout chydynge and brawlynge, that euery man shoulde speake his mynde frelye, and pronounce it in suche sorte as euerye mans sayinges myght be written: And what so euer shold there be agreed vpō, that the same shold be ratified & obser∣ued through out al their domions. And to thintent men myght know what thynges shoulde be decided, and comme thether all prepared, they propounded ten conclusiōs, which the ministers of their church,
Fraunces Colbe, and Bertholde Haller, dyd professe, and sayde: they would proue by the Scriptures. Whiche are these, that the trewe churche, wherof Christe is the only head, procedeth of Gods word, per¦seuereth in the same, and heareth none other mans voyce: that this self Theames or conclusions. same church maketh no lawes, without Gods worde: therfore are we not otherwyse bounden to mens traditions, bearyng the name of the churche, but in as muche as they be consonant to Gods worde: that Christe only hath made satisfactiō for the synnes of the whole worlde. Therfore if any man say that there is any other waye of saluation, or meane, to put away synne, the same dothe denye Christe, howe it can not be proued by the testimonie of Scripture, that the body and bloud of Christ, is really and corporally receiued: that the vse of Masse wher∣in Christ is presented and offered to his heauenly father, for the quicke and the dead, is against the Scripture, and a contumelie to the sacri∣fice, which Christ offered vp for vs: that only Christ is to be called vpō, as the mediatour and aduocate of mankynde to God the father. that there should be any place after this lyfe, wherin soules should be pour∣ged, is not to be founde in the Scriptures: wherfore all those prayers and ceremonies, yearely Diriges and Obites, whiche are bestowed Prayers for the dead are superfluous. vpon the dead, also Lampes, Tapers, and suche other thynges, profite nothyng at all: That any image or lykenes should be set vp to be wor∣shypped, is against the holy Scriptures: therfore if they be errected in churches for that intent, they ought to be taken downe. That matri∣mony is to no kynde of men prohybited, but for to auoyde fornication, is commaunded and permitted vnto all men by holy wrytte. Where as euery whoremonger is euen by the testimony of Scripture, seque∣stred from the communiō of the churche: That the syngle life vnchast, and fylthy, is moste vnsemely for the order of priesthode. What tyme the men of Bernes had wrytten their letters, concernynge these mat∣ters vnto all the Heluetians, exhortyng them both to sende their lear∣ned men, and to suffer all others to passe saufelye through their coun∣treis, the Lucernates, Uranites, Unterualdians, Engianes, Glareōs, Soloturnians, and they of Friburg, exhorte them with long letters, to leaue their enterpryse, sayinge that it is not lawfull for any nation or prouince, to alter the state of religion, but the same to belonge to a generall counsell: wherfore they desyre them, that they wold attempte no suche wycked acte, but contine we in the religion, whiche their pa∣rentes and elders haue obserued. Fynally they saye that neyther they wyll sende, nor suffer any of their men to come, nor graunt saufecōduit to any others to passe through their countrey. All this not with stan∣dyng the men of Bernesse, procede in this matter, and at the daye pre∣scribed, whiche was the .vij. of Ianuary begynne their disputation. There came none of the byshops before named. They of Basyll, Zu∣ricke,
& Abbecell, also the Shafusiās, Sangallians, Mullusiās, & their neighbours of Rhetia, sent theirs: moreouer thei of Strausborough, Ulmes, Auspurg, Lindaue, Constance, and Isne, dyd lykewyse. The doctours of the same citie before named, began the disputation, & their conclusions defended Zwynglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Capito, Blanrer, and diuers others: And there impugned them emonges o∣thers Conrade treger, an Austen freer of great fame, who at the laste what tyme he sought for helpe besydes the Scriptures, and the mai∣sters of the disputation would not permitte hym so to doe, for that it was forbydden by the lawe, he departed out of the place. The dispu∣tation ended the .xxvj. of Ianuary, and the forsayde conclusions ap∣proued by the common assente of the moste parte, were ratified and obserued not only at Bernes, but also proclaimed by the magistrates, Religion re∣formed. in sondry places there aboutes, Masses, Aultars, Images, abolyshed in all places. They of Constance had chaunged certen thynges before. And when they had made a lawe against whoredome, adultrye, and dishonest or suspected company, these that are called Cannons, depar∣ted The prebids departe. thence in great displeasure Ambrose Blaurer, was preacher ther, who was a gentleman borne, but had professed him selfe a Monke in the Abbey of Alperspacke, in the Dukedome of Wyrtinberge, whyche Ambrose Blaures. by the readyng of Luthers workes chaunged his mynde and his cote together, returnyng home agayne to his frendes. His Abbot woulde haue had hym agayne, and wroote earnestlye to the Senate of Con∣stance for him. Wherfore Blanrer expresseth the whole matter in wri∣tyng, and propoundeth certen conditions, where vpon he was contēt to retourne, but they were suche as the Abbot refusyng, he remayneth styll at Constance: Where after the disputation at Bernes, Images, Aultares, Masse, and Ceremonies, were vtterly abolyshed. Lykewy∣se they of Geneua, in remouinge their Images and ceremonies, dyd Religion re∣formed at Geneua. imitate them of Bernes, wherfore the byshop and clergie, forsoke the citie in anger. The Religion being thus altered, they of Bernes renoū¦ced the league made with the Frenche kynge, prohibitynge the hyred warfare, as they of Zuricke had done, and were contented with that yearely pension that the kyng payeth them to kepe peace. And wrote The victory of the gospel the daye and yeare, wherein they forsoke the Popyshe religion, vpon apyllour in golden letters, that it myght be an euerlastyng memory all to their posteritie. I shewed you how the Cardynal of Yorke, was sent into Fraunce. When they were agred vpon the matter, both kin∣ges The kinges of Fraūce & Englād Am¦ballade to ye Emperour. sent their ambassadours to the Emperour: And the Frenche king, requireth to take his raunsome & delyuer his sonnes that were pled∣ges: The kyng of Englande agayne his debte to be payde him, which is threfolde: first thre hondreth thousande Crownes that he lent hym, secondarely, fyue hundreth thousande, for not obseruing the contracte
of Matrimonie, thirdly foure yeares pension, whiche the Emperoure promysed hym, as before in the third boke is declared. When the Em∣perour hereunto had aunswered, not after their myndes, the kynge of Englande also sent hym defiaunce by an Herault of Armes, who at the same tyme was consultynge, howe he myght be deuorced from Catherine the Emperours haunt, and Marry an other, whiche he did afterwardes, as shalbe recyted in his place, the Emperoure in his let∣ters, to other kynges accused the Frenche kyng moste greuously, that he kept not his fayth and promyse, and had ofte tymes sayd so muche to the Frenche Ambassadours. Where vpon the kynge in his letters wrytten at Paris, the .xxviij. of Marche, which he sent by an Herault: By the talke sayth he, whiche thou hast had with some of myne, I per∣ceiue that thou braggest certen thinges, that founde to my dishonour: The Frēche kings inuec¦tiue against the Emper. as though I had escaped thy handes against my fidelitie: And nowe, al be it that he, whiche after the compacte made, hath put in pledges, is hym selfe quytte from bonde, so that I am hereby sufficiently excu∣sed, yet neuerthelesse in the defence of my honour, I thought to wryte this briefly vnto the. Therfore if thou blame this facte of mine and my departure, or sayest that euer I did any thyng, contrary to the dutie of a noble Prynce, I tell the playnly, thou liest. For I am determined to maynteyne myne honour and estimatiō whylest I haue a day to lyue. We nede not many wordes therfore, and if thou wylt ought with me, thou shalt not nede hereafter to wryte, but appointe the place, where we may fyght hande to hande: For if thou darest not mete me, and in the meane tyme ceasest not to speake euyll of me, I protest that all the He offereth the Emper. the combat. shame therof belongeth vnto the, for by our combat all the stryfe shall be parted. I tolde you before of the contention betwene kynge Ferdi∣nando and the Uayuode of Transiluania. Whan the same burst out in to a cruell warre, and Ferdinando was of the greater power, the Uayuode in the moneth of Apryll, wryting his letters to the states of The empyre. After the lamentable death of kyng Lewis, sayeth he, I The letters of Iohn Uai¦uode, to the states of the Empyre. was by the common assent of the nobles, chosen and crowned kinge of Hongary: except three, whome pouertie, hatred, and hope of better fortune, had seduced, that forgettyng the wealth of their countrey, they subscribed to Ferdinando kyng of Boheme. And what tyme I was wholy addicted to succour my countrey, to recouer that was lost, and by the same meanes to procure your quiet, beholde he inuadeth my Realme with violence, taketh certen Townes, and by those whiche were of his faction, was created kyng at Posonye. I marueled not a lytle, and it greued me also exceadingly, that this nation should be mo∣lested by hym whiche ought moste of all to succour and releue the mi∣sery of the same. It had not bene harde for me at that tyme, to haue gyuen hym the repulse, but I would not hasarde rashely the remnant
of the power lefte of so manye shypwrakes and losses of that Realme, hath had of late, & I complayned vnto Clement the seuenth, to Fraū∣ces the Frenche kyng, to Henry kyng of England, and to Sigismūde kyng of Pole. And in dede the kynge of Pole, sendynge his Ambassa∣dour, without my knowledge, entreated him that he wold not in this daungerous tyme make away through ciuile discorde to let in the fo∣reyne enemy, whiche after neyther he, nor yet any other should be able to kepe out, but that he would kepe peace with me, & ioyne his power to myne to resiste the common ennemye. And where as Ferdinando answered, that he would attempt nothing against ryght and equitie, it was agreed vpon, that a certen daye, fytte men should be sent to de∣bate the matters of controuersie: I was content, and sendyng also my Ambassadours vnto you, and submytting my selfe vnto your arbytri∣ment, I made request, that you woulde gyue none ayde to myne ad∣uersarie: but what tyme they came into Ferdinando his countrey be∣yng taken and deteyned as prysoners, against the lawe of all natiōs, His Ambas∣sadours takē they could not declare their commission: And from you they shoulde haue gone to the Emperour. And al be it that this same was an extre∣me wronge & iniury, neuerthelesse at the daye appoynted by the kyng of Pole, I sent certen others that were very desyrous of peace, both of themselues, and also by my commaundemēt: Notwithstanding Far∣dinando his men propounded thinges so farre out of reason, that ther could be nothyng concluded. Whylest these thinges were a workyng, certen of the nobilitie, entysed by the crafte and polycie of Ferdinādo, breake their fidelite, which before they had gyuen me. And for somuche as the waye is layde, that I can neyther come nor sende vnto you, I thought good to declare vnto you by my letters, howe vniuste warre he attempteth, peraduenture intending to recouer the same that his auncetours, Frederick and Maximilian Emperours, haue lost here to fore for the one of them, when he was triumphyng, and thought hym selfe sure of the kyngdome of Hongary, myne vncle Emeryck expulsed out of the whole countrey. And my father Stephen Sepuse, when Matthie was kyng, did disconfite them both in suche sorte as he ad∣ioyned Uienna to Hongary. And I my selfe beyng very yonge, gaue the repulse to Maximilian, whan he moued warre against vs, & wold haue done the lyke to his enemy also, but that he contendeth with me rather by craft and subtyltie, than he doth by power and manhood. Hytherto haue I borne with this iniury as I might. But thinke with your selues (moste noble Prynces) howe greuous a thynge it is to be cast downe out of the hyghest degree of power & dignitie to the state of a priuate man. I suppose there can none be found, so mylde and pa∣tient, that sufferyng so many iniuries, woulde not loke about hym on euery syde for all the ayde he myght get. Wherfore, seyng that at no
tyme synce I receyued the gouernment of the commō wealth, I haue refused any conditions reasonable, nor wyll not yet doe, and had ra∣ther doe any thyng than styre vp cyuyle warre. and myne aduersarye proceadeth obstinately, I doe proteste, that it ought not to be layde to my charge, as blame worthy, if for myne owne defence, I seek the best meanes I can: For in case the common wealth doe susteyne thereby any dommage, that maye not be ascribed vnto me, that hath soughte all wayes to haue peace, but to myne ennemie, whiche inuadeth an other mans Realme, through great iniury. He hathe layde dylygent wayte in all wayes and passages, that nothynge be conueyed vnto you: Notwithstandynge I suppose you haue hearde, howe he for∣soke Kyng Ferdi¦nādo forsoke kyng Lewis his brother in lawe kyng Lewys: vnto whome, beyng ofte and earnestly requyred, he sent neyther men nor munition, nor any other ayde, agaynst the violence of his ennemie. And why? for he loked after his death to be kyng: Moreouer the common ayde of the Empyry, ap∣poynted for Hongary, he sent to his brother to disquiet Italy. Where as I sent to kynge Lewys at the same tyme, my brother with three thousande men of myne owne costes and charges, and woulde haue bene at the battell my selfe, had I not bene commaunded by the kyng to remayne in Transiluania: My brother dyed in the battel ryght va∣leantlye. Ferdinando promysed by an othe, that vnlesse he dyd fyrste recouer Belgrade and certen other castelles of the Turkes, he wold not take vpon him the gouernment: but his fayth fayled herein, for the Turkes haue inuaded further, destroyed and spoyled the coūtrey, and haue wonne the castell of Iaice, the chiefest fortresse of all Bosna. Whiche Castel kyng Matthias, with a great losse of his men, recoue∣red in times past of the Turkes, & mine vncle Emerick, defēded the sa∣me afterwards, induring a long sege, & the kinges haue fortified synce that time, to their exceading great charges, & now lost by our valeaūt captaine, yt made so many goodly promises. and I thinke not lōg to, he wil for very necessite cal vpon you for ayde, as though he stode in daū∣ger for the defence of Germany, but his mynde is an other waye. For he intendeth not to warre vpō the Turke, vnto whom he is cōtent to pay tribute yearely, & hath sent his Ambassadours thither for the same purpose: but he myndeth with your men and money to helpe his bro∣ther in Italye, to destroye me, and brynge the Realme of Hongarye into bondage. And seyng the matter is thus, I most earnestly beseche you, to forsee that this priuate iniurye donne vnto me, turne not to the great hynderaunce of the common wealth. And after a whyle he wrote also to the Emperour, muche lyke to this in effecte, exhortinge Ferdinādos title to Hon∣gary. him to appease his brother. And thus much for ye defēce of his case, but Ferdinādo grounded him self vpō the cōposition whiche themperour Maximilian had made wt the Hongarians and their king Ladislaus,
in the yeare .M. iiij .C. xci. by the whiche it was prouided, that if La∣dislaus died without heire male, that then Maximilian and his hey∣res descending in of the right line, shold possesse that kingdome. Wher¦fore whan Lewys the sonne of Ladislaus was dead without issue, as I tolde you before, Ferdinando nephewe to Maximilian by his sonne Philip, and Archeduke of Austriche, and moreouer hauīg maried the syster of kyng Lewys, affirmed the kyngdome to be his by good right. And this selfe same tyme, the Lantgraue of Hesse, and the prince elec∣tour of Saxony, mustering their mē, prepared thē selues vnto warre, the cause therof was this. One Otto Paccius a Lawer and a gentle man borne, one of the chiefest councellours about George Duke of Saxony, by occasion of talke, admonyshed the Lantgraue to loke to his owne thynges. For nowe of late had Ferdinand, the Marques of Brandenburge, the Cardinall of Mentz and Salisburge, George the Duke of Saxon, William and Lewis, Dukes of Bauer, and certen byshops, as Bamberge, and Wirciburge, made a league to destroye him, the Duke of Saxon electour, and Luthers religion: And for the more credit of the thing, he shewed him the copie of the confederacie, The duke of Saxon & the Lantgraue prepare thē to warre. promysing hym also the principall. Whylest they leuie their Armies, & make preparation for the warres, all men marueled muche wherfore it was, and what would come of it, some sayde one thynge, and some an other, as in suche cases is accustomed. Whan they had all thynges in a redynes, sendyng abroade their letters and messengers into all partes, thei published the copie of the cōfederacie, which was brought vnto them, and wrote also vnto them whiche were thought to haue made this league, and sent their Ambassadours, to knowe what their intent was. But they al pourged them selues euery man seueral, and sending abrode their letters, affirme it to be a forged matter, and that it can not be proued. And Duke George, ye Lantgraues father in law, vrged him chiefly to bryng forth the partie that tolde hym, whiche if he did not, he wyll thynke none other wyse, but that it is his own de∣uyse, to styre vp stryfe, and disturbe the quietnes of German ye. Their fyrst attempt shoulde haue bene to haue set vppon the byshoppes that were next them, and therfore they toke vp and waged men, as many as they could get vpon suche a soden. But when Paccius coulde not shewe the dede it selfe according to his promyse. Than the Lantgraue begaune to waxe colde in the busynes: And at the laste, by the media∣tion of countie Palatine, and Richarde Archebishop of Treer, they di∣mysed their armies, vpon condicion, that the byshoppes shoulde paye vnto the Lātgraue for the charges of this warre, a hūdreth thousand ducates, the Archebyshop of Mentz, fortie thousande, Wirciburge as muche, and Bamberge, twenty thousande. Afterwardes, what tyme the Ambassadours of the prynces did mete at a day prescribed, whom
in dede this accusation did touche Paccius, whome the Lantgraue there presented, was conuicted of falsihode. Yet by his meanes put at lybertie, whan he had wandered in straunge countreis certen yeares, at the last was beheaded at Andwerpe. When the matter was thus Paccen be∣headed. pacified, the prynces confederated of the Sweuicall league, accused the Lantgraue, that he had done wrong and iniury to their felowes: And where a new sturre had lyke to haue growen vpon the same, the matter in fine was quieted at Wormes, about the ende of Decembre, by the intercession of the Palsgraue. There be some that thinke it was not altogether nothyng, that he had spoken of the conspyracie: And the assemblie of certen princes at Regensburg, foure yeares before that encreased the same suspicion. Wherfore it is supposed that some suche thing was conceaued, but not brought to perfection, nor fully deter∣mined. Whiche thyng I doe not here affirme for a certentie, but leaue vnto euery man his owne iudgement. The assemblie of the Empire which I shewed before, shold haue bene in the beginning of the spring tyme at Regensburg, was in this warlyke preparation, not at all, the Emperours deputie, sending worde that they should not come there. The Frenche kynges letters wrytten in the later end of Marche, the Emperour receiued the seuenth daye of Iune: Afterwardes sendyng an aunswer by an Herault of armes, the .xxiiij. day of Iune, frō Moū∣tison: The Empe∣rours auns∣wer to the Frēch king. I blame the not, sayeth he, nor accuse the for departing home, for the same was done by my leaue and permission: but for that thou did∣dest not returne againe into my custody, captiue, as thou diddest pro∣myse me by thy fayth, thou wouldest, vnlesse thou fulfillest the condi∣tions of peace, lyke as in dede it is to be proued by wryting subscrybed with thyne owne hande. This in dede if thou haddest done, thou had∣dest played the parte of a Iuste man, and of a worthye Prynce: But nowe for so muche as thou hast herein broken thy faith I affirme, and that without any lye, that thou hast done shamefully and wyckedlye. And where as thou desirest to haue a place appointed for the cōbate, I am content, and do assigne the place by the Ryuer that runneth be∣syde fount Arabie, and Andey, whiche thou oughtest in no case to re∣fuse. For if thou diddest their credit thine owne lyfe and thy chyldrens, two yeres past what tyme being set at libertie to retourne home, thou gauest them to me for pledges, thou mayest aswel now also committe thy selfe to the same assuredly. And to the intent it be not differred by long delay, let noble men be sent thether on both parties, that are skil∣full in suche matters, whiche shall espye out a place conuenient, and a∣gree vpon the kynde of weapons, and appoynte a certen daye. But in case I receyue none aunswere from the within fourty dayes, after the receipt of my letters, what thy mynde is herein, the fault of the delaye and all the shame shall remayne towarde the, and to the cryme of fal∣sifying
thy fayth shall this be added also. These letters the Emperour delyuered vnto the Herault, that he goyng into Fraunce, should reade them before the kynge openly, or if he refuse to heare them, than he cō∣maundeth him to deliuer them to the kyng to reade. When the Herault came at the lengthe, the kynge syttyng at Pa∣ris Themper. Heraulde came at Pa∣ris. hearyng of a sermon with his nobles about hym; demaunded of hym if he had brought the maner of the combat? He sayde, he had both that and somwhat to saye besydes that, and more howe he had in com¦maundement to reade it before hym, or els to delyuer it to his owne handes, whiche he besought hym that he myght doe. But the kynge vnderstandyng ryght well the Emperours request herein, and lothe to haue the thyng read openly, fallyng at woordes with the Herault, arrose and would neyther heare hym speake any more, nor receyue a∣nye letters of hym, as in deede the Emperours men affyrme in theyr wrytinges. The firste of August, the Emperour wryting his letters from Ualolete, calleth a counsell of the Empyre of Spyres against the An assemble at Spires. beginning of February, to treate of Religion and the Turkysh warre. He excuseth hym selfe by certen affayres, by meanes whereof he can not be there present, appoyntyng of his deputes, his brother Ferdinando, Friderike Palatyne, William of Bauer, the byshop of Trent, and of Hyldesseme, Lantrechus the Lieutenaunt of the Frenche kynges Ar∣mie, after he had taken Pauie and Alexandria, as you haue hearde, wyntered he and his Armie at Bononie. And in the begynning of the spryngtyme went forewarde, and beseged Naples, whiche was kept Lantrech be segeth Na∣ples. and defended by Alphonsus Daualus, Ugo Moncada, Ferdiando A∣larco, Philibert, prynce of Orenge, and Ferdinando Gonzago. But in the moneth of Iuly a sore Pestilence consumed a great part of his Armie, and Lantreth hym selfe also in the moneth of Auguste, and before hym Mounsour Uaundemont, brother vnto Anthony du∣ke of Lorayne, whiche serued the kyng in hope to attayne to the king∣dome of Naples, for that the house of Gaunte, whereof the house of Lorayn hath also his ofsprynge, affirme it to be their ryght. After the disputation of Bernes, Religion was altered in sondrye places, wherupon the preachers at Strausborongh, emonges other Contention about the Masse. errours of the bishop of Romes doctrine, taught chiefly that the masse was wicked, and a great blasphemy to Gods holy name: wherfore it ought to be abrogated & the right vse of the Lordes supper instituted, vnlesse they could proue these thinges by the testimonies of holy scrip∣ture, they wyll refuse no kinde of punishment. Againe the byshops mi∣nisters taught otherwyse, which bred no smal contention: whom af∣terwardes, the senate for bycause they refused to dispute or conferre wt The papists forboden to preache. the others, cōmaunded to sylence. The byshop in his letters to the se∣nate, exhorted them to perseuer in the auncient religiō of their elders.
The Senate desyreth hym agayne, as they had done oftentymes be∣fore, that suche thinges myght be set forth as appertayned to the trew seruice and glory of God, and the residue taken away and abolyshed: for the same belongeth to his office. But he notwithstandinge that he would some tyme appoynte a metynge and a daye for suche matters, would do nothyng in ded, but only put them in feare with his letters, wherin oftentimes he mingled with intreatinges, threateninges, that they should alter nothyng. And when he was almoste in dispayre of the thynge, he intreateth the Senate of the Empyre, whiche was at that tyme at Spyres, by The Ambas¦sadour of the chamber im¦periall to Strausbor. their authoritie to set in foote in the matter. Who sendynge their Am∣bassadours solemnely, at the later ende of Decembre, requyre them not to put downe the Masse: for that it is neyther in the power of the Em∣perour nor of other states, to chaunge the auncient Religion of theyr forefathers, but eyther by a generall, or els by a prouinciall counsell: whiche if they supposed to be farre of, or ouer long to, that they would differre it at the leste vntyl the next assemblye of the Empire, and there put vp their requestes: where they doubted not, but that they shoulde receyue a reasonable aunswere. for it is forboden by the lawes, that a priuate Magistrate may vndo such thinges as be agreed vpon by the common consent of the whole worlde: wherfore it is reason that they should obtayne this at their handes: For if they should obstinatly pro∣cede in their enterpryse, and worke by force and violence, both the Em¦perour theyr hyghe Magistrate, and kynge Ferdynando also his de∣pute throughout the Empyre, would take the matter right greuously: And they lykewyse, accordyng to ther office and dutie, must bothe in∣forme the Emperour therof by their letters, and also see suche redresse in the thyng as apperteyneth. Whiche they would be loth and vnwil∣ling to do: wherfore they desire them aduysedly to waye the matter & followe good counsel, for the same shalbe to the Emperour most accep∣table, & for thē selues moste profitable. When the senate had made ans∣were to the Ambassadours, what their purpose was, they departed, & shortly after the byshop of Hildesseme, came vnto thē in themperours The bishops letters. name, with the like exhortation. Furthermore the bishop of Straus∣borough writeth letters to diuers of the senatours, which were gent∣lemen that helde their landes of hym: That for as muche as they were bounden vnto him by their othe & fidelitie, they should as much as in thē lieth, holde wt the masse, & not suffer it to be abolished. In ye meane time the senate, whā the thing had bene aboue two yeres in cōtrouer∣sie, & the preachers called vpō thē in their sermōs daily, & the citezēs al¦so were suters, callig the whole nūbre of .ccc. as in matters of weight & difficultie is ther accustomed, doth declare yt in case they shuld abolishe the masse, what daūger they were in by themperour, if they did it not,
howe muche God would be offended, wherfore they graunt thē lea∣sure to consider, and require them to consulte together so, that at their next assemblie, by their common wyll and consent, the matter may be determyned. Wherfore when the daye came, their sentence that were against the Masse preuayled. Where vpon a decree was made the .xx. of February, that the Masse ought to be suspended and layde downe, vntyll suche tyme as their aduersaries could proue it to be a seruice ac∣ceptable before God. And this decree to take place aswel within their The Masse put down at Stansbor. Citie, as without, in all places so farre as their iurisdiction stretcheth, and afterwarde by their letters certifie the byshop of the same: which was newes to hym as heauy as leade, as he wrote agayne hym selfe in his next letters. There was also great dissention about Relygion, certen yeares at Basill, and in fyne the senate decred that there should Dissentid at Basil for re∣ligion. be one vniforme doctrine through out the whole citie, and touchyng the Masse whiche as yet was sayde in a fewe places after an open dis¦putatiō had, it should be determined by voyces, what were to be done therewith. But where as the Papistes defende their Masse with touthe and nayle, and in their parsons rayled agaynst the others vn∣punyshed, the Burgeses chose certen to put the Senate in remēbraūce of their promise, and to requyre that those Senatours which are a let to the thynge, myght be displaced. when this coulde not be obtayned the Citezens flocke together and mete in the gray Freres church, first without Armure, and after with weapons keepe the gates, Towres They of Ba∣sill take ar∣mure. and strong places of the Citie, with watche and warde. The Senate was glad to graunte them certen requestes to apease their furye, re∣ferryng the cause of their iudgement, that first were sent vnto them. In the meane tyme, certen of those that were appoynted to make prouision in the Cytie for the reste, chaunced to comme into the chiefe churche, and one of them with his staffe, thruste at the Image of a saincte, in so muche that it fell downe and brake: Upon whiche occa∣sion they serued mo in lyke case, but when the Priestes came thether, whiche were much offended with their doynges, they because they woulde not passe their commission, departed without any further ba∣ble. When worde hereof was brought to the Cytizens in the market place, and reporte made that their fellowes stoode in daunger of their Images put downe. lyues, by and by were three hondred Armed men, sent to the heade Churche to helpe them. Whan they came thether, the others were gone. But leste they shoulde appeere to haue commen thyther for nothyng, they breake downe all the Idols and Images, they coulde fynde there, and from thence goe to all other Churches and doe the lyke. And when certen of the Senatours, ranne foorth to appease the tumulte, the Cytezens sayde vnto them, that, that you haue bene con∣sulted about these thre yeres, the same shall we dispatche in one houre,
to the intent we shall haue no more contention about images. Thus did the Senate condescende to al their requestes, and twelue Sena∣tours were displaced, and emonges others Henry Meltinger, that tyme boroumaister, and Lucius ziegler, captayne of the bourgeses. A decree was also made, that as well within the citie as without in all their lyberties, the Masse, with all maner of images, should be aboly∣shed, The Masse put downe. and that the Senate from henceforth should admitte two hon∣dreth and thre score burgeses to consulte with them of all matters cō∣cerning Gods glory and the common wealth. These decrees made the citezens retourne home ioyfull, and all their anger was wreaked vpon their images. The thyrde daye after whiche was Asshe wednes∣daye, the images were distributed to the poore to burne for want of Fewell. But what tyme they fell out about the partyng, and the mat∣ter came from woordes vnto hande strypes, they agreed that they shoulde be brent. Wherfore there were nyne stakes or heapes made Images brēt on sh wed∣nesday. before the head churche, and set a fyre and burnt. And so it fortuned that the same daye wherein the byshoppes mini∣sters are wont to marke mens foreheades with Asshes, to the intent they should remembre them selues to be earth and asshes, was vnto the whole citie for consuming their Idolles into asshes, mery and ioy∣full. The men of Zurick, Bernes, and Solodure hearyng of this tu∣multe, sent Ambassadours to be meanes betwene thē. but tofore they came thether, the matter was appeased. I tolde you a lyttle before of The assem∣blie of Spir. the assembly at Spyres, whiche the Emperour had appointed to cō∣mence at the beginning of February, but it began not tyll the Ides of Marche. Thither came many princes and states: the Prynce electour of Saxony, brought with hym Melanchton, fyrst they treated of Re∣ligion, and after muche decision, a decree was made, as we shall tell you hereafter. The Byshoppes and their complices, dyd what they coulde to sequestre the Duke of Saxon and other Prynces, from the Cities, that they should not take counsell and agree in one, whiche they hoped well to brynge to passe, for as muche as they dyffered in o∣pinion, touchynge the Lordes Supper. And Ferdinande with his colleges callyng before them the Ambassadours of certen cities, char∣ged them sore that contrary to the Emperours decree, they had alte∣red many thynges, and fynally exhorted them to be confourmable to the myndes of others, lest through their dissention the assemblye be The papists ī Swicerlād make leage with kynge Ferdinando quite dissolued. They make aunswere, that the alteration is not in∣iurious to the Emperour, but that they are desyrous of concorde, and woulde doe anye thynge for the Emperours sake, not refusynge to stande to the iudgement of a lawfull counsell. When two the moste floryshynge Cyties of the Swycers, Zuricke, and Bernes agreed in one Religion, the Lucernaites, Urites, Swites, Unternaldians and
Engians, whiche abhorred moste this doctrine, make a league with kyng Ferdinando. Clement byshop of Rome the .xiij. day of Aprill, sen∣deth Iohn Thomase of Mirandula, to exhorte the prynces to warre against the Turke: And al be it that he hath susteyned great losses of late yeares, yet promyseth he to assiste them with ayde, and to doe his endeuoure, that the Emperour and the Frenche king being accorded, the counsell may begynne immediatly, to the intent that Germanye may embrace again the same religion that other countreis do. In this assemblye, the Senate of the Empire woulde not permitte Daniel Miege Ambassadour for the citie of Strasborough, to sitte in counsel, The Amb of Srausbo∣rough exclu∣ded. for by cause the Masse was abrogated, before this counsell imperiall, not withstanding that they were intreated to the contrary, wherfore Iames Sturmius Ambassadour for the same citie, sayed vnto them, that in case they were thus displaced, contrary to the lawe & custome of the Empire, let them not loke from henceforth that they wyll beare any part of charges. But all might not preuayl, and Ferdinando hym self aunswering the intercessours bad, that any other citie, that obser∣ued the Emperours decrees, should be substituted in the place of the other. After a longe dispute of Religion, the fourmer actes of Spires were repeted, and a new decree made on this wyse. They which haue hitherto obserued the Emperours decree, let thē obserue the same styl, vntyll the generall counsell, and bynde the people to do lykewyse: but The decres of Spires. suche as haue altered their Religion, and can not nowe departe from the same, for feare of sedition, let them staye from henceforth and al∣ter nothynge besydes, vntyll the tyme of the counsell: Furthermore that their doctrine, whiche teache otherwyse of the Lordes Supper, than the churche doth, be not receyued, nor the Masse abolyshed, nor that in suche places where this newe kynde of doctryne is, anye man be letted to go to Masse that wyll: The Anabaptistes also such as de∣fende their opinion obstinately, shall suffer death: the ministers of the churche are commaunded to teache according to the interpretaciō re∣ceiued by the church, referring al disputable questions to be in the coū¦sell decided. Moreouer that all states kepe the common peace, & none to hurte other for the cause of Religion, neither one to take the defence of an others subiecte: they that shall do otherwyse to be accompted in the numbre of outlawes. This decree, resisted the Prince electour of Saxony, George Marques of Brandenborge, Ernest and Frances, Certen prin¦ces resist the same. Dukes of Lunenborough, the Lātgraue, & counte Anhald, who ye .xix. of April recite openly in wryting, the causes why they doe not consent thereunto. And firste they doe repete the decree of the former assem∣blie, whereby euery man hathe his Religion permitted him frely, vn∣tyll the counsell: from this maye they not departe, nor infrynge those thynges, whiche after great delyberation, were for a common quiet
establyshed, and with their sygnetes and othes also confirmed: They woulde in deede be glad, after the example of their progenitours, to do all thynge that myght content the Emperour, and as for their goodes and lyues also, they wyll spende them wyllinglye in his hyghnes ser∣uice: but this present cause, coucerneth the euerlastyng saluation of all men. Wherfore they desire them not to be offended with them, for that thei herein dissente from them: for like as the former decree was made by the common assent of all: so can not the same be broken with out all their consentes. They wyll not be against, that they shall in their own countrey, establysh what religion shal seme good vnto them, beseching God to illuminate the hartes of all men, with the light & knowledge of his truthe: And where as there hath bene dissention, and controuer¦sie about religion certen yeares, it was declared in the counsel at No∣rinberge, who haue bene the authours, and causers therof, as well by Who be the authors of dissention. the confession of the byshop of Rome hym self, as also by the requestes of Prynces and states of the Empyre, which were delyuered to the by∣shoppes legate, to the numbre of foure score: wherof notwithstanding as yet no redresse is made: And that of al consultations, this hath euer bene the ende, that for the debating of controuersies, and refourmyng of vices, there is nothyng better than a generall counsell. And where as the same left a parte, they haue nowe decreed, that suche as haue chaunged their Religion, and can not nowe without muche trouble forsake the same, shal alter nothyng from henceforth, that can they nei∣ther cōmende nor allowe, vnlesse they should discredite the doctrine, whiche they haue professed hitherto, as both true and Godly, & graunt moreouer that they ought to leaue the same, if thei might with any tu∣multe or vprores: And what thynges els were that, thā to denye gods worde, whiche is taught them purely and syncerely? whiche were the moste heynous offence that coulde be committed: For they must con∣fesse it, not in wordes only, but in very deede also: Moreouer what an hynderaunce this abnegation would be and howe muche preiudiciall to the fauourers of the Gospell, it is easy to coniecture. As cōcernyng the Masse, it is ryght well knowen, with howe strong and inuincible testimonies of holy Scripture, the preachers within their dominiōs, haue confuted the Popishe Masse, and in steade therof, instituted the Lordes supper, according to the institution of Christe, and the maner by the Apostles obserued: wherfore they can neither admitte this part of the decree, neyther permitte their subiectes to heare Masse, whiche is abolyshed: For though the byshop of Romes Masse, were neuer so good and godly, yet if they should haue in their churches two cōtrary Masses, al mē may wel perceiue what grudge & dissentiō would there vpon ensewe. Moreouer where they do prescribe, what they shal com∣maunde their owne subiectes, and what lawes they shall make with
in their owne dominions, they can not a lytle maruell, consyderynge that they them selues would not suffer any man to doe the lyke with them. Furthermore what thyng is taught in their churches, touchyng the presence of the body and bloud of Christe, is so euydent to all men, that it nedeth no further declaratiō: Notwithstandyng, as they haue sayde oftentymes, so thynke they it good now also, not as yet to make any decree against thē that teache otherwise, for that the Emperours commissiōs (teach the Latin beneth,) maketh no mentiō therof. And agayne for as muche as the maynteners of that doctrine, are nother called nor hearde: whiche in so weyghty matters is muche to be consi∣dered, that nothyng be determyned at any tyme, and they not hearde speake, whome the matter doth chiefly concerne. And where as they Howe scrip∣ture shoulde be expoūded. saye that the Gospell must be taught after the interpretations appro∣ued by the churche (that is very well) but all the stryfe is, which is the trewe church: But seyng there is no doctrine more certen than Gods worde, and besydes that nothyng ought to be taught, and such places of Scripture, as appeare to be some what obscure, can not be better expoūded, than by other more manifest places of the same Scripture, therfore wyll they dwell herein, endeuourynge that the bookes of the olde and newe Testament, may be taught syncerely and playnly: For this is the onely meane and waye, that is euermore certayne & sure. And as for mens tradicions, they are grounded on a weake founda∣tion: The decree of the last assemblie, was enacted for peace and con∣corde: but in case this decree should take effecte, it would opē the waye to muche trouble, and displeasure: for euen nowe all be it the decree of Wormes was suspended, doe some Princes seke to make some of their subiectes to forfyte their goodes, for not obseruyng that decree, where The decre of Wormes. of men may easely cōiecture what wyll insewe, if the same decree shal nowe take place agayne, and that some of them wyl vse force, and cō∣pelle men to suche thinges as can not be done with a saufe conscience. But that is not well spokē, that the fourmer decree was penned with suche wordes, as many did abuse the same thyng, tyl the counsell were called, they myght doe what they lyste: this is bruted of them chieflye, whiche are lytle afrayde of the last iudgement, whan all thynges shal come to lyght: for their partes, they wyll not refuse to aunswer, before indiferent iudges, to suche as wyll saye that they haue in anye poynte broken the same decree. Whiche thynges standyng thus, they can not consent to this their decree: And howe they wyll aunswere the matter both openly before all men, and also to the Emperour hym selfe. And in the meane tyme, tyll eyther a generall, or els a prouinciall counsell of Germany, shalbe called, they wyll do nothyng that shall deserue iuste reproufe. Unto this protestation of Prynces, certen of the chief cities, laying their heades together, did subscribe, as Strausborough, Norē∣berge,
Ulmes, Constance, Rutelinge, Winsseme, Meminge, Lindane, Campedune, Hailbrune, Isne, Wysseburge, Norling, and Sangall. Thorigicall of Protestan¦tes. And this is in dede ye first original of the name of Protestaūtes, which not only in Germany, but also emonges foreyn nations, is nowe cō∣mon and famous. Ferdinando was departed out of the assemblie of Princes, before thei had protested, notwithstanding that the Duke of Saxon and his felowes required him to tary a litle. After this the pro¦testantes deuise a certen appellation, wherein they doe appeale from the decree made at Spires, vnto the Emperour, to the next lawful ge∣neral or prouinciall counsell of Germany, and to all iudges that be not suspected, and determined also to sende Ambassadours to the Empe∣perour. Not long after this, the men of Zurick and Bernes, sent forth their armies against their ennemies of the fiue townes that made lea¦gue Ciuil warre emong the Swicers. with Ferdinando, declaryng why they so did, by wryting. And e∣monges sondry causes and iniuries, whiche they recite, this is one, yt what tyme certen of their Citezens came for money that was dewe vnto them, the Snites whypped them naked, and the Unterualdiās had in despyte, hanged vp their Armes, and also the Armes of the Ci∣ties of Basil and Strausborough vpon the gallous, and howe they haue all ioynctely made a league wyth kynge Ferdinādo, to oppresse Religion, and to roote them out of the coūtrey, wherby they haue not onlye infringed the lawe of nature, but also broken the bondes that were betwene them, in conspiring with their moste vtter and mortall ennemie, whome to subdue, they haue long and many yeares, euen frō the first beginning of their league, with one assent ioyned together al their force and power. When both armies were ready to ioyne in bat∣tel, by the mediation of their neyghbours, and by them of Strausbo∣rough, the matter was taken vp. Ferdinādo had sent thē ayde, which came as farre as the Rhine. emōges other thinges it was agreed vpō, that they should haue no warre for religion, and that from henceforth they should absteyne from all opprobriouse wordes vnder a great pe∣naltie. The Frenche kynge consyderynge the state of his chyldren, Mishappes of the frēche kyng. whiche he had lefte pledges in Spayne, and what euyll successe he had of his warres in Italye, hauynge loste bothe his Armie and also his chieftayne Latrechus. And more ouer Androwe de Aure of Ge∣nes, a Captaine of the Sea, moste skylfull, who about the same tyme that Lantrech the Coronell dyed, reuolted from the Frenche kyng to the Emperour, restoryng his countrey vnto lybertie: he inclined hys mynde to peace. Wherfore at Cambrey a Cytie in Artoys, mette the Ladye Margaret, the Emperoures Aunte, and Ales the kynges The peace of Canbrey. mother, and many other Nobles, and emonges others, Erarde Mar∣chiane, Cardinall and Byshop of Liege, whyche concluded a peace in the moneth of Auguste, wherein they recite the decree, which was
made thre yeare before in Spayne agaynste the Lutherians, whiche they newely ratified: the other conditions were partely altered. For the Emperour permitteth the Frenche kyng to inioye Bourgundy in case he haue a sonne by his sister. And the kyng paieth vnto the Empe∣rour for the delyuery of his sonnes, twēty hōdreth thousand crownes, accompting herein the debte dewe to the kyng of Englande. Not lōg after the Emperoure imbarked hym selfe in Spayne and arryued at Genes. At what time also Soliman the Emperour of Turkes, by the prouocation of Iohn Uaynode made by his Ambassadour Hierome Laske, a Hongarian, a man of an excellent wytte, marcheth with an armie innumerable, through Hōgary into Austrice, and in the moneth of Septembre, layeth sege to Uienna, the chief citie of that countrey. He assayed to vndermyne it, and where as he had ouerthrowen the The Turke besegeth Ui∣enna. walles, he gyueth the assaulte desperatly: but seynge the Souldioues of the garnyson, whiche were Germaines, whose chief captaine was Philip the Palsgrane, defendyng the breache moste valiauntly by the space of one moneth, about the eight day of Octobre, he raised his siege and departed without his purpose, many thousandes of mē, in his re∣tourne partely slayne, and partly lead away into myserable and vyle captiuitie. At his departure he created the Uayuode, kynge at Buda. The swea∣ting sicknes This yeare also was Germany sore afflicted with a newe kynde of disease called the Sweathing sicknes. Men were sodainly takē with a pestilent sweate, and within foure and twenty howres eyther they died or amended. And before the remedye was knowen, many thou∣sandes peryshed. It began at the Ocean sea, and in a very small tyme spred ouer all Germany, and with vnspeakeable spede, lyke a fyre con∣med all thynges farre and nere, it is called in Germany the English sickenes. For in the first yeare of Henry the seuenth kyng of England, whiche was the yeare of our Lorde M .cccc. lxxxvj. the same death be∣gan in that Ilande, and because in a new disease, the remedy was not knowen, it made a wounderful destruction. Moreouer this yere was small plenty of wyne and corne: wherfore all those thynges whiche God in his displeasure is wonte to caste vpon vnthankefull people (se∣dition warre, sycknes and penurie) were powred vpon Germany the Sondry pla∣ges. same tyme all at ones. The same tyme at Collen, Peter Flisted, and Adolphe Clarebacke, two learned men were imprysoned for that, tou¦chyng the lordes supper, and other opinions they beleued otherwyse Two clerks brenct at Col¦lon. than the papistes. The Senate of that citie hath authoritie, to leade to pryson suche as be offendours, but the Archebyshop only hath power of lyfe and death: And it maye be that whome the Senate hath con∣dempned, the Archebyshoppes officers may acquite and set at lyber∣tie. but these men being deteyned in pryson halfe a yere and more were nowe at the laste condempned of both partes, and brent, to the great
lamentation and compassion of many. Some layde the blame therof in the diuines that were preachers, whiche cried out daily that Gods wrath must be appeased with the deathes of these wicked mē, for whō he plaged vs with a newe kynde of disease. This Adolphe was a well fauoured mā, learned and eloquent. And as they were lead to the fire, they declared the maner of their beleue, and comforted one another by the testimonies of scripture, in suche sorte that all men had their eyes & mindes fixed vpon them. I shewed you before how Luther & Zwin∣glius, Luther and Zwinglius dispuie at Marpurg. differed in opinion, touching the Lordes supper: And bycause there was muche contention about it, the Lantgraue found the mea∣nes that the learned men on both parties, should mete at a certen daye at Marpurge, to conferre vpon the matter frendlye: Out of Saxony came Luther, Melancthon and Ionas: From the Swycers Oecol∣padius, Zwynglius: From Strausborough, Bucer, Hedio: From No rinberge, Osiander. And besydes these many graue and well learned men: but Luther and Zwynlius, only did reason the matter: But af∣ter that this forsayd disease, was then comen thether, they brake of the disputation, by the commaundement of the Lantgraue, concludinge thus: That for as muche as they consented in all the chiefest pointes of The maner of their agre¦ment. their doctryne, it was agreed that frō henceforth they should abstaine from all contention, besechyng God that he woulde shewe foorth hys lyght also in this controuersie, and set them at a concorde. And thus they departed frendly. In the beginning of Octobre, you haue hearde howe the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, were about a league three yeare synce at Spires, and nowe after this decree was made, they intended the same more earnestly, wherof a draught was drawē at Norenberge, and after debated, further more in other places, but because they were not all of one opinion, touching the Lordes supper, it was long before they were accorded, wherfore they apoynted ano∣ther assemblye at Smalcalde, at the eyght day of Decembre. What Erasmus bo¦ke againste Gospelers. tyme Cesar was arryued in Italye, Erasmus of Roterdame, who for the alteration of Religion, and for the auoyde of suspition, was gone from Basyll to Frybourg, a towne of kyng Ferdinandos, in the mo∣neth of Nouembre, set forth a booke intituled against them, that falsly boast them selues to be Gospelers: but toucheth in dede the whole nū∣bre. For emonges many other thinges, he sayeth he knewe not one of thē, whiche appeared not to be made worse then he was before. This was aunswered by the deuines of Strausborough, whome it concer∣ned most, and them of Basill, but chiefly Bucer. When the Emperour was comme to Bononie, Fraunces Sfortia, whiche was before in Fraunces Sfortia. league with the byshop of Rome and the Frenche kyng, after he had pleaded his cause before hym, was by the intercession of Clement the vij. restored to the Dukedome of Myllan, vpon condition to pay hym
nyne hondreth thousande crownes, the one half the same yeare, the re∣sydue within ten yeares, and the Emperour for a pledge, reser∣ueth to hym selfe Comes, and the castell of Millan, vn∣tyll the payment of the first yeare be made. ✚ The seuenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the seuenth Booke. THe Ambassadours of the Protestantes sent to the Emperour, do appeale from the answere he made them at Placence, where they were stayed. Wherof being aduertysed, the Prote∣stantes assemble at Smalcade. Stausborough entreth in to league with thre cyties of the Cautons. The Emperour returnyng from his coronation, commeth to Auspurge, where the Protestantes offer their doctrine, whiche their aduersaries go about to confute, and the meane whyle, certen are nominated to accorde it. The Emperour perswadeth with Princes of the Protestantes, who notwithstanding the threatnynges euyll wordes and replications there made, and the scaunders wherwith they were charged, persisted in their sayde confession, and hauyng ge∣uen their last aunswere, departe home. Eckius and Faber, forgyng of confutations against Stras¦borough and other townes, are lyberally rewarded. The compacte of Pruselande was here made frustrate. The notable decree of this assemblie at Auspurge, is red. The Ryuer of Tibre ouerflo∣weth at Rome. Melanchthon being heauy for this decree, is comforted of Luther, who was come nere vnto Auspurge: Bucer went to agree hym and Zwynglius. Commaunde∣ment came to make Ferdinando kyng of Romaynes, whiche the electour of Saxony and other Prynces resiste. I Saide before howe the Protestantes sent their Ambassadours to the Emperour. Those were The Ambas¦sadours of ye Protestants to the Emp. Iohn Khinger, Alex Framentrute, and Micha∣ell Cadene of Norynbergh, which goyng as far as Genes, vnderstode there of the Emperours commyng out of Spayne, and afterwardes the nynthe of Septembre at Placence, make theyr waye and meane by Mercurine Cattunarie, who was made Cardynall the daye before by Henry Earle of Nassow, Alexander Schweissie, and Alphouse Ual∣dese, a Spanyarde.
The Emperour appointed to heare them the .xii. of Septembre: Not withstanding he warned them to compryse their requestes in writing and to vse no long circumstance, for because of his sondrye and moste weighty affayres. Whan they came before him at theyr day, he admo∣nished them eftsones by an interpretour, to knit vp the matter in fewe wordes. They in lyke case as they had in commaundement, repete in ordre the decree of the Empyre, made thre yeares past, that is newlye taken awaye by an other decree: whiche if it shoulde be of force, great trouble would come therof: Wherfor the Prince electour of Saxony, and his fellowes and the Cities, also ioynynge with them, dyd there proteste openly that they would not consent to this decree: And their request is that he would not take this thyng displeasauntly, or in euyl parte: For they wyll do nothyng vntyll suche tyme as there shall be a counsell, but that whiche they truste, shal be allowed both before God and hym also: offeryng them selues in the meane tyme, after the exam∣ple of their auncesters, to doe any thynge for the wealth and dignitie of hym and of the Empyre, eyther to serue in the warres agaynst the Turke, or in any other charge, they shall be put to: Moreouer they be∣seche hym that in case it shall be reported to hym otherwyse, he would gyue no credit therunto, but trust vnto this information, and concea∣ue no displeasure agaynst thē, vnlesse they be first heard to make their purgatiō: especially, seyng they make alwayes offer, that if they maye be more ryght instructed by the scriptures, they wil do nothyng obsti∣natly or against their dewty: Wherfore they desyre hym to accepte thē in to his defence and protection, and as shortly as may be to aunswer them mercyfully and louyngly by wrytyng: And because the whole matter can not be declared by mouthe, as he hath also commaunded, therfore haue they comprehended in wrytyng, what thynge so euer is nedefull for the further knowledge of the matter, whiche they delyuer vnto him. the Emperour aunswereth them by an interpretour, that he The Empe∣rours auns∣were. hath heard what their sute is, and lyketh well also the obsequiens ser∣uyce, that they offer in theyr Prynces behalfe, wherfore whan he hath talked with his counsell, he wyll make them an aunswer reasonable. Fynally the twelth of Octobre, he gaue them an aunswere in writing as their request was. That he vnderstode by kyng Ferdinādo his bro∣ther, and the residue in commission with hym, of the decree made at Spyres, before thei came to him. and howe he is ryght sory for the dis∣sention that is amongest them. And for as muche as it is his dewtie to forsee that suche thynges happen not, or at the leste whan they are chanced, to see them refourmed, therfore after longe delyberation, had with priuie counsell of the whole matter, he findeth howe the same de∣cree was made, to the intent nothyng hereafter should be altered, that there should be no place for any newe secte from henceforth, as there
be many al ready euyll fauoured enough, and that peace and concorde myght be had throughout the Empyre: Therfore the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, ought of ryght to haue consented to al these thinges: for both he and other Prynces, set as muche by the healthe of theyr soules, and tranquillitie of their consciences, as they doe: And he for his parte, no lesse desyreth a generall counsell, for a staye to the com∣mon wealth, than they do: whiche not withstandyng were not all to∣gether so nedefull, if the lawes and decres (as that of Woormes and others whiche are made by comon assente of all states) myght be ob∣serued, as they them selues wyll graunte that suche decrees oughte to be fyrme and stable: Whiche thynge considered, and seyng that the vse and custome is, that loke what the more parte of the states of the Em∣pyre do decree, the same may not be disolued by a fewe persones, ther∣fore hath he in his letters to the Duke and his fellowes commaunded them, that they doe accepte this decree as ratisfied, and attempte no∣thyng against it, but obeye the same vpon theyr allegeaunce that they owe vnto hym and the Empyre: If not, it wyll come to passe that for aucthoritie and examples sake, he must punyshe them extremely: but he supposeth that his letters be already delyuered vnto them, or wylbe shortelye, and that they wyll obey his cōmaundemēt, wherof he wold be ryght glad, especialy at this tyme, wherin he is credibly infourmed, howe the great Turke (the common ennemy of christendom) is at this present marchynge through Hongarye with all his power into Ger∣manye. Daunger of the Turke. Wherfore it were now requysite to haue domestical concorde, to the intēt this myghty and cruell ennemy myght be repulsed, against whome he intendeth, so sone as he shal haue stayed all thynges in Ita∣ly, to bende all his force and power. wherfore he trusteth, that they consyderyng well the daunger, wyll doe that: whiche they are boun∣den of dutie. What tyme the Ambassadours had red this aunswere, The Ambas¦sadours ap∣peale. they delyuered an appellation, whiche was ready made to Alexan∣der Schneissie, callyng wytnes to the thyng, as the maner is. Who at the fyrst would not receyue it, but in fyne he was content to take it, and caried it to the Emperoure, and the same daye at after none he re∣tourneth, and hauyng ended his other talke, he sayeth howe the Em∣perour commaundeth them, not to styre one foote out of their Inue, that they wryte nothing home, nor sende any of their men, til he bring them further newes, in payne of for fayting life & goodes, if they should do other wyse. Why left this charge was geuen, it fortuned yt Michaell Cadene, was not within his lodging, and being hereof immediatlye certified by a seruant, he wryteth the whole matter to the Senate of Norinberge, and dispatcheth awaye his letters with great expedition for he was not bounde vpon fidelitie as his fellowes were. At the length the last daye sauyng one, of Octobre, at Parma, whether they
were cōmaūded to folowe Nicolais Granuellane, who executed the office of Cardinall Mercurine lieng sicke, she weth them, that all be it Grāunulane The Emperour taketh in euyll parte the appellation that was sent hym, yet doth he neuerthelesse permytte them to retourne home in to their countrey: But he commaundeth Michaell Cadene to remayne styll vnder payne of death, if he disobeye: the cause wherof is this. The Lantgraue when he came forth had geuen hym a booke fayre garnyshed, whiche conteyned briefly the somme of the Christiane doc∣tryne to the intent he should delyuer it to the Emperour. He vpon an occasion when Cesar went to Masse did present it, and the Emperour A boke pre∣sented to the Emperour. agayne delyuered it to a certen Spanyshe Byshop, to vnderstande what it was. He fortuned to lyght on the same place, where as Christ warneth his Disciples that they desyre not soueraignitie, for the same is not theyr profession, but the kynges of the gentyls doe vsurpe vnto them such authoritie: that place had the authour emōges other things expounded, declaryng the dutie of suche as be ministers of the church, but he lokyng vpon it superficially, when the Emperour asked hym The honeste of a byshoy. what it was, he made aunswere as though the booke toke away the authoritie of the sworde from the Christian Magistrate, and permit∣teted only the Gentyls to vse it, whiche were farre from the Christian Religion. And for this cause was he stayed, Granuellan sayde this moreouer howe the Emperoures pleasure was, that he shoulde dely∣uer the lyke booke to the Byshop of Rome: And where he sought to excuse his doynges, and receyued no pleasaunt aunswer, perceyuyng by the wordes of Granuclane, what dannger he was in, he tooke his horse priuely and roode to Farrare in poste, and from thence goyng to Uenyse, retourned home. When the Senate of Norenbergh, had re∣ceyued Cadenes letters before mentioned, immediatly, they certified the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, & theyr fellowes therof, the. xxiiij of Octobre: the matter being debated, they agreed to mete at Smal∣caldia, about the ende of Nouēbre. Thyther came the Duke of Saxon An assemble at Smalcald and Iohn Frederick his sonne. Erneste and Frances, brethren Dukes of Lunenburgh, Philip the Lantgraue, and certen counsellers of Ge∣orge Markes of Brandenburgh, moreouer these cities: Strausbo∣rough, Norinberge, Heilprune, Rutelynge, Constance, Menynge, Campodune, Ulmes and Lindaue. It is mentioned before how the Prynces and certen of these Cities differed in opinion touchynge the Lordes supper, wherfore they of Strausborough had already made a league, with them of Zuricke, Bernes, and Basyll, whiche were A league of thē of Stran¦sborough, Zuricke and Bernes. both nerer vnto them, and accorded better in Religion, to the intent they myght at all tymes be able to defende them selues from iniurye. The condicions were, that if they shoulde be attempted with force of armes for Religion sake, that then those cities should sende ayde and
men, as many as shalbe requisite, yet so that they of Strausborough, shall gyne vnto euery thousand of fote men, two thousād crownes by the moneth, in parte of recompence. Agayne if it be their chaunce to be first assauted, the citie of Strausborough shal ayde them with no mē, but with thre thousand crownes euerye moneth, whylest the warre shall endure. Moreouer if their ennemies be founde in any part of the others dominions, not to escape free, but to suffer accordinge to the lawe of Armes. If they shall be warred vpon all at ones, then euerye cytie to beare theyr owne charges: Strausborough shall in tyme of peace, sende vnto Zuricke when they may conuenientlye, ten thou∣sande poundes of gunne powder, and as many rasers of Wheate, vn∣to Basyll: Wherof shall be nothyng spent, but in tyme of warre, then to delyuer it out to the townes men, vpon a reasonable price. If they shall come to ayde them of Strausborough, they maye spende of the powder so muche as shall be nedefull: and in the warre common to them both, they to paye the one halfe for the same. This league was made for fyftene-yeares, the fyft daye of Ianua∣ry. When this was knowen, Fridericke Palatyne, presydent of the The cham∣bre wryteth to Straush. counsell imperiall, addressed his letters vnto them aboute the ende of the same moneth, signifiyng howe it is commonly reported that they haue made a league with certen townes in Swycerlande: whereat he marueyleth not a lyttle that they whiche are bounden to the Em∣pyre, should enter into league with others without the consent of the Emperour, and the states of the Empyre, and all be it that moste men affirme it to be trewe, yet wyll not he credite the thynge, before he shal vnderstande it by them selues. Wherfore he requyreth them to declare playnely by wryting vnto hym (whiche representeth the place of the Emperour) what the league is, and what conditions they are agreed vpon. The Protestauntes had appoynted an other assemblye at No∣rinberge, The Prote∣stantes assē∣ble at Norin∣berge. whyther came the Ambassadours of certen Prynces and cy∣ties, who for so muche as it was thought howe the Emperour would call a counsell shortly, agreed vpon this only, that in the meane tyme they should consulte what to propounde in the same, and euerye mo∣neth, to aduertyse the Duke of Saxon, what thynges they thought mete, that the reste myght vnderstande it by hym. And thus departed the fourth Ides of Ianuarye. In the meane whyle the Emperour, whiche was come to Bononye the fyfte daye of Nouembre, the one and twentye daye of Ianuarye, dispatchynge An assemble at Auspurg. his letters into Germanye, sommoned a parliament of all states at Auspurge, the eyght daye of Apryll chyefiy for the cause of Religion, & The Empe∣rours coro∣natiō at Bo¦nony. the Turky she warre. After the foure and twenty daye of Februarye, he was not wtithout great pompe and solempnitie, inuested by the Byshop of Rome, whan he had fyrst taken his othe, to be the cōtinuall
defendour of the Byshoppes dignitie: Before he came at Bononye, as he should enter within the lymites of the byshoppes iurisdiction, there were three Cardinalles sent by the byshop of Rome, to demaunde and take his fidelitie, that he should neuer do any iniury to the libertie of yt churche. He aunswered in such sorte as he declared, that he would lose no part of his right signifiyng secretly, that Parme and Placence, be∣longing to the Dukedome of Millan, whiche townes the churche of Rome possessed at the same tyme. Departing out of Bononie, he crea∣ted Fridericke, Duke of Mantua. In tymes past Mantua was a free citie of the Empyre, but afterwardes being sore afflicted with vprores & ciuile tumultes, they chose Lewys Gonzaga to be their gouernour, for expulsyng of a Tyraunt called Passeryne, the yeare of our Lorde M .ccc. xxvii. whose nephewes sonne Iohn Frances, the Emperoure Sigismunde created Marques, the yeare .M.cccc.xxxiiij. the seconde daye of Septembre, and remayneth in the same estate vntil this time. The first that came to Auspurge, was the Duke of Saxony, with his sonne Iohn Fridericke: in the trayne that came behynde, was Philip Melaucthō, Ihon Iselbe Agricola, Iustus Ionas, and George Spa¦latine, the cytie Ulmes, sent to mete and welcome the Emperour, but The diuines of yt protest. they were longe or they myght be suffered to come to his speche, in fine he requyred them to renounce the protestation of the yeare before, and promesse to be obedient from henceforth. The men of Auspurge had mustered eyght hondreth footemen, to kepe their Towne: whan the Emperour hearde of it, he commaunded them to be discharged, and he appoynteth and sweareth others in theyr steade, & requyred one gats of the Cytie to be delyuered vnto hym, certen dayes before that he came thether. Cattinarie that was newly made Cardinall, dyed this tyme at Isprouke, and Granuellane had his rowme. And about this The lady E∣leuour com∣meth into Fraunce. tyme also, the ladye Elenor with the kynges two sonnes Fraunces and Henry, whiche had bene pledges for their father in Spayne foure yeares, came nowe home into Fraunce. After a whyle that the byshop had inuested themperour, he sent vnto king Ferdinādo, Peter paulle Uerger, his legate, with great authoritie: Unto whome he gaue in cō∣maundemēt especially to deuise with Ferdinando, that he shuld ende∣uour Uergerius yt popes ambas¦sadour. to let & hinder yt prouincial coūsel of Germany yt in no wyse there should any be holden. He handleth his cōmissiō right diligently & seketh al meanes possible to hynder the Lutherians, and extended his lybe∣ralitie towardes Iohn Faber, Eckius, Chocleus, and Nanseas, that they should play the men: and made Eckius a Cannon of Ratisbonne, as the bishops legate, in whose presence, the right of Election ceasseth. the Emperour came to Auspurg at the Ides of Iune, and in his com∣pany the Cardinall Campegius with the byshoppes full authoritie. The Emperour had purposed to haue rydē into the citie in the middes
ther Ferdinando and the Cardinall, but because it was against the maner of the Empyre, the Archebyshop of Mentz and Collen, rode be¦fore hym, and after hym Ferdinando and Campegius. The nexte day was Corpus Christi day: the Emperour therfore wēt deuoutly to the churche, and the Cardinall of Mentz sayde Masse. All the Prynces were present, except the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, the two Du¦kes of Lunenboroug, George of Brandenburge, and the Countie An∣holde. The princes that woulde not heare Masse. The Emperour in dede had both wylled them to be there, and to put their preachers to silence: but thei neither came them selues, nor yet imposed silence to their preachers, which they sayd they could not, for as muche as the same assemblie was appointed to the intent al mē might speake their consciences. Two dayes after was a proclamation made, that the preachers on both sydes should kepe silence, til the cause of religion were decided, notwithstanding howe the Emperour in the meane time, should appointe certen that should preache without the reproche of any mā, this was proclaimed by the herault, vnder a great penaltie. The twenty of Iune, the parliament began, and the Empe∣rour goyng to heare Masse, as the maner is, cōmaundeth the Duke of Saxon to be there, & to beare the sworde before him. For that is the of The office of the Duke of Saxon. fice of the house of Saxon in such Solēnities: he asked the aduise of yt preachers, who said, how that, he might be there present, for as muche as he was called forth to do his office. Then wēt he not to heare masse as gods seruice, but to execute his office, accōpanied wt George Mar∣ques of Brandenburg: none of the rest came there, from masse he came to the court of parliamēt. There Frederick coūte Palatin, excuseth the long absēce of themperour, & repeteth the causes of the calling of that assēblie. After this was recited a lōg oration writtē (as the maner is) wherī was aswel declared the cause of themperours departure out of Germany into Spayne, & of his lōg abode there, as also of his returne now, & the callīg of this assēblie, which is instituted chiefly for two cau¦ses, thone for establishing of religiō, for the which sins his depature, he hath heard to his great griefe, what tumultes and commotions haue bene in Germany, the other for the Turkyshe warre, cōsidering what turmoyle of late the Turkes haue made in Hongary taken Beigrade, The Turks victorye in Hongary. and many other fortes & castels, slayne kynge Lewis, & wonne all the towres & fortresses, betwixt the riuers of Saue & Draue, spoyled and brent the whole countrey, & slayne of mē ful many a thousād, how sins that also they haue inuaded Slauonie, lieng aboue the Goulfe of Ue∣nise, from whence, after they had doue exceadynge muche mischiefe, in slaughter, burnyng, spoylyng, destroying, and rauyshynge, they led awaye .xxx. thousande in to moste myserable captiuitie, and howe this laste yeare they made an incursion into Austriche with an Armye
innumerable, and beseged the chiefe citie Uienna, destroyed the coun∣trey farre and nere, tyll they came almoste to Lincie, workyng all the crueltie that coulde be imagined, cuttinge a sondre in the myddes, yonge infantes, deffouring and rauyshing yong maidens and wyues, and driuing them awaye before them, lyke a sorte of beastes: At the whiche tyme he was fully determyned to haue cōmen with his who∣le The Turks crueltie. power against them, and so he wrote to his brother Ferdinando, & the Prynces and captaynes, that were beseged in Uienna, that they shoulde defende it valeauntly, and loke certenly for his commyng, but hearyng that the Turke had leuid his sege, he chaunged his purpose, supposyng it moste requisite to sette all thynges at quiet in Italy, and to conferre with byshop Clement, for the establyshyng of religion here in Germany: to the intent yt peace and cōcorde, and one vniformitie of Religion had in all places, the Turke may the better be resysted of all handes, and stronger armies sent against hym, than haue bene: For al be it he toke not Uienna at this present, but caried his Armie back agayne, yet lefte he behynde hym in the borders, garysons and captai∣nes, not only to vexe Hongary, but Austriche also and Stiria and all other places nere: And seyng that he hath his limites extended vnto ours, there is no doubte, but at the next occasiō he wyll retourne with a greater power to the vtter destruction of all, especially Germanye: wherfore to be very neful & requisite to cōsulte nowe how that houge and cruell ennemy, whiche seketh to brynge all men vnder his subiec∣tion, yea to bannyshe them quyte out of the bondes of nature, may not only be resisted, repulsed, and discomfited: but also subdued, vāquished, and dryuen out of all Europe. Wherunto we haue nede to be contribu¦taries for greater ayde of Men and mony, the highe byshop hath pro∣mysed him for his parte largely and liberally, and although he hathe bene at all the charges of his coronation at Bononie him selfe alone, whiche hath cost hym a great quantitie of treasure, yet in so holye and necessary a businesse, he wyll doe that, whiche shall become his estate: and lykewyse his brother kyng Ferdinando, whiche is nowe set forth as a strong bulwarke of christendom, but chiefly of Germany, to flāke the Turkyshe rage. And also other kynges and Prynces, wil not faile to helpe vs, wherin he hath wrytten to some alreadye and wyll be in hande with the reste: And where there hath bene dissention in religiō euer synce, the first begynnyng of his empyre, to his great discomforte, he according to his office and dutie, intendyng to prepare a remedy in tyme, made a decree at Wormes by their common assentes, whiche if it had bene obserued, Germany had not bene these yeares past so sore afflicted: with the sedicion of the commonaltie and the wycked secte of the Anabaptistes: And where as at sondry assemblies touchyng the same, nothynge coulde be concluded hytherto, thinkyng that his pre∣sens
shoulde be auayleable herein, he hath called this assemblie to the intent that euery man may herein propounde what he wil in writing, that the matter may so muche the soner and more easely be vnderstāde and determined, and that he wyll both in this and all other causes of the Empyre, do that thynge that shall concerne his office and dewtie, for the loue he beareth to the common wealth and countrey, and re∣quyreth that all others, would bryng hyther with them the lyke mind and affection euery man for his parte. The Prynces after deliberatiō taken, iudged it mete first to treate of relygion. The fourth daye after in the consistory before the Emperour and the other Prynces, Cardi∣nall The oration of Cardinall Campega. Campege made an oration in Latin, exhorting the whole numbre there present, that in matters of religion, they would folowe and obey the Emperour, commending his vertue and deuotiō: And that he wil in the name of the high byshop do his endeuoure, that all maye professe one and the same fayth that their mindes being reconciled, they might moue warre against the Turke. This done the Ambassadours of Au∣striche The cōplais of the Ambas¦sadour of Au¦striche. come in and declare what an ouerthro we they haue had by the Turke, and desyre ayde. After this the Marques George, the electour of Saxony, the Dukes of Lunenburge, and the Lantgraue, intreate the Emperour, that he would heare the confession of their doctrine comprysed in wrytinge: he commaundeth the writing to be exhibited, The confes∣sion of the protestantes and layde downe: agayne thei for as muche as the same thing concer∣neth their estimatiō, their lyfe, landes, and goodes, and also their euer∣lasting saluation, and for because happely the thyng hathe bene other wyse reported vnto hym than it is in dede, requyre hym instantlye to be heard. The Emperour, commaundeth them to come home to his house the next daye, but the wryting to be deliuered hym nowe. They agayne vrge hym and beseche hym as earnestlye as they could deuise: saying howe they had thought ful little, that this should haue bene de∣nyed them, seing that he is content to heare others, that be their inferi∣ours muche, in matters of lesse importaunce. But when he would al∣ter nothyng of his purpose, they requyre him to leaue them their boke, tyll suche tyme as it hath bene read opēly: which graunted, they came the next daye, and in the audience of all the Prynces and states, the Emperour hym selfe being present, recite it ouer: Afterwardes they delyuer it vnto hym wrytten bothe in Latin and Dutche, and if they shall doubte in any thyng, they offer a further declaration, and in case the matter can not be determined at this present, they do not refuse to abyde the counseell so often tymes promysed and looked for. The Em∣perour, whiche had layne all the wynter from Nouembretyl March at Bononie in the same place with the bishop of Rome, endeuoured as muche as he myght to appease this controuersie in Religion without a counsel. For by this meanes he knewe he should please Clement best,
whose intent was, that in case the matter could not be quieted by gē∣tle meanes, it shuld be oppressed by force of armes. Therfore the .xxvj. of June he calleth before him in his owne hous, the Ambassadours of al cities, & declareth vnto them by Frederick the Palsgraue, howe in the assemblye at Spires a decree was made, wherunto the moste parte did consent, where he was right glad: but that certen others contem∣ned the same, for the which he was as sory: Wherfore he requyred thē, not to swarue away from the rest, orels to shewe the reason, why they should not obey. Hereunto aunswered the Ambassadours of the cities of Protestauntes, that they had done nothing contrary to their dutie: For they haue no lesse desyre, than their elders haue had, to perfourme their fayth and obedience: but where as he woulde knowe the cause why they dyd not admytte the decre, they desyre some tyme to make aunswer: and after the seuenth of Iuly, they put vp their aunswere in wrytyng, in effecte lyke vnto that, whiche they sent the yeare before, by their Ambassadours into Italy. Two dayes after that, the Empe∣rour causeth one to demaunde of the Duke of Saxō and his felowes, whether they wyll exhibite any thynge more? They saye nothing els, but a brief somme of the same confession, whiche they haue delyuered already. After he commaundeth the Ambassadours of the Cities, that where they saye, how they can not for conscience sake, kepe the decree of Spyres, they should drawe articles briefly, of the thynges where with they founde them selues greued: And he delyuereth the confessiō of Saxonie, to the resydue of the Prynces to be skanned. And they a∣gayne, to their diuines, amonges whome Faber & Eckius were pryu∣cipall. A consulta∣tion of the Protestātes doctryne. Who wrote a confutation against it, whiche after the Prynces had heard red, many iudged it to be much extreme, and thought mete that certen should be chosen, to reade ouer both their wrytynges, and to qualyfie them, but their opinion preuayled, whiche sayde it shoulde thus be exhibyted to the Emperour, and the whole matter be referred vnto hym. In the meane tyme, they of Strausborough, Constance, Memming, and Lindaue, present the Emperour with a confession of A confession of the Zwin¦glians. their doctryne. For touchyng the Lordes supper they beleued other∣wyse, than did the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes. The Emperour debatyng the matter with the byshoppes Legate, framed an aunswer to the doctrine of Saxon, and sheweth it vnto the Prynces the fyrste daye of August. The wyndyng vp of it was vehement and harde, cō∣maunding them to obserue it vnder paine of outlawing: But through the coūsel ye of Prynces, this thing was mitigated: Wherfore the third daye of Auguste, he sendeth for al states, and declareth to them by Fre∣derick Palsgraue, how he hath long and much consulted vpon the cō∣fession of the Saxons doctryne, how he hath also commaundeth cer∣ten honest and well learned men, to examyne it, and to iudge what is
Godly therin, and what is against the consent of the churche: whiche they haue done accordingly and haue declared their myndes in an o∣ther wrytynge, whiche also he alloweth. After this was the confuta∣tion of the confession rehearsed in this ordre. They had deuided the Saxons bookes in two partes. The first part conteined .xxj. chapters of doctrine: of these some they receiued, and some they reiected, certen thinges were partely admitted, and partly refused, alledginge manye testimonies out of the fathers and counsell. They forsoke these good Thinges re¦fused. workes deserue nothing: Iustification to be ascribed to faith only: and not vnto workes, also that the churche is the congregatiō of the god∣ly, that we can not make satisfaction for sinnes: that sainctes be not in∣tercessours for vs, other thinges they admitte after a sorte, as ceremo∣nies, Matters re∣ceiued. moreouer that the true body and bloud of Christe was in the sa∣crament, so as Christ should be vnder both the kyndes, and the wyne and the bread, cleane chaunged: they allowed their articles of confes∣sion, so that the people were bound to confesse them euery yere at Ea∣ster, tellyng all their synnes diligently, and receiue the Lordes supper, and beleue that there be seuen sacramentes of the church: prouided al¦wayes that no man were appointed to instructe the people, but by the byshoppes leaue and consent. Moreouer that all lawes and decrees of the churche should be obserued, and in suche places as they be abo∣lyshed, be restored. The seconde parte comprehendeth fyue thynges chiefly, the communion of the Lordes supper vnder bothe kyndes, as they terme it, is reiected: and the Emperour desyred, that herein they would followe the consent and custome of all Christendome. For the marriage of Priestes, he sayeth it is to hym maruell they wyll requyre it, syns it was neuer vsed, from the Apostles tyme vnto this day: wher¦fore it may in no wyse be graunted: Their Masse is admitted, so that That the Masse is a sa¦crifice. it be consonant to the vse of the Romane churche: But in case it be al∣tered, it is reiected: and also affirmed, that the Masse is a sacryfice for the quicke and the dead, neyther that the priuate Masse oughte to be abolyshed: For Daniell had prophecied long before, that when Anti∣christe shoulde come, the dayly offeryng shoulde cease: whiche thyng is A fayre expo¦sition of Da¦niel. not yet come to passe, saue only in such places where the Masse is layd downe, and the Aulters destroyed, the Images brent, in the whyche churches nothyng is songe nor read, nor no lyghtes burne any longer, there in deede is the saying of the Prophet represented and verified: Wherfore all men must take dilygent hede, that they geue none occa∣sion, of the comyng of Antichriste: the monasticall vowes to be groun∣ded aswell vpon the authoritie of the newe Testament, as of the olde, wherfore they deserue punyshement whiche contrary to their profes∣sion, haue forsaken their ordre: That the bishop haue authoritie not on∣ly to teache, but also to gouerne the common wealth, & therfore ought
not to be abridged of their ryght and priuilege, whiche they haue ob∣teyned through the liberalitie of their elders. Not to abstayne from fleshe on dayes forboden, not to faste in the Lent ceason, not to cōfesse Good ghost∣ly fathers. their synnes, is an obstinate frowardnes, and not Christian lybertie. These beyng recyted, they confessed howe there were many thynges, that woulde be refourmed: The Emperour promyseth to doe his en∣deuour, that both these thynges maye be redressed, and the state of the churche also refourmed, & sayeth, howe he trusteth surely, for as muche they are agreed vpon dyuerse thynges, that the Protestantes wyl re∣tourne to the bosome of the churche, and submitte them selues vnto hym: whiche if they doe, there is nothynge but they maye be bolde to craue and loke for at his hande: but if not, then must he nedes do as be∣cometh the protectour and defendour of the churche. Wherunto the Prynce of Saxony aunswered for him selfe and his fellowes. For as muche as they promised at the fyrst, that if they went about the recon∣siliation of Religion, they woulde then doe what so euer they myghte with a saufe conscience: Moreouer if that any errour coulde be founde in their doctrine, and proued by the testimonies of Scripture, they would not stande in it: furthermore that if they requyred a further de∣claration, it should be geuen: And nowe seynge that of this their doc∣tryne, some articles be admytted, and some refused: it is requisite, that they shoulde confyrme theyr thynges the more playne and mani∣fest reasons: wherfore they desyre to haue a copie of the confutation. After two dayes, when the Emperour had taken long delyberation, he sayde they shoulde haue a copie, but vnder this condition, that they should put forth no part therof in prynte: Also he wyll haue no further disputation in the matter, requyryng them to be ordered by hym: but they shewe hym howe they can not receyue it vppon that condition. The next daye whiche was the syxt of August, the Lantgraue depar∣ted The Lant∣graue depar¦teth from Auspurg. from thence with a small company, leauing his deputes. The Em∣perour toke this displeasauntly, and commaunded the Senate that they shoulde suffer none to departe out of the Citie by the posternes in the nyght ceason. And the nexte daye sendyng for the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, he dissembled not his displeasure, requyryng them to tary tyll the later ende: and he wyll do what he can to make a cōcord. They excuse the Lantgraue by his wyues sycknes, and shewe hym howe he hath lefte his deputes, and saye that they wyll not departe: Notwithstandynge they maruell to see the gates kept with watche & warde: For it hath not ben thus accustomed in any assemblye of the Empyre. Cesar excuseth the matter, to be done sor a murther commit∣ted, and for the dissention that is betwene the Germaynes and Spa∣nyardes: but if any lyke trouble chaunce hereafter, he wyl do nothing therein without makyng hym fyrst priuie to it, whiche is high Mar∣schall
of the Empyre. The Duke answereth, that if any thyng happen wherin his duty is requyred, he wyll be ready, as it be commeth hym: Duke of Saxon Mar¦schall of the Empyre. And so were the warders remoued from the gates the same daye. A∣bout this tyme ended the warre of Florence, wherof I shal somewhat declare by the waye. What tyme Rome was sacked as I sayd before, and the byshop taken, the Florentines expulsed the house of Medices, and after ayded the Frenchemen at the sege of Naples. But when the byshop was restored, to the intent he myght reuenge his kynsfolkes, The warre of Florence sending his Ambassadours into Spayne, made a league with the Em¦perour, promysing him emonges other thinges to crowne hym, in case he wyll punyshe the Florentynes, after their demerites. The Empe∣rour The Pope made a lea∣gue with ye Emperour. was content, and shortly after arriueth at Genes. Thyther came the Ambassadours of Florence to craue pardon. Unto whome Cesar after he had sore blamed them, made this aunswere. Albeit they had deserued great punyshement, yet might their fact be pardoned, in case they would receiue againe the byshop of Rome, for other way is there none, to haue peace. When they were come home with this answere, after that the matter longe and muche debated, the opinion of one or two preuayled, whiche sayde they would defende their lybertie, to the vttermoste of their power, and inferred that not only the byshop, but also the Emperour hym selfe was through long warres muche impo∣ueryshed and wanted money. Notwithstāding, whan the Emperour was come to Bonony, thei sent other Ambassadours, but thei through the byshoppes counsel, would not be receiued. Wherfore being beseged with the armies of the bishop of Rome: and the Emperour, whan they had prolonged the warres, almoste by the space of one yere: In the mo¦neth Florence rendred. of August, they fell to a composition with Ferdinando Gonzago, the Emperours general of his armie. Afterwardes the Emperour ad∣dressing his moste effectuall letters, appointed Alexander Medices, (vnto whome he had promysed Margaret his bastarde daughter in marriage) to be their Prince and ruler. And he builded there a marue∣lous strong Castell, the begynning of their seruitude and bondage. Florence lo∣seth her liber¦tie. When the towne was ones rendred, the byshop of Rome Clement, chopped of the heades of certen of the Senatours and set a new ordre in the commune wealth, being assured that Alexander should be their gouernour, according to the Emperours promise. Now to our purpose agayne. After muche debatinge, at the Ides of August, seuen were chosen on eche syde to frame the matter to a concorde. Of the chatho∣lyke syde were these, the Byshop of Auspurg, Henry Duke of Brun∣swike, Certen cho∣sen to accord Religion. two lawayers, and thre deuines, Wimpine, Eckius, & Cocleus: of the Protestātes, George Marques of Brādenburg Iohn Friderick of Saxon, two Lawyers, thre diuines, Melancthon, Brentius, and Schnepsius. These agreed vpon diuerse thinges, but their chief con∣trouersie
was about the Masse, the marriage of Priestes, the Lordes supper, monasticall vowes, and the iurisdiction of Byshoppes, but e∣specially for the Masse, and Uotaries, for herein woulde the catho∣likes nothyng at all relent: For other matters, though they dyd mys∣lyke them, yet they sayde, myght be suffered vntyll the counsell: They permitted also priestes to haue wyues, suche as were maried already, but others not, all this for auoyding of further trouble: touchyng the power and Iurisdiction of byshoppes, they of Saxony graūted more, than the Lantgraues men, the Dukes of Lunenburgh, or they of No∣rinberge, would allowe. Then toke they a lesse numbre, on eyther side thre. Melancthon, with the two Ciuiliās, and Eckius with as many. But in fyne they could not agree. Whylest they were consulting toge∣ther, the Emperour doth solicite George the Marques of Branden∣burge, by the byshop of Mentz and others of the same familie, and the The Prote∣stantes were laboured. Duke of Saxon, by Friderick Palsgraue, the Erle of Nasso, and by George Truckesse, that thei should leaue of their enterprise. He sought to drawe awaye the Duke of Saxon from the reste as pryncipal, and where he desyred to be inuested in his Duckdome after the custome of the Empyre, he denied it, vnlesse he would first reconcile him self to the churche of Rome: and tolde to the other playnely that vnlesse he wold obeye, he would take from him the wardshyp of his nephewe Albert the sonne of his brother Casimire. And they went about to perswade with the Lantgraue, that in case he would agree vnto the Emperour, Ulriche the Duke of Wyrtemberge, should be restored, and that an a∣grement myght be had by the Emperours meanes, betwene hym and the Erle of Nassoe, for the rule of Chattes. In this Assemblie the by∣shop of Rome had graunted to kyng Ferdinando, all maner of Plate and ornamentes of golde and syluer, of all the churches in Germany, for the Turkyshe warre, and also to take a subsydie of the clergie, but the Princes woulde not suffer it, sollicityng the Emperour to make yt decree frustrate. The .xviij. of August, Erasmus of Roterdame, wry∣teth to Cardinall Campegius from Friburge. Howe the Emperours Erasmus writeth to Campegius power is in dede great, but all men doe not acknowledge this name: The Germanes do so acknowledge it, that they rule, rather thē obey: Luthers doctryne is sowen abroade throughout Germany farre and neare, in so muche that the chayne of this mischiefe reacheth from the Ocean sea, vnto the vttermoste borders of Swycerlande. Nowe if the Emperour shall attempt to accomplyshe the byshop of Romes de∣syre in all thynges, it is to be feared, lest he shall haue but fewe to com∣mende his doinges: Moreouer in what great daunger of the Turke we stande in, whose power all the force of Europe is skant able to re∣syste: The Power of the Turk And what a thynge it is to fyght with vnwyllyng souldiours, it is manyfest by mo examples than one. The Emperour doubtlesse is of
nature inclyned to peace. Neuerthelesse by a certen desteny haled and inforced to warres. Fraunce and Italy, haue bene sore afflicted wyth warre nowe of many yeares. But this warre wyll doe more harme than all the reste, if it be not well forseen: Men are commonly perswa∣ded, that all these thynges are done through the instigation and coun∣sell of the hyghe byshop. But the feare is, lest a great parte of the peril, redounde to the Emperour him selfe: Thei that loue sectes, are in dede worthy of punyshement, but yet ought rather a respecte to be had, for the preseruation of the common wealth: The state of the churche was in tymes past full miserable, whan the Arrians, Pagans, Donatistes, and the Manycheis, sowed abroade their opinions, and also the Bar∣barous nations made warre. Notwithstandyng it waded out of all these daungers at the length. For verely tyme it selfe wyl at laste bring remedy also, vnto most daungerous diseases. The Bohemers were The Bohe∣mers. borne with al, though they did not acknowledge the byshop of Rome. If the same were also permitted to the Lutheriās, it were not amisse, in his conceipt: and all be it this were verye muche, yet were it a great deale lesse euyll than warre. The seuent daye of Septembre, the Em∣perour sendeth for home to his house all the Pryntes and states catho∣licke about none: And two houres after for the duke of Saxōs and his fellowes, and commaunding all others asyde, sauyng his brother Fer∣dinando, the byshoppes of Constance, and Hispalia, Granuellan and Truckesse, he speaketh by Fredericke Palsgraue on this wyse: how he The Empe∣oracion to ye Protestātes. had trusted assuredly, that beyng so frendly and gently warned, after their confession exhibited, they would haue taken his parte. And all be it that his hope was in vaine, yet at the request of the Princes he was content, that certen should be chosen on eyther partie, to conferre and to make an agrement. And thus was he brought agayne in to a newe hope of a concorde. But nowe he vnderstandeth to his great grief that they dissente from the others in the chiefest opinions, whiche is cleane contrary to his expectation, for he wold neuer haue thought, that they beyng so fewe in numbre, wold haue induced suche newe fanglednes, against the auncient & sacred custome of the whole vniuersal churche, or chouse vnto them selues a seuerall religion so farre differinge frō the bishops of Romes religion & his, from king Ferdinandos & al the prin∣ces & states of the Empire, yea & from all the kinges and princes of the whole worlde. But now for as much as their desire is to haue a gene∣rall counsel & here to haue a quiet decree made, he whiche chiefly coue∣teth quietnes, wyll deuise with the byshop of Rome and other christiā Prynces, to haue one called so soone as they can agree vppon a place: This wyll he vndertake to brynge to passe, but yet vnder this condi∣tion, that in the meane tyme, they shall obserue the same Religion, that
he and other Prynces doe: For to procure a counsell, and to suffer this gere to hange waueringe, and not to prohibite this newe fanglednes, euery man sayeth plainely howe sore and preiudiciall it woulde be to hym, and others. They make an delyberate aunswere, that neyther Their aun∣swere to the Emperour. they haue brought vp newe secte, nor swarued frō the Christian chur∣che. In that he refused not a counsell, they gyue hym great thankes, desyryng hym that so shortely as is possible, there maye be had in Ger∣many a lawfull and a free counsell, as in the laste and former assem∣blye of Spyres it was agreed vpon. But to receiue again the ceremo∣nies of the Romyshe churche ones abolished, they can not, with a good conscience. The Emperour after long consultation aunswereth them agayne by Truckesse, that he hath red ouer diligently all their discep∣tation, and fyndeth that they swarue very muche from the Christian churche: Marueylyng also at the lyghtnes of the other parte, that they would graunte to so muche, and agayne at their styffenes that would not take theyr offer. And where they craue a counsell by the decrees of the Empyre, it can take no place in them, which refused the last decree, protested against it, and appealed from it: whiche appellatiō notwith∣standing, he maketh none accompte of. For reason woulde that the lesse parte should be comfourmable to the more. But howe small an handfull are they, to be compared with the great byshop and hym, and with the rest of the Christian Prynces? Wherfore he desyreth to knowe, whether they wyl maynteyne any further talke or discourse of the matter, for he wyll spare no payne nor trauayle to brynge them to an attonement: whiche if they shall refuse to doe, and yet perseuer in theyr purpose, than muste he doe as becom∣meth the protectour of the churche. And because it is now nere night, he gyueth them leaue to take aduisement tyll the morrowe. The next daye whan all the States were assembled at the howre appoynted, Pontane a Ciuilian, was set to aunswere for the Duke and his companions. If the Emperoure in dede doe vnderstande the whole matter, he wyll than geue credite to their fyrste tale, and doubt not but that theyr doctryne shall be adiudged by the testimonie of a Godly and a free counsell to be agreable to Gods worde: Wherfore it is the lesse to be marueyled, that they dyd not receyue suche thynges as were of late offered and graunted. That appellation of necessitie was obiected againste that parte of the decree, where it made agaynste the doctryne of the Gospell, and the maner of the primatiue churche: For the reste they doe obeye. Agayne that counsell was promysed in the begynnyng of the assem∣blie longe before the decree was made. And not there onelye, but also in all other assemblies of the Empyre. Thys was euer the
opinion of all men: Wherfore seyng that they haue appealed both vn∣to hym, and also to a free counsell, they truste he wyll not disanulle the thynge, tyll sentence be lawfully geuen: But whether the lesse parte in this controuersie, ought to gyue place to the more, it is not to be discus¦sed in this place. And for their appellation, whiche was done of neces∣sitie they wyll make further aunswere at the counsell. Where as ther∣fore all the fourmer assemblies, haue determined vpon a counsell, they beseche hym that he woulde not breake those decrees, but gyue his cō∣sent herein, to the good wylles and desyre of all other states. And where also he offereth his paynes to haue the matter debated further, they rendre him great thankes. How be it, it is manifest by that which is done already, how much they did submitte them selues at the laste. And where he marueleth at the Byshoppes syde, that they woulde graunte so many thynges, it is easy to coniecture therby what iudge∣ment he is of. And therfore were it in vayne to treate any more therof, for as much as it should be but a let and a hynderaunce to other mat∣ters. But they wyll not be agaynst it to deuyse howe peace maye be kepte throughout the Empyre, as they offered in the begynnynge. In the meane tyme they wyll doe nothyng but that whiche they truste wyll be allowed of God, and of a lawfull counsell: beyng commaun∣ded a syde, at the last they were called in agayne. And for as much as the matter was weyghty, the Emperour sayd, he woulde take good aduisement therein, and desyred the Duke of Saxon, whiche was the chiefest of them, that he woulde not depart. And in deede Georde Truckesse, and Uehus, a doctour of Ciuile, had A decree made. deuysed a reconcilement touchyng the Masse and Uowes, but it was in vayne. Wherfore the Emperour chouseth out certen of the Romysh Relygion to make a decree, the effecte wherof was this. That the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, had exhibited the con∣fession of their doctryne, whiche was afterwardes confuted by the testymonies of holy Scripture. And howe through his great paynes, and trauel of other states, the matter was brought to this conclusion, that they receyued certen opinions of the churche, and certen they did refuse. Wherfore to declare him selfe howe desyrous he is of peace, and howe he coueteth to doe nothyng vpon a wyll, of his singular huma∣nitie and gentlenes, he graunteth them space to take aduisement in, vntyll the .xv. of April, to the intent they maye in this meane whyle, waye and determyne with themselues, whether they can be content in the other articles to professe the same, that the byshop of Rome, and he doe, and all the rest of christendome. In the meane tyme he wyl∣leth, that all men kepe peace throughout the Empyre, and that neither the Duke of Saxō nor his fellowes, suffer in the meane time any new thynge to be prynted concerning Religion within their dominiōs, also
that they alter nothing els, that they neyther allure nor compelle any man vnto their Religion. And that they do not let their subiestes, that would followe the olde Religion. Moreouer that they do not disturbe Religiouse persones, but that they may saye their seruice, heare confes∣sion, and minister the Lordes supper after their wonted facion: How they shall consulte with him and the other states, to punyshe the Ana∣baptistes, and Sacramentaries. Fynally because there hath bene no counsell of a longe tyme, and manye thynges are to be refourmed as wel in the Laitie, as the Clergie, therfore wyll he labour and sollicite the byshop and other Prynces, that within halfe a yeare, one shall be A counsell promysed. sommoned, and begynne a yeare after. The Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, after consultation had, set Pontane to make aunswere, that where the decree mentioneth, how theyr doctryne was confuted by the Scriptures, that do not they cō∣fesse nor graunte. But to thynke thus, that it is so grounded vpon the Scriptures, that there is nothynge to be founde in it that is vngodly, and that would they haue proued manyfestly, if they had obteined a copie of the consutation: Notwithstāding lest it should be passed ouer Scripture is the touche stone of all doctryne. in silence, they haue made an aunswere as sone as they hearde it red, to so muche as they could beare in memorye, whiche al be it, it dyd not aunswere to euery partycular, for want of the copie: yet doubte they not, but if it would please the Emperour to peruse it, he shoulde fynde theyr doctrine as yet fyrme and stable, and neyther pearsed nor shaken with any of theyr aduersaries weapons. Whē he had thus farre proceded, he delyuereth this Apologie to the Emperour: whiche after Fridericke Palsgraue receiued of him, at the An Apolo∣gie deliuered but not recei¦ued. Emperours beckenynge, whome Ferdinando had whyspered in the eare, he delyuer it agayne. After this Pontane proceadeth, where as it is decreed, that they shoulde not alter or publyshe anye thynge in prynte, they haue in the last assemblye, touchyng this thyng made such aunswere as they thought was sufficiēt, and be yet of the same mynd, and wyll doe nothynge, that may be iustly reproued: Moreouer they haue nothynge a doe with sectes. And although the doctrine be trewe whiche they professe, yet dyd they neuer brynge any man to it by com∣pulsion, nor wyll not hereafter. As touchyng the Anabaptistes, & such as doe contempne the sacrament of the Altar, they neuer suffered any suche kynde of men within theyr lymites, but theyr diuines haue prea∣ched agaynst them: And the Anabaptistes haue also bene punyshed, in suche sorte as no suche sectes can take roote or remayne emonges thē. Fynally, for as muche as this is a matter of most weyghty importāce, whiche verely concerneth eyther the euer lastyng saluation or damna∣tion and losse of their soules, and for because the Ambassadours of their fellowes, whiche are absent, haue nede to aduertyse thē of all thinges,
they doe earnestly beseche hym, to graunte them a copie of the decree, to the intent they may consider and condescende vpon an aunswere agaynste the daye. The next daye the Emperour sent them worde by The Emp. to ye Protest. the Prynce electour of Brandenburge, that where they so stoutelye affyrme theyr doctryne to be trewe and Godly, he can not maruell e∣nough, consyderynge howe it is not onlye confuted nowe euen by the authoritie of scripture, but also condempned in all former counselles longe syns. And he marueyleth so muche the more, for that they doe ascrybe vnto hym and the resydue of Prynces errour and false Reli∣gion, for if that shoulde be trewe, as they saye, than shoulde bothe his and the Dukes of Saxons progenitours also, whiche haue kepte and maynteyned the same Religion, be accompted for Heretikes: Wher∣fore he can not be perswaded, nor graunte, that theyr doctryne should be establyshed by the testimonye of Goddes worde. And where of a syngular clemencie and loue of peace, he hathe wylled the decree to be thus deuysed, and herein hathe abased hym selfe ouer muche, therfore he requyreth them, that they wyll admytte the same, in lyke case as other Prynces doe, and consyder with them selues, that vnlesse they so doe, what great occasion they shall gyue to muche michief: for the whiche they shal rendre a strayght accompte to God one daye. Moreouer howe it was neuer set forth by no wryting Prayers mixt with threatnings that it should be lawfull to spoyle men, and afterwardes to excuse it thus, as though he that hath sustayned losse, shoulde make no restitu∣tion: And as concernynge the Apologie wrytten against the confuta∣tion, he had shewed them before, that he would admytte no further di∣sputation about Relygion, for as muche as he maye not, nother is it any part of his office: And for this cause hath he refused it: For vnlesse they wyll allowe and confirme this decree, he wyll doe as he shall see cause, that thynge whiche shall be come his estate & office. The Mar∣ques sayde this moreouer, howe they knewe what trauell and pay∣nes the reste of the Prynces and states had taken; that this contro∣uersie myght be ended quietly. And nowe besought them to way with them selues, howe muche it were bothe for their priuate profyte, and also to the common wealthes to obey the Emperour and admitte the decree, whiche vnlesse they wyll do, doubtlesse al the other states wyl do herein what soeuer themperour shal cōmaunde thē: For they haue The conspi∣racie of the Papistes a∣gainste the Protestātes. promysed hym already vpon their fidelititie, that they wil in this qua∣rell spende with him al their substaunce, their bloud and their life also, to fynishe vp the matter: and he hath promysed theim againe, to bende hytherwardes all his force and power, and not to departe out of the limites of the Empire, before he haue brought it to passe: And that he was commaunded to saye this muche to them by all the Prynces and states. Agayne the Protestauntes maynteyne theyr doctryne to be
agreable to Gods worde, whiche the gates of hell are notable to re∣sist, and the same to be further declared, in the wryting lately presēte, but for the decree made, they can not alowe it with a saufe conscience: wherfore thei desyre to haue a copie therof, to the intent after good de∣liberation, they maye frame a determinate aunswere, whiche shall be as conformable, as Gods worde shall permitted them: And in al other causes, they wyll not sticke to spende lyfe and goodes for his sake: but to heare that the Princes and states haue bounden them selues to the Emperour in suche sorte, they can not a little maruell, consyderynge they haue giuen them none occasion so to do, and that there is nothing whiche they are not ready, after the example of their auncesters, to do for the Emperour, and when nede requyreth, wyll not be the last. And where as he sayed, that no man ought to be spoyled of his goodes, they The protest. spoyle no mā doe confesse the same also and herein are nothynge culpable: For as touchynge Religious houses, they haue oftentymes protested, so to vse the matter vntyll the counsell, as it maye be certenly sene and perceyued, that they seeke not their owne priuate lucre or commoditie: After muche deliberation, the Emperour aunswered them agayne by the Marques of Brandenburge, that he wyl not confesse, nor graunt, that which they baoste of their religiō: And that he hath also a regard to his conscience, and his soules health as well as they, and wyll clea∣ue to the auncient Religion of the olde fathers: In the decree made, there can nothyng be chaunged: if they wyll allowe it, well and good, if not he hath an occasion gyuen hym to deuyse with the rest for an o∣ther decree to be made wherby these newe spronge vp sectes maye be plucked vp by the rotes, Germany set vp at quietnes, and the aunciēt Religion of the churche, fayth, and cerimonies, be had in estimation: whiche thing belongeth chiefly to his office and dutie: For except they wyll be ordered, he wyll declare all to the hyghe byshop, and to other kynges, and vse both their counsell and ayde herein: Unto that where they saie, they haue gyuen none occasion of offence, there is much to be obiected: For their preachers were a great occasion of the cōmotion & rusticall warre, wherin almoste an hondreth thousande were slayne: The protest. accused of se∣dition. And many thinges haue bene done in their dominions to the open re∣proche, contempt and mockery of the byshop of Rome and of hym, and of other states also: therfore not to be so clere without blame as they would make it. Moreouer that the prynces and states haue of no pri∣uate affection, but according to their duty offered their assistaunce, e∣specially seynge howe they wyll admitte no waye of vnitie and con∣corde: Fynally he wylleth and cōmaundeth them to restore in to theyr The drone bees desyre to be resto∣red into the hyue. former estate, the Abbottes, Moūkes, and other ecclesiastical persons, whiche they haue expulsed. For he heareth their dayly complayntes, & is troubled almoste continuallye about the restitution of them. After
a lytle respyte, the Protestantes do replie thus. For as muche as they can not obtayne the Copie of the decree, nor tyme to consulte of the whole matter, it is but foly to make any further discoursynge thereof: Wherfore they do committe the whole cause vnto God, in whom thei repose the chiefe hope of their saluation. But where they are charged with the sedition of the commons, thei be vtterly clere in that matter: for what they did at the same tyme, and howe they spared neither cost peryll, nor paynes, it is manifestly knowen to all men: And the cause & originall of that sedition, was declared also foure yeares synce in the assembly of Spyres. Wherfore it is not well done to lay this thyng to their charge, but therein they suffer iniurie: for if there be any man that wyll trye the lawe with them, in this or any other matter, they refuse not to abyde iudgement. Wherfore they beseche hym, he woulde con∣ceaue no hainous displeasure against them, nor be incensed wt hatred & malice: cōsidering that al they haue is as well at his commaundemēt, as any thyng els of the other states. When they had thus sayde, they axed leaue, and departed, leauing certayne of their coūsellers for their deputes. But before they went, the Archebyshoppes of Mentz and The excuse of some to ye Protestātee. Triers, and also the Palsgraue, sent to declare vnto them, that the sa∣me that the electour of Brandenburg, spake of gening their ayde and assistaunce for the defence of Religion, was done without their com∣maundement: whiche thynge also they hyd not from the Emperour, shewyng him howe they had none occasion of ennemitie or displeasur against them: Wherfore in case they had conceaued any euyll opinion against them, they desyred them to leaue it. The Prince of Saxony was content with that purgation, and bad them againe to loke for al good wyll and frendshyp at his hande. The next day after they were gone, the Emperour calleth before hym all the states, and first he com∣maūdeth the Ambassadours of the cities by Truckesse, that they shuld not departe before the end of the Assemblie, after that declareth what had bene done with the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, and be∣cause the cities of Strausborough, Constance, Memmyng, and Lyn∣daue, had exhibited a seuerall byll by them selues, he sheweth howe he wyll treate with them in lyke case. After are debated other matters of A deluge at Rome & in Selande. the Empyre, chiefly of the Turkyshe warre. This tyme at Rome the Ryuer of Tiber ouerflowed exceadingly to the great terrour of the ci∣tie, by reason that the wynde blewe sore against the streame, & droue backe the course of the water from the sea, wherfore it did much hurte. A lyke deluge and more cruell, was in Hollande and Zelande, where the Sea brake in ouer the walles, that are made to kepe it out in those parties, and drowned al the countrey farre and nere. Finally the xiiij. daye of Octobre, whan al the states besydes the Protestauntes were called and assembled in the courte, the decree was red to the Ambassa∣dours
of the Cities, who requyryng a Copye, were sayde naye, but it was repeted ones or twyse. When al for the moste parte had allowed it, they of Auspurge, Ulmes, Hales, and Franckeforth, desyred further delyberation: the eight day after the deputes of the Duke of Saxon & his fellowes, declare vnto the Archebishop of Mentz, whiche is chief emonge the Prynces: that if they maye haue their Religion quiet vn∣till the counsell, they are also contented to become cōtributaries with them for money and ayde towardes the Turkyshe warre, wherfore the next daye beyng called into the courte, there was red before them a certen tenure of the peace, wherin they only were comprised whiche had consented vnto the decree made, where about rose a contention. the Ambassadours affirming, that it concerned them nothynge at all, or if it did, howe it ought to be vttered with playner wordes, to take awaye all ambiguitie. They said, how they would moue it to the Em∣perour. After two dayes, the Emperour sent for home to his house, thē of Strausborough and their fellowes, and before all the states com∣maundeth A cōfutatiō of Zwilius doctrine. the confutation of their doctryne to be red openly, a wry∣tyng long and tedious, and also where it touched the Lordes supper ful bytter and sower. The authors therof were John Faber and Ec∣kius. And for because the argument was odiouse, they left out no kind of excusation, wherby to kyndle the Emperour and Prynces agaynst them, the ende was this. For as muche as in their Religion, they pro∣fessed an opinion contrary to al the reste, and allowed that moste hey∣nous errour of the Sacramēt, had also cast their Images our of their churches, abolyshed the Masse, and plucked downe Colleges, builded in tymes past through the lyberalitie of kynges & Emperours, mayn∣teyned sondry sectes, and dispersed their bookes wrytten of suche mat∣ters throughout Germany: therfore he requyreth them eftsones to co∣me to amendement and receyue agayne the auncient Religion, for o∣therwise wyll not he fayle to do the thing which his office requireth. They aunwer not long after, that in this confutation they were char∣ged with many thinges that were vntrue, for in ther cities is nothyng Their aun∣swer to the same. done out of ordre, but the same is extremely punyshed: wherfore, seing thei be clere in cōscience, the cause weightie, the cōfutation ouerlong, & can not be aunswered, before they make certificat home to their cities, they desyre fyrst therfore to haue a copie, secondarely, that credite be not geuen to this accusation, before suche tyme as their pourgation be heard and examined: In all other matters they wyll do any thyng for his sake. The Emperour sayeth, he wyll take aduisement, and the fyst daye after she weth them by the Marques of Brandēburge, how they can haue no copie. For that was for weightie causes denied of ye Duke of Saxony, and all disputatiō of fayth is nowe prohibited: But if they desyre to be reconciled, and retourne agayne to the churche, he is con∣tent,
that they shall heare the confutation red agayne ones or twyse: but he chargeth them to professe the same kynde of doctrine, that al o∣ther Prynces and states do, and to gyue ayde against the Turke: for vnlesse they forsake theyr stubburnes, he wyll worke by the counsell of the byshop of Rome and other kynges, as shal become hym. After this they make a further sute to obtayne a copie, and the same not graun∣ted, to haue peace and quietnes in their Religion tyll the begynnynge of the counsell, and therin to haue their cause decided, and they wyl in the meane time geue theyr ayde against the Turke so farforth as their power wyll extende, or els could they graunte nothing. The Maques promysed them, to be a petitioner for them to the Emperour. At after noone was red vnto them a graunt of peace, wherein were only con∣teyned suche as receiued the decree, as was rehearsed before to the de∣putes of the Dukes of Saxon and his fellowes, wherunto they aun∣swered in lyke case, that the same touched them nothyng, and desyred to knowe further of the Emperours pleasure herein. In this meane whyle had they of Ulmes, Auspurge, Franckeforth and Halles, forsa∣ken the decree made as concerning Religion, and vrged sore to haue a cousel. But Faber and Eckius, craue a great rewarde of the Princes, for makyng the confutations, and had it. And promyse from hēceforth to bestowe theyr trauayle in the defence of the Romyshe Religion. For they and dyuerse others sought preferment by the meanes of Luther, and in dede Faber was afterwardes by kyng Ferdinando made by∣shop of Uienne. Wherupon Erasinus of Roterdame, was wont to say Poore Lu∣ther maketh many men ryche. merely, howe poore Luther made many ryche. In the meane ceason the Saxons and their fellowes, put vp a supplication to the Empe∣rour, intreating hym to establyshe a peace throughout the Empyre, that no man be put in trouble or daunger for Religiō. But where this coulde not be obtayned, they wryte an Epistle to all states, makyng a brief rehearsall what thinge hath bene done, desyryng that the names of their Prynces be not put in to the later ende of the decree emonges the reste. And for as muche as they haue sued for peace in vayne, they saye howe they can graunte none ayde to the Turkyshe warre. More ouer, where it is prouided in the decree, that they only shall haue place in iudgement and counsell chamber, whiche allowe the decree made, they requyre that the same may be chaunged and amended: for els can they beare no parte of the charges, whiche the chambre requyreth. What tyme they had thus denounced, they departed the next daye, beyng the .xij. of Nouembre. I shewed you in the fyft booke, howe Marques Albert of Brandenburge was by the kyng of Pole made Duke of Pruselande. But the Emperour beyng sued vnto by Walter Cronberge, disallowed all that treatie or cōpacte as made to the dam∣mage of the Empyre: and the .xiiij. daye of Nouembre pronounceth it
to be of none effecte. The fyft daye after, in the Emperours presence was the decree recited before all the states, and after a long discourse The decree of Auspurg. of the handlyng of all matters, the Emperour decreeth, that they shuld no longer be suffered that teache otherwyse of the Lordes supper, than hath bene obserued hytherto, that in the Masse, eyther common or pri∣uate, nothyng be altered, that chyldren be confyrmed with chresme, & sycke folkes annoynted with oyle consecrated: that no Images be re∣moued, and where they be taken awaye, to be restored: that the opiniō of them that denye man to haue fre wyll be not receyued, for that it is beastly and also contumeliouse against God: that nothyng be taughte any where, agaynst the authoritie of the magistrate: that the opynion, that fayth only iustifieth take no place: that the Sacramentes of the church be in numbre and place accustomed, that the ceremonies of the churche, rites, obsequies for the dead and suche other be obserued: that benefices vacant, be imployed vpon mete persones: that suche priestes and men of clergie, whiche haue maried before this tyme, be depriued of their benefices, whiche immediatly after this assembly shal be geuen to others. But suche as forsakyng theyr wyues, wyll retourne to their olde profession and be absolued, the byshop may restore, by the consent of the byshop of Rome, or his legate. But the others to haue no refuge in any place, but banyshed or extremely punyshed: that the priestes be of honest conuersation, their apparell decent and commonly, that they auoyde all sclaunder. That the preachers exhorte the people to heare Masse, to praye to the virgyn Mary, and other sainctes, to kepe their holy dayes and fasting dayes, to abstayne from meates forbodene, to releue the poore, to tell the Monkes howe they may not forsake theyr profession and ordre, briefly that nothyng be altered in Religion: they that shall do otherwyse, to lose bodye and goodes. that where as Ab∣beys be pulled downe, they be reedified, and what soeuer hath bene ta¦ken awaye from the clergie, to be restored, that the wonted ceremo∣nies and rites, may be accomplyshed. And suche as be followers of the olde Religion, dwellyng within the lymites of the cōtrary parte, and allowe this decree, shall be receyued in to the protectiō of the Empire, and shall flitte whether they lyste without any hynderaunce. that the byshop of Rome shalbe called vpon to apoynte a counsell in some place conuenient, within syxe monethes, that afterwarde the same may be∣gynne as shortly as may be, and at the furthest within a yeares space: that all these thynges be ratified and establyshed. Al exceptions, or ap∣pellations made to the contrary, to be voyde and of none effect. And to the intent this decree may take place and be obserued, as cōcerning religion, the force and power that God hath geuē them, shalbe wholy applied hereunto, and their lyfe and bloude also spent in the same qua∣rell. Duryng this Parliament, Luther by the commaundement of his
Prynce, was at Coburge in the borders of Frankony, to the intent he myght be nerer Auspurge, in case the matter requyred his aduyse or counsell. And though he were absent, yet to the intent he myght some Luth. wrote a booke to ye byshoppes. what further the commō benefit, he wrote a booke to the byshoppes, & Prelates in that assemblye, wherein he sheweth what the state of the churche hath bene, vnder the byshop of Rome, what wicked doctrine, what shamefull errours: And with moste weightye wordes, admoni∣sheth thē of their dutie, chargeth them to be of cruell & bloudy mindes, and agayne exhorteth them, not to let slippe the occasion, nowe to re∣dresse their euyll: He sheweth them howe his doctrine is agreable to the bookes of the Prophetes & Apostles, and proueth that is in vaine, what soeuer they consulte or imagine against God. In this malyce & threatheninge of the Emperour and Byshops, Melancthon was dis∣couraged and careful in his mynde, not for his owne cause, but for po∣sterities sake, and gaue hym selfe wholy to pensiuenes, wepynge, and mournynge. But when Luther knewe therof, he comforteth hym Luther com¦forteth Me∣lancton. with sondrye letters: And for as muche as it is no mennes matter, but the cause of almyghtie GGD, he admonyshed hym, that layinge al thought and care a parte, he caste the whole burthen vpon hym. And why sayeth he, doest thou thus afflicte and tourment thy selfe? If God hath geuen his sonne for vs, why do we tremble and feare, why doe we syghe and lamente? Is Sath an stronger than he? Wil he that hath geuen vs so great a benefite, forsake vs in lyghter matters? Whye shoulde we feare the worlde, whiche Christe hath vanquyshed? If we defende an euyll matter, why doe we not chaunge or pourpose? If the cause be iust and Godlye, why truste we not to Gods promyses? Cer∣tenly the Deuyll can take no more from vs but our lyfe: But Christ li∣ueth and reigneth for euer, in whose protection consisteth the veritie. He wyll not cease to be with vs, vnto the Worldes ende. If he be wyth vs. I beseche you where shall he be founde? If we be not of his churche, doe you thynke that the byshop of Rome, and our other aduersaries, be of it? We be synners in dede dynerse wayes, but yet for all that Christe is no lyer, whose cause we haue in hande. Let kynges and nations fret and fume, as muche as euer they lyste: He that dwelleth in heauen, shall laughe them to skorne. God hathe gouerned and maynteined this cause hetherto without our counsell: the same shall also from henceforth, bryng it to the ende wyshed for. Luthers opi¦nion of mis¦traditions. Touchyng lawes and traditions of men, that you wryte of, the aun∣swere is not harde: For both the fyrst cōmaundement, and al the Pro∣phetes also, doe cōdempne suche maner of workes: They may be a bo∣dely exercyse: but if they come ones to worshyppyng, it is idolatry. As for any agremēt it is in vayne loked for: for neyther can we depose the byshop of Rome, neyther can the true doctrine be in safetie, so longe as
Popery shall endure. In that you wyll haue the Lordes supper to be communicated wholy, and geue no place to your aduersaries, whiche holde it to be indifferent, you doe well. For it is not in our arbitremēt, to decree or suffer any thynge to be vsed in the churche, whiche hathe not Gods worde to beare it. They crye out that we condempne the whole churche: but we saye how the churche was violently taken and oppressed with tyrannye, when the communion was deuided in the middes, and therfore to be holden excused, as the whole Synagoge was excused, that in the captiuitie of Babylon, it kepte not the lawe of The church oppressed wt Tyranny, is to be excused Moses & other ceremonies, beyng by force prohibited that they coulde not doe it. Take hede in any wyse that you graunt not to the byshops ouer muche iurisdiction, lest more trouble ensue there of hereafter. All this treaty of a concorde in doctryne is cleane agaynst my mynde: For the labour is spent in vayne, vnlesse the byshop of Rome woulde abo∣lyshe all his kyngdome. If they condempne our doctryne, whye seeke we an vniformitie? If they do allowe it, why do they mainteyne their olde errours? But they condemyne it openly. Wherfore it is dissimula∣tion and falshode, whatsoeuer they go about, they labour sore (as it ap∣pereth) about their ceremonies: but let them fyrst restore the doctryne of fayth and workes: Let them suffer the churche to haue Ministers that wyll doe their dutie. They requyre that Monkes maye be set a∣gayne The papists are accused of rerages. in possession: let them restore to vs agayne so manye innocent & Godly men, as they haue murthered, let them restore so many soules, destroied through their wicked doctrine, let thē restore those great ry∣chesse, gotten by fraude disceiptfully, let thē restore Gods glory, with so many contumelies, dishonored. Whan they shall haue made satisfactiō for these thynges, we shall than talke with them vnto whome the pos∣session Bucer labo∣reth for a cō∣corde. belongeth. Where as Luther and certen others differed only in opinion touching the Lordes supper, whiche the catholykes reioysed at, and the rest muche lamented, Bucer, by the Duke of Saxons pro∣curement, went from Auspurge to Luther, for an agrement, and re∣ceyued suche aunswere as he mislyked not, in so much as he went thēce to Zwynglius and the Zwycers, to the intent they might be ioyned nerer in mynde and opinion. When the state of thynges stoode thus, & all was full of displeasure The Lantgraue maketh a league for syxe yeares, with the cities of Zuricke, Basill and Strausborough, that if The Lant∣graue made a league wt Strausbo∣tough Zu∣rick and Ba¦syn. any be attempted with force for Religion, they shoulde ayde one an o∣ther This was concluded in Nouembre. The same tyme the Empe∣rour addresseth his letters to the Duke of Saxon, commaunding him to be with him at Collon, the .xxi. of Decembre, for certen weightie af∣fayres of the common wealth. Whiche after he had receiued the same, the .xxviii. of Nouembre, the same daye came a messenger with letters from the Archebishop of Mentz, wherein was wrytten, how the Em∣perour
had required hym to cal to an assemblie to Princes Electours, to create a kyng of Romaynes. Wherfore he cited him to appeare at Collon the .xxix. of Decembre, for this appertaineth to the byshops of∣fice, as before hath bene declared. Whiche thinge ones knowen, the Duke of Saxon dispatchyng his letters to the Lantgraue and to all other Prynces and cities that were Protestantes, prayeth and exhor∣teth them to mete at Smalcalde, at the .xxii. of Decembre: Neuerthe∣lesse in the meane tyme, he sendeth spedely to Collon Iohn Frederick his sonne, and with hym certen of his priuie counsell, to be there at the daye appoynted by the Emperour. By whome he declareth, how this citation of the archebishop of Mentz is not rightly nor orderly done, & how by this creation of the king of Romaines, the right and libertie of the Empyre is infrynged, and also the lawe of Charles the fourth bro∣ken, wherfore he wyl not allowe nor ratifie their enterprise. After that all were assembled at Smalcalde, they deuise a league, not offensiuely The league of the Pro∣testantes at Smalcalde. but defensiuely. Unto this subscribed immediatly all the Princes, and moreouer Albert and Gebart, Erles of Manssteld & Maidenborough and Bremen: But Strausborough, Ulmes, Cōstance, Lindaue, Mē∣ming, Cāpedowne, Heilbrune, Ruteling, Biberack, & Isne, do receiue it in such sorte, as first to infourme their cities therof, & within syx we∣kes to make an directe answere, what they wil do herein. It was fur∣thermore decreed to follicite by their Ambassadours, the king of Den∣marke, the Dukes of Pomerane, & Megelbourg, the cities of Embeck Northēme, Franckfourth, Brunswick, Gotinge, Minda, Hannobria, Hildesseme, Lubecke, Stetine, & other hauon townes. When the by∣shop of Rome vnderstode, what was yt end of the assemblie at Auspurg The cōplait of the Pope to the kynge of Poole. he wrote his letters to the kyng of Pole & others, how he had trusted assuredly, that the authoritie & presence of the Emperour, should either haue quenched or quieted Luthers heresie: for vpō this hope, & for this cause chiefly he came to mete the Emperour at Bononie, to the intent he might encourage him forward (who notwithstanding of his owne accorde was wel willing) for if this thing had ben brought to passe, re∣ligiō had bene staied, many mens soules saued, which through this he∣resie are nowe in daūger, & then might remedy haue ben foūd against the Turkish fury: but where as he vnderstādeth al well by thēperours as also by the letters of his legate, how they can not only be in no wise reformed, but are waxed also more obdurate, he which through yt wyll of God, gouerneth the shyp of Peter, in a time so tēpestuouse, & sustey∣neth the greatest part of the whole care for the same, consultinge wt his The Pope is a sayler. Cardinals, cāfinde no better remedy, thā the which his predecessours haue vsed, yt is a general coūsel: wherfore he doth admonish hym synce the matter is brought to this issue, that either hym selfe presentlye, or els by hys Deputes woulde further so holye a cause: For he enten∣deth,
so shortly as may be, to appoynte one in Italy in some place con∣uenient. These letters were dated the first daye of December. The xxiiii. daye of Decembre the Prynces confederated at Smalcalde, The Prote∣stauntes let∣ters against Ferdinando wryte vnto the Emperour, howe they heare it commonly bruted, that he pourposeth to create his brother Ferdinando kynge of Romaynes, who maketh great sute for the same. But what authoritie and ryght the Princes Electours haue herein by the lawe of Charles the fourth, howe when the Emperour is dead, an other is to be chosen in the na∣me of the whole Empyre, it is knowen to all men: Notwithstandinge he being alyue and in helth, and no suche chaunce happened, howe the Archebyshop hath cited them to Collon, against the prescripte of the lawe, and agaynst the custome of the Empyre: They heare moreouer, howe the residue of the Electours wyll come thyther at his requeste, to accomplyshe the sute of Ferdinando, as it were by conuenaunt and promyse: for this report is spread farre and neare: Wherfore they haue thought good to admonishe hym of certen thynges. And al be it they had leuer abstayne from suche kynde of talke, yet for as muche as they loue both hym and theyr conntrey and especiallye the lybertie therof, which they haue receyued of their auncesters, agayne for because now in this later ende of the worlde, many thinges are done captiously and crastely, they can not otherwyse doe. Fyrst therfore, he knoweth ryght well how circumspectly howe depely, with what wordes and bondes he bounde hym selfe to the Empyre, how he gaue his fayth by an othe, that he woulde obserue the lawe Carolyne, whereupon the lybertie of the Empyre chiefly dependeth, howe he promysed & cōfirmeth by an othe, yt he would neither him self do any thing against it, nor suffer any other to do. And certenly these conuenauntes may not be infrynged, broken or chaunged, without the consent and aduyse of all states: But nowe in case during his lyfe and prosperitie a kyng of Romanes shuld be chosen, and that his naturall brother, makynge suite and labour for it, he seeth hym selfe howe directly it were againste the lawe, againste the ryght and lybertie of the Empyre, agaynste promyse and conue∣naunt and the fayth that he oweth to the common wealth, confyrmed by a solemne othe: Moreouer howe incommodiouse also it were for hym and howe chargeable to the whole Empyre to haue two Rulers at one tyme, whome they must obeye. And because they woulde be so∣ry if any suche thynge shoulde be layde to his charge for breakynge his fidelytie, or also vnto them for their sloughtsulnes in defending the cō∣mon wealth, therfore do they ernestly beseche him to impute this their writing to the loue of him & their coūtrey, and to the world that now is that he would call to his remembraunce thynges past, and by his office and aucthoritie prohibite the creation of this new kinge, that he woulde consyder well wyth hym selfe, to how many euils & mischiefes
this thinge wyll hereafter geue occasion, vnlesse it be forseen: signify∣eng howe they wryte also touching the same matters to the resydue of the electours, trusting that they wyll worke for the profit of the cō∣mon wealth, and do their endeuour that there be no diuision made a∣monges the states of the Empyre: for the rest they will doe as muche for his sake as their habilitie and power wyl extende to. Afterwardes the Duke of Saxon writeth his seuerall letters to the Prynces hys colleges: that for as muche as he was somoned to Collon by the arche The duke of Saxons let∣ters to the Princes. byshop of Mentz, therfore hath he sent thither his sonne and certen of his coūsayle, which shal do in his name that shalbe requisite: He requi∣reth them to leaue of their enterprise, and to waye with them selues, what a preiudice and discommoditie, this wilbe vnto thē and al theyr posteritie, for to breake the right libertie and honour of the Empyre: he desyreth them also that in suche thinges as his sonne and counsellours haue to treate with them of, they woulde so vse them selues as it may appeare and be perceiued, that they loue the common wealth of their countrey. The Duke of Lunēburge, the Lantgraue, Counte Anhald; and the Erles of Mansfelde, wrote vnto the Electours at the same ti∣me long letters of the same effect, admonishing them righte ernestlye, that they doe not suche an open wronge to the lawes & to their coun∣trey: sayeng howe it is reported, that the matter is handled with bry∣bes and promesses, whiche is also openly agaynst the lawe Caroline. After this, the laste of Decembre as well the Princes as cities before named, by cōmon assent wryte their letters to the Emperour, wherin they recite the treatie of religion at Auspurge, how long they sued for peace, what aunswer he made, & also what maner of decree was there made afterwarde. And al be it he him selfe did mitigate the wordes of the Electour of Brandēburge, affirming that he had made a compact with the rest of the Princes for his owne defence only, and not to of∣fende others. Yet if that authoritie be committed to the chambre im∣periall, as the decree purporteth, to whome can it be doubtful, but that the same thinge apperteyneth both to force and violēce? but seyng that both they and their aūcesters haue shewed many testimonies of great good wyll to him and his progenitours, they beseche him in as muche as he hath mitigated the saying of the Electour of Brandenburge, he woulde also qualifie in deede and take away the terrour of confisca∣tion, to the intent they may be assured, that vntyll the ende of a God∣lye and free counsell, they shall nede to feare no violence. The causes which the Emperour alledged to create a king of Romains at the first cōmunication wt the princes in Collō, were these: First because that he The causes of creating a kyng of Ro∣maines. had ye rule of sondry realmes & nations, & could not be always in Ger∣many: agayne for yt the state of christendom was troublesome, namely in Germany, by reason of the dissention in Religion, and for the vio∣lent
power of the Turkes, for the late sedition and rurall warre, and for disobedience within the Empyre: Wherfore he thought it very ne∣cessary, and for the profit of the common wealth, that there should be a kyng of Romaynes chosen vnder hym, as it were an other head of the Empyre in his absence, which should be wyttie, cyrcumspect, indu∣strious, of great power, that loued peace and concorde, and were skil∣full in matters of the Empyre, and in euery poynte suche a one, as he myght repose his whole truste and confidēce in. And he knoweth none more mete for that charge, than his brother Ferdinando, king of Bo∣heme and of Hongary: For his realmes and dominions, are a defence vnto Germany against the Turkyshe oultrage. The Princes elec∣tours, after delyberation had intreate the Emperour, that he woulde not forsake Germany, but to sette and plante himselfe there: but where he persisteth stiffe in his opinion, conferrynge their counsels together. The fyft daye of Ianuary, they proclayme Ferdinando kynge of Ro∣maynes. The Duke of Saxon as muche as laye in hym, by his sonne protested that this election was faultie, and shewed the causes why, and that he coulde not allowe it. Longe before they departed from Auspurge. The brute was, that Ferdinando should obtayne that dig∣nitie. Afterwardes they went all from Collon to Aquon: where Ferdinādo was crowned kyng, the .xvj. day of Ianuary, and Ferdinando proclaimed kyng of Ro∣maines. streightwayes were letters dispatched into al partes of Germany to signifie the same. Cesar also commaun∣deth by his letters patentes, that all men shall acknowledge him for kyng of Romaines, and therof sent his seueral letters to the Protestantes. This done, from Aquon the Empe∣rour wēt to Brussel in Brabant.
✚ The eyght Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the eyght Booke. THe Protestauntes from Smalcalde, sent letters to the kinges of Fraunce & of Englande, agaynst sondry false reportes, and sollicite the kyng of Denmarcke, and the cities by the sea coaste, to entre into their league. Into this league the Swycers are not admitted. The kyng of Fraunce (who is descended of the Almaines) aunswereth their letters, so doeth also the kynge of Englande. About the strife of the creation of kyng Ferdinando. An assemble was holden at Franckforth, where was also debated the controuersic betwixt the byshop of Bam∣berge, and George Marques of Brandenburge. The Emperour appointeth a metyng at Spyre. whether the Duke of Saxon being moued to come, excuseth hym selfe. Conditions are put in wry∣ting, whiche graunted, the Protestauntes offer them selues to be there. The fyue Cantons geue battell to them of ʒ uricke, wherein ʒ wynglius is slayne, Shortly after dieth Ecolampadius. A peace is graunted to the Protestauntes vntyll a counsell. Christierne kyng of Denmarke, is com∣mitted to pryson. The Turke inuadeth Austryche, but he is thence repulsed. The Pope by his Ambassadour, sent to Duke Iohn Fredericke (who had lately succedeth his father) the conditions of the counsell. The Duke and his associates, after deliberation, make hym  full aunswere by wryting. IN the first assembly at Smalcalde, this emōges other thynges was agreed vppon: that for as muche as their aduersaries did aggrauate the cause and profession of the Gospell with manye sclaunders, and broughte it euerye where in to great hatred, they shoulde wryte pryncipally to the kynges of Fraunce and of Englande, that they would not credite, nor be perswaded herin. The protest. letters to the kynges of Fraunce & of Englande. Wherfore the .xvj. daye of February, the Prote∣stauntes wryte their seuerall letters to them both, of one effecte. How they knowe vndoubtedly of the olde complaint that hath bene of long tyme, concernyng the vice and faultes of the clergie, whiche many no∣table men, and of late memory, in Fraunce Iohn Gerson, and in Eng∣lande Gerson. Collet. Iohn Colet, haue sore noted & reprehended: the same thing hath happened of late yeares in Germany. For where as certen freers wēt about with indulgences & pardōs, whiche they so highly cōmended to the great contumelie of Christe, & no lesse daunger of mens saluation, yt they got a shameful & an vnreasonable gayne therby. And being gētly admonyshed by certen good & wel learned men, that thei should not so do, did not only abstayne from suche vsage, but also cruelly condemp∣ned them for Heretykes, whiche gaue them good counsell, in so muche that they were constrayned to stande in the defence of the trewthe:
vpon whyche occasion many other thynges were espyed and reprehē∣ded, but the aduersaries whiche through their impudent marchādise, gaue occasion of offence, woulde neuer be in quiet, tyll this doctryne whiche reuealyng their crafty iuglyng, was without dewe examina∣tion, condempned for wycked. And to the intent they might wholy op∣presse it, haue brought it into great hatred with the Emperour and o∣ther kynges. Neuerthesse the truthe breakyng out lyke the sonne bea∣mes discouered the faultes moste manifestly, whiche of euyl customes, and preposterous iudgementes, were crepte in to the churche, in so muche they could not be denied by the byshop of Rome hym selfe, whē they had bene exhibyted before to the Emperour by the states of the Empyre, in the assemblie at Wormes. and after had bene treated of in all assemblies of the Empyre, all men iudging for certentie, that for re∣formation therof there were no waye better than a free and a lawfull counsell, wherewith the Emperour was also content. But at his com∣myng out of Spayne into Germany through Italy, he was addicted wholy at Auspurge, to quiet the matter without a counsel. And so thei discourse the whole treaty at Auspurge, as hath bene before rehersed, and howe for the sore decree there made, they were compelled to ap∣peale to a free and Godly coūsell, lest they should both haue hurt theyr conscience, and offended God moste greuously. Afterwardes thei con∣fute Their appe∣lation. the false opinions and sclaunders, that theyr aduersaries ascribe vnto them, to bryng them into hatred with all men, and chieslye that the doctrine whiche they do professe, is against the authoritie of Ma∣gistrates and dignities of lawes: but their confession exhibited at Au∣spurge, doth fully aunswere this matter, wheren is the office and state of a Magistrate, by theyr doctrine declared to be of Gods ordinaūce, and agayne the people taught to owe all due obedience to the Magi∣strate, for Gods cōmaundement and for cōscience sake: so that it may be truly sayde, that the learned men of this tyme and doctrine, haue more hyghly commēded the dignitie of lawes and Magistrates, than any former age hath done. for els seing they are also appointed of God to haue rule and gouernment of others. What madnes were it for thē, to permitte that doctrine, whiche should geue licencious lybertie, take awaye obedience, and styre vp the people against them? Wherfore af∣ter this and dyuers other thynges they saye, howe that for so much as these sclaunders are reported by them, and howe it forceth very much for the cōmon wealth of christendome, that they beyng kynges of such wysdome and authoritie, should be ryghtly infourmed in the matter: therfore haue they thought good in their owne purgatiō to wryte this much vnto them, earnestly desyring them to geue no credit vnto sclaū∣ders, nor to conceaue any sinistre opinion of them, but to keepe theyr iudgement in suspence, tyll they may come to the place, where to make
theyr purgation openly, whiche thing they chiefly desyre: they beseche them also to exhorte the Emperour, that for the weyghty importaunce of the matter, and the profit of the whole churche, he would call a god∣ly and a free counsell in Germany so shortly as myght be: And that he woulde worke no extremitie against them, vntyll suche tyme as the cause may be lawfully decided & determyned. For hitherto haue they alwayes done their duty to the common wealth of the Empyre, and nowe that they professe this doctrine, they are brought in daunger, of no selfe wyll nor obstinacie, but for Gods worde and glory: whereby they haue the better hope also, that they wyll graunte to theyr reque∣stes herein. For it were hyghe prayse worthy, if they coulde throughe theyr aucthoritie and mediation bryng to passe, that these controuer∣sies be not decided by force of armes, but that an vpryght iudgement be had, that abuses maye be remoued, the Churches reconciled, and no force or violence done vnto mens consciences. Finally if they maye vnderstande by their letters of theyr good wylles towardes them, it shall be to theyr great cōforte. In February, the Duke of Saxon sum∣moneth all his fellowes to be at Smalcade the .xxix. of Marche to cō∣sulte howe to resiste the force of their ennemies, if any thynge be attēp∣ted againste them: those were the Prynces and cities before mentio∣ned. But the Duke being discrased, sent thether his sonne Iohn Fre∣derick. At the former meting it was agreed to sollicite Fredericke the kyng of Deumarke, and the cities by the sea coaste of Saxonie, tou∣chynge their league. And nowe that they met agayne, rehersall was made what had bene done in the meane tyme, and what aunswere e∣uery one made. And the kyng in dede saide howe he fauoured the doc∣trine of the Gospel, but in his realme were so many bishoppes of great The bishops of Dēmarke resute the Gospell. power and aucthoritie by reason of their rychesse, clientes, and noble kyndred, that he coulde not enter into this league as kyng, but as con∣cernyng his other countreis, lieng within the Empyre, he was contēt, Henry the Duke of Megelburge, excused the matter, for that his de∣putes had subscribed to the decree of Auspurge, notwithstandinge he would be no ennemy to them. Berninus Prince of Pomerane, was not against it, but that his elder brother had as yet in maner yt whole gouernment. They of Lubecke refused not, but for as muche as they had bene at great charges in the warres, they desyred that the same myght ve consydered. And if it fortuned that Christerne kyng of Dē∣marke, whome thei had holpe to dryue out of his realme, should warre against them, they desyred to knowe, what ayde they should looke for agayne at theyr handes. The citie of Lunenbourge sayde, that loke as theyr Duke Ernest would doe, so woulde they also. Afterwarde they consulted about geuyng theyr voices, for sodayne ayde, leuieng of mo∣ney for continuall ayde, chousyng of Captaines, and receiuing of those
that would be of the same league. After that they appointed theyr at∣tourneis and aduocates, to aunswere for them in the lawe, if the Em∣perour or any other, should attempte sute against them. And to this parte of defence, adioyned them selues, George Marques of Brandē∣burge, Norinberge, Campedowne, Heilprune, but the league they re∣fused. It was decreed moreouer that open crymes should be punished by eche man in his dominion. Before the league was made, they toke the aduyse and counsell, not only of lawyers, but also of the diuines. And Luther taught alwayes, that they myght not resiste the Magi∣strate, and set forth a boke of the same matter. But where as the law∣yers in this consultation dyd affyrme, howe the lawes did permitte in The lawes permitte yt the inferiour Magistrate maye in som cases resist yt superiour. some cases to resiste, and howe it was nowe come to the same point, that the lawes made mencion of: Luther confessed playnlye, that he knewe not this to be lawfull before, but for because the Gospell doeth not impugne nor abolyshe the polityke lawes, as he hathe alwayes taught. And agayne, for as muche as in this doubtful and daūgerous tyme, many thynges may happen, so as not only the lawe it selfe, but also the force of conscience, and necessitie may dryue vs to take wea∣pons, he sayeth, howe they make a league in their owne defence, whe∣ther the Emperour hym selfe or any in his name, shoulde moue warre against them. In a booke also set forth he declareth firste howe obsti∣nate the Romishe syde was in the conuocation at Auspurge, secondly, he warneth all men in generall, that they obeye not the Magistrate, commaunding them to take in hande any suche warre. And he reci∣teth manye and moste detestable errours of the Romyshe doctryne, whiche he sayth, are mainteined of them that warre in those campes. Wherein he sayeth is great wickednes: he sheweth also howe greatly mens myndes are lyghtened, by the knowledge of the Gospell, war∣nyng men to tempre them selues from entryng in to wycked warres. They appoyted an other metynge at Frankefurte, the fourth daye of Iune, wherein they should determyne, whether they of Zurick, Ber∣nes, or Basyll, shoulde be receyued into the league without exception of any opinion or doctrine, and the cities make a determinate answer, touchyng the preparation for their defence. And also an aunswer was framed in the meane tyme by the Duke of Saxon to the Emperours letters, wylling them to take Ferdinādo for kyng of Romanes, which thynge they wil not graunte to. But whylest they were yet at Smal∣calde, they receyued letters from the Emperoure, pourportinge howe Newes of yt Turkes cō∣myng. the great Turke was comyng with an exceading great Armie, to in∣uade Germany: wherfore he charged them without exception to pre∣pare their ayde to resiste: They make aunswere, howe they wyll, after thensample of their progenitours, refuse no charge or dutie, that they owe to the cōmon wealth. But he knoweth what threatning wordes
the Marques of Brandenburge spake vnto them at Auspurge in his name, and the rest of the Prynces, and what thynges were there de∣creed against them, howe they haue both there, and synce sewed vnto hym for peace, and can get no graunte nor answere. Wherfore to sende their ayde agaynst the Turke, whan they can obtayne no peace at ho∣me, but are dryuen to loke dayly for outlawyng and violence, were to vnarme them selues and to cut their owne senewes. Howe be it if he wyll graunte them peace and quietnes, frō the lawe and ciuile warre for Religion, vntyll the tyme of the counsell: they wyll doe agayne for theyr partes, not only in the Turkyshe warre, but also in all other af∣fayres that concerne the common wealth, that thynge whiche shall be their dutie, requesting him to signifie vnto them, by the same Am∣bassadours, what his mynde and pourpose is herein. In the moneth of Marche, Rychard Archebyshop of Treers, departed out of this lyfe, The Arche∣byshop of Treers de∣parteth. not without the suspicion of poyson: and one of his house being racked for the same, through his constance and stoutenes, escaped the daaun∣ger. This byshop was of great authorite emonges the Electours, for his experience, and frankenes in speakyng. Whan they of Ulmes had asked leaue of the Senate of Strausborough, Bucer went thether & Bucer set or¦der in yt chur¦ches at Ui∣mes, set an ordre in the churches, prescrybing them a forme of Religion, by the aduyse and counsell of Oecolampadius, and Ambrose Blanrer. About this tyme, the Lady Mary the Emperours syster, which was maried to Lewys kyng of Hongary, came into Flaunders, whom the Emperour made Regent of all the base countreis, in the place of hys The quene of Hungary made regēt of Flaūders aunte Margaret lately departed. Clement the seuenth, was at sute with alphonse Duke of Farrare, for the cities of Rhegio, & Mutina: at the length makyng a compromisse, they put it to the Emperours arbi∣trement, who being at the same tyme in Brabant, gaue sentence with the Duke of Farrare. The Frenche kyng aunswereth to the letters of the Princes and cities of Protestauntes the .xxi. of Aprill. How he de∣syreth The auns∣were of the Frēch kyng to the prote∣stauntes. nothing more than the concorde of all Europe, and is right glad that they do also bende the same waye, and couet to haue a counsel: for the same appeareth vnto hym to be not only profitable, but also ryght necessary: And so ofte as he chaunceth into talke of refourming the cō∣mon wealth: He iudgeth alwayes thatthere can be no surer founda∣tion, than if that holy spyrit (vtterer of all truthe) myght in this case be president. Whereunto if others would geue lyke consent, and a place myght be assigned for the counsell, voyde of all daunger and suspicion, where as euery man myght speake his minde frely, & nothyng be chief geuen to affections, than in dede there were good hope that all should be well. And where as they are carefull, lest he should beare them the lesse good wyll by reasons of the sclaunders of their aduersaries, they nede not to be afrayde: for he is not wont to credit thynges lightlye,
that are reported of his ennemies: but seing there is so great & so aun∣cient frendshyp betwene the kynges of Fraunce, and Prynces of the Empyre, what vngentylnes were this of his allies and frendes, to cō∣ceaue The amitie of Fraunce and Germa. a sinistrall opinion, especiall and they not harde? for how muche he setteth by this olde amitie, hereby it is well perceyued, that what tyme he hath warre with the Emperour, yet haue the Germaynes & the citezens of the Empyre free accesse into Fraunce, and libertie to passe from thence againe, whan their marchaundise & busines is done, as muche at their owne pleasure as if they were at home, in so muche as Fraunce may very well be called the mansion place of the prynces and citezens of Germany. And al be it these thynges be cōmonly kno∣wen, yet are they not so great, but that when occasiō shall serue, he wyl do muche more for them, in case as they do professe, they shall not refuse the decree of a free and Godly counsell, for to haue the controuersie de∣cided by waye of disputation, rather then by yt sworde, lyke as theyr re∣queste is, so semeth it vnto him also to be both more honeste and profi∣table for the common wealth: whiche shall suffer great misfortune in case the matter come to handstripes. Where he speaketh of the familia∣ritie and alliaunce betwyxt Fraunce and Germanye, thus it is. The A story of yt kyng of fra∣unce. Germanes of Franconie bordering vpon Swaues, in times past ma∣kyng inuasiō into Gawles subdued the people about Treers, Gelder∣lande, Cleauelande, and so down to Terwen and Tourney, and van∣quyshed Amiens, Beanuois and the Soissons: setlinge them selues at the last in that parte of Gawles, which is yet called Fraunce vnto this day, the chief citie wherof is Paris. And where as many of their kyn∣ges there reigned and enlarged their dominiō, at the last the gouerne∣mēt cam vnto Pipine, & also to his sonne charles, which was after for his worthy actes called Charlemaigne. All people saluted hym with Charles the great. the tytle of the Emperour Auguste, he possessed Germany, Italy, and Fraunce. Afterwarde his sonne Lewis, and his ofspryng were kinges of Fraunce. Wherunto kyng Fraunces doth ascribe his originall, and sayeth howe he is lineally descended of the stocke of Frankons. The same perswasions vsed he also, what tyme after the death of the Em∣perour Maximilian, he did seke the dignitie of the Empyre. For kno∣wyng that by an aūcient lawe, no straūger myght attayne the crown imperiall, he went about also to proue hym selfe a Germayne. But in dede the laste kynge of Fraunce of the heyremales of Charlemaigne, was Lewys the fifte, who died without isshewe, in the yeare of grace nyne hōdreth foure score and eyght: whan that possession of that king∣dome Lewys the fyfte. had remained in the same familie two hondreth and eight and thyrty yeares. After his death the succession had descended by ryght to Charles Duke of Lorayne, vncle to kyng Lewys: But Hughe Capet, Hugh Capet Erle of Paris, as they reporte, whose mother fetched her petygrewe
from great Charles, discomfiting and takynge the Duke of Lorayne prysoner, vsurped the kyngdom, and left it to his sonne Robert, whose heyres males continued afterwardes vntill kyng Fraunces. Some there be that saye howe that this Hughe Capet was of lowe and base hyrth, but the moste parte of the wryters of Frenche Cronicles recite his originall, as I haue sayde heretofore. Henry the eight, kyng of En∣gland, writeth to them agayne the thyrde day of Maye. That he hath The answer of the kynge of England red their letters to his great cōtentation, for as muche as they be incli∣ned and bent, that true religion remayning styll saufe, and peace con∣serued the faultes and abuses of the churche and clergie maye be re∣fourmed, and all suche thynges redressed, as haue bene eyther by the wyckednes or ignoraunce of men, corrupted and depraued. Moreo∣uer howe he toke great displeasure to reade ouer the whole discourse of their procead inges: That a reporte in dede went of them, that was not very good, as though they should maynteine certen franticke per∣sonnes, whiche sought to disturbé and tourmoyle all thynges vpsyde downe. But he gaue therunto no credite, first for because that Christiā charitie doth so requyre, secondly; knowyng for certentie, that suche kynde of sclaunder can take no place in mē of suche dignitie, Nobilitie and wysdome. And all be it he would neuer haue beleued anye suche reporte, before he had certenly tried and knowen it to be true: Yet for as muche as they haue thus pourged them selues, he is glad for thys cause, that he was not disceaued in his opinion and iudgement. And where as they desyre a refourmation, in that they doe agree with his mynde, and the opinion of all other good men. For the state of worldly thynges is after suche a sorte, that lyke as mans body, so also in the cō∣mune wealth and publique administration, there is nede of continual remedies: wherfore they deserue great prayse, that can lay to such me∣dicines The commō¦wealth hath nede of ma∣ny remedies as wyll so heale and cure the disease, that they doe not brynge to an outrage the matter. And doubteth not but that their endeuoure tendeth to the same ende: Notwithstanding howe they had nede to take diligent care of that sorte of men who seke alterations, woulde haue all men a lyke, and brynge the Magistrate in contempt. For he hath had certen of that secte within his Realme, whiche came thether out of Germany. And for because in their letters they mētioned of the obedience vnto Magistrates, therfore he thought good to admonishe them at fewe wordes, that they geue no man ouermuche lybertie: For if they beware of this, and seke a reformation, they shall doubtles doe hygh seruice vnto the common wealth. Howe he also desyreth chiefly a generall counsell, besechyng God to styre vp the hartes of Prynces vnto this desyre: And hath so good an hope of them in all thynges, that there is nothyng, that he wyll not ve glad to doe for their sakes: And wyll be a peticioner for them to the Emperour, that meanes of peace
and concorde may be founde, and wyll worke so herein, as they them selues shall from tyme to tyme, thinke best for theyr purpose. When the daye came of their assemblie at Franckefourth, the Ambassadours of the Cities, as it was agreed vppon, declare what they thought tou∣chyng the creation of the kyng of Romanes. And after long consulta∣tion, they founde that it was not expedient for the title & style of king The opinsō of the cities of the kynge of Romains Ferdinando, to enter in to any sute or trouble. For so long as the Em∣perour lyueth or is within the lymites of the Empyre, the whole po∣wer is his: And in his absence it commeth in dede to Ferdinando, but as to the depute or lieutenaunt of the Emperour: They haue at sondry tymes promysed to do what so euer laye in their power. And nowe in case they should resiste the creation of the kynge, many woulde iudge that promesse to be vayne, and therfore would beare thē the lesse good wyll, and woulde also worke against them, whiche els woulde haue done nothyng at al against the cause of Religion. It is also to be feared lest suche as would haue ioyned them selues vnto this league, wyll be affcayde nowe of this, and withdrawe them selues. For yt which cause they may not be against the election of kyng Ferdinando, but holde it indifferent as it is: But if Ferdinando shall commaūde any thyng cō∣trary to Gods worde, they wyll not obeye it, or if he attēpte any force, then wyll they worke after the prescripte of the league, and defend to the vttermoste of their power. But the Prynces wrote vnto the Em∣perour and Ferdinando, that they could not allowe that thing which was done against the custome and lybertie of the Empyre, nor attry∣bute vnto hym the tytle of kyng of Romaynes. The Duke of Saxon in his letters to the Emperour, added this moreouer, that if the matter The Duke of Saxons doubte of yt Swycers. might be lawfully vsed, he would not be vnlyke his auncestours. As concernyng the Swycers whome the citie would gladly haue recey∣ued into their league, the Duke of Saxon answered by his Ambassa∣dours, that for as muche as they were of a contrary opinion, touchyng the Lordes supper, he myght haue no fellowshyp with them: Howe muche they were to be estemed for their strengthe and power, he was not ignoraunt, but he myght haue no respect vnto that, lest it shoulde come to an euyll ende, as the Scripture witnesseth to haue chaunced vnto those, whiche for their defence, haue not cared what ayde they haue sought. Durynge this assemblie, letters were brought from the Duke and Lantgraue, to the Ambassadours of the other Princes and cities, pourportyng howe the Archebishop of Mentz and Lewys the The Pals∣graue and yt archbyshop of Mentz in∣tercessonrs. Palsgraue, had leaue of the Emperour to treate of a peace, and had re¦quested them by letters to graunte also to the same: For then woulde they appoynte a tyme to mete. After deliberation had, the Ambassa∣dours aunswere, that they be contended. Wherfore when the Duke & the Lantgraue had made reporte agayne, howe they misliked not the
so that the processe in the lawe myght cease in meane tyme: They ha∣uing first obteyned this of the Emperour, appointed the daye, the last sauing one of the moneth of Auguste. Wigande byshop of Bamberge, A controuer¦sy of the by∣shop of Bā∣berge with the Marques of Branden¦burg. had certen yeares before complayned to his fellowes of the Sweui∣call league, of George Marques of Brandenburge, for certen wrōges and iniuries whiche he had done vnto hym, as hynderynge his eccle∣siasticall iurisdiction and lyuing, and compellinge the priestes to thys false kynde of doctrine, and if they refused, erpulsynge them and im∣ployinge the churche goodes to prophane vses. And for as muche as this was contrary to equitie and iustice, and against the decrees both of the bishop of Rome and the Emperour, he requyreth that according to the league, they would ayde and assiste hym herein. Wherfore this yeare in the moneth of Iulye, a daye was appoynted at Norlinge for the hearynge of this matter, whether came at the request of the Mar∣ques, the Ambassadours of the Protestantes: And of the byshops side, were the byshops of Auspurge, Wircinburg, and Aester, as his coad∣iutours and counsellours. When the plantife had propounded & char∣ged him with iniuries, requiring the iudges to procede, and gyue sen∣tence after the prescripte of the league. The defendaunt in thinges cō∣cerning religion, and iurisdiction ecclesiasticall, put in an appellation, The Appel∣lation of the Marques. wherein he appealed from their decrees and iudgement to a generall counsell. The iudges sayde howe they would not admitte theyr sen∣tence geuen. This cause did not concerne the Marques George only, but also his nephewe Albert, whiche was his worde. In the meane tyme the Emperour calleth a counsell imperiall at Spyres, at the I∣des of Septembre, for the appeasyng of the controuersie in Religion: But the eleuenth kalendes of Septembre, came vnto the Duke of Saxon, the Erles of Nassowe and Nuenar, men of great authoritie, nobilitie and vertue: and by the Emperours priuitie, moue a reconci∣liation The Erles of Nassowe & Neuenar. and to treate with hym of fyue thynges, the Lordes Supper, the cerimonies of the churche, the churche goodes, the ayde nedeful a∣gainst the Turke, & the Election of king Ferdinādo. And where it ap∣pered by their wordes how the Emperour was perswaded that he al∣lowed the doctrine of Zwinglius, & the opinion of the Anabaptistes, he aunswereth that what kynde of doctrine his is, and what his mi∣nisters doe preache and teache, is ryght well knowen by his confessiō exhibited at Auspurg, in the which he pourposeth through Gods grace to remayne, duryng his lyfe, and that he had neuer to do with Anaba∣ptistes, nor greatly with the Zwinglians. And desired thē to pourge him herein to the Emperour: They sayd, how they knew it before this to be so, neuerthelesse they woulde declare it so to the Emperour, who no doubt, would be glad and ioyfull to heare it: For the reste of theyr
demaundes they were agreed, they should be differred vntyl the next assemblie of the Empyre, whether they desyre hym eyther to come him selfe or to sende his sonne: He sayeth howe he woulde be glad to gra∣tifie the Emperour in all thynges, but he is now aged and vnhable to trauayle, and besydes that there be certen weyghtie causes, for the whiche he can neyther come hym selfe nor sende his sonne, vnlesse the Emperour wyll graunte a saufe conduicte for hym and his trayne: Upon what conditions the Duks of Saxon wyll come to the assemble. Agayne where so euer he shall become, he can not want the preaching of Gods worde, nor haue prescribed hym a certen kinde of meate: fur¦thermore if the disputation shall be touchyng Religion, it is requysite that he bryng with hym Luther and others, whiche muste also haue saufecouduicte: Fynally howe he hathe oftentymes made suite to the Emperour, to be inuested in his owne Dukedome, after the custome of the Empyre, and for other thynges whiche he coulde neuer obtayn, all be it he made many fayre promyses. And nowe in this laste assemblie at Auspurge, Fridericke Pals∣graue, The inter∣cessours and Protestant. aunswered him so in his name, as it did easely appeare that the Emperour is sore offended with hym: vpon whiche consyderations he can not come, vnlesse he maye through their mediation, obtayne the Emperours saufe conduicte in dewe season: And than he wyll come without fayle. About the later ende of Auguste, the Ambassadours of the Archebyshop of Mentz and the Palsgraue, mette with the Am∣bassadours of the Protestauntes at Smalcalde, speakynge muche of the loue and zeale that theyr Princes bare to theyr countrey, who se∣ynge that they coulde not agree at Auspurge, and consyderynge the great daunger that myght ensue of that dissention, would neuer reste tyll the Emperour had graunted them leaue to treate of peace. Wher¦fore they thought it good to call agayne in question suche thynges as coulde not be agreed vpon at Auspurge, and to begynne where they lefte there. The others saye agayne, howe the Protestauntes knewe not what thynges should be propounded, and therfore gaue them no certen commission to determyne any thyng, but wylled them to sende home in wrytinge sealed, that whiche shoulde be propounded, and so they must do, and none otherwyse. And whan after much altercation in wordes, they could not otherwyse cōclude, at the last it was agreed that they should mete at Spyres at a daye, whiche the intercessours should assigne, after that the pleasure of the Duke and the Lantgraue herein were knowen, who ought in dede so shortly as myght be, in the name of them selues and their fellowes to signifie their mynde therin. Letters of yt Duke & the Lantgraue to the inter∣cessours. This was decreed the seconde daye of Septembre. And in the begin∣nyng of Octobre, the Duke and the Lantgraue, wrote to the Archby∣shop & to the Palsgraue, & repetinge the treaties of the Ambassadours before sayde, they declare howe there coulde be no good done therein
without diuines: And howe they continewe iin the same Religion styll, whiche they professed at Auspurge. And where as in all assem∣blies both when the Emperour was absent, and nowe also of late be∣ing present, a counsell was promysed, whiche shoulde forthwith be called and commenced, they trusted that the Emperour would shortly procure one in Germany: wherein they and their fellowes will open their doctrine more at large: In the meane tyme, they beseche them to be meanes to the Emperour, that there be no extremitie wrought within the Empyre, but that suche as nowe do or hereafter shall pro∣fesse the Gospell, may lyue in quiet vntyll suche tyme as the decree & authoritie of a lawfull counsell may determine the matter. And if they shall thynke good to treate howe to conclude the peace, and appointe a daye for it, they wyll sende theyr Ambassadours thither. And if in theyr doctrine exhibited at Auspurg, any man shall thynke to fynde an errour, and wyll shewe it, or if he cannot proue it, to stande to the te∣stimony of Scripture, that would they and all their fellowes be glad of: And if it shall please the Emperour to assigne a daye for it at Spi∣res, graunting a saufe conduicte for them, their fellowes, and for Lu∣ther, whome they intende to bryng with them, amonges other mini∣sters of their churche, and wyll permitte them to haue free and open preachinges of Gods worde, and the vse of the Lordes Supper, ac∣cording vnto Christes institution, prescribyng no difference or choyce of meates: than wyll they either come themselues, or els sende theyr deputes with large commission, and make declaration of their doc∣tryne vnto all men. And if at the same metyng, theyr doctryne can not by the Scriptures be confuted, than truste they that the Emperoure wyll no further moleste them, but that they may styll perseuer in the same Religion. And for as muche as they haue appealed to a lawfull general counsell, and as yet nothyng is founde in theyr doctrine, that is agaynst Gods worde where also by the order of the lawe and equi∣tie, duryng the appellation no extremitie ought to be shewed vnto the partie that appealleto; their trust is; that the Emperour wyll the ra∣ther at theyr requestes, suffor Germany to haue peace and quietnes. I shewed you before of an assemblye, that should haue bene in Septem∣bre at Spyres: But the Emperour being aduertised by sondry letters and messengers of the Turkyshe preparation, prorogeth the same to the moneth of Ianuary followynge, appoyntynge the place at Re∣genspurge, that he myghte be so muche the nearer Austriche, where he perceyued the warre, woulde be. I shewed you before in the syrt booke, howe the warre whiche they of Zurycke and Bernes, would Warres in Swycerlāce haue made vppon the fyue townes, was pacifyed by the intercession of other Cities: But this yeare the Sore brake out agayne, and those two Cities, steppynge all streightes and passages, woulde permitte
no victuall to be brought vnto them. This was when the dayes were at the longest. And where as great trouble was lyke to ensue therof, Condicions or peace. the Frenche kyng and certen other cyties of the Suysses, laboured to take vp the matter, and drewe certen conditions of peace, but all was in vaine. Than did they of Zuricke and Bernes, declare by wryting, with what great wronges and iniuries they were cōstreyned to stop their victualles: And now for as muche as they refuse the cōdicions of peace, whiche the intercessours haue deuised and propounded, they de∣clare their malicious hartes against them, and howe they haue brokē the fourmer conuenauntes made betwene them, wherfore it is lawe∣full for them to cut o theyr victualles: And if any hurte come therof, it ought to be ascribed vnto them, whiche seeke nothyng elles but dissen∣tion, this was the nynth daye of Septembre. And what tyme these fyue townes were in great want and penury; the nynth of Octobre, they armed them selues secretly and marched forwarde: And before any man was ware of them, come vnto the borders of Zurick, where as laye a garrison of a thousand men or more. Which sent diuerse mes∣sengers into the citie to warne their men to come to them with spede, but their ennemies approched so faste, that they coulde hardely come to their reskewe. For when they were come to the toppe of the Hylle, whereby they must nedes passe; they sawe theyr men in great daūger, in the next valley. Than exhorting & incouraginge one an other, they ranne downe the hyll, who myght go foremoste, but the nature of the hylle was suche, as there coulde but one go downe at ones, whiche was the cause, that where as they coulde not marche in ordre of bat∣tell, they were of a greater multitude vanquyshed and put to flyghte. This was the eleuent daye of Octobre. Amonges the nombre of them Thei of Za¦rick disconfi∣ted. that were slayne, was Zwynglius. For it is the maner of Zuricke, that when they go forth in warfaye, the chief minister of theyr churche goeth with them. Zwynglius also of hym selfe beynge a man of a stoute and bolde courage, consyderyng that if he shoulde rary at home, The death of Zwyng. and they shoulde go by the worse, what displeasare he should susteyne, as one that in his Sermons woulde encourage others, and hym selfe faynte, whan any daunger was, would nedes take such te as other did. They shewed great crueltie vpon his dead corps, and their hatred towardes him was so muche, that theyr malice was not satisfied with A beastlye cruelite. his death. He was fourty and foure yeares olde, foure yeares yonger than Luther. At the same moneth of August before, was seen a blasyng Starre, & at the same tyme died Lewys the Frenche kynges mother, syster vnto Charles Duke of Sauvy. The citie of Bernes, hearyng of this ouer∣throwe, comforted them of Zuricke, promysing to sende them ayde, & to come with their whole power to auenge them of their ennemies:
Whan they were all commen together, whiche was aboute the eight daye after the battell, and they of Bernes, whiche before desyred to take the matter in hande alone, were than nothyng hasty, the citie of Zuricke, whiche had ayde sent them from the Schaffusians, Mullu∣sians, and also from Sangall and Basill, of the whole numbre chose out certen enseignes, whiche settynge foorth in the nyghte, laye in the Hylle besydes Mencinge, pourposynge whan the Moue rose, to take the towne of Tugie thereby, vpon the sodayne. But theyr ennemies whiche had encamped them selues not farre from thence, knowynge of this by espeiall, went thether spedely, and set vpon them beynge a slepe, the .xxiiij. daye of October. And to put them in the greater feare, they made a wonderfull clamourous outcrye. Many were slayne on An other slaughter. both partes. And all be it the fyue Townes had the vpperhande, yet woulde they of Zuricke nothyng relent in their Religion. At the last through mediation, a peace was concluded, whereunto was added that they of Zuricke, Bernes, and Basill, should forsake the league whiche they had latelye made with the cytie of Strausborough and the Lantgraue: lykewyse shoulde the fyue townes breake of their lea∣gue with kyng Ferdinando. And hereof were obligations made and sealed in the later ende of Nouember. Oecolampadius departed out of this presente lyfe, as it was supposed, for the inwarde sorowe and The death of Oecolam∣padius. thought, he conceaued for the death of Swynglius, whome he loued intierly: he wanted but one yeare of fifty, there be of his workes writ∣ten vpon certen of his Prophetes, whiche of learned men are muche commended. At the .xxix. daye of December, the Ambassadours of the Protestauntes, mete agayne at Frankeforte to finishe vp the rest, con∣cernyng the preparation of their defence. In the which assemblie, the ci∣ties of Goslarie & Embecke, were receiued into their league, & a litle be fore that, they also of Eslyng. But George the Marques of Branden∣burgh, and the citie of Norinberg, Campedown and Hailbrune, were absent. For all be it they professe that same Religion, yet were they not of that league. The Emperour in the begynning of Ianuary, toke his iourney from Bruselles, to go to Regenspurge for the assemblie before mentioned. By the waye when he came to Mentz at the begynnynge The Assem∣ble of Regē¦spurge. of February, the Archebyshop there and the Palsgraue, intreate hym agayne for peace, whiche the Emperour grauntinge vnto, they aduer∣tyse the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, wyllynge them to doe the lyke: Wherfore by theyr letters sent to and fro, they appoynte to mete at Schwinfurte, a towne Imperiall by the Ryuer of Moene, at the begynning of Apryll. There dyd they begynne to treate of a peace, whiche shoulde continue vnto the generall counsell. The Prynces that were intercessours, were there present, and by ordre geuen by the Emperour, do propounde these conditions.
That besydes the writyng exhibited at Auspurge touching Religion, they should alter nothing, teache nothyng, nor publyshe any thing, but Conditions of a peace be¦twene the Emperour and Protest. remayne in those boundes, vntyll the tyme of the counsell: so as they haue nothyng to doe with the Zwynglianes and the Annabaptistes. Neither that through the occasion of Religion, they do allure vnto thē other Prynces subiectes, and permitte any of their Ministers to prea∣che out of their owne countrey: that they abstayne from wordes of re∣proche: that they disturbe not the iurisdiction, rytes, and ceremonies of the churche, that they geue their ayde agaynst the Turke, and obey the decrees of the Empyre, whiche concerne the common wealthe and politike gouernaunce, that they be obedient to the Emperour & kynge of Romaynes. And if they haue made any league againste the Empe∣rour, kyng or other states of the contrary Religion, to abolyshe the sa∣me: If they wyl thus do, they truste how the Emperour and the king, wyll leaue and forget all displeasure paste. The Duke had sent thether his sonne Iohn Fridericke, being him selfe sore sicke. There was also Fraunces Duke of Lunenburg, and Counte Anhalde, agayn the Am∣bassadours of other Prynces & cities, whereunto came also the Nor∣tusians and Halbestans of Swelande. After muche debatyng, the in∣tercessours aduertise by their letters, the Emperour of the whole mat¦ters, who was than at the assemblie of Ratisbonne, to knowe his fur∣ther pleasure in matters. Unto that demaunde, whiche was that the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, should obey the kyng of Romains. They wryte an aunswere to the Emperour, what lacke they fynde, & and what they woulde requyre hym to doe therein. and deliuered the same sealed to the intercessours the .xvij. daye of Apryll, the effect wher¦of was, that Ferdinando should not take vpon hym to be kyng of Ro∣maines, but in case the Emperour had nede of a coadiutour, that than by the aduyse and counsell of the Prynces Electours, he should so in∣terprete the lawe Caroline, makyng an acte therof for euer, ye it myght be done lawefully after this sorte. That as longe as the Emperour ly∣ueth, Conditions of creatinge a kynge of Romaynes. there should neuer hereafter be chosen a kynge of Romaines, vn∣lesse the seuen Princes Electours, and sixe other Prynces of the Em∣pyre ioyned with them, iudge it so mete to be done. And what tyme it shall appeare to be for the profite of the common wealth, that than the Archebyshop of Mentz shall appointe the rest of the Electours, & syxe other Prynces to mete in a place conuenient for a further consultation to be had therin: And whan they shall haue considered the whole mat∣ter diligently, that than the Prynces Electours only with the kyng of Boheme, shall haue authoritie to electe a kyng of Romaynes, who so long as the Emperour lyueth, shall gouerne the cōmon wealth in the Emperours name onlye, and otherwyse to take vppon hym none auc∣thoritie or gouernment. That the Princes and states of the Empyre,
be not bound to him by any fidelitie or othe, except it be after the Em∣perours death. And whan a newe kynge shall be created, that he be sworne after the order of the lawe Carolyne, and that it be not in the Electours power to alter ye same. He that shalbe proued to haue done contrary to that othe, or els be had in great suspicion therof and ma∣keth not his purgation, shalbe depriued of all ryght of Electourshyp for euer. Moreouer that there be not chosen three kynges successiuelye of one house of Prynces, that none be chosen kyng of Romaynes, ex∣cept he be of some house of the Princes of Germany. Suche thynges as are establyshed by the lawe Caroline, concernyng the kynges elec∣tion, neyther the Emperour nor kynge of Romaynes, maye chaunge. Whan it shal seme good to the electours to create a king of Romaines, that they shall not nede to signifie the same before to the Emperour: Neither that it shalbe lawfull for the Emperour in this case, to com∣maūde the Archebyshop of Mētz, to assemble the Princes electours: but what tyme there shall appeare iust cause, to electe a kynge of Ro∣maynes, duryng the lyfe of the Emperour, that the Archebyshop at a certen daye call his company to Franckfurth: And that it lie not in his authoritie to appointe the assemblye els where, vnlesse his collegues doe vpon weyghtie considerations permitte hym, that the Archeby∣shop of Mentz shall not demaunde the Crowne, Scepter, and other ornamentes of the Empire of them of Norinberge, but by the consent of his peres. Neyther that he diminishe anye parte of thre monethes, which after they be sommoned, is graūted to the Prynces to haue cō∣ference together, for it may be daungerous to the Empyre and cōmon wealth, if one or two comyng not in tyme should be absent. That whi∣lest the Electours consulte at Frankeforth, all others be shut out. If any of those matters be infrynged, that thē the Electours be not bonde eyther to repare thether, or there to remaine, and what soeuer is there done to be voyde and of none effect. That neyther the Emperour nor king of Romans in Italy, Fraūce, or other places do permitte harmes of the Princes Electours to be borne before hym, or their offices to be executed, but by the Electours them selues or their deputes. That the kyng of Romaynes do not solemnyse his laste coronation, vnlesse ey∣ther the electours or their deputes be present, that neyther the Empe∣rour nor kyng of Romaynes, be a let to the Ambassadours of foreine kynges and Princes, wherby they may not come to the counselles of the Empyre, there to propounde their matters: for that this appertey∣neth both to the lawe of nature, and is also a thyng full of humanitie & ciuile dutie. That neither the Emperour nor kyng of Romaynes, in cases of the Prynces of the Empyre, take vpon them any authoritie of determining, but suffer the same to be lawfully decided, in place where they ought to be. That suche thinges as shal apperteine to the honour,
welth, and preseruation of the Princes and of the Empyre, and suche as the Emperour hath promysed vpon his fidelitie to obserue, he doe maynteyne, and in case any thynge be otherwyse done to refourme it, and bynde the kynge of Romaynes by a lawe, to obserue the same. And if the Emperour woulde after this sorte expounde and confyrme the lawe of Charles the fourth, the Duke of Saxon woulde not faile to doe his dutie: when so euer the common wealth should requyre any suche consultation. But in case the intercessours coulde not obtayne these thynges of the Emperour, that they woulde not refuse any law∣full hearyng of the matter. Yet so that in the meane tyme king Ferdi∣nando, should neyther take vpon him nor vsurpe any gouernement of matters of the Empyre nor authoritie: namely ouer thē, & ouer Williā and Lewys, brethren Dukes of Bauier. And if this wyl not be graū∣ted them, that then the Emperour would heare thē openly in the coū∣sayle of the Princes and other states: where they wyll declare, vpon how weightie and iuste causes they disalowe this election. And for so muche as for the refusall of the same, they perceyue how they incurre, not only with the Emperour, but also with foreine kinges and natiōs in to the suspicion of rebellion, they desyre muche that the Emperoure would not take it displeasaūtly that they should make theyr purgatiō, as well within Germany, as also without the lymites of the Empyre, for this must they do of necessitie. Where amonges other thynges it is sayde, that the Electours should sweare after the ordre prescribed in the Caroline, thus it standeth. What tyme they be comen to Francke∣forth, when masse is done they go vp to the Aultar, and there lay their The othe of theelectoars handes vpon the holy boke (as they call it) and certen wordes beynge spoken, take a solempne othe, by the fayth that they owe to God and to the Empyre, that they wyll chose a newe and hyghe Magistrate, suche a one as they shall thynke moste worthy, mete, and necessary for that office, so farreforth as thei can coniecture by their wytte and iud∣gement, without any compacte, bribe, rewarde, or promyse. Where they accompte the Dukes of Bauier to be of their numbre, this is the consideration. They also misliked the election of kyng Ferdinando, & takynge their counsell herein, entred into league with the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, and the Frenche kynge, to defende the lyber∣tie of Germanie: And indede the kyng of Fraunce delyuered into cu∣custody of the two brethren, Dukes of Bauer, an hondreth thousande The Dukes of Bauer mi¦sliked the e∣lection of Ferdinādo. crownes, to be alwayes in a readines, if nede requyred. The Prynces that were intercessours make aunswere hereunto the .xx. day of April. Howe they treate of these matters for a concorde, neyther had they thoughte that they woulde haue propounded these thynges. For in that they haue chosen a kynge of Romaynes, the Emperour yet ly∣uyng, they haue moste weightie causes, whiche were at the same tyme
declared to Iohn Fredericke his fathers deputie there, and if nede re∣quyre, may be yet more playnely expounded, but synce this matter cō∣cerneth not them only, but the Emperour also and the kyng, and resi∣due of their fellowe Prynces, they wyll not make many wordes ther∣of, but leaue it alone, to the intent they may come more easelye to the reconciliation of the rest. Neuerthelesse if they be constrayned to make aunswere for their doinge, they wyll not refuse iudgement herein, and doubt not to approue their doynges in suche sorte, that nothinge can iustly be layde to their charge. But in case these thynges should be re∣ported to the Emperour, they feare muche that it should not only take no place, but also let and hynder the whole treatie of peace. Wherfore that both truce may be taken, and a reconcilement may be had, as wel for Religion as for the Election, and that neyther be separated from yt other, they ernestly beseche bothe the father and the sonne, Dukes of Saxon, that they would consyder the thyng, and forsake their opiniō. And in so doing they doubte not, but that the Emperour and the king woul put them in good assuraunce, that this election shoulde not be hurtfull to them nor to their heyres: and woulde shewe them besydes all the pleasure they coulde, as well in matters of Religion as other∣wyse. For that Religion shoulde haue peace graunted, and the matter of election remayne vndertermined, they feare muche that this coulde not be obtayned. Thus verely doe they frendly counsell them, and re∣quyre them to take it in that parte, and so vse thē selues, that they may perceyue their aduise is regarded, and their diligence well imployed. Hereunto aunswereth Duke Iohn Fridericke the fourth daye after: The auns∣wer of the Duke to the itercessours. that he loked for no suche aunswere of them. For where they sayed la∣tely amonges other thinges, that the kyng of Romaines was elected for the welth and dignitie of the Empyre, they oughte of necessitie to to aunswere to this poinct, for the satisfiynge as well of his father as his fellowes, who are perswaded that this electiō is not good nor pro∣fitable to the Empyre. And where as they susteyne the persones of in∣tercessours, he had thought certenly that they woulde neuer haue de∣fended the matter, but haue left the same doubtful and vndetermined: for such thinges as they haue spoken do not concerne them that be in∣tercessours, but ought to be referre dvnto that time whā these things shall come in comon consultation. In dede at Collon, what tyme the Emperour desyred to ioyne with hym his brother Ferdinando, in the fellowship of the Empyre, he adledged certen causes, why it ought so to be: But those semed not to be so great, as therfore the lawe Caro∣line, the ryght and libertie of the Empyre ought to be infringed. At what tyme, he and other of his fathers Ambassadours did aunswere them, why it ought not so to be done. Wherfore the thynge that was spoken in the last place, nowe they repete agayne also: that in case the
Emperour wyll not admitte theyr requestes, that then the matter de∣termined in lawfull iudgement, where the reasons of theyr refusall may be heard. And seyng they treate of equitie, he supposed they wold also in this case haue founde out some way and honest meane and pro∣fitable for the Empyre. But in as muche as it is not so done in this cō∣trouersie, he wyll no further moleste them herein. But vndoubtedlye his father and his fellowes wyll declare (yet to the iniury of no man) howe the lawe of libertie of the the Empyre, are by this meane infrin∣ged: he trusteth also, that for so much as these thynges concerne the ho∣nour and preseruation of the common wealth, the Emperour wyl not take them displeasauntly. In the reste of theyr demaundes, that same The craft of the Papistes first poinct, whiche is touching the Zwynglians, was ment, that the Prynces myght be sequestred from the moste parte of the cities: and in this treaty the intercessours did so expounde it, that if the Zwyn∣glians would acknowledge theyr errour and forsake it, they myght also be comprysed in this peace: if not, to be refused, & neyther to ayde A cancorde. them nor enter into league with them. But the last yeare at Smal∣calde, the Protestantes were accorded. And what time thei of Strau∣sborough, and certen cities of Sweuia, had more playnly expounded their opinion propounded at Auspurge, concerning the Lordes Sup∣per, their declaration was excepted of the Saxons. And therfore now with one mynde they aunswere all one and the same thynge to euery¦ry requeste, and at the length propounde these conditions of peace. That they which at Auspurge did exhibite the confession of theyr doc∣trine, and an Apologie of the same, and suche as hereafter shall recei∣ue the same doctrine, do consiste within these lymites, and renewe no∣thynge furthermore, vntyll the counsell, so often tymes promysed and poynted vpon: That they ioyne not with them, as concernyng theyr doctryne, whiche teache otherwyse of the Lordes Supper, & of Bap∣tisme, than is specified in their wryting exhibited at Auspurg: that thei neyther allure vnto them, nor maynteyne an other mans Subiecte, through the occasion of Religion. Howe be it if it shall be lawfull for any men, eyther by lawe or condition, to go whether they wyll, whan they shal haue first declared the same to their Lordes or Magistrates, they may flitte and remoue if they wyll, and be receiued. That they sende forth no preachers without their owne limites to preache, vn∣lesse that eyther the Magistrate of that place, desyre or permitte hym so to doe, whan any assembly shall happen to be there. For if he refuse, than it shalbe lawfull for them to doe it at home: And if they shalbe ey∣ther at the counselles of the Empyre, or sende the power agaynste the Turke, let them at suche tymes vse theyr owne preachers, and also the Lordes Supper, accordyng to Christes cōmaundement, let them ab∣steyne from the reproches: not withstanding let the Ministers of the
churche, according to their dutie, reprehende errours and vices with a modestie, and shewe them the thynge that is ryght. That such as be of their Religion, be not secluded from the chamber imperiall: that the ecclesiasticall iurisdiction remayne in place as it nowe is. And that it shall not be lawfull for byshoppes to moleste or brynge in trouble any man for professyng this doctrine. That sentences geuen concernynge Religion, iurisdiction, Ceremonies, churche goodes, whiche are not yet put in execution, be differed tyll a generall counsell. Let them vse the churche goodes, whiche remayne in those places, wherunto those gooodes do properly appertayne, neyther let any thyng be violentlye taken from any man, and that the yerely reuenewes be brought to the same places, as they haue bene of olde tyme accustomed, tyll the coun∣sell, shall otherwyse determine it: In al ciuile matter, let euery man do his office and dutie, let all men tende the common wealth, and shewe mutuall faith and beneuolence. When the matter was brought vnto this poynt and woulde come no nerer, the intercessours continue styll theyr purpose, and to the intent that all thynges myght be reported to the Emperour more spedely, they appointe an other metynge at No∣rynberge, the thyrde daye of Iune. And there at the laste, albeit the ful The Empe∣rour of neces¦sitie graun∣teth peace to Germany. agrement was not had, yet for as muche as the Turke inuading Au∣striche, necessitie requyred to make all the power againste hym that myght be gathered, the Emperour doth establyshe an vniuersall peace throughout Germany, and decreeth that no man be molested for Reli∣gion, vntyll the tyme of the generall counsell, and if there be none vn∣tyll the states of the Empyre, shall fynde an other meane, to redresse this controuerste: vnto such as shal do otherwyse, he appoynteth great punyshement: And sayeth he wyll do all his endeuoure, that it may be called within this half yeare, and begynne within a yeare after. And if this can not be obteined, that then the matter shalbe discussed in the counsell of the Empyre: wherfore he chargeth and commaundeth that all suytes and proces in the lawe, commenced for Religion, shal in the meane tyme be let falle and suspended. And if any thyng be otherwyse done against the protestauntes, he commaūdeth it to be voyde and of none effect. Agayne the Protestauntes which were than seuen Prin∣ces, and .xxiiij. cities, offer vnto hym their obediences and seruice, and promyse him ayde against the Turke. This peace was concluded by The ibre of Protest. the intercessours the .xxiij. of Iuly, and the Emperour, whom they ad∣uysed by letters and messengers confirmed it the seconde of August, & caused it to be proclaymed openly, commaunding the counsell of the Empyre and other iudges to obey the same. It was decreed in the counsell at Auspurge, that the iudgement of the counselles chamber, should be refourmed. Wherunto the Emperour appointed two in his name, and moreouer chose the archebyshop of Mentz and the Pals∣graue,
Prynces Electours, also the byshop of Spyres, and of Strau∣sborough, and Philip the Marques of Brandenbourgh. Euery one of these sent his depute to Spyres, at the begynnynge of Marche, who made there certen lawes, whiche concerned partly the iudges, pattly the aduocates, and partly the suters. Which they exhibited to the Em∣perour in this assemblie at Regenspurge, who lyked the reformation well, and added a fewe thynges to the same. In the laste booke before The assem∣ble at Regēs¦purge. this, you haue hearde howe the Emperour vnded the conuenantes betwene Alberte Duke of Pruse, and Sigismunde king of Pole. But where as Albert perseuered in his purpose, he was outlawed at this tyme by the Iudges of the Emperiall chambre, at the sute of Walter Cronberge. Whiche thynge whan the kynge of Pole vnderstoode, he sent his Ambassadour to this assemblie, to declare howe the lande of Pruse hath of olde tyme bene vnder the defence and tuition of his re∣alme. Wherfore he desyreth that this sentence of outlawerye maye be reuersed. But Cronberge with a long oration had the thyrde daye of Iune, proueth it to be vnder the iurisdiction of the Empyre, and to be∣long nothing at al to the kynges of Pole. And al be it that his predeces∣sours, vanquyshed in battell, were constrained to geue their fidelitie to Casmire, father vnto Sigismunde, yet was the same cleane contra∣ry to the conuenauntes made before tyme, whiche thynge he is able to proue by the testimony of Albert him selfe, who cōfessed the same eight yeares synce in the assemblie at Norinberge. Therfore requyreth he, that the requeste of the kynge of Pole set a parte, the sentence geuen a∣gaynst Alberte may be put in execution. This yeare Christierne kynge Christierne kyng of Den¦marck is ta∣ken. of Denmarke, who had bene ten yeares a banyshed man, prouyded a nauie, intendyng to recouer his kyngdome, but he was taken on the sea, and committed to warde, and about the same tyme died, hauing a towarde young man to his sonnne, and broughte vp with the Empe∣rour his vncle. The chiefest consultation in this assemblie was about the Turkyshe warre. And whan newes came daylye by letters & mes∣sengers, The Turck inuaded Au∣striche. howe the Turke had sent before great bandes of horsmen to the Ryuer of Danubius, and also the Ambassadours of Austriche, and of other countreys nere, had declared in what daunger they werein, they decreed to geue their ayde, so as al the states of the Empyre shuld ayde, not with mony but with soldiours. Wherfore the .xxvj. daye of Iuly, ended this assembly, and al men prepared them to warre. At the Ides of Auguste, the Duke of Saxon, Prynce electour, ended his lyfe, and Iohn Fridericke his sonne did succede him. Whan Solyman The death of the Duke of Saxon. the Emperour of Turkes, was come to Belgrade, he taketh the waye on the left hande, and attempteth the towne and castell of Giunte in vayne, being manfully defended by Nichas Iurixe: after that he sent forth Captaine Cason with fiftene thousande horsemen to spoyle the
countrey, who inuaded the countrey as far as Lintzie aboue Uienne and destroying all farre and nere, leaueth no kynde of crueltie vnprac∣tised, but in his retourne, he fel in to the lappes of our horsemen, which were made out to kepe hym from the spoyle, and so beyng fought with The slaugh∣ter of yt Tur¦kysh warre. in sondry places to his vtter destruction, at the lengthe hym selfe was slayne. Solyman tournyng more and more on the left hande, mar∣cheth vnto Gratin a towne of Stiria. Whiche thynge ones knowen, the Emperour beyng than at Lintze, taketh aduisement what was beste to be done. At the last it was determied, that he should encampe with his whole armie at Uienna, abydyng his ennemie there. Thus in fyne Solimā retyreth, without any notable exploict done. The Emperour had intreated the Frenche kyng for ayde, but he made him aunswere, as the Emperour that tyme reported, that Germanye was able enough to resyste the Turke alone. The kyng of Englande also wrote agayne somewhat doubtfullye: The byshop of Rome Clement, sent hym ayde by the conduicte of Hi∣politus a Cardinall of the house of Medices. The Swycers beyng re¦quested by the Emperour, would not for all that styre one fote. This yeare was sene a blasyng Starre in Septembre and Octobre, before A blasyng Starre. the sonne rising. After the Turke was retyred with his armie, the Em¦perour mislykyng their aduyse, that thought good to pursue the enne∣mye, dischargeth his armie, for that wynter was at hande, and from Uienne toke his iourney into Italy. And being at Mantua, he ap∣pointeth in his letters wrytten to the states of the Empyre, that his The Empe. goeth into Italy. brother kyng of Romaines, shall gouerne the cōmon welth in his ab∣sence, he was for weightie causes gone in to Italy, and there woulde treate with the byshop of Rome, concerning a counsell, as it was de∣creed at Ratisbone: He wylleth all menne therfore to maynteyne the peace whiche was of late proclaymed, and be as obedient to his brother as they would be to him selfe. Departyng from thence to Bo∣nonie, he entred into talke with Clement the seuenth, deuysynge a∣monges other thynges of Religion and a generall counsel. He maketh also a legue with hym, and with the resydue of the Prynces in Italy, in wordes to mayntayne the peace and quiet of Italy. But in verye deede to kepe out the Frenche men. The Embassadours of the Frenche kyng, were sore against it, but the byshop admonished them not to be so ernest, priuely signifiyng that it should not long endure, for the Emperour had brought with hym a great nombre of Spanyardes, which the byshop wold fayne haue dis¦patched out of Italy. And for this cause made the league, obserg the The Pope serueth the tyme. occasion of tyme. The Emperour shortly after sayled into Spayne in the moneth of Marche: And not longe after that the byshop of Rome sendeth a legate into Germanye, Hughe Rangon byshop of Rhegio:
And whan he came to the Duke of Saxō accompanied with the Em¦perous Ambassadour, he made a long oration, the effect wherof was this. How after muche and long conference had betwene the byshop The Oratiō of the Popes Ambassad. to the Duke of Saron. and the Emperour, about the controuersie that is in Religion, in fyne they concluded, that for the remedy therof there is no waye better thā a generall counsell, wherof they perceiued, the Prynces of Germany to be also very desyrous. And this to be the cause of his message, euen to declare vnto hym and the other Prynces, how both the byshop and the Emperour are determined to haue a counsell free and common for all men, suche as the olde fathers were accustomed to haue in tymes The Popes policie. past, whose myndes vndoubtedly were gouerned by the holye ghoste, prouided alwayes that suche as shall repare thyther, make faythfull promesse to obserue the decrees therof, for els should all their labour be spent in vayne, if they should make lawes whiche none woulde obser∣ue and kepe: As concerning a place both for holsome ayre and plentye of victuall commodious, the byshop thinketh either Placence or Bo∣nonie not vnmete for the purpose, or els Mantua, whiche is a citie of the Empyre, nere vnto Germany, of a goodly situatiō and plentiful of all thynges necessary, of the whiche thre it shall be lawfull for them to chose one: Whereunto if the kinge of Romaines he and other Pryn∣ces of Germany, woulde make some reasonable aunswere: Than the byshop consulting also with other kynges, would cal the same within this halfe yeare, to begynne within one yeare after, to the intent suche as dwel very farre of, may prepare thē selues to take their iorney. Whan he hadde spoken this and more, he deliuereth certen Arti∣cles comprysed in wryting to the Prynce Electour from the byshop of Rome. Afterwardes the Emperours Ambassadour speaketh on this wyse. For as muche as in al former assemblies, the recōciliation of reli∣gion The Oratiō of the Empe¦rours Amb. hath bene hetherto attēpted in vayne, & is supposed that by a coū∣sel the matter might be pacified: therfore hath the Emperour of late ob¦tayned that same of the byshop of Rome (that is to say) that it be holdē after the same maner, time & place as his Ambassadour hath declared. And therfore is he sent of the Emperour, to beare witnesse that the by∣shop of Rome is content to haue a counsell, and because his Ambassa∣dour hath spoken sufficientlye of the whole matter, he nedeth to saye no more, but to desyre hym to credite his tale, and make hym a frend∣ly aunswere. The Duke of Saxon sayeth, that because the mat∣ter is weightie, he wyll take delyberation, this was at Weymer. After a fewe dayes the Duke aunswereth, that where the Emperour and the byshop haue agreed vppon a counsell, he is exceadinge glad, The Duke of Saxons aunswere. for the state of the common wealth doth chiefly requyre such a one as oftētimes the Emperour hath promised the Germanes, wherin ye cause may be duely examined, according to the prescripte of Gods worde.
Whiche if it might be, he would nothing doubte, but that all thinges should go wel: he wil both pray vnto God to graunt this and also ad∣monishe the people vnder his iurisdiction to do the lyke: he will applie his whole studie hereūto, and moue his fellowes also to be carefull for the same: he would be glad moreouer to make a present aunswer, but there be many others of the same religion, who with his father Duke Iohn, professed the same doctrine in the assemblie at Auspurge before the Emperour, so that he can not aunswere of him selfe alone, without making them priuie, neither is it expedient for the cause so to doe. For better it is that the same be done by comon assent. And for as much as the Emperour & the byshop the last wynter in their letters wrytten to the states of the Empire from Bononie, put them in hope of a counsell, therfore did he & his fellowes appoint a day, the .xxiiij. of Iune, to mete at Smalcalde, to consult of the whole matter: wherfore he desireth thē not to be offended with this differment of time, for so sone as his fello∣wes mete at their day prescribed, they shal haue answer either by Am∣bassadours or by letters shortly after: And he wold through Gods gra∣ce so demeane him self, that not only this present age, but also the time to come, shold perceiue right wel that he wyshed for nothing more, thā that the pure religion & doctrine, & peace, not only of Germany, but of the whole comon wealth of Christendom, might also floriche, and that the Emperour his chiefe souereigne might haue his due honour & dig∣nitie. Afterwarde whan his fellowes were come, with good delibera∣tion The Prote. aunswere to the Pope & Emperour. they framed an answere by commō assent in their letters the last of Iune. Howe they gaue great thankes to the Emperour, whiche for Gods glory & preseruation of the cōmon wealth had taken so muche paynes of a good zeale they doubted not. And therfore pray God so to confirme & direct his mynde to yt ende, that the truthe may be set forth and embraced. And false doctrine, wicked worshipinge, & rites aboly∣shed, and that all errours being cleane weded out of mens myndes, Gods true seruice, & other godly vertues, may agayne take place: For they chiefly desire a counsel wherin the matter that is in controuersie, may duely and orderly be decided. Suche a counsell also the Empe∣rour hath promysed long synce, and that in all assemblies of the Em∣pyre, with great deberation hath bene decreed, to be kepte in Germa∣nye. Wherof sprang the dissention of Religion. For all this dissention sprange vp fyrste of that welle, that certen impudent persones ouermuche extolled indulgences and pardons. At whiche tyme also other errours were perceyued and detected. And all be it that byshop Leo condempned this doctryne, whiche brought those errours to lyghte, yet haue they hetherto impugned that con∣dempnatiō with the testimonies of the Prophetes and Apostles. And therfore hath a counsell ben alwaye thought moste nedefull, as well of other Prynces and states of them, wherin the cause myght be exa∣mined
and openly tryed, what is true and what is false: for that they sawe howe many thynges were crept into Religion, whiche were to be refourmed. And therfore in the assemblies of the Empyre, it was de¦creed, that there should be a free and a christian counsell, eyther of all nations, or els of the prouince of Germany: by those especiall wordes, lest that eyther the sentēce of the byshop, or the force and power of any other man, should be preiudiciall to the cause. Agayne that in all this cause iudgement should be geuen, not after the byshoppes decrees and opinions of Scholemen, but accordyng vnto holy Scripture. For yf any mans power should be of more force than the Scriptures, than due examination, who doubteth. But that he that shoulde contende againste the byshop, shoulde lose his labour, and stryue agaynste the streame: Wherfore not without great considerations it hath been de∣creed that the counsell should be holden in Germany: And the Empe∣rour also content it shoulde so be, but nowe these requestes of the bys∣shop to be vtterly against the decrees of the Empyre, confyrmed by the seales of the Emperour and the other Prynces. For all be it he spea∣keth of a free councel, yet doubtles he intendeth an other thynge, whā How a free counsel is to be vnderstād he goeth about to haue kynges and Prynces bounden to hym: For in case he woulde haue it free, what shoulde this obligation nede? But nowe seyng that he is wholy bent this waye, certenly this is his pur∣pose, that vnder the name of a counsell, he maye maynteyne his power and aucthoritie that no man shall reprehende his faultes and errours, or if any doe atttempte it, that he shall not escape vnpunyshed. They knowe not what other men wyll doe, but surelye this demaunde of his, is wrytten in suche sorte that it rather maketh them afrayde of a counsell, than prouoketh them to it: for who woulde bynde hym selfe after this sorte, especially beynge not yet knowen, what shall be the or∣dre of the counsell, the fourme and maner: whether the byshop wyll haue his adherentes to beare there moste aucthoritie, or whether the controuersies shall be determined accordyng to the holy Scriptures, or after the traditions and lawes of men grounded vpon no Scrip∣ture at all. The lybertie of the Counsell, is also restrayned, in that he wyll haue it kept after the olde accustomed maner. They doe not refuse the former counselles that are consonant to the Scryptures, but suche as haue bene in our tyme or a lyttle before, The coūsels are swarued from their old puritie. whiche haue attributed more than reason wold to the byshop of Rome and decrees of men, farre differing from the auncient counselles: ther∣fore where he sayeth it shall be after the olde accustomed maner, this is his crafte and policie, that there shall not be that lybertye of speache and geuinge of sentences, as they both desyre, and also the cause requi∣reth, but that iudgement shall be geuen accordynge vnto his lawes and vsurped power, whiche he taketh vppon hym, as by certen of the
last coūselles it is manifest: but by this vsage and hadling of matters, can neither the churches be pacified, nor the troubled conscience quie∣ted, but are brought into further darkenes & bondage: wherfore seing that the bishop hath not as yet satisfied the requestes of the Emperour and states of the Empyre, they ernestly desyre, that Cesar considering The Empe. part to dd Religion. the weightines of the cause, whiche concerneth the vniuersall cōmon wealth, and all nations would see, that the matter might be handled indifferently: For this is his office and dutie, & this may he doe by the lawes. When in dede the byshop impugneth the truthe: for it is to be forseen and prouided, that the plaintife or defendaūt be not also iudge in the cause. For all nations haue great hope in this counsell, and doe The Pope is plentife, defendaūt & iudge. both wyshe and pray, that at the laste mens consciences (troubled and sore afflicted with doubtfull dissentiō) may be made free, set at libertie, and taught the way of saluatiō. For these many hondreth yeares hath not bene so muche contention about so weighty matters as is at thys present. And this stryfe aryseth of sondry errours and vices, whiche haue spronge longe before our tyme: But and if men be disceaued of theyr expectation, and shall haue no suche councell as hathe bene pro∣mysed, what sorowe and grief that thynge wyll be to mens hartes, it is easy to coniecture. Agayne if the byshop shall refuse the dewe exa∣mination & triall of the matter, it is to be feared lest the cōmon welth and state of the churche, shall be tourmoyled with sorer tempestes thā it hath bene hitherto: But where as the states of the Empyre, haue in all theyr assemblies cōdescended vpon an vpright counsel, they distrust not, but they will perseuer also in the same, vtterly refusing the snares The Popes snares. and bondes, wherwith the bishop intendeth craftly to catche thē, tru∣sting that other kynges & Princes wyl do the like. For the bonde that he goeth about, is full of craft & deceitfulnes, neyther can there be true iudgement, vnlesse the myndes of all men be franke & free: so that if he procede thus, & hold the counsel after his owne pleasure, they wyll cō∣mitte the whole matter vnto God, whiche doubtles will defende his owne cause & doctrine. Howe be it in case the matter should so come to passe, that the byshop should be permitted so to do, they wold take fur∣ther aduisement, what were thā nedeful to be done: And if perchaunce they shalbe sūmoneth & se that they shalbe able to do any thing for the glory of Gods holy name, they wil come thither by saufe cōduict, whā they are made wel assured, or send their Ambassadours to propounde what soeuer the necessitie of the cause shall requyre, neuerthelesse vn∣der that condition, that they wyll in no wyse admytte those requestes of the byshop, nor acconsente to any counsell that is contrarye to the decrees of the Empire: For they can not see howe this interprise of the byshop, can make for the contynuall peace of the churche and the com∣mon wealth: Neyther is it also semelye for hym so to doe, in case he
would execute the office of a true Pastour, whiche is to haue a care for all men, and to feede them with the true doctrine of Christ. Whiche The bishops office. thynges standing thus, they desyre them to cary this theyr aunswere to the Emperour and the bishops, and that the Emperour whom thei do reuerently acknowledge to be their chief souereigne appointed of God, do not take the same in euyll parte, but that he woulde fynde the meanes that the counsell myght be had according to the decrees of the Empyre, and that the whole controuesie may be decided by vertuous men, and nothyng suspected. For certenly this appertayneth to his cō∣mendation and vertue, to employe al his power and aucthoritie to the aduauncement of true doctrine, and not to the establyshynge of theyr crueltie, whiche nowe these many yeares haue persecuted innocent persones, only for the profession of the Gospell, and holsome doctryne. For the residue they committe all that euer they haue vnto the Empe∣rour, neyther is there any other thyng, whiche they wyll not be glad to doe for his sake. At the same tyme with kyng Ferdinando, was the byshoppes Ambassadour Peter Paule Uerger, whome I spoke of in Uergerius. the former booke. And because the byshop of Rhezo was an aged man and sickly, Clement commaunded Uerger, that in case any impedimēt happened vnto him, he should supplie his rowme: but he geueth hym an especiall charge, that he beare alwayes in memory what his mynd and wyll is, touchyng the counsell: Let hym loke therfore that in no wyse he doe passe the boundes of his commission, no not one fynger breadth, nor that he dryue not hym to suche an exigent, that he must of necessitie kepe a counsel, though king Ferdinādo would neuer so fayne haue it so, and vrged The Pope sleeth the coū¦sell. hym streightly therunto
✚ The nynth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the nynth Booke GEorge Duke of Saxon marketh suche as fauoured the Gospel, and accuseth Luther to the Electour of Saxony his cosyn. Pope Element meting the Frenche kyng at Marseilles, geueth his Niece in marriage to Henry Duke of Orleaunce. The Dake of Wirtenberge, dryuen out of his countrey. Henry the eight kyng of Englande, putteth away Quene Ka∣therine his wyfe, and forsaketh the Pope. The Pageaunt of the spirite of the graye freers of Orleaunce, is recited. The Lantgraue recouereth the Duke dome of Wittemberge. The agre∣ment betwene kyng Ferdinando and the Duke of Saxon, and the articles of peace betwixt Ferdi∣nando and ich Duke of Wirtemberge, are rehersed. Clement dieth. Paule of the house of Fer∣nese, succedeth. persecutiō at Paris, by reason of certen placardes, the kyng pourgeth him selfe to the Germaynes therfore. The Emperour taketh the citie of Tunnes. Moore and the byshop of Ro∣chester, are beheaded. Pope Paule by his legate Uergerius sommoneth the counsell of Mantua, wherfore the Protestauntes metyng at Smalcalde, sende their aduyse in wrytinge. The Lorde Langey being sent thether by the kyng of Fraunce, solliciteth them to a league, and debated diuers matters: wher vnto the Protestauntes made aunswere. The kyng of Englande also sent thether, to declare what woulde be the ende to attende for suche a counsell. The league of Smalcalde is renewed, into whiche are newly admitted sondry Prynces and Cities. WHan they had made this aunswer, they appoyn∣ted diuines, and lawyers, to delyberate vpon the action for the counsell to come, and determined to set forth the byshops aunswere in prynte, and communicate the same to forein kynges and na∣tions. Also to sende Ambassadours to the Iud∣ges of the chamber, who contrary to the Empe∣rours proclamatiō, graunted out proces against certen, in causes of Religion, whose iudgement, vnles they surceased they would refuse. Moreouer to sende an Ambas∣sade to the Archebyshop of Mentz, and to the Palsgraue, which were intercessours: And last of all to reporte vnto the Emperour the whole matter in wryting. I haue tolde you oftener than ones, howe Duke George of Saxony, bare malice to Luther priuely, and hated his doc∣trine The craft of Duke Geor∣ge to fynde out the Lu∣therians. openly. And where as he vnderstode that diuers of his subiectes did holde opinion, that they ought to receyue the Lordes supper after the commaundemēt of Christe, he charged the Ministers of his chur∣ches, to geue vnto all suche as after the olde custome at Easter, confes∣sed their synnes, and receiue the Sacrament after the byshop of Ro∣mes lawe, certen tokens, whiche they should afterwardes deliuer vn∣to the Senate, to the intent it myght be knowē, who were of the Ro∣myshe,
and who were of Luthers opinion. So were there founde in Lipsia, whiche is the head Towne of that countrey, to the numbre of Luthers coū¦sell. lxx. without tokens. They had consulted with Luther before, what was nedefull to be done: Who wrote vnto them, that suche as beleued certenly howe they ought to receiue the whole supper, should doe no∣thing against their owne conscience, but rather suffer death: Wherfore being thus encouraged, they sticke vnto it, and whan the Prince cal∣led them before hym, geuing them two monethes respite to deliberate, and they woulde not alter their purpose, they were bannyshed the town. Luther in his letters to them of Lipsia, called Duke George the Apostle of Sathan, whiche thinge breade muche trouble: For Duke George did accuse hym before his cosyn the Electour of Saxon, howe he had not only rayled on hym, but had also styred vp his subiectes to rebellion. The Prince Electour in his letters charged Luther withal, and amonges other thynges sayth, that vnlesse he can make his pur∣gation herein, he must of necessitie punyshe hym. Wherfore vpon this occasion, Luther wryteth a booke, wherein he confuteth this accusa∣tion, declaryng howe he gaue them counsel not to resiste their Prince, Luthers pur¦gation. commaunding them not to doe wickedly, but rather to suffer death or exile, whiche concerneth no rebellion. For that is to be ascribed vnto them that teache howe the Magistrate shoulde be resisted by force of armes, and they are sedicious in deede, of whome also Peter the Apo∣stle hath prophecied, but this belongeth to the profession of the Gospel, to be condempned as seditious: Christ hym selfe was for this cause put to death moste vnworthy, as though he would haue bene kyng of Ie∣wes, Christe was called sediti∣ous. and haue made the people to rebelle against the Emperour. After to the same booke, he adioyneth an epistle, wherwith he doth comforte those banyshed men of Lipsia, admonishyng thē to take their exile paciently, and also to geue God thankes whiche hathe graunted He comfor∣teth the eri∣es. them his constancie of mynde, and perseuerance. I shewed you of the league concluded, betwene the Emperour and Clement the seuenth, but when the Emperour was retourned into Spayn, Clement at the request of the Frenche kyng toke shipping and arriued at Marceilles in haruest tyme: and for the more intier frēdship, he marrieth his niece Pope Cle∣ment cōmeth to Macilles. Katherine Medices, vnto Henry the kynges sonne Duke of Orleans, a younge Prynce of fiftene yeares of age. And because the occasion ser∣ueth, I purpose here to speake a litle touching ye house of Medices. and Syluester, Euerarde, & Iohn, were the first accompted of that name, whiche were all Senatours of Florence: but the fyrst that ennobled that house was Cosmus, who was the rychest marchaunt, not only of his owne citie, but also of all Italy. His sonne Peter had two sonnes, Laurence, and Iulian. And Iulian had a sonne borne after he was dead, called Iuly, who was afterwardes Clement the seuenth. Not
withstanding that they reporte diuersly touching his byrth: Lawrēce had the sonnes, Peter, Iulian, and Iohn. Who was made byshop of For many suppose hym a bastarde. Rome, Leo the tent: Iulian had no chyldrē. Peter expulsed out of Flo∣rence, and at the lenght drowned in the mouth of Lyre, by reason of a tēpest, left a sonne named Lawrence, who married Galla of the house of Bolonois, and by her had this Katherine, of whome here mention is made. Clement which made his abode at Marseilles, a moneth and somewhat more, to gratifie the kyng and his nobles, made foure fren∣che Cardinalles, whome he perceiued to be moste in fauoure with the A consecra∣ting of Car∣dinalles. kyng. Odet Chastilion, Philip Bolon, Claude Gifrie, and Iohn Ue∣nerie, byshop of Lisiens. No man doubted but this affinitie pretended an alteration of the state of Italy, and many marueled at the vniqua∣litie of the mariage: In so muche that Clement hym selfe, as the report Unmete ma¦riage. goeth, was doubtfull, and woulde not beleue that they ment good er∣nest, before the mariage was solempnised. Within a fewe monethes after, the Lantgraue goeth to the French king, the cause wherof was The Lant∣graue goeth to the Frēch kyng. Duke Ul∣rich expulsed this. In the yeare of our Lorde. 1519. Ulriche Duke of Wirtem∣berge, was driuen out of his countrey by the confederatours of the Sweuicall league, for takyng of Rutelyng a towne imperiall, whiche was in confederacie with them. Which Prouince first the Emperour had of the rest, and after in the diuision of the inheritaunce, Ferdinādo receiued it of the Emperour. In the assemblie at Auspurg, certen prin∣ces were peticioners that the Duke whiche had bene eleuen yeares in exile, might thā be restored: But it was in vayne, for the Emperour reciting the causes from the beginning, for whiche he was exiled, dyd create his brother Duke, there openly of that countrey. Wherfore the Lantgraue being a dere frende, and a nere kinsman to Duke Ulriche, thought to attempte some thing at this present: but being disapoynted by certen, which had promysed theyr ayde, he differred the matter, vn∣tyll better oportunitie serued. And nowe in the Emperours absence, cō¦sidering how the Sweuicall league made for eleuen yeares, was dis∣solued, he goeth into Fraunce, and layeth to pledge the Countrey of Mount Pelicarte, vnto the kyng for a summe of mony, in the name of The Lant∣graue boro∣weth monye of the Frēch kyng. Duke Ulriche, vpon condicion that if he redeme it not within thre ye∣res, to be than the inheritaunce of the realme of Fraunce. Besides this some of money, the kyng also promysed him to lende hym another som, in hope that the lande should not be redemed. At this tyme fortuned a wonderfull alteration in Englande, and the occasion was this. Henry A great alte ratiō in En∣glande. the seuenth kyng of Englande, had two sonnes, Arthur and Henry. Arthur maried Katherine daughter to Ferdinando kyng of Spayne, diyng without ishewe. Henry the father, who coueted much that this alliaunce with the Spanyarde myght continue, by the lycence of the byshop of Rome Iuly the seconde, deuyseth to marrie this Katherine
to his other sonne also, whiche was kyng after him, who departed the yeare of grace. 1509. Wherfore Henry the eight of that name, after he had maried her, his father beyng dead, and he nowe of manye yeares Kyng Hēry. sufficiently establyshed in his kyngdome, propoundeth this scrupulo∣sitie of his conscience, to certen byshoppes, and calleth in questiō, whe∣ther it were lawfull to marrye his brothers wyfe, and of longe tyme abstayned from her company. The byshoppes hauynge priuate talke with the Quene, by the kinges assignement, declare vnto her, that the byshop of Romes lycence was herein neyther good nor lawfull. She aunswereth that it is to late nowe to examyne the licence, whiche so longe synce they had allowed. She had dyuerse tymes miscaried of chylde, and brought forth none that prospered, sauynge one daughter called Marie. The byshop of Rome committeth the hearynge of the matter vnto two Cardinalles, Campegius, whome he sent into Eng∣lande, and the Cardinalle of Yorke. After longe and muche debatyng whan the kynge was put in hope from Rome, that sentence should be geuen on his syde, Campegius in maner at the same instant, that iud∣gement should haue passed by the byshop of Romes admonyshement, The incon∣stancie of Pope Cle∣ment. began to drawe backe, and fynde delayes. The cause wherof, as men suppose, was that through the death of the Duke and captaine Law∣trech, and distruction of the Frenche armie about Naples, & that An∣drowe de Aurie, the moste experte man of the sea, forsakyng the Frēch kyng, was fled vnto the Emperour. All the whiche thynges chaunced so at the same tyme, that the byshop was afrayde to offende the Em∣perour, being nephewe to Quene Katherine, whiche had suche lucky successe in all his assayes in Italy. Wherfore Campegius in fyne re∣tourned without any thyng determyned, wherwith the kyng toke ex∣cedyng muche displeasure. Neuerthelesse, lest it should appeare that he should do anythyng vniustly, the kynge sent into Fraunce, Italy, and Germany to enquyre the opinions of all vniuersities. And the moste part consented to the kyng, and emonges other the diuines of Paris, The vniuer¦sities of Pa∣ris & others. approued the kynge by the vniuersitie Seale, and as it was thoughte were lyberally rewarded therfore. But amōges others of the quenes maydes, there was one of an excellent beautie, called Anne Bolen, whome the kyng began to fantasy, in so muche as men myght easelye quene Anne loued the Gospell. perceyue that he entended to marrie her to his wyfe. Whan the Car∣dinall of Yorke perceyued this, whiche was chief about the kyng, and as they saye, authour of the diuorsement, he chaunged his purpose, ad∣monyshyng the byshop of Rome by his letters, that he should not ap∣proue the diuorsement: For than shoulde an other succede Quene Ka∣therine, whiche was infected with Luthers opinions. Whiche thyng whan the kyng vnderstode by his Ambassadour that was ledger at Rome, he was sore offended. And not longe after for this and other
thinges whiche he had practised in e, where he was Chaunce∣lour of the Realme, and had thre of the beste byshophes, York Du∣resme and Wynchester, first he displaced hym from his office and after taketh away two of his byshoprikes: And in conclusion, what time he leading a priuate lyfe at home, had spooken certen wordes that were arrogant, and importing a desire of reuengement: the kyng sent Syr William kingstone Captaine of the garde, to discharge his house, and brynge hym to London: but fallyng in to a vehement ixe by the way he dyed, and was buried at Lecester. But the byshop of Rome to the The death of Cardinall Woolsey. intent Campegius myght haue some excuse to departe, reuoked the sute into his own handes. And perceiuing that the marriage of quene Anne would be to hym preiudiciall, he warneth the kyng full ofte, and goeth about also to feare him with threateninges, that he should leaue of his enterpryse. But whan he could not preuayle, to please the Em∣perour, he gaue sentence with his at Katherine, this yeare the .xxiij. of Marche, where as the kynge had a yeare before married an other, forsakynge Katherine, & proclaiming his daughter Marie a bastarde. The Lady Mary a ba∣starde. But after he perceiued, that sentence was geuen against hym, he con∣ceaued a mortall hatred against the byshop. And immediatly maketh a lawe, whereby he declareth him self to be head of the church through out Englande, abolishyng the byshop vtterly, and commaundeth vn∣der payne of death (and maketh it treason) if any man ascribe vnto the The kinges hatred a∣gainst the Pope. byshop of Rome the supremacie: he denieth also the yearely pension, whiche was wont to be geuen to the bishoppes Collectour. And with moste weightie wordes enacteth, that from henceforth no monye be conueyed to Rome: and this did he by the consent of the whole nobili∣tie and commons of the Realme, by ordre of the hyghe courte of parlia∣ment. Fraunces the Frenche kynge, was thoughte to haue furthered very muche this diuorcement to the intent he myght thus cleane with drawe him, from the frendshyp of the Emperour, concerning the try∣bute payed to Rome, thus it standeth. Inas kyng of Britane, aboute Inas kyng. the yeare of our Lorde, fiue hundreth and forty, for the opinion of Re∣ligion and deuotion, made the Realme tributory to the byshop of Ro∣me, as it is leaft in memory, in ioynyng euery house to paye a penny. Wherfore the byshoppes had their Collectours cōtinually there to ga∣ther this annuall stypende, called of the common people Peter pence. The byshoppes collectour at this tyme, was Peter Uan, who retour∣ned not to Rome, but remayned styll in Englande. And where as this money had bene continually payed frō that time, vnto these our daies, kynge Henry firste of all men, made a restrainte therof, and an inhi∣bitiō The contē∣tion betwen Erasmus & Luther. that it should be payed no more. You haue heard how Erasmus and Luther wrote one againste the other of free wyll, in the fourthe booke: And this yeare their contention began a freshe. And Luther ta¦kyng
an occasiō by one of his frendes epistles, chargeth Erasmus sore, as though he should call the christian Religion in doubt, mocke it, and condempne it: And also alledgyng certen places of his owne workes, goeth about to proue the same, and sheweth that in his wrytyng he is ambiguous, and with his eloquence practyseth a kynde of Tyraunye. And for as muche as in Godly thynges, he trifleth & dalieth thus with doubtfull wordes, where as he coulde & oughte to speake more playn∣ly, he aduoucheth that all thynges ought to be construed agaynst him. Wherunto Erasmus afterwarde aunswered and that ryght sharpely, for he feared most of al other thynges, left his workes should lose their grace and authoritie. About this tyme in Fraunce, the Grey freers of The traged! of the Grey freers. Orleaunce, wrought a terrible and a bloudy enterpryse: And thus the thinge was. The Mayers wyfe of the citie prouided in her wyll, that she would be buried without any pompe or noyse. For whan any de∣parteth in Fraunce, the Belmen are hyred to goe about the Citie, and in places moste frequented, to assemble the people with the sounde of the bell, and than to declare the name and title of the partie deceased, also wher and whan they shal be butied, and last to exhorte the people to praye for the dead. And whan the coarse is caried forth, for the moste The solēne burieng in Fraunce. parte these beggyng freers go with it all to the churche, and many tor∣ches are borne before it: and the more pompe and solempnitie is vsed, the more is the concourse and gasyng of people: but this woman wold haue none of all this gere done for her. Wherfore her husbande which loueth her well, followed her mynde herein, and gaue vnto the Graye freers in whose churche, she was buried besydes her father and her grandfather, syxe crownes only for a rewarde, where as they looked for a great deale more. And afterwardes, whā he cut down a wood & folde it, the freers craued to haue part therof without money, and he sayde them nay. This toke they in maruelous euyll parte. And where as they loued hym not before, they deuise now a waye to be reuenged, saying that his wyfe was damned euerlastingly. The workers of this tragedy, were Coliman and Stephen of Arras, both doctours of di∣uinitie, and the first in dede was a coniurer, and had all his trynkettes False doc∣tours. and furniture concerning suche matters in a redinesse. And they vsed the matter thus. They set a yoūg man yt was a Nouice, aboue ouer the vaulte of the churche: And when they came to mumble vp their mat∣tyns at mydnyght, after their accustomed maner, he made a wonder∣full noyse and shryking a lofte: than goeth this Colman to crossynge & coniuring: but the other aboue woulde not speake, beynge charged to make a signe, to declare if it were a dume spirit, he rustleth & maketh a The dume Spirite. noyce agayne: that was the signe and token. Whan they had layd this foundation, they go to certen of the chiefest in all the citie, that fauour red them moste, and tell them what an heuy case is chaunced at theyr
house, yet do they not vtter what it is, but entreate them to take the paynes to come to their seruice at night. When they came and the ser∣uice was begonne, he that was a lost made a great noyse: Beinge de∣maunded what he would, and who he was, he signified that he could not speake: than is he commaunded to aunswere to their interrogato∣ries by signe, there was an hole made, where by laying to his eare, he might heare and perceyue what the coniurer sayde. Than was there Questions moued to yt dome spirit. a table at hande, wherupon being asked a question, he clapped & beat, so that he myght easely be heard beneth. Wherfore he was fyrste de∣maunded whether he were any of them, that haue bene buried there. After that rekening vp their names in order, whose bodies had there bene buried, at the laste they come to the Mayres wyfe: there by a signe made, he sheweth that he is the spirite of her. Than they questio∣ned with her, whether she were dampned, and for what deserte or of∣fence? Whether it were for couetousnes, pryde, or letchery, or that she did not the workes of charitie, or els for this newe sprong vp heresye, and Lutheranisme? Furthermore what she ment by this noyse & dis∣quietnes? Whether that her body being buried within holy grounde, shoulde be digged vp and caried to some other place? Unto all these thinges he aunswered by sygnes in like case as he was commaunded, wherby he affirmed, or denied any thynge, in so muche as he stroke v∣pon the table twyse or thryse. And whē he had thus sygnified that Luthers heresy was the cause of her dampnation, and that her body must be taken vp, the freers de∣syre the citezens that were present, to beare witnes of such thynges as they had sene and heard, & set their handes to it in wryting. But they taking aduisement, lest they should both offende the Mayor and bring them selues in trouble, refused to subscribe. Notwithstāding the freers take the pyxe with the hoste, as they terme it, and all the reliques of sainctes, and cary them to an other place, and there say their Masses. Which thing is acustomably done by the bishop of Romes lawe, what tyme a churche is suspended, and must be hallowed againe. And when the byshops iudge deputed, whome they call officiall, heard of this, he came thether to vnderstande the matter better, and associatynge hym selfe with certen honest men, cōmaundeth them to coniure in his pre∣sence, & would haue chosen certen to go vp into the Uault, to se in case any spirit doth appere there. But Steuen of Aras, was sore againste this thinge, and exhorted them instantly it might not be, sayinge that the spirite ought not to be molested. And albeit the official did earnest∣lye vrge them to coniure before hym, yet coulde he not bryng thē to it. In the meanetyme the Maior makynge his frendes priuie what he would doe, went to the kynge and enfourmed hym of the whole mat∣ter. And for as much as yt freers, by reason of their priuileges, refused to
come vnto iudgement, the kyng chose certen out of the court of Par∣liament at Paris, to examine the matter, and gaue themfull authori∣tie. The same did also Anthony Prate Chauncelour, and the Cardinal that was the byshop of Romes Legate in Fraunce. Wherfore hauing no exception, they were caried to Paris, and constrayned to make an∣swere: but they woulde confesse nothyng. Yet were they kept a parte, The game prayers ca∣lled to paris and the Nouice whiche Fumeus a Senatour, had at home with him, being often tymes examined, woulde vtter nothyng, fearyng, leste he shoulde after be murthered of them, for sclaundering their ordre: but when the iudges had promised hym that he should escape free, & should come no more in the Freers handes, he declareth the whole matter in ordre, and brought before the others, aduouched the same. They albeit they were conuicted, and in maner taken with the deede, yet refused their iudges, and bragged of their priuileges: but that was in vayne, for they were condempned in open iudgement, that they shoulde be caried agayne to Orleaunce, and put in pryson. And afterwardes The condēp¦nation of fal rs. brought openly to the Cathedral churche, and so to the place of punish∣ment, where malefactours are executed, and there shoulde confesse their owne wyckednes. But euen at the same time chaunceth apersecution against the Lu∣therians, which was the cause that the same sentence albeit, it was to gentle for so great an offence, was not put in execution. For because the Persecution against Lu∣therians. name of the Lutherians was moste odiouse, they feared, lest the pu∣nishment of these men, should not haue bene so muche thought dewe for theyr offence, as done to the reproche of the ordre: And what soeuer misfortune happened vnto them, many iudged that the same woulde be a moste pleasaunt syght, and spectacle for the Lutherians. And this ordre of Franciscanes, was of the common people estemed holye: And what time they were caried out of Paris, certen women moued with pitie, followed them vnto the gate of the vniuersitie, with manye tea∣res and syghinges. After they came vnto Orleaunce, and were be∣stowed in seuerall prysons, they beganne to boaste agayne of theyr liberties and pryueleges, and at lengthe after longe imprysonment, they were discharged and set at lybertie, without any punyshement. Whylest they were prysoners, they wanted nothynge, but hadde all thynges ministred vnto them aboundauntly, especially of women. Had not these persecutions and fyrynges before mentioned, letted the thing, the kynge had determined, as in dede it was reported, to plucke downe all theyr house, and make it euen with the grounde. But in the Romyshe kyngdome were wonte to be very many spy∣rites. Spirites in the Popyshe kingdome. For it was beleued certenly that dead mens soules dyd walke after they were buried: Wherefore they shewed that eyther they were dampned, or els for a tyme were tourmented, in the fyre of
purgatory, and woulde sollicite their nerest kynsfolkes and frendes to sucour them. And moste commonly requyred them, eyther to performe their vowes and pylgrimages, which they had behight to some sainct in their lyfe tyme, or els to cause a trentall of masses to be sayd for thē. Whiche thynge increased maruelously the opinion of Purgatory, and brought the masse in to highe authoritie, and was to the priestes gain∣ful aboue measure. But after that Luthers doctrine was spred abroad Luthers apt ō touching the spirites. and knowen, those spirites by lytle and lytle, vanyshed cleane out of syght. For Luther taught by the scriptures, howe the soules of dead men were at quiet rest, loking for the last daye of iudgement, and that suche terrible noyses and visions, were styred vp by the deuyl, who let∣teth none occasion slyppe to confirme mens myndes with idolatrie & false opinions, and to quenche the benefite of our sauiour Christe. Whan the Lantgraue had bargayned with the Frenche kynge, in the begynnyng of the spring tyme, he leuied his armie: And than wry∣tyng their letters both vnto kyng Ferdinando, they declared the cause of theyr enterpryse. And whylest Ferdinando referreth the matter to the trial of the lawe, they marche forwardes with their armie, and the fourtene day of May, chauncing to mete with theyr ennemies, which were twelue thousand foote men, they shotte of theyr ordinaunce, and put them to flyght besydes the towne of Lausene in the lande of Wir∣temberge. The generall of Ferdinando his armie was Philip Counte The victory of the Lant. Palatine, who at the same battell had his hele stryken of with a great pece. In the chase many were drowned in the Ryuer of Neccar, wher into they ran headlong, for feare of their ennemies that pursued them. Whan the battell was done, all men for the moste parte of the Duke∣dome of Wirtemberge, yelded them selues to their naturall Prynce Ulrichus: Asperge situated vpon a verey hyghe mountayne standyng alone, also Urach, Tubinge, and Nipha, all stronge castelles of nature in fine rendred also. Ferdinando the fyrst of Maye, set forth a procla∣mation, that no man shoulde ayde that faction, but that al men should resiste them to the vttermoste of their power, and had wrytten to the Protestauntes his seueral letters, touching the same matter. And like∣wise had the Emperour done a litle before, and openly no man did as∣siste them. And al men marueled, to what end this stiring wold grow to. About the tyme of this warre, the archbyshop of Mentz, & George Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraues father in lawe, sought the reconci∣lement of kyng Ferdinando, and the Prince Electour of Saxon. And at Cadamea town of Boheme, the last day of Iune sauing one, they concluded a peace with those cōditions. For religiō no force to be attempted, nor any sute in the lawe commensed, and the same peace Conditions of peace. that Cesar hath made to be obserued. Ferdinando in the Emperours place shall brynge to passe, that the Iudges of the chamber shall sur∣cease
from al proces against the Protestauntes, amonges whome not¦withstanding neyther Anabaptistes, nor Sacramentaries, nor any o∣ther suche lyke sectes be comprehended. The Duke of Saxon and his fellowes shall acknowledge Ferdinādo for king of Romaines, & gyue him that title. Ferdinando shall againe within a certen tyme deuise so with the Emperour, & other princes Electours, that a decree be made after this sorte. Whan tyme shall hereafter require to make a kynge of Romaines, duryng the lyfe of the Emperour, that than the Electours do first assemble and consulte, whether the cause be iuste and reasona∣ble, and if it so appere, that than they do proceade after the Tenure of the lawe Carroline. That whiche shall be otherwyse done, to be fru∣strate. And vnlesse this decree be made within ten monethes, than the Duke & his fellowes not to stande bound to these cōdicions: and that within the same time, the Emperour shall also cōfirme the Dukes suc∣cession in the possessious of his father & progenitours: Ferdinando shal also endeuour, that the Emperour do ratifie such compactes of matri∣mony as are betwixt the Dukes of Saxō and of Cleaue. Whilest thei treate of these matters, they take in hande also an other peace ma∣king. And the Duke of Saxon offereth for the Lātgraue & the Duke of Wirtemberge, as their substitute, that they shal ratifie, what so euer they should agree vpon. After muche debating, the Dukedome beinge wholy recouered, they cōdicioned thus. Ulrich the Prince & his heires Condicions betwixt Fer¦dinando and Duke Ulri. males, shall holde the Dukedome of Wirtemberge of kyng Ferdinan∣do as Archeduke of Austriche, and so to be his wardes and clientes, & if it fortune the house of Wirtemberge to be without heyres males, than the Princes of Austriche to possesse that region, to holde the same of the Empyre whiche they shalbe bounden therunto. Ulriche to ac∣knowledge Ferdinando for king of Romaynes, & to make no league againste hym: That the Lantgraue, and Duke Ulriche restore suche goodes, as they haue gotten in this tyme of warre, to their owners: that they doe constreyne no man to chaunge his Religion: that it shall be lawefull for suche as are fled for feare or for shamefastnes to retourn home. And they that lyste, to take theyr goodes, and goe where they wyll. The peces of ordinaunce, that were for the defence of Auspurge, shall remaine to kyng Ferdinando: the kinges debtes, for his own pri∣uate affayres, he him selfe shall paye, but that which was employed for the cōmoditie of the countrey, the Duke shal aunswere: For suche lan∣des of the Dukedome, as are holden of the kyngdome of Boheme, the Duke and his heire shall holde styl of Ferdinādo & his heires as kings of Boheme: That Philip the Palsgraue, and the residue of the pryso∣ners, be let go without raunsome: that the Lantgraue and the Duke shall submitte them selues, & aske pardon of kyng Ferdinando either in their own persons, or by their deputes, & than Duke Ulriche to receiue
full state and possession of kyng Ferdinando: Ferdinādo shall entreate that the Emperour will also forgeue thē, for the charges of the warre, nothinge to be required on either parte: that the Lantgraue and the Duke, shall sende vnto Ferdinando, out of their armes, fyue hondreth horse men, and thre thousand fotemen, whiche shall immediatly go to the sege of Munster, of their cost and charge, there to promyse their fi∣delitie to Ferdinando by an othe, and if nede requyred to serue him for a thre monethes. For at the same time was Munster a towne of We∣stphalia, kept by the Anabaptistes, beseged, as hereafter shalbe decla∣red. Wherfore king Ferdinando requyred of thē this aide, for the win∣ning of the towne. Whan the Duke had by this meane, recouered the countrey of Wirtemberge, & made his peace with Ferdinando, before the yeare was ended, he repaied the French king his money, & recoue∣reth the possession of Mompelicarte. And the lone money, the king for∣gaue The liberal∣tie of yt frēch kyng. him, whiche was no small somme. This peace making did Pe∣ter Paule Uerger the byshops legate, toke not very well. And in Cle∣ments name, did expostulate sore with king Ferdinando, that he had taken Luther & princes into his amitie. And he answered that he dyd it in cōsideratiō of the time, for the auoyding of further trouble. What time Duke Ulriche was expulsed, his sonne Christopher, being a child of .iiij. yeares olde, was first brought vp vnder the tuicion of his vncle Williā Duke of Bauer, after that he was remoued frō thence to In∣sprouek a towne of Ferdinandos, in the countie of Tirol. And whē af∣ter the Turkes retire, as I sayde before the Emperour retourned into Italy, he through the motion & aduise of his frendes, cōueyeth him self out of the Emperours traine, & repareth again into Bauier. For being the sole & only heire, this was thought to be the deuise yt he sholde haue bene lead into some straūge countrey, & made religious: but after that his father was restored, he wēt into Fraūce, & attended vpon the frēch king. When the matter was pacified, the Lātgraue sent a messager wt letters to the Emperour in Spain, & the cōditions of peace in writing The Lant∣graues let∣ters to the Emperour. craning pardon for him self & for duke Ulrich, & from henceforth promi¦seth al due obediēce for him & for the other. This was in the moneth of Iuly: And in Septēbre following, the Emperour answereth hym by letters frō Ualentia, how that he vnderstode the whole matter alrea∣dy The Empe. aunswere. by his brother Ferdinādo: vnto whome he hath written his mynde in this behalf, & now sheweth him more by his Ambassadour, by whō he may vnderstand of his clemencie and desire of peace and quietnes. Wherfore he doth admonishe him to perfourme in deede the thinges which he hath promised in wordes, vsing him self obediētly, & eschewig all troublesome coūsell. During the warres of Wirtēberge, Fraunces Sfortia mar¦ried yt Emp. Nece. Sfortia, duke of Millā, taketh to wife Christine, ye daughter of Chri∣stierne, king of Denmarck captiue, the Emperours nece by his syster.
The Frenche kyng would haue moued warre agaynst hym: But the death of Clement the seuenth, with whome (as I sayde before) he had The death of Clement the seuenth. made a league, was supposed to haue bene the lette and delaye therof. For he being diseased in the stomack, whan after the aduise of his phi∣sicion Curtius, he had chaunged his diet, being an aged man, dieth in this moneth of Septembre, and had to his successour Paule the third Paule ye .iii. surnamed Farnesius, whiche shortly after, made Alexander his young Nephewe by his Bastarde Sonne Peter Aloise, and his Nephewe Ascanius, by his bastarde daughter Constance, bothe Cardinalles. After that he calleth home Peter Paule Uerger oute of Germa∣ny, to vnderstande the state of the countrey: And he consulteth with his Cardinalles, howe the counsell myght be differred, tyll suche tyme as by their priuie practyse, they might fynde the meanes to set the Em∣perour and other kynges together by the eares. In conclusion they a∣greed to sende Uerger againe into Germany, to make promyse of a ge¦nerall counsell, and that he should so handle the matter, that their craft and subtiltie were not suspected, as it was in Clementes tyme: And Paule was r than Clement. that he should aduertyse the prynces howe the counsell should be hol∣den at Mantua, and there to entreate of the condicions: And that he shoulde chiefly marke what forme of disputation the Protestauntes would seke to haue, that ones knowen, he myght after prescribe vnto them suche lawes, as he knewe they woulde not come there for the same. He had also commaunded him, to incense the hartes of Prynces The practise of Prelates. against the kyng of Englande, whose Realme he intended to geue a∣waye for a pray, to hym that coulde get it: And that he shoud see more ouer whether that Luther and Melancthon, myght throughe anye meanes be broughte from their purpose. Also certen Cardinalles and byshoppes were chosen to deuise, some refourmation for the Clergie, whiche in fyne was made and puplished, as in place shalbe declared. Kynge Ferdinando was causer, that Paule sent againe Uerger, saying that he was a very fitte man for the purpose. At this tyme Andrewe Gritte. was Andrewe Gritte, Duke of the state of Uenyse, a man of great au∣thoritie for his singular wysdome and experience. Who what tyme he liued at Constantinoble, had a bastarde sonne called Lewys: whiche Lewys his sonne. being there brought vp frō his yougth, where he had a good witte, & by his syngular industrie had attayned to great ryches, and throughe his lyberalitie had gotten many Frendes first by the gentlemen of the courte, and after by the meanes of Ibrain Bascha, who at that tyme myght doe all thynges alone: he was so well knowen with the Empe∣rour Soliman, that he was also admitted vnto his priuate talke. Thus vsing the oportunitie of tyme through the beneuolence and libe∣ralitie Hongary. of the great Turke, he came in to Hongary with great power & dignitie, to possesse that part of Slauonie, that is next vnto the bor∣ders
of Uenife to his own priuate vse, & to kepe the nether part of Hon¦gary, wherof Belgrade is chiefe, for the Emperour of ye Turkes. He had a sonne named Anthony, bishop of Quineueecclesia: whom bishop Clement purposed, for his father & grādfathers sake, to haue made Car¦dinall: But in the meane whyle that Lewys was in hope of no lesse than a kyngdome, and had in muche reputation of all men: And that his father was glad exceadingly of the good and lucky successe of his Sonne, by occasion of a grudge and a faction reysed againste him, he was taken by his aduersaries and beheaded, aboute the same tyme that Paule succeded Clement. In this meane tyme beginneth anewe persecution in Fraunce, againste them that were anye thynge suspec∣ted Persecution in Fraunce. of Lutheranisme, wherof in dede the occasion was this. In the citie of Paris and certen other places, and euen within the kynges palace, aboute one tyme, in the night season, sondry billes, were set vp against the masse and other poinctes of Religion: And streight wayes inquyrie and searche was made, and many were apprehended, some by information, and some by suspition, whiche after they were racked, were brent alyue and vnstrangled, whiche was terrible to beholde: For they beyng fastened to an engyne, and lifted vp in to the ayre, wer The punysh¦ment of the Godly. after let downe into the fyre from on hyghe, and there fynged & skor∣ched, were hoysed vp agayne: and at the length the hangeman shoulde cut the corde, and they fall downe into the fyre vnderneath them. And suche also as were any thynge learned, had their tongues cut out, lest either thei should vtter the cause of their death, or declare vnto the peo¦ple The crueltie of Iohn Mo∣rin. the somme of their doctrine. And for this busines, was Iohn Mo∣tine, the Lieuetenaūt Criminell, a very mete minister: For as he could moste craftely smel and searche them out, that were any thynge at all suspected, so lykewyse whan he had founde them in execution and ex∣treme A booke of marchaūted. punyshement, he passed in all extremitie. Neuerthelesse at the same tyme came forth a booke in Frenche without the name of the au∣thour, against Romyshe marchauntes, tempered with mirth and gra∣uitie. And first he sayeth howe that marchandise is a kynde and trade of lyfe, neyther dishonest nor vnprofitable for the common wealth, so it be voyde of fraude and auarice. For of this kynde of men. Christe toke his similitude what tyme he commaunded that the talentes receiued should be occupied that they might be made gainfull. Whiche place in dede is to be vnderstande in a mistery: for nothynge lesse becommeth the pastours and ministers of the churche, than the lest suspicion of fil∣thy lucre. Notwithstanding almighty God being offended with the wickednes of men hath suffered to enter into his churche, not only ry∣che and welthy marchauntes, but also theues and murtherers. For who wyll not call hym a thefe, that eyther selleth an othermans goo∣des for his owne, or counterfeited wares, for ryght and true? Is not
the bier foule disceaued? But this thyng hath chaunced vnto vs longe synce: For in steade of true shepeheardes, are crept in exceadyng raue∣nyng wolues. And al be it that no mans witte or tongue is sufficiētly able to expresse theyr craft and subtiltie, yet wyll I touche it a little. Wherfore these marchauntes of whome I speake here, are craftie be∣yonde Crafty mar∣chauntes. all measure, and haue so auaunced their trafficke, that there is not so lytle a corner any where, that they haue not fylled full of theyr stuffe. And al this through a pretensed kynde of fayned holines. In ap∣parell they differ from the rest, and for the moste part are all shauen in the crowne: Neyther maye any others, than suche as haue the greate beastes charact, or Balles marke, be permitted to occupie that trade of marchaundyse. These only sell and sell againe, and chaunge, and that Busy mar∣chauntes. at al times: For other marchauntes cease from their busynes vpon ho∣ly dayes, especially on principall feastes: Agayne they followe and oc∣cupie for the moste part, but one kynde of marchaundyse as Woulles or Sylkes, or els Corne or Wyne, or els Cattel, or Metall, or Grossery wares: But these marchauntes let slippe no time of the yeare, and thei occupie al maner of wares, and nothing escapeth their handes, nother men, women, nor young chyldren, as well borne as vnborne. For they reape againe of all thinges in generall: Unto their luste serueth hea∣uen and hell, the earth and tyme it selfe, yea in all creatures lyuinge, & without lyfe, wyne, bread, oyle, flaxe, milke, butter, chese, water, salte, fyre, and perfumes. Of all these thynges can they wrynge out golde & A straunge chaunge. syluer, to the wonderfull losse of people, both concernyng their goodes and chiefly their soule, hauing infected and vtterlye extynguyshed the true doctrine of God. What thinke you it not a point of a subtile mar∣chaunt to sell a thyng and that very dere, wherof the bier hath none o∣ther commoditie, sauyng only the syght of the thing? Other marchaū∣tes, whan they set forth their wares to sell, are wonte to say commō∣ly, you shall see for your loue, and by for your money: but these do farre otherwyse. If any man departe, they are streightwayes readye to de∣maunde of you, whether you wyll haue the beste crosse, and the beste bere cloth whan the corps goeth to burieng, or els yt worste, or the best sauyng one: for as you shall choyse, so shall you paye accordingly. I be∣seche the what hast thou for thy money, or what thinge cariest thou a∣waye besydes the syght therof? For they laye vp their wares againe, & the next daye sell it to an other for as muche. It is a lyke policie, to en∣crease the pryce of the thynge for the better apparell of the marchaunt, The Price of the masse is derer som tyme after as the parsō is. for in case the abbot, or the bishop do say you a masse, it must coste more than if a monke or a chaplayne saye it. In the whiche thynge in deede they differ nothing from common harlottes, for the gayer the whore is, the derer she selleth her filthines. But what pratty sleyght is it, to sell the selfe and same thynge at one instaunt to sondry men, and they
neuer the wyser: especially  suche places where is great resort of peo∣ple. There cometh a man of honour or worship into the freers church, & desireth to haue a masse, the freer doucketh: and sayeth by and by syre: And furth with an other craueth the same, and lykewyse the thyrde, or more also, at the laste commeth he forth disguysed, and whan masse is done, taketh the whole rewarde of euery of them. And thinke you this is nothynge? This gere doth not wante a wylie wytte: And for the moste parte you shall fynde, that they nede lytle other thynge to make their profite of than crafte and pollycie. It fortuneth that a poore wo∣man commeth into the churche, & setteth vp a candell before an image: my marchaunt the priest is at hande, whiche fyngereth the candell, putteth it out, and selleth the same to sundry others, one after an other. For al the sorte of them occupie waxe, the poorer sorte, as I haue now tolde you, but the greatter cobbes, in sealyng their letters and other writinges of the whiche sorte be those that are commonly called Offi∣cialles, Commissaries, Seale kepers, Notaries, and such other lyke. But that great Choploch whiche so farre exceadeth all others, that he placeth him selfe two degrees aboue God, for where as God is called the od mar∣chaunt. Sanctus deus, he wyll be called Sanctissimus, that is to saye, holy God, and the other most holy father: he in dede vseth no ware, but by a mar¦uelous artificial policie, thaungeth leade into golde, farre exceadinge all the Alcumisticall multipliers that euer were, agayne he selleth har∣tes very dere, namely redde or purple, whiche after the byers haue o∣nes gotten on their heades, they are as bragge and as proude as pe∣cockes, and iette vp and downe in all places, where is great resorte of people, to shewe and set forth them selues, and moste commonlye fre∣quente the courtes of kynges, and Emperours, with whome they are checkmate. For they haue wonderfull great prerogatiues, and maye enioye as many byshoprikes and benefices as they lyste, without any charges or paymentes. And againe they are of that numbre whiche are in election to clyme to the hyghest degree and seate of dignitie. Af∣ter whose example, the doctours of Louen, and of Paris, namely the Sorbonistes, do sell their cappes also to the Batchelars of diuinitie, and of their charges, fare ryght delicately. But here woulde I fayne Pope Iohn a woman. knowe, for as muche as Iohn the eyght of that name, was a woman, and deliuered of a chylde going a procession, in the thirde yeare of her byshopryke (I saye) I would fayne know first, whether she were cho∣sen by the vertue of the holy ghoste? Again whether her doinges were to be approued and ratified, what tyme she solde Cardinalshippes, by∣shoprikes, & Abbotshippes? Finally what is to be thought of the priests marke, that she receiued. But I returne to my purpose, which is to de∣clare that in all the whole worlde, is there not to be founde, more fyne crafte and subtiltie, than is in these kynde of marchauntes. Do we not
see howe they haue gotten into their handes, Empyres, kyngdomes, countreis, cities and great possessions? Haue they not oftentymes de∣posed Couetous marchaunts kinges and Prynces, spoyled them of their Realmes and domi∣nions, and brought them into muche mysery? And nowe are they of suche force and power, that they kepe al these thynges by stronghand, Proude mar¦chauntes. and wyll tourmoyle heauen and earth together, rather than they wil forgoe or lose one iote. Oh vnsatiable woulues: howe ryghte in tymes paste, haue the Prophetes and Apostles, namely Paule and Peter, paynted and set you forth in your colours. Other marchauntes force no man to bye their wares: but these doe compell men, wyll they nyll they to bye. And if any do refuse their baggage, they crie out vpon him Heretike, to the fyre with hym. There dieth a very poore man, leauing behinde him wyfe and chyldren, not able to helpe them selues: A pitie∣full case surely, and the poore wydowe were worthy to be releued, but what do they? They not only haue no compassion vpō her, but hauing an eye to their praye, immediatly after that they haue mumbled vp a fewe prayers, must haue money and good chere, and besydes that the parson and vicar wyll haue for a mortuary, or a coarse present, the best thynge that is about the house. But what greater iniurye can be Theuishe marchaunts done, than to sell a thynge that is not his owne, yea and to sell it vn∣to those that haue moste ryght to it, and to sondry men one thyng. Tel me, I pray the, who bought the belles & hanged them vp? Unto whō belongeth the churche flowre? Is it their patrimony? no forsouthe. Why than do they sel the ryngyng of the belles, and the church floure, so dere and so oftentymes? Perauenture they wyll saye, it is the right of the churche. I graunt, but not of that churche, whiche Christe hath washed, instituted, and iustified, but of the same wherein they walke, that is replenyshed with theftes, robberies, and all other kynd of vice. For Christe commaundeth all these thynges to be geuen frely. But it is a sporte and a pleasaunt syght to see, howe the Rauens wyll stryue amonges them selues for the carion. For when any ryche man is dead, Brawlynge Freers. by and by come they flockyng and swarming, gaping eche man for his praye full busely, especially those that are called beggyng freers. For the graye freers contende with the Dominickes, and the white freers with the Austen, oftentimes about the buriyng, a kynde of people that is idle, sloughtful, and not only vnprofitable, but also very chargeable, and worthy to be whipped out of euery good common wealth. These thynges that I haue sayde, can not be denied, and are sene dayly: and yet is this miserable worlde so assotted, and mortall men so blynded, that they can not vnderstande with what spyrite they are moued. Whan a benefice or prebende is fallen (Lord God) what busie suite, what gadding and prickyng vp and downe, what diligent inquisition Selling of benefices. is made to knowe the yearely value, what it is worthe to be absent, &
what to be resident vpon it, what profites arryse of the christenyng of childrē, of mariages, pilgrimages, & reliques of saintes, & what may be leuied of buriynges, habites, and diriges, by legacies and laste willes. But the moste auauntage is gotten by suche sainctes, as for some no∣table propertie and power are sore feared, as sainct Laurēce, and S. Angry salu∣tes. Anthony, S. Roche, and suche other angry sainctes, whiche muste be pleased with vowes and great giftes. But oh ye kinges and Princes, why do you wynke at so wicked and detestable thinges? Why do you so longe suffer so paciently, so many great enormities? They wyll in dede refuse to be reformed by you, and yet doubtles haue you the rule ouer them, whether they wyl or no. For God hath geuē you the sword and authoritie to punyshe: And why do you not vse the same than, and be auenged of this moste cruell kynde of extortioners? God requyreth this dutie at your handes, whiche if ye do neglecte, he wyll not leaue it vnpunyshed. Would to God you were as diligent in auauncing his glory, as they are vigilante and circumspect in handlyng of their mat∣ters, for they let slyppe none occasion. They kepe so good watche, that Wyly mar∣chauntes. nothing can escape them, hauing as many eyes as had eyther Ianus or Argus. If they here the sound of the bel, they runne thither streight, if any welthie persone be sicke, they put them selues in prease, and will neuer awaye tyll they haue their rewarde: At euery mariage wil they be, and must blesse the brides bed, and saye ouer it certen praiers, chast and holy men (I warrant you) whiche liue a sengle lyfe moste filthely, to the entent they may more at libertie, play their partes in all naugh∣tines. And this whiche I haue spoken here of marchauntmen, concer∣neth also marchaunt women called nunnes, wherof ther be sondry or∣ders. Idle N But it can not be expressed with wordes, what idolatry and wic¦kednes, all this rabble had induced. At the last arryse thou O God, & auenge thy self for the glory of thy name, into whose league or societie, no man ought to presume to come. And where as this foresayd buche∣ry, began in the moneth of Nouembre: In Ianuary followyng, the kyng came to Paris, and to appease Gods wrath, he goeth a pylgry∣mage to diuers sainctes, with an vncredible nombre and concourse of people. They worshyp at Paris sainct Geneuefa a virgin, aboue al o∣ther sainctes. Whose image was nowe caried about with great pōpe, and solempne procession. Whiche is neuer wont to be done, but in ty∣me S. Geneue∣fa yt goddes of Paris. of extreme daunger, whan either Gods wrath is pacified, or that they muste fyght a great battell or els when they feare great penury and skarsitie of corne and wyne. For than flye they vnto her, as vnto the laste ancker, and only porte of theyr succour: And the people are perswaded, that her helpe was neuer yet desyred in vaine, in so mutch as some wyll saye, howe God can do verey mutche, but saynct Gene∣uefa is the sauiour of Paris. It is caried of foure butchers, by an olde
custome, whiche prepare them selues hereunto certen dayes before, by fasting and prayer and there be officers appoynted to make rowme & waye, whiche is not done without great payne. For when the image is borne about, the people runne vnto it on euery syde with great de∣uotion, and well are they that may touche it with theyr fyngers ende, or els with theyr cappe or handkerchief, so that the thronge and prease of people is beyonde all reason. Whan masse was done, and the kyng had dyned in the byshops palace by our ladies churche in the presence The kinges oration. of his chyldren, and the foreyne Ambassadours, and al his nobilitie, he made an oration full of affections, testifying the inward sorow, which he had conceaued of the presumption and naughtines of these wic∣ked persones: Than after he had made a longe discourse concernynge his obedience to the churche: he exhorted them all to beware of the pe∣stiferous secte, for none should escape without punyshement that was taken with the maner. And if he knewe any part of his owne body in∣fected with this contagion, he sayed he woulde teare it away, least it should growe any further. But to make amendes towardes God, the same daye were syx brought forth, whiche beynge fastened to the en∣gines, as before is sayde, in sondry places, as the kynge should passe by home to his owne house, were burnt, the fyre beyng kyndled at the sa∣me instaunt, that the kyng should go that waye by, and they beseching hym of mercie and pardon. It is the custome of Fraunce to doe execu∣tion at after none: And there when silence is proclaimed, are redde the causes of his punyshemen: But whan any man is executed for heresy, The maner of execution in Fraunce. if it be touchyng the iustification of fayth only without respect of wor∣kes, or against praying to sainctes, or if he haue affyrmed that Christe only is the byshop and aduocate of mankinde, or if he haue eaten fleshe on dayes forboden, whiche is death with them, there is no suche thyng spoken of, but generally is reported to haue offended the diuine Maie∣stie, and bene cōtumelious against the virgyn Mary, & other sainctes, and to haue broken the lawes of our mother holy churche. An therfore the people beleue that there is nothynge more hurtfull, and wicked in The Luthe∣rians are ab borred. all the worlde than this kynde of people: And it is cōmonly seen there, that whan they are burning in flammes of fyre, the people wyll gnashe theyr teeth at them, and euen in the myddes of theyr tourmentes, wyl curse and deteste thē as wicked and vnworthy to loke vpō the sonne. And where as the Turkes Ambassadours were at the same tyme in Fraunce, and the kyng hymselfe had heard, that he was for this same cause, brought into hatred and suspicion throughout Germany: And that this fyryng had offended manye, the first day of February, he ad∣dressed his letters vnto all the Prynces and states of the Empyre, ex∣cusyng The Frēche kinges let∣ters. both the commyng of the Turkes Ambassadours into Fraūce, by the example of others, whiche haue sent & receyued Ambassadours
from the Turke in lyke case: And also the burnyng of Lutherians, sai∣yng that he was constrayned to be seuere, against his owne nature & wyll, by reason of the rashenes of certen whiche vnder the pretence of Religion, intended the destruction of the common wealth, and so ex∣cuseth the matter as though it had bene for rebellion, and not for Reli∣gion, that these men were executed. At the first beginning of the spring tyme, the Lantgraue went vnto king Ferdinando, as in the yeare be∣fore The Lant∣graue. it was agreed vpon for a full reconcilement, and there founde he Peter Paule Uerger, newly come thither from Rome. Who vpō this occasion did his message to the Lantgraue, concerning the counsel be∣fore mentioned, but he taking deliberation, made him none other aun∣swere. After yt Uerger traueling to the rest of the Princes, applied his busines with diligence. And a fewe monethes after, the Lantgraue, Duke Ulriche also, went vnto kyng Ferdināde. For where as it was conuenaunted that they should both come and aske him pardon, com∣myng at seueral tymes, it was easely graunted. Howe beit, Duke Ul∣riche was sore offended, both with the Lantgraue and also with the Duke of Saxon, that they had consented that he shoulde holde his landes of the house of Austriche, and was of long tyme doubtful, whe∣ther he woulde ratifie the peace made or no, at the lengthe by the per∣swasion of his frendes, he went to Ferdinando, according to the con∣uenauntes. In the moneth of Aprill, the Emperour tooke shippinge at The Empe∣rour voiage into Barba∣ria. Barchin, and transported his armie into Barbarie. And whan he had wonne the citie of Tunnes, and taken the castell of Golete, he restored the kynge of that countrey Muleasses, being of Mahumetes Religiō, whome Barbarossa the Turkes admirall had before expulsed, byn∣dyng hym to paye him tribute, and after he had fortified the Castell, with a strong garnyson, he sayleth into Sicilie. Unto this warre, by∣shop Paule, sent certen Galleis furnyshed, by the cōduicte of virginie Ursine, & also did permit him to take tenthes of the clergie in Spaine. Barbarossa through our mens negligence and ignoraunce steppynge Barbarossa. asyde escaped: And first he fled to Hippon, and from thence to Argi∣ers, where he repared his nauie and returned to Constantinople. In Englande were two notable men, Iohn Fysher byshop of Ro∣chester, and syr Thomas Moore knyght, both very well learned. For Rochestr & More behea∣ded. the fyrst wrote sondrye bookes against Luther, and Moore also, whi∣lest he was Chauncelour, whiche is the chiefest office there, extremely punished suche as were suspected to be of Luthers doctrine. They nei∣ther approued the kings diuorsemēt, & much lesse the act of Parlamēt, which denying the byshop of Romes supremacie, affirmed ye kyng to be head of the church of Englād: wherupōbeing both apprehended, wher they perseuered obstinatly ī their opininiō, th yere in ye month of Iuly
they were beheaded. The byshop of Rome had made Rochester Car∣dinall, whylest he was prysoner in the Towre, which thyng was sup∣posed Rochester Cardinall. to haue kyndled more hatred against hym. Afterwarde about the ende of Octobre, Fraunces Sfortia Duke of Millan died without issewe, whiche gaue the occasion of a newe The death of Sfortia. warre, as shalbe shewed hereafter. In the meane tyme the Emperour came out of Sicilie vnto Naples, and in his letters written the laste daye of Nouembre to the Protestauntes, he sayd in dede that he wold obserue the peace of Norinberge, notwithstandyng he was informed howe thei had taken churche goodes and did withholde the same, and whan iudgement was geuen, that they should make restitution, they refused, alledging the pacification of Norinberge: which appereth vn∣to hym vnreasonable, and can not but discontente and offende hym. About this time also went the prince Electour of Saxony vnto kyng Ferdinando in Austriche, and hauing dispatched his busines, for the whiche he went thether, in his retourne home at Prage, the chief citie of Bohemy, met him the byshoppes Legate, Peter Paule Uerger, who declared vnto hym his message touchyng the generall counsell, Uergerusto the Duke of Saxen. whiche the byshop Paule intended (as he sayed) to holde at Mantua, free, Godly, and lawfull, without any condicions, whereunto al other Prynces had consented, for he had bene with them all, namely in Ger∣many. Wherfore if he should nowe refuse it, men woulde suppose that nothinge could contente hym. When both the Emperour and kynge Ferdinando are willyng with the thing and the place: and the byshop so ernestly desyreth the same, that vnlesse he brynge it to passe, he wyll doubtles be wery of his lyfe. Therfore nowe the tyme requyreth, that he should declare howe muche he loueth the aduauncement of Gods glory and the common wealth, willing him not to let passe this presēt oportunitie, whiche he should hardely at any tyme hereafter recouer. And albeit he woulde nothynge further the counsell, yet neuerthelesse should it procede, and Christ they trusted would not fayle them. Wher vnto the Duke of Saxon sayd, whā he had deuised with his fellowes, The Dukes aunswer. he wold make him an answere, requiring him to deliuer vnto him such thinges as he had spoken in wrytinge. Wherfore at the kalēdes of De∣cembre exhibiting a wryting, he declareth thinges more at large, and otherwyse than he had spoken before, howe other Ambassadours were sent vnto other kinges, and he vnto king Ferdinando & the Princes of Germany, how Mantua is the place agreed vpon by the Emperour & other kynges, & that Germany is ful of Sacramētaries, Anabaptists, and suche other sectes, that it is to muche daunger for other nations to kepe a counsell emonges them, for they are for the moste parte Fran∣ticke and without all reason. Agayne such as supposed, that the byshop woulde gyue place in his ryght, that hath bene of so longe time confir∣med
to be farre disceaued: And they also that beleue howe the Empe∣rour can holde a prouinciall counsell of Germanye, agaynste the by∣shops wyll, are as muche abused. And where as they talke of a saufe conduicte and pledges for theyr commyng into Italy, there is no cau∣se why it should so be: For Mantua is a Citie of the Empyre, nere vn∣to Germany, and nexte the dominions of the Emperour and the Ue∣netians, wherfore there is no daunger. Finally he sayeth howe he wil go to kyng Ferdinando, abiding there for their aunswere. He had been Uergerus spake with Luther. before in Saxony, and had spokē with Luther at wyttemberge. And in his retourne to kyng Ferdinando, he met with the Duke comming from thence homewarde. The Protestauntes were appointed before to mete at Smalcalde the sixte of December, for other matters. Wherfore the .xxi. of the The answer of the Prot. same, they framed an aunswere for the byshops of Romes Ambassa∣dour, whiche they saye is not so exacte as the thynges requyreth, yet for as muche as he desyred to haue the same with expedition, playne & manifest. And first howe they haue declared their myndes concerning a counsell, both in diuerse assemblies, and also two yeare synce, to the Emperours and byshop Clementes Ambassadours: For they also wy∣she to haue a lawfull counsel, for the preseruation of the cōmon wealth and common saluation of all men, and haue required this of the Em∣perour ioyntly with other Princes, who also thought it nedefull hym selfe, doubting not but all good men do desyre suche a counsell, as may helpe and profite the common wealth. For it greueth many good men, that the true and holsome doctrine is through the wicked crueltie of certen men euery where oppressed, the members of the churche tone a sondre, and open crymes mainteined: but suche crueltie becommeth Crueltie is vnsemely in churchmen. not the Rulers of the churche. Wherfore if euer there were any, nowe is moste nede of a counsell, that bothe the olde accustmed vyces maye be roted out, and also vniuste violence and crueltie be restrayned, and the churche from henceforth set in due ordre. They therfore wyll not fayle the common wealth herein, but wyll ryght gladlye come vnto suche a counsell, as in sondrye assemblies of the Empyre hath bene a∣greed vpon: Besechyng God that all the doinges there, may redounde vnto his glory, and the saluation of men. And wher as the bishop hath chosen Mantua to be the place, they truste assuredly that the Empe∣rour wyll not in this poynte swarue from the decrees of the Empyre, and his owne promyse also, in as muche as it was prouyded, that the counsell should be holden in Germany. For where he sayeth it is daungerous keping of the same there, the truthe is farre other wyse, for what peryll can be there, where all the Prynces and Cyties are obedient to the Emperoure onlye? Where the Cyties be so ordered that they defende straungers from iniuries,
and saue them from all peryll? Therfore oughte it chieflye to be kepte there, to the intent that matters in controuersie, might duely be deba∣ted, that men might frankely speake, and iudge vpryghtly, and feare no force nor faction, but saye theyr myndes freely. Two yeares paste, Clement the seuenth promysed a counsell, with conditions verye cap∣tions. And nowe the chiefest point is craftely left out, touchyng the ly∣bertie of the counsell and more of the treatie, and partlye referred to Their craft is spied. the Byshop of Rome, whose office they saye it is to call and ordre the counsell. Nowe is the byshop whiche hath so ofte condempned theyr re¦ligion and doctrine, their opē enemie. But in case they should permitte theyr aduersary to geue iudgement, than coulde not the counsell be free: wherein by the aduyse of the Emperour and other Prynces. Mete men should be chosen out of the whole numbre, whiche accor∣dyng vnto Gods worde, might heare and determine the cause: For a counsell is the iudiciall seate not only of the byshop of Rome, but of all other states also: for it is to be proued by the examples of the primatiue churche, and also by holy scripture, that Prynces and other states ha∣ue in tymes paste been admitted in counselles, for the hearyng of mat∣ters. But wheresome woulde haue the byshoppes power to be aboue the authoritie of the whole churche, it is agaynst all reason and full of tyrannye: For it belongeth as well to the Emperour and other ciuile The Empe. may order counsels. states to set in foote in counselles, and to chose experte men, especiallye in suche causes, where the byshoppes errours be impugned, that is to wytte false doctrine and Idolatry for this thynge is permitted also by the byshop of Romes lawe. And feinge that this is the vniuersall cause of all men and concer∣neth Pepes con∣cempned of Heresy. the whole common wealth, it is the Emperours parte and other Prynces to forsee, that vpryght iudgement be had: For both other by∣shops of their owne people, and also byshoppes of Rome haue in times paste bene condempned for Heresy and obstinacie, of the Emperoure and the churche together. And at this tyme there is contention of manie weightie matters, whiche the byshop doth defende not in wordes only, but also by wyc∣ked and cruell decrees, punishyng most sharpely, suche as obey not the same. For as muche therfore as he is an aduersary, and susteineth the one halfe of the sute, the thinge it selfe requireth that the whole church, the Emperour & other kinges take in hande to prescribe an ordre, for the deciding of the matter: wherfore as they haue done euer, so they requyre nowe also, that the matter maye be handled vpryghtlye, ac∣cordynge to the examples of holye wrytte, and the olde primatiue churche. And if it so maye be, they wyll not be behynde with theyr partes, trustynge that truthe shall come to lyghte, and the glorye of our Sauioure Christe be aduaunced and tranquillitie be restored
to the Churche, but if it be otherwyse, there is no doubte but greater commotions wyll arryse therof, than hytherto hath bene seen: for their partes, they wil at no tyme neglecte the common wealth. And as they can not forsake nor shrynke from the true doctrine, so lykewyse in all other matters, they will do all thynges for peace and concorde. The kyng of Fraūce whiche was fully determined to make warre in Italy sent Ambassadour Williā Bellaye, to this assemblie at Smal The oration of the Frēch Ambassad. calde. Who the .xix. daye of Decembre, had there an eloquent oration. And first he excuseth the kynges seueritie in punyshynge certen of his owne subiectes, whiche not withstanding was nothing preiudicial or hurtfull to their cause of Religion, though some euill tongues dyd re∣porte so, no more than it was displeasure to him, what tyme they with all their force did suppresse the rebellion of their commons, and puny∣shed the Anabaptistes, doing yet nothing without iust cause. wherfore he distrusteth not but they be men of such wysdome and grauitie, that they wyll of no lyght reporte conceaue any euill opinion of so noble a kynge that is their frende, who was nowe for vrgent causes (not here to be spoken of) constrayned against his nature to vse extreme punish∣ment, Folysh pitie marreth a citie. lest hauing so large a Realme, he should through ouermuche le∣nitie, set open the wyndowe of wickednes, to the temeritie of manye. And touching their religion and doctrine, the kyng wyll not take vpō him the persone of the iudge, but in dede lyketh many thinges well, & the rest he leaueth vndiscussed. After this he goeth about to wynne theyr fauour, and confuteth theyr opinion whiche had warned them to be ware of forayne Ambassades: For he proueth that the same doth tende to theyr owne hynderaunce and bondage: sayinge that there is no people so stronge that can long prosper and floryshe, vnlesse they be mainteined by the league and amitie of theyr neyghbours. But the frendshyp of the kynges of Fraunce, and the Prynces of Germanye, Of Fraunce and Germa∣ny one of∣spring. hath bene of suche auncientie, and both nations procedinge of one ori∣ginall, and lye so borderynge together, that they maye be not onlye an ayde and strengthe, but also an honour and beautie, the one vnto the other. Therfore whan the kynge hearde saye howe the Germaynes dyd hardely agree amonge them selues, he was ryght sorye, and as muche as in hym lyeth, wysheth a reconcilement: fearyng lest this dissention in Religion, should come to some sorowfull ende. Wherfore vnderstandinge that for theyr owne preseruation, they were nowe here assembled, the kynge had sent hym to declare vnto them his aduise to be thus. That for as muche as a free and general counsel could not as yet be obtained, the Germains within thē selues shold assemble altogether & come to some vnitie & concord, for the furtheraūce of the which cause,
in case they be so contented, he will chose out certen well learned men and experte diuines in Fraunce, and sende them into Germany to be at the same reconcilement, or els if they woulde sende some of theirs in to Fraunce for the lyke purpose, they should do him a maruelous great pleasure. In the meane tyme, he doth exhorte them to be at peace a∣monges them selues & knitte their mindes with mutual consent & bro∣therly loue, and the king wyl neuer ayde their ennemies, neyther with his helpe nor counsell, in case they continue their good wyll towardes hym, as they haue done alwayes hitherto. In the beginnyng of this booke, I shewed you howe the iudges of the imperiall chamber con∣trary to the Emperours decree, made out proces against the Prote∣stauntes: The iudges of the cham∣ber trouble yt Protestātes. For the iudges in dede wer of the Romish religiō, and what tyme the Emperour was retourned from the warre of Austriche into Italy, they at the suite of the clergie, whiche had complayned on the Protestauntes, attempted the lawe against them: And albeit the Em¦perours proclamation were to the contrary, yet did they proceede a∣gainst them. The protestauntes wrote herein to the Emperour, And the Duke of Saxon him selfe traueled to kynge Ferdinando, who cō∣maunded the lawe to cease, and ratifieth the peace made by the Em∣perour, but that would? not staye them. Than did the Protestauntes vtterly refuse their iudgement, as suspected and their enemies, decla∣ryng the causes wherfore. But that would not be admitted, for they were encouraged by the Emperours letters, whereby he gaue them The Emp. letters. authoritie to iudge, whiche were matters of Religion and which not, so that after that they proceaded not onlye in doubtfull causes, but in suche also as concerned religion and nothyng els. After this the Duke of Saxon obtayneth a newe commaundement from the kyng Ferdi∣nando, but all was in vayne. Finally after muche adoe Ferdinando consented that he would fynde the meanes to staye all matters in the lawe, whiche the Duke and his fellowes had touchyng Religion, cō∣prysed in the peace of Norinberge: Unto suche thynges as the French The answer of the Prote¦stauntes to the Frenche Ambassad. Ambassadour had spoken, this answere was made. Albeit that of the execution done, reportes went diuersly, yet for that he sayeth, how thei went about sedicion, they can not be muche offended with the kynges doynges herein, whiche in deede woulde suffer no suche thynge them selues in their owne countrey: Neuerthelesse they woulde wyshe, the kynge should haue a respecte vnto suche as do professe the pure doctri∣ne of the Gospell, whiche they protested in the assemblye at Auspurge, and not to punyshe them with the rest, for it can not be denied, but ma¦ny false and wicked opinions, are crept into the churche, which vnlear¦ned and malicious persones, do defende with great crueltie, to mayn∣teyne their lucre and Authoritie: and they through a maruelous poly∣cie do forge oftentimes great crymes, vpon the good and innocēt per∣sones,
to exasperate the kynges mynde agaynst them: But seyng that it is the propre office of kynges and Princes, to seeke Gods glorye, to The duty of Princes. pourge the churche of crrours, and to inhibite vniuste crueltie, they de¦syre instantly that the same moste mightie kyng would wholy applye him selfe hereunto, for if he so doe, than wyll they suppose that he bea∣reth a frendly and louyng mynde towardes them, which they wyshe to be lucky, and fortunate to his highnes, & to the churche. Touchinge the auncient alliaunce and frendshyp betwixt the kynges of Fraunce and the Prynces of Almaygne, all his talke was to them ryght plea∣saunt, and they wyll to their powers endeuour, that the same mutuall loue and amitie may long continue. And as concernyng the reconcile∣ment of opinions in religion, they desyre nothyng els but that the mat¦ter may be heard indifferently, and determined by a lawfull counsell: And for as muche as it is not the office of the byshop of Rome only, to appointe the counsell, but that the same thynge also concerneth other kynges and Princes, they desyre the kynge to forsee, that there be no violent counsell called, in a place suspect & perillous, to the intent that vnder the name of a counsel, the true doctrine be not extinguished, but that in so weyghty matters as concerne the preseruation, and peace of the vniuersall churche, and euery particular persone, free disputations and vpright iudgement be had accordingly: Whiche thinge should get the kyng immortal fame and thankes, not only in this present age, but also in tyme to come, so longe as the worlde should endure. As for the conferens to be had betwene the learned mē of Fraunce and Germa∣ny, it requireth a long deliberation and diuerse cōmissions extende not to suche matters. But so sone as any thyng may be determined herein they wyll aduertyse the kyng by their letters. For they desyre nothyng more than that holsome doctrine myght be set forth and auaunced: last of all, where he sayde howe the kynge would geue none ayde against them, they were very glad to heare thereof: wherfore in all thynges that concerne not the Emperour and the Empyre, they also wyll assist no man against hym. The Ambassadour had also priuate talke with Pontane, with Melancthon, with the Lantgraues learned men, and with Iames Sturmins, of sondry doctrines, and declared what was the kynges opinion in euery article, and the myndes also of other lear∣ned men in Fraunce, especially of Paris. Of the byshop of Romes su∣premacie, The kinges opinion of matters in controuersie of the Lordes supper, of masse, of the inuocation of sainctes, of Images, of free wyl, of purgatory, of iustification, of monastical vo∣wes, of marriage of priestes: And that in moste of these thynges, the kyng agreeth with the booke, that Melancthon hath wrytten of com∣mon places: touchyng the byshop of Rome the kynge is wholy of Phi∣lippus The commō¦places of Ma¦lancthon. opinon, that he is not chief supreme by Gods lawe, but by mans lawe as he affirmeth, but the kyng of England denieth both. And cer∣tenly
the byshop vsurpeth ouermuche authoritie, whan he taketh vpō hym to depose kynges and Emperours, whiche nowe he entendeth to put in practyse against the kynge of Englande, albeit that the kynge & also diuers Cardinalles, iutreate him to the contrary. The diuines say he is head of the churche by Gods lawe, but when the kyng demaun∣ded the place they could not shewe it. He misliketh also the defence of pourgatory: For of that wel, spryngeth masse, dirige, and al theyr mar∣chaundise. But if the masse were taken away, their combes were cut, The masse mainteineth purgatory. and they should no lōger be able to defende their authoritie. And whā the kyng had graūted them certen monethes, wherin they shold proue purgatory by Scripture, they aunswered at the lengthe, howe they oughte not to reache their enemies weapons, whiche they myght vse against thē. As touching monasticall vowes, the kyng supposeth that it might be obteined of the byshop, that none should be taken in yong, Monasticall voues. and before the vowers were of type yeares, and that it should be law∣full for them to depart thence whan they woulde and mary: And thin∣keth not good to deface theyr houses, but to conuerte them in to Colle∣ges, wherein yought may be brought vp in learnyng and vertue. The diuines would in any case haue priestes to liue vnmaried, but the king had deuised this meane waye, that suche as haue maried wyues, shold remayne so styll, but the rest not to mary, or if they did, to absteyne frō the ministration of the churche. For concerning y• whiche is alledged of Paphnutius, who in the counsell of niece, perswaded the mariage of Paphnuti∣us. priestes, the diuines aunswere, that it can not be proued, that priestes haue maried at any tyme, Not withstandynge they wyl not deny but that they had wyues, before they were admitted to the ordre of priest∣hod. As concerning the lordes supper to be receyued wholye or vnder both kyndes as they terme it, the kynge had conference herein with The Lordes suppervnder both kyndes Clement the seuenth, and trusteth also that it wylbe obtayned at this byshoppes handes, that it shalbe lawfull for euery man to receiue after his conscience. Moreouer the kynge affirmeth, that a hondreth yeare synce in Fraunce, they receiued the whole supper, not in the myddes of the churche, but in chappelles, as he had heard old men make relatiō. And agayne the kynges of Fraunce do receyue the whole communiō. And where as the kynge obiected this vnto them, the diuines made aunswere that kynges were anoynted as well as priestes, and that the Scripture speaketh of a Priesthode Royall: And that the same whiche is lawfull for kynges, is not to be permitted to others, in lyke case. Furthermore in mattins and other dayly seruice, the kyng doth acknowledge that many thinges may be cut of, and many taken cleane away. And that Clemēt the seuenth committed the charge here of vnto Cardinall Crucei, a Spaniarde, whose boke of the same thing remayneth, whiche the diuines of Paris haue condempned for he∣resy:
whiche be suche a kynde of men, that wyll condempne not onlye the Germaines, as wicked and erring in Religion, but also the byshop hym selfe with all his Cardinalles, and the case require it. But seynge the whole matter is full of difficultie, the kyng is altogether addicted to haue the churche restored to vnitie and concorde. And how he hath talked herein with the Dukes of Bauier, whom he fyndeth stiffer, thā the diuines of Paris. Finally he exhorted them, to admitte no place of counsel, but by the kyng his maisters, and also the kyng of Englandes aduise, whiche wyll consent both in one. Moreouer how certen yeres past. Lewys the Frenche kyng, contended that it was not laweful for The kynges of Fraunce and Nauane ercommuni∣cated. Iuly the byshop, to appointe a counsel without the consent of the Em∣perour and other kynges. And the kyng of Nauarre was than of the same opinion, and where as Iuly did excommunicate them both, Fer¦dinando kyng of Spayne, by this title inuaded Nauarre: And that the kyng is nowe also of that mynde and opinion, neyther wyll he ad∣mitte any counsel, vnlesse the place be sure and not suspected or apt for iniury, and wherin a man may speake his mynde frely. Besydes the talke before mentioned, he was earnestly in hand with them, to enter into league with the kynge. And this was the principall cause of hys Ambassade. But where they did except the Emperour, against whom they sayde, they myght attempte nothynge, he departed without his The protest. would make no league wt the kyng. purpose, and to certen he spake in counsell, how he marueled, that they would neglecte so mightie a kyng, and sayde, the tyme woulde come, wherin they would wyshe to haue redemed his frendshyp derely. The kyng of Englande also Henry the eyght, sent thether his Ambassade, the chief wherof, was Edward Foxe byshop of Hereforde, who in the begynning made his relation. For as muche as the aliaunce and kin∣red the oratiō of byshop Fore Ambassa. for the kynge of Englande. is great, betwene the kynges of England & the Princes of Saxō, the kyng can not but beare muche good wyll towardes hym and hys cōsortes, especially synce their chief endeuour is to set forth Gods true knowledge vnto others. And al be it that for this cause only, they haue susteyned great reproche, yet doth he mislyke them neuer a whyt ther∣fore, nor iudgeth otherwyse of them than of suche good men, as con∣trary to their dutie, and without a reasonable cause wyll doe nothing, and to haue this respect only that through the true preachynge of the Gospell, Gods glory myght be aduaunced. And of the same desyre is The altera∣tion of Reli∣gion in En∣glande. the kyng also, whiche is sufficiently enough declared, by the alteratiō that is now in Englād. For by the kinges cōmaundemēt, a great part of Errours are abolyshed, and by commō assent of the whole Realme, the byshop of Rome, with all his deceiptfull iugglynges, are frō thence cleane banyshed, in lyke case as it is in Saxony. And for so muche as the same desyre and good wyll is common to them both, the kyng hath a wonderfull great affection towardes them, that they woulde thus
procede, and professe al one doctrine: for that should doubtles establysh a continuall peace and quiet. And what commotions haue arrysen of the diuersitie of opinions, the kynge vnderstandeth. And the Anabap∣tistes, by theyr example haue declared: The byshop nowe pretendeth as though he would calle a counsel: and certenly if there remayne any dissention, and they doe not agree in their doctrine, it wyl make much against them, whan they shall come to the counsell. Wherein notwith¦standyng he imputeth not the fault to the diuines, for the state of the churche was neuer so quiet, but at some tyme there hath been dissen∣tion: Whiche thynge is also proued by the example of Peter, Paule, & The state of the churche troublesome Barnabas. Therfore is an vniformitie to be sought for, that maye be grounded vpon the sure foundation of Scripture. And the byshop of Rome endeuoureth with all his myght, to let that peace and concord. Wherfore the kynge is of this opinion, that so longe as his authoritie, tyranny and crueltie endureth, it is vnpossible to come to agrement: for that the kynge hath lately deliuered his realme of Englande, out of that moste fylthie bondage, and restored it vnto lybertie, that Idole & Antichriste is nowe starke madde, and where as he can work no mis∣chief openly, he goeth about fraude and gyle, and with false forged sclaunders, to incense kynges against hym. And al be it he woulde do any thynge to mainteyne his authoritie: yet is this his deuyse and po∣lycie, to styre vp cruell warres, and set one in an others toppe. And the kynges pleasure was, that he should thus declare vnto them, not for that he stode in feare of the byshop, for he was so furnyshed with all thynges, that he cared neyther for hym, nor yet for all his adherentes, but to the intent they might clerely perceyue what Antechristes pur∣pose The rage of Antichrist. is, chieflye at this present tyme, whan he pretendeth to holde a counsell, but in his mynde intendeth farre an other thynge. The kyng doeth confesse and graunte, that a lawfull disputation were very pro∣fitable and expedient for the common wealth. But yet for all that, it ought to be forseen in any wyse, that ther be no such coūsel had as shal intreate only to establysh the bishoppes authoritie. Wherfore he requy∣reth and admonysheth them, that they wyll allowe no counsell before a common peace be made through out christendome: Moreouer he wi∣sheth that Gods true Religion and seruice maye be restored, whiche thinge to accomplyshe and mayntaine, he is content to ioyne hym selfe with them. And that these are the thynges which they were commaū∣ded to declare vnto them. And moreouer required thē that they might hereafter haue further conference in these matters priuately with cer∣ten appointed persones. For the kyng bare suche an affection towards them and their Religion, that he would employ herein al his treasure, and hym selfe also. Whereunto they made aunswere, and commending the kinges good wyll, do shewe howe their chief desyre is, that the doc∣trine
of the Gospell myght be spred far abrode. And whatsoeuer they do herein, to be done of dutie: And all be it they haue suffered for the same great rebukes and iniuries, and although thei haue procured thē selues hereby moste heinous displeasures, and haue oftentymes endu∣red the malice and threatnynges of many, yet haue they nothynge re∣lented, nor slacked therfore their enterpryse, in settyng forth that moste holy thyng. And the only cause of so great hatred & Malice was, that they had forsaken wicked errours and false doctrine. Now where the kyng promysed his ayde herein, & so ample maner, where also he hath expulsed and banyshed out of his Realme, the tyranny of the byshop of Rome, from whence as out of a well sprang all wicked idolatrye, they are glad and ioyful to heare it, and beseche God that he may thus pro∣cede. Moreouer where he doeth admonyshe thē to beware, that there be no dissention in their doctrine, they gyue hym harty thankes: but doubtles there is no controuersie at all, & they doe perseuer in the same doctrine, whiche they professed at Auspurge. For as concernynge the Anabaptistes, they be with thē extremely punyshed, vnlesse they come to amendement: And that they also reigne chiefly in those places, wher the doctrine of the Gospell is prohibited. The talke also of the byshop, and of his craftie dealynge, pleased them very muche, and that the by∣shops legate is nowe in Germany, makyng promyse of a counsel to be holden at Mantua, and howe he had talked herein with the Prynce Electour of Saxony. But what deliberate aunswere they made vnto his demaundes, is comprised in wryting, whiche he shall haue deliue∣red vnto hym to beare vnto the kyng, to the intent he may vnderstāde what is their mynde herein, for the kynges societie and coniunction, wherof he spake, they yelde him harty thankes. And also to the intent that this so holsome doctrine may kepe his ryght course, they wil spare neyther paynes nor peryl, and doubte not, but God wyl gouerne these affayres, although their aduersary doe neuer so muche contende, and spurne against them. And for because he desyreth to conferre of these thynges more at large with some men priuatly, they haue chosen cer∣ten for the same purpose, with whome he may cōmunicate his things, praying him to reporte of them so vnto the kynge, as theyr good wyll towardes hym, may appere the better through his commendation. Whan the Duke of Saxon was retourned from kynge Ferdinando The protest. league is re∣newed. to Smalcalde the twelfte of Decembre, on Christmas euen, a decree was made, that the league whiche lasted one yeare longer, shoulde be renewed for ten yeares, and howe the reste of their furniture shoulde be prouyded, and were agreed to receyue into the same league such as were wyllynge and desyrours, so that they professe the doctrine pro∣pounded of them at Auspurge, and woulde beare with them scot and lotte. Emonges whome were the Prynces of Pomerane, Ulriche
Duke of Wyrtemberge, Roberte Bauier Prynce of Bipounte, Aul∣purge, Franckeforte, Kempten, Hamborough and Hannobria. And herein toke ordre howe to withstande & defende themselues, againste the vniust iudgement of the Emperiall chambre. At the same tyme also was William Erle of Nassowe, admitted into the league. And albeit that the Lantgraue by reason of the controuersie that was be∣twixt The Erle of Nassowe. them for the lande of Chattes, did not assente, yet if any wrong were offered him for the profession of the Gospell, he sayde he woulde not fayle him, in case he desyred his ayde. This yeare also the Se∣nate The Gospel receiued at Auspurge. of Auspurge, all dissention at the length taken cleane awaye, receyueth the doctrine of the Gospell, and wrytinge their letters vnto Luther, intreate hym that he would sende them faithful ministers of the churche, and amonges others, Ur∣banus Regius.
✚ The tenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the tenth Booke THe citie of Munster through the preachyng of Barnarde Rotman, receaued the Gospell wherupon the clergie with theyr byshop forsoke the place, neuerthelesse a reconcilemēt was made by the Lantgraue. There came thether out of Hollande an Anabaptiste called Iohn of Leiden, who hauing wonne Rotman and diuers others, infected the whole citie with his poyson, in so muche as they of that secte being set on mischief, became strōger, had all thinges in common, and married many wylles. Iohn of Leiden, after the death of Iohn Matthewe, is de∣clared the chiefest Prophet and shortly after kyng vniuersall hauing his cheyalry, and power of life and death. The citie being beseged, a metinge was appointed at confluence to enforce the siege. The Anabaptistes had sent letters to the Lantgraue, and a booke of their doctrine, whiche Luther than impugned. The citie being in extreme famine, at the last was surprysed and wonne. The kyng and his companions were taken prisoners, whose execution is after recited. About this busines of Mū∣ster was an assemblie appointed at Wormes. The Duke of Sauope besegyng Geneua, is repoul∣sed. The kyng of Fraunce prepareth an armie to go towardes Millan, and by this occasion here is mentioned of the ryght whiche he pretendeth to haue there. The Emperour beynge aduertysed of his enterprises, commeth to Rome and accuseth the kyng, and solliciteth the Pope to holde a coun∣sell. The Protestauntes make a league with the kyng of Englande. The Pope publisheth the counsell to be kept at Mantua. There is warre betwyxt the Emperour and the Frenche kynge. The Archebyshop of Collon reformeth his countreis. NOWe must we come to the siege of Munster, Munster a ci¦tie of Westo¦phalia. the Metropolitane citie of Westphalia. But first are certen thinges to be repeted, euen from the beginning vntyll such tyme as the citie was finally taken, and the chief malefactours execu∣ted. I spake of Thomas Mūcer in the fist boke, howe he reysed a tumulte of the communaltie, and shewed what his doctrine was, and also howe he endeth his lyfe. Out of his schole pro∣cedeth The origi∣nal of Ana∣baptistes, their doctrie and maners a kynde of prople, whiche for their practise and doctrine, are cal∣led Anabaptistes, of whom also is some thing mētioned before, for thei prohibite the christening of children, and are thē selues baptised again, affirming that all others ought to do lykewyse, and take away al effi∣cacitie from the former baptisme. They pretende certen outwarde ho∣lynes. They teache howe it is not lawful for the christians to go to the law, nor to beare office, nor to take an othe, neither to haue any thynge priuate, yt al thīgs ought to be cōmō vnto al mē. And th{is} at ye begīning,
but afterwardes thei propounde a great deale more heinous matters, as I shall hereafter declare. And whan they began to spreade ouer all Germany, and that Luther, & almoste all other learned men inueyhed against them, and the Magistrate also punyshed them, in so much that there could no great nūbre of them cleaue together. At the length they placed them selues in this forsayde citie, whiche in dede was of great strengthe, and that fortuned thus. Not farre from the citie of Munster is there a churche of sainct Morice, wherin in the yeare of our Lorde M .D. xxxij. Barnarde Rotmā, preached the Gospell, and had a great Rotman a Preacher. audience out of the citie. And he where they deuised to receiue him in to the citie. The catholickes to hinder that, gyue hym a meane summe of money, to the intent he should go to some other place, to exercise him selfe in learning. So he departeth to certen places, where he thought to attayne to some further knowledge. After a fewe monethes retour∣neth, wherewith they beinge sore offended, doe their endeuour to de∣barre him from preaching, but that was in vayne, he had so great fa∣uoure of the people. Within a whyle certen of the beste and principall Senatours, receyue hym into the Citie. And where he was kept out of the churche, they set vp a pulpet for hym in the churche porche, and heare hym without. But where as his audience encreased daylye, re∣queste made, that the churche myght be open for hym, or els should the dores be broken vp. And he not longe after, through the aduise of certen that the people had chosen, writinge his letters into Hessia not far of, the Lantgraues countrey, desyreth that certen good and well learned men myght be sent thether to helpe hym to preache the Gospell. Wherfore a couple were sent thether from Marpurge. And when they came thether, they consulted with Rotman, and thre others howe they myght bannyshe the byshop of Romes authoritie fyrste of all, that after they myghte teache the Gospel, to the more profit of the hearers. For the compassing wherof, this waye semed vnto them best. They drawe out certen articles of the byshops errors, to the num∣bre of thyrty, and delyuer them to the Senate, beynge in the meane tyme so prepared, that vnlesse they could proue by the Scriptures that all these were directly against Gods worde, they would refuse no pu∣nyshment. The Senate cōmaundeth the catholiques of the clergie to come into the court, & there propoundeth vnto them the forsayde arti∣cles of errours. And for because they haue alwayes pretended, that theyr doctrine was pure and grounded vppon Goddes worde, and the Preachers denye the same, and wyll ieoperde theyr lyues, to proue it. They demaunde whether they wyll confute by the Scrip∣tures, suche thynges as are obiected. Beyng thus spoken vnto, and perceyuynge that the Senate tooke pleasure in the thynge, they
aunswere in fewe wordes, that they haue nothyng to alledge for them selues: And where they haue affirmed hitherto, their doinges to be The papists cō sesse their ignoraunce. ryght and good, that was done by wening and ignoraunce. Than the Senate, for as muche as they were conuicte of false doctrine, and had nothyng to saye for them selues, and confessed their owne naughtines: commaundeth from henceforth, that they teache no more, but geue place in all churches to these newe Preachers, whiche haue detected their errours. After by the consent of the Senate and the common people, churches were assigned to euerye of them where they shoulde preache. Whiche thynge the Popyshe priestes toke very displeasaunt∣ly, especially those that were of the cathedrall churche, beynge for the moste parte gentlemen borne of good houses. Who at what tyme they coulde not otherwyse preuayle, departe thence in great dislikynge and go vnto the byshop of the citie, and layinge their heades together, doe The papists forsake the citie. deuise to stoppe all wayes and passages, that there should no corne be brought vnto the citie. And a lyttle whyle after, whan all the wayes were stopped on euery syde, the byshop and the others afore sayde, for a further consultation to be had, come to Telget which is a litle town a myle without the citie: from whence was a messenger sent to the se∣nate with letters of this effect. That they shoulde forsake their enter∣pryse, and restore the olde and former state, or els they would take thē for their ennemies. The byshop was countie Fraunces Waldeck. The last before hym had Frederick, brother to the Archebyshop of Collon: Frederick forsaketh the byshoprike. But he eyther for that he coulde not haue his health in those parties, or els for because he smelled some thynge, not long before, forsoke the place of his owne accorde, and was content to lyue a priuate lyfe at home in his countrey. The Munsterians consulting of the matter, de∣teyne the messenger, & setting forth vpō Christmas euē at night, about They of mū¦ster oppresse the papistes i .C. of them, & coming vpon thē soden, taking the towne, & keping the gates yt none shold escape, they apprehend thē al. The bishop was gone thēce the day before as it happened. By & by they cary the prisoners in to the citie, amōges whom wer the chief of the clergie, & diuers others of the nobilitie. The senate demaundeth of thē, what their intēt is, and whether they purpose hereafter to disturbe the preaching of yt Gospell. They make a gentle answer how they wyl do their endeuour, that the same doctrine may floryshe, wherupon a cōuenaunt is made, the copie Condicious of peace. wherof the Senate sent vnto the Lantgraue, requestinge him for the Gospell & common wealthes sake, he would further this matter. Who sendeth certen of his counsel, by whose meditatiō it was cōcluded that being reconciled in their myndes, & forgetting al displeasure past, both partes should obserue the peace, that the Gospell should be preached in syxe churches, that al wicked & supersticious Religion should be aboli∣shed, that in the cathedrall churche nothyng should be altered, neyther
that the citie should imagine, that the same cōcerned them any thyng: This cōclusion of peace was confirmed with the Seales of the Lāt∣graue, of the Bishop & his clientes, of the nobilitie and cōmon people, the foretenth day of February, the yeare of saluation M .D. xxxiij. Whā al thinges were thus pacified, cōmeth a certen Cobler to Mū∣ster out of Hollande, one Iolm Leidan, a ranke Anabaptist. Who af∣ter he was acquainted with the preachers of the Gospel, demaūded of Iohn Leidā an Anabap. them priuatly, whether they supposed, that yonge childrē were rightly christened? Which after they had affirmed, he, that was wholy addict to the contrary opiniō, began to smile, and contempne theyr answere. Which thing once perceiued, Barnarde Rotman (before mētioned) ex∣horteth the people in his sermō to pray, yt they may kepe still the trewe doctrine, & maynteine it, that it be not infected of fantastiēall persons, namely of Anabaptistes, which now also are priuely crept in amongs them, and kept company with others, whose opinion, if it shoulde pre∣uaile, not only the state of the cōmon wealth, but of religiō also, should become miserable. About the same time came thither also Hermā Sta¦pred, Herman Stapred. who beyng cōpagnion to Rotman, inueighed openly against the christening of Children. He was scholler to Henricke Rollie, whiche a lyttle before was executed at Utreight for thopinion of Anabaptisme. And he was another occasion of this newe doctrine. And nowe was the matter comen so farre, that there was a great brute of the Anabap¦tistes throughout the citie, albeit that as yet the thynge was closselye and secretly wroughte. For no man was admitted, vnlesse he were of theyr secte: besydes that the chiefe aucthors, did not professe these thyn∣ges openly, neyther taught they, but in the night when other mē were a stepe, than practised they theyr misteries. But whan the thinge was knowen, and many citezens sore offended, whiche said it was not suf∣frable, that a newe doctrine should be priuatly taught in the night, by a decree of the Senate, they were commaunded to departe the citie. The Anab. banished the citie. But they went out one way, and came in by another, braggyng how God had commaunded them there to remayne, and defended theyr cause earnestly. Which thing troubled the Senate, & also stroke them with a soden admiration: Wherefore, for the auoidinge of a further tu∣multe and daunger, the Senate commaunded the preachers, aswell of the Anabaptisme, as of the Gospel, to come before them, and certein other learned men with them. Than did Rotman bewray his opinion Rotman be∣came an A∣nabaptist. which he had kept close vntill that time, and condemned the christe∣nynge of children, as wycked and detestable: But Herman Busche chieflye, defended the contrarye opinion before the Senate in suche sorte, that they were commaunded to get them oute of the Cytye im∣mediatlye by a common decree. And where they alledged that they myghte not safelye passe throughe the Byshoppes Countrey, the
Senate both obtayned for them a saufe conduicte, and gaue them also money to beare theyr charges: but they whiche longe before were de∣termined to go no whither els, went priuely to the followers of theyr secte, and lurked there for a certen space. In this meane tyme before they came abroade agayne, the Senate shut vp all the churches saue one, fearyng lest the Anabaptistes (the numbre of whome encreased dayly) accompanied with their teachers, shoulde haue driuen the prea∣chers of the Gospell out of the churches. Afterwardes in the moneth of Nouembre, the Lantgraue at the re¦quest of the Senate, sent two thether to preache, Theodoricke Fabri∣tius, The constā∣cie of Fabri∣tius. and Iohn Melsinger. And he in dede vnderstanding the trouble towardes and affrayde of the daunger, retourned home agayne: but the other aboade stoutely, admonyshyng the citezens diligently to be∣ware of the Anabaptisticall doctrine, and keepe styll this course and perseuered tyll the Anabaptistes gettinge the vpper hande, droue the reste out of the Citie, as hereafter shalbe recited. And to the entent thei should fynde lacke in nothyng, he penneth out a certen fourme of doc∣tryne and ecclesiasticall administration, whiche was allowed of the Senate and the commōs. Moreouer by the leaue of the Senate, Pe∣ter Peter Wir∣temie. Wirtemie began to preache agayne: but he had made but a fewe Sermons, before he was through the instigation of Rotman, expul∣sed of the Anabaptistes. Who nowe waxinge fierse, prouoked Fabri∣tius and others to disputation. And the Senate did consente, that the matter should be tried by the Scriptures only, and by suche other like wrytinges as were agreable to the same. And that there should be cer¦ten well learned men, as arbitrers, who consyderynge the sentences and reasons on eyther parte, should determine the case, and what they decreed to be ratified, to the intent that in fine all controuersie seclu∣ded, peace might be restored to the churche. But this cōdition Rotman and his fellowes refused. Wherfore whan they would not abyde iud∣gement, they began to be dispysed. But to the intent they myght washe out this spotte, they inuente an other waye more easye. One of them, as though he were moued with the spirite of prophe∣cie, A Prophet inspired. tuneth vp and downe the citie, crying repente, repente, and be bap∣tysed agayne, if not the wrath of God shall nowe ouerwhelme you. At this began the common people to sturre, and as many as were christened agayne, cryed out after the same maner as he dyd. Many for feare of Gods anger, that they so much bragged of abused through simplicitie, beyng in deede otherwyse not euyll, followe their myndes herein: Others also for sauyng of their goodes, were rebaptysed, for the Anabaptistes punished sore theyr aduersaries, and the best was the losse of theyr substaunce: This was at the ende of Decembre.
And nowe agayne were they crept out of their dennes, that we spake of before, and resortyng to the market, make an outcrye, and cōmaund that all whiche are not rebaptised should be slayne as Paganes and wicked men. After this they take the common pieces of ordinaunce & Eiuile war in the citie. munition, they inuade the towne house, and do muche mischief to ma∣ny. And others, to the intent they myght defend them and theirs from the spoyle and iniurie, kepe against them an other stronge place of the citie, and take diuers of them. This contention with the Anabaptistes that kept the market, and had fortified it on euery syde, continewed so longe tyl at the last they came to a compositiō, geuing pledges on both parties, wherby it was agreed that euery one should follow his own Religion, that they should go home and kepe the peace. In the meane tyme Rotman and Cnipperdoling; whiche was the chief of that fac∣tion, notwithstandynge that they had commended the composition, Cnipperdo∣lyng. yet sendynge their letters priuely into Townes nere by, warned men of their secte, that leauing all their goodes behynde them, they shoulde repare vnto them with all possible diligence. And what soeuer they left behinde them, they shoulde receiue ten tymes as muche in recom∣pence. They being allured with so large and ample promises came the∣ther in great nombres, both men and women, hauing an assured hope to attaine to better fortune, especially suche as were poore and not a∣ble to lyue at home, resorte to the citie of Munster. But the tounes mē, especially those that had any great substaunce, when they sawe theyr citie full of straungers, conueyed them selues thence as well as they myght, leauing the Anabaptistes and the other multitude. This was about shroftyde in the moneth of February .M.D.xxxiiij. And what tyme the one parte was thus weakened, the Anabaptistes, doe chouse newe senatours, all of their owne factiō, and also make new conselles, and one of them was Cnipperdolyng. And shortly after they fyred the churche of saint Morice in the suburbes, and all the other buyldinges thereabout. Than spoyle they all the churches, and vndermyne the ca∣thedrall churche within. That done they flocke together in euerye strete, and crye first repente, repente: And by and by, auoyde thence quickly ye wicked men, vnlesse you intende to hazarde your lyues. Fi∣nally they assemble in armure, and al that were not of their secte, im∣mediatly they thrust out of the citie, without respect of age or sexe, in so muche that in that hurly burly, diuerse women miscaried of chylde. And as sone as they had put them to flyghte, streight wayes they toke their goodes. And albeit that this happened yt day before, that they be∣sieged the citie, yet neuerthelesse where as certen of thē that fled, chaū∣ced into the byshoppes handes, he toke them as his ennemies, and dy∣uerse of them lost their heades, and emonges others one or two prea∣chers of the Gospell. And the same Peter Wirtemie beyng in daunger
amonges the rest, at the request of the Lantgraue, was preserued. Whiche thynge moued the residue of the honest citizens, that all be it they were mynded to forsake the towne, yet seyng the present daūger without, they were in a maner constrayned to tary agaynst their wil. At this same tyme the chiefest Prophet amonges them, for that name they doe vsurpe to themselues, Iohn Mathewe commaunded them, that loke what golde or syluer euery man had, he shoulde brynge it all Iohn Mat∣thewe the high prophet foorth vnder payne of death, and for the same purpose was a common treasure house appointed. The people beyng fore astonied at this cruel decree, durst not but obeye: Neyther myght any man disceiue or begile thē of any part, for two certen yonge maydens that prophecied, coulde declare what fraude was vsed, neither did they only bryng their own, Maydens do prophecie. but toke also to their owne vse the goodes of thē, whome they had ex∣pulsed. After this the same Prophet cominaunded, that no man from henceforth should haue or kepe any booke, sauing the holy Byble: All others he commaunded to be brought forth and brent. This commaū∣dement sayde he, was geuen hym from aboue, therfore were bookes brought thether in a wonderfull numbre, and all consumed with fyre. It chaunced at the same tyme, that one Hubert Trutelynge a smyth, had spoken some thynge in ieste against them, whiche named them sel∣ues Prophetes. Whan this was knowen, they called the people toge∣ther, Iestyng p∣nyshed. and commaunded them to put on harnesse: by and by the mā was accused and cōdemned to die: whiche thinge astonied the people mar∣uelously. Than the chief Prophet before named, taketh this poore man and casteth hym downe flat vpon the grounde, & thrusteth his speare into hym, yet he gaue him not his deadly wounde, although he pearsed hym with great violence: that done, he commaunded him to be caryed away to another place. Then caught he a boore speare out of a young mans hande that stode next him, and as he laie iobbed him in with the staffe heade, and seyng that the man would not by & by die for all this he sayde howe it was declared vnto hym out of heauen, that his tyme was not yet come to dye, and that God had graūted him his pardon. Notwithstandyng he died within a fewe dayes after. Whiche thyng whan the Prophet knewe, he toke a long morispike, and rode vp and The prophet inspired wt . downe the towne a great pace, crieng that God the father had com∣maunded hym to discomfite the ennemies without the citie, and put them to flyght. Whan he came nere to their campe, a souliour encoun∣tred with him & ran him through. And albeit yt his false prophecie was thus detected the seconde tyme, yet had his fellowe Prophetes so be∣witched men, and made the matter so fayre to the common people, that they were ryght sory for the losse of hym, saying that there hanged some great plage ouer them, that so worthye a man was taken from them. The next prophet vnto hym, Iohn Leidan, bad them be of good
comforte, for it was reuealed vnto hym longe before, that he shoulde thus ende his lyfe, and that he should marry his wyfe. Two daies be∣fore Easter, they ran in to euery churche, and there range all the belles at ones. And after a fewe dayes Cnipperdoling prophecieth, that such Cnipperdo∣ling prophe∣cieth. as are placed in high dignitie, shalbe cast downe, and others preferred to their rowmes that be of lowe and base degree: than he commaun∣deth that all churches should be destroyed, affirminge earnestlye that this commaundement came from God. Therfore was he obeyed, and the commaundement whiche he sayd came from heauen, was accom∣plyshed with great diligence. Not longe after this Iohn Leidane, de∣liuereth the sworde of execution vnto Cnipperdoling, and appointeth hym to be hangeman, for thus it hath pleaseth God, that he whiche From the horse to the Asse. had before borne the hyghest office of consulshyp, should now haue the lowest office of the hangeman. He not refusyng, toke his offer in very good part also. Whan the byshop had nowe by the space of two or thre¦monethes, borne the whole charges of this warre alone: Herman the Archebyshop of Collon, and Iohn Duke of Claeue, sent hym money, munition and certen bandes of horsemen and fotemen for his ayde. And the Archebishop wēt also to the campe, tasist hym with his coū∣sell, and not longe after the citie was assaulted in diuers places. But when they were out of hope to wynne it by assaulte, they buylded seuē bulwarkes or fortes about the citie to take away their victualles, and put into euery forte an enseigne of fotemen, with certen bādes of hors∣men to wynter there. And for the continuance of the siege of warre, whiche aswell concerned others, the byshop of Munster desyred ayde of those Princes and cities, that are of the prouince of Rhine, by rea∣son they were nere at hande. For the whiche cause an assemblie was appointed at cōfluence the .xiij. daye of Decembre of the yeare .M.D.The diuisiō of Germany into prouice xxxiiij. for all Germany is deuided into sixe prouinces, into Frankony, Bauier, Swelande, Saxonie, the coaste of the Rhyne, and Burgun∣dy. Within the whiche limites all Princes and cities are of an aunciēt custome, accōpted in the assemblies of the Empyre. But now is Saxo¦nye deuided into hyghe and lowe, and agayne the base countrey of Germany, Westphalia and Austriche, are added hereūto, so that now the Empyre conteineth ten regions. After the assaulte was attempted in vayne, Iohn Leidane gaue him self to reste, and slepeth thre whole daies together, and what tyme he did awake, he spake not a worde, The salshod of Leidane. but at the last called forpaper, wherin he wrote the names of twelue men, wherof certen were gentlemen, whiche as the twelue trybes of Israel, should rule and gouerne all thynges: for this sayde he, was the Twelue iudges. wyll of the heauenly father. When he had thus by the meanes of these twelue men, prepared awaye for his kyngdome, he propoundeth certē opinions to the preachers, whiche he requireth to haue them confuted
by the testimonies of Scripture: for if they can not, than will he vtter them to the people, that they may be approued and ratified. The some wherof was this, that a man was not boūden to one wife, but might The Para∣doxes of iohn Leiden. lawfully marry as many as he list: But whan the preachers reproued his opinion, he calleth them into the counsell house, and the twelue mē also. And when they were all come thither, he taketh of his cloke, and throweth it on the grounde, and the newe Testament withall: Wit∣nessing and swearing by the same, that the thinge whiche he had pro∣pounded, was reuealed vnto him from heauen. Therfore he thretneth them with right high wordes, as thoughe they should not haue God to be theyr frende, vnlesse they consented to him. In fine, they agree in opinions, and the Doctors preache of Matri¦mony three dayes together. And streight waies he marieth three wy∣ues at ones. Wherof the one was the wife of the aforesaid great Pro∣phet Iohn Mathew. Whose example afterwardes others folow, in so muche, as it was all accompted a praise, to be often married. But diuerse honest citezens, which misliked their doynges, geuing a notice throughout the Citie, called all suche as professed the doctrine Sedition in the citie. of the Gospell into the market place. And afterwardes apprehended the Prophet, and Cnipperdolinge, and all their Preachers. Whiche thing when the rascall people vnderstode, they came in armure, tooke away the prisoners from them, and slewe of them about fiftie wt great crueltie: For they tyed them vnto trees, or pillers, and shotte them in with dagges, theyr highe prophet greatly commendinge them, & wyl∣ling them that would do God pleasure to shoote first: howbeit others were otherwise murthered. At the eight kalendes of Iuly, arriseth a newe prophet, which was a Goldsmith. Who calling an assemblie of the people into the market∣place, declareth vnto them, howe it is the will and commaundement of the heauenly father, that Iohn Leidane should possesse thempire of the whole worlde. And that he marchyng forwarde with a puissaunt Iohn Leidā inuadeth the kingdome. armie, should distroy all kinges and princes without respecte, & spare only the multitude, at the least such as loued righteousnes. And that he should possesse the seate of Dauid his father, vntill suche time as the father should reuoke the kingdome into his owne handes: And howe the wicked beyng destroyed, godly men should reigne in his life. When these thinges were openly declared, Iohn Leidane immedi¦ately fell downe vpon his knees, and liftyng vp his handes vnto hea∣uen, said: Men and brethren, this thing knew I many dayes sins: Yet would I neuer speake it. For to the intent it might be of better credit, A new king of Anabap. the father hathe vsed another minister. And beynge thus made kinge, forthwith he displaceth the xii. men, and after the custome of kynges, chouseth vnto him nobles, and commaūdeth also, that a sworde with
á gylte seabarde, two crownes, a cheyne, a sptre, and suche other like ornamentes, should be prouided for him of pure golde. After that he ap¦pointed certen dayes wherin he wyll heare them openly that haue a∣ny sutes to hym. As ofte as he came abroade, he was accōpanied with His pompe his nobles and officers of houshold. Next after him followed two yōg¦men ryding, wherof the one of the ryght hande, caried the crowne and the byble, and the other bare the sworde drawen: with the lyke pompe went his chief wyfe, for he had diuers at ones. In the market place was prepared for hym an highe seate, hanged with cloth of golde, such complaintes and sutes as came before him, were all for the moste part concerning wyues and diuorcementes, whiche were then moste com∣mon cases, in so much as many which had liued together a long time, were now first diuorsed. And it fortuned that what tyme the people stoode thicke about him, preasing to heare, beholde Cnipperdoling lea peth forth & creping vpon the mens heades and sholders that stoode the madnes of Cnipper. thick together, and breathing into their mouthes sayd vnto euery one, the father hath sanctified the, receiue the holy ghost. At an other certen tyme, when he daunced before the kyng, thus sayeth he, was I wonte to playe in tymes past with my whore? and the father hath commaun∣ded me to do lykewyse before the kyng. And where he was ouer tedi∣ous and could make none ende, the kyng being offended departed: thā getteth he vp into the kynges seate, and toke vpon him to be king: But the kynge retourning in the meane tyme, plucked him down headlōg, and kepeth him in pryson thre dayes. During the siege, they compyle & set forth a booke, whiche they call a restauration: wherein amonges o∣ther thinges they teache that the kyngdome of Christe shalbe of this The boke of restitution. sorte, before the last daye of iudgement, that his elect and chosen shold reigne, the wicked being vtterly destroyed in all places. They teache moreouer, howe the people may put downe the Magistrate. Further more, albeit the Apostles had no commaundement to vsurpe any iuris∣diction, yet suche as are nowe ministers of the churche, ought to take vpon them the ryght of the sworde, and by force to establyshe a newe common wealth, and that no man ought to be suffered in the churche, whiche is not a true christian. Againe, that no mā can be saued, vnles he make all his goodes common, and kepe nothing priuate to hym self. They saie also, that Luther and the bishop of Rome be false prophetes, yet of both is Luther the worse. Finally they saye, how the mariage of such as are not lyghtened with the true fayth, is polluted and filthie, and rather to be reputed for whoredome or aduoutrie. These opinions Who wrote against thē. of their were comfuted chiefly by Melanchthō, Iustus Ionas, Me∣nius, Urbanus Regins, whose workes full of eloquence remayne tou∣ching the same. Than a fewe weakes after, the newe Prophet that I spake of, blewe the trompet in euery strete and commaūded all men to
arme them selues, and repayre to the head churche porche: for the ene∣my must be driuen from before the citie. Whan they came thether they fynde their supper ready, and being commaunded, there sate downe to A supper. the numbre of foure thousand. Afterwardes also suppe thei which had watched in the meane tyme  a thousand. The kyng & the quene with theyr familie serued, what tyme they had eatē wel, and that sup∣per was almoste done, the king him selfe reacheth bread vnto euerye one with these wordes, take, eate, shewe the death of the Lorde. And the Quene geuing the Cuppe, sayeth, drynke, and shewe the Lordes death. This done, the Prophete before mentioned goeth in to the pul∣pet, and demaundeth of them, whether they wyll obey Gods worde. Whan they had all sayde yea. It is the heauenly fathers commaunde∣ment saith he: to sende forth preachers of his worde, to the numbre of twenty eight. whiche going into the foure partes of the worlde, may preache the same doctrine that is taught in this Citie. Than he reci∣teth The Apost. of Munster. their names, and she weth whether eche man shall go. Wherfore sixe were sent to Osenbridge, as many to Warrēdorfe, eight to Soest and as many to Coselde. And than the kynge and the Quene suppe with the rest of the seruitours, and the Preachers that were appoyn∣ted to be sent forth. In supper tyme the kynge ryseth vp and sayeth, he hath a little busines that the father hath communded him, it chaun∣ced that a souldiour was taken prysoner, whome the kyng accuseth of treason as an other Iudas, and beheaded hym his selfe. After this he The kinges murther. retourneth to his supper, and telleth merely what he had done. After supper these foresaid eight & twenty were sent away about nyght, and besydes their charges, euery man had deliuered him a piece of golde, whiche they were commaunded to leaue in suche places as would not admitte their doctrine. Whiche should be a token of their destruction and death euerlasting, for refusyng of peace and holsome doctrine offe∣red. Who setting forth, whan euery man came to his place, they cried throughout the townes, that men shoulde repent and do penaunce, or The prea∣chers of Mū∣ster. els they should shortly be destroyed, they spread their clothes vpon the grounde before the Magistrate, and threwe down vpon the same the pieces of golde whiche they had receiued, affirming how they are sent of the father to offer them peace, which if they wyl receyue, thei bid thē to communicate their ryches. But if they refuse so to doe, than do they by this sygne witnesse their acte and vnthankefulnes. For this is the same tyme that all the Prophetes haue spoken of before, wherin God would haue ryghteousnes obserued, through out the whole vniuersall worlde. And whan the kyng shal (accordyng to his duty) haue brought the matter so to passe, that iustice shall reigne in all places, than shall Christ deliuer vp the kyngdome to his father.. What tyme they had spoken thus, they were apprehended, and fyrst by gentle meanes, and
afterwardes by tormentes being examined of their beliefe, and kynde of lyfe, and the fortification of the citie: They make aunswere howe They be rac¦ked. they only haue the true doctrine, and that woulde they witnesse and stande to the death. For since the Apostles tyme hitherto, the worde of God was neuer preached ryghtly: neither hath there bene any iustice. And that there be foure Prophetes, wherof two are iuste, Dauid and Iohn Leidane, and two vniuste, the byshop of Rome, & Luther, who is worse than the other is. Being damaūded why they did expulse the innocent people out of the citie contrary to their fidelitie and promyse, taking their goodes, their wyues and their childre, and by what place of Scripture they could proue, and defend this their iustice? They say that nowe is the tyme come, wherin Christ sayd, how the meke should possesse the earth. And yt after the same sorte in times paste, God gaue the goodes of the Egiptians vnto the people of Israell. Afterwardes speakyng of the numbre of men and victualles within the citie, they af¦firmed that diuerse and many had aboue fiue wiues. Moreouer howe they loked dayly for a greater power out of Hollande and Friselande. So sone as they should come, the kyng would marche forwarde with his whole Armie to subdue and cōquere the world, destroying kinges and Princes, for that they had not ministred iustice. After their rac∣king, whan they perseuered styl in their purpose, and would acknow∣ledge Their obsti∣uacie. no Magistrate, besides their owne kynge, they were rewarded with the losse of their heades. Neuerthelesse one escaped. But nowe was the citie on euery syde so narrouly and straightlye besieged, that there was no waye to go out. Wherfore the citezens fearing famine, & being carefull for their owne perill, thought to apprehende the kynge, and sende hym to the byshop boūde. But the king hearing therof, chose The Kynge taketh hede to hym selfe. out twelue amonges them all, whiche he thought were moste faithful vnto him and called them Dukes, and appointed to euery of them a garde, and some part of the towne to kepe, lest there should aryse anye tumulte amonges the people. Than maketh he promyse to the multi∣tude, howe at Easter they should be deliuered, both from siege and pe∣nurie But vnto the twelue Dukes whiche he chose, he promised more ample thinges a great deale, telling them howe they shoulde haue the chiefe rule and gouernment, namyng also what coūtreis, townes and Castels, he would geue vnto euery one of them. He sayd, he would on∣ly spare the Lantgraue, for that he trusted that he woulde take his parte at the length. I shewed you before of the assemblie appointed at Confluence, in the moneth of Decembre, for the states of the prouince of Rhine. Unto whom also Friderick the Prince Electour of Saxo∣ny, annexed him selfe of his owne accorde. In this assemblie, after consultation had, was decreed to ayde the byshop of Munster imme∣diately, with thre hundreth horsemen, and thre thousande footemen,
for syxe monethes: ouer the whiche garryson and the whole warre al¦so, Wiricke, Countie Obersted had the charge. They decreed moreo∣uer, to sollicite the residue of the states imperiall for their ayde. And because the Emperour was in Spayne, to entreate king Ferdinādo, that against the moneth of Aprill, he assigne a generall metyng for the same purpose. After this they admonishe them that were beseged, by their letters earnestly wrytten, that they should leaue & forsake theire enterprise, whiche was so dishonest and wicked, as nothynge could be more: And vnlesse thei would obey, and submit them selues vnto their laweful magistrate, they do proteste that the byshop (who nowe bese∣geth them) shal not wante the ayde of the whole Empyre. This was at the ende of Decembre. And at the Ides of Ianuary, in the yeare a M .D. xxv. Thei write again with many wordes in dede, but to smal purpose, yet so as they cōmended and mainteined their quarel: but vn∣to that, whiche was obiected vnto them for makynge of a kynge, they aunswered nothynge at all. Howe be it in theyr letters to the Lant∣graue, they go about to excuse the matter, speakinge many thynges of the salle and destruction of all wickedmen, and of the deliueraūce and kyngdome of the Godly in this lyfe. And sende him withall, the booke of Restauration, before mentioned, admonyshyng him to amende, and that he attempte no warre against them, as other wycked Prynces doe, for they are holy men and good people. The Lantgraue readinge ouer their booke and their letters, noted what he thought blame wor¦thy, and cōmaunded his learned mē to aunswer it. And for as muche as they had in fewe wordes and those abscure written that their king was not so muche of theirs, as of Gods appointment, he demaundeth of thē, wherfore they did not expresse those places of Scripture, wher∣by they thought it lawefull thus to doe? And why they dyd not con∣firme the thynge before with signes and wonders? For of the cōminge of Christe, God had declared longe before by all the Prophetes, so eui∣dently, that it was well knowen, not only of what house or familie, but also whan and where he should be borne. They had also requested that the matter might be heard, wherunto the Lantgraue answered, that the same might not now take place. For so much as they had takē vpon them the aucthoritie of the sworde, and had bene the workers of so muche mischiefe: For all men see what marke they shoute at, certēly to subuerte all lawes and common wealth. And lyke as their intente is wicked and detestable, so is nowe their requeste to haue their cause heard, fayned and dissembled. He doubtles sent vnto thē faythful prea∣chers and ministers of the churche, of whome they were ryghtlye in∣structed. And where as they nowe contēpning their doctrine, do resist the errours and mischief of Anabap. the magistrate, take other mens goodes, mary sondrye wyues, & haue chosen them a newe kynge. Where also they denye that Christe toke
the humane nature of the virgyn Mary, where they affirme that man hath free wyll, where they compell men to make their goodes cōmon, where they saye there is no remission for a sinner that falleth, all these thynges are against the lawes both of God and man. Whan this answer was brought vnto thē, they wryte agayne, and sende a booke with all compyled in the vulgare tōgue, of the misteries A booke of yt miries of scripture. of Scripture. And againe in an Epistle they amplefie their cause, and defende their opinions. And in this booke they deuide the course and tyme of the whole worlde into thre partes, & the fyrst age from Adam to Noe, they saye was destroyed with the Deluge of water, the secōd wherein we are nowe at this daye, shalbe consumed with fyre, but the The diuisiō of the world. thyrde shall be cleane a newe worlde, wherein iustice shall reigne: ne∣uerthelesse before this last tyme shall appeare, this present age must be pourged by fyre, but that shall not be tofore that Antichriste shall be reuealed, and his power vtterly abolyshed. Thā shall it come to passe, that the scate of Dauid, whiche is decayed, shal be newly erected, and Christe shall possesse his kyngdome here in earth, and the wrytinges of the Prophetes shall be accomplyshed. And that this present worlde now, is lyke the tyme of Esaw. For iustice kepeth silence, and the God∣ly are persecuted. But as after the captiuitie of Babylon, so nowe also This presēt age cumpa∣red to Esaw the tyme of restauration is at hande, to delyuer vs from all these my∣series, and to rendre vnto the wycked aboundantly after their deme∣rites, as in the Apocalipse is declared: And that in this same Restau∣ration goeth before the worlde to come, to the intent that all the vn∣godlye beynge destroyed, the house and seate of iustice, myght be pre∣pared and beautified. Whan the Lantgraue had red this booke, he set in hande the Mi∣nisters of his churche to wryte against it. The residue of the states im∣perial assembled at Essinge, do mislyke the doinges of them that were at cōffuence, affirming that they had no authoritie to impose or charge them with any burthen, vnlesse it had bene by the consent of the Em∣perour and all states. In the moneth of February, Corne within the citie waxed very scarse, in so muche that some also died for honger and wante of meate. It fortuned that one of the Quenes, pitieng the peo∣ple had sayde to the rest, howe she supposed that God woulde not that men should peryshe thus with famine. The kyng whiche had his stoore houses furnyshed at home, not on∣ly The kynge beheaded the Quene. for necessitie, but also for riot and voluptuousnes, after he knewe it, brought her forthe in to the Market place, and all the reste with her, and commaundynge her to knele downe, stroke of her heade, and whan she was dead, vttered her to haue played the whore. This done the residewe syng, and gyue thankes to God the heauē∣lye father. After that the kynge daunceth wyth them and exhorteth
the rest of the multitude, whiche had nothynge lefte them but breade and salte, to dauncynge and mery pastymes. Whan Easter came and no deliueraunce appered at all, the kyng whiche had promysed so stou∣tely, to inucnte some excuse, fayned him selfe sicke for the space of syxe dayes: After he commeth abroade amonges the people, and telleth thē howe he hath ryden on a blynde Asse, and that God the father hathe A blynd asse layde vpon his backe the synnes of the people. Wherfore they are now made cleane, and delyuered from euery spotte. And this to be the deli∣ueraunce whiche he promysed, wherwith they ought to holde them cō¦tented. Luther amonges other thynges whiche he set forth in the vul∣gar tongue, about this tyme, wrote also of this tragedye of Munster. Luthers wri¦tig of Mūst. Alas sayeth he, howe should I complayne or lamente those wretched men? for the thynge it selfe declareth, that there dwell deuylles thycke and threfolde: but yet ought we to praye the infinite mercy of God he∣rein, and haue good cause so to doe. For albeit that for the contempt of the Gospell, the reproche of Goddes holy name, and the shedyng of in∣nocent bloud, Germany hath iustly deserued to be plaged, yet hathe God hetherto restrayned the force and violence of Sathan, and hath not permitted him to haue the reignes at libertie, but mercifully admo¦nysheth vs, and by this tragedye of Munster, nothinge at all artifici∣ous, calleth vs to the amendement of lyfe. For vnlesse God had bryde∣led God bridleth the power of Sathan. hym, and holden hym backe, I doubte not, but that moste subtille fynde, and wylie artificer, would haue handled the matter farre other wyse. But nowe that God hathe made a restraynte, he rageth and tourmoyleth, not so muche as he woulde, but so much as he is permit∣ted. For the wycked spirite, that seketh the subuersion of the Christian fayth, goeth not this way to worke, to perswade the marriage of ma∣ny wyues. For seyng both the vnlawfulnes and the fylthye beastlynes of the thynge, is apparent in the syght of all men, he perceiueth well enough that men woulde abhorre it. In dede the politicke and ciuile gouerne∣mēt may through this meane be disturbed, but the kingdom of Christ must be attempted with other weapons and Ingines. He that would circumuente and deceaue men, maye not affectate rule and gouernment, and playe the tyraunt: For all men disalowe By what meanesmen be disceaued this, and see playnely what his intente is. But he must attayne there∣unto by secrete meanes, as it were by certen bypathes. To goe in olde and euyll fauoured apparell, to looke with a graue countenaunce, to hange downe the heade towardes the grounde, to Faste, to handle Croked nec∣ked cattell. no Money, to absteyne from Flesshe, to abhorre Matrimonye, to eschewe bearynge of offyce as a prophane thynge, to refuse gouerne∣mente, and to professe a wounderfull lowelynes of mynde.
This I say, is the ready way and meane, to deceyue them that be also ryght wyse, and the whiche couertly and priuely setteth open the way to a kyngdome. But it is ouermuche impudencie, for a mā to take vpō him self to be king, & for his fleshly luste to mary as many wyues as he The craft of an ignoraūt Deuyll. fansieth, this is not sure ye policie of any skilful deuyl, but of one yt is yet rude & ignorant, or if he be expert, thā assuredly God hath him so boūde in a chayne yt he can worke no more craftely. Whiche doubtles he doth for this intentethat we shoulde feare his deitie, and amende our liues, before he let lose that cunning deuyl, whiche certenly wyll assaulte vs muche more fiersly. For if this deuyl being but a symple grammarian, hath styred vp so muche trouble, what shal we than do, whan Sathā of muche more knowledge, being an expert Lawyer, and a perfite di∣uine, shall make towardes vs with full sayle. Wherfore there is no great feare of this so vngoodly a deuyll. I suppose also that all that be in the citie, lyke not well this sport and game playe, but that many are ryght sory, whiche not without syghynges and teares, desyre of God to be delyuered, as chaunced certen yeares synce, also in the sedition of the countrey men. And woulde to God, that in the whole worlde there were no craftier Deuyll than this of Munster: So that God would not take his worde from vs, I beleue there are but fewe that woulde geue any credite to so grosse and so drunken a maister. And yet surely whan Gods wrath is kyndled, there is no errour so absurde Gods wrath or vnsauery, whiche the Deuill can not perswade, as we see happened in the doctrine of Mahomet. For albeit, it is altogether folyshe, yet the lyght of Gods worde beyng quenched, it toke force and strengthe, and is spread abroade in suche ample maner as you see. And if God had not infrynged the deuise and enterpryse of Muncer, the same woulde haue come to passe also in Germany. For Sathan can rayse vp a great By what meanes the deuil is van∣quished. flamme through Gods permission, of a verey small sparke: neyther is there any better waye to quenche the fyre, than by the worde of God: for where as ye armure of our ennemies is al together incorporate, it cā neyther be subdued with tropes of horsemen, nor yet by the force of mu¦nition or other warlyke furniture. But our Prynces and Byshoppes go the contrary waye to worke. They hynder the doctrine of the Gos∣pell, by the whiche only the myndes and hartes of men can be healed. And in the meane tyme, exercyse cruel punyshement, to bryng the body from the Deuyll, but they leaue hym the better part of man, whiche is the harte and the soule: whiche thyng shall haue like successe wyth thē, as it had with the Iewes in times past, who thought to quēche Christ by his crosse and passion. But as concerning those thinges, which they of Munster haue wrytten and set forth, I suppose the thynge standeth thus, and theyr wrytinge lately publyshed maketh me so thinke, wher¦in they haue gallantly paynted out theyr owne furye.
For fyrst touchinge faythe they teache verey absurde thynges, and of Christe, as though he were not borne of the virgyn Mary, not with∣standing The errours of the Mun∣sterians in fayth. that they confesse howe he came of the seede of Dauid. But they do not sufficiētly declare the thinges, and assuredly Sathan brin∣geth vp some monstre. This in dede doth he signifie nothinge darkely, that the seede or fleshe of Marye, can not delyuer vs, but he labou∣reth in vaine: for the Scripture saith that Christ was borne of the vir∣gin Mary, whiche vocable sure in al tonges is referred vnto the chyld In baptis∣me. whiche conceiued of the flesh and bloud of his mother, & takyng shape, is brought forth into the worlde. Againe, where they condempne the baptisme of the tyme paste as a prophane thinge, it is vnwittely done of them. For they do not iudge or esteme that worke as a thyng ordey∣ned of God, but of man only. But in case euery thing ought to be dispi∣sed & cast away that wicked men geue or haue, I maruel surely wher∣fore they do not aswell contemne gold, syluer, and other ryches, taken from the wicked, and inuente some newe metall or other deuise. For lyke as these are, so is also baptisme, the worke and creation of God. Whan the wicked sweareth, he abuseth the true name of God: If he haue not the true name of God, he offendeth nothyng. He that robeth or stealeth, breaketh the commaundement of God: In case he haue not the true commaundemēt of God, he synneth not: so likewyse if the for∣mer baptisme be nothyng, than suche as are washed therewith, haue not erred. Why thā do these fellowes detest the Christening of though it were a wycked thyng, where it is nothynge at all, as they them sel∣ues doe confesse. If the mariages of this fourmer tyme, were to be ac∣compted for whoredome and adultery, because they were contracted Of mariage of suche as wanted faith (as they saye) I praye you do not they graunt them selues to be whore sonnes all the packe of them? Nowe if they be bastardes and misbegotten, tell me why doe they enioye the landes and patrymony of the citie and of theyr auncesters? Reason woulde in deede that for as muche as they are of that sorte, they shoulde inherite no lande but in this their newe kynde of matrimonie, should prouyde them newe possessions and ryches, whiche myght haue a more honest tytle: For it is not semelye, that so holy and Godlye people as they doe pretende to be, shoulde lyue of the vnlawfull and bastardelye goodes of Harlottes, muche lesse take them frō others, by vyolence and playne robberye. And as touchynge theyr foolyshe kyngdome, there be so many and open crymes in this one thynge, that it nedeth no longer discourse: And certenly that whiche is sayde, maye seme ouer muche and not greatly necessarye, especiall seynge that all these matters are sufficiently treated and declared of others. In the assemblye of the Empyre, whyche Kynge Ferdinando, at the requeste of the Prynces, kepte by his Deputes, in the Moneth
of Aprill at Wormes, the cities whiche hitherto had geuen no money, do proteste in the beginning, that their comming thether was not for The assem∣blie at Wor¦mes. the decree made at confluence, but only to obeye the Emperour & king Ferdinando. After they had great altercatiō with the Princes, about contribution. At the length they condescended to giue ayde for fyue monethes, twenty thousand crownes monethly, they decreed moreo∣uer that what tyme the citie should be wonne or taken, the innocent people should be spared, and that such good men, as either be there be∣seged, or els are fled thence, should be restored to their goodes. Whan this decree was made, the byshop of Munster deliuereth his armie vnto Obersten. But where as the money was ouer negligētly leuied, and almost in dede to late, there coulde no notable exploicte be done. And the captaynes them selues, for lacke of money, were oftener than ones in daunger of their lyues, through the sedicion of the souldiours. What tyme the matter was brought to suche an extremitie within the citie, that many died dayly for famine, many also departed thence, and went a broade so pyned and hongerstoruen, that their very ennemies had pitie and compassion vpō them: The Captaines sent worde to the The citie was requi∣red to rendre townes men, that in case they would deliuer the king & certen others, they should haue no harme. Whiche albeit the citezens woulde fayne haue done, yet were they so afrayde of the kynges crueltie, & vigilācie, that they durst attempte nothynge, for he was so obstinate, that so lōg as any thyng remayned for him selfe & a fewe others to eate, he would neuer rendre. Wherfore the captaynes wryte againe, and bidde them sende out no more from hence forth, not so muche as women or childrē. This was the first day of Iune: The next day they wrote an answer, The cōplait of ye Munste∣rians. complayning that their matter could not be heard, and said they were afflicted without desert of their parte: For if any man coulde detecte them of errour, they would do as should become them. After this they doe expounde a certen place of Daniel, of the fourth beast which was much more cruell than all the rest. The conclusion of their letters was, that they would through Gods helpe perseuer styl in this confession of the veritie. All whiche thinges were thus wrytten after the kynges mynde. But whan thynges were brought to a maruelous extremitie Two esca∣ping betraye the citie. in the citie, two certen men escaped out, the one of them was taken of the souldiours, the other vpon his fidelitie came to the byshop, and ey∣ther of thē shewed the meane how to wynne the citie. Countie Ober∣sten and the byshop, hearyng bothe their tales, the two and twenty of Iune, sommoned the towne, charging the citezens to rendre it vp and yelde them selues, that the people might be saued, and not perysh thus for honger. They cause Rotman to aunswer on the walles, the kynge standing there by, in suche sorte as they would not relent nor chaunge their purpose. Two dayes after about aleuen a clock in the nyght, the
fotemen were brought closely to the citie, and certē chosen souldiours, through the conduict of the two men escaped, got ouer the dyche vp to walle, and slewe the watche: others followyng thē, fynde the posterne gate open, and about fiue hondreth with certen captaynes and ensig∣nes entred the citie. Than the tounes men being assembled together, stayed the reste that would lykewyse haue inuaded, and longe it was or euer they coulde put them backe and shut the gate, that done, they geue charge by and by vpon those that wer come in, and slew many of them. And whan they had foughten sore by the space of one houre or The wyn∣nyng of Mū∣ster. two, the souldiours that were enclosed, stept to the next gate, that was kept with a small garde, and breake it open perforce, and so made way for their fellowes without, which immediatly pressed in with a strōg power. And wheras the townes mē at the first made resistaunce, and kept the market place, whiche they had wel fortified for their own de∣fence, at the last the matter being desperate, and many of them stayne, at the first encountre, they craued and founde mercy. But the kynge & Cnipperdoling were taken at the same instante: Botman being out of The kyng is taken. all hope to liue, running amōges his ennemies where they were thic∣kest was stayne, lest he should come into their handes alyue. Whan the Citie was won, the Byshop toke to hym selfe the munitiō and half Rotman de∣sperate. the spoyle, after discharging his armie, he reserueth to him selfe two en¦seignes only to asiste him in the citie. Than followed an other counsell imperiall at Wormes, in the mo∣neth of Iuly, wherin kyng Ferdinando by his deputes, propounded and demaundeth, whether that the citie beyng nowe taken, they shall treate furthermore howe to destroye all the Anabaptistes: He admo∣nysheth them also to call vpon the Byshop of Rome for a counsel. Thei saye that as touchyng the Anabaptistes, it hath bene all redy set forth by diuers proclamations, what is mete to be done. And the Byshop The byshop of Munster demaundeth his charges. hath bene oft enoughe sollicited for a counsell euen by the Emperoure hym selfe: neyther can they doe any thinge more therein. In the same counsell the byshop of Munster requyreth to be recompenced for his charges, and cōplayneth that the money promysed was not yet paide. Whan nothyng els could be concluded, and very fewe states also wer there present: An other metinge was there assigned against Nouem∣bre, wherin they shoulde take ordre for the accomptes and charges of the warre, and howe the commō wealth of Munster hereafter should be gouerned. Whan the daye was come, Ferdinando his Ambassa∣dour in fewe wordes repeteth the causes of that assemblie, and that a∣monges other thynges they myght deuise also, how the citie lately ta∣ken, maye remayne from hence forth in the olde religion. After this the Byshoppes Ambassadour declareth what charges he hath bene at all this warre tyme, what great somes of money he hath borrowed, and
Howe after the citie was taken, for the auoyding of tumultes and ut ther daunger he was enforced to buylde two fortes in the citie and to manne them: Of all the which thinges he desyreth that a cōsideration might be had. Hereunto aunswere was made that the byshop had the greatest part of the spoyle, all the munition, & also the citezens goodes. All the whiche thynges do in dede apperteyne to the common wealth of the Empire: wherfore reason would that of al these thynges an esti∣mate should be made, and so much be out of the charges diducted, and than the ouerplus to be aunswered accordinglye. After it is decreed, that the byshop of Munster should be vnder the Empire, according to the olde custome, that all the Nobilitie of the citie should be restored, & the citezens also that are fled awaye so that they be not Anabaptists. Touching Religion the Byshop shall take ordre therein accordinge to the decrees of the Empyre, that in the spring of the next yere following the Ambassadours of the Prynces should go to Munster, and vnder∣stande the state of the citezens, that they saue the innocent people, and destroye all the fortifications made by the Anabaptistes, and that the byshop shall also caste downe the two fortes whiche he hath buylded within the citie. And that he execute immediatly the king, Cnipper∣doling, and Crechtinge, prysoners according to their demerites, and kepe them no longer. To that point concerning Religiō, the Duke of Saxon, the Lant∣graue, the Duke of Wirtemberge, and Countie Anhalde, protested o∣penly, that they would neuer assente to. The cities also professed the same, neyther would they haue the olde fortification defaced, for the newe they were not against. The kyng and his two fellowes were The kyng & his fellowes caried about  caried hither and thither vnto Prynces, for a shewe and mockery. By the whiche occasion the Lantgraues preachers enter in disputation with the kynge, touchynge these opinions chieflye of the kyngdome of Christe, of Magistrates, of Iustification, of Baptisme, of the Lordes Disputation with ye king  supper, of the incarnation of Christe, and of Mariage, and by the testi∣monies of Scripture priuayle so farre, that albeit they did not chaūge him wholy, which stroue and defended his opinions stifly, yet did they turne him & cōfounde him, so that in fyne he graunted to many things, whiche not withstanding he was supposed to haue done to saue his lyfe. For whan he retourned vnto him the seconde tyme, he promysed if he myght haue his pardon, to brynge to passe, that the Anabaptistes whiche were in Hollande, Brabant, Englande and Freselande, an ex∣ceadyng great numbre, shold kepe sylence, and obey the Magistrates in all thynges. Afterwardes the same preachers reasoned with his fellowes also, both by mouthe and wryting, of mortification, of Chri∣stening of Chyldren, of the communion of goodes, of the kyngdome of Christe. What tyme they were brought to Telget, the kyng beyng de∣maunded
of the Byshop, by what authoritie he durst be so bolde to v∣surpe so muche libertie vpon his Citie and people? He asked hym again who gaue him that power and aucthoritie ouer the Citie? And wher The bolde aunswer of the kyng. the Byshop made aunswere, that by the consent of the College & the people, he had that rule and iurisdiction: And I (sayde he) was called hether of God. At the thirtene kalēdas of February, thei were brought again to Munster, & cōmitted euery man to a seuerall pryson. And the same daye also, came the Byshop thether accompanied with the Arch¦bishop of Collon, and the Ambassadours of the Duke of Cleue. The space of two dayes followyng, was spent in Godly admonitions, that they myght be reduced from their heresy: And in deede the kynge con∣fessed his faulte, and fled vnto Christe through prayer. The other two neyther woulde acknowledge any offence and yet stode obstinatly in their opinions. The next daye the king was brought vp to the skaffold and tied to a post: There were two hangemen ready and eche of them a payre of tonges read hote: at the three first pulles he helde his peace, afterwarde callyng continually for Goddes mercy, whan he had bene The cruell death of the kyng. thus turmented an howre and more, and at the last was thrust to the harte with a sharpe poynted dagger, he left his lyfe: and his fellowes had the same punyshement. Whan thei were dead, they were fastened to grates of iron, and hanged out of the hyghest towre of the Citie, cal¦led saynet Lambertes, the king in the myddes a mans height aboue the other two. In the moneth of Ianuary, of this present yeare, died the lady Ka∣therine Dowager, whome Henry the eyght kyng of Englande, had The death of quene Ka¦therine. put away thre yeares before. I shewed you in the fourth booke, howe Fridericke Duke of Holste, was by the helpe of the Lubeckes, made kyng of Denmarke. After whose death there arrose mortall warre be∣twene his sonne Christiane that was kinge after him, and the Citie of Lubecke. But where as the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, Ernest Duke of Lunenburge, and the Citie of Breme, Hamborough, Maydē¦burge, Brunswicke, Lunenburge, and Hildisseme, intreated a peace. This yeare in the moneth of February, all was pacified. Than had Charles Duke of Sauoye, a certen space maynteyned warre against the Citie of Geneua, beynge ayded by the Byshop of the same Citie, or The warre of Geneua with ye duke of Sauoy. set on rather, partely for the profession of the Gospell, & partly for other matters. And the Citie of Geneua, was ioyned in league with the Ci∣tie of Bernes in Swicerlāde of whome at the length receiuing great ayde, they gaue the repulse to their ennemies. And they of Bernes mar¦ching further, subdued al that laye cōmodious for their countrey, euen to the loke of Geneua. The residue of the Swicers also, that bordered The ayde of Bernes. vpō Sauoye, did the same. Whylest this was a working, the kynge of Fraunce, whiche had longe before purposed to warre in Italye, but
especially synce the death of Fraunces Sfortia, leuieng his Armie in the begynning of the spryng tyme, maketh warre also with the Duke The Frēche king against the Duke of Sauoye. of Sauoye his vncle, for a controuersie of inheritaunce, whiche he said was due vnto him, possessed and deteyned by the Duke. Who beynge already much inpoueryshed by the Swycers, and therfore an vnmete matche for so puissaunt an ennemye, was in short tyme dispossessed in maner of his whole Duckdome. For the kyng passing ouer the Alpes, inuadeth also the countrey of Piedmount, and amonges other taketh Turrine, the chiefest town in those partes & fortifieth it with workes and strength of men, by the conduict of Philippe Schabotte Admi∣rall. The Duke of Sauoy had marryed Beatriche daughter to Ema∣nuell kyng of Portugall, and the Emperours syster Isabel. And in the former tyme, he addicted him selfe to neyther of them: but now where he semed to incline to the Emperour, he styred vp the king his nephew by his owne syster Lewesse against him. Some reporte howe byshop Clement, what tyme he was at Marseilles, as in the last booke is re∣cited, The Popes counsel to in¦uade Sauoy gaue the kyng this counsell, that in case he intended to recouer Millan, he should first seke to be lorde of Sauoy and Piedmonte, ad∣ioyning to the same. Howe soeuer it was, the kyng in the yeare follo∣wyng, after a certen newe custome ordeyned through out the Realme of Fraunce legions of Souldiours, to the numbre of forty thousande, Legions of Souldiours. whiche shoulde exercise their weapons, and be in a readynes, when tyme of seruice came. For where as aunciently the kynges of Fraunce haue alwayes maynteined cheualry, and their whole force hathe bene horsemen, this man would haue also footemen ready monstered, that he shold not euermore haue nede of forein souldiours. And the kynges purpose was to leade forth his armie, and make warre thereby in Lū¦bardie, to the intent he myght recouer the Duckdome of Millā, which he had before enioyed syxe yeares together, and contented that it was his, and the right of his children by Ualentine his grandmother, sister to Philippe Uicecounte, the last Duke of Millan of that familie. And thus the matter standeth. The house of Uicecoūtes, bare a noble brute The house of vicecoūtes in Lumbardie. And the first of them is accompted Otho, Archeby∣shop of Millan, who in the tyme of Raffe Emperour, expulsed the Tur¦rians, a noble and worthy familie, whome his nephewe Matthewe, his brother Theobaldus sonne, succeded after hym Galeace, Actius, Luchine, Iohn, Matthew the seconde, Galeace the seconde, Barna∣bas, Iohn Galeace, whom the Emperour Wēceslans created the first Duke of Millan. He had two sonnes, Iohn, and Philippe, which died both without issewe, and one daughter, Ualentine. Fraunces Sfor∣tia, a stoute warriour, married the bastarde daughter of Philip, and by that occasion vsurped the Dukedome of Millan, secludyng Ualē∣tine, Philippes syster, whome Lewys, Duke of Orleaunce, brother to
Charles the sixt, kyng of Fraunce, had maried. Sfortia had thre son∣nes, Galeace, Lewis, Ascanius. Wherof Lewis inuaded the Duke∣dome, The Frēche kinges title to Millan. and begot two sonnes, Maximilian and Fraunces. The Duke of Orleaunce, had by Ualentine, Charles, Philippe and Iohn. Char∣les was father to Lewis Duke of Orleaunce, whiche was after king of Fraunce, the twelfth of that name. Philippe died without issewe Iohn Erle of Engolesme, had a sonne named Charles, father to kyng Fraunces, who toke Maximilian Sfortia prisoner, and subdewed all Lumbardie. But Leo the tenth and the Emperour, dispossessing hym agayne, restored Fraunces Sfortia an exile. Who being nowe dead, kyng Fraunces to reclayme his ryght (as he saieth) and to be auēged, moueth warre agayne. For that after the death of Sfortia, the Em∣perour had taken the possessiō of Lumbardie, by Anthony Leua, whō he left his depute there, what tyme he sayled into Barbaria, as before is mentioned. Wherfore so sone as he had anye knowledge of the kynges enter∣pryse, he leuieth immediatly all the power he myghte in Germanye and other places, to come into Italy. And coming frō Naples to Ro∣me in the beginning of Aprill, within a fewe dayes after his repayre, he required that a Senate might be called, wherin before the byshop The Empe∣rous oration against the Frēche king and a great numbre of Cardinalles, and the Ambassadours of foreyne Prynces, he had a graue and a vehement oration against the Frenche kyng, who breakyng league, of an olde hatred and malice, hindreth & impecheth his moste worthy and Godly enterprises. The ende of his oration was to declare, that he was ready to fight with him the com∣bat, to the intent that through the priuate losse of one of them two, ra∣ther than by publique domage of the whole worlde, the warre might ones haue an ende. Before he departed from Naples, The Uenetians entred into lea∣gue The Uene∣tians league with ye Em∣perour. with him against the Turke, the rather for that they hoped well, that he would delyuer the possession of Millan to some priuate man. For the states of Italy, chiefly the Uenetians, wouldneyther that the Emperour nor yet the Frenche kyng should enioye the goodly Duke∣dome of Millan. And therfore in these former yeares, they conspyred oftentymes, one whyle against the Frenche kynge, an other whyle a∣gainst the Emperour, that Fraunces Sfortia myght be restored, of whome they supposed to stande in lesse daunger. For the league which Clement and the Uenetians made against the Emperour, ten yeares before, was for this cause only. Thinkyng that the Emperour hauyng displaced Sfortia, would haue kept to his owne vse, all Lumbardie, whiche in dede they supposed would be to their great hinderaunce. And where at the intercession of Byshop Clement (sixe yeares past) he restored Sfortia at Boloigne la grasse, he got him wonderfull fauour
and great good wyll. At Naples also the Emperour finished vp the mariage of his bastarde daughter, with Alexander Medices, whome he had made Duke of Florence, as I tolde you in the seuenth booke. The Duke of Florence marieth the Emperours bastarde. This Alexander was the bastard sonne of Laurence Medices, which had to father Peter, whiche was drowned in the mouth of Lire, as in the last boke is mentioned. You haue heard howe Uergerius was sent into Germany. Whan the Emperour was arriued at Naples, the byshop calleth hym home againe, who returning with great expe∣dition, whan he came to Rome, declareth his Ambassade, how the pro¦testauntes required to haue a free and a Christian counsell, and that within the precinct of the Empyre, in a place conuenient, as the Empe¦rour had made them promyse. Of Luther and the rest, there is no hope Luthers con¦stancie. vnlesse they be dispatched out of the way. And as concerning the king of Englande, the Protestauntes wyll not assente to it, and the reste of the Princes are very colde. Howe George Duke of Saxonye, affirmeth that there is great daunger of the Lutherians, whiche can not be otherwise eschewed or auoyded, vnlesse the Emperour and the Byshop make warre against them ryght shortly. Whiche thynge whan the Byshop vnderstode, he sendeth hym to Naples with all spede, to recite these thynges to the Uergerius sent to the Emperour. Emperour, especially concernyng the warre to be attempted agaynste the Lutheriās. Aterwardes whā the Emperour was come to Rome, he was earnestly in hande to haue a counsel called, and coueted great∣ly to cary with hym the letters patentes of the same: The Byshop said he was content, notwithstāding he woulde chouse some citie in Ita∣ly, and prescribe therein certen conditions necessary for the churche of Rome. Hereunto the Emperour so that he woulde do it ones, he cared for no more. For he would bryng the greater parte of Germany to fol∣lowe hym herein, so therfore the Byshop chouseth out nyne of that nū∣bre to make the wrytte. Those were Campegius, Cesius, Simonet, Ginucius, Cōtarene, Poole, Cardinals: The Archebishop of Brundu∣se, The diuisers of the bll. the Byshop of Rhezo, and Uergerius thā made byshop of Modruse, and not long after of Instinopulis. All these together, first in the By∣shops presence, afterwardes seuerally by them selues deuise the forme of Somoning the counsell. You haue heard before of the Ambassadours of Englande, with whome it was accorded at Smalcalde vpon certen conditions, that the kyng should set forth the pure doctrine of the Gospell, whiche they professed at Auspurge, and maynteyne the same with them in a lawe∣full counsell, if any suche shalbe: that neyther of them admitte the cal∣ling or place of a counsell, but by cōmon assent. Neuerthelesse if it may appere by certayne and manifest reasons, that any suche counsel is like to be, as hath bene declared to Peter Paule Uerger, the Byshoppes
legate that it be not refused: but in case the byshop continue his pur∣pose, that than his enterpryse be letted, and by open protestation be re∣fused. And lyke as the kynge hath ioyned hym selfe to their religion, so lykewyse to ioyne with them in league also, and to be called the Pa∣troneand The king of England is patrone of ye Pro. league defendour of the same. That common opinion of the supre∣macie of the Byshop of Rome, to be vtterly reiected for euer. If anye warre be attempted against other parte for Religion or other cause, that no ayde be geuen vnto hym that inforceth the same. That for the defence of the league the kyng shal paye one hundreth thousand crow∣nes, wherof the one halfe the confederatours shall and may employe, whā nede shall requyre, the rest of the charges to be borne of their own money, whiche they shall contribute amonges them: but if the warre shal longe endure, and the force of the ennemy driue them to it, thā the king to disburse two hundreth thousand crownes, for as much as they if the lyke chaunce should fortune, stande also bounde, not only to spēd their goodes but their bloud and lyfe also. And of this somme also the like consideration to be had as before, and that it be not emploied to a∣ny other vse, than to defende the league, and the remainder to be resto∣red whan the warre is finished. That the Ambassadours shall wryte to the kyng hereof, and whan they knowe his mynde, to aduertise the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue therof, that after a commō Am∣bassade The english Ambassad. wynter at Witteberg maye be sent vnto hym. Whan the Ambassadours had sent these requestes vnto the king, going than to Wittemberge they passed away the rest of the wynter there. And in the meane whyle reasoned with the diuines there of certen articles, but their chiefe controuersie was about the mariage of Priestes, the Lordes supper, the Popyshe masse, and monasticall vowes. But their chief desyre was, that the diuines would approue the kynges diuorsement, but they sayde, they coulde not do it by the scriptures. And whan they had alledged many thinges to perswade the matter, and this one chieflye that the byshop Clement varied in his sentence, and had declared to the Frenche king in priuate talke, what he thought: The diuines answered, that in case it were so, the king had great cause so to do. But where they vrged thē to say the cause was most iust, to that would they not graūt. And now when letters were come out of Englande, pourporting the declaratiō The kinges letters to the Protestants of the kynges mynde herein, the Ambassadours do aduertise the prin∣ce Electour hereof. And the .xij. day of Marche at Wittemberge, whe∣ther the Duke was at that tyme come, speaking first many thinges of the kynges great good wil, declare how the most part of the requestes do content him, if a fewe might be amended. And albeit that in Eng∣land all thinge is quiet, neither is there any cause wherfore the kynge should feare any man, and if happely any cause hath bene, the same is now taken away by the death of his wyfe forsaken, neuerthelesse to
recouer and mayntayne the true doctrine, he doth not refuse to deray the somme of money whiche they requyre, so that the league goe for∣warde, and hereof wyll treate more at large with theyr Ambassa∣dours. And where they offer vnto hym this honour that he shoulde be defendour and paîrone of the league, he geueth them great thankes, and acknowledgeth their good wil. And although he vnderstandeth, with howe muche enuie and displeasure, the same is annexed, yet for the common wealthes sake, he could be contente, if they can agree vp∣pon the fyrst and seconde demaunde. For vnlesse there be an vniformi∣tie in doctrine, he supposeth that this charge can not be greatly to his honour. But he would chiefly wyshe that the learned men of his Re∣alme and theirs, myght be wholy of one opinion. And where he seeth The king of England re¦quireth a cō∣ference of ler¦ned men. well that the same wyll not be, vnlesse certen places of the confession and Apologie of their doctrine, maye before through priuate talke be some thynge qualified. Therfore he desyreth them instantlye to sende their Ambassadours, and amonges them some one that is excellently learned, whiche may conferre with his diuines of the whole doctrine and ceremonies, and determine the matter. And where he sheweth him selfe so lyberall vnto them, he requyreth agayne, that in case anye man attempte warre againste hym, fyrste they wyll ayde hym eyther with fyue hondreth horsemen, or els with ten Shippes well manned and fournyshed for foure monethes. Further more, that vpon his own charges, they shall prouyde hym two thousande horsemen, and fyue thousande fote men. Finally that the sentence whiche the diuines of The kinges deuorcemēt. Wittemberge prononced touchinge the diuorcement made, they wold approue also, and defende in the next counsell. The Duke aunswereth that for as muche as the whole matter concerneth his consortes, he wyll make them priuie to it, and vse their counsell in the same. After the foure and twenty daye of Aprill, was assigned for all to mete at Franckeforth, both for this and other causes. And firste they prescribe there a fourme for their Ambassadours to followe, whiche should be sent into Englande, wherein it was prouided amōges other thinges, that whan they shall come thether, & perchaunce cōclude vpō a league, that in al thinges they do except by expresse wordes, the Em∣pire, & the Emperour, vnto whom they are bounde by their othe & fide∣litie. Ambassadour for the citie was appointed Iames Sturmius, Receyued in to league. and the diuines were Melanchthon, Bucer, and George Draco. In this assemblie, were receyued into the league Ulriche Duke of Wyrtemberge, Bernine and Philippe brethren, Dukes of Pomerane George and Ioachime bretherne, Countes of Anhalde. Moreouer the cities of Auspurge, Franckeforte, Kempten, Hamborough, Hauno∣bria: they treated also of other thynges appertayning to the league and defence therof, & of the iudgement of the imperial chāber. It was
decreed moreouer to sende messengers and letters to the Emperour, thereby to aunswere to the Epistle sent them frō Naples. And where as George Duke of Saxon, for the exceadyng hatred he bare to Lu∣thers doctrine, was oftentymes at great cōtention and sute with the Prynce Electour of Saxon, this mans father, and at the last an agre∣ment was made, and nowe broken againe by the sayde Duke George diuerse wayes. The Prynce Electour declaringe the whole matter by his Ambassadours to his consortes in this assemblie, requestyng to be assisted with their ayde and counsell, in case he attempte anye force or violence. After the assemblie brake vp the tenth day of May. And in the begynning of Iune, the kynge of Englande hauyng cō∣dempned The lamen∣table death of Quene Anne. his wyue Quene Anne, of adultrye and inceste, but vniustly as it is supposed and proued synce, causeth her head to be stryken of, af∣ter that she had borne hym a daughter, calleth Elizabeth. And with her were executed certen Gentlemen of the kynges priuie chaumbre, Noreis Weston; Brewton and one Markes, whiche contrary to his conscience (as it is reported) for hope of preferement subscribed to a byll, whereby he condempned both hym selfe and all the reste. For where the Lorde Admirall Fizt Williams, that was after Erle of Southhampton, sayde vnto hym, subscribe Markes, and see what wyll come of it, he subscribed, and receyued therfore a rewarde vnloked for. And also the Lorde of Rochforte the Quenes brother, through the false accusation of that errant strompet his wyfe, whiche afterwardes suffered therfore, accordynge to her desertes. Whiche doulfull tragedie toke cleane awaye the Ambassade, that should haue been sent into Englande. Whan the warre was hotely begonne betwene the Emperour and A counsel is called. the Frenche kyng, Paule the thyrde publisheth a wrytinge vnder his Bulles of lead, the somme wherof is, to call a counsell at Mantua a∣gainst the .xxiij. day of May, in the yeare followyng, commaunding al Archbishops and byshops, & other heads of churches to be there at the same day, vnder the penaltie by the ecclesiasticall lawes prescribed, for disobediēce. Furthermore he chargeth & desireth the Emperour, kings and princes, & al others, which either by lawe or custome haue interest to be there, for the loue of Christe & the cōmon welthes sake, to come in persone, or if they be otherwyse letted, thā to send their Ambassadours with their full authoritie, to remayne tyll the ende of the counsell, that the churche may be refourmed, heresies weded cleane out, and warre attempted against the ennemies of Religiō. This was the effect therof whereunto subscribed sixe and twenty Cardinalles. The seuenth of Iune, kyng Ferdinando sent Iames Sturcelly, a Ciuilian Ambassa∣dour from Insprucke to the Swycers. I heare saith he, how the Frē∣che kyng hath requyred your ayde, but not obteined, which was to me
great pleasure, and I haue aduertised the Emperour hereof. And cer∣tenly reason would it should so be. For the Emperour gaue none occa∣sion of this warre, but was fully resolued this sommer to haue warred vpon the Barbarians and the ennemies of our Religion. Notwith∣standing Against the Frēch kyng. the Frenche kynge immediatly after the death of Fraunces Sfortia Duke of Millan (albeit he hath no right nor title therunto, & a composition made touchyng the whole matter certen yeares paste) contrary to the conuenauntes sought to renewe warre, and to reco∣uer Lumbardy. And at the same tyme passing the Alpes with a great armie, inuaded the Duke of Sauoye, a Prynce of the Empyre, to the intent that hauing ones subdued his countrey, he might haue the way open to passe further. And nowe that the Emperour hath leuied an ar¦mie to resiste hym, as he was in dede constreined, I am informed that he craueth nowe ayde agayne of you. Neuerthelesse for as muche as he breakyng his fidelitie hath commenced warres a freshe, I desyre you that you doe not assiste hym. Whereby you shall do the Emperour and me pleasure, and preserue the quiet of your owne commō wealth, The Prote∣stantes send to the Emp. In this meane while the Protestantes had sent an Ambassade to the Emperour in Italy, to make their purgation in that he had charged them by letters to haue taken the churche goodes, and further more to complayne of the iudges of the Emperiall chamber. But before the Ambassadours were arriued, the Emperoure, the seuenthe of Iulye, had sent letters to the Protestauntes, from the Towne of Sauilie. signifieng how he hath at al tymes both present and absent, by his let∣ters The Empe. letters to the Protestant. and Ambassadours, sought the quiet of Germany, and hath both promysed them peace in theyr Relygion, and also perfourmed the same. And nowe for as muche as the Frenche kynge, against whome he is enforced to rayse an armie, maye perauenture by false suggestion perswade with them, that he would now take occasion to breake that treuce of Religion, therfore hath he thought good to admonyshe them by his letters, to beleue no suche thinge, but assure them selues, that he woulde obserue his promyse, neyther would he moue warre vpon any man for religion, nor styre vp any trouble in Germany: for all this pre∣paration of warre is to mainteyne his ryght and authoritie. Wherfor let them quiet them selues, and styre not, what so euer they shal heare: For this shall be both to hym acceptable, and to them also profitable. Whan the Emperours power was come altogether, he marched The Empe. inuadeth the French pro∣uinces. through the myddest of Italye with a stronge armie, tyll he came in to prouynce of Fraunce. The kynge had incamped hym selfe at A∣uignion, betwyxte the Ryuers of Rhosne and Druence, and destroy∣inge the countrey. Whereinto he perceiued the Emperour woulde come, and kepyng hym selfe from geuynge the battell, he brought his ennemies into great perplexitie and myserie.
For the Emperour enforced through the penurie and scarscitie of all thynges, and the losse of manye thousandes, whiche died for famine and pestilence, and also for the death of Anthony Leuie, dischargeth the reste of his Armye and retourneth to Genes. An other Armie of his, that warred this sommer in Uermandoys, Peronne be∣seged. beseged the towne of Peronne, by the cōduicte of Henry Erle of Nas∣sowe, but preuayling not, leuied the siege about the same time that the Emperour retyred in the prouince, and the reporte of eyther newes brought vnto Paris the same daye, reioysed the citie exceadynglye. For they were in verye great feare, and the Preachers in their Ser∣mons to the people inuehed sore against the Emperour. And the kyn∣ges Lieutenauntes began to intrenche the cytie, and kepte the gates with watche and warde. William Furstemberge a Germane, serued the Frenche kynge in this warre. About the begynning of this warre ended his lyfe the Frenche The death of Fraunces the Dolphin kynges eldest sonne Fraunces, the Daulphin, eyghtene yeares of age, the reporte went that he was poysoned, and one Sebastian de moute Cuculo an Italian, beyng had in suspicion, was fyrste racked, and af∣ter torne in pieces with sondrye horses at Lions. And the kynge after∣wardes in his letters to the Prynces of Germanye, amonges other made a greuous complainte hereof, against Anthony Leuie, and Fer∣dinando Gonzage the Emperours Lieutenauntes, in whome he layd all the blame. Herman Archebyshop of Collon, of long tyme intending A reforma∣tion of Col∣lon. a reformation of his churche, holdeth at this tyme a counsell of his owne prouince, callynge to it as the maner is, the Byshoppes within his iurisdiction, of Liege, Utreicht, Munster, Osenbridge, and Myn∣des. Herein were decrees made of ceremonies and doctrine, and after set forth in a booke compyled by Iohn Gropper wherein were al Po∣pyshe Ceremonies for the moste parte paynted out with new colours, whiche booke dyd not contente the Byshop than, as hereafter shalbe declared. About this tyme also in the moneth of Iuly, Erasmus of Roterdam The death of Erasmus departed out of this lyfe, an olde man of thre score and ten yeares, and was buried at Basill. Howe excellently learned, and howe eloquent a man he was, and howe muche al learnyng is bounde to hym, his own workes shall testifie. By occasion of puttyng downe papistrie in Eng∣lande, and suppressing of certen Abbeyes, vnder thre hundreth markes of yearely valewe, there arose a commotion in Lynkcolneshyre, in a Commotion in Linkcoln¦shyre. market towne they call Lowthe, styred vp by Doctour Mackerell a false Monke, who named him selfe captayne Cobblar, and after that it was appeased by the Duke of Southfolke the kynges Lyeute∣naunt, an other began in Yorke shyre, a grear deale worse. For those Rebelles were manye and stronge, and came as farre as Dankcaster,
where the Duke of Northfolke met them with the kinges power, and when they should haue ioyned together in battell by the mediation of the Erle of Shrewisbury, which was a man welbeloued of the com∣mons, the matter was taken vp without bloudshed. Their chief Cap∣taine was Robert Aske, who was after executed for his treason, with certen others of the Nobilitie his adherentes. Unto the letters which Captayne Aske. the Emperour wrote in Iuly, the Protestaūtes answer the nynth day of Septembre, and where it pleased hym to wryte so gentle and so ly∣berally, they shewe hym howe they conceaue great pleasure in theyr mindes: for albeit they did neuer distruste his promise, yet for as much as diuerse reportes of his displeasure came to their eares, and agayne for that the iudges of the imperiall chamber and others, makyng none accompte of the peace concluded, did procede diuerse wayes agaynste them, they had some cause to doubte and feare the matter. But nowe that he hath wrytten againe so louingly and playnly, they are out of all doubtes, that he wyll perfourme the same, and refuse the sclaunde∣rous reportes of their aduersaries: lykewyse wyll they doe, and geue no credite vnto suche as shall otherwyse reporte of him, and in al other thinges also, doe according to their dutie, than came they to the coun∣sell which the Byshop had lately appointed at Mantua. And for as muche as the Emperour had oftentymes promysed them a free coun∣sell in Germany, and especially in the peace concluded at Norinberge, and what this shall be, they can not perceiue by the wryting, they de∣syre hym that he woulde see the matter myght be indifferently heard and vsed. In this same moneth the byshop of Rome publysheth an The Pope wyl reforme the court of Rome. other wryting and sayeth howe in the meane tyme tyll the counsel be∣gynne, he wyl refourme the holy citie of Rome, the head of all christen∣dome, and maistres of doctrine, maner and disciplyne, and washe it cleane from all spottes and vyce, to the intent that his owne house be∣ing first well pourged, he may after more easely take ordre for the rest, and because the nature of man is full of imbecillitie, neyther can he do so great a thing alone, and also dispatche other affaires of the common wealth, therfore hath he chosen certen Cardinalles, whome the liuing God hath ioyned to hym, as the coadiutours and companions of his cure and of office, to be the workers of this necessary and holsome bu∣synes, the Cardinall of Ostia, Sauseuerine, Ginute, Simonet, and with them thre byshops, whome he commaundeth all men to obeye vnder a great penaltie. In the moneth of Octobre the Emperour imbarketh him selfe at The king of Scottes ma∣ried yt Frēch kinges dau∣ghter. Genes to sayle into Spayne. The Frenche kynge came afterwardes to Paris, and on new yeares day, gyueth in mariage madame Mag∣dalene his eldest daughter, to Iames the fift, kynge of Scottes, who came into Fraunce in Autumne before. And in maner about the same
tyme Laurence Medices, through treason in the nyght, murthered A∣lexander Medices Duke of Florence, of his owne kyndred and fami∣lie, The Duke of Florence slayne by his cosyn. whan he had allured hym home to his house, putting hym in hope to enioye a noble matrone, that was his neyghbour, who in beautie & honest fame, farre excelled others. Who being slayne, the gouernment came vnto Cosmus Medices, which after by the Emperours consent, married Elenor daughter to Peter Toletane Uiceroy of Naples. At the Ides of Ianuary, the kyng of Fraunce came in to the court of Parliament at Paris, whiche thinge is seldome accustomed. And there in a great audiēce, he maketh a sore complaint of the Emperour, and declared causes, why the countries of Flaunders and Artois, whiche the Emperour holdeth of the kynges of Fraunce, as his elders haue done also, ought to be called againe to the patrimony of Fraūce. The speaker hereof was Capell the kynges aduocate, and he named The Swy∣cers sewe to the king for the Gospel∣lers. hym not Emperour, but Charles of Austriche. In the meane tyme the cities of Zuricke, Bernes, Basyll and Strausborough, make sute to the Frenche king, for such as were imprisoned for Religion, intreating hym that the exiles myght be restored, the kyng graunted partly vnto their requestes, but yet accomplished not their desyre. Wherfore whan they had receyued their aunswere the foure and twenty of February by Annas Momorantie the Conestable, and suspected that the kynge through his impulsion, dealt the lesse frendly with them, the Ambas∣sadours vsed afterwardes the helpe of the Quene of Nauarre, the kin∣ges owne syster, a very good ladye, and whiche bare a great zeale to the true doctrine. In this meane whyle the kyng hauing mustred his men, in the beginning of Marche leadyng his army towardes Arras, besegeth the towne and strong castell of Hesdine, whiche he had ren∣dred Hesdine ren¦dred. to hym within a moneth. At the selfe same tyme came to the kynge an Ambassadour from the byshop of Rome, Reignalde Poole an Englysh mā borne, of the bloud Cardinall Poole the Popes Am∣bassadour to the Frenche kyng. roial, lately made Cardinal. The cause of his ambassade was thought to be to worke some mischief against the kinge of Englande. About the same tyme that the kyng of Scottes maried the Frenche kynges daughter, the byshop had sent him for a present a fayre sworde, riche, & well wrought, and did exasperate him against the kyng of Englande. For the byshoppes are accustomed on Christmas daye at nyght, amō∣ges other thinges, with certen ceremonies to consecrate, as thei terme A sworde hallowed. it, a sworde, whiche after for an honour and token of beneuolence, they geue or sende vnto some man to whome it lyketh them. Sixtus the fourth was first authour of this custome, as is mentioned in the booke Pooles boke against king Henry the eyght. of their ceremonies. Afterwardes Cardinall Poole wrote a booke, whiche he had intitled, a defence for the vnitie of the churche. And he addresseth his style and speache vnto king Henry, and reprehēdeth him
sore, that he toke vpon him to be head of his churche, for that title to be longe only to the Byshop of Rome, whiche is the Uicar of Christe and Cold reasōs for the popes supremacie. the successour of Peter, whome Christe appointed Prince of the Apo∣stles: For he it was only that aunswered, how Christe was the sonne of God: vpon hym as vpon a Rocke, Christe buylded his churche. And howe Christe prayeth for his fayth that he being conuerted, myght al¦so conuerte his brethren: And that Iohn, after Christes death did euer obeye Peter. And what tyme they made haste bothe to Christes Se∣pulchre, he wold not go in before, but gaue him this honour. The cure and charge to fede the shepe, was committed chiefly to hym of Christ. And the nette also ful of fysshe, whiche many were not able to hale vp was drawen vpon the shore by Peter alone. Than hath he a long discourse of the deathes of the byshop of Ro∣chester, and syr Thomas Moore, detestinge his crueltie. Moreouer, howe the kyng had afflicted all the states of his realme, And into how muche mysery, he had brought a moste floryshynge kyngdome, what daunger he stode in of the Emperour, for the diuorsement of his Aunt, and subuersion of Religion, and sheweth hym how he neyther can nor ought to loke for any ayde, eyther of his owne subiectes or any other men, whiche hath deserued so euyll of the common wealth. And tour∣ning his tale to the Emperour, with many wordes stireth him vp, pro∣uoketh He incēseth the Emper. against the king of En∣glande. him and prycketh hym forewarde, to auenge that notable re∣proche done vnto his familie, and sayeth howe the Turkyshed seede is sowen abroade in Englande, and in Germany, signifiyng the doctrine that is contrary to the byshop of Rome. Finally after many opprobri∣ous wordes and sharpe rebukes, he prouoketh hym to regentaunce, & telleth hym howe there is none other remedy, but to retourne agayne to the bosome of the churche, whiche ones he defended by setting forth of bookes, greatly to his honour. This booke printed at Rome, bea∣ryng no date, was of long tyme kept close, and at the last after manye yeares, it came to one or two in Germany. And he sayeth, the cause of his wrytinge therof was for that the kynge had desyred hym to wryte his opinion. And albeit that certen learned men in Englande, whiche had done the lyke, had lost their lyues, yet could not he whiche was so muche bounde vnto hym, dissemble what his opinion was, neyther ought it to be imputed to hym as raylynge or cursed speakynge: for he doeth both of his naturall disposition and also by a certen ordre of life, cleane abhorre that vice. But in that he endeuoureth to reduce him a∣gayne into the waye, which deceiued by flatterers, was strayed farre out of the ryght pathe, he geueth hym a great benefite. Kynge Henry had brought him vp in his yought in good letters, and done very much Poole was vnthankful. for him. But whan this alteration was in Englande, whiche I haue spoken of, and he myslyked it, Paule the thyrde, through the commen∣dation
of Contarene, made hym Cardinal, and sent for hym to Rome. They that are familiarly acquaynted with him, say, how he knoweth His hipocri∣sie & falshod. ryght well the doctrine of the Gospell, and suppose the cause to haue been why he wrote so against kyng Henry, to auoyde the suspicion of Lutheranisme. He caused the booke to be printed at Rome of his own coste and charge, as they reporte. And taking to him selfe all the Co∣pies, gaue it to reade only to the byshop him self, and to the Car∣dinalles, and others of his dere frendes: for vnto such he wold be commended and feared on the other syde, leste if it should be red openly of all men, he should incure the rebuke and obloquie of them, that had oftentymes heard hym speake the contrary. ✚ The eleuenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the eleuenth Booke THe Protestantes hauing declared to the Emperour by ambassade three poyntes, Heldus cō¦ming to Smalcald, maketh them answer, to the which they reply, and vrge a fre counsel, such as was promised: vpon this the Pope sendeth the Bishop of Aste. The Protestants set forth an Apologie vpon the refusal of such a counsel, and writ therof to the French king. The king of England writeth against this coū∣saile of the Pope. I Spake of the Citie of Auspurge in the nynthe booke, and of the chaunge of Religion there, for the whiche cause the Clergie being for the moste parte of noble house, forsoke the citie. Wherupon the Senate in a writing directed to the Empe∣rour, A wryting of Auspurg. kyng Ferdinando, and all the states of the Empyre, declareth the cause of their doynges, howe frendly they dealte with them, how ma∣ny thynges they suffered, and howe scornefully they behaued them selues, and howe often they went about to stire vp sedition in the citie. Whereunto not long after, Christopher the byshop aunswered for him selfe and the reste, and after many contumelious
wordes, exhorteth the Emperour and Princes, that for as muche as the daungers concerneth aswel them as him self, they would loke to it in time. You haue heard in the last booke of the Ambassadours which The Prote. Ambassad. to the Emp. the Protestauntes sent to the Emperour in Italy, to whom they gaue commaundement chiefly thre thynges to treate of. First to confute the brute whiche was raysed vp, that they shoulde haue made a league with the kynge of Fraunce and of England, secondly that the Empe∣rour would restrayne the iudgement of the counsell chaumbre, thirdly that suche as were come into their league, since the composicion of the peace at Norinberge, myght inioye the same peace. Whiche requestes the Emperour in dede hearde, but being wholy occupied with ware∣lyke matters, he sayde howe he woulde sende his Ambassadour into Germany, who should make them aunswere. Wherfore at his depar∣ture from Genes, into Spayne, he sent Matthie Helde his vicechaū∣celour, Heldus the Emperours Ambassad. into Germany. Whan the Protestauntes vnderstode that by their Ambassadours nowe retourned, they appoynte a generall me∣tyng at Smalcalde, the seuenth daye of February. And because the daye of the counsell approched nere, neyther was there any doubte, but that the Emperours Ambassadour would haue some talke of the same, they were agreed also to bring with them their chiefest diuines. Wherfore at the daye assigned, besydes the Prynces & Ambassadours of the cities, came thether Luther, Melanchthon, Bu∣cer, Osiander and diuerse other. Whan the Ambassadour was come to Smalcalde, the fyftene daye of February, he speaketh thus before them all. Howe the Emperour had commaunded hym to doe his mes∣sage, His sration at Smalcald only to the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgraue. But for as muche as they haue thought good, to make their consortes also parta∣kers of the same, he is contente to followe their mindes herein: he saith in dede that he knoweth not al the Ambassadours of the league, wher¦fore in case there be any amongs them, whom this answere of the Em¦perous doth not concerne, there is no cause why they shoulde suppose that any treaty is made with thē, but chiefly they of Auspurge, which haue oftentymes sollicited the Emperour both in Italy and Spayne, about Religiō, and nowe also lately at Genes by their Ambassadour. Unto whome the Emperour sayde, howe he would sende his Ambas∣sadour into Germany, whiche shoulde make them an aunswere. And they not abyding his commyng, haue altered the state of Religion, not without both the contempte and also making of the Emperour. There¦fore whan he came to Auspurge, beinge constrayned of necessitie to chaunge his purpose, he treated with them nothynge at all, and hath wrytten to the Emperour the whole matter, as it standeth. After whā he had exhibited the testimoniall of his Ambassade, he procedeth. And where they had so diligently pourged them selues of the Frenche and
Englysh league, the Emperoure was ioyfull to heare it, whiche doeth both credit them, & also cōmendeth their vertue, that they haue so wit∣tely eschewed the Frenche practises, full of disceirfulnes. Afterwards The Frēche practises. discoursing the warre of Sauoy, and speakynge many thinges of the Frenche kyng, sayde that he was not only a lette vnto the Emperour, that he could not bende his whole power against the Turke, but also that he consulted with the Turkes, & prouoked thē to inuade Cristen∣dome. And that this is also his daily practise, to styre vp stryfe and ci∣uile warre in Germany, and nowe endeuoureth al that he may to per¦swade them, that the Emperour wyll not kepe promyse with them. He desireth them therfore not to credite his crafty counselles: For the Emperour to be of suche honour and vertue, that he wyll not shrinke from his promyse: And that may they well perceiue by mo experimēts than one. As touchinge the iudgement of the imperiall chambre. The Emperours commaundemēt was, they should meddle with no cases of Religion: But they aduertised him by their letters, that there was oftentymes controuersies, whiche partely concerned religion partlye not. And therfore the Emperour cōmaunded thē, that of such matters as thei supposed were sequestred from religiō, thei should iudge indif∣ferently. For it were pitie but the lawe should haue his course. And se∣yng the Emperour hath commaunded them to surcease from determi¦ning matters of Religion, they ought to be contente there with. And if the iudges haue done ought, contrary to the Emperours decre, they shall not escape free, but shalbe punished according to the lawe made at Regenspurge. But the Emperour againe admonished them, that they would do nothing rashely, neither prescribe the imperiall cham∣bre. For this thinge is neither lawfull nor voyde of seditiō, and should The iudges of the chāber seme to be done in contempt of the Emperours iurisdictiō, and to the reproche of the iudges, whiche ar partly men of noble houses, and part¦ly of excellent learning and vertu. And therfore requireth them, not to hynder the lawe. Unto their thirde requeste whiche is, that suche also as be not comprised in the peace of Norinberge, shoulde inioye the be∣nefite therof, he sayeth: the Emperour can not with a safe conscience graunte it, for that they haue promysed and subscribed to the decrees of the Empyre, whiche are contrary to this Religion. And if eche man should be suffered to swarue from his promyse whan he liste, that wer the ready waye to breake the pacification of Norinberge. Wherfore whan the Emperour shall knowe more certenly of their procedynges, he wyll do than as shall seme ryght and reason. In the meane tyme he requyreth them, to obserue the peace them selues, and to see that it be not broken of others, whiche his truste is they wyll doe, considerynge that the counsell is so nere, whereof they haue wrytten to the Empe∣rour, and is the fourth thyng, whiche he hath in commaundement to
treate with them of. And after vseth a great and long perswasiō with them, that seing the Emperour and all other kynges and nations, in∣tende to be there and to further it, they wyll not refuse nor be agaynst the same: wherein the Emperour desyreth to vnderstand playnly their myndes. For in case they should refuse, take exceptions and make de∣laye. The Emperour thynketh both that a most Godly purpose shold be stopped in the middes of the course, and that straungers woulde al¦so conceaue of them a suspicion, that they loued rather the vexation of the common wealth, than peace and quietnes. And seyng the Empe∣rour hath this respect only, that Gods glory be set forth, and the salua∣tion of men be consydered, he exhorteth, and earnestly requyreth them, that they would satisfie herein his desyre and the common wealthes also. He hath also in commission, that if anye controuersie shall happen in this matter, he shall solute and appease the same, wherunto his wyl and diligence shalbe ready. If they desyre also any further declaration of his talke with them, he woulde not refuse. The next daye after he had thus spoken, he treateth seuerallye with the Duke of Saxony, howe the Emperour beareth him an especiall good wyll, but the lette that he hath declared not thesame hitherto hath bene the dissention a∣bout Religion. But seing that there is great hope, that all that matter shalbe quieted by the counsell already called, he desyreth hym to fur∣ther the same, and to sende his Ambassadours thether, to the intente that all discorde taken awaye, he may declare his good wyl towards hym. For if he refuse, and take exceptions, what displeasure wyll come of it, he knoweth well enough. Moreouer for as muche as the Turke maketh great preparation to inuade Germanye, he requyreth hym to sende hym the ayde decreed at Regenspurge against the Turkes force, or if chaunce that the Turke come not to the field, nor attempte Ger∣many, that then he woulde sende hym the same ayde agaynst the Frē∣che kyng, who hath inuaded Sauoye a prouince of the Emperour. Last for because the Emperour hath borne the whole charges of theim periall chambre of long tyme alone and hath consumed great treasure in his warres, he requyreth that after the olde custome of the Empyre, he would be contributary, for the portion of money hereunto belōging, as the residue of the Prynces haue also promysed. The Duke sayeth The Dukes aunswere. that in as muche as these thynges concerne not hym alone, but his cō∣sortes also, he wyll take deliberation. After the .xxiiij. daye of February all the confederatours make aunswere together. And first wyshynge vnto the Emperour longe health and preseruation, as concernynge them of Auspurge, they haue heard the whole matter by their Ambas∣sadours, and say howe they can not sequestre them from theyr fellow∣shyp: Touchyng the Emperours warre with the Frenche kyng, they are not a lytle sory, seyng the same to be commodious for the Turkes
the ennemies of the Empyre. For that the Emperour hath taken in good parte, their purgation, and mynded to kepe the peace made at Norinberge, they are ryght glad and thanke hym. But touchynge the Iudgement of the Imperiall chamber: where he sayde, howe sore it should greue the Emperour, to stoppe the course of the lawe: They shew how there was a difficultie in the thinge, what time the Arche∣bishop of Mētz & the Palsgraue, were intercessours. How after much & long deliberation, there appered no surer way to establish the cōmon¦welth, than to graūte peace to religion, & to al matters annexed to the same, till either a general counsell of Europe, or a prouincial counsel of Germany migh be had. For vnlesse it might so be, & except yt all maner of matters that procede of religion, might be cōprised together, howe lightly occasion of trouble may be geuen, was both than considered, & nowe may be also perceiued. The wordes also of themperours procla∣mation, set forth at the same time, declare this sufficiently. And that it was neuer their minde, to pretende any other cause, saue only matters of religion, neither are the iudges of the counsel chāber in their opiniō, able to proue the cōtrary. But now where he sayth, how themperour gaue them authoritie to iudge of qualitie of matters, it is to them gre∣uouse. For they accōpt al those actions to concerne religion, whiche in dede can not be decided, vnlesse the controuersie of religion be first in a lawful counsel determined. Which thing they haue many times signi∣fied both to themperour and kyng Ferdinando, by letters & Ambassa∣dours. For this question of Religiō is preiudiciall, & ought to be deter∣mined by a counsell, before suche matters be examined, as depend vpō the same. And seing that benefites are imployed for desert & dutie, they can not suffer yt those, which wtin their dominions folowe a cōtrary re∣ligiō, frō their doctrine to enioye the goodes of the church, in as muche as either they wil not, or can not execute their dutie. And for so muche as the matter cōcerneth the cōsciēce of the mynde, there remaineth no place to right of possessiō or of restitutiō. And seing yt whē the cōpositiō was made at Norīberg, they expresseli named al actiōs & sutes, which hanged then eyther in the chāber or other courtes of iudgemēt, exhibi∣ting thē to the intercessours as matters of religiō, who promised than to fynde the meanes, yt themperour should exempt thē frō iudgement. The same thing also king Ferdinādo toke vpō him in thassēblie of Ca∣dane, & by those wordes of proclamatiō, where thēperour cutteh of all ple, all authoritie to iudge of the state of matters, was cleane taken a∣way frō the iudges of yt imperial chāber. And although they wold not report euil of thē, yet many, seyng thē ready to geue sentence agaynste them, wer incouraged to rather to comēce their actiōs, which thing is to be prouoked by mo wayes thā one. For what time their men do re∣quire iugedmēt in any thyng they ar not only admitted, but also with contumeliouse wordes reiected. As of late they of Humborough were
by them cōmaūded to restore the clergie of their citie not only to their goodes & possessions, but also to their olde religiō & al their iurisdictiō. And where as they could not so do wt a safe conscience, they were con∣demned in a great sōme of money. And therfore themperour may se by this one fact what their mynde & purpose is. For either is th{is} a matter of religion or els there is none at al: And if they may vse the matter af¦ter this sorte, than was the truce made in vayne. And in case by this meane the rites & ceremonies that are chaūged, may be restored, there shal nede no general counsel, wherunto notwithstanding themperour him self saith, that al these thinges do belong. Wherfore vpō iust & ne∣cessary causes they haue refused that iudgemēt, whan after diuerse ex∣ceptiōs they could preuaile nothing. Now as touching the persons of the iudges, there can not past one or two of our religiō be found in the whole cōpany: but what decre was made at Regēsburg, in th{is} behalf, is not vnknowen. For the more fiersly that any of thē impugneth our doctrine, the better is he there accepted. And euē by their coūtenaūces it may be easly perceiued, what affectiō thei beare vs, in hādlīg of mat∣ters. Whiche thing being thus, they doubt not, but that themperoure wyll cōmaunde thē to surcease. And in case themperour thinke, yt anye prophane matter be mixed with matters of religiō, they refuse not the due examinatiō of the same, so that in the meane tyme, the iudgement of the imperial chāber may cease. And for such as are cōmen into their league since the pacification of Norinberge: in the former yeres the in∣tercessours did require them at Scwinforte, that they should receiue no mo into their league & nūbre, but than they refused the same. And whan they came after to Norinberge, they perseuered in the same opi∣nion. But where he sayd, that many had promysed & cōdicioned, not to alter their religion, some of them answere thus, that they made no pro¦myse at al, some againe made exceptions in their priuate compositiōs, that they might thus do, and some in dede promised, but vpō condiciō that themperour put thē in hope to procure a coūsell to be called wtin sixe monthes, which should begin within the yere after. But wheras yt was longer delayed, & they in the meane while through Gods benefit, vnderstode more rightly the true doctrine, thei could differre it no lon∣ger, & thought it their duty to professe yt thing, which they knew to be true & Godly: For yt byshop of Romes lawe so teacheth, yt if a man hath also bounde him selfe by an othe to do any thing yt is wicked, he is not bound to performe it. And again, like as their aduersaries will not re∣fuse, if any of their nūbre should fall to take their partes, no more may they also, if any may escape from them, and come into their felowshyp, let him, but that he maye so doe. Wherfore they beseche the Emperour that he woulde restrayne the Iudges, and suffer not them onlye, but others also, whyche are synce come to them, to enioye the benefyte of
the peace: for if it be otherwyse, or that thei haue any wrōg offered thē, they can not forsake their league fellowes or lyke professours of doc∣trine, in that necessitie, which they declared also to Ferdinādo at Uiē∣na: For their cause is alone with theirs, which if the iudges of the chā∣ber shal take vnto thē, & preuente the counsell herein, who doubteth it to be extortion & open wrong, against the which they are constrained, euen by the lawe of nature, to defende thē selues. But what discōmo∣ditie will come therof, & what wilbe the ende of it, Themperour of his wisdome can consider. Thei doubtles wishe for peace, & couet to grati∣fie themperour in all thinges, yet so as all men may haue fre accesse to the true doctrine. And if they may this obtayne, they wylbe the more prest & ready to accōplishe that, which the Emperour & king Ferdinā∣do require, touching the Turke, & charges of the chābre. Cōcerning the counsaile, wherunto themperour so greatly perswadeth them. They haue red the copie of the letters which Paule the third hath publyshed touching the same, & perceius therby that he is not of the same minde & opinion, that themperour is of. For although Adrian the sixt in thassē∣blie at Norinberge cōfessed there by his legate, yt in a maner al thinges at Rome were sore corrupted, promising to do his endeuour that they might be reformed. Yet was Clement the seuenth, his successour with in two yeares after, cleane of an other minde, as appered by his legate sent to the next assemblie, in so muche as themperours lieutenaūtes, & other Princes, by a decree there made, ordeined a fre general councell might be holden in Germany, in the which coūsel what errour or vice so euer had crept into the church, might be takē away. This decre was afterward cōfirmed by thēperour at yt suite of tharchbishop of Mēzt & the Palsgraue Prince Electour. Howbeit this Clement, a yeare after, propoūded a counsel farre otherwyse, thā was specified by the decrees of thempire, & had assigned the place in Italy, which thā they refused. The same thing afterward did Paule the third, whom they answered also, following the lyke trade as they did before. And nowe also doeth the byshop of Rome attempt the same (although couertly) as did Cle∣ment the seuēth openly by expresse wordes. For herein doth he by a cer¦ten implicatiō condēne their doctrine, where he speaketh of late sprōg vp heresies. For that he meaneth the same of this doctrine, & intendeth to plucke it vp by the rootes, it is manifest by thexecution & punishmēt that he putteth innocēt persones to, for professing this same doctrine, & yet he through a shamelesse dissembling, pretedeth as though he wold reforme those horrible erours & vices of his church, of the which, these many yeres, so many good & learned men haue cōplained. And yt them¦perour being through his crafty policy perswaded, prouoketh thē to ye counsel which he would not do, if he knew his fraude & disceiptfulnes. The same craftes he vseth also, what time by his legates, he solliciteth
kynges and Princes, yea and them also to admitte the counsell, to the intēt he may haue thē as fauourers & mainteiners of his wicked pur∣pose, & by the confirmation of the counsel, myght thē selues condemne their owne doctrine. By the whiche craft Iulian the Apostata discea∣ued in times past the Christen souldiours. And although the byshop of Rome susteineth the persone of their aduersary, yet taketh he vpō him the authoritie of iudge, against al right & equitie, and hath all others, consenting to him herein, whiche are bounde to him by othe & manye wayes. But how vnlawful the same is, & how it ought not to be graū¦ted thē, themperour doubtles & other kings in their opiniō, can iudge. For yt the byshop of Rome hath brought errours into ye churche, & a doc¦trine cleane cōtrary not only to Gods worde, but also to the auncient toūselles & doctours, & mainteineth the same, & that he hath also made exceading many lawes against Gods cōmaundemēt, wherby the true knowledge is vtterly oppressed & defaced, the same vereli haue their di¦uines through Gods gift declared. And therfore do they intēde, to ac∣cuse the byshop & his fellowes in any lawfull counsell, of these so great matters, & to coudēpne thē of the same. How also through euil craftes, and dishonest meanes, yea through force & guyle they achiefe their dig∣nities, how filthie a life they leade, what euil examples thei geue, how they do no part of their dutie, how thei neglect such as are cōmitted to their charge, & wallowe in all wickednes of lyfe, it is so wel knowen & tried, yt it nedeth no further declaratiō. For the which causes also, it is not lawfull for the bishop (euen by the testimony of his owne lawe) to appoint there coūsel, muche lesse to be iudge in the same. Neither may his sworne clientes vsurpe the persone of the iudge, seing they may not in dede, be any part of a lawful coūsel. moreouer the place of the coūsel is appointed in Italy, cleane cōtrary to the decrees of themperour & states of thempire, which he scornefully dispiseth. Thei know not more ouer as yet, whether other princes of Christendom wil allowe yt place, & that there be weighty causes for the which it shold be daūgerous for them & theirs to come thither. For albeit they should haue a saufe con∣duicte, yet for so muche as the byshop hath there his clientes euerye where, which hate this doctrine most bitterly, ther is great daūger of lieng in wayte, & priuie cōspiracies, which in those parties are much to be feared. Furthermore since this matter is most weighti, & such as vn¦der the sonne can arrise no greater, which doubtles cōcerneth either e∣uer lasting saluatiō or dānatiō. And seing that the greatnes of the mat¦ter requireth, yt they should in great nūbre wt the ministers of their chur¦che & preachers be there present, & not to cōmit so weighty a matter to their deputes & proetours alone, it should be a great griefe vnto thē, to passe out of the limites of thempire & go into Italy, leauing their coū∣trey & people, in suche grudge of mindes as is now in Germany, wtout garde, and their churches any long time without preachers. Wherfore
they moste humbly beseche that the Emperour would way with hym selfe all these poinctes diligently, and seing he is the high and supreme magistrate, vnto whom chiefly belongeth the setting forth of the trew doctrine, that he wold applie him self wholy, that the true knowledge of God might be aduaunced, for they doe embrace no wicked kynde of doctrine, nor seke any other thyng, than the glory of Gods holy name. And this aunswere concerning the counsell agreed vnto, also the Am∣bassadours of George Marques of Brandenburge, and of the cities of Norinberge, Halles, and Hailbrune: in other thinges they medled not, because they were not of the league. What time the Protestantes had thus spoken, Heldus the Ambassadour aunswereth by and by, & spea∣king The answer of Heldus. many thinges againe of the great good will of the Emperour & of the Frenche kyng whiche had conspired with the Turkes to the di∣struction of the cōmon wealth, he cometh to that matter touching the iudgement of the imperial chambre, and sayeth in deede that peace is graunted for matters of Religion, & no man to say the cōtrary, but all the strife to consiste in this which be matters of religion, & which not. And where as they take suche for cases of religion, as others do accō∣pte for ciuile & prophane, how farre against reason is it, that the thyng should not be debated, & the causes & obiectiōs of either part be heard, & so procedeth further to the meaning of yt same matter. And as touching such as are lately receiued into their league, yt Emperour thiketh thus that they yt be not cōprised within the peace of Norinberg, are bounde al to the decrees of thempire, & ought to yelde to ye authoritie of the coū¦sel. And for asmuch as themperours minde is wholy addicte to peace & cōcorde, he requireth estsones, yt they wyl ayde him wt men & mony, for the Turkish warre, & nedeful charges of the imperial chābre. And if the Turke inuade not, yt thā they wold a few monthes, assiste themperour with like ayde against the French king: whiche if they wil doe, it shall not repēt thē of yt seruice, wherin he desireth to know a direct answer, that he may aduertise themperour therof. And as concerning the coū∣sel, they thē selues knowe what labour & trauayle, themperour had to bring it to passe. And how his trust is, yt in the same shalbe appeased all cōtrouersie, yt is in religion wt quietnes, & the state of the cōmō wealth be reformed to the glory of God, & preseruatiō of men. Wherfore them perour trusteth assuredly that they should make none exceptions, nor swarue from the rest of men, for if they should persiste herein, it would be grieffull for him to heare. And after he had againe vsed sondrye per∣swasions, & amonges other, that the Emperour would through saufe∣conduicte saue them harmelesse, he requyred to haue a determinate aunswere herein, and besydes the names of them, which are come vn∣to them, synce the peace of Norinberge: Wherein was wrytten that Marques George, the cities of Norinberge, Weysenburg, Hailbrine,
Winsem and Hales, were of the same Religion, but not of the league. Wherefore in the Emperours name he desyred to knowe what their league was, and the condition of the same. The selfe same daye came thether the Romyshe legate, the byshop Aques, with letters from the The Popes Ambassad. byshop of Rome to the Duke of Saxon, exhorting him to come to the counsell, whome the byshop of Rome sent into Germany, in the place of Peter Paule Uerger, hopinge well that the newe Ambassadour should some thing haue brought to passe, but he also loste his labour, & was as little regarded, in so muche that on a certen day, whan he de∣sired to speake with the Lātgraue, he tolde him he was at no leasure, and in maner at the same instant, went to see howe Luther did, who at the same tyme laye sore sycke of the stone. Which thyng the Ambas∣sadour The Popes Ambassad. vispysed. myght see out of his lodging. Uergerius had geuen this Am∣bassadour instructions of the whole state of Germany, and how euery man in the byshops behalfe must be enterteined and vsed. The fourth daye after, whiche was the last of February, the Protestauntes auns∣wer Heldus. That for the Emperour him self, they neuer doubted, but that he woulde obserue the peace made, whiche he hath also promised, both in publique and priuate letters, but the imperiall chamber con∣trary to the expresse wordes of the composition, sealed and confirmed by the Emperour, hath taken vpon them to heare and determine, and to call before them diuerse for the alteration of Religion, for Rites, ce∣remonies and churche goodes, whiche thyng were playnly exempted in the pacification concluded. But the iudges of the imperiall cham∣ber being also of a contrary Religion, & bounden by their othe to geue sentence, as well after the prescript of the byshop of Romes lawe, as of the Emperours, doe lyttle regarde the compositiō of the peace, but pro∣cede directly against it. Wherfore they haue iust cause to refuse theyr iudgement, and to desire a reformation, and that for diuerse considera∣tions, whiche are also before mentioned. For first the iudges of the im∣periall chamber, are for the moste parte of a cōtrary Religion, they are bounde by an othe to iudge after the decrees of the Byshop of Rome, as wel as after the lawes of the Empire. Thei beare fauour to our ad∣uersaries, and that manifestly, and frowne vpon vs and our fellowes. They medle with mere matters of Religion, contrary to the Empe∣rours proclamation. Finally they haue condēpued our cōfederatours of Hamborough, only for matters of Religiō, in a great somme of gold & so would procede against others in case they were not refused. And as touching the names of them that are come into their league synce the peace making, they had long synce wrytten and sent to the Empe∣rour in Italy by their Ambassadours. Who seing the tyme of the coun∣sell so longe differred, ioyned them selues in league with thē, iudgyng it mete to preferre their conscience, before any ciuile bonde: last where
hedesyreth to knowe the fourme and maner of their league: thei mar∣uell that he will requyre it, considering that the Emperour knoweth it well inough, and made meanes by the intercessours at Norinberg, that they should haue left it: but they made hym suche aunswere than, as he moued them no more herein, howe their aduersaries haue geuen the occasion hereof. For what mischiefe they haue deuysed against thē, it is right well knowen. And this league of theirs is ordeined to iniu∣rie no man, but to defende them selues, and is framed of suche condici∣ons as if nede require, it may be declared to the Emperour or any man els without any shame at all. And as concerning suche thynges as he spake of the counsell, and of the Emperours mynde towardes the com¦mon wealth, they lyke very well all. Howe they do beleue also that the Emperour knoweth not the byshoppes minde herein, & therfore procu¦reth the counsell so ernestly. But what opinion the Emperour hath of the bishop, thei wil leaue vndiscussed. Neuerthelesse for as much as his wrytte is cōtrary to the Emperours minde, and altogether suspicious they can not dissemble, what they thinke thereof. For before the coun∣sell do begyune, he hath condempned their doctrine, not only in word, but in dede also: and also it is wel knowen, how that in all assemblies, where religion is treated of, albeit thei see that the Scripture maketh against them, yet wyl they presume and take vpon them the authoritie of determination. And although they are mynded in a lawefull coun∣sel, to accuse the byshop and his complices, of false doctrine, heresy and The Popes errours. impietie, yet is there no doubte, but that he will after his accustomed maner be both partie and iudge also. For that is his entent, the wrytte it selfe wittenesseth, whiche if they should ones allowe, it were in vain and to late afterward to talke of any conditions or fourme of disputa∣tion in the counsell. And whether this be suche a counsell than as the Emperour and the states of the Empyre haue in diuerse assemblies a∣greed vpon, they leaue it to the opinion of any indifferent iudge. For euermore those wordes a free and a Christian counsell were wyselye & pourposely added, and the same in deede not to be so taken, as that it should be lawfull only, for euery man to speake his minde there, but al¦so that neyther the bishop nor his adherentes, which are depely bound through their fidelitie and promyse, one to an other, should pronounce sentence in their owne causes. And the other ought not so to be inter∣preted, as though there were no place in the counsell for the Turkes and suche others, but that accordinge vnto holy Scripture, all partes of doctrine might be examined and determined. And how they know moreouer, that not in one countrey only, but euery where also in the The Popes vnreasona∣ble authori∣tie. whole worlde, are Godly and learned men dispersed here and there: whiche thinge refresheth their spirites to thinke vpon, considerynge & hopyng that in case this vnreasonable power of the byshop of Rome
might be diminished and that all thinges shoulde not depende vpon one mans cōmaundement, it would come to passe that not only their diuines, but also diuers other good men in sondry countreis, whiche being now oppressed with his tyrannie hyde thē in coruers and sayde nothyng, would applie their whole study and endeuour to the refour∣mation of the churche. And now as concerning the place of the coun∣sell, they knowe not where it should better be chosen, than in Germa∣ny. For albeit the counsell doth also appertayne to other nations, yet chiefly it concerneth the Germaines, whiche must come thether them selues with the ministers of their churches, where as other kynges & Prynces may do the thing by their deputes, after the olde wōted ma∣ner of long tyme accustomed. Furthermore what the situation and cō¦moditie of Mātua is, they wyl not dispute of, but there is now warre in Italy, but in case there were none, yet haue they lately declared, why that place ought to be of them suspected. How the Duke of Mā∣tua him selfe is affected, they wyll not reason, but his owne brother is one of the chiefest Cardinalles, whiche maketh muche to encrease the suspition. Therefore if other nations shall heare one of their reasons, wherfore they doe refuse both the place and fourme of pleadyng, they doubte not but they wyll allowe the same, and if they did not, than should they in dede conceaue of them a wronge opinion. The Empe∣rour Of the place of the coūsel. knoweth also that in Germany be many cities as commodious for the pourpose, as Mantua, and the whiche ought chiefly to be re∣spected, muche commended for equitie and iustice. For those secret and priuie conspiracies to dispatche men out of the waye, are not so well knowen and practised in Germany as they be in some other places. And where as thei cleaue and sticke on this wyse to the decrees of the Empyre, and wyll not permitte them selues to be remoued from the same, it ought to seme no maruell nor newes to the Emperour. For al¦so in tymes past Liberius Bishop of Rome, the frende and fawtour of Athanasius, required the Emperour Constantine to call a counsell at Alexandria, where the defendant and plaintiues dwelled. And albeit that the same place was nothing commodious for the West churche: And although the Emperour alledged that Athanasius and his fello∣wes were by the consent of the whole worlde condempned, and excō∣municated: Albeit that he contended Liberius to be one man emōges Athanasius. Arrius. Liberius. all others, that sought to disturbe the publique quiet: Yet neuerthe∣lesse did he relent nothyng, and than whan the Emperour had denied the same, a long time after, the errour of Arrius reigned, but in fine the doctrine of Athanasius had the vpper hande, and preuayled for euer. And who is able to recite, what bloud was spilte, in the quarell of his doctrine: And the condition of their Religion to be like vnto the same, whether aconuenient place be geuen or otherwyse. For a lyke cause
also suche as were at the counsell of Basill, refused Ferrare, where as Eugenius the byshop had summoned an other counsell. The Empe∣rour Henry the seuenth, had a great sute and cōtrouersie with Robert kyng of Sicilie, & had cited hym to appere to Pisa: but the same was thought vnreasonable to the byshop Clement the firste, whiche bothe defended the kyng & also shewed reasons, wherfore he was not boside to come thether, nothynge so weighty as these of ours. Therfore wher they no we refuse suche maner of counsel, the faulte ought not to be im∣puted vnto them, but to the byshop. For so ofte as they haue referred their matter to a counsell, they ment it of suche a counsell as the Em∣perour and states of the Empyre had decreed: For they were not igno¦rant, that in case the byshoppes might be permitted, to haue the whole orderyng of the matter, but that they would worke all to their owne auauntage, and oppressing the true doctrine, woulde establyshe theyr owne wyckednes. And yet for all that doth Paul the thyrde so collour the matter with wordes to the Emperour, as though he woulde vse the thynge vpryghtly and sincerely, where he intendeth the contrary. Moreouer what counsell they requyred, thei haue declared by writing The craft of Paule the. to Peter Paule Uerger the Ambassadour, not only of Clement, but also of Paule the thyrde. And where as he sayth that the Emperours mynde is, that errours and vices might be reformed, there is none ap∣parence therof at all in the byshops wryting. For in case he intended a true and a nedefull reformation, he would not haue cōdempned theyr doctrine before they were heard. And albeit they distruste not the Em¦perours equitie, and are so muche the more sory that they can not gra∣tifie hym herein, yet are they nothing furthered through this his good wyl and diligence. For albeit the Emperour him selfe be present at the counsell, yet is it well enough knowen, what authoritie the bishoppes wyll permitte eyther hym or other kynges also, to haue in suche maner of cases: For the moste that they wyll graunte to, shalbe perauenture to vse their counsell in matters, for as to determine any, they wyll not Popes haue Emperours in subsectiō. permitte them, but reserue that authoritie to themselues only, to the entent that in case the Emperour and ciuile Magistrates went some thynge to farre, they myght hereby as with a bridel hamper them in, & in fine determine al thinges at their own pleasure. They desire ther∣fore, that the Emperour would not be offeded with them, in that they seke to eschew these snares of the bishop where with he wold intrappe them. For this is geuē naturally euen vnto brute beastes, to shunne the place, where they knowe they are layde in wayte for to be taken. Fur∣thermore it is commonly knowen, howe the matter was handled in the counsell of Constance, with the Emperour Sigisinūde. For albeit The counsel of Cōstasice. he had graunted a saufeconduicte to Iohn Husse, yet did the byshops deminishe his authoritie, saying, howe it was lawfull neyther for him Iohn Huss.
nor no man els to prescribe or measure them in this behalf: wherwith the Emperour being vāquished, gaue place to their authoritie whiche they chalenged to them selues, not with out sighinge in their opinion, but yet to the miserable destruction of hym, who trustinge vppon the saufe conduicte, fell into that calamitie. Wherby it appereth euidently, how muche the Emperour is able to helpe thē herein, though he wold neuer so fayne, after they haue ones intrapped them, and enclosed thē as it were in a pinnefolde: therfore must they worke circūspectly, and yet for all that, lest any thyng should be imputed to them, they are rea∣dy not only to abyde lawfull iudgement, but also moste earnestly bese∣che the Emperour, to waye and pounder these so weightie matters di∣ligently, and to call a lawfull counsell in Germany, wherin neither the byshop nor his consortes shall occupie the place of iudgemēt. And if the byshop wyl let or impeche the Emperour in so doing, and shal not per∣mitte a sincere counsel to be holden in Germany, they do proteste opē∣ly, that the faulte is not in them, that the matter is not brought to a cō¦corde. What incommoditie also shall arise therof, the same to be wholy ascribed to the Byshop: in conclusion they requeste hym to make this same reporte vnto the Emperour, and declare their good wylles and dutie to wardes hym. Whan the matter was thus decided amonges them, And Heldus had promysed them to make relation to the Empe∣rour of all thynges, the Protestauntes decree also howe to mainteyne The Prote∣staunes de∣cre for main¦teining Mi∣nisters. the ministers of their churches in lyuing, for the erecting of free scho∣les that their churches and common wealth might neuer want lear∣ned men, last of suche thynges as concerne their league and defence. As concerning the Turke, they had aunswered the Ambassadour be∣fore, that if they and theirs might haue quietues in other matters, they would be glad and wyllynge to ayde the Emperour against hym, but nowe the brute went, howe kyng Ferdinādo prepared warre against John Uayuode, and therfore requyred ayde. In the whiche perplexi∣tie, lest haply they should not do theyr dutie to the common wealthe, it was decreed in the absence of Heldus, that the Duke of Saxon, and the Lantgraue, sendynge abroade espialles of the common charges, should get intelligence what thynges were a brewyng, & if the Turke entended to inuade Germany, that they should than assemble agayne, to consulte what eche mans dutie is herein. Moreouer to the entent that all men myght vnderstand, what iust Reason why the Protest. refuse the Counsel. cause they had to refuse the counsell they condescended to compryse the whole matter in wryting. Whiche after wardes they set forth in print, and speaking of foreine kynges and nations: Paule the thyrde (saye thei) hath sent forth his bulles of late, to sommō a counsel at Mantua, to begynne nowe at the .xxiij. daye of May, and alledgyng certen cau∣ses therof. Moreouer he hath sente his Ambassadours to kynges and
Prynces as well Germanes as others to aduertyse them of the coun∣sell, and to exhorte them, eyther to come thither thē selues, or send their protectours. And where he moued vs also by his Ambassadour here vnto, and so did the Emperour in lyke maner, the thynge it selfe requi∣reth that we should therfore declare, what peryll and losse it were not for vs only, but also for the whole common wealth of Christendome, if men should obeye hym herein. And notwithstandyng that the cause of our determination is iust and reasonable, yet is there no doubte, but our aduersaries be of suche nature, that they wyll blame our doyng, & constrewe it to the worste parte. For to the entent they may bryng vs and our cause into hatred, they wyll affyrme doubtlesse, that we can a∣byde no examination nor iudgement, and that we despyse al other na¦tions, amonges whome there haue often bene many excellent learned men. This wyll they saye moreouer that it is wickednes to refuse the decrees of the counsell, for that it is the hyghe iudicial seate of the chur∣che, whiche all men are bound to obey. They wyl forge also, as though we were ashamed of our doctrine, or afraid to come to light, or els that we sought contentiō where no nede is, and can not endure n vniuer∣sall quiet. Nowe if this myght be verefied of vs in dede, it were not on¦ly wicked, but also detestable be heard of. Wherfore we must of neces∣sitie shewe the reason of our doynge, and we truste than, that all good men whether they be in Germany or other places, wyll not only cre∣dit no suche thynge of vs, but wyll also doe their endeuour, that this moste weyghty cause of all others may be handled vprightly, and that the byshop of Rome be not permitted, vnder the forged and coloured name of a counsell, to oppresse the manifest truthe by a kynde of tyran∣ny. For we shal declare that we do not only professe the pure doctrine, but also respecte nothyng els but Gods glory, and the preseruation of the common wealth, and that there can be no obstinacie, or froward∣nes obiected vnto vs. And fyrst to proue that we do not contemne the iudgement of other nations or of the churche, hereby it appereth ma∣nyfestly, that al our care is lest the byshop and his clientes, should take vpon them the authoritie and iudgement, and that all thynges myght be decided by mete and no suspected persones. Whiche thyng we trust that all Godly men would lykewyse wyshe for. For where as in dy∣uerse countreis there remayne certen olde wrytinges, and complayn∣tes of the false doctrine, vices, and idolatrie, that were than crept into the churche, we doubte not, but in the same places at this daye there be some Godly and learned men also, whiche vnderstande the sounde doctrine, although being oppressed with the byshoppes tyrannye, they are constrayned to holde their peace. These in dede of iuste deserte Who ought to be at the counsell. ought to be present at the coūsel, that they myght speake their myndes frely. For it is not to be accompted a free counsell, that is gouerned by
the byshop and his fellowes, whiche defende false doctrine by power and violence, and of an olde custome make decrees contrary to Gods worde. For Christe what tyme he instituted this highe iudiciall seate, commaunded that all matters should be referred to the churche, that requyred a reformation. By the whiche selfe wordes he excludeth all tyranny and lordshyp. It is also a sclaunder, where they saye perhaps that we are a feard to come abroade and can not abyde the opē light. For in the assemblie imperial at Auspurg, we professed our doctrine o∣penly, before the Emperoure and all the states of the Empyre. Againe The Prea∣chers of the Gospel haue brought god¦ly workes to lyght. this selfe same doctrine is preached openly in our dominions, and our learned men haue set forth bookes of the same, and diuerse of our ad∣uersaries do confesse, that through our mens wrytinges, sondrye arti∣cles are called agayne to lyght, whiche laye before hidde in darkenes. For nowe the true doctrine shyneth agayne, of penaunce, of faythe in Christe, of the remissiō of synnes, of good workes, of true worshipping, of the vse of Sacramētes, of the authoritie of the keyes, of Magistra∣tes, of the traditions of men and suche other lyke thinges. Neither are we ashamed of the Gospell (as Paule sayth) but haue an especiall de∣syre, that we myght declare our mynde in these thinges before al men. And where it is also obiected to our preachers, that they shoulde haue It is false yt they styre vp  heresies. reysed vp agayne the heresies before time condempned, neither should nede therfore further disputation or hearing, it is false & may be easlye excused, before them that haue red our confession and the defence an∣nexed to the same. For the doctrine that we confesse is not newe, but the verey consent of the primatiue churche, as moste clerely doth ap∣pere. Neyther haue we admitted any heresy or wycked opinion, but our men haue restored the doctrine of the aunciēt fathers, which was oppressed by bishops and monkes. It is vntrue also, that is reported of vs, that we shoulde delight in dissention, for we are sory from the bo∣tome of our hartes that the Christē commō wealth is thus deuided, & to haue a concorde desyre a lawfull counsell. But for as muche as the byshop and his fellowes do cōdempne the true and necessary doctrine, and do tormente and persecute the professers thereof, exhorting others to do the same, we can not but mislike their cruel tiranny. For God wil be honored through the confession of his name, and it is wickednes for any man to ioyne hym selfe to the byshops tyranny whiche so rageth. Moreouer it is manifest that we beare and susteine all maner of char∣ges of the common wealth, as the residue of the states do. Whereby it is to be seene, that we woulde also gladly accorde with others in rely∣gion, Byshoppes styre vp pri∣ces. in case it were lawful. Besydes this we vnderstande what daū∣ger hangeth ouer vs for the same. For the byshoppes haue nowe these many yeares, declared manifestly, what they go about, and how they incense kynges myndes against vs. And were it not extreme madnes,
to abide all these so great daūgers, and to be at so great charges with out iust cause? But we knowe assuredly that we owe this dewtie vn∣to God. And that there is nothing to be so much respected, as his com¦maundement, and take God to wytnes, that we seke for nothing els. Nowe that we haue confuted theyr sklaunders, we will come to the seconde part. Emonges straungers many parauenture suppose, yt we of a certen curiositie haue impugned some light faultes, which for ke∣pinge of a quiet, mighte better haue bene dissembled, especiallye con∣sydering that the state of worldly thinges is suche, that in a common wealth be euer remaining some thinges, whiche must be wincked at. But the matter standeth farre otherwise. For fyrst in dede errours and false opinions may not be dissembled with. For Christ commaundeth vs to beware of false teachers: Againe False doc∣trine is not to be borne with. the controuersie is not about light errours, but touching the doctrine of faith, and the true knowledge of God, which is the principall pointe of the Christian life, and sincere worshipping of God, which ought not to be passed ouer in silence, but to be obserued purely, and diligentlye taught in the Churche. And it can not be denied but this doctrine was wholy extinguished, and a newe brought in for it, to the greate contu∣inelie of Christ. Moreouer we do reprehende diuerse and sundrye er∣rours and wickednes, which others also haue espied longe before our daies, and therfore desyred a counsell, that the wrong beyng redressed concorde might be reteined: But in this our time a Counsell is muche more nedefull, for as muche as the same errours and vices do remaine in sundry places, and strife and contention is arrisen, and many there∣fore are in daunger of their lyues, that be innocent persons. For these therfore so weightie considerations, not onely we, but themperour al∣so Why the in¦nocentes be in perill. and the residew of the states and Bishoppes, haue determined that acounsell is chiefly necessary for the Church, wherin the pure doctrine might be mainteined. For vnlesse it were of suche sort, they sawe right well, howe it would styre vp a greater confusion: But behold, whilest we loke for such a counsell, the Bishops Buls come forth quite contra∣ry to the decrees of thempyre. And because it doth not cōcerne vs only but also the whole commen wealth of Christendom, we haue thought nedefull by this publike writyng to testifie and declare, wherefore we discommende this counsell. For the power and Authoritie of Iudge∣ment belongeth not onely vnto Bishoppes, but vnto the churche. Of which numbre verely are all kinges and all other states. Wherfore al Thathori∣tie of iudge∣ment is in the churche. beit the Bishoppe of Rome were nothing at all accused, yet were not this to be graunted him, that he alone and his should be iudges, exclu∣dyng other ministers of the churche: but seyng manifestly that he is a partie & one of the suters, much lesse ought it to be permitted, because it is both against Gods lawe and also the lawe of Nature:
But we accuse the Bishop of Rome of no smale crimes, neyther do we dispute onely of his vsurped Authoritie and abhominable liuinge, but we reprehende his doctrine, his lawes and wicked Religion, that is, we accuse him as giltie of Idolatrie and Heresie. Whiche crimes The Pope is accused of Idolatry & Heresye. beyng obiected, the Bishoppe ought not, but the churche to geue iud∣gement, as the olde lawes of the Bishoppes them selues do testifie. Furthermore the Bishoppe is not only one of the parties, but because he hath condemned oure doctrine longe before, he hathe heaped vpon him selfe the greater suspition: And seyng it is thus, who can doubte, what his iudgement shalbe in the counsell concernynge our doctrine? For it is not to be thought, that he will contrary to his olde custome, permit any other man to haue the determination of matters. And wheras in his writynge, he speaketh nothyng of the maner of treatie in the Counsell, we haue iust cause to suspecte all thynges the more. For he calleth them onely thither, which are bounden vnto him Like lippes like lettuse. diuerse wayes, of whose good willes he is assured: And he protesteth also this to be the cause of calling the counsel, that the Heresies sprong vp of late might be weded out. And albeit, the same may be taken lar∣gely, yet is there no doubt, but he meaneth it of our doctrine. For it is not credible, yt he speaketh of his own errours. Yea, after he sent forth an other writynge touchinge the reformation of the Courte of Rome, wherein by expresse wordes he confesseth that the Counsell is called for this intent, that the Pestiferous Heresie of Luther might be abo∣lished. And so in dede at the fyrst, he couered his mynde crastely, that his writte myght haue some shewe, but he disclosed it afterwarde. Wherfore there is doubte, but that he is fullye bente, to roote oute The craft of the Pope. our doctrine. And what madnes were it than for vs to allow this his intention? For this goeth he about: that suche as receiue his writyng, shoulde confesse oure doctrine, to be wicked and Hereticall: Moreo∣uer that Kynges and Princes whiche admitte the same, shoulde be bounden to aide and asiste him. Therfore seing the thing concerneth the vniuersal common wealth, we beseche all men, that they will consider diligentlye, thys his crafte and policie. For it is to be marueiled, whie he conceaued his writynge with suche wordes: And there is a doubt, whether he did it to the in∣tent to feare vs from the Counsel, or by the approuing of the writte to haue vs intrapped. But amonges vs assuredly there is no doubt, but that themperours mynde is, to further the common wealth, neyther do we thinke that he will allowe this forme of writte. But the By∣shoppe hathe not onely appoynted the Counsell, but hathe also pro∣nounced sentence against vs. For he will not permitte that the matter may be tried by the Scriptures, but he will aledge his own lawes, &
custome, and certen Counselles of the latter time to proue the matter. But we chiefly hold & affirme, ye mens traditions that are contrary to Gods worde oughte to be reiected. For we admit the doctrine of the church, but the Byshops errors & tyrannie ought not to be coloured wt the title of the church. Tholde church neyther receiued any law cōtra∣rie to the Scripture, nor attributed ye vnmeasurable power to the Bi∣shop of Rome which he now taketh vpon him selfe. And againe y• sorte of men, which do condemne & persecute by the doctrine of the gospell, be not the church, but paricides, the generatiō & ofspring of Cam. And in old time in dede godly Bishops dyd oftentimes refuse coūsels, seing Thosspring of C. the same to be called, not to defende the veritie, but either for the main tenaūce of some wicked opinon, or els to establishe some mē in Autho∣ritie. Themperor Cōstantine had assigned a counsel at Antioche: But Maximus Bishop of Hierusalem, albeit, it was not farre of, came not thither, for because he knewe themperors minde, & what the Arrians intended. And although Athanasius came to the coūsell at Tyrus, yet taried he not long, for yt he saw the chiefest of the coūsel plaie the parts both of the accusers & Iudges. And for yt he saw certen accusers procu∣red against him. There was holdē a great counsel at Sirmiū, a town in Hungry against Photynus, for the matter was weightie. And albe it themperour cōmaunded the Bishops to come thither, yet wold not they of the west partes obey him, for that they sawe there a numbre of Arrians there encreased, & suspected yt some false opinion shoulde there be decreed. That time was Osius Bishop of Corduba, a famous man, whom themperor, at the request of the Arrians, commaunded also to come thither out of Spaine: When he was come, he approued yt peri∣lous counsell of Sirmie, which brought afterwardes a great consusiō to the church, & for this cause was Osius sore reproued of Hilarie, whi∣che came not there. Cyrillus Bishop of Hierusalē neuer came at their assemblies, which denied Christ to be of the same substannce wt the fa∣ther, & is accompted the fyrst, that euer appealed from the counsell by writyng. There was a Counsell kepte at Millan, and the Bishoppes called thither by the Emperour: But what time Paulinus, Bishoppe of Treuers, and a fewe others, sawe, howe Anxentius the Byshoppe of Millan and his mates went about an euill purpose, they departed, The Coun∣sell of Mill broken of. brake vp that Counsell. After this sort did those worthy men flie at su∣spected counselles, lest they should be made partakers of the crime. And for asmuche as the Bishop signifieth plainly that this counsell is instituted to confirme his Authoritie, we besech al men that they wold not impute this refusal to vs, as a fault blame worthy. Finally the ve∣ry place of the counsell we can not like for diuerse causes. For it is fitte to offer iniurie, and altogether such, as should let the libertie of speche.
And besydes there is muche hatred conceaued againste vs in foreine nations through the sclaunders of our aduersaries, as though Religi∣on and honest liuing were exiled from among vs: which perswasion, when mennes mindes be thus prepared, is not without great perill. Wherfore it were very expedient for this cause onely that the counsell should be holden in Germany, to the entent that straungers might see the order and maner of oure Churches and Cities. And not throughe false sclaūders to hate the trew doctrine. The weightines of the cause also requireth, yt many of vs should come to the coūsell oure selues, but to forsake our own limites, is no maner way for vs expedient. And se∣yng yt for most weightie causes, it was decreed, yt the counsel should be holden in Germany, we se not wherfore we should depart frō the same Considering therfore yt this case cōcerneth the preseruation of al Chri∣stendome, we beseche al kinges & princes, to geue no credit vnto oure aduersaries, but herunto rather to applie thē selues, yt the trew know∣ledge of God might be restored: For they cādo nothing yt shal more re∣dound to theyr honor. The Bishop laboreth to this ende, yt he mighte perswade thē to practise crueltie: the which thei ought moste chiefly to abhorre. For euē for this cause are they placed in this degre of dignitie, yt they shold honor Gods holy name, & be a light vnto the rest through their good ensample, & to defende innocēt persons frō wrōg & violēce. And if there shal euer at any time be any lawfull counsell, thā shal we so defende our matter there, yt all men shall vnderstande, how that our endeuours haue bene euer annexed, with the preseruation of the com∣mon wealth. In this assemblie were these. The Duke of Saxon, Er∣nestus & Fraūces bretherne Dukes of Luneburge, Ulriche Duke of Wirtemberge, the Lantzgraue, Philip prince of Pomerane, the three Erles of Anhalde, & Albert Counte Mansfelde, besides many Ambas∣sadors, of the cities with most large & ample cōmission. For they were admonished what thinges should there be treated. Before they depar∣ted thence, which was the vj. day of March they addresse their letters to the French king, wherin first they excused the matter, that they had The Potest. letters to the Frēch king. not satisfied his Ambassadoure in the former assemblie, and shewe the cause also, whie they sende no Ambassadours as nowe vnto him. Thā they desyre him to continew his frendshippe, and seynge they haue set open to him all waies to come to a concorde in religion, and yet haue nothing preuailed, that he would recompence this theirendeuor, with his fauor and beneuolence. Fynally they declare what their mynde is touchyng the Counsell, and desyre to knowe what he hathe also deter∣mined to do herein. The kinge afterwardes maketh Aunswere, at the tenth kalendes of Iune, he accepteth theyr satisfaction and promi∣seth largely concernynge hys continuall amitie towardes them, con∣futyng the sclaunders of his aduersaries in a wrytynge, the whiche he sent with all, and saieth that this is his opinion of the counsell, and
euer hath bene, that vnlesse it be lawefull, and in a sure place, he wyll neuer allowe the same: neyther doubteth he, but the kynge of Scot∣lande his some inlawe, will also folowe his mynde herin. He a lytle before at the beginning of Maye, was retorned home with his wyfe, which after aboute Midsomer, ended her life there. The queene of Scottes dieth. In the meane time the Bishoppe of Rome deferreth the Counsell till the kalendes of Nouember, and the cause thereof (he saieth) is, for that Friderick the Duke of Mantua, mindeth to fortifie his citie with garnisons of souldiours, and to employe cost therupon: which thinge hath happened contrary to his expectation, and saith he is sore affraid lest many, folowyng his decree, are already commen to Mantua, and happely beyng excluded, are dryuen to retourne home againe: for the which chaunce he is in dede very sory, but yet taketh the matter lesse greifefully, forasmuche as the thinge hath fortuned throughe another mans faulte, and not his. And not longe after the king of Englande in his owne name, and The king of England re suseth the Counsell. the nobles of his Realme, publisheth a writing. That there is a Coun∣sell called by the Bishoppe of Rome, which he hath none authoritie to do, and called at suche a time, whan mortall warre is betwene them∣perour, and the Frenche kynge, and the place appointed at Mantua, whither it is neyther saufe nor commodious for all men to come. He in dede desyreth a Christian Counsell wyth all his harte, but vnto the Byshoppes Counsell, he wyll nether come him selfe, nor yet sende hys Ambassadours. For this is alwayes theyr facion, that for theyr own lcre sake, they wyll in suche maner of assemblies, oppresse Christ and his veritie: And for his parte, he will haue nothynge to do with the Bishoppe of Rome, nor regardeth no more his Decree, than the wry∣tynge of anye other Byshoppe: Addynge that Counselles were wont to be called by the authoritie of the Emperour and kynges, which ma∣ner ought to be restored, especially at this tyme, whan the Byshoppe hath so many graue personages to accuse him. Yet neuerthelesse can he neither be reprehended, without the daunger of a mans life, nor ac∣cused presently: but in a lawfull Counsel: nether is there any prouision made for him or his by saufconduicte, and thoughe there were, yet ma¦nifest daungers shoulde let hym, that he coulde not come: for it is no newes to the Bishoppes to falsefie theyr faith, and to sprincle, and de∣sile them selues with innocent bloude: And albeit it should be lawfull for others to repaire thither, yet were it no saftie for him, whome the Bishop hath laide waite for, whō he hateth deadly, whom he seketh to bring in hatred with other kinges, for none other cause assuredly, than for that his Tyrranny is exiled out of his realme, and his yerely reue∣newes taken away: which thinge in very dede he taketh in most euill part, and so much the worse for that he feareth lest other kinges, war∣ned throughe his example, will hereafter do the like.
And nowe also is the counsell proroged vntyll the kalendes of Nouē∣bre. And yet not the place appointed where it should be holdē: and the faulte is imputed to the Duke of Mantua. Is not this to delude the whole worlde? The Duke of Mantua is surely blameles, which wyll not receiue so great a multitude into his citie being vnfurnyshed of a garrison, but all the blame is to be ascribed to him alone, who doeth nothing syncerely, but worketh al thinges by craft and collusion. And now in case he shall assigne an other place for the purpose, he wyll ey∣ther appointe it in some citie of his owne, or of some Prince yt is bound to him: For he hath him self ryght ample and large dominions, and in the same many goodly cities, which his predecessours haue gotten by force and subtiltie, & he with as small fidelitie kepeth. But seing there is no hope to haue a true coūsel, as men of witte and iudgemēt do sup∣pose, he thinketh it best, that euery Magistrate in his own dominions seke the reformation of Religion. And if perchaunce the Bishop should obiecte vnto them, custome, the same taketh no place. For euen by the testimonie of Cypriane, custome that is grounded vpon no counsell, as he hath sayde before, but if any man haue an other way that is better, A proper say¦ing of Ci∣priane. he wil not refuse it. The Emperour remained al this yere in Spaine, but his armie in Flaunders, by the conduict of Counte de Bure, wan by assaulte the towne and castel of Sanpulle in Artois, in the moneth of Ianuary, and put al to the sworde, and from thence went and bese∣ged the citie of Terowen, but yet in vayne. There at the length was a truce taken for ten monethes in those parties only: For in Piedmōte was hote warre neuerthelesse, and the town of Cherie was taken by Terowē be∣seged invain assaulte of the imperialles, who made a wonderfull slaughter both of souldiours and citezens. And whan after the garrison of Turrin suffe∣red great penury, being on euery syde beseged, and stopped from vir∣tualles, the Frenche kyng in haruest tyme, leuied a power and sente thether his eldest sonne Henry the Daulphin, and Mommorācie, who making waye and entring perforce, releued their present famine. In the moneth of October, the armie of kyng Ferdinando, wherin were the horsemen of Saxony, and Meissen, of Franckonie, and Austri∣che, the Carinthians, Bohemers and Hongarians, whome the Ger∣maines cal Hussares, beseged the towne Exechium vpon the Ryuer of Draue, whiche was kept with a strong garryson of the Turkes. And Ferdinando his armie de¦stroyed. where they tracted the tyme, and were constrayned for wante of vic∣tualles to leuie the siege, in the retire they fel into the lappes of their en¦nemies, which had layd for them ambusches in the woodes, and kept all the straytes, that they could no way escape. In this distresse firste certen Centurions and captaynes of souldiours, and the Hongarians fled, after also went Cacianer the kinges Lieutenaunt. But the reste who detested the shame of running away, exhorting them selues vnto
manhode, especially the horsemen of Almaigne, aboade the charge and violent force of their ennemies, but in fine, being vāquished of the grea¦ter numbre, were all for the moste parte slayne, and manye of the cap∣taynes taken prisoners, and led to Constantinople in to moste misera∣ble captiuitie. The fourth Ides of Octobre, the kyng of Englande had The birth of kīg Edward the sixt. a sonne borne at Hamptoncourt, Prince Edwarde, by Quene Iane Semer, whome he maried after the death of Quene Anne. In the meane whyle the byshop of Rome, for so muche as truce was taken be twyxt Fraunce and Flaunders, went about to procure the like also in al other places, to the entent that through this occasiō he might worke his purpose, and ceased not tyll he had brought it to passe. The bishops deuise was, as it is reported, that setting them at peace, he myght stire The Pope hateth the kyng. them vp against the kyng of England, whom he hated vnto the death and against the Lutherians. About this tyme also Christina the Em∣perours nece by his syster Quene of Denmarke, Duchesse of Millan, leauing Italy, retourneth into Flaunders, through Germanye, and there was a treaty of a mariage betwene her and William Duke of Cleaue, but it toke not effect. Than also the men of Gelderland began Rebellion in Gelderland. to rebelle against their Prince Charles Egmonde, whiche was al his lyfe tyme of the Frenche parte, and therfore sore hated of the Burgun∣dians: and than as it was sayd, went about to make his country Frē∣che. He was so chased out by his owne people euery where in this ou∣tragious tumulte, that he had scarsly a towne or two lefte hym to flye into. He was alwayes a great mainteiner of the bishop of Romes doc∣trine, Pope Paule euil reported and abstained not from sore punishment. Paule the third in the first beginning of his byshoprike, made his two yonge nephewes Car∣dinalles, as before is wrytten. For the whiche thing being euyll repor∣ted of, he vouched saufe to call other worthy men also, both in nobilitie and learning to the same degre of honour, partly to asswage the enuie and displeasure, partely to haue mete champions, whiche were able to defende hym by their learnyng and eloquence, amonges whome was Caspar Contarene, Reginalde Poole, Iohn Bellie, Frederick Fre∣gose, vnto whom within a shorte space after, he added moreouer Sa∣dolete, Alexander, and Bembus. And purposed also Erasinus, as in a The Pope entended to make Eras∣mus Cardi∣nall. certen Epistle to a frend of his, Erasinus himselfe reporteth. There re∣mayne also certen Epistles written of Sadolet to Erasinus, wherin after he hath spoken muche of the great good wyl of the byshop to∣wardes hym, he sayth that within shorte tyme he wyl auaunce him to hyghe dignitie. Contarenus was a noble man & a Senatour of Uenise, for his learnyng ryght famous, and beyonde all expectation, whan he had cra∣ued nothynge, was sodaynly promo∣ted to this dignitie.
✚ The twelfth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne in the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyste. ❧ The argument of the twelfth Booke POpe Paule by his deputes ordeyned a reformation, touching the abuses of the Churche, as permutations, voisomes, benefices incompatibles, Cardinalles courtiers, Chaplelaynes, Courtisanes, Pardoners, and the Colloquies of Erasmus prohibited. The Protestauntes mete at Brunswycke, whether came the king of Denmarke. Persecution aryseth at Pans. The Pope, the Emperour, and the Frenche kyng, mete at Nice, there the kynge kissed his foote. A Colledge and a Frenche churche, are erected at Strasborough. The kyng of Englande burneth the bones of Thomas Becket. The Prince Efectour of Brandenburgh, aduertiseth the Duke of Saxon, of the preparation of the great Turke. A secte of Antmomians aryseth. The con∣spiratie of Heldus and the Duke of Brunswycke, are discouered, by the takyng of his Secretary. An assembly is holden at Franckeforte: decrees are there made, and appointment mode for a confe∣rence to be had for the peace of the Protestauntes, whiche to let Duke Henry of Brunswicke, leui∣th an armie. George Duke of Saxon, ennemy of the veritie dieth, Henry his brother succedeth hym. The kyng of Englande hauyng set forth a booke against the counsell of Uicence, call¦seth certen articles to be made concerning Religion. They of Gaunt rebell. The Em∣perour hauing saufeconduicte passeth through Fraunce. The Uenetians make peace with the Turke, but certen Senatours had disclosed their secretes. I Haue shewed you before how the Counsels wer deferred til the kalendes of Nouēb. but the same also was made frustrate: Notwithstandyng the Bishoppe, to the intent he myght feed men with hope, and seme to do some thinge, had longe be∣fore chosen out certen of his owne sect amōges the whole numbre, and had streightly commaū∣ded them, that they shoulde espie oute diligently the faultes of the Clergie, and all flatterie set a∣part declare them vnto him: He released them also of their othe, yt they myghte speake their mindes franckly, and had commaunded them to kepe the thinge close & secret. There were chosen Caspar Contarene, Peter Theatrire, Iames Sadolete, and Renalde Poole Cardinals: Fridericke, Archebishop of Salerne, Hierome Aleander, Archbishop of Brunduse, Iohn Mathew Bishoppe Uerone, Gregorie Uenet Ab∣bot, and Thomas, maister of the sacred Palace. These in conclusion after consultation had, comprehended the hole matter in writing, & addressinge theyr stile vnto him, extolle him with great praises for the zeale he hath to the trueth, wherunto the eares of certen Bishoppes in times past haue bene stopped, chiefly through the faulte of flatterers, whiche haue ascribed vnto them ouer muche Au∣thoritie,
what tyme they haue affirmed them clearely to be lordes of althinges, and haue power to do what they liste: For out of this wel∣spring, as out of the horse at Troy, haue spronge into the churche so ma¦ny euils, wherwith now it is most greuously afflicted. Therfore is his wisedome and vertu great, who considereth that the remedie must be fetched from thence, from whence the beginning and cause of the dis∣ease proceded, who followyng the doctrine of S. Paule, wilbe a mini¦ster and a steward, and no lorde: And for asmuche as he hath commit∣ted this charge vnto them, they willyng to obey him herin, haue accor¦dyng to theyr meane wittes, drawen certen Articles, whiche do con∣cerne him▪ the Bishoppes, and the Churche. For where he susteineth a The Pope hath a dou∣ble office. double person, and is not onely the Bishop of the vniuersall Christian Churche, but also the Prince of many Regions and Cities, they onely touche suche thinges as concerne the Ecclesiasticall administratiō: for the ciuile commen weale, he gouerneth with muche commēdatiō and wisedom. And fyrst of al., they say, most holy father, in like case as Ari∣stotle commaundeth, that lawes be not rashly altered, so semeth it vn∣to vs also, that thecclesiasticall lawes be in any case diligently mayn∣teyned, and not infringed without some vrgent cause: For there can no greater plage inuade a commenwealth, than what time thautho∣ritie of lawes is weakened and disolued, whiche oure predecessours would haue to be kept as sacred and holy. The next pointe is, that the Bishop of Rome, Christes Uicar, whan, for the Authoritie he hathe of Christe, he geueth or graunteth anye thinge, he take no money or re∣warde for the same: For seynge that all these thinges are giuen freely, Christ will also that the same be freely distributed to others. This foū∣dation once laide, it must be foresene, that you may haue very manye mete ministers of the churche, to gouerne it for mens saluation. In the which numbre the Bishoppes occupie the chiefe place: but herein is a great abuse, in that all kinde of men are receiued into this ordre confu∣sely, and without respect, neither commended for their learninge, nor honest lyuing, and diuerse also very yong. Wherof arrise sundry offen∣ces, Wherof ∣meth the cō∣tempt of the Clergie. and holy thinges come in contempt, and growe oute of reuerence. It semeth good vnto vs therfore, that first in the citie of Rome, you ap¦point certen to make a choise of suche as desyre to take orders, and af∣ter commaunde all Bishops to do the like euery mā within his owne Diocese: And that you suffer none to be admitted without the consent of the said commissioners, or Bishoppe. Let the youth also that purpose to be made pristes, haue a Scholemaster appointed to bring them vp in learnyng and vertuouse maners. Moreouer in geuing of Benefices and spirituall promotions it is farre a misse, in suche especially as con∣cerne the Cure and charge of soules. For here haue they this respect on lie, that the Beneficed man may be well prouided for, laying apart all
care of his flocke. Therfore whan suche an office is geuen chiefely if it be a Bishopricke, it must be diligently forsene, that they be good men, Who ought to be made Bishoppes. and learned, which both can and will gouerne the Churches themsel∣ues, as they are bounden by the law. Therfore may not an Italian en∣ioy a benefice in Spayne, or in Englande, nor a Spaniarde or an En∣glishman in Italy. Furthermore, there is much fraude vsed, what tyme a man leaueth his benefice, and resygneth it to another, reseruing to him self an yerly pension, many times also the whole profytes. For no pension maye be reteined, vnlesse it be for the pore, or some other godly vse. Because the fruits are annexed to the benefice, and ought no more to be sequestred from it, than the bodye, from the soule. And he that hathe the same, is bounden to vse the commodities therof honestly, and so much as suffi∣seth, the residew to employ vpon suche vses as is beforesayd. Notwith¦standyng it shalbe lawfull for the Bishoppe, if the case so require to im∣pose this bondage, that he shall pay a certen thing yerely to some pore man, especially beyng of the Clergie, wherby he may liue more honest∣ly and better at ease. Againe they offende exceadingly in permutatiōs for all thinges are done for lucre: And albeit it is not lawefull to gyue Unlawefull to geue bene¦fices by lega¦cye. Benefices by legacie, yet is there a subtill way founde by wyttie men to defeate this law, and benefyces are giuen to another, yet so, as they haue theyr reentrie agayne into the fame with the whole profytes and ministration. And thus commeth it to passe, that he beareth the name of a Bishoppe, which hath no right or Authoritie, and he whiche is in¦dede and possession Bishop, hath not the name at all. And what thing els is this, than to make to him selfe an heyre? Bishoppe Clementre∣newed an olde lawe, wherby it was forbydden that the sonne shoulde A pristes son may not in∣ioy his fa∣thers bene∣fice. not enioy his fathers benefice: but yet is this permitted, truly with an euill example: For it can not be denied, but the greatest part of sclaun∣ders arryse of this, that the churche goods are conuerted to priuate v∣ses. Hitherto many haue loked for a redresse of this thynge, but nowe they are in vtter dispayre, and speake and thinke full euill of vs there∣fore. An other euill vse is to geue out vousons of benefices, as it were in a reuertion, where an other mans death is wished and looked for: And others that better deserue to haue it, are secluded from it, & mat∣ter ministered of muche strife and contention. What shall we saye to those benefices, whiche because they coulde not be employed vpon one man alone, were called commonly incompatibles: but herin is tholde discipline neglected, and to some one also is permitted to haue diuerse Bishoprikes, which semeth vnto vs worthy reformation. Herunto be∣longeth these pluralities, totquotes, and vnitynge of benefices, whan many benefices be ioyned together as the partes and membres of one body. What? is not this to delude the lawes? Finally nowe is this dis∣ease
crept in also, that Bishoprickes are giuen vnto Cardinalles, and that many vnto one: Whiche thynge semeth vnto vs in dede a matter of importaunce, and chiefly to be refourmed. For the offices of Cardi∣nals and Bishoppes be distinct, and diuerse, and agree not in one per¦son: for the Cardinalles were ordeined for thys cause onely that they should remayne about you (most holy father) and neuer departe from your syde, and should gouerne the vniuersall Churche together with you: But vnto Bishoppes it belongeth to fede theyr flocke committed Why Car∣dinals were fyrst made. to them of God, which in dede can not be done, vnlesse they be present with them, as we see the Shepardes be with their Shepe. Moreouer the thynge it selfe doeth harme by that example. For with what face or audacitie, shall we redresse the faultes of others, which are most apparent and best sene in our fellowshyppe? For they Aarice and concupiscēce let counsels. may not thinke, that because they are placed in dignitie, they may ther¦fore take more libertie, no, but let them vnderstande, that they oughte rather to vse more temperauncie, for because they ought to shine before others in life and maners: neyther must we folow the Phariseis, whi∣che made lawes, and themselues kept them not, but Christ, who flori∣shed in word and worke. This libertie also is a great let to good Coun¦sels, whan the minde is before possessed with lust and Auarice. Besy∣des this, diuerse cardinals frequent the courtes of kynges, to obteyne of them Bishoprikes, and for this cause are so addicte vnto them, that they dare vtter nothynge frankely. And woulde God this waye were inhibited. And the Cardinals otherwise prouided for, that they might honestly fynde them selues and theyr families, and that Equa∣litie were obserued herin, that the yerely reuenewes of all were egall. Which thinge semeth vnto vs not harde to be broughte to passe, if we could, forsaking all couetousnes, folowe the fotesteppes of Christ. Whan these faultes are redressed, and mete ministers in the Churche appointed, it is chiefly to be loked to, that the Bishoppes do inhabite amonges theyr owne people, for they be the husbandes of the Church. But what more heuie or sorowefull sighte can be shewed, than euerye where to se congregations forsaken, and flockes destitute of Pastors, deteyned in the handes of Hirelinges? Therfore oughte they to be ex∣tremely punisshed, whiche leade their flockes to deserte, and to be ex∣communicated or outlawed onely, but also to lose theyr liuinges for e∣uer, vnlesse they craue pardon of you within a short tyme. For by aun¦cient lawes it was decreed, that a Bishoppe might not be aboue three wekes absent from his congregation. We se also that very many Car¦dinals are absent from Rome, and do nothynge that properlye belon∣geth to their office. We graunt it to be expedient that certeine of them be resident in theyr owne prouinces. For by them, as by certein braū∣ches and rotes of trees stretched out farre and wide in the Christiane
worlde, men are kept in theyr dewtie and dewe obeidience of this our common wealth: but yet were it requisite, that the most parte of them were by you called againe to Rome: For so shoulde they bothe execute theyr office, and also theyr presence shoulde be there bothe honoura∣ble and profitable to the courte of Rome. Moreouer in punyshynge of crimes and vices, there wanteth a greate seueritie of discipline. For suche as haue offended and deserued punishment fynde a meane, wher¦by to conuey themselues out of the iurisdiction of their Bishoppe, or iudge ordinary, or in case they cannot do this, than go they to the ma∣ster of the Pentionaries, and fyne with him for a pece of money. And that do they chiefly, that are of the clergie, which thing doeth offende many. Wherfore we beseche you in the bloud of Christ, wherewith he redemed, washed, and sanctified his churche, that this licentious liber¦tie, may vtterly be abolished. For seyng that no common wealth maye longe endure, wherein synne is vnpunished, howe muche more ought the same to be looked to in the Churche? Emonges the Monckes also, Many filthy actes of Monkes. are many abhominable Actes committed, wherefore we thinke good that their Colledges and Couentes be dissolued, not sodēly, or through violence, but so, that no mā from henceforth be admitted into that or∣der. For so shall they by litle and litle decay. And afterwardes may ho¦nester men be placed in theyr houses. Neuerthelesse we thinke mete, that all yong Nouices which haue not yet professed religion by a vow solempnely made, be presently remoued from thence. There muste also be diligent hede taken, that they be mete persons, which are set to here confession. And herin ought the Bishoppe to haue a vigilante eye, but chiefly that there be nothinge done for money. For the same free gyfte which we spake of before, concerneth not you onelye, but all others in like maner. Moreouer in the houses of Nunnes, and sacred Uirgins, namely▪ where they be gouerned of Monkes, are many, and that open crimes committed after a most filthy and detestable example, therfore must the ouersight of suche be takē from the Monkes, & cōmitted vnto others, of whom no perill or suspicion can be had. Now wheras in ma¦ny places, and chiefly in Italie, certen wicked opinions are disputed not onely in vniuersities, but also in churches, it deserueth muche dis∣praise. Therfore the Bishoppes muste be charged, that in suche places wheras vniuersities or Scholes be, they admonish the teachers, that they propounde no suche thynge herafter, but instructe and bringe vp youth in vertue and feare of God, nor that they haue any open disputa¦tions of matter of diuinitie, but within theyr priuate houses. Likewise muste Princes and Magistrates be admonished, to giue commaundement to the Printers, that they set not forthe all sortes of bokes, but suche onely as be permitted. There is commonly read in al scooles a boke of Colloquies, compiled by Erasmus of Roterdā, wher∣in
be many thynges, whiche may beate in to younge and tender myn∣des, vngodlynes, and infecte the frayle and bryckel age. Therfore this and suche other lyke bookes must be bannyshed the Scooles. Further more where it is permitted to Monkes, that haue professed Religion The cowle maketh not the Monke. by a vowe, to put of theyr owne wede and putte on other apparell, we thinke it not well done, for the garment is as a badge of the mona∣sticall vowe. Therfore if they ones forsake theyr cootes, let them be de∣priued of theyr lyuinges and all ecclesiasticall function. Also suche as cary about the relyques of saincte Anthony, and other lyke, are in our iudgementes worthy to be vtterly abolyshed, for through innumera∣ble superstitions they brynge the ignoraunt people in to erroure, and playnly abuse them. Oftentymes also, they ae permytted to marrye, whiche haue taken holy orders, but this ought to be graunted to no man, but for vrgent causes, as whan the whole stocke and defence of a Realme is brought to one man. And because the Lutherians per∣mitte all men to marry without respecte, therfore must we more stifly resyste the same. Nother may they be suffered to mary together, which are at the seconde degree of bloud or affinitie, vnlesse it be vpon moste weyghtie considerations, but suche as are further of, maye haue more lybertie graunted them, and that to be done without money, excepte perauenture they haue fyrst had carnall copulation, than is it lawfull to punyshe them by the purse, and the money to be employed immedi∣atly to good vses. But the vyce of Simonie, whiche hath his name of Simony re∣igneth in the churche. Simon magus reigneth so in the churche nowe adayes, that men are nothynge ashamed: For they offende herein moste boldely and seke to be assoyled by geuyng of money, and the benefices thus wyckedly got¦ten, they enioye this not withstanding. We doe not denye but youre holynes may pardon theyr offence touchynge the punyshement which they haue deserued, but that the occasion of transgressynge may be ta∣ken awaye, we thynke you had nede to deale more strayghtly, and not to remitte the punyshement: For what more shamefull or detestable thyng can be, than this bieng and sellyng? There must be a prouiso had that the clergie geue not away by legacie any part of the churche goo∣des, without great causes, lest that to the hinderaūce of the poore, some other shal haue aboundaunce to spende in riot and voluptuousnes. Also licence is graunted for euery man to chouse a chaplaine where he lyste, and to haue masse in priuate houses: whiche ought not rashlye to be graunted, lest that secrete thinges should come in contempt, and e∣specially the chiefest sacrament of all. Iudulgences and pardōs ought not to be geuen so commonly, but only ones in the yeare, and that in great cities. Uowes may not lightly be chaunged, nor conuerted to an other worke, vnlesse it be correspondent to the vowe. Sometyme the last wyl of the testatours is wont to be chaunged,
whiche happely had bequethed some portion of money to Godly vses, and that chaunceth cōmonly by reason of the pouertie of the heires, or wylmakers, but there must hede be takē, that vnlesse the testatour fall in pouertie, so that the wil can not well be perfourmed, it be not suffe∣red. For it is wickednes els to alter the deades wyll. And nowe that we haue declared our mindes in thīges cōcerning the vniuersal chur∣che, we shal adde to the same a fewe cases, whiche properly belong to the byshop of Rome. Where as this citie & churche of Rome is the mo∣ther and maistres of all churches, it were comlye and decent, that it Harlottes honoured at Rome. should excelle others in Religion and honestie of life. But in the chur∣che of S. Peter, haunte many vnlearned & filthie priestes, appareled with so vile garmentes, both of their owne & of their churche, that it were also vndecēt to the like worne in the priuate houses of the porest sorte. And in these garmentes say masse, to the great offence of the lo∣kers on. Therfore must the Archedeacon, or the Cōmissarie be cōmaū∣ded, that first in this citie, and after also in other places, suche filthines be auoyded out of mens sight. What shall we saye of the vnchaste wo∣men and strompetes, whiche in apparell and all kynde of ornamentes differ nothing in this citie, frō matrones of honour, rydyng vpon their Mules through the middes of the citie, euen at none dayes accompa∣nied with the familiar frendes and seruaūtes of the chiefest Cardinal∣les and suche other like. Certenly we haue not sene suche intemperan∣cie, and dissolute liuing vsed, in ani other citie, but in this which ought in dede to be a spectacle and ensample to the whole vniuersall world. These Courtisanes are also maynteyned to inhabit gorgeous houses, which doubteles is great shame. There be also in this citie great con∣tentions and factions: It is your parte to amende all these thinges, & it shalbe requisite yt you oppointe certen Cardinalles mete for the pur∣pose, to appease all strife, and to reconcile the myndes of the citezens. Last of all, the prouision of the wydowes & other pore people, properly apperteineth to your charge. And these are the thinges moste holy fa∣ther, whiche we haue thought mete to be refourmed: And albeit we were vnmete for this charge, yet haue we done that laye in vs, & vtte∣red our cōscience vprightly, & we are entred into a great hope, yt vnder your gouernment we shal see the church pure & cleane, & quiet, to the perpetuall & immortall glory of your name. You haue takē to you the name of Paule, wherfore we trust it will come to passe, that after his example, you will embrace the churche with a certen earnest & seruent zeale. God chose Paule as a singular instrument, to preache the Gos∣pell to the Gentyles: so truste we also that you are chosen to cal again to light the name of Christ, by the gētyles defaced, to remedy publique diseases, to reduce the flock of Christe into one shepefolde, and tourne away Gods wrath, which hāgeth now ouer vs, dewe for our offēces.
This reformation was in deede conceaued in woordes, but neuer brought to effecte, nor published. Finally the byshop delayeth the coū¦sell from the beginninge of Nouembre to the kalendes of May in the next yeare followyng, and assigneth the place at Uicentia, a large and a plentifull citie belongyng to the state of Uenise, and sendeth thither three Cardinalles, Campegius, Simonet and Brunduse, whiche Presidentes of the coūsel should both begynne the treatie, and receyue them that came. The by∣shop would haue had the matter of reformation kept close as is sayde before, but it was not longe hydde. And what tyme it was brought from Rome, into Germany, Luther answered it in the duche tongue, and Iohn Sturmius in the Latine, framynge theyr style to the com∣missioners 1538 of the reformation. Before Luthers booke was sette out a picture, whiche playnely declared the argument. For the byshop was placed in an hyghe seate, and certen Cardinalles standing about him, whiche with foxes tayles tied to staues lyke besomes, sweepe all thin∣ges vpsyde downe. There was amōges these Cardinalles, Nicholas Archebyshop of Capua, who coulde abyde no reformation. He beinge sente by Bishop Paule (as it is crediblie reported) contended sore that The Cardi▪ of Capua cā abide no re∣formation. nothynge should be redressed at all. And amonges other thinges, he sayde howe than, the Lutherianes would make their boast, that they wer driuē of thē so to doe in maner by compulsion. Wherupon the By∣shop and the Cardinalles were cōtenthed to be perswaded to alter no thing. And yet he him selfe, that so letted them, is reported to haue sent a booke priuely to a certen frende of his in Germany, whiche manye men take so, as though he would haue both the byshop and the sayde commissioners lawghed to scorne for their labours. Others thynke that the bishop was made priuie to that booke of reformation, that by setting forth of the same, there might appeare in hym some wyll of a∣mendement of thynges, and yet vnderstande it by an other meane, as though he hym selfe would haue done greater thinges, in case he had entended to haue publyshed any suche like matter. And as touchynge the colloquies of Erasmus, thus it standeth. Amonges manye other workes wherby Erasmus wonderfully auaunced learning, he made The Collo∣quie of Eras¦mus. also a booke of Dialogues for chyldren. And seyng it red so gredely, he ofte augmented the same. And as he was a man of an excellent witte, and of great eloquence, he toke pleasure to wryte of sondry argumen∣tes taken out of naturall thynges, and of the lyfe of men. And with a certen maruelous dexteritie, and style moste pleasaunt, he setteth forth precpres of Godlye and vertuouse maners, and noteth with all by the same occasion, olde accustomed errours and vices, whereof commeth this complaynte of hym. In the moneth of Februarye, the Frenche Momorāci made consta¦ble of Fra. kyng made Annas Momorauncie, Conestable of Fraunce, whiche is the hyghest degre of honoure there.
This office had bene euer voyde synce the death of the Duke of Bour∣bon. For the kyng beyng greuously offended with his treason, had be∣stowed the same vpon no man vntyll this tyme. And the same office hath had but bare lucke, in more than one or two, whilest they abusing their authoritie, haue styred vp against them, either the kynges them selues, or the nobilitie. In the meane tyme the Protestauntes assemble at Brunswicke about the ende of Marche, to treate of matters cōcer∣nyng their league. And they receyue Christiane kyng of Denmarke in Christiane kinge of Dē¦marke recei∣ueth the gos∣pell. to their league. He was sonne of Frederick, and had receiued the doc∣trine of the Gospell, and had appointed Iohn Pomerane, whome he called from Wittenberge, to set ordre in his churches, and by him was annoynted and crowned kyng. Iohn also Marques of Brandēburg, the brother of Ioachim prince Electour, made meanes by the Duke of Saxon, to be admitted into the league. He therfore was appointed to treate with him vpon certen cōditions at his retourne home, and thā to receiue hym in all their names. The same requeste also made Albert Duke of Pruselande, whome syxe yeares before the chamber had out∣lawed, and that was the chiefest cause whye he was not receyued in The Duke of Pruse is outlawed. to this societie. Neuerthelesse they promysed hym all their fauour and good wyll. Whan the Duke of Saxony, the Lantgraue and their cō∣sortes, were goyng to this assemblie, Henry Duke of Brunswycke, de∣nied to geue them saufe conduicte, whan they should passe through his countrey. For euen than he imagined warre, as hereafter you shall heare. In the Duke of Saxons company was Maurice, nephewe to Duke George by his brother Henry, a young man of seuentene yeares olde. Henry was of the Protestauntes Religion, and therfore the Du∣ke toke his sonne Maurice, beyng his kynsman, to bring vp. The kyng of Denmarke hym selfe came than also to Brunswicke. In the nynth booke I spake of the persecution that was in Fraūce for Lutheranisme. It were long to recite al, but this yeare at the Ides of Apryll, whiche was than nyne dayes before Easter, a young gentle∣man of Tolouse, learned, about twenty yeares of age, was brent at Paris for eatyng of fleshe, not alyue in dede, but yet so as beinge han∣ged A gentlemā of Tolouse burnt at Pa¦ris. ryght ouer, he felte the fyre kyndled vnder hym, whiche after the maner there was accompted as a great benefite, for that he in prison before he was brought forth to execution, feared with the cruell wor∣des of Morine the iudge threatenyng hym, confessed that he had done wyckedlye and agaynste Religion. For the maner of repentaunce is there only, that he shal suffer with the lesse torment. But suche as abyde constant are moste cruelly tour∣mented. Two younge men of Flaunders were in the lyke daunger, but admonyshed therof by a certen Senatour, learned, and of a good iudgement, they escaped death by flyeng awaye.
In the moneth of May the Bishoppe of Rome goeth to Nice a ha∣uen towne in Ligurie: Thyther also came the Emperoure, and the Themperor the frenche king and the pope, meets at Nice. Frenche kynge, at his request chiefly, he with a Nauie out of Spaine, and the kynge by lande, accompanied amonges others, with a power of Almaignes, whiche were lead by Wylliam Countie Furstēberge. After a longe treatie, albeit they coulde not throughlye agree, yet a trewee was made in the moneth of Iune for ten yeares. Here was the lady Margaret the Emperours bastarde daugh∣ter ensured to Octauius Duke of Parma, the Byshoppes nephew by his sonne Peter, whom Cosmus duke of Florence woulde fayne haue maried after the death of Alexander Medices. The two kynges spake not together in this place, albeit the By∣shoppe desyred it muche: But a fewe dayes after, whan he was de∣parted, they mette at Aegnes Mortes, a Towne of the Prouince, in the mouth of the Riuer of Rhosne, whither the Emperour retorninge into Spaine, came with his Nauie at the Ides of Iulye. The kinge had sent to mete him Uelius his Ambassadoure, and Galleis to con∣duicte him. Whan the Emperour came nere vnto Aegnes, the Cone∣stable of Fraunce was there readye to entreate hym, that he woulde arriue there with his Nauie: For he saied the kynge woulde be there within these two houres, and would come into his Barke to him. Whan the Emperour sawe that the rest of the Shippes (which were scattered the daye before by reason of a miste) were come together, he putteth into the hauen. And not longe after commeth the kynge also, and accompanied amonges others, with Anthony Duke of Lo∣raine, and the Cardinall his brother, goeth streight waye to the ship∣pes. The Emperour goynge forth as farre as the ladder of the shippe to mete him, receaueth him in. But it can not be spoken, what embra∣cynges, and gratulations were there. Whan they were set downe in the Sterne of the Shippe, the no∣bles aboute the Emperour come and salute the kinge lowly and right curtesly. There the Emperour sent for Andrewe Aurie his Admirall, Prince of Melphite, who forsoke the kynge tenne yeares before, as is Andrw de Aurie. mentioned in the sixte Booke, to come and salute the kyng: Whan he came, the kynge said, Prince Andrewe, for as muche as you are frende and seruiture to the Emperoure, And that it is his pleasure, that I should speake wyth you: I am contente to gratifie him herein, whom I esteme as my brother. After whan they had talked familiarlye and frendly together by the space of an howre, the kynge departeth. The next day in the mornyng. As sone as it was light day, the Emperour gyueth commaundement by a Trompet that no man go a lande: but he himselfe garded wyth certen of his nobles, saileth out to dyne with the kynge.
When he came to lande, the kinge and the quene, and his two sonnes most gently do embrace him, and lead him into the Palace towardes euenynge, themperour aduertiseth Androwe de Aure, who remained The meting ofthemperor & the kynge. within borde, howe, at the request of the kinge and the queene his sy∣ster, he purposed to lie in the towne that night. And the next day at af∣ter diner to retourne to his Nauie. Whiche he did for this intent, leste he should, throughe his absence, conceaue some false suspicion in hys minde. Wherfore the next day, the Emperour came againe to the sea, accompanied with the king, and all his nobles: And whan they had drunken together in the Emperours cabben of the shippe, they depar∣ted great frendes. Which thing once knowen at Paris and other pla∣ces, they songe Tedeum, and made bonefyers. The Bishop had reque∣sted them at Nice, whan the peace was concluded, that they woulde go to the counsell Uicentia, and sende thither suche Prelates as they had than in theyr companyes. And also to sende commaundement to the rest at home, to repayre thither in like maner: But when they had excused them selues of both those thinges. And the Cardinals, whiche he had sent thither aduertised him that there was great solitarinesse. Againe he deferreth the day of the Counsell till Easter folowyng, sen∣dyng abrode his letters touching the same matter, the fourth kalendes of Iuly, whan he was retornyng homewarde, at Genes. At the fyrst metyng the kyng kissed his right foote, as he sate in his chayre, and af∣ter, The Frēche kinge kissed the Popes right foote. the rest of the nobles: Notwithstandyng there were diuerse in the kinges traine, that refused to do it, although the Conestable had war¦ned them before, as Christopher, Duke of Wirtemberge, william coū∣tie Furstemberge, Germanes, Mareschall Marchan, a Frencheman, and George Gluchie, the Ambassadour of the kynge of Denmarke. At the selfe same time departed out of this life Charles Ecmonde Duke of Gelders: In the former boke you haue harde, howe he was in a ma¦ner turned out of al his possessions: And brought to this distresse, whā he laye sicke, he deuised with his cosin, William duke of Cleaue, who after by the consent of the nobilitie and commons, brought all to hys owne gouernement, not without themperours highe displeasure, as shalbe declared in his place. A litle before that dieth also Erarde Mar¦chian, Cardinall, Bishoppe of Liege: no man tourmented more for Re¦ligion, The Bishop of Liege made his graue yet li∣uing. than he. In the Cathedrall churche of Liege, he had many yea∣res before builded him a Tombe most sumptuous, and had Masse and Dirige songe for him yerely, as the Papistes are wonte, for the deade. For he iudged these merits of priestes to be more auaileable to him be∣yng a liue: wherunto they do attribute the deserte and rewarde of eter¦nall life. They that knewe the man well, affirme that he did this for a certen ostentation, for that he was most desyrous of vayne glorie, and toke pleasure in that pompe and solemnitie. This time were the En∣glishe
Bibles in printyng at Paris, which by the kinges commaunde∣ment, English Bi¦bles were printed at Paris. should be had in all churches through out Englande: but after it was knowen, it was prohibited, and the Printer was in daunger. In Fraunce they haue not commonlye the Scripture in the vulgare tongue: neither doth it want suspicion, if any man chaunce to read the Newe Testament, or suche a like thinge in Frenche: neyther is is law¦full for any to studye the Scripture, but such as professe Diuinite: but the common sort of men know nothing at all, and the towne wiues, whan they go to here Masse, cary with them bokes of Latin prayers, which they mūble vp after a sorte, knowing not what they saye at all, and are perswaded, that the same is to God more acceptable, than if they should praie in their mother tonge. This is a practise of the prie∣stes The igno∣raunce of the people is gainefull to priestes. vnto whom the ignoraunce of others is gainefull. The Bishoppe retourning home in the begynnyng of August, was receiued into the citie of Rome, with a merueilous pompe and trium∣phe. And all the stretes and waies, beyng hanged and spired with rich and costly carpets, and posies written in euery place, wherin they ex∣tolled him wonderfully, for restoryng peace vnto the world, and recō∣ciling the Princes. This yeare at Strauseborough was erected a Colledge, or a grā∣mer A colledge erected at Straus. Scoole for youth, by the meanes chieflye of Iames Sturnne, a principall Senator: whiche in shorte time, thoroughe the diligence of learned men so florished, that there repared thither not onely from the furthest partes of Germany, but also out of foreine nations, the maner of teaching the youth, and diuiding them into fourmes, and the whole order was deuised by Iohn Sturmie, whiche he fyrst exhibited to the Senate, and afterwardes in a booke put forth, he declareth it more at large. And wheras many were fayne to flie for Religion and consciēce sake, out of Fraunce and Flaunders, and the Senate appointed them a churche, wherof Iohn Caluine was fyrste for certeine yeres the su∣perintendent, Iohn Cal∣uin. Peter Bru∣lie. and after him Peter Brulie of whose ende I wil speake herafter. But in Englande Thomas of Canturbury, was of long time had in great reuerence: And his body was shryned in siluer, and han∣ged rounde about with costly Iewelles of Gold and precious stones, beyonde measure. And amonges others, there was one riche Iewell, called the Regal of Fraunce. This yeare did king Henry take him out of his shrine, and burne his Reliques. This Thomas, surnamed Bec∣ket, Thomas Becket. was in time past Archebishop of Canturbury. And where he stode styffe in defending the liberties of the Clergie, he fell into the displea∣sure of the kyng of Englande Henry the seconde of that name, & com∣maunded into exile, he fledde to the Bishoppe of Rome Alexander the thyrde, who at that tyme, for themnitie of themperour Friderick Bar¦barousse, was in Fraunce. At the length Thomas Becket by the inter¦cession
of him, and of Lewes the vij. kinge of Fraunce, was reconci∣led, and retourned home, the seuenth yere of his exile. And when after¦warde he troubled certen Bishoppes that toke the kynges parte, and did excōmunicate them, the kyng beyng againe offended, said he was in a miserable estate, that could not liue in quiet for one priest: he lamē¦ted also that there was no man aboute him, that woulde deliuer him from suche disquietnes: whiche wordes so ticled many, that, knowing it should be no displeasure to the kinge, they went to Cantorbury, and slewe Thomas. The kynge pretended a great sorowe: And sendynge Ambassadors to Rome to make his purgation, in fyne entreated the Bishoppe to sende inquisitours into England: to enquire and examine the matter. And what time the Bishoppe at the laste had sente two Cardinals, and the murther could not be searched out, the kyng pour∣geth him selfe by an othe: And because of the former hatred, and wor∣des spoken, there was some suspecion and fault in him, in conclusion, he was reconciled vpon this condicion, that after the yeares he shuld go into Syria, and warre vpon the Saracenes. This murther was committed in the yeare of mans saluation .M.C.lxxi. And not longe after, the memoriall of Thomas waxed famous, throughe miracles, which the Monkes of Canturbury sayd he wrought: Whereof when the Bishoppe of Rome was aduertised by the Legates, that came out of Englande, he Canonised him, and made him a saint. What time the metyng was at Nice, Ioachim Marques of Bran¦denburge, prince Electour, the sonne of Ioachin, in the beginninge of Iune, sent his Ambassador, Eustace Schlebie to the Duke of Saxon with these instructions: howe Sigismunde kinge of Pole, and Iohn Wayuode kynge of Hungary, had aduertised hym, that the Turkes made great preparation to inuade Hungary, and so fortifiyng Buda, to make an incursion into Germanye: And this same did themperour Newes of the Turkes approche. of Turkes signifie vnto Uayuode: And where it was once inioyned, his father in an open assemblie, that whan he had any intelligence of Turkishe matters, he should aduertise the other states therof, therfore can not he also, but performe this dewtie to the common wealth, and is not a litle moued at these newes, for the chaunce and calamitie of his natife countrey: For this therfore and for other causes he went to kyng Ferdinando into Lusatia: But he had both before his comming and when he was there also, receiued letters and messagers touching the same thinges: Wherfore in case he should not be resisted, there is no doubt but they, which lie nexte him should se shortly in theyr countrey that most cruell enemie: For all the way from Buda vntill theyr fron∣tiers, is there nother Castell nor Towne fortified, able to hold out such a power, no mountaines nor streight passages to stoppe his carriage, sauing onely the citie of Uratislauie, and the towne of Lignice: For as
for of the situation of Morauie and Silesie, and howe champion and fruietfull a countrey it is, he knoweth well enough, and nedeth no re∣hearsall. And albeit he hath promysed ayde to kynge Ferdinando, for the common daunger, yet he seeth howe lytle suche maner of ayde is able to helpe, for the greatnes of the case requyreth al the ayde and po∣wer of the whole Empyre. But for as muche as the same haplye can not be obtayned without a generall assemblye, and vnlesse ail Ger∣many be quieted. And agayne the present daunger wyll permitte no long delaye, therfore hath he in talke moued the kyng that he woulde wholy dispose him selfe vnto this thynge onlye, that a fyrme and sure peace myght be concluded. Wherunto kyng Ferdinando had answe∣red ryght honorably, and promysed his endeuour, and to further the cause to the Emperour, so that he might vnderstande what he and his league frendes, furthermore demaunded. And seing it standeth thus, he desyreth hym to geue his mynde hereunto, and open vnto hym vn∣faynedly, suche conditions of peace as he thynketh mete to be intrea∣ted of: And he hym selfe wyll deuyse and that in his owne name, that Ferdinando shall preferre them to the Emperour, in suche sorte as he trusteth that the treatie shalbe commodious to the vniuersall worlde. And nowe also maye the Turkes violence more easelye be resisted, for as muche as Iohn Uayuode is reconcyled to kynge Ferdinando, as the kynge hym selfe tolde hym in counsel, for he would not haue it bru∣ted abroad, leste it should come to the Turkes care. Certen yeares past and hetherto hath a great part of Hongary bene plucked awaye from Christendome through ciuile warres, but nowe their myndes are ap∣peased and all displeasure paste, there is a goodlye occasion offered of well doynge: Wherfore eftsones he besecheth hym, that he would help the cause of the common wealth. This Marques had maried the daughter of Sigismunde kyng of Poole, whiche was nece to Iohn Uayuode by his systers syde, and hereof came that frendshyp and familiaritie betwyxt them. He had al¦so than receyued the Religion of Saxony, and set forth a booke of the The Mar∣quses of ¦denburge of the Prote∣stantes Re∣ligion. same, but kepte hym out of the league, and was otherwyse wholy ad∣dicted to the Emperour and kynge Ferdinando, and reteyned certen ceremonies, and sought to quiet offences. The Duke of Saxony signifieth the whole matter by his letters to the Lantgraue. And the twelfth daye of Iune after, they wryte bothe to this Marques of Brandenburg on this wyse. Albeit the matter is of muche importaunce, and altogether suche as they oughte to make their fellowes priuie to, yet doe they see what discommoditie myghte come thorowe delaye, especially consideryng how the Turke flacketh nothyng of his fiersenes, and they haue also consulted ouerlonge, how to quiet Germany and to withstande hym with all their powers, for
where he aduertised them by his Ambassadours, that it were nedefull to resiste that moste cruell ennemie, truthe it is and they confesse, that the common wealth requyred no lesse. But they stād in that case, that they had chiefly nede of suche a peace as were honourable, trewe, syr∣me, and nothyng doubtfull. For in case they should spende theyr trea∣sure on the Turkyshe warre, & the meane whyle, haue vnquiet neigh∣bours at home, he seeth him selfe howe vnmete and hurtefull the same would be vnto them. They for their parte are verye desyrous of peace, whiche if they can not obtayne, and therfore in doubtfull matters, di∣minishe no parte of their power, and in the meane time the cōmon we∣alth sustayne any damage, there may no blame therof be imputed to them, but all together vnto those that refuse the conditions of peace. Moreouer they suppose, that it should concerne the kinge Ferdinādo, and others that border on the Turkes, that relatiō were made of these thinges vnto all the states: Where also hetherto there is no counsel im¦periall called, it is not for the profite of the commō wealth. For though perchaunce the time wil not permitte that publique ayde should be de∣creed sodaynly, and nede requyreth to craue ayde of some men. Yet is the Turke of suche power, that he is able to continew in warres ma∣ny yeares: And wil not cease tyl eyther he hath obteyned his pourpose, or hauing an ouerthrow be cōstrayned to breake vp warres for a time. Wherfore they thinke an assemblie of the Empyre, to be very expediēt, that both the peace of Germany therein myght be established, and cō∣sultation had conserning the Turkishe warre. And this later to be of so great force, that albeit al thinges were quiet in Germany, yet neuer thelesse a common assembly to be nedefull. Nor it skileth not greatly, if perchaunce kyng Ferdinādo, can not well be there in the Emperours name, so that Ambassadours be sent with full commission and autho∣ritie. Whiche thing if he can bring to passe, the same shalbe cōmodious for the Emperour, and for all Germany. Howe be it leste they shoulde in any point fayle the common wealth, or hinder the cōmoditie there. of, they woulde haue in a readynes suche ayde, as they for their par∣tes are acustomed and oughte to finde, to be alwayes readye to serue, whan nede shall require: Neyther doubte they, but theyr fellowes wil do the same, but vnder this condition, that kyng Ferdinando immedi∣atly obtayne for them of the Emperour a sure and vndoubted peace: And the whiche all other Princes of the Empyre, that be of the Bys∣shoppes Religion, shall ratifie. That done, and the suites and actions of the chamber set apart, their ayde shalbe streight wayes ready. But in case the Emperour by reason of his absence, can not brynge all the Prynces heeeunto in time, at the leste he perswade these to be of his o∣pinion, William & Lewis, Dukes of Bauier, George Duke of Saxo∣ny, the Archebyshop of Mentz, Collon and Treuers, also the Bishops
of Salisburge, Maydenburge, Breme, Bamberge, Wyrtenburge, Munster, Auspurge and Aeslet. But in case they can not be perswa∣ded, that then the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando doe confirme the same peace, for them selues and for all their subiectes, and make pro∣myse do their endeuours that other Prynces also maye geue theyr assente to the same: whiche in case they shall refuse to doe, yet shall they neuer swarue from this conuenant. And so shortly as may be, for this and other causes, shall call an assemblie of the Empire. If this be done they truste that their league frendes also wyll be ready to sende theyr ayde, lyke as they themselues are determined to doe, in case their lea∣gue frendes be agreable to the same, and that as well they maye en∣ioye the benefyte of this peace, whiche came into their league after the composition of Norinberge, as suche as shal repare vnto them hereaf∣ter. Moreouer that the same may extende, not only to the Princes of the Empyre, but also to the kyng of Denmarke. And to the entent it may well appere howe desirous they be of peace, for as muche as the state of the Empyre can not be so soone assembled, therefore wyll they appointe an assemblie of their company at Isenacke, against the. xxiiij of Iuly, to be there with moste ample commission. Wherfore it were well done, if he could brynge it to passe, that the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando, he hym selfe also and the Palsgraue, sent their Ambassa∣dours thither. Whan they had aunswered on this wyse, they dispat∣ched their letters vnto their league frendes requyringe them to be at that daye at Iseuacke, a towne of Turingie. The Marques had cau∣sed his Ambassadour to shewe them, that in case they were so content, he wold deuyse that the Palsgraue who tēdred also the cōmon welth should trauayle in the same matter. With the letters to the Marques of Brandenburge, they sent also the whole treaty, that they had with Heldus the Emperours Ambassadour, that he myght clerely perceiue the whole matter, whiche thynges receyued, the Marques intrateth kyng Ferdinando, that he would immediatly preferre this matter to the Emperoure, to fore he retourned out of Italy, into Spayne: After he requireth the Palsgraue, to take this matter in hāde together with hym, he maketh aunswere, that albeit the Protestauntes had not spo∣ken to hym herein, yet woulde he not refuse, but his men were gone, whiche were wonte to serue hym in the same affayres: wherfore he wylleth hym to sende his counsellours all vnder one, and if the matter should afterwardes requyre his presence, he would not fayle. Whan the daye came, the Marques by his Ambassadours declared this first to the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, and after to all the rest, at Isenacke, for the Prynces them selues were not present. And he wyl∣led them to desyre the Palsgraue to take this trauayle and payne, and that an other daye myght be appoynted, wherin to mete agayne: In
the meane whyle the matter may be brought to passe with the Empe∣rour, that his consent also and aucthoritie may be had. Moreouer he requested them, that they woulde not be ouer streight lased, but to graunt to so muche as they myght with a saufe conscience. For kynge Ferdinando wyll slacke no maner of dilygence, neyther doubteth he but that the Emperour is also greatly inclined to peace. Hereunto the Protestauntes aunswere from Isenacke the fifte day of Auguste, that to make a concorde they are very desirous, so that the Emperours wyl and cōmaundement be accordingly. Further though they thinke it not nedefull for them to intreate the Palsgraue, whiche is of him selfe well disposed, and if the Emperour cōmaunde hym, wil not refuse it, yet wyll they wryte vnto him, and whan the Emperours pleasure shalbe knowen, by the aduise of him and the Palsgraue, they wyll assigne a daye, wherin they shall mete all to treate of the forsayd matter. In this assemblie was receyued into their league the lady Eli∣zabeth, The lady E¦lizabeth sis∣ter to the Lantgraue is receiued in to the league of Protest. the Lantgraues syster, a wydowe. The cities also of Halles & Hailbrune, made sute to be admitted by the mediation of them of Aus∣purge, and Ulmes. Here were heard also euery mās complaintes, but especially the cause of the Goflarians, whome Henry Duke of Brun∣swycke had sore oppressed. Wherfore, they agreed to requeste the Mar¦ques, that he woulde obteyne of the Emperour, through the meanes of kyng Ferdinando a precept, wherby the Duke of Brunswicke may be compelled to aunswere the matter: For otherwyse, the state and cō∣dition of the Goflariens is so miserable that they can not forsake them in that distresse. Hitherto was also newes brought of the peace conclu¦ded betwene the Emperour and the Frenche kyng. And the assemblie brake vp the nynth daye of Auguste. This yeare sprang vp a secte of them, whiche are called Antino∣mians. The fecte of Antinomiās These doe affirme that repentaunce is not to be taught by the ten commaundementes, and impugne those, whiche teache that the Gospell is not to be preached, but vnto the myndes that are firste sha∣ken and broken through the declaration of the lawe: But they deter∣myne that what soeuer the mans lyfe be, were it neuer so sinfull, yet is he iustified if he beleue only the promyses of the Gospell. The chiefe of them was Iohn Islebie, surnamed Agricola. But Luther doth plain∣ly confute these thynges, and proueth that the lawe was not geuen, to Iohn Isleby the intent it should iustifie, but to declare synne, and to feare the con∣science, and therfore ought fyrste of all to be taught, and than the Go∣spell, whiche sheweth vnto vs the sonne of God, the mediatour and ad¦uocate of mankynde. In fyne Islebie admonished by Luther priuatly, and by the conference of the scriptures better instructed, was perswa∣ded to be of Luthers opinion, and afterwarde by open wryting wit∣nessed the same, confessing his errour.
In the laste booke you haue heard muche speaking of Heldus, whom the Emperour sent Ambassadour into Germany. He receiuing of the Protestauntes not suche aunswere as he woulde, goeth to the moste parte of all the Princes, and deuising a sclaunder, as though the Pro∣testauntes could abyde no right nor hearing of matters, and had refu∣sed moste reasonable conditions of peace by hym propounded, began to moue them to a league, wherof he protested bothe the Emperoure and kynge Ferdinando to be aucthours, and rested not before he had brought it to passe with some. Those were the Archebyshops of Mētz and Salisburge, William and Lewys, Dukes of Bauier, George A lege of the Papistes a∣gainst the Protestātes Duke of Saoxony, Ericke and Henry Dukes of Brunswicke. And for this matter they assembled at Norinberge, & the league was made vnder this title, that in case any man were iniuried or molested, for the byshops Religion whiche they call the olde, the others shoulde assiste him with their aide. Therfore thei called it holy, as ordeined for Gods glory and defence of the churche,. It is decreed for eleuen yeares. The Frenche kyng returnyng from Nice, came to a cōmunication with Marie the Emperours syster, Regent of Flaunders, at Compe∣gue a towne of the Swycers. Some men thought that all her dryfte was, that by the occasion of this newe made peace, and frendlye me∣tynge at Aeguesmortes, she myght turne awaye the kynges mynde, from the Duke of Cleaue, who possessed Gelderlande. And by the opi∣nion of the kynges amitie, myght make hym sore afrayde. Ye haue hearde much of the iudgement of the Imperiall chamber. They being euermore lyke them selues, and nothyng relentynge of their wonted rygour, had lately outlawed the citie of Myndin for a sute betwyxte The citie of Mynden ou lawed. them and the clergie of their citie, whiche thynge ones knowen, the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgraue in their own names and their league frendes, publyshe a wrytynge at the Ides of Nouembre: wher in they recite in ordre what trouble they haue had with the cham∣ber these certen yeares paste. And because they can neuer be quiet, and vpon moste iuste causes haue bene refused. And yet neuerthelesse pro∣cedyng obstinatlye, haue nowe prescrybed theyr fellowes, the cite∣zens of Myndyn, they doe admonyshe and praye all Prynces and states, that they would repute the sentence geuen as vniuste, and not suffer them selues to be styred vp to any violence. For if it were other wyse, and that the sentence were put in execution, they would not sure neglecte the iniuries of their confederatours. In the meane tyme the Emperour beyng moued by kyng Ferdinando, as before is sayde, sent his letters in to Germany, declarynge his good wyll towardes the common wealth. And howe muche he desyred to appease thys con∣trouersie in Religion. And because a fewe dayes paste he receyued aduertysement, that the Protestauntes also dyd not refuse the con∣condicions
of Peace, and required a treatie, so that his consente were therto, therfore he vnto whome nothynge is lieuer than the publique tranquilitie, doeth both allowe this waye, and maketh his deputes, the Archebyshop of Londe, and Matthie Helde, or one of them, and geueth them ful aucthoritie by these presentes, that they together with the counsellers of his brother kyng Ferdinando, and the other Pryn∣ces that be intercessours, may treate and determyne the matter: what soeuer they shall doe, he wyll ratifie. These letters were dated at To∣ledo the .xxv. daye of Nouembre. And whan they were afterwardes brought into Germany, the twelfth daye of February, was assigned at the whiche daye all shoulde mete at Franckefurte. I tolde you a litle before of a league made at Norinberge. The chief ryngeleaders hereof were Lewis Duke of Bauier, and Henry Duke The Duke of Brun∣swick desy∣rous of war of Brunswycke, whiche was wholy addicted to disturbe the common quiet. And did his endeuour to styre vp warre agaynste the Prote∣stauntes. And where he had about the same tyme receyued letters from the Archebyshop of Mentz, on the morowe after Christmas day he aunswereth at fewe wordes committing the reste in credite to hys Secretary Stephen Faber whome he sente withall. And the last daye saue one of December, it chaunced not farre from the towne of Cassel, that the Lantgraue going a hunting, mette with him, and an other yonge man of the Archebyshop of Mentz, that had brought the letters. There the Lantgraue after the Almaigne facion, demaunded of the younge man, which firste mette hym, what he was? I am sayeth he, seruaunt to the Prynce Electour of Brandenburge: what is the other? And he lykewyse whan Stephen nowe came nere hym, he asketh of hym selfe, what he was? He aunswered as the other had done, he enquireth whether he was goyng? He sayde to Spyres: howe doeth the Prynce? in health. After beyng demaunded, whether he woulde iustifie these thynges to be trewe? He sayde yea that he woulde, and so was dimissed. Afterwarde whan he was gone a little waye, one of the Lantgraues seruauntes tolde, howe that it was the Duke of Brunswickes Secretary, whiche after that an other had al¦so affirmed that knewe hym, the Lantgraue sent to fetche them back to Casselle, tyll he came from huntynge hym selfe. In the meane tyme The Lant∣graue inter∣cepteth the Dukes let∣ters. Stephen Faber, whylest he was in the Stowffe, plucketh out of his bosome a lether bagge, and takynge out of it certen letters, hasteth out of the doers: one of the houshold seruauntes perceiued it, and gaue notice to the Stewarde, who as it chaunced was there present, loo∣kynge downe out of the stowffe wyndowe into the courte vnderneth wherfore being asked for his letters, he draweth thē out of his bosom: The Steward receiueth thē into his custody, and delyuered them to
the Lātgraue, whan he came from hunting. Those were two letters wherof the one was directed to the Archebyshop of Mentz, the other to Matthie Helde. And with al were certen tables of remembraunce, or instructions of thinges he had incredite. And seing the matter was of it selfe very suspicious, and the notes within the table increased the suspition more, the Lantgraue openeth them both. The somme of the Archebyshoppes letters was this: That he had receyued his letters, and reioseth muche, that he hath hym in contynuall remembraunce, and that he is all his to commaunde, and howe he hath sent vnto him Stephen his Secretary, a trustye man, by whome he maye vnder∣stande the whole matter, and what newes was brought hym out of Bauier: Unto whome he desyreth hym to geue credit. After he wy∣sheth well to hym and theyr adherentes, but his aduersaries he com∣mendeth to Sathan, of the same effecte he had wrytten also to Hel∣dus, howe he had sent agayne Stephen with instructions, he desy∣reth to heare hym gently, and gyue no lesse credite to hym, than if he spake presently to hym in persone, so longe as he lyueth, he wyll take the Emperours parte, howe so euer the matter falleth out. Neyther doubteth he but the Emperour wyll deuyse for all thynges well e∣nough. In the remembraunce of the Archebyshop was this. How the Lantgraue was vnquiet, and could take no slepe nor reste, and was so geuen to huntynge, that he was almoste madde: Wherby the thing myght the better be done. And some parte of it was already brought to passe: And what the Lantgraue goeth aboute, is not vnknowen to to the Dukes of Bauier, and is moste certen; that he wil make warre againste the one of them two: Wherfore he muste perswade the fello∣wes of his college to come into the league. He shall doe very well also to addicte him selfe wholy vnto this league, and haue respect to them, of whome beynge ones forsaken, he receyued muche displeasure. Howe the Duke of Bauier and he intende to talke together, and by conferryng their counselles to determine some thyng. Moreouer how the state of Sweuia are moued vnto this league, and the matter brought almoste to an ende. The instructions to Heldus were these. How his truste is, that the Emperour wyl come shortly out of Spayne, and that if he perseuer cō¦stante in his purpose all thynges shall procede well. For than he tru∣steth that other kynges also, whiche as yet haue not vttered them sel∣ues, wyll fauour the same waye. And if all the confederatours be of the same mynde and wylle that he is of, there shall wante nothynge. But howe soeuer others vse them selues, he wyll euer remayne con∣stant, and obedient to the Emperour. Howe he thynketh it good that the chamber cōmaunde the Lantgraue, to laye aparte his weapōs, in the meane whyle wyll he and the Duke of Bauier, be in a readines:
And if he do not obeye, that than the chamber may cōmaunde the Du¦ke of Bauier and him to forsee that the cōmon wealth susteine no dā∣mage, & inioyne other Prynces also to geue their assistaunce after the forme of the league. What time these thinges were thus come to light because there was great daunger towarde, and the occasion of warre was sought of them, the Lātgraue furthwith wrote his letters to his father in lawe Duke George, and declaringe the whole matter as it stoode, sheweth how he hath great wrong offered him, & how he ma∣keth no preparation for warre. About the same time, Matthias Hel∣bus, rode in great post haste through Fraūce into Spayne to the Em¦perour. Afterwardes the Lantgraue wrote to king Ferdinando, and to his syster Mary, Regent of Flaunders, to the Princes Electours, & the Dukes of Bauier, after the same sorte as he did to Duke George 1539. his father in lawe, and maketh his purgation. Whan the Duke of Brūswicke perceiued that the matter was disclosed and heard of the Lantgraues letters, he aunswereth, that he hath not susteined wrong at his handes only, whiche nowe hath taken his Secretary, but also by the Duke of Saxon the last yeare, whan by the commaundement of kyng Ferdinando, in the Emperours name, he went to Duke Ge∣orge of Saxony, and againe comming home from Norinberge, what tyme the league was made, than did he laye wayte for him. Unto this the Duke of Saxon aunswereth. For as muche as he denied him and his fellowes saufeconduicte, whan they went to brunswicke, against the lawe and custome of the Empyre, he coulde thinke none otherwy∣se of hym, but to be his ennemye: he had dyuerse tymes before gone with two or thre with hym, disguysed in seruauntes apparell, that he should not be knowen through his and his brothers countrey priuely, neyther did he whiche knewe this well enough, empeche or lette him. But after he would haue the passage stopped for hym and his league frendes, why should he thinke to haue more libertie with other men, than he wyl graunt vnto them? Wherfore vpon this occasion they be∣gan to write one against an other, which not long after ended in most sharpe and bitter inuectiues: hauing in dede the beginning of the Du∣ke Inuectiues vnmete for Princes. of Brunswicke, whiche after a rare example amonges Princes let passe no kynde of raylyng and opprobrious wordes, as bokes set forth in prynte doe declare. Whylest these thynges are a workynge, dieth Iohn Duke of Cleaue, leauyng William his sonne and heyre, whome The death of Iohn Du¦ke of Cleaue Conradus Heresbachius, from his chyldhode had instructed in good letters and maners. What tyme they were come to Franckefurte, in the moneth of Februarye, accordyng to the appoyntment. After much sondrye and sharpe debatynge of the matter, they concluded at the last the nyntene daye of Apryll vpon these conditions. The Emperour, to the intent a cōmunication of learned mē may be
had cōcerning religion, graunteth to the cōfederatours of the doctrine professed at Auspurge, whiche are nowe in that numbre, truce for .xv. monethes, and commaundeth, that in this meane tyme they be not molested in any case concernyng Religion. The peace of Norinberge and the Emperours decree at Regenspurge, are also for this tyme ra∣tified. And if duryng the tyme of this truce, they can not fully agree in Religion, yet shall that peace be of force, vntyll the nexte assemblie of the Empyre. And if perchaunce there be an assemblie before the truce be expyred, yet neuerthelesse that peace shall take place, vntyll the o∣ther assemblye. In the meane whyle, during the tyme of this truce the Emperour doeth suspende all suites and actions in the lawe commen∣ced againste the Protestauntes, and also the outlawyng of the Cytie of Myndin, and if anye thynge be otherwyse done, he commaundeth it to be frustrate. Where it is wonte to be obiected vnto them, as though for the profession of this Religion, they myght not consiste in iudgement, the same shall take place no longer, but they shall enioye the benefite of the lawe without exception. Agayne the Protestauntes shall moleste no man, and durynge this truce, shall take none in theyr league, yet so as no man susteyne anye wronge in the quarell of their Religion: The Emperour shall also for∣see that no man be receyued more ouer in to the contrary league. The Protestauntes shall permytte the clergie to enioye all those yearelye profites whiche they haue at this daye. By the consent of the Emperour, a daye shall be assigned at the ka∣lendes of Auguste, at the whiche daye should mete at Norinberge the Cathoqliues and Protestaūtes, such as were good men and desirous of peace, and not contentions or frowarde. Those shal chouse out a cer¦ten numbre of diuines, whiche quietly and frendly may conferre of re∣ligion: with them also shalbe ioyned others, that professe not diuinitie, but yet experte men and sobre. Moreouer, the Emperour and kynge Ferdinando if they lyste, maye haue their deputes in this conference: and what soeuer shall there be agreed vpon by consent of eyther partie shalbe signified to the states yt be absent, who approuing the same, the Emperours Ambassadour also shal ratifie it, or els the Emperour him self in the next assēblie of thempire, after he shal haue cōfirmed, shal cō¦maund to be kept inuiolate. Both parties shal lay away ye preparatiōs vnto war, & he yt shal seme to go about any thīg, shalbe enforced to shew the cause why he doeth it, yet so as no mā be inhibited to kepe a defēce necessary, in al other thīgs, the law of thēpire shalbe of both parties ob¦serued. In this truce are cōprehēded neither Anabaptists, nor others yt followe a doctrine cōtrary to the cōfessiō of Auspurg. The protestātes shal haue in a redines ayde for the Turckish warre, yt ther be no delay: And whan the Princes Electours and other principall states, shall at
the Emperours commaundement sende their deputes to Woormes, at the .xviij. daye of May, the Protestaūtes shall sende theirs also, that they may consulte of soden ayde against the Turke, and what some∣uer there shalbe agreed vpon by the consent of the more parte, to the same shall they also subscribe. And if the Turke shall moue warre du∣ryng the tyme of the truce, they shall resiste hym with the reste. And these thynges to be ratified, in case the Emperour within syre months shall allowe the same, begynning from the kalendes of May. And in the meane tyme, that agrement concerning the truce, and not to aug∣mente the league, shalbe of force. And in case the Emperour do not de∣clare his mynde within the same tyme, yet shall the peace of Norin∣berge, be in as full strength and vertue hereafter as it was before. The Emperours depute here was Iohn Archebyshop of Londe, for Heldus was gone into Spayne as before is sayde. And kyng Ferdi∣nando also sent thether his Ambassadours. The Protestauntes were there many, and the Duke of Saxon him selfe and the Lantgraue, whiche brought with them certen diuines. The Palsgraue and the Marques of Brandenburg, both Electours, did intreate as meanes. The Duke of Saxon amonges other thynges protested this at that The Duke of Saxony woulde not geue to Fer∣dinando the title of kyng of Romains tyme, that he would not attribute to Ferdinando the title of the king of Romains, but stode to the conuenaūtes of Cadame & Uienne, that same Archebyshop of Londe was a Germayne borne, and counsel∣lour to Christierne kyng of Denmarke, who beyng expulsed, was also exiled and lost his byshopryke, than came he agayne into Germany & attended vpon the Emperour, and afterwardes was made byshop of Constaunce. Whylest this treaty was at Frankefurte, certen bandes of Souldiours were assembled in Saxony, and were commaunded by their gouernours to go lye in the countreis of the citie of Breme, of the Duke of Lunenburge, and others of the same Religion, and there to remayne tyll the campe remoued. It was kept very secrete at the first, by whose conduicte or aucthoritie they were leuied, but at length it was certenly knowen that they were mustred by Henry Duke of Brunswycke, and his brother Christopher Archebyshop of Bremen. They that were iried by them, complayned in dede to the imperial chāber, but it was in vayne. The Protestaūtes afterwardes through their industrie, lest they should do any more harme, procured the same men to serue them, whome notwithstanding they vsed to the iniurie of no man. At the request of the Princes that wer intercessours, Ste∣phen Faber, was set at libertie by the Lantgraue, who gaue him passe¦porte. He had sayde of his owne accorde, that he woulde not retourne to his Prince, for that he trusted hym no more. But whan he was re∣leased, he went streight way to him. In this assemblie William Duke of Cleue, by his Ambassadour, did exhibite a wrytinge to the Prote∣stauntes,
wherin he declared by what ryght & tytle he possessed Gel∣derlande. And prayed them that they would be meanes for him to the Emperour, and to commende his cause also to the Emperours Am∣bassadours there. The Frenche kyng, had aduertised Ulrich Duke of Wirtenberge, The Frēcha kyng geueth toūsel to the Duke of wit¦temberge. by his Ambassadour, that he heard saye, howe he through the motion of his confederatours, was determined to make warre vppon certen Byshoppes in Germany. But this pourpose did not he alowe, and for his good wyll he beareth hym, doth admonyshe hym that he do it not: For if he did, he should offende the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando, vnto whome he was lately reconciled, and bryng him selfe and al that euer he had into great Daunger. The Duke geuyng him thankes for the good admonishement (sayth) he is sclaundered, and howe he sup∣poseth the same to be reysed vp by the Dukes of Bauier, who hathe fasly sowen a lyke bruite of hym in Germany, he desyreth hym to geue no credit to it. For it is neither his entent, nor yet his fellowes, to styre vp any trouble, or to attēpte any thyng by force of armes, vnlesse they be constrayned. And doubteth not also, but when they shal heare ther∣of, they wyl pourge them selues herein. Wherfore whan he had decla∣red this to his fellowes at Franckefurte, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, the .xix. daye of Aprill, addresse their letters to the kynge. And saye howe they vnderstande by Duke Ulriche, what reporte of The Duke of Saxon & the Lantgr. write to the Frēch kyng them was made vnto hym: but to be a sclaunder forged by their enne∣mies and euill wyllers: For they entende to make no warre, and how muche they desyre peace, that can the Princes tell, that were interces∣sours. For albeit they are more wayes than one prouoked, albeit theyr fellowes citie is outlawed, and a league made of dyuerse, for the de∣fence of vniusle decrees, though bandes of Souldiours by them hired for great and vnaccustomed wages, are nowe spoyling the countreys of their league frendes, yet are they quiet and styre not one whytte. for they loue their natiue countrey and remitte all iniuries for the cōmon wealthes sake. But their aduersaries are lead with a certen impudent hatred, and followe no temperate wayes, nor wyll admitte no lawe∣full reasonyng, but seke only that Germany maye swymme with ciuile bloud. And seyng it is thus, they desyre hym not to credit these false re∣portes but to geue his ayde, that the churche maye be quieted by god∣ly meanes: For this is properly the dutie of kynges, to maynteine tru∣the and innocencie. And where as they defende the cause of Religion, it is done of none euyll pourpose, but of a certen Godly dutie: for they doubte not, but that the doctrine whiche they doe professe, is agreable vnto Gods worde, whiche they maye in no wyse forsake. Duke Geor∣ge of Saxon irth. About the ende of this assemblie, the .xxiiij. daye of Apryll, died Ge∣orge Duke of Saxony, without chyldren: For his two sonnes were
departed before without issewe, whereof the one had maried Eliza∣beth the Lantgraues syster, and the other one of the house of Mandes∣fielde. Wherfore Duke George by legacie maketh his heyres, his bro∣ther Henry, and his sonnes, Maurice, and Auguste, vnder this condi∣tion that they alter not the state of Religion. Whiche vnlesse they shall perfourme, he geueth his whole landes to the Emperour and to kyng Ferdinando, vntyll suche tyme as eyther he or his sonnes, or the nexte kynsman of that familie, doe accomplyshe this condition. This wyl of his so made, he sheweth first to the Nobilitie and cōmons of his coun∣trie, beinge nowe olde & sickly, and wylleth them to confirme the same by an othe neuer to alter this his last wyll. But they fearyng leste it should be the occasion of warre betwene the kinsmē, intreate him that he would be content, to sende to his brother Henry: For they truste that he wyll consente to alter nothing in Religion. Whereupon Am∣bassadours were sent to perswade with him, and whan they had al∣ledged Ambassa∣dours sent to his brother Henry. sondry reasons, and especially sayd, how there was muche rea∣dy Money, and a great quantitie of Plate and goodly stuffe, whiche should come wholy to his handes, in case he would obeye his brothers wyll. He aunswered them by and by thus: Certenly your message se∣meth vnto me to resemble the same that is writtē in the Gospel, what tyme Sathan promysed Christe the kyngdomes of the whole worlde, so that he would falle downe and worshyp hym. Doe youthynke that I sette so muche by any ryches, that I would therfore forsake the tru∣the and pure religion? Assuredly you are farre abused if you so thinke. Wherfore whan they had this answere, and were departed without their purpose, before they came at home, Duke George had lefte hys lyfe. His brother Henry going immediatly to Dresda, and other tow∣nes, bindeth the people to hym by an othe, which was the more easely done, by reason he was in league with the Protestauntes. Moreouer the Prince Electour of Saxony, hearyng of his death, hasteth home with all expedition, that if nede were, he myght ayde Henry. The Princes of the Popysh parte, for the losse of so sure a pyl∣lour, and so lucky successe of the Protestauntes, were sore agreued, especially the Archebyshop of Mentz, and the Duke of Brunswycke, as hereafter you shal heare. Thus had Duke George a successour and heire cleane contrary to his wylle. And he whome he hated moste of all men duryng his lyfe tyme, namely Luther, was sent for by the new Prince to Lipsia, to preache and to alter the Religion. About this tyme in the moneth of May, appered a blasyng starre, and shortly after departed Isabel wyfe to Charles the Emperour, for whome the Frenche kyng, so sone as he heard therof kepte a solempne funerall at Paris, as the maner of kynges is. I shewed you before of the counsell of Uicence, whiche the byshop of Rome had proroged tyll
Easter of this yeare. But seyng than that none would come, he publi∣sheth his letters the tenth of Iune, wherin he prorogeth the counsell no more, but suspendeth it at his owne pleasure, and senate of his Car¦dinalles. The kyng of Englande had certen monethes before set forth another wryttyng touching this Synode of Uicence, and declareth howe the Byshop deludeth the whole worlde. For where he excused hym selfe by the Duke of Mantua, it was a playne mockery: For se∣ing he taketh vppon hym so great anothoritie, why did he not com∣pelle hym? If he coulde not, wherfore shoulde he commaunde men to come to a place vncerten, and the whiche is not in his power. Nowe albeit he hathe chosen Uicence for the same pourpose, yet is there no doubt, but the enetians, men of so great wysdome, wyll no more suffer their citie to be pestred with suche a multitude without garm∣sons of Souldiours, than woulde the Duke of Mantua, and that in fyne there wylbe as small resorte thether, as was to Mantua. There fore it is but delusion, what so euer he doeth, neyther oughte he to be permitted in this dissolute lybertie any longer. There is nothynge in dede better nor more commodious than a lawfull counsell. But whan they are applied vnto priuate lucre and commoditie, and to the esta∣blyshynge of certen mens aucthoritie, they brynge a wonderfull de∣struction to the common wealth. Whan the name of the counsell and of the churche was nowe common in euery mans mouthe, Luther set¦teth forth a booke of either of them in the vulgare speache. And fyrst he treatefh of the assemblie of the Apostles at Hierusalem, whiche is men¦tioned in the .xv. of the actes: After he reciteth the contrary opinions of the Doctours, especially Austen and Ciprian, concernyng baptisme, & by the same occasion he maketh mention of those lawes, that are called the Canons of the Apostles, and proueth by manifest reasons that thei The Can cōmonly cal∣led of the A∣postles are false. be false and countrefeated, and those that geue them that tytle, to de∣serue death. Than doeth he recite in ordre those foure counselles which were of chiefe authoritie, the counsell of Nyce, Constantinople, Ephe∣sus, and Calcedonie. And declareth for what causes they assēbled ther, and what they decreed in euery of them. After he commeth to the prin¦cipall question, and sheweth what is the aucthoritie of a. counsell. Wherfore he sayeth howe a counsel maye not confirme any newe doc∣tryne, nor commaunde any newe worke, neyther bynde mens myn∣des with newe ceremonies, not to intermedle with ciuile gouerne∣mentes, nor to make any decrees, to establysh the authoritie of a few. But the dutie therof to be, to abolyshe and condemne newe opinions contrary to holy Scripture, and newe ceremonies whether they be superstitious or vnprofitable for the churche. And suche thynges as are brought in controuersie, to examine, and determine after the writ∣ten text of Gods worde. After this he diffineth the churche, & sheweth
by what tokens it ought to be knowen, and by a comparyson made, declaring what Christe and his Apostles taught, he sayeth howe the Byshop of Rome, whiche hath brought into the churche a farre cōtra∣ry doctrine, and by wicked meanes hath pylled the whole world with intollerable exactions, ought to be condempned, and dryuen to make restitution. Amonges diuerse other thynges wherby in the same boke he declareth what blyndenes men were led into vnder the Byshop of Rome, and howe shameful and vyle was the Religion, he sayeth how A Freers were ma∣keth the de∣uyll afrayd. it was come thus farre, that a monke or a freers wede, was thought to be sufficient to bryng a man to eternall lyfe. And manye not onlye meane folkes, but also great Prynces, would be buried in a freers gar¦ment. Those that shall come after peraduenture wyl not beleue it, but yet is it true and wont to be commonly done in Italy. And in our me mory, Fraunces Marques of Mantua the seconde of that name, put into his last wylle, that he myght be buried in a gray freers cote: The same did Albertus Pius, Prynce of Carpes in Paris: And Christo∣pher Longelie a Bourgonnion, buried at Padwey, a man excellently Langelius Oration a∣gainst the Lutherians. learned, and a great Ciceronian, who also wrote an Oration against the Lutherians, in lyke case as Alberte did diuers against Erasmus of Roterdame. Immediatly after the death of Duke George, Henry the Duke of Brunswycke, rydeth to the Emperour into Spayne tho∣rowe Fraunce. About the same tyme, Henry the eyght kyng of Englande, calleth a Parliament, wherein amōges other thinges were enacted certen de∣crees for Religiō, called the syxe Articles, as followeth that vnder the The syr Ar∣ticles. four me of bread and wyne, was the true and natural body and bloud of Christe, and that after the wordes of consecration, there remayned no more substaunce of bread and wyne, that the receiuing of the whole supper of the Lorde was not necessary to saluation, and that Christ is wholy cōteyned vnder both kyndes. How it is not lawful for priestes to marry. That the vowes of chastitie ought to be perfourmed. That priuate masses were to be reteyned. That auricular confession is good and necessary. To suche as thought and did otherwyse, was appoyn∣ted punyshement dewe for heretikes. And the same tyme, the kynge stoode in termes to marry the Lady Anne of Cleue, a mayde of an ex∣cellent The Lady Anne of Cleaue. beautie, which after she was affianced, within a few monthes was sent to Caleis, whether the kyng had sent the Lorde Admirall & others with his shyppes to receyue her, and transporte her into Eng∣lande, But he hymselfe accompanied with all the Nobles and Gentle¦men of the Realme, receiued her vpō blacke Heath, and brought her to Grenewitche, where shortly after they were married by the Archeby∣shop of Canturbury. Some saye howe the Bishoppes had perswaded the kyng to cōsent to the syxe Articles, to the intent they myght bring
the Archebyshop of Cantorburye and the Lorde Crumwell, whiche were great fauourers of Religion, out of aucthoritie & creditie. This yeare in the mōth of August, Barbarousse the Turkes Lieutenaunt, Barbarouse taketh Ca∣stel newes. taketh by assiege, Castelneufe a towne in Slauonie, borderinge vpon the Goulfe of Uenise, and sleying all the Souldiours, leadeth awaye many captiue. A yere before in the moneth of October, the Emperour and the Uenetians beyng of one confederacie had wonne it. And the Emperour in dede put in a garrison of foure thousand Spanyardes, and made captayne Fraunces Sarmiento. Whiche chaunced to the Uenetians contrary to their expectation, for that they sayde the town standing in that coaste, ought rather to be theirs. Therfore not longe after, when they more & more mislyked this societie, and sawe it wold be very daungerours for them, aske truce of the Turke and obteyne it. In maner at the same tyme arose a sedition at Gaunte. Whiche ci∣tie Rebellienat Gaunte. is of great force and aucthoritie in those parties, and hath oftenty∣mes made many sore bickeringes for their lybertie with the Gouer∣nours of Flaunders, in whose dominion it standeth. The Emperour hauing intelligence hereof, where he firste had thought to haue gone through Italy into Germany, he altered his purpose, and determined to passe through Fraunce, seyng the kyng required hym instantly so to The Empe∣rour passeth throughe Fraunce. doe, and promysed hym all thynges franckely. In the meane tyme the Palsgraue and the Marques of Brandenburge, intercessours, addres¦syng their letters to the Emperour of the pacification at Franckfurte, had requyred hym to permitte a conference of learned men to be had at Norinberge. But he sayde, that the death of his wyfe, and certen o∣ther affaires, would not suffer hym to entende suche matters. Whan the intercessours had sent a copie of these to the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, and yet had not signified whether the Emperour had confirmed that truce of .xv. monethes. The .xix. daye of Nouember, an assemblie was appoynted at Arustet, a towne of Turingia. Here they consulted to augmente their confederacie, & for their nedefull defence in case the Emperour wyll not allowe the peace makyng at Francke∣furte, for well disposyng the churche goodes, to sende Ambassadours into Englande, touching the syxe Articles, and to mitigate the kinges mynde, to moue the Frenche kynge, that innocente persones be not tormented, for Religiō. Moreouer to sende Ambassadours to the Em∣perour so sone as they shall vnderstande of his commyng into Flaun∣ders. And for because certen of the confederatours were absent, and o∣ther some had not commission to determine of certē matters, an other daye was assigned at Smalcalde at the kalendes of Marche, wher∣in to treate of the reste. Here were receiued into the League the men of Rigen a citie in Linonia, whiche were at cōtencion with their Ar∣chebyshop, lyke as many others were in Germany. Neyther wer they
receyued vpon other condicion, than to be defended in the counsel chā∣ber by the commō procurers, & therfore payed to the confederatours, a thousande and fyue hundreth crownes. Henry Duke of Saxon, was taken into the league two yeares be¦fore without any charge, because he was but poore, but yet vpon con∣dition, that if he were at any tyme enriched, he should beare like char∣ge with the reste: Nowe therfore that he was auaunced to this good∣ly inheritaunce in this Assemblie they treated with hym touching the same, whiche assemblie ended the tenthe of Decembre. The Prynces were not there present, but had sent their deputes. And the Duke of Saxon had sent Iohn Dulcie and Fraunces Burcarte vicechaunce∣lour into Englande in the moneth of Nouembre, to be is his name pre¦sent at the marriage betwene the kynge and the Lady Anne of Clea∣ne, for he had married her syster Sibille, as is mentioned in the sy booke. Wherfore vpon this occasion, they were enioyned at Arnstade to treate with the kyng in the name of the Protestaūtes, for these mat∣ters before sayd. The Emperour receyuing a saufe conduictetoke his iourney with a small company in the moneth of Nouembre. Whan he came to the frontiers of Fraunce borderynge vpon Spayne, he met the kynges two sonnes, Henry and charles, which were come thether in poste, and the Constable which was gone thether long before with a great parte of the nobilitie of Fraunce: of whom being receyued and conduicted through the myddes of Fraunce & the greatest cities, whā he came to Loche in Burges, he mette with the kynge hym selfe, who was than scarcely amēded of a late disease. After passyng through Or leaunce, on Newe yeares daye, rydynge in the myddes betwene the kynges two sonnes, he entred into the citie of Paris, and the Consta∣ble 1540. bare the sworde before him. For no kinde of ioyful myrth and glad∣nes, no honour or solemnitie that the mynde of man coulde delight in, The Empe¦rour entreth into Paris. was left vndone. Thether came the Byshoppes Legate, Alexander Farnesius, Cardinall, who together with Cardinall Bellaye the By∣shop of the citie, Receiued the Emperour into the Cathedrall churche at Paris. Where the Emperour remaining seuen dayes, afterwardes departeth, the kynge hym selfe accompanying hym into Uermandois, and his sonnes brought hym as farre as Ualencenes, a towne in He∣naulte. The kynge was brought into a great and almoste a sure hope to recouer Millan, but it chaunced farre otherwyse, as hereafter I purpose to declare. What tyme the Emperour was with the Frenche The Empe¦rours and Frēch kings Ambassade to the Uene¦tians. kynge in Fraunce, they sent both their Ambassadours to the Ueneti∣ans moste nobly accōpanied. The Emperour sent Alphonse Daualle gouernour of Millan, and the king, Claudie Hannebalde Lieutenant of Piedmonte. These exhorted the Senatours with a longe discours to ioyne them selues in amitie with these two most myghty Princes
and to put to theyr good willes and power to ouerthrow the Turke. But they, whan they had most honorably dimissed the Ambassadors, The Uene∣tians Ambas¦sador to the Turke. considering the thing more diligently, thought mete to reconcile them selues to the Turke, with whom they had trewce already. Wherfore concluding at the last, to rendre vnto him Nanplia, and Epidaurum, they obteyned at his hande peace. Some saye, that the Frenchemen, albeit, exhorted them openly, as did themperours Ambassadour, yet secretly, whispered in their eares, that they should prouide for themsel¦ues, & not enter into such a daunger, for the which they were fyrst like to smarte: the king him selfe, in an Apologie against themperour, re∣porteth that the common wealth of the Uenetians, of him destroyed, was through his meanes releued, and recouered. Aloisius Bardnari∣us, the Ambassadoure of the Uenetians, sente to the Turke for peace,  as commaunded fyrst to offer al other conditions, and reserue those two cities for extreme necessitie. But the Turke, which by priuie espi∣all, knewe the determination of the Senate longe before, did expostu¦late with him, that he did not declare his commission plainely and di∣rectly. And without those two places deliuered, would not conclude. Who beyng amased, seyng the priuities of the common wealth were The secrets of the senate vttered to the Turke. bewrayed (full sore againste his will) permitteth him to haue them at laste. But whan he was retourned to Uenise, and had declared the whole matter, the Senatours greatly astonied, after moste diligente inquisition, apprehende certen, and fyndynge them giltie, cut of theyr The trators executed. heades. One of them was fledde into the Frenche Ambassadours lod∣gyng (the Bishoppe of Mompelier) as into a Saintuary: wherefore officers were sent to haue searched all the house: But whā they might not be suffered to enter, the Senate commaundeth certeine great pie¦ces to be fetched out of theyr ordenaunce house, to ouerthrow the lod∣ging: Wherupon the Frenchmen consyderinge theyr owne daunger, bring him forth vnto them. The Senate afterwarde, wrote vnto the kinge, the cause why they so dyd, lest he shoulde thynke his Ambassa∣dour had susteined wrong. When themperour came into Flaunders, Themp. ar∣riueth in Flaunders. kyng Ferdinando comming out of Austriche, met there also: After the Protestantes Ambassadors, as it was condescended at Arnstad, who the xxiiii. daye of February, beyng admitted to the Emperours speach at Gaunt, welcome him into the low countrey, pourge them selues of the euill reportes of theyr aduersaryes, and complayne of the Duke of Brunswike, and the Iudges of the Chaumber, declare how desirous they be of peace, and by howe many waies they haue sought it, which they nowe desyre him to graunt and establishe for euer.
The Emperour telleth them before Granuella, that after he hath con∣sulted of the matter, he wyll make them an aunswere. And in maner about the same tyme that they sent this Ambassade to the Emperour, The Prote. wryte to the Frēche king they wrote also to the Frenche kynge, reioysinge muche at the great good wyll and amitie betwene the Emperour and hym: And with a long proces intreate hym, in this cōsent of mindes, to further the cause of Religion and publique quiet to the Emperour. At the kalendes of Marche, the Ambassadours of the Princes & cities of Protestauntes An assembly at Smalcald met at Smalcald, as was appointed, with whom also came these di∣uines, Ionas, Pomerane, Melancthon, Cruciger, & Bucer. And they were inioyned to deuise a fourme in wryting, wherwith they shoulde thinke mete to treate with their aduersaries, for the cōciliation of reli∣gion. In this assemblie they cōsulted of such matters as were left vn∣discussed at Arnstad, as before is said. In the meane time Dulcie and Burcarte, were returned out of Englande, & the seuenth day of Mar∣che, they make reporte at Smalcalde of the state of Religion in Eng∣land, that for the decrees made the yere before, there is no great puni∣shement, Latimer. Shaxton. notwithstanding Hugh Latimer byshop of Woorcester, and Shaxton byshop of Salisbury are deteined in prison for Religiō, and as yet not released. The Lorde Cromwell, whiche is in moste autho∣ritie The Lorde Cromwell. doth appease and mitigate the kynges mynde, and that also the kyng him selfe in familiar talke, opened vnto them his mynde, & suppo¦seth thus, that the diuines of the Protestauntes thinke not rightly cō∣cerning the mariage of priestes, the lordes supper vnder both kyndes, and of the priuate masse, & requireth them to write vnto him of these & other necessary questions at large, alledging the causes and reasons of their opinions. And he wyll see agayne, that the learned men of his Realme shall wryte an aunswere, that thus a waye may be made to come to the knowledge of the truthe. Moreouer Cromwel and certen others thinke it mete and expedient to sende a great Ambassade to the kinge, and Melancthon with them. For if any meane agrement in re∣ligion might be had, the kynge woulde bestowe a great somme of mo∣ney vpon a league, that he purposeth to make with them, not onlye in the cause of Religion, but in generall: for the kyng marueleth greatly, why they are confederated for Religion only: for the tyme wyll come that they shalbe attempted with warre, vnder a contrary title. And a fewe dayes after, the diuines exhibite their wryting, the some A wrytinge exhibited by the diuines. wherof was this. Not to swarue from the steppes of the confession at Auspurge, and the Apologie afterwardes annexed to the same. Which sentence afterwardes all the diuines that were absent did approue by their letters sent thether. This tyme came Henry the Duke of brun∣swick The Emp. aunswer to the Protest. to Gaūt. The day before the Ides of March, thēperour answe∣reth ye protestātes Ambassadours by Cornelles Scepp, gētly so so, but
yet in suche sorte as it coulde not be wel perceiued, whether he would graunte them peace or not. Wherfore the Ambassadours by the Em∣perours leaue going a litle asyde: by and by retourne, and desire hym to inhibite the processe of the Imperiall chamber, and graunte them peace whereunto the Emperour sayde, he had no more to aunswere them at this tyme, he woulde take further delyberation. This auns∣were was recited at Smalcalde the tenth daye after. And on Easter munday, which was than the .xxix. of Marche, came thether the Prin¦ces them selues. That tyme was a certen contention and hatred be∣twyxte Granuella and Heldus, which in fine came to this ende that Hatred be∣twixt coun∣sellers. Heldus being displaced, departed from the courte, and lyued a priuate lyfe. For the other was aboue hym in authoritie, and brought Heldus into hatred and obloquie, for that he was ouer vehement in counsell matters and other affaires, and had constreyned the Emperour, thin∣kyng nothyng lesse, to haue warres in maner against his wyll. And whan Granuella had geuen certen manifeste instructions of his wyll and mynde, to be inclyned to peace and concorde, beynge requested of the Protestauntes, he perswaded the Emperour also to the conditiōs of peace. And he hymselfe at the begynning, as though it had bene in his owne name sent to Smalcalde intercessours and Ambassadours, Theodoricke Manderschitte, and William Nuenarie Erles, men of great wysdome and dignitie, notwithstanding the first taried by the waye sore sycke. Their demaundes were reasonable enough, neuer∣thelesse they signified this, that the Emperour was almost perswaded The false perswasiō of the Emper. as though they cared not for Religion, neyther desyred peace in theyr hartes, but altogether sought to conuerte the churche goodes to theyr priuate vses, delyghted in discorde, & bare him no good wyll, but were more addicte to take their partes, that were his open ennemies. And these things were reported to the Emperour partly by their aduersa∣ries, partly by the Frenchemen, as it is sayde for a certentie. For what tyme the Emperour went through Fraunce, and all thinges were lyke to growe to a perfite frendshyp, then were certen thinges disclosed, and the Protestauntes letters vnto the kyng, shewed vnto the Emperour, some do impute this to the kyng him selfe, and other some to the Constable who was than of chief authoritie, & sought al meanes possible to quiet and agree the Princes, and dyd beare the Protestantes no good wyl, because of Religion.
✚ The thirtene Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the thirtene Booke THe Protestauutes make aunswere to the Emperour demaundes, shewyng how they haue more regarde to Religion, than to churche goodes. They confute also the argumentes of the kyng of Englande, touchyng the syxe Articles. The Emperour hauing punyshed them at Gaunt, sendeth letters to assigne a metyng for the protestauntes, against whome speaketh Alexander Farnese the Popes Legate, who had followed the Emperour out of Fraunce. In the meane tyme the Frenche kyng made a league with the Duke of Cleane, whose syster the kyng of Englande than refused. At the assemble of Hagenawe certen poinctes of Religion were a∣greed vpon the resydewe were referred to the conuention that kyng Ferdinando assigned at Wor∣uies: Whether Granuellan sendyng first Naues, came afterwarde also hym selfe, and made an Ora¦tion: And after hym Campeigius the Popes Legate. The conference brake offe, and all was diffe∣red to yt Iourney of Regenspurg. In this meane whyle Luther answereth a booke set forth by the Duke of Brunswycke, where is spoken of the dere mantell of the Archebyshoppes. The counsell beyng begonne at Regenspurge, Granuellan presenteth the booke of the Interim. The Duke of Cleaue commynge into Fraunce, marrieth the daughter of Nauarre. VNto the Whiche thinges the Protestauntes the eleuenth daye of Apryl make a long aunswere, The answer of the Prot. to Grāuellā declaryng their innocencie in suche thinges as they were of the Emperour suspected. And the chief & only cause why they to their great char∣ges & peryll do professe this doctrine to be done neither for any priuate cōmoditie, or for pleasur or displeasure of any persone or other respect at all, saue only that God requyreth this dutye of them, that they should professe the name of his sonne and the Gospell. For he commaundeth vs to flye from Idolatrie and warneth vs most straightly, that we do not allowe their crueltie, whiche persecute the true doctrine. And as touchynge the churche goodes they shewe vnto what good vses they imploye them. And of all the dissention that is, others to be authors thereof and not they. Than they discourse the cause of Religion at large, and confute that sclaunder that they should be more inclyned to the Emperours ennemies, than to hym, by the goodly and large offers, whiche for his cause they refused, and by the ayde and assistaunce, whiche they haue geuen hym in his warres. Finally they requyre, that Monser Granuellan who to his great cōmendation, hath euermore hytherto perswaded the Emperour frō ye bloudy coūsels of their aduersaries, to peaceable wayes, wold preferre
to the Emperour the complainte of the chamber, and intreate hym to graunte them peace, so often sought and desyred. What tyme they had made this answer, at the Ides of Apryl, they ende theyr intreaty. And appointe the diuines to make a confutation, of the syxe Articles enac∣ted A confutatis of the six Ar∣ticles. by the kyng of Englande, and the booke afterwarde to be sent the∣ther, to the entent that in case the diuines of Englande wyll aunswer it, and that there be any hope of agrement, a further communication may be had: but to make any league with him otherwyse than for Re∣lion only, no man there thought expedient. It was also there decreed to intreate the kyng for suche as were persecuted in Fraunce for Reli∣gion, but first to learne the state of Fraunce, and howe the kynge is af∣fected, and whether it maye be thought that the mediation wyll take place. There were dyuerse other decrees, touchynge the churche goo∣des, and seueral complayntes, and that they of Haylbrune, should abo∣lyshe the Popyshe Masse, which remayned as yet in certen churches. Fynally they determine, what is nedefuull to be done, in case the Em∣perour eyther refuse peace, or aunswere doubtfully, or the Chamber procede after their olde maner, or if there be a power reised vp against them pryuelye. Whilest these thynges were a workyng, the Emperour doth great Great execu¦tion done at Gaunt. execution of Gaunt, making the chiefest Rebelles to hoppe headles, he taketh away all their armure and weapons, all their priuileges and commodities, he buyldeth a Castell, and placeth there a Garnison in the neckes of them. That citie was euer wonte to rebell against theyr Princes, as I haue also declared before. This parte played they with Charles of Burgundy, the Emperours great graundfather, and with Phylip his father before that, with Lewys Erle of Flaunders, great grandfather to the same Philippe by his mothersyde. All the whiche this Emperour semeth to haue reuenged. For they were neuer so sub∣dued, as thys tyme. The eyghtenthe daye of Apryll, the Emperoure addressed hys let∣ters to the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgraue. Howe he hathe The Emp. letters to the Prootestāt. talked wyth hys brother Ferdinando Kynge of Romaynes, amonges other thynges of the State of Germanye, but especiallye of the dis∣sention in Religion whiche he woulde fayne were appeased. For lyke as here tofore he hathe omytted nothynge herein, so is he nowe also of the same mynde styll: So that they wyll acknoweledge this zeale of his, and not abuse the same. And that desyre of peace whiche they haue longe synce pretended in wordes and promyses, they wyll nowe perfourme in deed: He hath vsed many yeares nowe sondrye and gēt∣le meanes of treaty, but with them it hathe not priuayled hetherto. And nowe is the matter come to that poynte, that vnlesse it be short∣lye remedied, there wil followe a great dissolutiō of the cōmon welth,
and a maruelous sturre of all states. And although it be so, yet of his benigne gentlenes he appointeth them againe an other assemblie at Spyres the syxte daye of Iune, or if perchaunce plage or infection of sickenes wyll not permitte them then suche place as his brother Fer∣dinando shal appointe, to deuise by what meanes this great daunger that hanged ouer Germany may be auoyded. Willing them to be ther present them selues at the daye assigned, all lettes set aparte, vnlesse it be syckenes, and than to sende their chief counsellours, suche as be lo∣uers of peace, mete for the treatie and priuie to their doings. And that they signifie the same to their fellowes, to the entent they be there, at the daye. And thether shall come his brother Ferdinādo, who can fur∣ther declare of his mynde and wyll, and of theyr Ambassade sent vnto hym. And that they so frame them selues for the preseruation of them selues and the countrey, that all dissention beyng taken awaye, they may so muche the better consult of the other affayres of the Empyre. And there is no cause to feare any daunger, for he wylassure thē vpon his fidelitie, and graunteth them the benefite of the peace of Norrin∣berge, and wyll suffer no man to doe against it, yet so as they agayne doe offende no man. Unto whiche letters they aunswered the .xv. day The answer of the Prot. to the Emp. letters. of may. For that he followeth the counselles of peace, they geue hym most harty thankes. And where he admonyshed them that they shuld acknowledge his studious desyre, and not abuse the same, there is no cause they saye why he should thinke otherwyse of thē and their cōfe∣derates and league frendes. For there is nothing more derely beloued of them than peace. And that the matter hath not ben agreed vpō he∣therto, it ought not to be imputed vnto thē, but to the greatnes of the cause, and to their aduersaries, whiche coulde abyde no declaration of their doctrine. Nowe where he would haue them to be there presente at the daye appointed, they wyl gladly obeye. Howe beit because they woulde not that the kynge shoulde trauell in vayne, they wyll shewe their fantasye: for it is not vnknowen to his hyghnes, that euersynce the fyrste beginning of this controuersie, after muche delyberation in the assemblies of the Empire, this waye only semed beste vnto al men, that eyther a lawefull counsell myght be had, or els a prouinciall Sy∣node of Germany: but sythe that for the shortnes of tyme, that semed litle to purpose, it was deuysed at Franckefurte, to haue a communi∣cation of the matter, and a decree was made of the same. And seynge the matter is weightie, wherein the saluation of man cōsisteth, it can not be shortly determined, if it should be purposely done, and therfore should be troublesome and paynfull both to kyng Ferdinando, and to them also and others, to traue in suche matters, to fore any communi∣cation be had, or the waye prepared: wherfore that whiche pleased all men at Franckefurte, semeth nowe best vnto them also, that in case a
conuocation of Germany can not be had, a communication myght be appointed: For in their iudgement, there can no better way be founde as they declared also of late to Counte Nuenar: wherein they truste that holy Scripture, euen by his commaundement shall occupie the chief place, and that whan their aduersaries shall swarue from the sa∣me, they maye be called agayne into the waye. And albeit they maye not go thether without makinge their fellowes priuie to it, and the tyme is so shorte that they can not assemble before, yet whan the thing shalbe cōmenced, and that there shalbe any hope to do any good there, they wyll not let to come thether in persone. Requiring hym that he would graunte the saue conduicte, whiche he promysed, not onlye to their Ambassadours, but to their deuines also. For as muche as they shal haue moste to doe in this matter: laste they desyre to vnderstande his pleasure herein. I tolde you before of Cardinall Farnesius, he went with the Emperour from Paris in to flaunders, scarsely yet come to mans state. In so muche that the Emperour toke it in very euill part, that the Byshop had not sent some man of rype yeares and counsell. What tyme therfore they did consulte of Religion and the Turkish An oratiē or a yeūg Car∣dinall. warre, and Granuellan had spoken his mynde, at the laste the young Cardinall in the presence of the Emperour and king Ferdinando, said his fantasie, inueighing chiefly againste the Lutherianes throughout his whole oration. And amonges many other thinges, he sayd it could not well be discerued, whether were more against Christe, the Prote∣stantes, or the Turkes. For the one of them shewe their crueltie onlye The Prote.  to Turkes. against the body, but the others drawe the soules also into euerlasting perdition. Farnesius had ioyned with hym Marcellus, Ceruinus, by∣shop of Nicastre, as gouernour of all his counselles, who in the same legacie was made Cardinall. This Oration of Farnesius coming a∣broade a fewe monethes after, was set forth in prynte, and Iohn Cal∣uine made a comentary to it, leste any man should mistake it. At this tyme, the Duke of Cleaue came to the Emperour, to be at a point with him for the possession of Gelderlande, but it woulde not be. And therfore returnyng home agayne, he began to consulte with the Frenche kynge. For whan he was out of hope to recouer Millan, the Emperour offering hym suche condicions, as he woulde lyttle haue A priuy ha∣tred of yt frē∣che kynge a∣gainst the Emperour. thought, he tourned his mynde wholly from his frendshyp, yet couert∣ly, and complayned, that he was so farre abused. And than began to mislyke the Constable, whiche had put hym in this great hope, & was the cause that the Emperour passed through Fraunce, and could neuer abyde hym after, where before he did all thynges. When he therfore sought all meanes priuelye, howe to moleste the Emperour; and the Duke of Cleaue was not able to susteyne so great a sute and displea∣sure alone, they beganne to entre into mutuall bandes of amitie. The
Frenche kyng had a nece the lady Iane, daughter to his syster Mar∣garete Quene of Nauarre, of eleuen yeares of age, the greatest in∣heriter in all Fraunce, both of an excellent beaultie, and well brought vp, vnto whose frendes the kyng made sute, & especially to the Quene his sister, that she myght be maried to the Duke of Cleaue, & brought The Duke of Cleaue ioyned with the Frenche kynge. it to passe, as shalbe recited in his place. At this tyme dyd the Byshop of Rome warre vpon the Perusians, for that they refused to pay a cer∣ten custome for salte and other thynges that he had reysed vpon them. And so brought the citie vnder his iurisdiction. And for a like cause ex∣pulsed Ascanius, a man of great power, of the house of Columnois, out The Pope warreth vpō ye Perusiās. of all his dominions. The Cardinall Farnesius, hauing done his com∣mission, seyng the peace did not take effecte betwixt the Emperour & the Frenche kyng. And also vnknowen to hym, a daye was assigned at Hagenaw for the Protestauntes to decide their cause in, he depar∣ted out of Flaūders, & came to Paris about the Ides of May. And at the feaste of Pentecoste in the Cathedral churche there, he consecrated Anthony, Uncle to madame Destampes, the kynges darlinge, Cardi∣nall of Medone, setting vpon his head a purple hatte, latelye brought from Rome. And salutyng the kyng by the waye, he goeth with great spede to Rome. Afterwarde kyng Ferdinando toke his iourney from Brusselles, to goe to the assemblie at Hagenaw, for it could not be hol¦den at Spyres, by reason of the plague. Unto this assemblie the Frē∣che kyng also sente Lazarus Baysius, by the aduyse of the Emperour for eyther of them dissembled theyr grief, and the matter was hetherto handled with flatteryng wordes. And the first daye of Iune the kyng of Fraunce set forth a sore proclamation against the sowers abroade of Heresie and the false doctrine of Luther and his companions. And the twelfthe daye after the same was imprinted and proclaimed at Pa∣ris. Aboute this tyme the kynge of Englande beheaded the Lorde Cromwell, whome he had from lowe degree auaunced to hyghe dig∣nitie The Lorde Crumwell beheaded. and a little before made Erle of Essex, he forsaketh the lady Anne of Cleaue, and marrieth Catherine Hawarde Nece to the Duke of Norfolke. The Lord Cromwell was the maker of the marriage with the house of Cleaue. And where after the kynge loued Hawarde, he The kynge marieth Ka∣therine Ha∣warde. was thought to be perswaded by hir, that Cromwel, whom she iud∣ged be a lette vnto her matters, might be dispatched out of the waye. He was a man also not wellbeloued of the Nobilitie, and was suspec∣ted, as though he should seke the distruction of the Papistes. In the meane tyme the Duke of Brunswicke, accused moste heinously boeth the other Protestantes, and chiefly Henry the Duke of Saxony, that The Duke of Brūswik accused the Protestaun. contrary to the wyl of his Brother George, and condition expressed in his Testament, he had altered the state of Religion, that he molesteth the Byshoppes of Merseburge, and Misene, in their iurisdiction. And
that he kept to hym selfe the money that his brother lefte to the vse of the league, to the some of .lx. thousande crownes. Wherfore he admo∣nyshed the Emperour, to compell hym to doe his dutie, whiche if he shall refuse, to dispossesse hym of the inheritaunce, after the fourme of the wyll. And he wrought not this alone, albeit he was principal, but certen others also of the same confederacie. Nowe wyll I speake of the assemblie at Hagenaw, whiche began the fyue and twenty daye of Iune. When kynge, Ferdinando was The assem∣ble of Hage∣nawe. come thether a moneth before. A fewe dayes before the cōmencement, the Protestauntes had spoken to the Palsgraue, to the Archebyshops of Collon and Treuers, to Ericus, Duke of Brunswick, and to the by¦shops of Ausburge and of Spyres, euerye man seuerallye at his owne house, that they would entreate the peace. Ferdinando therfore at the forsayde daye, callyng the Protestauntes before hym, declareth vnto them the cause of that assemblye. And because the Prynces came not them selues, whiche the Emperour thought verely they woulde haue done, he wylleth them to she we their commission and aucthoritie. Af∣ter he nameth intercessours Lewys the Paulsgraue, Iohn Archeby∣shop of Treuers, Lewys Duke of Bauier, and William Byshop of Strasborough. When they were contente with them, they beganne the treaty. Thether came also the diuines of the Protestantes, a great number, Iustus Menius, Pistorius, Urbanus Regius, Bucer, Bren∣tius, Blanrer, Osiander, Shirepsius and many others. Melanchthō fell sore sycke by the waye. These preached at home euery man to their company, but chiefly what tyme al the Ambassadours mette together to consulte vpon any matter. But Ferdinando whan he vnderstoode it, forbade them: the Ambassadours agayne shewed hym, howe they Preachyngs forbydden. preached not openly, but only priuatly, neyther was there anye cause why he should be offended. The Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, were about to come, in case the talke had gone forwarde, and taried vpon the frōtiers, to the entent that hearing newes therof, they might haue bene there by and by. The intercessours requyre the Protestātes to deliuer them in a brief somme the Articles that are in controuersy, they say, how they did exhibite the somme and confession of their doc∣trine ten yeares synce at Auspurge, & an Apologie to the same, whiche they sticke vnto, and to none other beyng ready to make aunswere, if any man fynde lacke therin. And for because they knowe not what thynge chiefly their aduersaries do reprehende therin, they haue no∣thyng to exhibyte, but the same is rather to be requyred at their hādes to shewe what they suppose to be contrary to Gods worde: Whiche if they doe, and that the matter come to disputation, as was thoughte mete at Franckefurte, they wyll not be against a cōcorde. They shew them againe within a fewe dayes after, that forasmuche as they dwel
styll in their confession exhibited at Auspurge, they doe fynde in rea∣dinge of the treaty there, that certen thinges were brought to a conci∣liation, and certen not. Nowe that the reste also myght come to a re∣concilement, they wyll doe their endeuours, and desyre them to vtter their myndes herein. The Protestauntes agayne saye, that there was in dede a talke of certen Articles, but nothyng concluded, nor anye a∣grement at al made there. Thus the matter being debated to and fro, where the Protestauntes requyred that they myght come to disputa∣tion, and they againe sayd, howe it was cōmaunded them by the king and the Emperour, that they should procede accordinge to the treaty at Auspurge. Kyng Ferdinando the .xvi. daye of Iuly, callyng them al Ferdinādos request. before hym, forasmuche sayth he, as the matter standeth thus, that no∣thyng can nowe be determined, and that chiefly for the absence of the Duke of Saxō & the Lātgraue, an other day must be appointed, wher in the Ambassadours & learned men of both partes shall mete of lyke number, to conferre of the Articles professed at Auspurge. And than after a longe controuersie betwyxt the kyng and the Protestauntes, for the peace of them and all their confederatours, about the restitu∣tion of churche goodes, and the iudges of the chamber, Ferdinando the .xxviij. daye of Iuly maketh a decree, and reciting the whole mat∣ter, The decree of Hagenaw appoynted the day for a cōmunication to be at Wormes the. xxviij daye of October, vpon condicion that the Emperour be so content. The Prynces Electours, the Dukes of Bauier, and the Duke of Cleaue, and the byshoppes of Madenburge, Salisburge, and Stras∣burge, are commaunded to sende thether their counsellours, and the Protestauntes also theirs, so that there be eleuen on eyther part. And also as many Scribes, to wryte diligently what euery man sayeth, & the conference to be had of the Protestantes doctrine professed at Aus∣purge, and that request be made to the Emperour, that he wyll call a counsell of the Empyre. And in the meane tyme he commaundeth all men to obserue peace, and abstayne from violence, vnder a great pe∣naltie, appointed by the Emperours commaundemēt. Prynces before mentioned at this assemblie were Christopher the byshop of Trent, & Henry Duke of Brūswycke, but he went home before the matter was ended. The greatest peace makers in this assemblie were the byshop of Collon, and the Paulsgraue Electours, and also the byshop of Aus∣purge: For all the reste were extreme agaynst the Protestauntes. Duryng this assemblie, died Iohn Uaiuode kyng of Hōgary, leauing The death of Iohn Uay¦uode king of Hungary. behinde hym a younge sonne, Stephen whome Isabell daughter to Sigismunde kyng of Pole, had borne hym a lytle before, whiche was a cause also, that kyng Ferdinādo beyng aduertysed therof by letters, hasted homewarde. About this time also were certen townes and villages of the Pro∣testantes
set on fyre in Saxony & there aboutes, and burnt vp cleane. This wicked acte, was sayde to be done by the Duke of Brunswyck, Fyres in Saxony. as shalbe declared hereafter. The seconde kalendes of Iuly, Robert Barnes, Doctour of Diuinitie was brent at London in Smithfield. He was for a certen tyme fled out of Englande for the doctrine of the Doctor Ber∣nes burnt in Smithfielde Gospell, and what tyme he vnderstode, howe kynge Henry gaue his mynde to the knowledge of the truthe, he retourned home agayn, and was after in the Ambassade sent into Germany, and was one of them whiche treated with the diuines at Wittēberge, touching the kinges diuorsement, as is wrytten in the tenth boke. But where as the kyng had exiled the name of the byshop of Rome, but kept styl his doctrine, this man whiche loued the truthe, was chieflye by the meanes of the byshop of Wynchester, this daye executed, after he had protested hys fayth openly there in the place of execution. And with hym also were Thre Prot. burnt, and thre Papi∣stes hanged all at one tyme. brent two others of the same Religion. And the same daye in the selfe same place were three others hanged vpon the Gallowes, that helde with the supremacie of the byshop of Rome, so yt neyther rāke Papists nor ernest Protestauntes escaped punishement. In the moneth of Au∣gust, ended his lyfe at Paris Williā Budey, maister of the requestes, a man of great learning, and worthy to be had in perpetuall memory, The death of Budey. for this cause only, that he and Cardinal Bellaye, byshop of Paris, did counsell and perswade Fraunces the Frenche kyng, to do a moste no∣ble acte, that is to appoint great stipendes, for the readers of tongues and good artes at Paris. For out of this welspryng, no mā can beleue what clere and plentiful ryuers flowe out, not only into Fraunce, but also into other countreis. The lyke hath Henry the eight done in Eng∣lande both in Cambridge and Oxforde. And Buden would be buried without any solemnitie. This yeare was notable by reason of an intol¦lerable heate and drought: Than also was excellent good wyne. In An erceadig hote sōmer. the meane tyme the kyng of Fraunce, dispatchyng abroade his letters to all his byshoppes, commaunded them to go a procession in all pla∣ces. For albeit he had peace with the Emperour, whiche he would not willingly breake, yet feared he greatly leste the olde enemye of man∣kynde, would styre vp warre by his ministers or euer it were longe. The Emperour being aduertised by the letters of his brother Ferdi∣nando and the intercessours of the whole matter, cōfirmeth the decree of Hagenawe. And wryting his letters from Utrecht at the Ides of August, exhorteth the Protestauntes to sende their Ambassadours & diuines to Wormes at the daye assigned, and sendeth saufe conduicte for them all. And because of his affayres he can not be there hym selfe, he sayeth he wyll sende thether some notable man of his: And he doub¦teth not, but the byshop wyl sende thether also to quiet the cōtrouersy.
He promiseth moreouer an assemblie of thempire, whither he will come in parson, vnto the which assemblie also, the summe of this talke must be referred. Afterwardes at the Ides of Octob. in other letters, dated at Brus∣sels: he maketh Granvellan his deputie, giuing him full authoritie at the communication to be had. That time was Granvellā at Bizanse, in highe Burgundie, the towne where he was borne. And beynge so occupied with other affayres, that he coulde not come thither by the day, writyng his letters to the Archebishop of Mentz, and to the resi∣dew of the Princes, appointed to this talke, the seconde daye of No∣uembre, he sendeth before Iohn Nauie of Lucemburge, to excuse hys longe tariyng: For after he had wronge oute Mathew Helde (as is before said) he called forth this man, as more obsequious and agreable to his maners, and placed him in his rome. In the meane time them∣perour Nauius hath the place of Hel¦dus. calleth a counsell of thempire, that in the moneth of Ianuary, they should al be ready at Regenspurge. After whan Granvellan him selfe came to Wormes, accompanied with his sonne the Bishoppe of Arras, and certen Diuines of Spaine, Muscosa, Maluenda, Carro∣bello, shewing fyrste his commission, and the Emperours letters, the xxv. daye of Nouembre he made an Oration. And excusynge the mat∣ter, that neither themperour, nor king Ferdinando were there, he de∣clareth The oratiō of Granvel∣lan at Wor. the louing and frendly minde that themperour beareth to the common wealth, who wisheth for nothing more earnestly, than that this olde feastred strife might be taken awaye, wherewith not onely the Church, but also the common wealth is sore afflicted: For he doub¦teth not, but they them selues see the present calamitie, and wil iudge that a reformation of the Churche is necessary: Therfore can there no∣thing concerne their dewties more, than throughe godly counsels to remedy this euill, that it spread abrode no further: For in like case, as it is the part of good Citezins, to quenche the fyre that happeneth by casualtie: so must you do for all the worlde in this case, that peace and concorde may be restored. Furthermore, let them wet with them sel∣ues, and set before their eies, what an heape of euilles haue throughe this dissention, as it were, ouerflowed Germany: For to passe ouer murther and mischief, religion is destroyed, Charitie out of men herts The euils that cōmeth of the discen∣tion in Reli¦gion. cleane quenched, all reuerence of the olde Catholike churche taken a∣way: finally, the great misery can not be sufficientlye expressed by any mans eloquence: In times past Germany hath florished both in Reli∣on, and in all kinde of vertu, but nowe it hath very muche degenera∣ted And is accompted the cause and author of all the discommodities of the vniuersall commune weale. And vnlesse a remedye be founds for this disease, all thinges will go to ruine. And for asmuche as them∣peror,
hathe appoynted thys disputation, to thentente that bothe the truth myght be searched out, & gods glory auaunced, they must bring with them a mynd neyther ambitious nor couetous, but godly & mo∣derat, hauing only a regarde vnto Chryst, who now with his armes stretched foorthe as he wold imbrace, desyreth the same of all menne: This is also the only wish of the high bishop, of themperour most Au∣gust & of king Ferdinando: Therfore he besecheth them, for the death of Christ, & for all loues, that they woulde amende oure lordes coate, which is rent & torne on euery syde, remembryng the name of Christ, which was geuen them in holy baptisme, remembring also the noble prouince of Germany, the natife countrey of them all: For except they be reconsyled, it is to be ascribed vnto them, what mischiefe some euer shall arryse hereafter, of this theyr obstioate mynde: but yf they wyll handle so weyghty a matter with modestie & sobrietie, the same shal∣be bothe to God most acceptable, and themperour will also accepte it in steade of a very greate benefyte: who wyll afterward do his ende∣uour, that in the nexte assemblie of thempire, the matter shalbe wholy accomplisshed. After the death of Uayuod, the tutours and rest of the nobles sent ambassadours to the Turke to commend the childe vnto The Turke receiueth the infant of Uayuode. hym: who promiseth to defend him, and with all sendeth hym giftes. Fernando also, when he knew therof, sēdeth Hierosme Lascie which certen yeres past had forsaken the Uaynode, from Hagenaw to Con∣stantinople, that by a fit man he myght appease the Turke. After whē he came home, he thought it best to make warre before the Quene be∣yng a wydow, and the tutours of the infante were furnished. Which knowen, the Turke throweth hys Ambassadoure in pryson, as moste priuie of Farnando his counsel, and also sendeth ayde, who not with∣standing Lascus com∣mitted to pri¦sed. being letted by reason of the winter, came somwhat to late, The nexte daye after that Granuellan had hys oration, They beegan to deuyse of the notaryes and scribes, and on eyther syde were chosen two, whyche shoulde penne, and kepe althynges diligentelye. By the Protestantes were assygned, Caspar Cruciger, & Woolfangus Mus∣culus, diuines. After the eyght daye yf December, Thomas Campe∣gius, Bisshop of Feltre, the Roomisshe Legate, had an oration, in the preface wherof speakyng many thynges concernyng peace, whych is so greately commended vnto vs of Chryst, lamentyng also the state of Germany, affyrmeth that serten bisshops of rome, but especially paule the thyrde, haue done what they can, to put of this calamitie from it, and for the same cause of late, called a counsell at Uicence, but when certen monethes passed, and no man came, he was constreined to dif∣ferre it tyll an other tyme: but themperoure whyche is that eldest and obedient childe of the churche of Roome, the Protectour also and the aduocate, hathe appoynted this conference, as a certen preparatiue,
to the treatye that shalbe at Regenspurge: by whose wyll and assent, and by the Byshops cōmaundement, he is coomen thither to intreat them that they would applye theyr whole endeuours to vnitie & con∣corde for sertaynly the bishop of Rome will do herein what he can, sa∣uing his holines. The presidents of this assemblie toke order at the be¦ginning, that no man should be made priuie to theire talke, vnlesse he be of the nomber appoynted, and that the actes therof should not bee published, till themperoure wer first aduertised of all together: more∣ouer, they required that the Protestantes would comprise, & exhibite in wryting, such articles as they wer fully resolued to sticke vnto. Of these matters & of the maner of the othe, of the nōber also of the dispu∣ters, and of geuing of voyces, they had a longe altercation: For when the catholickes perceyued that the counsellours of the Paulsgraue & the Marques of Brādenburg electours, & also of the Duke of Cleaue were inclined towardes the Protestants, fearing lest they shoulde be ouer coōmen with voices, of a set pourpose differred the matter from day to day, tyll such tyme as they had other worde from themperour The papists seke delayes as herafter I shall declare. And the second daye of Ianuary, they doe propounde new and straunge condicyons, that of the whole nomber ther should be chosē two diuines to reason the matter: that the scribes should wryte theyr argumentes, and delyuer them to the presydentes that the lesse parte shoulde not bee bounden to followe the opinion of the greater, vnlesse themperoure and the states of thempyre shoulde thynke it expediente: that the notaryes shoulde not write all the talke of the reasoners, but the bare sentences, whether they wer agreed vp∣on or left in controuersie: that the decree of Auspurge, and such other lyke, shoulde neuertheles be of force. But the Protestantes agayn re∣quire, that forasmuche as ther bee .xxii. on bothe partes appoynted to conferre: euery man mighte speake hys mynde. And that not only the bare sentences, but also the Argumentes and reasons, with the proba∣tions of the same be committed to wrytyng. They declare also that it is vnreasonable in this most holy cause of al others, to follow the opi∣nion of any part, & not rather the prescripte of gods worde, or to com∣pell any man, that he shoulde eyther thynke or speake against it. Whi∣lest the time was thus prolonged, the Protestantes oftētimes cōplain thereof and desire, that the disputation of the doctrine propounded at Auspurge, may accordinge to the decree of Hagenawe, be forthewith commenced, especially consyderyng the same to be a frendly discepta∣tion and not captious, to thentent a certen way vnto concorde might be prepared. The diuines also which were there very many, required the same, as Melancthon, Capito, Bucer, Osiander, Brentius, Cal∣uine, Alesius, a Scot sent thither by the marques of Brandenburge & diuers others, vnto whom wer annexed, Symon Grineus, and Iohn
Sturmius. At the last aboute the Ides of Ianuary, the catholickes choose Iohn Eekius, and thothers Melancthon, to dispute together. A disputati∣on betwixte Eekius and Melancton. And first of all to thentent they might procede in order, they Reason of originall synne, by course, in open consistory: but beholde, the thirde day after the disputation began Themperours letters wer brought to Granuellan and to the rest of Ambassadours, wherin he differreth the whole matter vntill the assemble at Regenspurge, commaunding chiefly the Protestantes to come thither, & Granuellan to repare vn∣to hym with all syede. These letters beyng red in the consistorie, the xviii. daye of Ianuary, Granuellan, exhorteth them, to obey thempe∣roure, and come vnto Regenspurge: for he is very desyrous of peace: And yf he him self by occasion of talke hath spoken any thyng rough∣ly, he desyreth them not to take it in euell part, and promiseth to beare hys good wyll towards the publyke weale. Whereunto the Protes∣tantes say, how they are ryght sory, that the disputation had not begō a great whyle souner, and that they cānot now procede further ther∣in but for asmuch as themperour doeth so commaund, they must obey Wherfore they wyll now retourn home, to declare howe all thinges stande, and doubte not, but their Princes and cities will gratifye thē∣perour herin: Notwithstandyng in case it be longe or euer they come or sende, they ar to be holden excused, by reason the time is but shorte. In thys assemble, was also Peter Paul Uerger, bishop of Iustinople in worde, as for the Frenche kyng, but sent in dede by the Bishop of The oratiō of Uergeri∣vs. Roome, who supposed that he myght serue hys tourne better, beynge there in another mans name, he made an oration of the vnitie & peace of the churche, and settyng it foorthe in prynte, he gaue it there to dy∣uers. Wherein he goeth about chiefly to proue that we maye not ones thynke vpon a counsell prouinciall, for that same Assembly dyd repre∣sente a certen shew of the lyke thyng, and semed to prepare the waye: for the Byshop coulde abyde nothynge worse, and Uergerius knewe hys mynde full well. By hym therefore, and by suche others of the bis∣shops ministers, the thynge was letted and at the lengthe dyssolued. For in tractyng of the tyme, & fyndyng of delayes, they seeke startyng holles, and wayes to escape. In the begynnyng of Ianuary thempe∣roure takyng hys Iorney from Brussels, came vnto Mentz, the head citie of Lorayne, from thence by Spires he goeth to Regenspurge, & by the way sent those for sayd letters to Grāuellā, he traueled by Nor∣inberge, whiche citie he had not sene before, and was receyued with moste sumptuous preparation. The eleuenth day of Februarye Phi∣lyp Schabotte Admirall of Fraunce, a man of great honour, beyng, brought into suspicion with the kynge for not acquitinge himselfe in The admi∣ral of fraūce condemned. the warre of Sauoye beefore mentyoned, after longe and mooche inquisityon of hys demeanoure, was condemned of extortyon, and
treason, and depriued of al his honour & dignities, which he had most ample, without all hope of restitution, and was committed to prison at Uincen, not farre frō Paris. William Poiet Chaūcelor of Fraūce gaue this sentence at Mellon, at the which Iudgement were all the notable men, and Iudges in the lawe, in all Fraunce. Albeit that sen¦tences geuen after this sort, are wont euer to be dissolued or altered, yet by the kynges authoritie not longe after he was cleane released, as ye shall heare afterwardes. About this time also Maurice the son of Henry Duke of Saxonie, maried Agnes, daughter to the Lantz∣graue. In the moneth of Marche diuers Princes and states resorted A greate as∣semble at Regēspurg. to Regenspurge, when themperor had taried for them a certen space. Thither came also the Lantzgraue, with a great company, almost at¦thende of Marche. And the nexte daye wente to themperor with his garde about him, of whom he was receiued right gentlye. The duke of Saxonie sent thither a most honorable Ambassador, and Diuines among whom was Melanchton. From the Bishoppe of Rome also came Caspar Contarene, a right famous Cardinall. There were pre∣sent, the prince Elector of Brandenburg, Friderick and Otto Henry, Paulsegraues, William and Lewis dukes of Bauier, Henry duke of Brunswike, Charles duke of Sauoie, George marques of Branden∣burge, Philip Duke of Pomerane, moreouer the Bishops of Mentz, Salisburg, Breme, Bamberg, Spires, Auspurge, Eistet, Constance, Luthers boke agaist the Duke of Brunswick. Hildessene, Brixie & Passaw. Aboute this time came forth (and was brought to Regenspurge) a boke of Martin Luthers very vehement written in the vulgare tounge against the Duke of Brunswycke. In the last boke before this, I mētioned of this dukes inuectiues against the Duke of Saxon, and the Lantzgraue: And where in a booke set forth of late, he called the Duke of Saxō Heretike, rebel, Cain, Mon∣ster, Eesope, hauing nether vertu, or qualitie of body, nor yet of mind, whom Luther also him selfe (whom he maketh his god) doth laughe at and contemne. Luther thinking the same to concerne his estema∣tion, answereth sharpely, and saieth it is a sclaunder. And for asmuch as the aduersaryes take vpon them the title of the Churche, by diuers and sundry argumentes brought in, he proueth that they haue cleane forsaken the trew Church, & by a comparison made, he sheweth that the Bishoprike of Rome, which hathe altogether defyled and corrup∣ted the trew doctryne of Chryst, to be Antechrist, of whom so manye yeares synce Daniell and the Apostles haue prophecyed. After he ob∣iecteth vnto them, that they flye from the lyght, & though they speake muche of a lawfull counsell yet dare they not abyde it, but yf youre church be holy, (sayth he) why is it afearde of a counsell, or what ne∣deth it any reformation? or yf it nedeth, why cal ye it holy? will ye also redresse youre holynes.
We neuer desyred a counsell to refourme our churche: For God hathe already sanctified it with his worde, pourged it from all the Romishe fylthynes, and restored the trew doctrine: howbeit our life doeth not answere to this profession, neither do we perfourme in dede so muche as both we are bounden and wishe to do: but this was also the com∣plaint of the Prophetes and Apostles whilest they liued. And that fe∣licitie shal than happen vnto vs, what timr we being deliuered out of this synfull body, as out of a prison, shall obtaine the like condition wt Angels. We desyre a counsell, to thentēt our churches might be open∣ly Why the Protest. de∣syre a coun∣sell. heard, and that your doctrine, contrary to the doctrine of Christe, might be condemned, that men beyng called agayne from it, mighte knowe and folow the trewe Religion of Christ: Nowe where ye ob∣iecte vntd vs rebelliō and disobedience, it is false, euen by the testimo∣nie of the states imperiall: who know that our Princes are obeidient to themperour in all thinges: For beyng called to any Assemblie, or to go a warfare, they haue bene euermore ready: But if ye raile thus on vs because we obey not thēperours decres that condēne our doctrin: We are glad and geue God thankes, for shewing no obeidience that way. For the thing that is dew vnto god only, ought not to be giuen to themperor, which should be Gods Client. God hath giuen him go∣uernement Themperor Gods client. ouer realmes and nations, but he alone will gouerne his church with his worde, neyther doeth he admit any man into the so∣cietie of this honor. Themperor hath more than ynough to do, concer∣nyng thadministration of the common weale. For vnto this office hath God appointed him, and prescribed him these limites. But if he procede any further, than doeth he inuade and vsurpe vpon Gods iu∣risdiction. The Duke of Brunswike had written in his inuectiues a∣monges other thinges, that Luther had reised vp this Tragedye of Religion, at the motion of Duke Friderik, for enuy that Albert Arch bishop of Mentz had the Bishoprike of Madenburge. Wherunto Lu¦ther answerynge, this sclaunder (saieth he) commeth to the Duke of Brunswicke by the suggestion of Mentz: And where he dissembleth to know, whan he knoweth best of all, I shall declare the cause & ori∣ginal of al this busines. In the seuentēth yere of grace aboue a thou∣sande What mo∣ued Luth. to writ against the papistes. and fyue hundreth. Iohn Tecell, a Dominicke Frere, caried a∣bout pardons to sell in Germany. This Tecel themperor Maximiliā had once condemned to die, and had commaunded to be drowned in the riuer at Inspruck, but through the intercession of duke Friderick, whose chaunce was to be there at that time, he escaped the daunger. He (I say) amonges other thinges taught, howe he had so great au∣thoritie of yt bishop of Rome, yt although a mā had deflowred yt virgin Mary, & had gottē hir wt child, he had power to forgeue hī for money.
Moreouer he did not onely forgeue synnes past, but also what so euer a man listed to commit herafter. And within a while after that, came The blasphe¦mie of frere Tecell. forth a Boke with the armes and title of Bishop Albert: wherein the Pardoners wer cōmaunded, most diligently to setforth to the people the vertu of those iudulgences. Wherfore it was knowen that Tecell was hired by the said Bishoppe to make those outrageous sermons. For Albert was lately than created Archbishop of Mentz, vpon con∣dicion, that he shoulde redeme his Palle from Rome of his owne co∣stes A most costly stole or palle and charges. For thre Bishoppes of that citie wer deceased with∣in short space, Bertolde, Iames, and Uriell, and it was ouer charge∣able for the Colledge to beare so great a burthen, and so often times. For that Palle stoode them in as good as xxx. thousande crownes or euer it came at home. So dere coulde the Bishoppe of Rome sell a so∣ry piece of clothe: This money had the Marchantes of Auspurge dis∣bursed: A meane to get money by pardons. wherfore to pay them, Albert deuised this kinde of gaine. And the Bishop did graunt it him, yet so, as the one halfe shold be brought to Rome, to the buildyng of S. Peters Church. But that time knew I none of all this gere: therfore wrot I to the Bishoppe of Mentz, in humble wyse, exhorting him that he woulde inhibite those criers: but he answered not one worde. The Bishoppe of Brandenburge beyng also moued, admonished me to cease, and not to bring my selfe in dan∣ger. After this I propounded certen Theames, contrary to those of Tecels, which within a fewe dayes were caried ouer all Germany, and were gredely red of many: For all men complained of Pardons especially of those that Tecell taught. And because there was neuer a Bishoppe, nor yet doctor that durst gainesay them, for that Tecel fea∣red all men with the Bishoppes thunderbolt. My name began to be spoken of, that there was founde one at the length in all the worlde, that did resist. But that vaine glory was not to me verye pleasaunte. For I scarsely vnderstode than, what the name of Indulgences mēt. This is the fyrst originall and cause of this motion, whiche came not of duke Friderick, but proceded of the Bishop of Mentz, by the prac∣tise of his collector and briber Frere Tecell: Wherfore if there be anye thing nowe that nippeth him, let him thanke himselfe therfore. An o∣ther cause of this trouble gaue that moste holye father, Leo the tenth, what time he cursed me, and excommunicated me, and manye in all places did triumphe ouer me, neyther was there anye man so vnlear∣ned, Luther is cursed of the Pope. that did not practise his style to write against me. I thought as∣suredly at the fyrst, that the Bishoppe would assoile me, and condem∣ne Tecell, for that the Canon lawe maketh for me, whiche teacheth plainely, that Iudulgences can not deliuer soules out of Purgatory: But lo, whilest I loke for a ioyfull sentence from Rome, I am striken with the thonderbolt, and condemned for the most wicked mā aliue.
Than began I to defende my doynges, settinge forth many bokes of the same, insomuche that the matter was brought at the laste into the assemblie of thempire. Thus did the wollen threde, wherof the Palle was made, breede matter of contention. And nowe is the same so fast A wollē hal∣ter to stran∣gle the pope wrought, and of suche strength, that the Bishoppe of Rome is in daū¦ger, to be strangled withall. And seyng it is so, let thē impute the fault to them selues, which so impudently and excessiuely handled the mat¦ter. I maye well laughe in my sleue: For he that dwelleth in heauen hath strikē them, and would not suffer so great wickednes to raigne any longer, and hath brought his people out of yt darkenes of Egipte, into the most cleare light and pleasant syght of the sonne. This Palle so often here mentioned, is geuen onely to Archbishops, and as a syn∣gular benefite, to a fewe other Bishoppes, of the whiche numbre the Bishop of Bamberge in Germany is one. And it is made with thys The maner of makynge this Palle. Ceremonie. In the Feast of S. Agnes the Uirgyn, whiche is the xxi. day of Ianuary, what time they come to Agnus dei in the Messe, two white Lambes are, laide vpon the Aultar, which afterwarde are de∣liuered to the Subdeacon of S. Peters churche. And they put them forth to pasture, and whan shering time commeth, do clippe them, of the which Woll mingled with other woll, whan it is sponne into fine threde, are made these Palles, which are not past three fingers brode and hange downe from the shoulders to the midde breast, and to the Reines of the backe, like a stoale: and at eche ende, are thinne plats of leade of the same breadth. Beyng thus wouen and wrought, they are caried to the bodies of Peter and Paule, and there certen prayers be¦yng said ouer them, they are left there al that night. The next day the subdeacons receaue them againe, and keps them diligently, vntil such time as some Archbishoppe that hathe nede of one, or his Proctor do sue for it. And than it is deliuered with many ceremonies, & they that haue the cariage therof are inioyned, that they remaine not aboue one night in a place. This ware whiche is neither costely, nor curiouslye wrought, do the Archebishoppes redeme of the Bishoppe of Rome for a wonderfull some of money. For it is not lawefull for him to weare the same that his predecessor did, but euery one of them is bounden to purchase a newe for him selfe at Rome: Againe in case he become Pa∣triache, or Metropolitan of another churche, throughe promutation, or any other meane, althoughe he had bought one before, yet must he of necessitie bie another againe. Of suche kinde of pillage, greate com∣plaintes Complaints of pillage. haue bene often made of all nations, as I shewed you in the fourth boke, but chiefly in Germany. And in the yeare of our Lorde, a thousande fyue hundreth & xviii. what tyme Leo the tenth in the assemblie of Auspurge, by Cardinall Caietan exhorted Maximilian and the Princes to the Turkish war,
and went about that all states should pay money, and the Cleargye for theyr partes, the tenthes: Answer was made him, yt there was no hope, to obteine that of thecclesiasticall persons, who were so manye waies, and by newe policies pilled, and poled by the courte of Rome: And the people, if anye thinge shoulde be imposed, woulde make great exclamations, that they haue so oft geuen theyr money for thys These Fye∣res were set on by the duke of Brū¦swike. purpose, and maruell how it is consumed, or whither that money go∣eth, that is gathered yearly in Germany. I tolde you before of sundry fyers, that were kindled of late in Saxonie: Whan diuerse of the ma¦lefactours were apprehended and taken in sundry places, and exami∣nation had, they testified, howe they were hired for money, by the cap¦taines and officers of Henry duke of Brunswike, and set on by them to do it. And this they affirmed to the last breth. For this cause there∣fore, and for other matters, the Lantzgraue, and thambassadours of Saxonie, accuse the duke of Brunswicke to the Emperor at Regen∣spurge, and exhibite in writyng the seuerall confession of euery one of these make fyers. And ioinetly with them, did William of Brunswik accuse his brother Henry sore, who had kept him many yeares in pry∣son. Whan all the most part were commen together, they began to sit the fyft day of Aprill. And in thēperours name, as the maner is, was propounded, what trauaile and paine he had alwayes takē, that the The treatie of Regens∣purge publike weale might be well established. And after a longe discourse of all that he had done, aswell for the appeasynge of the controuersye that is, in Religion, and reformation of the churche, as also for the de∣fence of thempyre against the cruell inuasions of the Turkes. In fine themperor demaunded of them all, but chiefly of the Protestauntes, that they would geue him leaue to chose out certeine to conferre, and herein to trust him, who will do nothing that shall not concerne the preseruation of the countrey. Whan they had this graunted him, the xiij day of Aprill, he appointeth, by Friderike the Paulsgraue, to thys The chosen by themp. talke, Iulius Pflugius, Iohn Eckius, Iohn Gropper, Philippe Me lanchton, Martin Bucer, Iohn Pistor, that they should treate of the oppinions that be in controuersie, and after make reporte and bringe them to him and the princes. Againe the two and twentie daye of A∣prill, he calleth them vnto him, and gyueth them a great charge, that in the handling of this matter, they should giue nothing to affections but that all pertialitie set apart, they should onely haue respecte vnto Gods glory. They full modestly do excuse themselues, and require al, that other more mete, might be appointed, sauing Eckius: For he said The rash∣nes of Ecki∣us. he was well prepared and fournished: but where themperor dyd in∣stant them to take it vpon them, they were content, and also intreate him, that he would assigne some to be as presidentes of the disputati∣on
& others to bee as witnesses and hearers of the matter. And so he commaundeth Fridericke Palatine and Granuellan to bee as go∣vernours: and willeth Theodorycke Countie Manderschit, Eber∣hart Ruden, Henry Hasie, Fraunces Burcarte, Iohn Figius, Iames Sturmins, to be there, to beare witnes. And when all these came to∣gether, the, xxvii. day of April, Fridericke the Palsgraue admonisheth the Collocutours that they should seriously go to the matter and con∣ferre together frendly. After Granuellan exhibiteth a booke written A boke pre∣sented to the Collocu∣tours. which he sayd was delyuered to themperour of certayne good & well learned men, as fit for a reconcilement: and that themperour woulde to thentent they might haue a lawful argument, and matter to treat of, that they shoulde reade ouer the same booke also, and waye it, and looke what they shoulde all allow therein, to commende, and The contēts of the boke. the rest to correcte. This booke contayned these articles following, of the creation of man, and before the fall, of the integritie of nature, of freewill, of the cause of synne, of originall synne, of the iustification of man, of the church, and of the tokens and authoritie of the same, of the notise of the woorde, of repentaunce after the fal, of the authoritie of the churche, in discerning and interpretyng the scripture, of the sa∣cramentes, of order, baptesme, confirmyng, of the lordes supper of pe∣naunce, absolution, matrimony, vnction, of the bond of charitie, of the dignitie of the churche, and of the authoritie to establishe the weale publicke, of images, masse, and ministration of the sacramentes, of the discipline of the churche, bothe for the ministers, and the people. In The Pro∣testantes let¦ters to the Frēch king for suche as wer persecu∣ted for the gospell. the moneth of May, the Protestantes wryting their letters frō Re∣genspurg to the Frenche kynge, entreate for such as at the same tyme in Fraunce, for the profession of the gospell, wer partly in prison, part∣ly in exile, partly hyd in corners, and led a miserable lyfe. And because many were receyued into fauour, incase they woulde abiure, they re∣quire that he woulde release them from that condicyon, declarynge howe heynous a matrer it is to wounde the conscience. The cause of thys persecution; was by a sentence geuen agaynst the Merindolans in the prouince, by the president Bartholomew Chassanie a lawyer, which beyng terrible and cruell beyonde measure, put the poore men in a wonderful feare: not withstanding the full execution therof was differred tyll an other tyme, and the persecution of thys yere was but a balle playe in comparison of that, whiche followed foure yeares af∣ter, as shalbe recited in hys place. Whylest these thynges were done at Regenspurge, the Duke of Cleaue, hauing themperour hys heuye The Duke of Cleaue goeth priue∣ly into Fra∣unce. Lorde, for the possession of Gelderlande, goeth priuely into Fraunce, appoynting such as he would haue with hym, a day and a place wher they going an other way, should mete hym, what tyme, therfore he ar∣ryued at Paris aboute thende of Aprill, being receiued of the kynges
officers and conducted throughe Orleans, the sixte daye of Maye he came to the kyng at Ambose a towne in Turin by the Riuer of Loire who imbracing him none otherwise than the father would his owne sonne, sent word immediatly to the kyng of Nauarre, and hys syster, that they shoulde repayre vnto hym with all expedition, and brynge theyr Daughter with them, for they wer the same time in Gascoigne. And after they wer coommen, the kyng by and by began to entreate of the maryage: And albeit the parentes than did not greatly lyke it, and the yonge mayde also was somewhat vnwyllyng, not somoch of her owne iudgement, or contempte of hym, as by the whispering and perswasyon of sertayne whych dispysed Germanye, as rude and bar∣ren in comparison of the delycacye and pleasauntenes of, Fraunce, yet vanquished by the kynges authoritye, whiche iudged the same affini∣tie very fit for hys pourpose, at the last they gaue place. Wherfore at the Ides of Iune the maryage was solemnised, the kynge hymselfe The Duke marieth the daughter of Nauarre. leadyng the bryde hys nece to the churche and the Cardinall of Tur∣non played the prest. The kynge gaue them a goodly dyner: And ther were thambassadours of Roome, Englande, Portugall, Uenise and Saxonye: For themperours had made an excuse. After a fewe dayes the Duke retourned homewarde leauing his yong spouse in Fraunce whom her mother woulde haue to remayne with her tyll she wer of rype yeares for a man. Before the Dukeof of Cleaue came into Fraunce the kyng had enlarged the Admirall that we spake of before, and sent hym home to hys owne house, and after in the moneth of May com∣maunded The Admi∣rall restored. hym to come vnto hym, whom receiued most gently, he re∣stored to hys former dignitie and called as it wer out of hel, into light agayne, and after a straung example and seldome heard of, made the sentence geuen agaynst hym, by all the princypal iudges of hys realm cleane frustrate, partlye for hatred of the constable, as it is thoughte, and partly at the requeste of madame Destamps, whych was allyed to the Admirall by a new affinitie: Therfore Memorancie the Coun∣stable, which loued not thadmirall, his egall, and was oute of the The consta∣ble put out of the courte. kynges fauoure, for themperours passage, as before is say∣ed, beyng had in contempt, gotte hym home and led a priuate lyfe, where before he had ruled the Kynge wholye hymselfe alone. (?)
✚ The fourtenth Boke of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concernyng the state of relygion, and the common Weale, duryng the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the fourtenth Booke. IN the processe of the communication, they treated of an order to be establyshed in the churche: sondry aduyses and aunswers bee there gathered. Eckius dispray syng the booke there presen∣ted, accuseth hys fellow collocutours. Themperoure hauing intellygence of the Turkes com∣myng, remitreth thys colloquie to the counsel, Fregose & Rincon thambassadours of the French kynge to the greate Turke, at taken and slayne, Wherupon the Bastarde of Maximilyan is a∣rested, The Turke taketh possession in the cytie of Buda. Thēperoure arryueth at Argiers. The plage is in Germany, and great calamities in Austriche. A supplication of the princes of Austriche to kynge Ferdinando that they myght haue the Gospell: Wherunto he aunswereth. After the o∣uerthrowe in Hongary, an assemblye was holden at Spires, where Oliuier beeing for the French kynge, made a longe Oration. Cardinall Maron the Popes Ambassadour offereth a counsell at Trcent. Luther Wryteth a booke intitled the sermon of Soldiours, comparyng papistry, with the Turkes Alcorane: The warre beyng proclaymed, betwene the Frenche kyng and the Emperour, Marten van Rossem inuadeth Brabante, decrces are made in Fraunce agaynste the Lutheranes. Farell prea∣cheth at Mentz. ABoute the ende of Aprill the disputation The collo∣quie of ler∣ned men at Regtnspurg began as I shewed yon before, but Ecki∣us was vnpatient and froward, for both he abhorred the booke, and mislyked hys fellowes and a lyttell after fell into an a∣gewe, so that he coulde not bee there: yet went his fellowes to him, and conferred with hym of al thynges. And certen pla∣ces of the boke exhibited, were throughe conference amended by common assent, but of some other they coulde not agree, of the churche and authoritie therof, of the sacrament of the body and bloud of Chryst, of the recytall of synnes, of satisfaction, of the vnitie & order of thecclesiastical ministers, of sainctes, of masse, of the vse of the whole sacramente, of the single lyfe. So was the booke deliuered vp to themperoure, as it was corrected, and the Diuines of the Protes∣tantes had written theyr mindes, vpon these forsayd opinions, which were leafte in controuersy, this was the last of Maye. Themperoure commendeth theyr good endeuour, and lyketh it well. And incase the matter herafter do so require, he exhorteth thē to shew the like good∣will and dilygence. Than in the eyght day of Iune, in the consistorie
before the Princes and other states he maketh relation, what hathe ben done, and howe farre they haue proceded: howe the collocutours haue handled the matter dilygentely, and haue reconcyled dyuerse, & weyghty articles of doctryne: And touching the rest, that are not yet agreed vpon, the diuines of the Protestantes, haue opened theyre myndes. After he exibiteth vnto ether of them boothe the wrytinges, requiring them, that so shortly as may bee, they woulde consulte ther∣vpon, and vtter theyr mindes in either of them. And moreouer would consyder, howe the state of the weale publike, as well ciuile, as eccle∣siasticall maye or ought to be reformed: he for hys parte will leaue no∣thyng vndone herein, doubtyng not, but the bishops legate is also in∣clyned to the same. The Senate of Princes consisteth for the moste parte of Bisshops. Therefore the nomber of them preuayled, whyche The worse parte ouer cometh by the nomber of voyces. bothe reiected the booke exibited by themperoure, and also the whole treaty of the collocutours: and the reason therof was cōprised in wri∣ting somewhat extremely: but what tyme the Electours, and certain other prynces, that loued the common wealth, would not assent ther∣to, another wryting was framed and delyuered to themperoure the second day of Iuly, wherin they doo admonyshe hym, that as the ad∣vocate and defendour of the churche, he doe communicate the whole matter with the Bysshops Legate, accordyng to the decree of Hage∣naw, especially those articles, which the collocutours haue agreed vp¦on: and that they bee wayghed dilligentlye, whether there bee anye thynge in them, that eyther in sence or in woordes is agaynst the doc∣tryne of the godly exposytours, or also the custom of the church: more∣ouer incase any thyng be darkely spoken, that it may be declared, and that after that done, he hymself do make reporte to the states of their opinion, and what his mynde is touching the same, and that he wold be in hande with the Protestantes, that they woulde be contented to be instructed in the resydewe of the articles that be in controuersie: or yf that can not be obtayned, that than the matter be referred, either to a generall counsell, or els to a prouinciall Sinode of Germanye. A∣monges the states wer sertayne that hyndred the reformation of Re∣lygion: and it is thought that by their motion, the whole treaty was referred to the Bisshops legate. Themperoure aunswered to the same the .vii. day of Iuly. How he had supposed that the collocutours wold haue vttered theyr myndes more playnly, especially consyderyng that they had the booke so long by them, but for asmoche as they stick here∣in, he wyll follow theyr counsell, and will know the legates mynd in euery poynte, to thentent he will omit nothynge, that conserneth hys dewtie. The Protestantes also declare vnto themperour by wryting what theyr mynde is, and open more at full, the doctryne reconsyled, and shew that it is not harde, to accord the reste in lyke case, and saie:
that they kepe thē selues to their confession at Auspurge. Than tou∣ching the third request of the Emperour, cōcerning the ciuil gouern∣ment Meanes to restore thec∣clesiasticall function. of the cōmen wealth, they say howe the lawes yt were made .xi. yere since at Auspurge, must be put in vre & execution, and shew how thecclesiastical function may be restored if the gospel be taught since∣rely, if according to the aunciēt lawes the ministers of churches may be chosen by the cōsent of the people, if the bishops doe retaine styll in their own hādes the ciuile ministration, & for asmuch as of an old cu∣stome, they them selues neither wil nor can do it they appoint others to execute their spiritual office, & finde them of their reuenewes: if the ministers of the churche may be frely permitted to mary. If yt foule bying & sellyng, whiche is of sondry sortes, & of Simon Magus is cal¦led Simony, may be vtterly taken away, if the goodes may be so dis∣tributed Simons must be takē awaye. as the law made long since prescribe, if chyldrē be brought vp invertue, & in their yougth learne the first principles of the christiā doc¦trine: if notable offēdours be expulsed out of ye cōmuniō of the church, til they come again to amēdement, & that the Magistrate do his duty herein, & abolishe al idolatrie, if thecclesiastical iudgemētes might be had, & as it were censours or maisters of maners apointed, to enquire diligētli of the behauiour of the ministers & people, & of their faultes & vices. Themperour, as I told you before doth cōmunicate the whole matter with the bishops legate, & nd requireth him instantly, that the state of the cōmon wealth, but chiefly of the church, myght be refour∣med. The popes Legate. Wherunto the legate answered, for as muche as the protestātes in certen opinions do swarue from the cōmon consent of the churche, and yet there is some hope that in fine they wil come into the way a∣gaine, he after diligent cōsideration of the whole cause, thinketh mete that there be no further determinatiō made touching any matter, but that the whole treaty be referred to the byshop, who assuredly wyl ei∣ther by a generall counsell, or by some other meane fitte for the tyme, deuyse that thing in this controuersie: that shal profit the whole com∣mon wealth, but chiefly of Germanye. Afterwarde to the intent he might seme to be desirous of a refourmation, he calleth home to hym al the byshops, & there geueth them lessons how they should demeane thē selues in al things, gouerne their families, & haue care of the flock cōmitted to their charge, how they should beware of errours, appoint learned preachers to resiste them, & bestow their benefices vpon mete persones, how they ought to imploy the churche goodes to the vse of the poore, and not to spende thē in riot or in any superfluous vse howe they should se yougth brought vp in good litterature, & knowledge of The diligen∣ce of the pro∣testantes iu teaching of children. tongues, which thing the protestantes do exceadingly, & by yt meanes allure all yougth vnto them, & infecte them with their doctrine, how it is the dutie of the bishops to warne the parētes yt thei sēde not their children to suche places, where there is daunger of heresie, with di∣uers
other lyke thinges, which after he delyuered in wryting to bys∣shops that desyred it, and also themperoure. Who the .xii. day of Iuly, reporteth to all the states, what aunswere he had made. And for by cause it appeareth that there can be nomore determined in this assē∣bly concernynge relygion, and the Turke maketh great preparation both by sea and lande, to inuade Christendome, he thinketh it chieflly requisite, that the treaty be brought to an ende, and that decrees bee made concernyng religion, peace, and ayde against the Turke: wher∣fore he requireth to know theyr mindes, whether they thinke it expe∣dient, that those articles of doctrine, which the collocutours haue, ac∣corded, shalbe receyued till a generall, or an other imperyall counsel, to thentent the controuersy of Religion, for the whiche they haue so many yeares bene tourmoyled, may be somewhat abated, that the re∣sidue not as yet agreed vpon, may hereafter more easelye be brought to an vniformitie. For he wyll go streight way to the Byshop, that he may certenly knowe what to trust to, & as shortly as he can wyll re∣tourne into Germany, to se to the common wealth. prouided always that these thinges be nothing preiudiciall to the decree of Auspurge. Whan the diuines of the Protestantes had red the two forsayd wry∣tinges The diuines of the Prote. aunwer to yt Popeslegate of Contarene, they aunswer with one accorde, and shewe that he doth them wrong, and say that considering his learning, they lo∣ked for much better things at his hande: & where also he exhorteth the Princes to punishment and crueltie, they reproue him therfore excea∣dingly, and byd him not thinke that they wil euer allow such errours as thei nowe do condemne, or at any time retourne vnto that churche whiche defendeth so manifest vices. Whan Contarene in the meane tyme heard that his aunswere was diuersly taken, by thaduise of cer∣ten, he sendeth to the states the third wryting, how he wil not assent ye the articles newly accorded, shalbe receiued vntil the coūsell, but re∣ferreth al thinges in general to the highe Byshop. The next day after the ides of Iuly, the Princes Electours, make The princes electours ans¦wer Them∣perour. answer to Themperours demaunde, & saye howe they are contented that the articles agreed vpō, should be receiued vntil the time of a coū¦sel, for the same is both expediēt for the auoiding of further incōueniē∣ces hereafter, & wilbe also a great helpe vnto a further agrement: and if there be any hope that the rest myght at this tyme be accorded, they desire him to shew his fauour herin: but if the shortnes of time wil not suffer it, yt thā according to his fre {pro}messe, he wold deuise wt the bishop and other kinges that there might be wt al expeditiō a coūsell appoin∣ted in some cōuenient place of Germany, either general or prouincial, & that he wold sende his legate thether, & if the same can not be obtei∣ned as they haue no truste it shall, that than he wold retourne againe into Germanye, and declare the same fidelitie to the countrie, that
he hathe doone hitherto, and establisshe peace and quietnes. But the Protestantes desyre themperour, that he wolde commaund the arti∣cles of religion al ready accorded, to be enacted and taught: for so shal the truthe be opened more and more, and this shalbe as a waye to a∣mende the diseases of the churche. And that also he wolde take awaye and abrogate the decree of Auspurge, as vnprofitable for concorde, or at the lestwyse leaue it in suspence: what their opinion is concernyng the counsel, and how they wil not permit the bisshop or his cliētes to be iudges therof, and of what sorte it ought to be, they haue declared heretofore, and remayne in the same opiniō: and if percase such maner of counsel wil not be had, and that ther be any assemblie of the states, in germany by his cōmaundement, in the same wil they declare their doctrine. After the other princes, amonges whom the bisshops were chief, and with them the two bretherne Dukes of Bauier, and Henry The answer of the popish princes. of Brunswicke, declare, what theyr aduise is, to themperour seueral∣ly, which was that so many vices, sectes, heresies and dissentions, did now not only in Germani, but also in other places, in maner through out christendō ouerflow, that they could not be holpen, but by a coun∣sell: and that there shoulde now be any alteration of religion and ce∣remonies, thai had so many yeares continewed, they could in nowise geue theire assent, especially, considering, that the bisshop by his legate doth promise a counsel, and he him selfe will moue him herein present∣ly: and say, how they are determined to sticke to the old religion, coū∣sels, & doctrine of their forefathers which hath continewed from the apostles tyme vnto this day. And alledgeing moch other matter, but to no great pourpose, they thinke it most expedient, to differ the cause of religion vnto the counsell, especially, for that the bisshops legate is of the same opinion, the residew of the cities, whyche were not of the nomber of Protestantes, Collon, Mentz, Spier, wormes, Tully. Ha∣genaw, Regenspurg, Schwinfurth, Colmaria, Semund, Roteburg and dyuers others, whan they were excluded from cousultation, and that the princes wolde not geue them the copie of the aunswere, they complayne herof to themperoure, as they had don ofte before, reques∣tinge him, that they myght not be hindered in theyr ryght, and many of them were content, that the articles agreed vpon shoulde be recey∣ued. Whan themperoure had hearde all mens opinions, he maketh a new propositiō, and recytyng euery thyng in order because the whole matter cannot be determined, and they most certenly stande in great daunger of the Turke, and the time is farre spente, he sayeth, he will referre the matter to the couusel, wherof both the Bisshops legat hath put him into an vndoubted hope, and he himselfe also will be in hande with the Bisshop: for he promiseth also to retourne shortly into Ger∣many, and desyreth the Protestantes that they wyll in the meane
tyme attempt nothyng els besydes those thinges wherin the diuines are accorded: Than warneth he the Bishpops, than they deuyse the The bishops are inioyned to reforme their church meanes wherby euery one of thē, maye reforme their owne churches to the intent ther be a way prepared for a cōmon redresse. This mind of Themperoure for the moste parte al men commended, and thinke inete that the Bisshops Legate, should geue also an ernest & streighte charge to the Bishops, that they redresse and pourge theyr churches. And the Protestantes concernyng the conciliation of doctryne, and all other thynges, promise to do according to theyr dewtie, & require that it may be lawful for all other Princes ther, to propounde in their churches, the articles nowe accorded. You haue hearde how Eckius The presum¦tuousnes of Eckius. abhorred bothe the booke exhibited of themperoure, and also the Col∣locutours. Wherefore after the conference had whan the booke was agayne restored to themperoure, & the matter debated in the coun∣sel of the Princes, he lying sick of a feuer, sendeth an epistle to the prin∣ces, of this effecte, that he neuer lyked that foolyshe booke, wherin he fyndeth so many errours: and therfore ought not to be admitted: for the custome of the olde fathers and the church layde a syde, the stepes and phrasis of Melanchthon are in it well perceyued: moreouer he sayeth, he sawe not the booke whiche his fellowes corrected, and af∣ter restored to themperoure, but as he laye sycke, there wer red vnto hym only certen opinions of the Lutheranes: Moche lesse did he al∣low that wrytyng, that was presented to themperoure with the boke for he neuer saw it. This thing knowne, Iulius Pfiugius, and Iohn Gropper, whiche thought how the same concerned their estimation, desyre the Presidentes and hearers of the conference, as witnesses of the whole matter that they would defend theyr honestie againste the sclaunders of Eckius. They informe themperoure of all the matter, who after in a publicke writing, gaue vnto them bothe a goodly, and an honorable report, affirming that they haue donne herein, as becō∣meth honest men. It is before mentioned, that the cause of religyon was referred to a generall or prouinciall counsell of Germany: After that Contarene vnderstoode it, the .xxvi. day of Iuly he wrote to the states and Princes, requiryng that the last might be crossed and can∣celled: for the controuersies of religion, ought not to be determined by suche maner of counselles, but the same to belonge to the vniuersall churche: and what someuer is determined in suche cases of any one nation, to be of none effect wherfore they shall shew a greate pleasure to the Bisshop, who is the head of the churche and of counselles, yf in dede they omitte the same: vnto whom agayne it woulde bee displea∣saunte, in case they should not do it, for the same would styre vp great stryfe and offence not onlye in Germany, but also in other countries. This he doeth admonisshe them of, bothe by the commaundement of
the Bysshoppe and also of hys owne dewtye. The same day the Prin∣ces make hym aunswere, howe the Bysshop maye auoyde all offensi∣on, in case he will call a counsell, whyche hathe been so longe promy∣sed. Yf not the state of Germany to bee suche, as they muste of neces∣sitie fynd some other waye to salue the sore: And therfore require him earnestly that he wold of hys wysdome and gentlenes so further the cause to the Byshoppe that a remedie might be founde. Moreouer the diuines of the Protestantes doe confute those letters and reasons of The protes∣tantes con∣fute his let∣ters and rea∣sons. Contarene, by a longe wrytyng, and proue manifestly, how it apper∣teyneth vnto all prouinces, to establishe gods trewe seruice and Reli∣gion. This done, themperour causeth a decree to be made and red the xxviii. of Iuly, he referreth the conference of the learned men, and the whole treatie, vnto the counsell, to the Synode of all Germany, or of the states imperial: in hys Iorney into Italy, he promiseth to intreat diligently the Bisshop of Roome for a counsell: And yf neyther gene∣rall nor prouinciall counsell can be obtayned, than wyll he call a con∣vocation of thempyre within .xviii. monethes for to quiet the cause of Religion, and will deuyse, that the Bifshop shall also sende hys legate thither: he chargeth the Protestātes, that they attempt no new thing besydes the articles alreadye accorded, and the Bisshoppes, that they should clense their churches of theyr faultes and enormities. In that decree were certen articles, that Religious houses shoulde not be de∣faced, that the churche goodes shoulde not bee put to prophane vses, that no man should be allured to a contrary Religion, of the iurisdic∣tion, and Iudges of the chamber: Whiche thinges whan the Protes∣tants dyd mislyke, themperour in a certen priuate wryting, declareth The Empe∣rours priuat wrytiug for the Protes∣tantes. seuerally, what his opinion is herin. In the doctrine not as yet conci∣liated, he doth prescribe vnto them no measure: Monkes houses wold not in dede bee pulled downe, but yet mete to bee reuoked to a godly reformation: the lyke is to bee thought of the churche reuenewes: no man that is of an other iurisdiction oughte to be intysed to theyr Reli∣gion, and so bee mayneteyned, but yet shall it bee lawefull for them to receyue any that will come vnto them vncalled: furthermore the de∣cree of Auspurge, concernynge relygion and doubtfull causes of the same, for a common quyet, he suspendeth tyll the cause be determined eyther in a counsell, or other assemblie, and commaundeth that no mā shalbe reiected of the Chamber for a contrarye relygion, but that the lawe shalbe ministred vprightly, vnto all men. What tyme they had these thynges confyrmed vnder themperours seale, they promise hym ayde agaynste the Turke, of whose commynge it was bruted daylye more and more. And the Ambassadours of Hongary and Austryche were commen thither which with greate intreaty required ayde. So was there a sodayn ayde of Almaignes sent into Hongary, by the cō∣duict of Friderick countie Fursteinberg.
In thys assemblie, Themperoure, the thirde day of Iuly before al the states, had a greuous complaynt of wyllyam Duke of Cleaue for the The Empe∣rours com∣playnte of the Duke of Cleaue. possession of Gelderland. He exhibiteth also a booke vnto them, wher∣in he declareth hys ryght & tytle to the same, and sayeth how he wil∣led hym to haue ben there, but he tooke a contrary waye, signifyinge couertly, Fraunce, as before is sayd. There were present the ambassa∣dours of Cleaue, which excused theyr prince, and when they proceded to declare his title, themperour xiseth vp and departeth. The .xxi. day of Iuly the Princes and states all go to themperoure, & intreate him The princes make inter∣cession, for the Duke of Cleaue for the Duke of Cleaue, and request hym that he wold receyue him in to the tuition of thempire, & permit that the case may be decided frēd∣ly, and promise to take paynes in the thynge, and in case they cannot make an ende in it, they beseche hym, to make clayme to it, and to re∣couer his right by the law. Wherunto themperoure maketh aunswer by Iohn Nauie. Forasmoche as this assemblie is called for the com∣mon welthes sake to thentent that all dissention and discorde taken a waye Germany myght be restored to quyetnes, and herin hath moch tyme ben consumed, and yet nothyng concluded, by reason of conten∣tion and diuersitie of myndes vnto his greate griefe, and hinderance of hys owne affaires: he sayeth, he marueleth greatly, that in this on cause, which is properly hys, they can so wel agree. Thus he sendeth them awaye, not withoute displeasure. The next day, Raymunde, the Frenche kinges ambassadour in a longe oration written, reciteth the The oratiō of the Frēch Ambassador cause of expulsing Charles Duke of Sanoye, who a few daies before had accused the kinge to the Emperoure and al the states. Durynge this assemblie, the Frenche kynge, sendeth Cesar Fregose an Italyan of Genes, and Anthony Rincon a Spaniarde, exiled, Ambassadours to themperour of Turkes: who sayling on the Riuer of Po, towards The Frēche ambassa∣dors, inter∣cepted by thimperiall. Uenise wer taken and flayne abont the kalendes of Iuly. That time was William Bellaye the kynges lyeutenaunt in Piedmount, who beynge sertifyed of the thynge, as he was maruelous circumspecte, and industrious, immediatly aduertiseth the kyng, and also the fyfte day of Iuly, wryteth from Turryn, to Alphonsus Daualus marques of Piscare, than gouernoure of Millan and all Lumbardie, that he woulde see, that the kynges Ambassadours which wer taken, might be restored, whom he knewe for certentie that hys menne had appre∣hended: or els for the same cause shoulde the trewes be broken, which was made thre yeares past, by thintercession of the Bisshop of Rome. And he required, they might be restored, eyther for because at the first he knewe not, els dissembling that he knewe not, what had hapned to them. The Marques maketh it very straunge, as though he knew nothing of the matter, and to pourge himselfe, sendeth Counte Fraū∣ces Ladron Ambassadour to the kynge. Langeus in a certen epistle,
whych he wrote to the Marques the eleuenth of Iuly, I would not doubte, sayeth he, in the counsell of the whole worlde, to speake of di∣uine Langens letters to Al∣phonse. matters, and that as aptely, as euer did your kinsman and aun∣cestre Thomas of Aquyne, yf I were as experte in diuinitie, as soom of youre familiars are perfit and priuie to this murther. For Alphon∣sus hys graundfather called Indicus, the sonne of Rodorick a Spa∣niard, maryed a great inheriter of the house of Aquinas. And this Al∣phonsus was cosyn germane to Fernando, Dauall of Piscare, a most worthye captayne. The. xx day of Iuly the king answereth Alphonce by letters, from Liner a Towne of Burges, admonisshing hym to re∣garde hys honour and estimation, and sheweth hym that vnles they be restored, he can not neglect the iniury done to hys men. Many wer the letters that were sent to and fro betwene Bellaye and the Mar∣ques for this matter, but nothyng els was done, whan Daualus af∣ter moche searche, sayd he could not fynd nothing, and herin perseue∣red The king moreouer by his ambassadour complayned to thempe∣rour at Regenspurge. And whan he receyued not suche aunswer as be wolde, he declared manifestly enough that warre wold insue ther∣of. It chaunced at the same time, that George of Austriche, Maximi∣lian his bastarde son, Archebishop of Ualencene, came out of Spain, George of Austriche ap¦prehended at Lyons. to retourne into Flaunders: Who at Lyons was apprehended & cast in prison, to reueng Rincon & Fregose. Aboute the same tyme, Fraū∣ces son to Anthony Duke of Lorayne, maryeth Christine the daugh∣ter of Christierne Kynge of Denmarke, Dowager of Millan. The Frenche kynge tooke thys displeasauntly, and so moche the more, for that the yere before, the daughter of Lorayne, was maryed to Renat Prince of Orenge, whiche depended wholy of themperoure. What∣tyme Themperour helde the counsell at Regenspurg, king Fernando besegeth Offen or Buda and layeth to it battery, wherein was than Ferdinando besegeth Bu¦da. the wydowe of Iohn Uaynode, with her yong sonne Stephen. The infantes tutours, and nobles of the realme had desyred the Turkes ayde: Wherfore the Turke sendeth thither his liuetenant with an ar∣mie, whyche came to Offen in Iuly: And not longe after commeth he with an other power: so wer Fernando his men repulsed, Almaignes Bohemers, Morauians leuing the siege, not withoute a greate ouer∣throwe, His armie discomfited and losse also of Pestum a Towne ouer agaynste Offen, the residew wer glad to saue themselues by runnyng away. About thend of August, the Turke sendeth presentes to the infante Stephen, cloth of golde, and goodly horses, and letteth shew hys mother, howe he is desyrous to see the childe, requyring her to sende hym vnto hym into hys Tente. The woman sore affrayd, whan she might not otherwise doe, by thaduise of her counsel, sendeth hym, and hys Norice with him accopanyed with a greate nomber of the nobilitie. He receyueth hym,
right gently, and after sendeth word to the quenes counsellours, that he woulde haue Buda deliuered vnto him: for he sayeth, they are not able to kepe it agaynste the enemie: and he shoulde be driuen to come oftē hither with an armie: which, would be both very painful & charg able: therfore it should be better that he had it in his custodi. They be∣ing affraid of their owne daunger, haue not a word to say. Forthwith was the captain of the Ianizarens, appoynted to enter the Towne, neither could the quene receiue her some again, before the thing was accomplisshed. Whan they had possessiō of the Towne, & vnarmed all the citezens, they require also to haue ye castell deliuered vp in to their handes, wherin the quene was than, whom the Turke by messagers sent betwene, comforteth, and permitteth her & her son to enioie Trā∣siluania. Whan she therfore had sodēly packed vp her stuffe, & was de∣parted, being conducted with captaines & soldiors of ye Turkes, Thē∣perour of Turkes & his two sonnes came into Offen the second daye of Septembre, And entring into the churche newly hallowed, and ge¦uing thankes to his god, for that lucky successe, he retourneth agayne to his campe, & leauing his garrisons at Offen & at Peste, he leadeth home the rest of his armie, and by the way deliuereth Lascus, whom he leaft prisoner at Belgrade, when he went to Offen, for the takyng of Fregose & Rincon. For the Frenche kyng being sore offended with that acte, had by his ambassadour Poline, signifyed the whole matter vnto Solyman. When the sessians were dou at Regenspurge, them∣perour goth streight into Italy, end talketh with the bishop of Rome at Lukes, whilest his armie toke shipping, which he had gathered be∣fore of Almaignes, Italians, and Spaniardes. And because winter was now at hand, the bishop did what he could to put him in feare of sayling, but he, although he had heard of the ouerthrow geuen in Hō∣gary, to thend he might vex the Turkes in an other quarter, was ful∣ly resolued to go foreward, and wayinge his Ankers, he hoysed sayle The Empe∣rours torney into Barba∣rie. in porte Uenery, and keping his course by Corsicke and the Ilandes of Baleare, the .xxiii. day of October, he arriued at Argier, a Citie of Barbarie by the Sea coaste. The nombre of his footemen was .xxii. thousande, hys horsemen were littell aboue a thousande. The vante∣warde of the Spaniardes led Farnando Gonzago, Uiceroye of Si∣cilie: the Battel, which was of Germanes, the Emperour: The reere∣warde of Italians and Knyghtes of the Rhodes, Camillus Colum∣nas. The same daye that Themperoure arriued, and the nexte daye after, the wether was fayre, and the Sea calme: But the thyrdde A great tem¦pest distroy∣ed hys ships daye there arrose so greate a tempeste, and so contynuall a rayne, that it letted all warlyke enterprises, in so muche that the Empe∣roure losynge verye manye Shyppes, hys munition and all hys o∣ther fournyture, beesydes two or three thousande of hys menne,
was enforced to departe without his pourpos, and at length retour∣ned into Spayn in the moneth of Nouember. Sir Henry kneuet be∣ing ther at the same tyme ambassadour for king Henry the eyght, lost Syr Henry Kneuet. all that he had, and escaped drowning verye narrowely: for when his owne Ship was ready to synke, he lept out and was receyued vppō an oare, into an other shippe, by Thomas Kneuet a kinsman of hys, who had recouered that shyppe before. Thus had our affaires both by Sea and by lande, as well in Affrica, as in Europe, a doulfull ende. This yeare was also noysome to Germany by reason of contageous sicknes, especially aboute the Rhine: amonges others at Strasburge The plage in Germani by the Rhine died Capito, at Basyll, Symon Grineus, both men of excellent lear∣nyng, thone of them a great diuine, thother a philosopher, and a great fauourer of the Scripture. Themperour at his departure out of Ger∣many, tooke order with Fridericke Palatine, that he shoulde through the Princes Electours, treate with the Duke of Cleaue for restoring vnto hym Gelderlande. They sende theyr Ambassadours, and admo∣nishe hym boothe of hys owne priuate perill and also of the publicke disturbaunce: he sayeth, how he is bothe ryght heyre, & tooke the pos∣session lawfully and is also content the matter be tryed in the law, be∣seching them, that they wolde suffer hym to susteyne no wronge, but perswade themperours mynde vnto equitie. And whan themperour imbarked hym selfe in Italy, he leaste Granuellan to sollicite the Bis∣shop for a counsel, and to set order in the comon weale of Senes, sore tormoyled with sedition. When newes came into Fraunce in Decem¦ber, of themperours losse at Argiers, ther was many merye harte, for Ioye in Fraunce at temperours losse. many men stamped for the murther of Rincon and Fregose, and now they sayde how the tyme was comen to reuenge them. King Fernan∣do, after this euill lucke & losse of Peste and Offen, calleth an Assēblie of hys states at Prage the chief citie of Boheme. There at the laste a∣monge other thynges, the nobilitie of Austriche, the .xiii. day of Decē∣ber putteth vp a supplicatiō to the kyng. wherin first to haue his good The nobili∣tie of Aus∣trich, put vp a supplicati∣on for the Gospell. will and fauoure, they offer all that they haue, to maynteine hys pros∣perous estate and dignitie. After they lament the vnfortunate state of the comune weale, and theyr owne condition, whiche haue so nere vnto them the Turke, a most cruell enemie, and also of late a conque∣rour: wherfore they saye, howe they muste looke for remedies, & chief∣ly that the wrath of God may be appeased, who offended with mens synfullnes, sendeth this great calamitie: For in the whole body of the common welth, is no parte cleane nor sounde: al honeste discipline is cast a syde, aswell priuate as common: which is the welsprynge of all enilles, but yet is the contempte of gods worde the chiefe cause, why God doeth so scourg and plage vs. For it is to be seene, they saye, and proue othe by sacred and prophane histories, that God hathe often
times greuously plaged great and most florisshing kingdoms, not for these lighter sinnes that be graffed in vs naturally, but for idolatrie & contempt of hys word. The people of Iewes wer led awaye captiue Kingdoms distroyed for dolatry. into Assiria and Babilon, for contemnyng the prophetes, & for a newe Religion and worsshipping, which they themselues had deuysed: and at the length was vtterly distroyed, & Hierusalem quite ouerthrowne for crucifying the sonne of God. The most triumphante Empires of the world in time past, of Babilon, Persia, and Grece, being now sub∣dewed by the Turkes, haue so cleane lost theyr religion, lawes, comō¦welth and all theyr dignitie, for the selfe same causes, that there is at this day in maner no tokē of christianitie there remayning: and wher partly they forsoke, and partlilothed gods benefites, they fel into hor∣rible darknes, and most filthy bondage. Whether was this any sodē alteration: for the Turkes maintened warre sixe hondreth yeres and aboue, beefore they conquered Grece. Whiche happened than at the lengthe, what tyme they beyng so ofte prouoked and warned, wolde neuer amend, but heaped vp sinne vpon synne. Now yf a man should compare those kingdomes, that wer of such power & dignitie, where∣in florisshed so many excellente wittes, with this very rude and beast∣ly common welth of the Turkes, he shall fynde that syns Noes floud there neuer chaunced a greater calamitie. And yf they so stronge and mightye nations were not able to resiste so weake a people, as the Turkes wer, at the beginnyng, god thus auengyng the synnes of the people, what maye we looke for, which in dede are gyltye of the same fault, but in so much the worse case, for that we be matched with ane∣nemie that is strong out of measure? we see how God doeth plage vs, chiefly in these parties wyth warre famyne, and pestilence: The most The plages that god sēt to Austriche and Germa¦ny. cruell enemie hathe taken of late Offen the chiefe citie of the Realme? he hathe brent & spoyled the land of Bohema: And what miserie haue we not suffered these sixtene yeres? howe moche blod hathe bene spilte & how many thousand peopele led a waye in to most miserable capty∣uitie? for certenly now is the Turkes power so increased that he is far exalted aboue all other kinges. And for by cause he obteyneth at oure handes in a maner contynuall victories he perceyueth him self to bee The Turke is the scurge of God. the scourge of God and that no man is able to escape his vengeaunce Seing therfore that our synnes be so great and many, what haue we to truste vnto, or howe shall we defende our selues agaynste him? As∣suredly there is but one only remedy. All thinges are in the handes of god: it is god that geueth and taketh awaye empires, whiche woun∣deth God offe∣reth his word before he plageth. and healeth, who prouoketh vs to repētaunce, by offering vs the knowledg of his word, which thing in dede he doth euer before he pla¦geth. So sent he Ionas the prophet to the Niniuites, and forgaue thē for that they repēted: So loked he mercyfully vpon Nabuchodonosor
the kyng of Assirians, followyng the counsell of Daniel. And certenly moste myghty kyng, we knowe none other meane or remedye, than that Gods worde may be purely taught, and the people exhorted to a∣mendement of life, to the entent that being ful of confidence, they may boldely withstande the Turkishe violence, for herein consisteth oure saluation that we serue God ryghtly. Wherfore seing that manye er∣rours are crept into the churche, whiche in this our tyme are disclo∣sed, and that lately in the counsel of the Empyre, diverse opiniōs wer agreed vpon, and for a certen tyme peace graunted for Religion, and the Byshop commaunded to refonrme their churches: We beseche your hyghnes to geue commaundement that the Gospell be preached The chiefe article of doc¦trine is iusti∣fication. sincerely, especially that article of iustification, whiche teacheth that our synnes are forgeuen through Christ only. Agayne that men be ex∣cited vnto loue and charitable workes, whiche are the true fruictes & tokens of fayth. Moreouer let them be made afrayd to synne, and ac∣custome them selues to geue God thākes, that of his mere mercy we are delyuered through Christ from synne, death, and hell, and made inheritours of the heauēly kingdome: that such as desyre, may receiue the Lordes supper after the maner of the primatiue church, And that also the Byshoppes be cōmaunded according to the decree of the Em∣pyre newly made, to redresse that is amisse in the churche, that they ap¦poincte mete ministers to instructe the people, and reiecte not the true preachers as they haue euer done heretofore. And let not your grace thinke that we make this sute vnto you, for that we either seke for a∣ny more libertie, or intende at any tyme to disobey: for we cōfesse that our whole saluation consisteth in Christe only, and that the knowe∣ledge of the Gospell, must be adourned with godly liuing, & acknow∣ledge it our bounden dutie to shewe vnto you all obedience, as farre forth as our goodes and lyfe wyll extende. And seing it is so, we doe humbly beseche you to suffer vs to enioye the benefite of this last de∣cree, and that suche as shall followe the fourme of Religion of vs be∣fore rehearsed, be not indaungered therfore. For so shal you haue faith full ministers of your churches, whiche are nowe many vacant and boyde of any, and men shall with more hardines warre against that moste terrible ennemy, vnto whome for our ingratitude and wicked∣nes, God hath geuen so many victories and conquestes hitherto. The nobles and states of Austriche that put vp this supplication, were foure and twēty men of honour, and ten cities, wherof Uienne was one, and their next neighbours the Stirians & Carnites. Ferdi¦nando Ferdinando desfateth the request of his uobles. hetherto aunswered that for calamities by them mentioned, he is ryght hartely sory, and doubteth not but these are plages sent for the synnes of the people, and, therfore hath oftener than once admoni∣shed the ministers of the churche, that they should exhorte the people
to amendement of lyfe. Moreouer sayeth howe he was neuer against that Gods worde should be ryghtly taught, according to the traditiō and settyng forth of the Apostles, and such other interpretours as the churche hath receiued and allowed: neuerthelesse he chargeth them, that in Religion they do alter nothing tyll suche tyme as the matter be fully determined by a generall or a prouinciall counsell of Germa∣ny, or els by some conuocation of the Empyre. And not to thynke that the decree of Regenspurge concerned them any thynge at all, wherof the meaning is, that the catholickes should remayne in the olde, and the Protestauntes in the same Religion whiche they followed at the tyme of this reconcilement, tyll some one of these counselles were ap∣pointed within eightene monethes: and seing it is so, he may not per∣mitte his subiectes, to do any thyng to the contrary. They desyre him againe at fewe wordes that the true Religion of Christe maye be a∣uaunced, The nobles resterut their te. and that the good preachers be not brought in daunger: for otherwyse let hym neuer loke to haue any victory or lucky successe as the Turkes hande. A litle after this dyed the Bysshop of Numburge, in whose steade Strife about the bisshop. ricke of Nū. burge. the College chose Iulius Pffugius before mentioned, but the Prince Electonr of Saxon, contended that they myght not doe it withoute his consente, and reiectyng the Flugins, substituted in his roume Ni∣colas Amstorfe of a noble house, a doctour of diuinitie of Wittemberg whome Luther stalled in the moneth of Ianuary, and after set forthe 1542. a booke of the same in dutche, wherin he declareth howe the flocke of Christe ought not to be cōmitted to Pffugius, as ennemie to the pure doctrine. Pffugius being thus repulsed, complayneth to the states of the Empyre howe wrongfully he is put from his ryght. The Prynce agayne aunswereth howe the gyfte belongeth properlye to the house of Saxon, and reciting many olde presidentes of great antiquitie, al∣ledgeth amonges other causes, wherfore he can not suffer him to bee Byshop, this also for one that he is openlye againste the confession of Auspurge. After the ouerthrowe in Hongary as is said before, the Em¦perour calleth an assemblie of the states at Spiers by his brother Fer¦dinando, to begynne in the moneth of Ianuary, and appointeth ioy∣neth An assemble at Spires. to him for assistaunce Hughe Monforte, and Iohn Nauie. The Princes that were there presente, were the Marques of Branden∣burge Electour, Fredericke the Palsgraue, Albert Duke of Megel∣burge, Ernest Marques of Baden, the Byshoppes of Mentz, Wor∣mes, Spier, Constance, & Hildessem, the residue sent Ambassadours. What tyme they were assembled the nynth daye of February, kynge Ferdinando in the Emperours absence propoundeth as the maner is, the cause of that assemblie whiche was in brief to consulte howe the Turke myght be kept out of Hungary, & for ayde touchyng the same,
After the assemblie of Regenspurge, whan Iohn Gropper, ambassa∣dour to the Archebyshop of Collon, was retourned home, he cōmen∣ded Gropper cō∣mended Bu¦cer. Bucer exceadingly, and sayde he was metest of all others, to ta∣ke in hande the reformation of Religion, for he was bothe well lear∣ned, a louer of peace, and of a pure lyfe. The Byshop therfore whiche knewe Bucer well enough before, and thought to vse his helpe, sen∣deth for hym in February to come to hym to Bonna, where he was verey gentlye receyued, namely of Gropper, who intreated hym to goe with hym to Collon. And so for that tyme was lycenced of the Bishop to departe, and to come agayn whan he should be sent for, as I wyll declare hereafter. Moreouer about this time also was beheaded Catharine Haward in Englād, and for that, where the king had maried her for a mayde, he founde that she had troden her showe a wrye. He that had deflou∣red her was gone into Irelande, and had an office there, but beynge called home againe by her whan she was Quene, and taken into her seruice, he was beheaded after her, as were also certein others, partly for concealement, partly for lyke offence. After her deathe the kynge The king of Englād ma∣ried the syxte wyfe. marieth the syxte wyfe Catherine Parre, that had bene wyfe to the Lorde Latimer, and syster to the Marques of Northhamton. To the assemblye at Spiers, the Frenche kyng sent an Ambassade the chiefe wherof was Fraunces Oliuer Chauncelour of Alenson. Who in the presence of all the states whan they consulted of the Turkyshe warre, Theioration of the frēche ambessrdour the fourtene daye of Februarye made a longe Oration, in the begyn∣nyng whereof he sekynge to wynne theyr fauour reciteth howe the yeare before the kynge vnderstandynge that the Turke woulde in∣uade Hongarye, for the loue he bare vnto Germanye, sent Ambassa∣dours immediatly to him to perswade him, if he myght to the cōtrary but the Emperours men toke them in Italy, & as yet it is not certein∣lye knowen whether theibe dead oraliue: wherby not only the truces is broken, but also the lawe of armes. And where as certein do encou¦rage the Germaines to warre against the Turke in the defence of Hō¦gary and al Christientie, alledgyng that albeit he be of great power, Perswasiōs to warre a∣gainst the Turke. yet maye he ryght well be vanquyshed, by the example of Iohn Hun∣niades, Matthie kyng of Hongary, Scanderbeg lorde of Epirus, and Tamberlane Emperour of the Srythiās, al the whiche haue wonne honour at his haude, as also they themselues did at Uienne a fewe yeares past, and vse diuerse other perswasions to pricke thē forward, he contrary wyse affirmeth that those whiche geue this counsell, doe not well consyder the state of Germany, howe full it is of dissention, nor the daunger that of this warre myght ensue. For a myghtyer or crueller ennemye is not in the whole worlde, nor one that is better furnyshed of all thynges belongynge to the warres.
Neither can this warre be finyshed with one battell or two, but euer requyreth newe and freshe men continuall, and marneylous greate charges. The force & power of Germany is in dede exceading great, but yet is the Turkes ten tymes greater, whiche passeth litle of the losse of two or thre hondreth thousand men, where if they should lose but one battell, in what daunger should the whole countrey be in, be¦fore they should leuie an other in this grudge & dissention of mindes? therfore his aduise is that they attēpte not warre against the Turke, neyther seke to recouer that he hath already gotten in Hongarye for feare of a further mischief. But in case he should at any tyme inuade Germany, that it should stande vpon their honours to bende all their force against him, & stoutely to giue him the repulse, otherwyse not to medle vntill suche time as they shalbe fully & throughly accorded in matters of religiō, in like case as they be partly already, namely in the chiefest articles of iustificatiō, of faith & workes, for certenly without a perfit cōcorde the state of Thempire can not long endure, especially the Turke stil inuading. The Romains became lordes of al the world not so much by power & force of armes, as by a certē craft & policie, for The policie of the Ro∣maines in e∣stablishing their empire loke what natiō thei purposed to subdue vnto their empire, thei wold euer practise to weaken by ciuile discorde, & for a time wold maintein thone parte of the faction, till at last thei had vanquished thē both. By this meane were the people of Carthage & of all Asia, the French men and the Grekes supplāted: thus also were the Germains deluded by Tiberius, what time they moued war in Italy, only Britaine which now is Englande escaped this yoke, for that they vnderstode their subtill fetches, & always in cōmon perill powred out all their ciuile ha¦tred vpon their ennemy. And by the same meanes at the length were The concord of England. the Romains thē selues subdewed. Philip also king of ye Macedoniās by this craft conquered Grece, setting together be theares the men of Athens, Corinthe & Thessalie. Ottoman the firste Emperour of this Turkishe nation, toke Bythinia through the dissentiō that was there among Christen Princes, & at last by the same occasion the Turke in∣uaded Europe, cōquered Thrace, al Grece & Morea, yea the Turkes haue these thre hondreth yeres wonne stil through our discorde & trea¦son. Howe the Turkes ache¦ued their em¦pyre. What time the citie of Constantinople was taken all Italy was ful of sedition, whilest one sorte wold be called Gwelphiās, & an other Gibellines, whiche were names of themperial, and popyshe faction: what chaunced lately at Rhodes, & what in Hongary, & by what occa¦sion it is no nede to recite. But thus indede the Turkes a poore vile & Gwelphiās. Wibellines. barbarous nation, creping out of ye corners of Scithia, haue increased through our dissention, & atteyned to so great an Empire, whylest ey∣ther the light Grekes opened thē a gate into Europe, or yt faithles mē of Genes haue transported thē by the sea of Helespōte, or the Prynces
of Peloponesus brethren, falling at variaunce, sent for them the one to destroye the other, whilest they of Epyrus did ayde thē, or the My∣sians conspyred with them or the Hongarians of their owne accorde dyd moue them to come. Therfore to mainteine their common lyber∣tie, they must fall to an vnitie and concorde, and may not thynke that whylest they them selues sytte styll and doe neglecte it, beynge deny∣ded into sectes and factions, that foreyne nations wyll take this cars in hande for them. This he sayeth is the kynges aduyse and counsell, whiche he desyred them to accepte in good parte, and of hym to loke for all amitie and frendshyp. The Byshop sente thether his Legate Iohn Morone, Byshop of Mutma, who beyng demaunded of kyng Ferdinando and by the Emperours deputies of the byshop of Romes The opinion of the Popes Ambassad. mynde, the .xxiij. day of Marche, speaketh on this wyse. The last yere whan the Emperour went into Africa, passing through Italy, he cō∣ferred with the hyghe byshop concerninge the turkyshe warre, and a generall counsell, but sythe the matter was very weighty, & the Em∣perour made great haste, nothynge was determined, and Granuel∣lan remayned in Italy, with whome the case was further debated af¦terwarde. Than he declareth howe the Byshoppes mynde is, and e∣uer hath bene, to warre vpon the Turkes, and that he wil sende ayde of fyue thousande fotemen, in case the Emperour come to the fielde hym selfe, if not, halfe that nombre. And lykewyse is cōtent that there shalbe a counsell, but that the same should be holden in Germany, ney¦ther his age can beare, who both wyll and ought to be present, nor al¦so The Pope suspecteth Germany. the farre iourney and alteration of the ayre wyll permitte: therfore he lyketh better Mantua or Farrare, Bolognia la gras, or Placence whiche are all ample cities, and fyt for suche a purpose: howe beit if none of these wyll please them, he wyll not refuse to kepe it at Trent, whiche is a towne nere vnto the frontiers of Germany, and woulde haue had it begonne at a Whytsontyde, but for shortenes of tyme, hath differred it to the Ides of Auguste, praying them that al displea¦sure set aparte, they woulde wholy applie them selues hereunto. King Ferdinando with the Emperours deputies, and all the Catholyque Prynces, geue hym thankes, and if a meter place maye not be had in Germanye, as Regenspurge or Collon, they saye howe they are con∣tente with Trente. But the Protestanntes doe neyther allowe the Bysshoppes counsell nor the place, nor that there was anye mention made thereof in the decree, and openly pronounce to the contrary. Whan the Frenche kynges Ambassadours coulde not preuayle, and the states were inclyned to the Turkyshe warre, and sawe that the Emperours men both lothed and suspected their presence, before the ende of the assemblye, they departe halfe in displeasure. Trent is in the Alpes, by the Riuer of Athese, a towne in Farnādo
hys dominion, thre dayes Iorney on this syde Uenise, and not two from Uerona. After the chauncelour of the Dutchie of Alenson was retourned home, the kyng begā streight wayes to prepare for the war And albeit he had already in effecte restored the Admiral, & vsed hym frendly: Yet lest it should be herafter preiudicial to him or his childrē. he causeth the whole matter to be comprised in writing, and restoreth him to his possessions, dignitie and fame, and protesteth that hee had committed neyther treason nor yet extortion, & releaseth and geueth hym the condemnation of seuen hondrethe thousande crownes, com∣maunding that these letters should be enrolled at Paris, and in other places, to remayne as matter of recorde. this was the twelfte daye of March. Whan the French kynge was at the same tyme besydes Pa∣ris in castell Uincenne, word came to him in ye night, of a sodē tumult A soden fear in the Frēch courte. as though the enemies, out of themperours contrie shoulde make an incursion in to the contrie of Uermandoeis in Picardie: whereuppon the princes that chaunced that time to bee there, were sent thither in al hast, the Dukes of Uandome, Guise, Aumall, Niuerne, and diuerse others, with a great nomber of gentlemen. Whan they came there, al was hushte, neyther saw they nor heard of any man. Many men sayd how thys brute was reysed, that the people might be perswaded that themperour sought warre, wherof the kinge him self wold not be ac∣cōpted the author, whan he had already vtterly determined the same, as shalbe declared herafter. Forasmuch as the state of Germany was such as before I haue shewed you, great ayde was decreed on, & com∣maunded An Army a∣gaynste the Turke. that an armie should be leuied, which ioyned with the pow¦er of Fernando, might resist the Turkishe force, and recouer that was lost. The leading and ordering wherof, was both by common assent, and also by themperours pleasure, committed in charge to Ioachim, Marques of Brandenburge, Prince electour, who in continently de∣parting from Spier, prepareth him selfe for the Iorney. For this war was gathered, polle money through out all Germany and graunted, that the magistrates might for this cause impose a taxe: They agreed moreouer to demaund ayd of the Suises, and other princes, especially of the king of Denmarke and of the Italians: furthermore it was de∣creed, that all mē should obserue the peace, and reise no tumult within the limites of thempire, & the .xi. day of April the assemblie was dissol∣ued. And in maner at the same time, in Saxonie, ther grew a greate Contention betwixte the elector of sax¦on & Duke Moris. hatred betwene the Prince Electour, & Duke Moris, who than succe∣ded Henry his father lately departed. The contention was for the ly∣mites, & a certen Towne: And Maurice did manifestly mayneteyne the cause of Pflugius, through the suite of hys frēdes, the matter was vtterly lyke to brede ciuile warre: For eyther of them had their mē vp in armure: but through yt mediation of ye Lautzgraue it was appeased
This was the beginning of the displeasure betwyxt them, whiche af∣ter increased in tyme, wrought a deadlye wounde to Germanye, as shalbe recited in place. And certenly many men marueiled at Mau∣rice, that he would be so earnest and bitter agaynst him that brought hym vp, and whome both he and his father may thanke for all theyr good fortune. But certen of the coūsellers that were with Duke Ge∣orge, were thought to haue set forwarde this matter, whiche neyther loued Religion, nor yet the Prince Electour. Whan the decree was Luthers ore¦tion for the field. made, and all men prepared thē selues to the warre, Luther set for the a booke in the vulgare tongue, an exhortation to the warre, whiche he dedicated vnto Philip the Lantgraue. And after hathe declared the cause why he wrote of the contrary argument in his yong days, ye to warre against the Turkes were nothing elles but to resiste God, whiche vseth hym for a scourge to afflicte vs, whiche sentence Leo the tenth had amonges other thynges condempned, for the Byshop of Rome so ofte as he mynded to procure a masse of monie out of Ger∣many, vsed euer this collour, to gather it for the Turkishe warre, and had shewed all the reasons that moued hym than, and amonges o∣thers that a Christen man ought not to reuenge nor resiste euil, but to suffer all thynges according to that saying of Christe, of leauinge thy rote, and agayne that the Emperour is not to be excited vnto warre as the head of Christendome, Protectour of the churche, and defen∣dour of the faithe: For the tytles are false and vayne glorious and in∣iurious to Christe, who allone can defende his churche: and the in∣iurie is the more for that certen kynges and Prynces are moste byt∣ter ennemies to his true doctrine, and therfore concludeth that the Turke is not to be warred vpon or resisted, for the diuersitie of his re∣ligion, but because he robbeth and spoyleth, and maketh vniust warr, The Pope ¦pared with yt Turke. and bringeth in with him most shameful examples of lyfe. By a cōpa∣rison made he proueth, yt the byshop of Rome is nothing better thā the Turke, for as he by his Alcorane, so hath the Byshop by his decree∣tales quenched the doctrine of the Gospell. That whiche he doeth by force, the same doth the byshop by his curse: but thei both worke repro¦che vnto matrimony, & abide punishment for the contempte of Gods lawe, which ordeined holy matrimony, what time god geueth thē o∣uer to their filthy lustes, & that they burne in most detestable desires, & worke most wickedly against the order of nature. Finally speakig of the turkish power, he admonisheth thē not to be carelesse in warfare, but to knowe how thei haue to do with a moste fierse ennemy. These and diuerse other, suche lyke thinges he treateth of in that first boke, but now what time the state of thēpire, had at the request of thempe. & king Ferdinādo decreed war, he cōpiled an other worke as I said, a warlike exhortation or sermon, to thentēt that such ministers of the
churche as followed the warres, myght haue some forme and order, howe to teache and exhorte. First therfore sayth he, that men may vn¦derstande what is to be thought of the Turke, the Scripture spea∣keth of two houge and cruell Tyrantes which shall destroy Christen∣dome, Two migh∣ty Tyrantes before the laste daye of iudgement, one through false doctrine, of whome prophecied Daniel, and after him Paule: this is verely the Byshop of Rome. And an other by power and force of armes, that is to saye the Turke, of whome Daniel in the seuenth chapter speaketh. Any pleasant lyfe is not to be loked for. Those therfore that wylbe christians, let them plucke vp their hartes and loke for no peace and quietnes; nor pleasaūter life frō henceforth. For that miserable tyme which he prophecied of before, is now come, but let vs comforte our selues with the comming of Christe, and with our finall deliueraunce, whiche immediatly after those afflictiōs shal appeare, and let vs knowe for certentie that al the woodnes and ma∣lice of the deuyll is powred wholy vpon vs by the Turke, for neuer did Tyrante practyse suche crueltie, as he doeth. After he expoundeth the seuenth chapter of Daniel, whiche is of the foure beastes cōming out of the Sea, declaring that the Turkishe Empire is there descri∣bed. For this is that same litle horne whiche sprang vp betwene those ten hornes of the fourth beast. And albeit it is wonderfully increased, yet can it not be that it should be in power like to the Romaine Em∣pyre, for the Prophet doeth there describe foure Empyres only, which The Turke shal not be of such force as were the Ro¦maines. should succeade in order, and the last to be the Empyre of Rome: ther∣fore shall there be none other that may be cōpared in greatnes to the Romayne. And for asmuche as Daniel did attribute vnto him three hornes only, whiche he should plucke of from those ten, his violence from henceforth shall not proceade muche further, for those three are plucked of long synce, Asia, Grece, and Egipt, whiche beinge three of the greatest prouinces in the Empire, the Turke now possesseth, with in the whiche limites the Prophet hath included him, wherfore there is good hope that from henceforth he shall possesse no prouince of the Empyre: And where he is nowe so busy in Hongary, and also readye to inuade Germany, this is the last acte of the tragedy, for it may bee The last act of yt Turke. that he shall inuade those countries, but he can not thynke that euer he shall haue them in quiet possession, as he hathe Asia, Grece and Egipt, for the prophecie is playne and manifest. After this he treateth of all the other partes, prouokyng them chiefly to repentaunce, and exhorteth them all to be ready and wylling to obeye the Magistrate commaunding vnto this warre, and not only to employe their goo∣des herein, but also to serue wt their bodies. The prisoners also whiche A cousolatiō of the pryso∣ners with the Turkes eyther be nowe in the Turkes handes, or hereafter shal come into the same captiuitie, he comforteth with many perswasions, and admoni∣sheth them to be well ware of that fayned and pretensed Religion of
the Turkes, for he heareth saye howe many that haue professed Christ doe of their owne accorde falle into their Religion, for that it hath a certen shewe of vertue and holines, and that they suffer this bondage patiently, and serue their maisters faithfully, though thei be prophane and wicked, neyther that they runne away from them, or fordo them selues for vnpatientnes and lothsomenes of that estate, but to beare alwayes in memory that same which Peter and Paule wryte of the dutie of bounde seruauntes, but what tyme they shal attempte warre against the christians, to hasarde their lyues rather than to serue vn∣der thē, for they be murtherers and make warre against the sainctes, as Daniell sayeth, and shead innocent bloude: therefore muste they chiefly beware that they be not partakers of so great a mischiefe and wickednes. Unto this Oration he annexeth a maner of praying a∣gainst the Turkysh fury, and about the ende, discoursing the vice that reigneth in this our tyme in all sortes of men he sheweth howe Ger∣many whiche is so corrupted, and wholy infected, can not longe con∣tinewe in prosperitie. And this fourme of prayer he prescribeth. Oeuerlasting father, we haue verely deserued to be sore afflicted, The prayer of Luther. but punnyshe vs thyne owne selfe Lorde, not in thy wrath and dis∣pleasure, but according to thy great mercy, for it is muche better for vs to falle in thyne, than into the handes of men and our ennemies, for thy merci is vnspeakeable and infinite: we haue certenly offended the, and transgressed thy commaundementes, but thou knowest O heauenly father, howe the deuill, the Byshop, and the Turke, haue no rightnor cause to punyshe vs, for we haue trespassed nothyng against them, but thou vsest them as a scourge to whippe vs, which haue mo ways than one, al our life time styred the vp against vs. They I saie, haue no quarell against vs, but would rather that we should euer af∣ter their example offende the moste greuously, that through idolatry, false doctrine, lyes, disceiptfull and craftye iugglynge, with murther, thefte and extortion, fornication, adultery, and sorcerie, we myght of∣fende the maiestie of thy name. This is the thing that thei most wishe for, and because we confesse and honour the God the father, and thy sonne Iesus Christe our Lord and the holy spirite, one and euerliuing God, that same is our offence and wickednes, for the whiche they so greuously hate and persecute vs. If we should forsake this fayth, and fal vnto their lore, thā should we loke for no displeasure at their hāds. Uouchesaufe therfore to loke vpon vs, O God the father, and to send a remedy, for they be more thyne aduersaries than ours, whan they doe tormente vs, they tormente the, for the doctrine that we professe, is not ours but thyne. And Sathan can not abyde it but wylbe wor∣shipped in thy place, and thy worde set asyde, goeth about to feede vs with lies: And the Turke also, in the steade of thy sonne Iesu Christ,
wold place his Mahomet. Nowe, yf thys be synne, that we professe thee, the father, and thy sonne, and the holy ghost to be the trewe and only God, certenly than arte thou a synner, whiche so teachest vs, and requyrest this dewty of vs, and whā they for this cause persecute vs, they do hate and afflicte thee also. Awake therfore my God, and take in hande thy selfe to aueuge thy sacred and holy name, which they de∣fyle and deface, neyther suffer thou this iniurie at their hande, which punnishe not our synnes and vices, but seke to quenche thy worde in vs, and doe what they can, that thou shouldest not reigne at all, ney∣ther shouldest haue any people, whiche might serue and honour thee. Nowe touching the ofspringe & encrease of the Turkes, because many haue written, it nedeth not to note any thing therof in this place: of a Of the origi¦nall of the Turkes. smal beginnyng they haue had a maruelous encrease: Their first Em∣perour is accompted Othomanne, aboute the yere of our lord a thou∣sand and thre hōdreth: whom, after succedeth Orchanes, Amurathes, who fyrst transported his armye ouer the sea of Hellesponte into Eu∣rope, and inuaded Thrace. Than Baiazethes, Cyriscelebes, Moses, Mahoniethes, Amurathes, Mahomethes, Baiazethes, Selime, So¦lyman. About this same tyme, Alphonse Marques of Piscare before mentioned, sendyng a booke to the princes of Germany, accuseth, and The Markes of Piscare ac¦cuseth the Frēch king. blameth the frenche kinge, whiche in so troublesome a tyme of the co∣mon welth, goeth about to styre vp stryfe, to thentente he might hin∣der the most noble enterprises of themperoure and al the states, & pre∣tendeth a lyght and a forged matter, for Anthony Rincon & Ce. Fre∣gose that should be intercepted, vnto whom, what thing hath chauu∣ced, he could not, after long and diligent searche fynd out. The Frēch Kinge, whan he knew thereof, declareth that he had an exceadinge great iuiurie done him, to haue his Ambassadours so cruelly destroy∣ed: The kinges purgation. of this thinge hathe he ofte complayned sore to the Bisshop and to themperoure, and hath requyred that he might be satisfysed herin, but it was in vayne: And seing it is so vnworthie an act, he can not with∣out the greate shame and dishonoure of his name, neglecte it. After, the second of Maye, addressing hys letters to the Senate of Paris, to thende sayeth he, that god maye illumine our heartes, and graunt vs the constancie of fayth, and bring again those that ere into the way of saluation, and sende vs peace throughe recompence, for the iniuries that we haue susteyned, by the vsurping of our right, and the outrage donne to oure messagers and ambassadours, or if in dispayre to haue peace, we must nedes haue warre, that he would graunt vs victorye: our request is, that the people go a prosession and pray in all churches And that by some fyt preacher the cause therof be recyted to the cōgre∣gation. Moreouer in case any ther be that thinketh not rightly of oure fayth and religion, neither will promise amendement, we, commaund
that he suffer openlye for his offence. Not longe after he sendeth the Duke of Longuill to the prince of Cleaue, who leauing ther a power in the somer season by the conduicte of Martyn van Rossen looked for an occasion to doe some exploicte. In the meane season, at the ka∣lendes of Iune, the bisshop appoynted a connsell at Trente agaynste the fyrst of Nouember, at the which time he commaundeth to repayre A counsell called at Trente. thither Patriarches, bisshoppes, abbottes and suche other lyke which eyther by right or priuiledg haue interest to be presēt at counsels, and are permitted there to speake their minde. He exhorteth also thempe∣roure and the French kyng, that eyther they wolde come them selues, or send theyr proctours, & to commaunde their bisshoppes to be there: but the bisshops of Germany he inuiteth aboue all others, for that, for theyr cause chiefly, and at theyr requeste, is all this payne and trauaile taken. In the moneth of Iuly the Frenche kinge, with moste hatefull woordes proclaymeth warre against themperoure, and in a wryting The Frēche king proclai¦meth warre. publysshed, geueth his subiectes libertie to spoyle and distroy his con∣tries by sea and lande, by what meanes so euer they might A littel be∣fore the Duke of Longeuill and Martyu Rossen had made an inua∣ston into Brabant, and were a wonderful terrour to men vnprouided and commyng vpon the sodayne, had lyke to haue taken Andwerpe The Duke of Languile and Martin van Rossen invade Bra∣bant. & Louayne, but wantyng thinges necessarie for munition, they could make no battery, and marching forewarde, whiche way so euer they wente, they diftroyed al before them, with fyer and sword, and extor∣ted many. And thus making theyr waie by force, in August they ioyne themselues with the kinges sonne, Charles Duke of Orleans, which warred that tyme, in the land of Luke. In this force were foure hon∣dreth horsemen sent by the kynge of Denmarke. Besydes Danuillier, Uirton, and Iuey, was taken also Lucemburge the chiefe citie. The kinge hym selfe maketh warre on an other syde, and marchinge fore∣ward Perpigusan beseged. with a strong Armie, besegeth Parpignan a Towne of Rusci∣non in the mountaynes of Pyrene. Moreouer he moueth warre in Piedmount by the conduicte of William Langey, and also in the bor∣ders of Flaunders, by the gouernment of the Duke of Uandome. So that he assayled his enemies in fyue sondry places wherby the iudge∣ment of many it had ben better for him to haue set vpon some one pro∣uince with his whole power, as thende also declared, for both he at∣tempted Parpignan in vayne, and also whan the Duke of Orleans was retourned home, the Imperialles recouered all agayne except it were Iuey. By this occasion they began to fortifie Andwarpe, where before it was easy to bee wonne. When the kinge pourposed to haue warres, he sente agayne Poline to the Turke, to entreate hym, that he wolde sende him a uanie into Fraunce: but where it was longe or Poline came there, Solyman differred the thyng vntil the next yere.
Duryng this warre the king setteth forth proclamations against the Lutherians: Moreouer the parlament of Paris chargeth the Prin∣ters vnder a great penaltie, that they shoulde neyther prynte nor sell any bookes condempned or suspected, namely the booke of Caluine whiche is intituled the Institution of Christiane Religion. Further more at the request of the Inquilitour as they terme hym, the seuenth daye of Iuly he maketh a decree, that the preachers shall admonyshe the people to doe their duty to the churche, and if they know any Lu∣theriane or one that thinketh amisse in Religion to present hym: for this is a worke to God moste acceptable. And the Ministers of the churche had an order prescribed, whiche they should followe in that inquirie. For they were cōmaunded to inquyre of the promoters, whe¦ther The maner to srche out yt Lutherin̄s. they knewe any man that would saye how there was no purga∣tory: whan a man is dead to be eyther saued or dampned, or that a mā is not iustified by obseruing of Gods commaundementes, that God only must be called vpon & not Sainctes: yt the worshipping of ima∣ges, is idolatry, yt sainctes worke not miracles, that the ceremonies of the churche profite nothing, that the lawes of the churche doe bynde no man: that the knowledge of the Gospell is necessarye for all men without exception, or that it is a fonde parte of the common people to pray to God in Latin: how the priest cā not forgeue sinnes through the Sacrament of penauuce, but to be only a minister, to pronounce the benefite of God whiche forgeueth our synnes: that the church can bynde no man to mortall synne, or that it is lawfull to eate fleshe at al tymes. This fourme of inquisition was geuen priuately to priestes, but openly was set forth a proclamation, wherin they were cōmaun∣ded to be presented and accused, whiche doe neglecte the Rites and lawes of the churche, or suche as haue bookes contrary to the christiā fayth, and eyther geue them others to reade, or purposely let them fall in the wayes as they goe, that thei may be founde, those that assemble in priuate houses and gardens, and forge diuises against the lawes of the chruche, and they that receyue suche kynde of men into their hou∣ses or gardens. They that are priuie to any suche thyng, are commaū∣ded to presente them within syxe dayes, to the doctours of Diuinitie, chosen by the Inquisitour, or els to stande accursed. The Stacioners were also charged that if they had any thyng eyther prynted or wryt∣ten, that were in any point suspected, or that swarued frō the custome of the churche that within syxe dayes they should bryng it before thē, after, none excuse to be taken. The same daye that this acte was pro∣claymed, they had a generall procession for the preseruation of the re∣alme S. Genefeua and of Religion: And saynt Genefeua their trusty Goddes was borne about with suche solemnitie as I haue before declared in the nynth booke. And in these dayes were certen brent in place Moberte
for Religion. At the same tyme Fraunces Landre, Uicar of S. Crois in Paris, taught the people syncerely, and sayde no Masse for that he branke no wyne: whether he did it of nature or of purpose, I knowe not. Against whome the Diuines had conceaued a great hatred. And after thei had noted certe in thinges in his preaching, they propounde vnto hym these articles. The sacrifice of the Masse to be instituted of Christe, and is vayleable for the quicke and dead: that we must praye to sainctes, that they maye be mediatours and aduocates for vs vnto Christe, howe the substaunce of bread and wyne, is chaunged in the The articles of the Sorbe nistes. consecration, that only preastes may consecrate bread and wyne, and that the whole supper of the Lorde apperteineth to them only: Mo∣nasticall vowes must be kept, that by the Sacramentes of confirma∣tion and vnction, is receiued the holy ghost. by prayer, fasting & good workes soules are delyuered out of purgatory, that the lawes of the churche concerning fastyng and choyse of meates doe bynde the con∣science, that there is one hygh Prelate and Byshop of the Churche, whome al are bounde to obeye by the lawe of God, how many thin∣ges must be beleued, and of necessitie receyued, that are not expressed in the scriptures, that the Byshop of Romes pardons doe release the paynes of purgatory, that priestes beyng neuer so synfull and vicious doe consecrate the Lordes body, that all deadly synne must be confes∣sed to the priest, and than to receyue of hym the sacramentall absolu∣tion, howe man hath free wyll, wherby he may doe good or euyll, and ryse from synne through repentaunce, howe not by fayth only, but by charitie and true penaunce is obteyned the remission of synnes, how the churche and counsell beyng lawfully assembled, can not erre, and therfore must be obeyed, howe the iudgement and interpretation of Scripture apperteyneth to the churche, if any thyng be in controuer∣sye. These thynges would they haue him to subscribe to, and confirme with his Seale. He a fewe dayes after aunswereth generally, that it is good and Godly, what so euer the holy & catholyque churche hathe taught in these matters, but they not content with this aunswere, at∣tempted greater thinges against him as afterwarde you shall heare. In this tyme also one or two Freers of saint Dominickes order, preached the Gospell at Metz. But whan the priestes shewed them Two friers preache the Gospell at Metz. selues sore offended, diuerse citezens made petition to the Senate, that they would not forbidde thē, promysing al dewe obedience. The ther came also William Farell, who taught first priuatly in the citie, and afterwardes in a certein Castell without. But what tyme the Emperours letters were brought, wherin he commaunded that they Williā Fa∣rell. should alter nothyng in Religion, but punyshe the offendours, the peo¦ple were forbodē to heare any more sermons, vnles the preacher wer¦licenced by the Byshop and the Senate.
This sommer an infinite nombre of grassehoppers came flieng into Germany, and the hither parte of Italy. They were of a wonder∣full grashoppers in Germany and Italy. bignes, and where soeuer they lyghted, they eate vp bothe grasse and corne. Concerning the Duke of Brunswicke, of his moste bitter inuectyues against the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, and of the burnyng of certen places in Saxony, I haue spoken oftener than once: And nowe where he vexed with continuall inuasions and rob∣beries, Goslarie and Brunswicke, cities of the Empire inlincked with the Protestantes, and would not obeye the decrees of the Emperour and kynge Ferdinando, who at their request, had commaunded him, to cease from all violence, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, in the name of al their confederates, make warre against him, and with The Duke of Saxon & the Lantgra¦ue mouewar againste the duke of Brū¦swicke who flieth. in a short space, brynge all his countrie into their subiection, and his strong castell of Wolsebutell, standing not farre frō the citie of Brun∣swycke, wherein he put all his truste, they wanne by composition, he taried not long hymselfe, but whan they began to inuade, he fled with his eldest sonne Charles Uictor to the Duke of Bauier. In that for∣sayde castell were founde sondrie letters, wherby it was evident to see, what thinge he and the Duke of Bauier, the Byshop of Mentz, Heldus, and diuerse others went about, but that shalbe after repeted in place conuenient. The Protestauntes in a wrytyng set forth, decla¦re a Large the causes of this their doinge, and shewe howe they dyd not begynne this warre, but of necessitie defended their fellowes. In the fourmer assemblie at Spier they had intreated kyng Ferdinando that in the Emperours name and his own he would cōmaunde him to suffer the Goslarians to lyue in rest by hym, Ferdinando followed their myndes, who at the same tyme had nede of their ayde agaynste the Turke, and sendyng his Ambassadours, warned hym sharpely to surcease, but he aunswered contemptuously and proudlye, and would not leaue, whereupon ensued this desension before rehersed, for they had shewed kyng Ferdinādo at Spier, that vnlesse he obeyed his de∣cree, they would not suffer their fellowes to susteyne this wrong. At the Ides of Iuly was an other assemblie of the Empyre at Noryn∣berg, for so it was decreed at Spier, because of the warre in Hōgary. An assembly at Noriberg. Kyng Ferdinando was present, and the Emperours deputies were, Fridericke the Palsgraue, the Bishop of Auspurge, Fridericke counte Furstemberge, Hugh Monforte, Iohn Nauie. Ferdinando propoun∣deth howe the Emperour toke it in very good parte, that they sente an army into Hongary, who had purposed to haue bene at the same warre him selfe with all his power, and therfore had called an assem∣blie of the states in Spaine: but in this cōfutation he fell into a great sickenes, and so was constrayned of necessitie to differ it tyll an other tyme: And whan he was nowe fully resolued of the matter, and how
to haue sent his force out of Italy and Burgundye before, than brake foorthe thenterprises of hys enemyes, in so much that he hath cause to feare some perill not only in Ialy, but also in Flaunders and Artoys. Wherof notwithstanding he hath geuen none occasion, who chieflye loueth the comon tranquillitie: but as they knowe well enough, how thenemies haue euer sins the assemblie at Spier endeuoured to leuie men in Suyserlande, & in Germany, to begin the warres: thus is the Emperour against his mind impeached and letted, so that he can ney∣ther come hym selfe, nor send his force, which he hathe nede of: for his owne defence, neuerthelesse he is fully mynded, before the nexte yeare goe aboute, to retourne into Germany, and accomplishe the warre in hys mynde so long intended. And that he will haue on the Sea also a nauie well prepared & furnisshed, that the Turke beyng assayled with double warre, maie not bende hys whole power agaynste Hongary. Moreouer whan he cometh into Germany, he wil leaue nothyng vn∣attempted, that maye make for the godly and tollerable reconcilemēt of Relygyon: And after complayning that almen did not obey the de∣cree of the last assemblie: for some sent no soldiours, others sente: but not the full nombre, som were sent foorth without money, there wan∣ted also of the munitiō & furniture that was promysed, which thinges for because the captaynes made complaynte of, he vewed himself and sawe it was so. And for that the whole iorney was letted herby to the detriment & daunger of the empire, he is commen vnto this assemblie not without his losse & hinderaunce, to require thē that in so nedefull a time, they would not faile the cōmon wealth. Before Fernādo toke his iorney from Uienna, to come to the assemblye at Norinberge, bee∣ing aduertised of the war of Brunswick, he sent a messager to exhorte thē to surcease. And now that he was comen to Norinberge, by cōmō aduise were sent Ambassadours the sōme of whose oration was this, Ambassa∣dors to the Duke of Saxon & the Lantzgraue. that they should not try the matter by force of armes, especially at this time, for in case they did, it were to be feared lest ye Turkish war should behindered, & ciuil warrestered vp in Germany. Unto this the Duke and the Lantzgraue made aunswere the .xi. of Auguste, oute of theyr campe before the Castell of Wulfebuttel, & recyting the causes of this enterprised defence, declare that the thyng might not otherwise haue ben doon. And that albeit they were dryuen of necessitie to take thys warre in hande, to theyr greate charges, yet haue they neuerthelesse sent ayde to the Turkishe warre, fully as moche as they wer boundē, neyther wolde they fayle also to dooe the lyke hereafter. And yf all o∣ther men wold doe the same, ther should be no nede to feare the disso∣lution of the armie: But the lacke that is in many men, is reported by the mouthes and letters of diuers: which seing it is so, and forasmoche as the Duke of Brunswick coulde by non other meane be quieted,
contemning both the Emperours and kyng Ferdinando his cōmaun¦dement, and also the decrees of the Empire, they desire them not to misconstre this their doyng, for they seeke no man by this warre, but him only, neyther doe they refuse whan thinges be appeased to sende al their force to the aide of Hōgary, as much as they are able to make. This assemblie ended the sixe and twenty daye of August, a penaltie was set for suche as obeyed not the decree of Spier, and certein other thinges for the warre requisite were enacted. There were no Pryn∣ces there, sauinge Walter the Master of Prussia, and the Bishops of Bamberge, Eistet, and Trente, and themperours deputes before na∣med. You haue harde before of Cardinall Contarene. He for hys am∣bassade, had no greate thanke of the Bishoppes and Cardinalles, and Contarene in displesure with yt pope & cardinalles was charged that he was not vehemente enoughe in resystynge the Lutheranes, and that he had almoste brought the common welth of Roome in daunger. Where as many blamed hym sore in hys absence, Cardinall Fregose only stode in hys defence. Retournyng out of Ger∣many into Italy, he came to Lukes, where the Bisshop Paule atten∣ded for the Emperours comming, to goe into Barbarye. Than going with the Bisshop to Roome, he was shortly after created Legate of Hys death. Bononie, where at the last he departed thys yere in thend of August not without the suspicion of poison. Whan his frende Cardinall Fre∣gose was also dead a little before they that knowe him well, say that he beleued ryghtly touching mans iustification, he was a man excel∣lently learned and wrote a boke of the Magistrates & comon welthe of the Uenetians. In this same moneth the Chaunceloure of Fraūce, The Chaū∣celour of Fraunceput in prison. williā Poret by the kings cōmaundement (who went thā to Perpig∣nan) was taken in the night, as he laye in his bed, & carried to prison. What time the brute therof came to Paris, al men reioised exceading∣ly. For in those foure yeres that he had ben in that office, he had offen∣ded all sortes of men, and from some lady of the kynges courte, came this misfortune to him. The condēnation also of the Admiral augmē∣ted the hatred, as before is said. He was in a great, & in maner an as∣sured hope to bee made a Cardinall, & therfore two or three monethes before, he wold nedes take holy orders, which thing notwithstāding som mē saied he did, that forasmuch as he was in the hatred of mani, he might the better beare it, & escape the daunger of his life in case that heat should at any tyme breake out & boyle ouer. This was the third mockeri of fortune that chaunced in Fraūce, with in a few monethes together. For where these three before mentioned, the Constable, Ad∣mirall and Chauncelour, were in the highest degre of dignitye. They burned in mutuall mallice & declared by theyr ensample, the disceipte∣fullnes, vncertentye, and slyppernes of woordly thynges. At this tyme Otto, Henry the Palsegraue embraced the doctryne of
the Gospell The same dyd they of Heildessem. I tolde you before of the counsell, the Byshop sent immediatly let∣ters The Pals∣graue recey∣ueth the Go∣spell. and Bulles therof to the Emperoure into Spayne. Wherunto Cesar aunswereth the fyue and twenty daye of Auguste. Fyrst he cō∣mendeth his endeuour and zeale towardes the common wealth, but it greueth hym that the Frenche kyng should be compared vnto him, for he is that prodigall chylde, but for hym selfe which neuer swarued The Empe. aunswered the Popo. from his dutie, he sayeth he ought more derely to be imbraced, for he hath refused no paynes, peryll, nor coste, that a counsel myght once be had, that the whole common wealth beyng pacified, they myght sette vpon the Turke on all handes. Contrary wyse he mynded euer an o∣ther waye, wherfore he fyndeth some lacke in his letters. The other was wonte to make his boaste that he had the Cardinalles at hys becke. Wherfore he doubteth whether the thynge be trewe or coun∣treseared. But howe soeuer it be, he resteth vpon a good conscience, & both their doinges are openly knowen. He hym selfe hath bene ouer∣gentle to hym and fauoured hym a great deale to muche. For all the labour he hath taken these many yeares is in vayne: he hath ofte bene warned of his dutye, sondrye great iniuries haue bene remitted, lea∣gues with hym haue often tymes bene remoued, but with all these thynges he is waxed worse, and vtterly doeth abuse his lenitie and patience. Who brake the league and gaue the occasion of warre, he hathe declared at Rome. What hathe happened since, he wyll vtter now also. For how frendly & desirous of peace he hath bene, hereby may easely appeare, that after the truce taken at Nice, he came into talke with him at Aegnes mortes, & cōmitted him self vnto him, & the yeare followyng, he passed through Fraunce to the great admiration, and not without the reprehension of many. For seing he hath oftener than once broken his fayth and is fickell & vnconstant in all his coun∣selles, it was sure a great daunger, to hazarde his persone vpō his fi∣delitie & promesse. Moreouer he knoweth for certeintie that thei deli∣berated to deteine him at the same time. And where as many say that for the rebellion of Gaunt, he must nedes passe that waie, that was no∣cause at all. For that rebellion was stired vp of a very fewe, & that of the basest sorte of men, & al the coūtrey remayned in their allegeaunce and fidelitie, & the quene his sister could haue remedied those matters. How beit where he was prefixed to retourne into Germany through Italy, he was moued by his intreaty to chaunge his purpose, & went through Fraūce, which thing he is able to proue by his own letters, & by the letters of his sōnes & nobles. For he requested this thing of him so ernestly, yt he rekened he should be dishonoured, in case he toke any other way than through Fraunce. And what tyme he was wt hym in Fraunce, he affirmed many times, yt he wold obserue the truces made
But after he began to complayne, that Millan was not redred vnto him according to the promesse, where not withstandinge vnto ye same promesse was added thys condicyon, that he should restore hys vncle the Duke of Sauoie and doe serten other thinges: And yet syns that tyme hathe he practised agaynste hym in sondry places, in Germanie, in Italy, with the Turke, with Iohn Uaiuod, and his wyfe the wid∣dow, and with certen noble men of Hongatye, by whose meanes the Turke had the citie of Offen: And yet in the meane season he coulde full well cloake hys mallice, & promise hym greate frendshyp, through a subtill fetche and polycie, that he myght tracte the tyme, and set vp∣pon hym vnware. And than tooke he first occasyon, what tyme hys ministers Fregose and Rincon, were intercepted: In the which thing The enter∣prises of Fre¦gose & Rin∣con. how he wolde in dede haue satisfyed hym, he hymselfe can tell, whiche was chosen vmpere in the arbitrement betwene them. This therfore dyd he pretende to bee the cause of a newe trouble and disturbaunce of the weale publicke whan he had prefyxed it long before: But what Fregose and Rincon attempted by hys commaundemente, in Italye and Turkie, and what seruyce they had oftetymes donne hym, was knowen well enoughe. For they wente aboute throughe treason to haue broughte the Christen common welth into great daunger: ther∣fore coulde not they inioye the benefyte of the peace Nicene, whyche had them selues infrynged the publycke peace. Agayne they wente by stealthe, and priuelye throughe Lumbardie, with a companye of oute lawes, whyche is deathe, by the custome of the countrye. He bla∣meth sore the Marques of Piscare, but he offered, to abide iudgment: And whye he shoulde refuse it, and also forsake other satysfactions, it is not vnknowne, he certenly thinking he had been satisfyed, passed ouer into Barbarie, and sendynge, hys Ambassadoure commended vnto hym the publycke peace and queyet. And albeit hee made fayre promises, yet did he attempte diuerse thinges agaynste hym, in Ger∣many, Denmarke & other places: he intēded also to inuade Nauarre. Agayne in the assemblie at Spier, he did what he coulde, to nurryshe stryfe in religion, whilest he promysed seuerally to eyther partye hys amytie and fauour: he indeuoured moreouer to diswade the states of the empire from the Turkisshe warre, he sollycited the Turke, he sent a power into Italye, and mooued warre agaynste hym, in Brabant, by Martyn Rossenn, and in the lande of Luke, by the Duke of Or∣leans, beefore the same was proclaymed. The reste of hys force hee bent wholy agaynst the Frontiers of Spaine: And thys is the fruict that he gathereth of hys dylygence whyche hath geuē hym so moch of his wil, & exhorted him so oft vnto peace: Furthermore where he hath suffered him, to deteine the arche bisshop of Ualencene, prisoner, and
certen noble men of Spayne to be outrageously iniuried by Frēche men at Auignion, hath in dede bene ouermuche sufferaunce. Nowe therfore is he compelled of necessitie to make resistaunce, what tyme he had lefte feare of hym, by reason of his moste large and ample pro∣myses, and also what tyme he had prepared hym selfe for the Tur∣kyshe warre, and therfore was resolued to retourne into Germanye. The iniurie sure is great, and the dammage not smalle, that he hathe done vpon his Frontiers, but yet is he not moued so muche with all these thynges, as for the calamitie of the common wealth. For con∣cernyng his owne affayres, for as muche as he doeth so ofte breake conuenauntes, it is muche better for hym to haue open warre, than to truste to any truce or condicions whiche at the fyrst light occasion, he wyl abholyshe and make frustrate, for peace is oftentimes disceiptful, Peace is dis∣ceiptful. for in the meane season doeth he practyse newe deuyses, hurtfull to the common wealthe, mayteyne factions and is wholy occupied, that when he is wery hym selfe of losse and charges, he maye dryue hym than to resiste the Turke. And beyng of this disposition hym self, he bryngeth vp his chyldren in the same disciplyne. Nowe is his am∣bition and vnmeasurable couetousnes so increased, that it can not be The Frēche king is accu¦sed of ambi∣tion. hydde. His Auncestours dyd vsurpe the Frenche prouince, whyche was of the dominion of the Empyre. So nowe doeth he possesse Sa∣uoye and a parte of Piedmont, and so fortifieth the same, that it is verye apparente, he entendeth not to restore them. And his pourpose was, not only to inuade Lumbardy, but also Parma, and Placence, and than Luke and Seine, after that also the dominion of the church of Rome, to the entent he myght thus haue the waye open to Naples and Sicilie. It is no doubt, but this is his entente, and it maye be ea∣sely perceyued by suche thynges as he attempteth and practiseth in Italye. To be brief his couetous desyre is conteyned within no cer∣teyn limites, but is great and infinite, neyther is it to be thought that euer he wyll obserue conuenauntes so longe as any thyng remayneth that he may take a way frō others & to conuert to his owne vse. For with this disease & vice of mind is he caried about, as with a Raging tempeste, that forgettyng all vertue and Religion, he hathe lyncked hym selfe in league with the Turke, and doeth participate not onlye his counselles, but also his goodes and fortune with the ennemye of our common wealth and nowe also maketh his boaste full stoutelye, that Barbarossa shall come into our Seas with a nauie. Whether these thynges doe make for the reformation of the common wealth, & begynning of a counsell, he ought of his wysdome to cōsyder, his stu∣dy hath bene euer, that there shoulde bee no counsell had, for that he iudged it to bee moste profitable so for his owne priuate commoditie.
Therfore did he this thing wayed and cōsidered, deuise an other way to reconcile and appease the controuersie of Religion in Germanye, & herein had only a respecte vnto Gods glorye, and the dignitie of the churche, therfore let it be imputed to the kynge that there is no coun∣sell, who hath euer impeched the same, and not to hym, whiche hathe taken in this behalfe so much trauayle and payne: Wherfore if his ho∣lynes be nowe disposed, to helpe the common wealth thus afflicted, he ought of dutie to professe him selfe his ennemie, who is the authour of all trouble and calamitie, who moueth and allureth the Turke to inuade the Christen cōmon wealth, who leaueth no waye vnassayed to accomplyshe his ambition and mynde moste desyrous to reuenge. For sythe the chief care of Christianitie apperteyneth vnto hym by rea¦son of his office pastorall, the thynge it selfe doeth surely requyre, that he should no longer suffer hym to cause this vexation and trouble, but declare hym selfe to be his vtter ennemye. Whiche thyng if he would doe accordyngly, it should both be moste accepted of al good men, and and also be very profitable to reteyne other kynges in their du∣tie. For to haue a counsell to recouer peace, and establyshe the common wealth, this is the only remedy, wher∣in if he wyll doe his owne dutie vnfaynedly, he wyll not bee behynde with his parte.
✚ The fiftene Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The argument of the fyftene Booke THe Pope could not accorde the Emperour and the kyng. Warre waxed hote betwyxt En∣glande and Scotlande. The Frenche kyng appeaseth the rebellion of Rochelle. In the as∣semblie of Norinberge, Granuellane demaūded for the Emperour ayde against the frēch kyng, who in a certen answere obiecteth to the Emperour many thinges. Fraunces Lan∣dry is examined. Bucer is sent for to Collon to make a reformatiō. The Pope would buye Millan, he incenseth the Clergie of Collon agaynst the Archebyshop. Laundersey is taken, and Dure is sacked, An assemblie is holden at Spyers, and greuouse complayntes made againste the Frenche kyng, in so muche that his Herauld was sent backe with threatninges. There the Pro∣testantes accused the Duke of Brunswycke, and recite an Acte of his doyng with a young dam∣sell. The Duke of Sauoye accuseth the kyng. The Frenche Ambassadours set forth there an O∣ration, whiche they should haue made, in case they had bene admitted to speake in the counsell. At this assemblie an accorde was made betwyxt the kyng of Romains and the Duke of Saxon. The The Prynces graunt ayde against the Frenche kyng. After the Emperour besiegeth saynt Desier. The kyng of Englande with great force taketh Boloigne. The Em∣perour concludeth a peace with the Frenche kynge contrary to mens expectation. WHan the warre waxed hote on euerye syde, the Cardinalles sent to maks a peace. Byshop at the xxvi. daye of Auguste, sent Am∣bassadours two Cardinalles to treate of peace Michaell Uisense a Portugall, to the Empe∣rour, Iames Sadolete, to the king of Fraūce, praying them, to remitte their priuate miuries for the commō wealthes sake, and frame them selues vnto peace. He sendeth also three Cardi∣nalles as Legates to the Synode at Trente, Paris, Poole, and Morone. The Emperour both answereth the Le∣gate The Presy∣dentes of the counsell at Trente. Uisense, and also wryteth to the Byshop, almoste the same in ef∣fecte, that he dyd in his former letters. How it is vayne to make peace with hym, that wyll kepe no conuenauntes: Therfore he aduertyseth hym agayne, that he would professe hym selfe to be his ennemye: For he hath often sayd that he would before auenged on him, that should breake the tcuce, or make league with the Turke. This is nowe only the surest and fittest meane to establysh the cōmon wealth. With the∣se letters he sent away the Ambassadour about the eyghtene daye of October. For asmuche as the Duke of Longeuille and Martyn Ros∣sen, had leuied their armye in the dominions of the Duke of Cleaue,
the emperialles, by the conduiet of the Prince of Orenge, inuade Gu∣licke, and distroye the countrie with fyre farre and wyde, and take by composition, Dure the chiefest Towne in those parties. For Gulicke Dure is ta∣ken. & Mounten came to the Duke of Cleaue by his mother. At this time also the Emperiall armie in Hongary, no exploite done, when they had attempted in vayne to wynne the Towne of Pesta, retourneth home, and through infection dyed many thousandes. Duke Maurice of Saxonye serued in thys warre voluntarily, a yonge prince aboute xxi yeares of age, who on a certen daye ryding out of the campe, and but one mā with him, meting by chaunce with certē Turkes, foughte with them, and hauing his horse slayne vnder him, was smitten to the ground. Than his sernaunt being a gentel man borne, lay downe vp∣on hys lorde and with his body couered the Duke, and defended him and bare of the stripes so longe vntill certen horsemen came and res∣cewed the Prince. And so he saued hys lyfe, but his man hauing recei∣ued many woundes was caried into the Camp, and dyed shortly af∣ter. Thus ended the warre in Hongarye. The bisshop had sente ayde of thre thousand footemen, whiche wer led by Alexander Uitellius. At thys tyme also began hote warre betwene England & Scotland, the occasion wherof was ministred a yere before, for that the Scottish Warre be∣twixte Eng∣land & Scot∣lande. king, when he had promised to mete hys vncle, the king of Englande at Yorke, to make an accorde touching theyr limites, being diswaded by hys mother and certē of his nobles, came not. And it fortuned that the Scottes had this yere in the beginning of december a great ouer∣throwe at a place called Solymosse. In the whiche battell were ta∣ken the most part of all the lordes in Scotelande: For the which losse The Scotes taken at So∣lymosse. the kynge toke suche thought, that retournyng home, he dyed within a fewe dayes after, which was the day before the Ides of December when the eight day before, the quene had brought him forth a daugh∣ter, Mary: whiche thinge also did greatly augmente his sorrowe, for Theyr king dieth. that he wanted an heyremale: For in the yere before he had loste two sonnes, in sondri places, within the space of foure and twenty houres: And he had to wyfe Marye, daughter to the Duke of Guyse, of the house of Lorayne. When the Scottes werre in thys calamitie, the Frenche kynge sent them monye and munition. After the kynge was dead the gouernement was committed to Iames Hamelton Erle of Arrayne, whiche was the kinges greate cosyn. The next place vnto hym had the Cardiuall of. S. Andrewes, most addickte to the kynge of Fraunce. I shewed before how Henry the Prince of Saxonie had for him selfe and his sonne Maurice, entred into league with the Pro∣testantes: But after his death, Duke Maurice being moued herein, sayed how hys father coulde not bynde hym, neyther wolde he be ty∣ed to the bondes of his father. Whē Henry Duke of Brunswicke was
expulsed, as before is sayd, he accused the Duke of Saxon, the Lantz∣graue and theyr consortes to the imperial chamber. Who being after∣warde The Duke of Sarō and the Lantz∣graue refuse the iudgmēt of the chaum¦ber. cited, in the moneth of December, do refuse theyr iudgemente in all thinges, and sendinge ambassadours thither, declare this vnto them, and also do protest, that they doe not refuse a lawfull and ordy∣narye Iurisdiction, but take exceptions to the Iudges themselues, which are all of a contrary relygion, which prayse the decree made at Auspurge twelue yeres past, and haue confirmed the same by an othe which for the same cause dissent from them exceadingly, and beare thē greate mallice: whiche take them for heretikes, and thinke them vn∣worthy to haue any iustice ministred: which by sōdry preiudices haue oft tymes vttered and bewreyed this theyr hatred. In the conuentiō at Regenspurg it was decreed, that the chamber would this yeare in the moneth of Ianuary, be refourmed. This did the Protestantes al∣low, so that men also of theyr rellgion might be admitted to be of that nombre, which thing Themperour graunted them, and king Fernan∣do renewed after in the assemblie at Spier, and appoynted the mo∣neth of Iune for the same reformation, and by this meane obteined of them ayde for the Turkishe warre. For yf it had ben otherwyse, they tolde him that tyme plainely, that they wolde not only beare no char∣ges frō henceforth touching the iudges of the chamber, but also wold refuse hereafter to obey theyr decrees. When therefore nothinge was donne hitherto, they as before is sayde, sending Ambassadours, doe refuse theire iudgment. And agayne the iudges after in a wrytyng set forth, dooe reiect that same refusall. They agreed in theyr last metinge at Norrinberge, there to assemble agayne about the Turkish warre, the xiiii. daye of Nouember, but the matter was differred: And in the The Duke of Cleauere∣couereth Dure. most sharpe time of winter, the Duke of Cleaue besegeth and recoue∣reth Dure. What tyme the Frenche kynge beseged Perpignan, there arrose a rebellion at Rochel an hauē towenin Pantois verey famous and situated in a place right commodious. It was ones possessed of Englysh men, but it was rendred Frenche, in the tyme of Charles the A rebellion at Rochelle. first sonne and heire to his father Iohn, The cause of that commoty∣on was for a garison placed there by the king, vnder the gouernemēt of Iarnacke the Admirall his kinsinā: And in other places also there aboutes, they were vp for a tribute of Saltepittes, and droue awaye with reproche the kinges officers and treasurers that came thither. So soone as the kinge vnderstode it, he sente thither a new garrison of horsemen and footemen: Iarnake also taketh from them, all theyre munition and armure, and kepte the gates with watche and warde. The laste day of December followyng, the kyng hym selfe came thy∣ther, 1543. and the next daye, settyng in place of iudgement, whan both the Townes men, & theyr neyghbours aboute them, laye prostrate before
hym, and besought hym of mercy. Albeit, sayeth he, what tyme I and my thildren, were occupied in moste weightie affayres, for the defence The kynges oratiō to thē of Rochell. of oure whole Realme and of you al, you forgetting your dewtie, that you owe vnto vs, haue made a rebellion and an vprore, in suche wyse, as we haue iuste cause to punnishe you, and for the estate of oure per∣son, and enormitie of your offence, myght dryue you to fyne: Yet for that we accompt it, no lesse honorable and prayse worthye for a prince The clemēcy of king Fraū¦ces. to extend mercy to his people, than it is honest for hys subiectes to re∣main in their duty, & againe because we set more by this your submis∣sion and wyllyng myndes, than by the rigour of the lawe, we doe in∣tende to forget the iniurie that you haue done vnto vs, and to haue a consideration not so much of your errour and trespasse, as of our own accustomed gentlenes, vpon this trnste and confidence, that you wyl committe no suche lyke facte hereafter. For els in a steade of a gentle and mercifull Prince, you shall haue a seuere executour of iustice, and that through your owne faulte, whiche doubtles ought to be accoūp∣ted no lesse, than that for the which in these laste yeares past the Gan∣tois were handled extremely, whan they were not only executed and punished, but also lost their liberties for euer. Whiche example in dede though we myght followe without reprehension, because we haue neyther susteyned lesse iniurie, neyther are inferiour vnto hym in any thynge, whiche hath thus reuenged his griefe. Yet for as much as we loke to encrease rather through the loue, fidelitie & beneuolence of our subiectes, thā to be enriched by their goodes & substaūce, we do clere∣ly forgeue you this act, & restore you to your former estate. Notwith∣standing suche thinges as you haue frely and lyberally geuen vs, we doe accepte and reteyne. What so euer also hath bene taken from you in this tumulte, we wyll that it be restored you agayne. Whan after this Oration of the kyng there ensued a reioysing & a confused noyse of the audience, by and by was heard a moste swete and plesaunt me∣lodie in the steple of the head churche of saynct Bartholomewe, testi∣fying the publique ioye and gladnes. After that the Senate made the kyng a moste costly supper. The next daye, the kyng beyng ready to departe, sayde to the chief of the people, we goe nowe into an other parte of our Realme, to defende the same from the ennemy, defende you this, as we truste assuredly you wyll doe. Moreouer if there be any thyng that apperteineth to the bettering of the cōmoditie of your citie, we wyll not denye your requeste. The seuentene day of Ianua∣ry kyng Ferdinando and his two sonnes came to Nurrenberge to The assem∣blie of Nur∣renberge. the assemblie. And the eyght daye after came thether also Granuel∣lan out of Spayne, who comming by Trente with his sonne the by∣shop of Arras, had exhorted there the byshoppes legates. In this con∣uention the Emperour had substituted for his deputies, Fridericke
Palatine, the Bishop of Auspurge, Iohn Nauie. The seconde kalend of February, king Fernando maketh hys proposition. And forasmuch as in certen assemblies before, continual ayde agaynst the Turk hath been decreed, he admonissheth and requireth them, that they wyll all condescend vpon this nowe, that nothing nedefull be wantyng: for it is reported of all men, that he wyll retourne thys yere into Hongarye with an exceadynge greate power, and that he is prouoked so to doe, by certen christian Princes. And albeit his countries be sore impoue∣rished with almoste continuall warres, yet will he not faile them for his part. And how great a matter it is, to defend Hongary, Austrich, Morauia and other countries adioining to the same, there is no man in maner, but knoweth. And for the better perswasion were red di∣uerse letters, sente vnto king Fernando & others, from sondry places, all the which in a maner pourported thys, that the Turke prepared a new armie, and a Nauie, to warre bothe by sea and land. There wer also the Ambassadours of quene Marie, who gouerned the lowe coū∣trye for themperour, Wiricke Criechinge, and Uiglie, Zwichem a Lawyer. They in a longe oration accused sore the Duke of Cleaue, that through hys ayde and counsell, the French kyng, by the conduict The treatye of Norin∣berge of Martyn Rossenn, had made warre in those parties, wherfore they requested them to reduce and frame him to his dewtie that he myght leaue the possession of Gelderland, & recompence the dommage don. After the fifte daye of Februarie, Granuellan shewed his commission. And what the good will of themperour was towardes the publicke weale, he sayd it was no nede to recite: but he reioysed not a lyttle, the last yere, whan it was she wed hym, how they made oute theyr pow∣ers together ioyntely agaynst the Turke, and wolde in dede haue ben therepresent hym selfe, and had prepared all thynges for the same ior∣ney, but then did the French king and the Duke of Cleaue moue war agaynst hym vnloked for: which thing certēly disapoynted his former pourpos, for the force which he had intended to haue sent agaynst the perpetuall enemie of Christianitie, he was constrayned to reteyne a∣boute him, for his owne defence: especially seynge his enemyes brag∣ged also verey moche of the Turkisshe Nauie, wherin they sayd came great soccour for them. But all thys notwithstandyng he perseuereth styll in the same mynd, that he hath euer ben of, and also declared, and is determined to spende not only hys Treasure, but also hys lyfe and bloude in the Turkisshe warre, so that they will agayne ayde hym a∣gaynst the French king and the Duke of Cleaue. Wherunto both his will and zeale towardes the common welth, and also the state of this dangerous tyme onght to perswade thē: How the French king hath expulsed his vncle the Duke of Sauoie oute of his inheritaunce, it is not vnknowen: the same he intendeth to doe also vnto others, astune
and occasyon will serue. And for because themperoure dooeth let his violent enterprises, therfore doeth he beare hym all thys hatred and mallice. They heard ryght nowe, by the letters that wer redde, what he worketh with the Turke, and what he practiseth in Germany, and how he seketh to hynder the Turkisshe warre. And forasmuch as the Duke of Cleaue is ioyned in league with hym, and also distourbeth themperours moste worthye exploictes, and is a let to the saufgarde of Germany, it is requisite that ayde be decried agaynste them bothe, that theyr insolente Rasshenes may be repressed. In the meane tyme A supplicati∣on of the pro¦testantes. the Protestantes deliuer a supplycation to king Fernando and them∣perours deputies: wherin they make a longe rehersal, what hath ben don in Religion these many yeres, how the peace was geuen at Nor∣inberge, and how the iudges of the chamber haue infringed it, howe themperour made them a prouiso two yeres past at Regenspurg, and declared playnely hys mynde, and howe a decree was made there for the reformation of the chamber, and vpryght ministration of Iustice: what they also did protest than openly vnlesse the decree were obser∣ued. And seing there is nothing redressed hitherto: And that the iudg∣es of the chamber do stil molest them after theyr wonted maner, first: for theyr defence agaynste the Duke of Brunswicke, secondly for not paying the stipendes of the chamber, therfore haue they refused their whole iurisdiction: which thing in dede they protested longe before in the open assemblie that they wolde doe. Now therfore, yf the matter be otherwise reported vnto them, they desyre them, to geue no credit: for they were constrayned of necessitie thus to doe, and vsed lawefull remedy, whych both the law and equitie it selfe doeth permitte. For if they should on this wyse procede, and vsurpe the authoritie of iudge∣ment, and pronounce publycations & other penalties, the same wolde not be to them only, but also to the publicke weale hurtfull. For what time, throughe mallice and hatred kindled amonges the states, theire whole treasure shalbe consumed in ciuile warre, how fyt and profita∣ble the same wilbe for the Turkes, there is no man but knoweth wel enough. For howe harde a thing it is, after that althynges be exaspe∣rated, to quyet the matter, it maye by dyuers examples be shewed. The Turks increase by the losse of christians. They verely doe wishe for nothyng more, than that a fyrme peace, vp∣right iustice, and publicke quiet might be stablished in Germany, cer∣tenly of the dissention that is in religion arriseth al this grudg & diffi∣dence: And that dissention springeth of that same wel, for that the doc∣tryne of the gospel, and Gods trewe relygyon are prohibited, for that errours and open crimes are not only not taken awaye or a mended, but also for ambition and lucre sake, are defended and maynteyned. Therfore god beyng offended & prouoked to wrath for thys vnthank∣fulnes, doeth plage vs with greate calamities, and will not cease hys
hand, so longe as we perseuer in the same: They praye them therfore, that they wolde applye theyr studye hereunto, and at the lestewyse so trauell in this matter, that for relygion sake, there bee no trouble mo∣ued, and that iustice maye bee ministred to all men indifferentlye: but for somoche as that can not be, as the state of the chamber is at thys present, they requyre, that accordyng to the olde lawes of the empire, and Themprours declaratiō, that iudgemente may be reformed, and other iudges appoynted, and actions to remayne in the same state as they were in before the refusall made, and the iudges to bee charged, that they obserue exactely, the fourme of the reformation that shalbe, and attempt nothynge agaynst the peace makinges of former yeres: For vnlesse the thyng maye thus bee ordered, and that they may haue a sufficiente warraunte to haue peace, they cannot consulte of the Turkishe warre althoughe they desyre to doe anye thynge they maye for the common welth. The matter beyng longe and mothe debated, whan bothe kynge Fernando, and Themperours attourneis, sayed, howe the counsell was alreadye appoynted ar Trente, and Thempe∣roure also would come thyther: And that the Iudges of the chamber coulde not be remoued without theyr cause were hearde, and that the redresse, is already decreed, and shortely shall take effecte. And howe they coulde not denye the Duke of Brunswicke, by them expulsed, makyng claime to hys owne, to haue the lawe, neyther that they had Aucthorytye to make any further graunte. The Protestauntes shew them agayne, that they neyther allowe that Counsell, neyther wyll they come there, neyther are they satisfyed in other thynges, nor suffi∣ciently assured, neyther can they take any further delyberation. Not∣withstandinge Fernando and the other states make a decree for the The decre of Norinberg. fortyfying of the places nere to the Turkes dominion, and for contri∣bution monye for the same, and appoynte the thirde daye of Iuly, for reformation of the Chamber, ordeynynge that it shoulde be redressed after the fourme prescribed eleuen yeares paste at Regenspurge, ap∣pointing a penaltie for those that shall refuse to contribute their ayde accordyngly. But the Protestantes agayne do proteste, that they doe not assente vnto this decree, because it was made withoute theyr ad∣uise, because there is no certen thing establisshed touching the peace, & law, and because there is great pertialitie cōcerning the contribution. When for Themperours cominge, the matter was lyke to tende to a mortal warre betwene him, & the Duke of Cleaue. The Princes elec∣tours and other states by theyr Ambassadours doe intreat, & hardely at the last obteyne a trewes of Granuellan, not certē and determinat, but suche, as shoulde stande at Themperours pleasure, so soone as he shoulde sette foote into Germanye, whether he wyll approue,
or refuse it, and in the meane season, Sittarde a verey stronge towne in the frontier of Gulicke, shoulde haue been in the Emperours pos∣session, vntyll he had declared what hys mynde were. The interces∣sours promysed thys also, that they wold send Ambassadours to mete with the Emperoure, to in treate him in the matter: And Granuellan put them in greate hope, that theye shoulde receyue of hym a gentle aunswer. Thys treatye thambassadours of Cleaue, the chiefe where∣of was Iohn Ulatten, a noble man of birthe and well learned, dyd well allowe, and gaue thankes to the intercessours, for theyr paynes taken: but in the meane whyle was a battell foughten at the Towne of Sittarde, the .xxiiii. daye of Marche. And where as the Duke of Cleaue wanne the feelde, partely by reason of this victorye, and part∣ly The Duke of Cleaue re∣fuseth truce. throughe the perswasion of the Frenche Kynge, that fed hym with money, he waxed obstinate, forsakynge the treuce, whan hys ambas∣sadours were retourned home. The newes of this prosperous battel, brought spedely into Fraunce, caused great reioysynge, and at Paris by the Kynges commaundemente, they sange Te deum. The Dukes of Banier bretherne by theyr Ambassadours, make intercession to the Protestantes in thys conuentyon, and amonges other condicions they propounde thys also, that all the Duke of Brunsewickes landes, myght be committed to the custody of Themperoure, or certen prin∣ces of Germany, tyll the matter be further examined: but herein could be nothynge determyned. In this assemblye Christopher Bysshop of Auspurge dyed of a soden paulsey, when he had appoynted to make The death of the bishop of Auspurg. a feaste on the nexte daye. He was of the house of Stadious, a man learned and peaceable, whom Otto Truckesse suceded. Here was a decree made, but not entered of recorde as was accustomed, neyther was it of authorytye. It was longe or the Frenche Kynge receyued Themperours Letters wrytten to the Bisshop of Roome, therefore nowe at the laste he aunswereth them at the full. Where Thempe∣roure wolde be preferred before hym, as though he had well deserued The French kinges aun∣swer to the Emperours letters. of the church of Roome, it is a mockerie and a vayne thyng. For ney∣ther are Themperours auncesters to bee compared with hys, nor he hymselfe also with hym in thys behalfe: certenly he is a good sonne, and moche prayse worthye, whose Armie dyd besiege, vexe, and take prisoner, the father and good man of the house, Clemente the .vii. and sacked the chiefe citie of the whole world, and polluted the Churches and Temples of God immortall by sondry wayes, and lefte there vn∣donne no kynde of mischiefe, fylthy luste, and crueltye, who vnto this so greate an outerage, gaue also hym selfe a prettye mocke, what tyme he made vowes and supplycatyons in Spayne for the delyue∣raunce of hys father, whom he moste streyghtely deteyned at home
captiue: But hys Progenitours kinges of Fraunce, euer syns Char∣les, Martell Pipine and Lewis, haue studyed alwayes to auaunce Kinges of Fraunce most addicte¦th the pope. and enryche the Bysshoppes of Roome. He prayseth moche his owne dilligence and zeale to the common welthe, but the thynge is farre o∣therwyse: yf it bee indged a ryghte: for throughe hys order and con∣duite haue many thousandes of Christians ben slayne of the Turkes, within a shorte space, in Hongary ones or twyse, in the Goulfe of Ue∣nise at Castelneufe, after that in Barbarfa, at Argiers. Whither at the same tyme he sayed he muste nedes gooe, whan in deede he fled, and leafte Germany for appraye to the enemie than approchynge throughe hys faulte, the yong infante of Iohn Uayuode, and his owne brother Fernando, and all the Realme of Hongary are fallen into thys cala∣mitie: he telleth with a brauerye, as thoughe he came to Aegnesmor∣tes to confirme the peace: but yf there be any prayse in thys thynge, it ought rather to bee ascribed vnto hym, whiche wente fyrste in to the Shyppe to hym, and after also sente hys chyldrene thyther, wherein surely there was great daunger, bothe of hym selfe, that can truste no man, and also of Androwe de Anxie, hys Admirall, a man of a subtyll and craftie witte. After he tooke hys Iorney through Fraunce, at his requeste in dede, but when he had fyrste by hys Ambassadour, letters: and Messagers, craued thys of hym, and offered hym Millan: he al∣ledgeth nonne other causes, but he was constrayned of necessitie for the Rebellion of Gaunte to passe that waye: where he sayeth, howe consultation was had, to haue stayed hym, it is faulse, & neuer came into hys thought: He did the Duke of Sauoye no wronge, but when he denyed him bothe hys mothers dowarye, and in herytaunce, and woulde not permitte hym to redeme Nice, and besydes dyd euyll in∣treate The Dukes of Sauoye frend to thē∣peroure. hys Lieutenauntes and soldiours, he recouered by foorce of Armes, that he coulde not gette by lawe and equitie especyallye, syns he wrought all thinges in a maner at the Emperours pleasure, whose vse and propertye is, to perswade other Kynges, subiectes to reuolte, & after to bryng them to miserye: As for example the Dukes of Bour∣bon, Sauoye, the Prynce of Salarne. And Duke Henry of Brunse∣wicke: He is also chargeable and hurtful to his kinse folkes and alies, to Christierne king of Denmarke, to Fernando his brother, & to hym chieflye whiche hathe maried his eldeste syster: For that the Turke hathe of late inuaded Hongarye, and taken the chyefe Cytye, it ought not to be ascribed vnto hym, but to hymselfe and hys brother, whiche layed wayte, for the yonge Heyre, Uayuodes sonne, and made warre agaynste hym. And so aunswereth to euerye poynte of the Em∣peroures Letters, concernynge the Turke, and hys Ambassa∣doures sente vnto hym touchynge the Germanes Relygyon and
counsell, that he will seme to bee in no faulte, but to deserue well the Title of the mooste Christian Kynge, geuen longe syns to hys noble progenitours. And in fyne desyreth the Bisshop to geue no credyte to the sclaunderous reporte of hys aduersary, but to thynke howe there is nothynge, that he wyll not bee glad to doe for the common welthes sake and hys, and for the Churche of Roome. A little before this time dyed Willyam Bellaye of Langeis, of whom wee haue oftetymes mentioned, a man of moche honoure and vertue, and an especyall or∣namente The death & praise of W. Bellay. of the Frenche Nobilytye, by reason of hys notable lear∣nynge, Eloquence, Experyence, and syngular aptnes in all affayres, farre vnlyke vnto the moste parte that followe the lawe, which seeke onlye to auaunce and augemente theyre ryches: but he was of so no∣ble a courage, that he had thys respect onely, howe he myght through more vertue, wynne trewe renowne, and serue hys Prynce trewelye thoughe it were to hys owne hynderaunce. I tolde you beefore of Fraunces Lander, a preacher of Paris. Whan he had made a doubt∣full Frances Lā¦der cōmmit∣ted to prison aunswer to the articles propounded, and perseuered styll in hys Preachynge, two or three dayes before Easter he was commytted to warde. Thys was doone by the procuremente of the Diuines, which had accused hym to the lieutenaunte Criminell. Within a fewe daies after the Kynge came to Sangermane whyche is a little Towne and Castell by the Ryuer of Seine, fyue myles benethe Paris, and His weknes before the kynge. beyng infourmed of the whole matter, calleth the Preacher beefore hym. He whan he came thither, beynge put in feare by some mennes woordes, whyche sayed howe the kynge was sore offended, declared not that constancye, whyche many men looked for at hys hande: And beynge caryed agayne vnto Parys the .xxix. daye of Aprill he was enforced to recant suche thynges as he had taught before. For on that day in the Cathedral Church did assemble the Senatours and iudg∣es of the Parlamente, moreouer all the Magistrates and officers of Parys, and a great nomber of Diuines. After the Church dores wer made faste, and men set in Armure to dryue a waye the people. Whan all were placed hys opinions were recyted, and beynge demaunded of euery one, what he beleued therein, he aunswered as pleased them, confessynge howe he had erred, and promyseth all obedyence from hencefoorthe, and acknoweledgeth those Articles of doctryne, which fryste the Diuines, and after the Kynges counsell propounded vnto His recanta¦tion. hym, to bee trewe and godlye. After the same sorte also they handled an other Preacher, Depensius, thoughe not with so greate a solem∣nitie: for whan he had at the fyrste made hys retractatyon nothynge Depensius driuen to re∣cante. playnlye, he was compelled an other daye in hys sermon beefore the people, to declare eche thynge distinctelye and apertelye, tyll the Di∣vines there present, were fully satisfyed. In Fraunce liued Clemente
Marotte, who in the vulgare tounge surmounted far al Poetes that eyther wee before hys dayes, or that liued also in his tyme. He had no The prayse of Clements Marot. greate knowledge in the latyn tongue, but yet through the company of learned menne he profyted verye moche: Neyther was there any thynge almost in the bookes of Poetes, but he kneweit, so that out of theyr woorkes he tooke moche and applyed it to hys pourpose. Thus did he translate certē thinges couertly, out of Tibullus, Propertius, and Ouide into hys owne elegies. And our of Gallus, he tooke the Marriage of Hercules, Duke of Farrare, and Senate Armoricke Daughter to Lewes the .xij. Kynge of Fraunce. He translated also moste excellently the fyrst booke of Ouides, Metamorphosys. And in his later dayes he bente all his writynges, to holy scripture, and was prefixed to haue expressed Dauid his Psalter in Frenche metre, but Psalmes translated by Marot. taken away through sickenes, he finished only fyfty Psalmes, which now remaine, and are red not without thadmiration of hys excellent wit: for nothinge is more pleasaunte than hys style, nothynge purer than his speache, nothyng apter or more pleasaunt than hys Rythme, And he set them foorthe thys yeare at Geneua, whither he repaired, what tyme hee myghte not safelye make longer a bode in Fraunce, for suspycyon of Lutheranisme, he had prynted .xxx. Psalmes two yeares before in Parys, but with moche diffycultye: for thys myghte he not doo, beefore the Doctours of Sorbone had pronounced, that there was nothynge conteyned in that booke, contrary to the Chry∣styane fayth. Thys peraduenture maketh not moche to our pourpos, but I thought good to commend the name, of so excellent an Artificer also, to other nations, for in Fraunce hys memoryal shal endure to the last posterytie, and most men be of thys opinion, that it shall be ryght harde for anye man to matche hym in thys kynde of vertue, and as Tullye reporteth of Cesar: he maketh all wyse menne a frayde to wryte. Some others haue taken in hande the same Argumente, and in deede better learned than he, but they doo not attayne to that fynes of perfectyon. In the tenth booke is mentioned of the Archebis∣shop of Collon, how he coueted to refourme hys churche, and allowed The Arche∣bisshop of Collon cal∣leth a con∣vocation. not that Synode of hys prouynce, notwithstandynge that the booke went foorthe in hys name. And after that, in the conuention at Regē∣spurge, Bisshops were enioyned, bothe by kinge Fernando, and also by the Bisshop of Roomes Legate, that euery man in hys owne dyo∣cesse shoulde see a godly reformation to bee had, he calleth a conuoca∣tyon of hys states, whych are the clergye of the cathedrall churche, the Erles, the Nobilitie, and Ambassadours of cities. The matter beyng debated, they agreed all, that so godly and holsome a worke shoulde be taken in hand. Therefore he appoynteth certen to conceaue in wri∣tyng a draughte of the reformation that shalbe, and to espye out good
men to bee mynisters of the churche. Thys wryting he sendeth to the Diuines of Collon, and wylleth them to iudge thereof by the Scrip∣tures, and to shew theyr opinion, but where hys requeste was not sa∣satisfyed, and hauing not conuenyent ministers to instructe the peo∣ple, he sent for Martyn Bucer at Strasburg, whō both Iohn Grop∣per had alwayes commended vnto hym highly, and he hymselfe also knewe ryght wel, by familyar comunication. Who commyng thither the laste yere in Decembre, in the begynnyng of thys yere, at the com∣maundemente of the prince, beganne to preache at Bomia, a Towne vpon the Rhine fyue miles aboue Collō. After at the Ides of March, the Bisshop calleth a newe assemblie of states, at Bomia, and requi∣reth Bucer prea∣cheth at Bo∣mia. that they wolde consulte vpon a godly reformation: But where the clergie had assigned no man for this pourpos, the rest of the states desyre the Archebishop, that according to hys owne iudgemente, hee wolde chouse mete men for the thynge. Wherfore he committeth thys charge vnto Bucer, that he shoulde penne oute the articles of the chri∣stian doctrine, and to thentent all thynges might the better be donne, The bis∣shops boke of reformatiō. he intreateth the Prince Electour of Saxonye, that he wolde Ioyne vnto hym Melancthon. When he was commen and Iohn Pistor frō the Lantzgraue, and that the woorke was fynished, the Archebishop sent it to the clergie of the head church in Collon, whych are all of no∣ble Melancthon and Pistor come to Col∣lon. houses, and requireth them, that they wolde ponder dyligently the doctryne of that booke. After at the .xxii. daye of Iuly, he calleth an o∣ther Synode and exhibited vnto them the booke of reformation, re∣quiring them that euery state wold chose certen, whyche myght per∣vse that booke ouer, and conferre with hys, to thentent some tollera∣ble and godly accorde myghte in fyne bee had. But the clergie before sayed, vrged this obstiuately that Bucet especially, and certen others appoynted of late to instructe the people, myghte bee dysplaced. After they require a further tyme of delyberation, touching the booke, and refuse to conferre with the rest. He, albeit he knewe well enoughe for what pourpose they made thys delaye, yet to thende they should fynd no lacke, graunteth them tyme to consulte in. And where they spake of remouing of Bucer, and hys companions, he did not refuse, in case any man were able to conuicte them, eyther of false doctryne, or of e∣uyll lyfe: And at sondrye tymes offered them lybertie to trye it, beyng ready to exhibite them before any lawefull or indifferent Iudg. Whā the matter therfore stayed here, they prepare a contrary booke, and in A booke cal∣led Anti∣dagma. title it Antididagma. In the preface of the same booke, after a won∣derfull raylynge agaynst the Lutheranes, they affirme with expresse wordes, that they had rather lyue vnder the dominion of the Turkes than vnder a Magistrate, that wolde followe and defend that refor∣mation. The author and diuisor of this booke, as they say, was Grop∣per.
For he, albeit he was very familiar with Bucer two yeres before at Regenspurge: Albeit that comyng home from thence, he cōmended Gropper for∣saketh the Gospell. hym maruelously, not only to the Archebisshop, but also euerye where to all others, albeit he had written him many, and that most frendely letters, yet whan the matter was brought vnto this poynt, he forsoke his frendeship altogether, and leauynge hys prince, by whom he had all hys preferment, he reuolted into the tentes of his aduersaries. The same did Barnarde Hagie his Chauncelour: which had bothe of them many fatte benefyces. The diuines of Collon affailed Bucerfore, and rattled hym vp with manye opprobrious wordes. But he requyred, that the matter might come to disputatiō, and protested that he wold defende this doctrine agaynste them in all assemblies. In hys defence also Melanethon set forthe a booke at the same tyme, and exhortinge them vnto modestie, sheweth them, what shamefull errours they de∣fende. Duke Moris of Saxonye maketh certen lawes at this tyme, Duke Mo∣ris maketh lawes for ye ministers of the churche. to be obserued within hys dominiō. And fyrst in dede he exhorteth the preachers and ministers of the church to execute theyr office diligent∣ly, to preache the Gospel sincerely, and to shyne before theyr stock with honest examples of lyfe, that they exhorte men to prayer, and mutuall loue, that they rebuke vice sharpelye, and sequester desperate persons from the communion of the church, by the consent of the Magistrat, vntyll they amende. And suche as will not thus be refourmed, to pre∣sent vnto the Magistrate. Secondly, forasmoch as youthe is the store of the Churche and the publicke weale, he founded three Grammer He foundeth three scooles. Scooles, at Misene, Merseburge, and Porte. And in euerye place, he fyndeth a certen nombre of Scolars, bothe theyr apparell and com∣mons: And payeth also yerely stipendes to theyr Scolemasters. And to thys vse doeth he applye the reuenewes of the relygious houses wherin Monkes had dwelt, and suche others. He graunteth that the youthe shal remaine there, for the space of sixe yeres: of the same lands He is benefi∣ciall to the Uniuersitie of Lipsia. also he geueth in Augementation to the Uniuersitie of Lipsia, two thousand crownes yerely, and certen Rasers of wheat. Moreouer he forbiddeth beggynge, and appoynteth an yerelye somme of monye in certen places to releue poore householders. After this for suche, as de∣floure Lawes a∣gaynst de∣flowerers of Uirgins, & adulterers. maydes, and mary them not, he appoynteth thys punishement, that albeit they sett them foorthe afterwardes, and marye them to o∣thers, yet shall they be committed to pryson. And commaundeth that aduouterers shall dye by the sworde. And noble men that marie suche wyues as they haue accompanied with beefore, he punnishethe thus, that he taketh awaye from theyr children, that were borne before the Marriage, the possession and profites of suche landes as they holde of him in fee. In the meane time themperoure cōming oute of Spaine, arriueth with his Nauie at Genes. And the .xxvi. day of May addres∣syng
his letters from thence to the Duke of Saron, the Lantzgraue and theyr consortes. For as moche as they are alreadye sufficientlye warranted by hys proclamations for publyke peace, and that also the reformation of the chamber shal now be shortely, he exhorteth them, they would not refuse to contribute theyr ayde agaynst the Turk, of whose not only preparation that is exceading greate, but also of hys commyng, he is credebly certifyed both by letters & messaugers: He was infourmed of all that was dooue in the conuention by Nauius, that wente vnto hym. At the same tyme also he calleth a counsell of thempire at Spier, agaynst the laste daye of Nouembre. Departyng than frō Genes, he spake with the Bisshop of Rome at Busset, which An assemble at Spier. is a Towne by the Riuer of Tare, betwixte Placence and Cremone. There agayne in lyke case as he did before by letters, he required him to proclayme hymself enemie to the French Kynge: but he sayde howe that was not expedient for the common welth, and herin perseuered. The Bisshop had geuen to hys sonne Peter Aloise, Parma and Pla∣cence, whiche he had obteyned latelye of the College of Cardinalles, by an exchaunge made, and because these Cities were sometyme the Dukes of Millan, he required, that the Emperour by hys authorytie would for a pece of monye, confirme hys sonne in the possession of thē, The Pope woulde bye Millan. and create hym Duke of the same. But that did themperoure (which helde Millan, and wolde deminishe no part of hys ryght) refuse. They saye moreouer howe the Bysshōppes intente was, to haue perswaded themperour, for a somme vfmony, to haue made his Nephew, Octa∣uian, Duke of Millan. The Emperour breaking of this talke, that he might be no longer letted, whan he had deliuered vnto Cosmus Me∣dices, Duke of Florence, the Casteles of Florence and Liburne, which he had vntill that time in his owne custodye, receyuing of hym ther∣fore, two hondreth thousand ducates, he procedeth on hys iorney. Be∣fore he came out of Spayne, he had created hys sonne Philip kynge, and gaue vnto hym in marriage, the Ladye Marye, Daughter vnto Philip crea∣ted kynge of Spayne. Iohn kynge of Portugall. This yere also did Sigismunde, the sonne of Sigismund kyng of Polle, mary the Lady Elyzabeth the daugh∣ter of Fernando kyng of Romanes. Henry the Duke of Brunsewicke going to mete Themperour in Italy, heynouslye accuseth the Prote∣stantes at Cremoise. Whan Themperour was now comming out of Italy with hys armie, the Protestantes, whiche had lately receyued hys letters dated at Gene, mete together at sinalcalde the .xxiiii. daye of Iune, to consulte of sending to hym Ambassadours, of matters ap∣perteyning to the defence and kepyng of the Dutchie of Brunswicke, and to theyr league, to sollicite Duke Maurice, of the king of Swe∣cia, of Otto Henry Palatine, Wuolfange Prince of Bipounte, of the Bisshop of Munster whiche than desyred all to be receyued into their
league. This assemblie ended the .xxi. of Iuly. And moche aboute thys same tyme, the Emperoure and the Kyng of England make a league A league of themp. & the king of Eng¦land against the Frenche kyng. agaynste the Frenche Kynge, whiche ayded the Scottes, as before is sayde. But this confederacie the Bisshop of Rome toke in maruelous euill part, and therfore thoughte the French frendeship to be nedefull for hym. Whan themperour was commen to Spier about thende of Iuly, the Protestantes sende thither Ambassadours, Fraunces Bur∣cart, George Bemelberg, Christopher Ueninger, and Iames Stur∣mius. The protest. ambassad, to themperor. Being admitted the second of Auguste, they speake in a maner the same in effecte that they did before to king Fernando, the conclu∣sion of theyr tale was, that in case they might be sufficiently warraū∣ted to haue peace, yf the Iudgement of the chamber myght be refour∣med, as it was lately decreed at Regenspurg, yf the inequalitie of cō∣tributyng may be takē away, they wil not fayle to beare theyr partes in publicke necessities: As touchinge the Duke of Brunswicke, theyre desyre is, that the matter maye come to hearyng, and they saye howe they will proue manifestly, that he: whiche firste had done open iniu∣rye to the cities of Goslarie and Brunswicke, to haue benryghtlye ex∣pulsed and dryuen oute of hys countrey. Hereunto Themperoure, by Nauius, in the presence of Granuellane, two dayes after: that there was no more to bee required: For they were well enouge assured of peace by the fourmer decrees: the iudges of the chamber can not bee remoued before theyr cause be heard. In the moneth now of October, inquisitiō shalbe made of them, and if any fault may be found in them, they shall not escape vnpunnished: the moderation of contributinge, can not be made, without the comon assent of all states: let them con∣sider the present state of the publicke weale, and because it is a matter of moste daunger, vnlesse it be holpen in time, let them geue theyr ayd agaynste the Turke, lyke as other states doe. He muste hym selfe goe now with hys whole force agaynst the Frenche Kyng and the Duke of Cleaue, to thentente he maye defende hys subiectes from Iniurye. The Duke of Brunswick vrgeth sore to be restored: therfore let them saye theyr fantasye in that matter. They desire to haue this aunswere deliuered them in wryting, that they may the better consyder it, Thē∣perour was content, and the nexte day he went frō Spier to Mentz, so farre the ambassadours followed hym, and whan they had recey∣ued the wryting, they shewe Granuellan and Nauius, wherfore they are not satisfyed touchinge the peace, and because theyr desyre is, that the cause of Brunswick, might be hearde, they haue no further comis∣sion in that matter. The archebisshop of Collon came to themperoure at Spiers to intreate for the Duke of Cleaue, but that was in vaine: Themp. vi∣age againste the Duke of Cleaue. For excepthe wolde fyrst departe from the posession of Gelderlande, Themperour wold heare no mention of peace. And where the ambas∣sadoure
of Saxonye, by hys Princes commaundemente, made suite for the Duke of Cleaue, to Granuellan, at Mentz, and to perswade, dyd saye howe a priuate iniurye muste bee forgeuen for the common welthes sake, especially now that the Turk inuadeth. The other ma∣keth aunswer, that Themperour wil not goe frō hys pourpos, what inuasyon soeuer the Turkes shall make. I tolde you before how they of Heldesseme had forsaken the popisshe Religion, & entred into league with the Protestantes: Whom Ualentyne the Bisshop of that Cytye They of Hildisseme are accused to the empe∣rour. had accused heynousely before to the chamber, and to kynge Fernan∣do, and nowe also to Themperoure, that they had chaunged the reli∣gion and Ceremonyes of the churche howe they had appoynted new preachers to teache the people, put downe the Masse, punnisshed the followers of the olde relygyon, howe they haue broken and beaten downe not only aultars and fontstones but also the churches, howe they haue taken into theyr handes & custody all the mouables, goods and Iuelles of the clergie, and that of late also they haue setfoorthe gameplayes to mocke and deryde openly the Uirgin Marye, and o∣ther sainctes, that they pourposynge to forsake hys Iurisdiction, had lynked themselues in confederacie with the Protestantes, and con∣streyned Monkes and such others to obserue theyr religyon through violence, and those that wold not obey them, haue put to open shame, and also bannished. When Themperour had heard thys complaynte, the syxte daye of August, he wryteth vnto them From Wormes, and with a terrible threatenyng commaundeth them, to restore relygyon, and all other thinges into theyr fourmer state vntyll some publicke decree be establisshed in such matters. Thre dayes after, he addresseth his letters to the Senate of Collon, how he heareth that certen prea∣chers Thempe∣rours letters to them of Collon. labour sore to remoue them from the aunciente religion, whom they notwithstandyng haue stoutly resysted hytherto: whych he was ryght ioyefull to heare of, admonisshing them to perseuer in the same, and kepe the citezens in theyr dewty. This shalbe to him most accep∣table, whiche he will also declare in dede, in tyme to come. At the ka∣lendes of Iune, the Bishop of Roome wryteth to the same effecte vn∣to the prebendaries of the cathedrall churche at Collon. In the care & The Popes letters to the clergie of Colion. sorrow of mynd, which he hath of the Archebisshopppes folye concea∣ued, he is greatly cōforted with theyr stoutenes, and constancy which is not only to themselues, but also to all theyr neyghbours righte hol∣some: For nexte to the immortall God, they deserue the thankes, that bothe that moste noble Citie and also the whole prouince, is in sayfe∣garde. Therfore he geueth them ryght harty thankes, for standyng so styffe in the cause, and whylest he lyueth, will neuer forget the same. For albeit they did but theyr dewtie, yet for the thing it self, and for the example he must nedes confesse, that he is moche bounden vnto them.
Notwithstandyng they had nede to bee constant, for thys cause chief∣ly left if they should faynte, and that the Archebyshop shoulde happe∣ly gette the vpper hande, he wolde wreake hys tene on them extrem∣ly. Therfore let them be stronge and stoute in the defence of Goddes name and the catholicke relygyon, and of theyr owne lybertye & sal∣uation, whyche that wicked Archeheretike goeth aboute to subuerte and destroye. They haue no nede of a counselloure, yet wolde he also thruste as it were thys spurre vnto them runnyng, and desyreth them ernestlye, to take good hede, that he whiche is vn woorthye the name of an Archebishop, doe not infect that most noble Cytie with his con∣tagion: neyther that they take hym for theyr Pastoure, but for an ene∣mie: and he wyl not fayle to assist them bothe with hys counsell and o∣therwyse. These letters dyd Iohn Poggius, the Bisshops Ambassa∣dour to Themperour sent vnto them the. xxv of August. A little before thys tyme, the French Kyng goyng with an army into Uermandois taketh a little Towne of Themperours called Landersey, & maketh The French king fortify∣eth Lander∣sey. it stronge with fortifications, and garisons, aboute the same tyme al∣so, Barbarousse the Turkes Lieutenaunt, by the conduit of Poline a Frenche man, arriued with a greate Nauie at Tolloye, whiche is an hauen towne in the prouince of Fraunce betwene Marselles & Nice. The turkes Nauie arri∣ueth in the prouince. Whan the Kyng knewe of hys comyng, he sendeth the Duke of Uen∣dome, Angiane, with a force & with Galleis to assiste hym. After they goe bothe to Nyce, and whan they had taken the Towne and the ha∣von, the .xx. day of August, they layesege to the castell. An other armie The Castell of Nice bese∣ged. of Turkes made incursyon into Hongarye, whyche tooke the towne Quinquecclese, and the citie and Castell of Strigone, and Wanne, Stulweysenburge by assaulte. The Bishop of Roome had sente ayd, wherof Baptista Sabella & Iulye Ursine were Captianes: but they came sō what to late, Whan the diuines of Paris had thus triumphed ouer Lander and Depensius, as beefore is sayde, they publyshe those articles of Doctrine, propounded to the Preacher Lander, whiche in nombre were xxv. The matter was solēnely donne at Paris the first daye of Auguste & the people beyng called together, as the maner is, by a trompet, those articles were recited, and after also, by the kynges commaundemente, wer put in prynte, and proclamation made, vnder a great penaltie, that no man should worke nor teache agaynst them, and a decree also added for the searching oute of Lutheranes. The di∣uines moreouer charge theyr studentes, that are called bacchelaures Batche∣laurs. and others that studie diuinitie, to follow this fourme, or els to be ex∣pulsed their colledge. Agaynste this theyr doctryne, Caluine wrote a booke, whych he calleth Antidotum, and paynteth them forth in their Abooke of Caluine a∣gainste the Sorbonistes. collours, and moch aboute the same tyme setteth forth an other booke in Frenche, of the relyques of Saynctes, to thintente that bothe thys
age, and also the tyme to come may see, in to what a case relygiō was fallē: but he recyteth these thinges only, which vnto him were knowē A booke of the relieques of Sainctes. and wissheth that the same were done lykewyse in other countries. And of this nombre are the Cribbe, Swadling clothes and bearing clothe, the foreskinne and blud of Christ, partely pure, partely delayed with water, the sixe waterpottes that were at the mariage in the Ci∣tie of Cane in Galilee, the wyne that Christe made than of water, the stuffe and furniture of hys Maundie and last supper, that he had with hys Apostels, the Manna of the people of Israell: the Crosse the cane Nayles, Sponge launce, Crowne of thorne, Cote, Shoes, Handker∣chef, and teares of Chryst: The Milke, Smocke, Heare, Girdel, Slip¦per, Combe, and Ring of the Uirgin Marie. The sworde and bucklar of Michel tharchangell: The Scull, Iawebonne, braynes, and fingar of Iohn the Baptiste: The Chaire, Honlette, Massinge garmentes & brayne of. S. Peter: And then the bodies of Sainctes, and that the same in diuerse and sondry places. And he sheweth with what vene∣ration, the people worshipped these thynges, whan the Pristes not without monye let them haue a syght therof, and shewe them a farre of, verey tryfles, and thinges of nought, which yf they be well conside∣red, haue nothing but craft & colloure diuised of the Pristes for lucre. But in vase Dutchelande, ther be two famous Cities in thys behalfe, Treuers and Achon, for hither they saye, men were wonte to come to Two Cities full of re∣licies. see reliques, oute of Hongary and Slauonye. What tyme those mar∣chauntes set forth theyr wares, but euery seuenth yere, that thautho∣rytie and wonder mighte bee the greater. Themperoure came from Mentz to Bomia by water: Ther taught Bucer at the same tyme, & Casper Hedio also, sent for thither newly frō Strasburg by the Arch∣bisshop a man of a verey milde nature, and verey mete to instruct the people. They were bothe in great daūger, especially the Spaniardes beyng thete, Themperour also doth wyll the Archebisshop by his am∣bassadours, to send them a waye: Melancthon was departed thence before: They also not long after obteynyng lycence to departe, hauing taken order with the ministers in the churches, retourn home again. After this Themperour wente to Dure: And what tyme he came be∣fore the Towne the .xx. of Auguste, the nexte daye he sent an Herauld to sommon the Towne, willyng them to render it vnto hym, or els he wil attempte it by force. The soldiours within aunswer hym contēp∣tuously, sayinge, that they are not affrayde of hym, who was a good whyle sence made bayte for fysshes: For the brute went howe Them∣perour, Afalsereport of the Em¦perours deathe. in hys retourne out of Barbarie, after the ouerthrowe at Ar∣giers, suffered Shipwreake, & was drowned. And this opinion was so setrled in the myndes of the Cleauois, that they would neyther cre∣dite them whiche sayed they had sene hym, nor scarsely those that had
spoken with hym. The Prynce hym selfe also was lykewyse perswa∣ded, by acerten fatall credulitie. The Frenche men were thought to be authors and forgers of this vanitie, lest the Cleauois should relēt, and for feare of Themperours power, fall to some cōposition. Them∣perour receyuing this aunswer, whan he had fortyfyed his camp and furnished it with all thinges, the .xxiiii. day of August, before the sōne rysyng he beginneth to make his battery, and after geueth thassault, especyally by the Spanyardes, whyche were exceadyng preste and wyllyng. They beyng often repulsed, and hauyng loste many of their men, neuer ceased, before they had taken it by force. The fortune of the Townes men was suche, as is wonte to bee, whan the waye and en∣trie is made by the sword. Howbeit here was wont to be shewed the head of Saint Anne our Ladyes mother, and thither came yearelye a greate multitude of people, at the. xxvi daie of Iuly whyche is dedi∣cated to that sainct. But the Spaniardes being victours, caried that head inclosed in golde with a greate pompe deuoutely into the graie Freres Churche, lest it shoulde bee lost in that Ruine and burnyng of the Churche. After the Towne was spoyled and distroyed by fyre, Themperour Marchinge forewarde, had rendred vnto hym Gulick, and than Ruremunde a stronge Towne of Gelderlande, situated where the Ryuer of Rure, and the Mase mete. For the sodein distruc∣tyon of Dure, broughte all men into a wonderfull feare and perplexi∣tie. From Ruremunde he goeth to Uenlon. Thither at the laste came the Duke of Cleaue to hym into his Campe, accompanyed with Hen∣ry The Duke of Cleaue craueth par∣don of them∣peroure. Duke of Brunsewicke and the Ambassadours of the Archebishop of Collon. And what time he humbly besought Themperoure to per∣don hym, the Duke of Brunswicke also and the Ambassadours, er∣nestly intreated for hym, Themperoure at the last ryseth vp, and ap∣poynteth the Prynce of Orenge, and Granuellane, to prescribe lawes vnto hym. Therefore vpon these conditions, he was receyued againe into fauoure, the seuenth daye of September. He shall not departe Condiciōns to him im∣posed. from the relygyon of the Catholycke Churche: yf he haue altered any thynge, let it be restored: that he promyse hys fydelytie & allegeaunce to themperour, to king Fernando & to thempire: that he doe renounce the league of Fraunce and of Denmarke: He shall make no confede∣racie, wherin he shall not excepte Themperoure, Fernando, and their heires: He shall leaue the possession of all Gelderlande, and release the people of theyre othe. And in case any place or places shall refuse to render, that he shall than ayde the Emperoure to recouer the same. The Emperoure agayne restoreth vnto hym the Lande of Gu∣lycke, latelye Conquered, excepte two Townes, Henseberge and Syttarde, whyche hee wyll kepe for a tyme, tyll he haue somme
experience of hys fydelytie and Loyaltye. Whylest the Emperoure wente agaynste the Duke of Cleaue, the Frenche Kynge Marcheth throughe Champagne towardes the lande of Luke: And sendeth for the Lady Iane hys Systers Daughter, whyche was despoused and solemnelye Maryed two yeares before to the Duke of Cleaue, to ca∣rye her to her Husbande. She wente full sore agaynste her wyll, as I shewed you beefore. Howbeit she obeyed the Kynge her Uncle. The daugh∣ter of Naua∣ris sent to the Duke of Cleaue. The Kynge appoynted vnto her, Cardynall Bellaye, Bysshop of Pa∣rys, as a man mooste meete to perswade with her, and kepe her com∣panye all that Iorneye. When she was commen nowe to the Soys∣sons, to goe from thence to the Kynge, woorde was broughte that the Duke of Cleaue was subdewed. Wherwith beeyng greatlye re∣ioyced, she sawe then, that shee nede to feare the thinge no longer, and knewe what wolde bee the ende thereof. Neyther was she deceaued at all: For the Kynge at these newes was sore astonyed. And so she retourneth home, but he neuerthelesse procedynge, taketh the Cytyo of Lucemburge aboute thende of September, and after delyberaty∣on had, fortyfyeth it. Aboute thys tyme also, Henry the eyghte Kynge of Englande confederated latelye with the Emperoure, sendeth hym a power of men, by the conducts of Syr Iohn wallop, Capytayne of Laundersey, beseged. Guisnes, whyche Ioynynge with Themperoures Armye, beesege the Towne of Landersey. In the Moneth of October, Charles Ros∣set a Lawyer was sente by the Emperoure to Mentz, who there The prea∣chers of the gospel thrust oute of metz. tooke order with the Senate, Monkes, and Clergie for the obseruing of the olde relygion, bannysshynge the Preachers and others that were inclyned to the Protestantes, vnles they shoulde reconcile them selues within a certeine tyme. Whan Barbarousse had beeseaged the Castell of Nice in vayne, and that Themperoures power out of Lū∣bardye The sege is leuied at Nice. also approched, whyche was led by the Marques of Piscare, he leuyed the sege, and somewhat sooner, than the tyme of the yeare requyred, he leadeth backe hys Armie to wynter at Tollon: for that Towne had the Kynge assigned hym, commaundyng all the Citezēs and inhabiters to auoyde thence. This yeare was moche dissention Dissencion in Scotland. and trouble in Scotlande, the mindes of the nobles beyng deuyded: For those Lordes, whyche we sayed were prisoners in Englande, be∣ing libally dismissed of the kynge, furthered hys cause as moche as they myght. But the Cardinall of Scotlande, who had great yerely reuenewes by benefyces in Fraunce, and the Quene beynge Daugh∣ter to the Duke of Guyse, tooke the Frenche Kynges parte. After the The yonge Quene of Scottes affi∣aunced to Kynge Ed∣warde. death of the Scottish king. Henry the eyght, was wholy in this, that the yonge Quene of Scottes might be affianced to Prince Edward his sō. In the which thing, those nobles that I spake of, did him good seruyce. And when they had perswaded Hameltō the gouernour, they
toke the Cardinall, and besege the Quene in a certen castell, and ma∣kyng the wrytynges, confyrme the marriage. But where the French kynge disturbed this deuyse: And the Nobilitie also pitied moche the Quenes chaunce, and the gouernoure reuolted to thother syde, they brake theyr conuenauntes. And the warres beganne agayne afresihe betwixt them and England, as shalbe declared herafter. The kyng of Denmarke had also warre with Themperialles of the low countrye, The king of Denmarke, warreth vpō thē perialles. for Kyng Christierne that was captiue. And he axed ayde of the Pro∣testantes, but they saye how thys quarel concerneth not theyr league: for it was prouyded, that in case he shoulde haue warre for hys religi∣on, that then he shoulde by their cōmon ayde be defended. When the Duke of Cleaue had made hys peace with Thēperour, he sendeth his Ambassadoure to the Kynge of Fraunce and renounceth hys league, The duke of Cleaue re∣nounceth the Frenche Leage. and requyreth that his wyfe maye bee sente hym, for whose passage, he hathe obteyned a saufe conduite of Themperoure. The kynge aun∣swereth the Ambassadour, howe there hath ben no let in hym, that he hath not bothe had his wyfe delyuered, and an Armye also sente, but that it hath ben hys owne faulte, which certifyed, that ther was ney∣ther open way for them to passe in those parties, nor vitaile to be had: What soeuer he hath promised, he hath lyberally perfourmed, and sō∣what more also, than he was bounden: But he hath not donne well, who forgettyng his noble lynage, and estate, hathe brought hym selfe into suche bondage. As concernynge hys Nece, he maie knowe what her mynde and her parentes is: he is in nothyng further bounden to hym. Whan Themperoure had establysshed thynges in Gelderlande in the moneth of October he came to Landresey, with an exceadynge greate armye. Thyther came also the French kynge, with hys whole force, and the thynge was none other lyke but to haue commen to a battell. But when the Frenche men had vytayled the Towne, they The depar∣ture of the Frenchmen from Lāder∣sey. went awaye by nyght so pryuely, that the enemy perceiued it not, be∣fore it was day light. Than at the length pursuing after them they o∣uer tooke the rerewarde, & slew many. And because winter came on, Themperour thinking good to attempt no further, whan he had sēt a certen power to the sege of Lucēburg, he dischargeth the rest of hys army. Duke Maurice serued themperour at Landresey of hys owne Duke moris voluntarye mynde, wherby he gote moche good wyll, and made the way to obteyne hys frendship. In the winter season the Duke of Lo∣rayne and certen others intreate for peace, but that was in vayne. Themperoure retournynge home from Landersey, sent Fardinando County wil∣lyam forsa∣keth the Frenchking Gonzage, Uiceroy of Sicilie, to the Kyng of England, that he might incense hym more agaynste the Frenche kynge. I haue oftentymes mentioned of William Countie Furstēberge: he beyng made a straū∣ger with the Frenche kinge, made suite by Granuellan to come in to
Themperours fauour: And to declare hys fydelytie, he leuyed a cer∣ten power of foote men, in hys owne Iurisdictyon, and wente in the myddes of wynter to Lucemburge, and ioyned hym selfe with Thē∣perours Armie. But when the Frenche men, by the conduite of the Duke of Longouile, had vitayled them within, he departeth without any thynge doon, after that many were dead for colde and honger. I shewed you before, howe the counsell of thempyre was appoynted at the last of Nouember: Wherfore the Protestantes assemble together at Franckfourd, to consulte before, what thynges they shoulde treate of in the whole assemblye. And where the matter was delayd by rea∣son of the Frenche warres, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue in the moneth of Nouember addressyng their letters to themperoure, do aduertise hym, howe they wyll come to the counsell, yf he hymselfe wyll bee there, and graunte them saufecounduite, for them, and theyr league frēdes. Wherunto Themperour aunswered, frō Brusseles, the x. day of Decembre, that he would come doubtles, and that in the mo∣neth of Ianuarye, and sendeth withall a saufconduite. Howebeithe excludeth suche as are addicte to hys enemyes, by promesse, faythe or conuenaunte, signifyinge the priuie espialles of the Frenche kynge. Than in the begynnyng of Ianuary, takyng hys iorney he commeth to Spire. The .xxiiii. day of thys moneth, was a great Eclipse of the Sonne, in the daye tyme, so that all men beheld it, not without great 1544. wonder: This yeare also were thre ful eclipses of the Moone: A mat∣ter in dede to bee wondred at, and the whyche, as the astronomiers Thre eclip∣ses of the moone. saye, hathe not chaunced synce the tyme of great Charles. Alexander Farnese Cardinall, passyng throughe Fraunce, spoke with Thempe∣roure goynge towardes thassemblye, and tooke hys leaue of hym at Wormes. The cause of his ambassade was thought to be, a treaty of peace. This assemblie of Spier was exceading great: For booth king A great As∣semble at Spiere. Farnando, and all the Prynces Electours, which is seldome seene, & in maner all other Princes were there, and amonges them also the Duke of Cleaue. As the Duke of Saxony was comyng, whych was the .xviii. day of February, the Lantzgraue, the Archebisshop of Colō. Friderick the Paulsgraue, and the Uiceroye of Sicilye, went foorth and met hym. Two dayes after the counsel began. And Themperour propoundeth, for what causes leauynge Spayne, he is nowe retour∣ned into Germany, and hath called this conuention, he hath sufficiēt∣ly declared by hys letters dated at Gene: neyther is it nede to recyte, howe moche he hathe euermore loued the Publyke weale, that all thynges put in order at home, he myghte warre agaynst the common enemye of Christendome: but howe he hath ben impeached hytherto, and by whom, it is not vnknowen. For thys last yere, by the procure∣ment of the French kyng, the Turkisshe nauie is comen into the Sea
of Ligurie, and hath inuaded the countrey of the Duke of Sauoye, a Prince of Thempire, taken the Citie and hauen of Nice, and with greate force beseged the Castell, and vattered it ryght sore. And albe∣it they were constrayned, throughe hys Armye approchynge to leuye theyr siege, yet haue they syns attempted other places of Thempyre, and of Spayne also, and are nowe wholy aboute to distroie all toge∣ther. Therfore is the matter nowe brought into an extreme daunger, and vnlesse they ioyne theyr mindes and powers to helpe it, it is to be feared, lest Germanye shall acknoweledge and bewayle hys miserye al to late. He hath often wisshed to redresse these euilles, but the Frēch Kynge mouing warre agaynst hym insondry places, he could neither retourne into Germanye, nor Ioyne his power with theyres. And that the Turke doeth so boldly inuade Germany, & that the warres The causes of the turkes prosperitie. also attempted agaynste hym, haue had so euell successe hytherto, the cause hathe ben, fyrst, that he hath ben aduertysed from tyme to tyme, by the Frenche kyng, of the dissention in relygion, of the publycke and priuate dyspleasure of al degrees, of the state of Thempyre, and what thynges are donne therein. Secondlye, for that he seeth, howe at the Frenche Kynges hand he fyndeth fauour, and socour ready, as it hath not been only declared by witnesse and letters, but nowe also proued in dede. For asmoche therfore as he styreth vp and armeth the comon and moste cruell enemye of all others agaynste the Christen publyke weale, he supposeth, that they shoulde esteme thys warre, whyche he is constreyned to maynteyne agayste hym, non otherwyse, than if it were attempted agaynste the Turke: trustynge moreouer that they wyll not onlye condemne hys practyse and enterpryses, but also wyll The French king compa∣red to the Turke. assiste hym, to thentente that beyng delyuered from the domestycall enemye, he maye dysplaye hys whole force agaynste the Turke. After thys expostulatyng, that the ayd decreed for the Turkish warre, was not sente accordyngly, for the wante wherof, the Turke hathe agayne thys laste yere, preuayled, and taken certen Townes and Castels in Hongarye, he requyreth them, that seeyng the Turke goeth about to wynne Hongarye, that he maye after inuade Germanye, they wolde consyder depelye so weyghtye a matter, that they may haue ayde not oulye to defend, but to inuade also, to thende thys moste noysō plage may ones be driuen away from theyr wyues, children, and natif con∣trie: declaring moreouer how willing he is, ye thinges amisse shoulde be refourmed, and emongs other the iudgement of the chamber. The same day king Fernādo, by hys ambassadours, speakīg many thinges The Protes∣tantes ora∣tion to them∣peroure. of the Roades & invasions of the Turkes, craueth aide. After this im∣mediatly, the Duke of Saxon & the Lantzgraue with their confede∣rates addressing their oratiō to thēperour, you know saye they, moste victorious Emperoure, howe we haue offered oure selues euer syns
the beginnynge, to declare before this moste honorable Senate, the cause of our defence taken agaynst Henry of Brunswicke: And be yet also of the same will and mynde: doubtyng not, but when the matter shalbe hearde, there shall appeare vnto you weyghty and iust causes, wherfore we were dryuen to it of necessitie, and that it is not lawfull for hym to be present here in the counsell of Princes. Howbeit because we see hym put hymselfe in prease, to occupie a place in thys most no∣ble consistorye, moche agaynste oure willes, in as moche as we can or maye, we doe protest, that wee neyther take hym nor acknoweledge hym for a Prynce of Thempire, neyther will that any right of oures, shoulde through hys presence, be diminished. Wherunto the Duke of Brunswicke aunswereth streyghte waye, by hys Chauncelour. The The Duke of Brunse∣wicke accu∣seth the Pro∣testauntes. Duke of Saxō, sayeth he, the Lantzgraue and theyr fellowes brea∣kyng both gods law and mans law, infringing the statutes of them∣pire, and the faythe publicke, by violence and open wronge, haue spoi∣led me of my countrey: For the which cause I haue accused thē to the Iudges of the chāber. And seeyng it is so, they ought to haue no place in the Senate of Thempire, and yf they had any, they haue nowe lost the same, by committing that acte, and are worthye, whose companye all men shoulde eschewe: But if it so be, that I muste nedes syt by thē, in comon counselles, I protest, that I do neyther attribute this place vnto them, nor will therfore that the same should be preiudicial to my case. The Protestantes were verye desyrous euen than to haue reci∣ted the cause of theyr enterpryse, and the whole matter in wrytynge, leste hys complaynte shoulde appere to be trewe, or settle in mennes heartes. But Thēperour, by Fridericke Palatyne, and by Nauius, required them, forasmoch as the day was farre spent that they wold differre it, affirming also that he wolde assigne thē a day for the pour∣pos and so they followed hys mynde. And because as the Princes sat in counsell, it fortuned that the Lantzgraue sate next to the Duke of Brunswicke, the Prince of Palatine, Iohn Suner, for the auoyding of stryfe, arryseth out of hys place, and sytteth downe in the myddes betwixte them bothe, protestyng before, that the same shoulde bee no preiudice to hym or to his familye. Yt was thought he did it, at Thē∣perours request. The day before the Duke of Saxon and the Lantz∣graue had intreated Fridericke the Paulsegraue and Iohn Nauie, that they wold so deuise with Themperour, that the Duke of Bruns∣wicke might not come in the comon assemblie: but it could not be ob∣tayned, Themperour alledging that he might not be excluded, vnlesse the causes were fyrst declared. The Frenche kyng knowing for certē∣tie The French ambassade to the assem∣ble at Spier. that Themperour wold make a greuous complaynte on hym to the Prynces: determineth a most honorable Ambassad, Iohn Bellaie Cardinal, Fraunces Oliuer, chauncelour of Alensō, Affricane, Malley
presydent of Diuion: whan these wer commen to Nance a Towne in Lorayne, they remayne there lookyng for Themperours saufcondict: For the king, had sent before to Spier an Heraulte, for the same cause with letters to Themperour, and seuerall letters also to the Princes Electours, wherin he required saufe conduite for hys Ambassadours. And when he came to Spier about the ende of Februarye, in hys rich cote of armes, as is accustomed, he was stayed by Granuellan, vnto whom he delyuereth the kyng his maisters letters written to Them∣peroure, whan he myghte not otherwyse doe, and declareth the cause of hys comyng, requyring that Thambassadours which are not farre of maye accordyng to the law of Armes haue saufconduite, beyng cō∣maunded to tary within and dilligētly watched, that no man should The French Herault euil receyued at Spier. come to speake with hym, the fourth day after, he was dismissed with most sharpe wordes, that he had played a fond part, and was in daū∣ger to haue lost hys head, whych durste presume to come thyther. For the kynge, beyng enemy to Germany hathe not to doe with in the ly∣mites of Thempyre, neyther is he worthy to enioye the law of Nati∣ons: let hym retourne home therfore, and tell the kynge thus: Howe ther is no cause, that herafter either he or any other may comefor him. And nowe in dede this fault is forgiuen and perdoned, more of them∣perours clemencie, than of his desert, but let him take hede from hēce∣forthe: or els he wil not escape vnpunnisshed: For he hath don against the law of armies, neyther was it laweful for hym to haue comen into Themperours habitation, without his leaue and permissiō. And tou∣chyng the letters whyche he sayeth, he hath, the kyng hath so well de∣serued of the Christen publicke weale, and chefely of Germanye, that in thys present state of thynges, Themperour neyther wyll, nor ought to receyue them, lest by hys accustomed maner of writing and promi∣ses, eyther he, or also others myghte be disceaued. This aunswer was delyuered vnto hym wrytten in Frenche. And thus was he sent back with the kynges letters wrytten to Themperour and Prynces, and certen horsemen were sente with hym to conduite him to Nance. To this were not the Princes made priuie: And many thoughte it was done agaynst the custome of thempyre. Thys thyng knowen, the Am∣bassadours were in a pecke of troubles, and toke great thought, how to retourne home without daunger, and vsing the counsell of Autho∣ny Duke of Lorayne, they went a waye secretly in the nyght season, and so retourned into Fraūce. Whylest they yet remayned at Nance, The ambas∣sadors re∣torne by nighte. Christine, the Dukes daughter in lawe was sente to Spier, that the thing which neither he could, nor certen others, that might she, which was Themperours Nece, by his sister, through her intreaty & teares, and by a certen commendation of her kind obtayne, but yet was this in vayne. For Themperour was wholy bent to haue warre: And hys
counsellours sayde he muste so doe, to mayntaine hys estimation and dignytie. The Duke of Lorayne, albeit he was addicte to neyther, & had long syns couenaunted with them both, that he myght be a new∣ter, yet for asmoche as the warre was to be kepte vpon, hys frontiers, and sawe, howe that coulde not be done, without hys greate losse & domage, was verye carefull for peace. The .ix. daye of Februarye cer∣ten Priuces, through Themperours motion, wryt letters frō Spire, The princes letters to the Pope. to the Bisshop of Roome, partely commendyng hym, for that the laste yere, he adioyned hys force with Themperours, to rescue the Castell of Nice, partly requiring him, that for as moch as the enemye is now reparyng his nauie at Tollone, to repare agayne to Nice and to win that Castell, which shoulde be a greate shame and a sore anoyeaunce vnto Italy, the Churche of Roome & all the common welth, he which is the father of the comon welthe, and hygh Bisshop, wolde ayde the Duke of Sanoye with hys helpe & counsell, and of hys syngular wis∣dome wolde deuyse some meanes howe that cruell enemye myght be expulsed not only from Nice, but also frō those places, where he hathe hauens and holdes for hys refuge: for thys shoulde be a thynge, bothe to God most acceptable, and to the whole common wealth also moste holsome and profitable, with diuerse other perswations touching the same matter. To this the Bishop aunswereth the .xxvi. day of Febru∣ary: Theffect of his aunswer is thys, that the castell of Nice may bee The Popes aunswer. defended, he wyll be no lesse carefull hereafter, than he hathe ben hy∣therto, trustyng, that as they are carefull for it, so wyll they be no lesse mydnfull, to take paynes for the whole common welthe, for this shall best become them. And after a longe rehearsal of the ayde of men and captaynes, which he hath sent into Hongary and Affrica agaynst the Turkes, how he hath wasted his treasure in suche affayres, how ofte he hath sent Ambassadours, how oft traueled him self aboute the pub∣lyke weale, he sayeth in fyne, that lyke as they commende vnto hym Nice, so doeth he commende vnto them, the state of the comon welth, whiche is sore afflicted and decayed. And the chiefe and only waye to helpe thys matter, is, that the myndes of Kynges may be reconciled, The meane to heale the comon welth for out of thys welsprynge procedeth all the discommoditie, that is in the comon welth. And if dissention betaken awaie, the fourmer beau∣tie will come agayne: For before this grudge and displeasure, there were neyther heresies in Germany, nor Turkee in Hongarye, But so soone as the waye was made throughe ciuile discorde, immediatelye sprange vp heresyes, factions, and hatred bothe publyke and pryuate. And hitherto hath also the counsel ben letted and hyndered. Therfore muste we seeke to recouer the peace, that was before: And after thex∣ample of phisitions, take away the fyrst cause of ye disease: For through peace, warre and the Turk are put to flyght. And by a counsel which
in peace may be kepte, all heresyes and what so euer is amisse, may be refourmed: Otherwise, let them not thinke that eyther Nyce can bee defended from the enemye or any part of Christendome kept fre from daunger, but that all men shalbe wrapped in the same calamitie and distructiō. In the moneth of March the Paulsegraue Lewis prince Electour departed out of this lyfe, and his brother Fridericke did suc∣cede him. The Princes electours and thother states, through Them∣perours aduise, the second day of Aprill sende letters to the Swyses, The princes letters to the Swisses. to diswade them from aydyng the French kyng, who to the vtter de∣cay and ruine of Christen relygyon, hathe lincked hym selfe with the Turkes, and thys last yere, hath conducted theyr Nauie, into the sea of Lygurie: where they haue warred vpon the Duke of Sauoye, and taken Nice. And yet remayne still in Fraunce, intendiuge to worke more mischiefe, to Themperour and all hys countries. Wherfore they require them from hencefoorthe to suffer non of theyr men to serue the Frenche kynge, who for thys wicked league with the people of Ma∣homet, ought to be detested of all men, and taken for a comon enemie. And yf any be gon to hym already, to call them home agayne, and so to vse them selues, that it maye appere, they doe not neglecte the pub∣lycke preseruation. Whilest they consulted of matters propounded by Themperoure, The Duke, the Lantzgraue and theyr confederates, the fyrst daye of Aprill, before Themperoure, Kyng Fernando, and al The protes∣tantes accuse the Duke of Brunswicks the states of thempyre, accuse Henry the Duke of Brunswick, of most heynous offences, and also recite in order by wrytinge, what harmes and iniuries he had done to the cytyes of Brunswicke and Goslarye, theyr consortes, in whose defence they wer cōstrayned, to repulse that vniust violence. After they reherse howe these many yeres, hys whole endeuour hath ben, to seeke occasyon to moue warre agaynst them: & proue the same by the testimonye of letters, which were founde, as I tolde you before, whan he was expulsed, in hys princypall Castell. In those letters, whych he had wrytten for the most parte all to the arch∣bisshop of Mentz, to the duke of Bauier and to Heldus before he was The tenure of his letters dryuē oute, he wissheth oft for Themperours comyng out of Spaine. And when there was any hope therof, than he braggeth and threate∣neth: And what tyme Themperour was comē, and slacked the mat∣ter, he complayneth of hys lyngering and delaye, and be wayleth, that he and hys fellowes are not satisfyed, & that the league made at No∣rinberge was neglected, and layeth all the blame therof in Granuel∣lan, which is corrupted with mony by the Protestantes, he raileth on hym, and wissheth hym a shamfull death for his demerites, and saieth how themperour is a slepe and can not be awaked. And that he vseth hys name sometime, only for a clooke and a terrour, as Faukners are wonte many tymes to shewe foorthe a dead hauke, to feare the fowle
withall. These and many other letters of suche lyke sorte, wherin he vttereth hys mynde and affections, were red openlye. And moche to the same effecte had the Duke of Bauier and Heldus wrytten to him agayne. And for because Henry brother to Duke George of Saxonie, was in league with the Protestantes, and had altered the religion, as before is saide, the Duke of Brunswicke had with letters & messa∣gers sollicited Themperour, to take awaye hys landes, trustyng, that he should be set to kepe the possession of the contrie: herof wer the let∣ters also recyted. Furthermore they declare hym to be a wycked mā, The Duke of Brunse∣wicke contē∣neth hys owne religi∣on. and that he doeth contemne & delude the Bisshoppes relygion, which he wyll seme to maynteyne, and proue it by a moste euydent testimo∣nie. Thys Duke of Brunswick had maryed the Lady Mary, syster to Ulriche Duke of Wirtemberge, who had a gentlewoman waytyng vpon her, of an excellente beautye, called Eue Trottine, vpon whom her husbande doted in loue, and when he had perswaded the mayde, he had by her diuers children. After to thentent the matter should not A straunge tale of the saide Duke. bee perceyued, and that he myght vse her company the longer, he ge∣ueth her counsel, to faine, as though she wold go home to her parētes. And he fournissheth her of horses, charyote, and althynges necessarye for her Iorney. She departeth, and where she was thought to haue gone home, she was conueyed into a Castell of hys. And the captayne was made priuie to it before, what thyng should be done. And a wo∣man or two appoynted to wayte vpon her, whom he moste trusted. This Eue within a few daies after she came thither, kepeth her bed, and fayneth her self sycke. He had before caused to be made an Image of wood, whiche dyd represente the head, necke and Boulke of a dead body, the other partes were made & set out with lynen clothes, which the wemen had stuffed and filled with earth and asshes, that it might seme proportionate, and so set the Image of wood and the clothe to∣gether: for the cloth was so shapē, that it couered also the otherpartes which were of wood. The body therfore being thus ordered and lap∣ped in the wynding shete, is layed foorth on the floure, streyght waies cometh one of the womē to the parlour dore where the Captain was, and declareth how Eue is dead. He by and by commaundeth a coffin to be made, to lay her body in: And to make men affrayde, that no bo∣dy should come nere hir, they fayne that she dyed of the plage, and per∣fume the house with the graines of Iuniper, & other sauoury thinges: After, is the corps brought foorth, and with a solemne pompe caryed to the graye Freres Churche. And there was honorably buried, with An Image buryed in the slee of Eue. messe and dirige. And the Freres pray for her al the yere long, and de∣syre the people in theyr sermons to doe the same. Moreouer by the Dukes commaundemente, there was a funerall made for her in the Chapell of the Castell, where it was sayde, she dyed, and lykewyse in
hys head Castell of woulsebutell, whiche is not farre from the Citie of Brunswicke: for thither came also the reporte of her death. And at this Obite or exequie was his wyfe the Dutches, with her women & trayne of maydens, all in mournynge apparell: thithere came manye Pristes that were sente for oute of the contrye, whyche had a dyner made them, and monye geuen in rewarde to euery man somewhat, after the olde accustomed maner amonges the papistes. In the meane tyme Eue, whose deathe so many bewayled, liueth and fareth well in the Castell of Stansseburge, where oftentymes the Duke visiteth her, and syus that tyme hath had by her seuen children: he perswadeth hys wyfe also to sygnyfye to her parentes and frendes, that Eue is dead. But when it was bruted abrode that she was alyue, and kepte in the Castell of Stansseburge, hys wyfe which had also an Inkling therof, conceaueth a vehement suspicion, & inquyreth of the seruaūtes, howe the matter stoode, but he forbad that any man shoulde come at her, of those that knewe any thyng: but thys suspicion sticked faste in her mynde, so longe as she lyued, and wryting ofte vnto hym, beway∣led her miserye. Thys fact of hys was recyted emonges others in the same presence, to thentent all men might vnderstande, what opinion he had of hys owne relygion. The conclusion of theyr accusation was this, to proue for howe iuste & necessarye causes, they attempted war agaynst hym, who contemnyng the Proclamations of Themperour, and of kinge Fernando, had disturbed the Publicke peace, and had wrought all kynde of Iniurye to theyr fellowes and confederates. The Duke of Brunswicke was not present at thys action, Thempe∣roure so willing it: For the Protestantes desyred that he myght haue ben presente, and herein had moued Themperour. On Easter Mon∣day, which than was the .xiiij. day of Aprill, Themperours soldiours, led by the Marques of Piscare, foughte a battell in Piedmont, with the Frenchemen at the Towne of Carignane, and lost the felde, and The French victory at Carignane. many thousandes of them were slayne. The generall of the Frenche armie was Angian Duke of Uandosme, before mentioned. Whanre∣port came of that ouerthrow, many men supposed that Themperoure wolde not haue refused the treatye of peace, but he was ernestly bent to haue warre, & made preparation accordyngly. The Duke of Brūs∣wicke aunswereth to the accusation of the Protestantes, the .xxiij. day of Aprill. And powryng out a greate heape of reproches, obiecteth vn∣to thē conspiracie, rebellion, treasō, extortiō, societie wirth the Turkes and Frenche men, and touching the letters founde in his castel, he ex∣cuseth as well as he maye, and yf theyr closettes were searched, he sai∣eth there might a great deale worse stuffe befounde. But the matter, concernyng Eue hys darlyng, he toucheth but a little, to this reproche the Protestantes make aunswere agayne. And whan Themperoure
wolde suffer the matter to be pleaded no more openly, they exhibite a wryting, the same afterwardes doth the Duke of Brunswicke. The xxvij. day of Aprill Charles the Duke of Sauoye, agayne by hys am∣bassadoures The Duke of Sauoye accuseth the Frēch king. accuseth the French kyng, and besydes the violence and iniuryes of the foormer yeres, he sayeth, how he hathe styred vp the Turkes lieutenante, Barbarousse, who beyng ayded by the Frenche men hath taken by composition hys Citie of Nice, and agaynst his fi∣delitie and promesse, spoyled it, and leadyng many awaye into capti∣uitie, hath sette it on fyre: he requireth therfore, that they would help hym in thys hys extreme miserye especiallye, seeyng the enemies are fully prefixed to retourne to the sege of the castel. He hath craued ayde of the Bishop of Roome, and he hath graunted hym only that trybut, whiche the clergie are wonte to paye hym yerely: But that is a verye smal reliefe in thys hys pouertie, where he scarsely possesseth the tenth parte of hys dominion. And that he came not hym selfe to the counsel, he excuseth hym by hys age, the longe Iorney, and the iminent daun∣ger of hys enemye: And saieth moreouer how he is not hable to beare the charges, whiche hath scant somuche as wyll fynde hym, hys sōne, & hys familie. Aboute thende of Aprill the Swises assemble at Badē, The swysses aunswer the Princes let∣ters. make aunswer to the letters of the states of thempyre. Howe theyre captaynes beyng demaunded the question, affirme, that they saw no band of Turkes in the Frenche campe, nor hearde any thynge therof: For than woulde not they haue serued. And that the Frenche kynge, beyng of them moued herin, doeth complayne, that when he sent Am∣bassadours the last winter, they coulde not be admitted which if they myght haue ben hearde speake, coulde easely haue confuted thys slaū∣der: And that if Themperoure refuse not peace, he promiseth both the Bohemers, that wrote to hym in Februarie, and also the Germanes. hys ayde agaynst the Turke. Nowe as touching themselues, somme of them in dede are bounden to serue the French kyng in his warres, by composition, some agayne are only in league of amit with hym, & haue ben these many yeres, out of whose dominions, if an runne into Fraunce, it is done contrary to theyr will and knowledge as the lyke may also happen in some places in Germany. But they rekon it beste, that the kynges Ambassadours shoulde be hearde, and peace estably∣shed: Wherin if they may do any good, they wil with al their heartes. This tyme did the kyng of England send a great Nauie into Scot∣lande. Who chauncynge of a good wynde, whan they were arriued, Thenglishe Nauie inua∣deth scotlād. take fyrste Lythe, a notable hauon, after Eddenborough, the head cy∣tie of Scotlad. And when the Castell was kept agaynst them which for the situation was vnprenuable, they burnt it, in the begynnyng of the moneth of May. In thys Assemblie Themperoure with a solemn ceremonie created woolfang, Master of Prusse, openly and gaue him
the armes aperteynynge to that office, whyche Alberte of Branden∣burge, the brother of George and Casimire, had enioyed many yeres, & marieng a wyfe vsurped the same to hym selfe, & was therfore oute lawed by the chāber, twelue yeres before as is declared. And Sygis∣munde Kynge of Poole, defended hym as hys Cliente. And nowe, what tyme an other was inuested, as I haue sayed the kynges Am∣bassadoure proteted openlye, that thys creation was vnlawfull, ney∣ther that it oughte to bee any derogation to the Kynge hys Master, vnder whose defence and protection is the Lande of Prusse. Whan the Ambassadours of Hongary had recited theyr misfortune and losse of the yeare paste, they requyred ayde of Thempyre: For nowe is the matter broughte to the verey extremitie, and yf they bee nowe leafte destitute, they must nedes doe, as men are wont in matters desperat, and for the which no man can blame thē: they wil accept right harde conditions, yea bōdage it selfe rather, that whilest other men sit still & loke on, they should fal into present destructiō. How the Frēch kings Heraulte was sent away from Spier with his letters, it is before de∣clared, whan the ambassadours therfore wer retourned home, ye ora∣tiō, The oration of the Frēch Ambassa∣dours. which they should haue had before the states of germany, they set forth in print. In the beginning, to get good will, they say how bothe nations haue one & the same originall, neither can any thing chaunce vnto germany which apperteineth not as wel vnto Fraunce. Thā do they cōfute the reportes of their aduersaries, as though the king with an other warre should disturbe the cōmon welth, & haue made league with the Turke, vsing a certē preface to appeace themperour. And af∣firme how the former warre was begon, for that the king could not obteine of the duke of Sauoie his mothers inheritaūce. And this la∣ter, for ye kinges ambassadours, which wer slain against the law of all nations: And yt the king hathe no league nor societie with the Turke, but for marchandise & cōmon quiet, such as the Uenetians, Poloniās & others haue. And albeit ther wer any league betwixt thē, it wer not to be reprehended, for asmoch as in times past both Abrahā, Dauid & Salomō, Phineas, the children of Tobie, & captaines of the Macha∣beis Holy men haue had leagues with men of a contrarye relygyon. haue done the like. After also themperours, Honorius, Cōstātine, Theodostus ye yonger, Iustinian the secōd, Palaologus, Leo, Frede∣rick the first & second, haue vsed the aide & succour of nations of a con∣trary religiō. And doubtles Fredericke the second was euen vpon the shoulders of the saracens caried again into Italy frō whence the bis∣shopes of Rome had expulsed him. They know, how great powers & aide the king hath oftener than once promised to the Turkish warre: Hereof also the Bishop and Senate of Cardinalles, are good wyt∣nesses. The cause whye the Turke inuaded Hongarye, was for the contentyon aboute the gouernemente: And after was moore pro∣voked
by the war in Affricke for the taking of Townes: And where of late the Turkisshe nauie came into the Ligurian Sea, it is not to be imputed to the kynge: neyther maketh it to the pourpose, that Po∣line the kinges seruaunt was in the same: For thintēt of Barbarousse was to searche and take Androwe de Aurie his enemie. And when he could not fynde hym, he beseged the castell of Nice, and that of hys owne determination. The kyng in dede hath taken trewes with the Turke, lyke as he hath at other tymes shewed them, which is honest & hurtfull to no man: for the which he ought not to be blamed, consy∣dering that the greatest men that be, haue also lately muche desyred the same. The state of the publyke weale is sore afflicted, and for that is the kynge right sory: And by this meane maie peace be recouered, if Themperoure will restore to the Kinge that thinge that is his owne ryghte and in heritaunce: Yf they can brynge thys to passe, the kinge wyll spare neyther trauell, cost, nor perill to defende Germanye from all foreine violence. In the fourmer bookes you haue hearde how the Duke of Saxon wolde not acknoweledge Fernando to be kynge of Romanes: but in thys conuention, that matter wente through in the The duke of Saxon is set throughe with kynge Ferdinando moneth of Maye, and the Duke promised to honour hym according∣ly. Themperour agayne, ratifyeth the Marriage conuenauntes be∣twixte hym and the house of Cleaue, whiche euer before he refused, & permitteth, that in case the Duke of Cleaue fortune to dye withoute heyres malles, that the Duke of Saxon whiche had maryed hys sy∣ster, and his heires males should succede him yet vpon thys condiciō, if before that chaunce, they shal agree vpō religion. And for a further bande of amitye, Fernando, by Themperours consente, promiseth to geue his daughter Elenore in marriage to the Duke of Saxōs eldest sonne, yf a reconcilemente in religion may be had, before she be mary∣ing able. This latter thyng was kepte verey secret, and closely coue∣red on eyther syde, so that neyther the Lantzgraue and hys fellowes knewe anye thynge thereof. For the matter was done by a fewe counsellours, and Themperoure vsed Granuellane, Feruando Hoffe∣man, the Duke of Saxon, Pontane and Burcarte. The King of Dē∣marke also, sendynge hys Ambassadours, fell to a composytion with Themperoure, where before he had kepte hys power all the wynter longe for the chaunce that myghte haue happened, he semed to forsake the Frenche Kynges frendeshyp for the Turkyshe confederacye: for The French king hate of all men for the turks societie. somuch the Ambassadours dyd sygnyfye, in famylyar talke with their fellowes. Nowe wyll we retourne to the demaundes of Thempe∣roure and Kynge Fernando. The matter beyng longe and muche de∣bated, the tenth daye of Iune the conuention ended. The States of Thempyre, albeit they thoughte it muche to bee charged with dou∣ble ayde, yet supposynge that they shoulde the better warre agaynste
the Turke, yf the domesticall enemie were fyrste broughte vnto hys bewtye, graunted to Themperoure monye to fynde foure thousande Horsemen, and .xxiiii. thousande footemen for halfe a yere agaynst the The states of thempire, decree an aide against the Frenche Kynge. Frenche kynge. And with parte of that monye Themperouce depar∣teth to hys brother Fernando, to thentente he shoulde fortifye suche places as are nere the Turkes: And for the Turkishe warre to come, they agreed that moneye shouldbe gathered of euerye man throughe oute Germany, & all men to be seased after theyr landes and goodes, and no man to bee exempted, and enacted that no man shoulde serue any foreine Prynces, especyally the Frenche Kynge, and the Magis∣trate permitted to execut those that were taken with the maner. Be∣cause the controuersy of relygyon could not in these warlycke affaires A decree for relygion. bee treated on, it is differred tyll the nexte assemblye to bee holden in the moneth of December: In the meane season wyll Themperoure appoynte certen good and well learned men to compile some godlye fourme of reformation, and also exhorteth the Princes to do the lyke, to the ende that throughe a Conference made in the next assemblye, somethyng by common assent may be establysshed, to be obserued vn∣tyll a generall counsel to be holden in Germany, or a prouincial Sin∣ode of the same. In the meane tyme let all men be quyet, and styre vp no trouble for the dyuersitie of Relygion, and that the Churches also, of what relygion so euer they bee, maye inioye theyr commodytyes on eyther partie, and parte of those goodes to be imployed to the fynding of the mynisters of the Churche, of free Schooles, and the poore: the Of the chā∣ber. iudges of the Chamber shall kepe theyr place, vntyll the tyme prefix∣ed: whan the same shalbe expired, than shall all be receyued into that nomber indifferently without respecte of relygion. The decre of Aus∣purge, and all actions commenced agaynst the Protestantes for doc∣tryne sake, the case also of Goslarie and Minden, to hang in suspence, vntill the nexte treaty: The Anabaptistes to suffer punishement, long synce for them determined: Yet shall the magistrates assigne learned and godlye men to shewe them theyr errour, and call them agayne to amendemente. The Catholickes mislyked thys decree, and resisted it withal theyr force: But when the byshopes of Collon & Munster held with the Protestantes, & also the duke of Cleaue and the Marques of Baden referred althinges to thēperours pleasure, which after lōg dis∣ceptation, had deuised thys way, as a meane & tollerable for both par∣ties, They being wel shortned of their nūbre, say, that certēly they wil not assent to it, howbeit they will not prescribe themperour, nor resyst hys authorytie, but are cōtent to suffer it. Friderick the Paulsgraue, & the Marques of Brandenburge, Princes electours had intreated yt it might be thus decreed. The protestātes desired also yt the duke of Brū∣swickes case might haue ben cōprised in ye same decree, but it could not
be obtayned, & themperour vrged thē, that eyther they should restore him, or els permit vnto him the prouince, by sequestration, til the mat∣ter be tryed. And therof he treated with the Duke & the Lantzgraue, when they were present, and after theyr departure, moche more with theyr deputies. The Cities at the fyrst refused the ayde of the French warre, by reason of theyr intercourse and trade of Marchandise: But what tyme the Prynces had assented, and the Frenche kynges cause was full of hatred, they subscribed also, thoughe sore agaynste theyre willes, especyally, that were nere vnto Fraunce. The Ambassadours of the Dukes of Luneburge and wirtemberge refused also, but they were admonysshed priuately, and chastened in woordes, that they a∣lone shoulde not lette the good will of the residewe. Whan the Lātz∣graue was ready to goe home, and came to take hys leaue of Them∣peroure, Thempe∣roures gen∣tlenes to the Lantzgraue he had most gentle intertaynement. And Themperoure said howe he wolde not trouble hym at thys tyme to serue agaynste the Frenche Kynge, for thys cause only, that he wolde not bringe hym in∣to hatred: but whan thys warre is doone, he wyll goe streight waye agaynste the Turke, and than wyll he make hym hys lyeutenaunte, and generall of all the warre. And whan he with a certen modestie excused, and abased hymselfe: as vnmete for suche a charge you haue done righte well or euer nowe, sayeth Themperoure, bothe for youre selfe and for the others. And we doubte not, but that you can doe vs also ryght good seruice, & with these wordes taketh hys leaue of hym moste Frendely. He beyng full of good hope, and ioyefull that he had Themperoure so moche hys good Lorde, whan he had declared the same to certen of hys Frendes, retourneth home. Touching the seque∣stration, after longe and moche pleadinge, they agreed that all the landes of the Dutchie of Brunswicke should be committed to Them∣peroure, as to the hyghe Magistrate, tyll the case were heard and de∣termined, The duchye of Brunse∣wicke com∣mitted to thēperoure. eyther frendely, or by ryghte and lawe. And that Thempe∣rour shoulde committe the gouernement of the Contrye eyther to the Paulsgraue, or to the Electoure of Brandenburg, moreouer to Duke Maurice or the Duke of Cleaue. They that shall not abyde thys or∣dre, to suffer the penaltye of breakynge the Publycke Peace: That Themperoure doe aduertyse the Duke of Brunswicke to obeye the same, yf not, to punish him according to the lawes of thempire. These condicions at the last Themperour propounded, & herin perseuered, Thā did the protestantes ratifie the same, as shalbe declared herafter. The assēblie being ous finsshed, thēperour goeth frō Spier to Mētz. Thempe∣roures Ior∣noy into Fraunce. Nowe was all his armie assembled in Lorayne vpon the borders of Fraunce. And about thēd of May, he had recouered the citie of Lucē∣burg by cōposition. In this warre ther serued thēperour duke Mau∣rice of Saxonie, the Marques Albert with ether of them a thousand
Horsemen, moreouer Counte william of Furstemburge, Captayne of the footemen, and Sebastian. Sherteline all of the Protestantes re∣lygion. Whylest Themperour was at Mentz, there was takē in Lo∣rayne, Huberte Erle Richlynge, a Germane, that serued the Frenche kynge: beyng brought to Mentz, he is condēned to suffer. The Coū∣tesse hys wyfe, whan she was comen thither, and fel downe prostrate at Themperours feete coulde fynde no fauoure. And nowe were all thynges prepared for the executiō. At the length was procured Max∣imylyan the sonne of kyng Fernando, whom Themperour had late∣ly receyued: he in thende obtayned hys pardon, and saued hys life. In the meane tyme Barbarousse; eyther for that hys bufynes requyred so, orheyng perswaded by the kynge, or els fearyng, leste the Frenche barbarossue retourneth, Kyng should conclude a peace with Themperoure, retourneth home, and what so euer places by the Sea syde apperteyned to Thempe∣roure or thempire, he inuadeth and spoyleth: But from the Bisshop of Romes landes he refraineth, as it is most lyke, by the French kinges perswasion. Themperours armye marchynge forewarde, taketh the Towne and Castell of Lyney, three myles from Barrey. And from thence goeth to Sandesyre, a Frenche Towne standyng vpon the ri∣uer of Marne, which was kept with a stronge garrison, ouer whom Mounser Landren was Captayne, who so valeauntely the yere bee∣fore had defended the Towne of Landersey from Themperour and from Thenglishemen. Whilest these thynges are thus a woorkynge, The death of the Duke of Lorayns. Anthony the Duke of Lorayne departeth out of this lyfe, not so moch for age, as for thoughte and care he tooke for thys nere and almoste domesticall warre, whom Fraunces hys sonne succeded, whiche had maryed Themperours Nece, Christine, as before is sayde. In thys meane whyle the Kyng of England sendeth ouer the Sea to Caleis, the Duke of Northfolke with one Armye, who marchynge throughe Bollonois, went and beseged Moustrell, & here Maximilyan Coun∣tiede Bure, by Themperours accorde, serued the Kynge of England. And immedyately after sente an other stronge Armye with the Duke of Suffolke, who layed sege to Bollogne, and thyther came the king The kyngs besegeth Bollogns. in person. The Frenche Kynge had appoynted Gouernoure there, Mounser Ueruyne a man of honoure. Whan Themperour had enui∣roned Sādesyre, with his army, he maketh the Batteri, & the Bretch onse made, geueth thassault at yt Ides of Iuly, but where the townes men stode to theyr owne defence moste valeauntelye, Themperialles were repulsed, and fyue hondreth Soldiours slaine. Fynally in the se∣conde moneth, what tyme Landrey the gouernoure was slayne with the fall of an House, and the Gunners wanted pouder, the Towne was rendred. Durynge thys seege, Renate, Prynce of Orenge bee∣ynge stryken with a greate Peece, the nexte daye after, whan he had
made his Cosyn the Erle of Nassow hys sonne, his heire, he ended his lyfe not without a great grief to Themperoure. That tyme were the The deathe of the Prince of Drenge. Protestantes Ambassadours in Lorayne, that they myght confyrme the couenauntes of Sequestration, latelye propounded by Thempe∣rour. And fyrst they rested at Metz, and after at Tullie, and sendynge dyuerse letters to Themperour and to Granuellan, they declared the rause of theyr commyng: But Themperoure at the last excusyng hym selfe by hys warlyke affayres bad them go home agayne, and differ∣reth the whole matter to the next conuention of thempyre, or to some other tyme more conuenient. Whan Sandesyre was taken, thempe∣rour, the .xxv. day of August, marcheth on styll, and leauing Catalāne, a Towne of Champagnie, pitcheth his Tentes by the Riuer of Mar∣ne, on the other syde wherof laye certen bandes of Frenche horsemen in an Ambusshe. There Counte Willyam of Furstemberge, whyche Counte wil∣lyam taken prisoner. knewe the sytuation of Fraunce, and euery passage, goeth foorthe in the nighte and but one man with him, to searche in what place of the ryuer they myght wade ouer at a foorde and passe with theyr Armie. And hauing a pesaunt of the Contrie to bee hys guyde, whan he had founde a forde, and was gone ouer on the other syde, he was intercep∣ted by Frenche horsemen, and caryed in to theyr Campe in greate de∣rysyon, and not withoute reproches, for that he seruinge there before, had caryed a greate deale of Golde oute of Fraunce, and from thence was sente to Parys. This thyng chaunced to Themperonre contrary to hys expectation, and helde hym long in suspence. The French king, because the Swysses were not commen, eschewed the battell. And Themperoure procedynge foorth by the Ryuer syde, dayly auaunced hys campe. In those: partyes is the Towne of Eperney: There was moche store of victualles, Munition, and other warlycke furniture: whiche thynges, leste they shoulde come into the enemyes handes, were conueyed in greate haste downe the Riuer: All that coulde not bee caryed awaye, was consumed with fyre, the Frenche men them∣selues Eperney brunte. settyng the Towne a fyre. Wherfore Themperoure, withoute resistance, marched to Castell Theodoricke a Towne by the same Ryuer, not two dayes Iorneye from Paris. And albeit the Frenche kynges Ambassadours, sente to entreate for peace, were in Thempe∣rours Campe, yet marched he forewarde neuer the lesse, and whan he was commen thus farre, there arose a wonderfull feare amonges them at Parys. All men that were of any welthe fled thence, neyther coulde they be kepte backe by the kynges proclamation, forbiddynge The feare & flyghte of the Parisians. that any man should flee, and the vilest sorte remayned styll. And ther∣fore was there some daunger, leste the greatest Citie in all Europe, and exceadyng ryche also, shoulde euen through those same haue been spoyled. In the same Uninersitie is a wonderfull nombre of Stu∣dentes,
out of al countries in christendom: they fled also, and the king had in dede proclamed that all alienes shoulde departe immediatlye, vnder payne of deathe thys was in the begynnynge of September. A fewe dayes after the kynge of Englande hauynge sore shaken and battered Bollen. with hys myghtye ordenaunce; had it rendred vnto hym, whiche neyther hys father, nor the kynges of former tyme could Bollon ren∣dred. euer wynne. For he dyd not batter the walles only with canon shot, and shake a sondre the Castell and Bulwarkes with, vndermynyng, whyche in wynnynge of stronge places, is the common practise of o∣ther Princes, but also had greate and heuge Morter peces, whyche were shotte of suche a compasse, that they fell ryght downe, and looke where they lyghted, brake downe all beefore them to the grounde, so that many wer oppressed with the ruine that they made, and the rest that loued theyr lyues were driuen to kepe in caues and sellars vnder the earth. At the last the .xxiiij. day of September, Thēperour mak∣eth peace A peace con∣cluded be∣twixte them∣perour and Fraunce. with the Frenche kynge, whan he was commen to Castell Theodoricke, a towne of the Soissons: the peace makers, of Them∣perours parte were Gonzage the Uiceroye of Sicilie, and Granuel∣lan. And for the Frenche kynge was Claudie Annebalde the Admi∣rall, Charles Nulley, and Gilbart Baiarde. And the condicions wer these. What soeuer hathe ben taken on eyther syde syns the trewes of The condici∣ons of the peace. Nice, is restored agayne. The French kyng shall render to the Duke of Lorayne, the Towne of Asteney, for because it is vnder the protec∣tion of Lucemburg. They shall aydeone an other, and Ioyne al their forces together that the olde relygion & concorde of the churche maie be restored. The Frenche king promiseth to ayde Themperour in the Turkissh warre, with sixe hondreth men of Armes, and ten thousand footemen. He renounceth the title and clayme of Arragonie, Naples, Flaunders, Artois, and Gelderlande. Themperour agayne renoun∣ceth hys ryght to the Countie of Bollonois, Perone & other townes, standyng vpon the water of Some: Moreouer, to lowe Burgun∣dye, and the contrie of Macon: Than promiseth he to geue in Mary∣age to the kynges sonne, the Duke of Orieans, the Lady Mary hys eldest doughter, or els the daughter of hys brother Fernando, & whe∣ther of them he wyll geue, he shall declare with in foure moneches: yf he geue his daughter, he promiseth for her dowary, Brabant, Gelder∣lande, Lucemburge, Limburge, Flaunders, Holland, Henaulte, Ar∣tois, Namures, Friseland, Utrecht, and all hys dominions there, and also hyghe Burgundie, that after hys deathe they maye inioye & pos∣sesse the same. Yf he thus doe, than the kyng for hymselfe & hys Chyl∣dren, renounceth hys ryght to Millan: And if it fortune themperours daughter to dye, hauinge no Children, than the Duke of Orleans de∣parteth from all that possession, and the ryghte in Millan remayneth
wholy to the Frenche kynge, and to Themperoure the ryghte of the House of Burgundie: Yf he geue the daughter of Fernando, he graū∣teth for her dowarie the Dukedome of Millan, howe so euer the ma∣riage be, it shalbe accomplisshed within a yeres space. And the Kynge shall wholy restore the Duke of Sauoie. The Kynge also is permyt∣ted to kepe Hesdin: Themperour promiseth his whole endeuour, that peace maye bee made also betwixte Fraunce and Englande: As con∣cernynge the Duke of Cleaue, beecause the kynge and Quene of Na∣uarre did affirme that theyr Daughter neuer consented to that Mar∣riage, but also witnessed the contrarye, after the solemne and accusto∣med maner, the Frenche Kynge shall sende that protestation to Thē∣peroure within syxe weekes that some thynge maye bee determyned. In thys peace are comprised the Bisshop of Roome, Kynge Fernan∣do, Portugall Polle, Denmarke, the Uenetians, Swyses, the dukes of Sauoye, Lorayne, Florence, Farrane, Mantua, Urbine, the Cy∣tyes of Gene, Luke, Senes, the Prynces Electours, and al the states of Thempyre, that are obedyente to Themperoure. Thys peace con∣cluded, Themperoure dyschargynge hys Armye, retourneth home to Brusselles. All men woondred at thys peace makynge, For euen those whyche were Themperours frendes, and famylyare with hym, loked most certenly for a Conquest before they went in to the Fielde, and made theyr boast, that with in a fewe monethes, Fraunce shoulde bee theyres, or Three moste myghty ene∣myes of Fraunce. the kynge shoulde be at commaundemente, who had three moste myghty enemyes, Thempe∣roure, the Germannes, and the Kyng of Englande.
✚ The sixtenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyste. ❧ The argument of the sixtenth Booke ¶ The Pope by letters admonisheth, taunteth, threateneth Themperoure hys sonne: and maketh new Cardinalles. The clergie of Colon resisteth the Archebishop: Master Peter Bruly for prea∣chynge at Tournay, was brent quicke. Whilest the assemble was at Woormes, they of Merindol∣le and Cabriere, named Uandois be sacked and burnt. The Pope notwithstandyng the counsell by hym called, burned with desyre to make warre agaynst the Protestātes. Luther wryteth against hym, and paynteth hym in hys collours. Grignian is sente to the Protestantes, to cause them to ap∣proue the counsell. The Archbisshop of Colon is cited to Roome. Open warre betwixte the Duke of Brunswicke and the Lantzgraue: wherin the Lantzgraue had the victory, the Palsgraue prince Electour, receyueth the Gospell. Bruites of warre are sowen agaynst the Protestantes, a Colloquie was ordeyned at Regenspurge, to dispute of Relygion: which broken the Counsell of Trente is publysshed, and the sessions beginne in the meane tyme Luther departeth oute of this presente lyfe. WHan the warres were hotest, the Bysshop of The Popes letters to the Emperoure. Roome, at the eyghte kalendes of Septembre, wryteth hys letters to Themperoure, wherin he rebuketh hym sharpelye, for vsurpinge, as he sayeth, hys authorytie, and intermedlinge with the reformation of Relygion, whiche neuerthe∣lesse he dooeth not ascribe to hys owne nature, but to the malycyous perswations of such euell men as he hathe lately made league and frend∣ship with, he threateneth him with thexamples of Dathan, Abiron, and Core, whiche wolde haue taken vpon them the authorytye of Moyses & Aaron: And also of Kyng Ozias, whom God strake with Leprosie, for that he wolde attempte to burne incēse vpon the Aultar: he telleth hym playnely that he hath nothing to doe with the reformation of Churches but the same to be longe vnto hys office chyefly, whom God hath geuen authorytie to bynde and loose: Than proueth he by ensamples, that suche Emperours as haue aided the See of Roome and the Bisshoppes therof, God hath euer rewar∣ded with great gyftes and benefytes, as greate Constantyne, Theo∣dose, and Charlemaygne: Agayne such as haue resisted them, to haue The ene∣mies of the romish church ben punnyshed with greate misfortunes, as Morys, Constans, Phy∣lyp, Leo, Henry the fourthe and Fridericke the seconde whyche came vnto shamefull endes, and were some taken, some also slayne of their
owne chyldren: And that for suche disobedience, not only kynges and Emperours, but also whole nations haue ben plaged, as namelye the Iewes and Grekes, the one for crucifying of Chryst the sonne of God, the others for contemnyng of hys vicar: Moreouer he wylleth him to imitate the example of greate Constantyne, who refused to be iudg in the Bisshops causes, Notwithstandynge he coulde be contente to vse hym as a coadiutour, in matters of relygion, but herin to be head and gouernour, he can not abyde hym. Fynally he warneth him frō hence The Pope can abide no superiour. foorthe to treate no more of relygion in the assemblies of Thempyre, but referre that vnto hys indgement, and that he disanulle and abro∣gate all suche thynges as he hath, through ouer moche fufferaunce al∣ready graunted, to those rebelles and aduersaryes of the Churche of Rome, or els must he be constrained to deale more roughly with him, than either hys custome, nature or will also can beare: Yet wil he not neglect hys dewtie: for the example of gods plage vpon Helithe prest is euer before his eyes: Hitherto he hath vsed the clementie of a father, Thempe∣roure is the Popes eldest sonne. but if thys will not serue, he must feele another waye: therfore let him consider, whether it shalbe more for hys honour, to assist his olde age, in recouerynge the tranqullytie of the Churche, or els to fauour those, that seke the desolation of the same. It is thought, that the Frēch king set hym on to wryte thus extremely, who made the matter odious by reason of the Englysh league, to incense the bysshop the more, for her∣of cometh it, that he wryteth of the Societie of euel mē. For they both are wont to swe and craue hys frendship right busyly bothe by letters Great prin∣ces swe for the Popes fauoure. and ambassadours, especyallye in tyme of warre, and eche laboureth for hym selfe, that they may bee to hym most acceptable. Aboute thys tyme, Stephen Bisshop of Winchester set foorth a boke agaynst Bu∣cer, verey opprobrious and bitter. Wherin emonges other thinges he defendeth the sengle lyfe. This yere the Bisshop created Cardinalles, Christopher Madruce, of the Trente, and Otto Truckesse Bishop of The creaty∣on of Cardi∣nalies. Auspurge, Germanes: George Arminiack, Iames Anuebald, Frēch∣men. Fraunces Mendoza, Bartholomewe Cueua, Spaniardes, to gratifye the Emperoure, Fernando, and the Frenche Kynge. At the same tyme also he calleth a counsell whyche had ben hindered hereto∣fore by reason of the warres, agaynst the Ides of Marche in the yere A counsel is called. following. And because Themperour and the French king wer now at peace, he vttereth greate gladnes, and the writte, wherewith he reneweth the connsel beginneth of that place of Scripture Letare Ie∣rusalem-In these dayes also cometh foorthe a booke of Luthers, tou∣chyng the Lordes supper, wherin he reneweth the olde controuersie, Luthers booke of the Lordes sup∣per. and speaketh many thynges agaynste Zwinglius and the fellowes of the same doctryne. Which was aunswered by them of Zuricke, & that ryght sharpelye. I tolde you before of Clergie and Uniuersitie of
Collon, howe they with theyr whole force resisteth the Archebisshop in the reformation of religion: But where as he procedeth, they sen∣dyng The clergie of Collon to the Arche Bisshop. agayne Ambassadours & letters, requyre hym to leaue, and at∣tende the decree of the counsell, yf not they must cōplayne to the high∣er magistrate, and fynde remedy, to quyet theyr conscyence, and paci∣fye Gods wrath. They are lothe to take that waye, but yf he goo fore∣warde, they muste nedes do it. Whan they coulde not thus preuayle, the .ix. daye of October they assemble in the head Churche of Collon, and there recyte by wrytyng amonges other thynges what hath ben done at Wormes .xxiij. yeres past, what Luther by the common assēt of all Princes was condemned of Themperoure, what was decreed at Auspurge, what at Regenspurge, and what latelye at Spyer. All these thynges neglected, they saye, how theyr Archebysshop Herman, hathe gon a new waye to worke, and hath sent for Bucer an Aposta∣ta and twyse polluted with incestuous mariage, a sacramentary, and a defendour of that opinion, and to hym hath committed thecclesiasti∣call function, and hath appointed euery where new preachers, lewde and euill persons: by them also was a fourme of a refourmation diui∣sed, & set forth by the princes commaundement. All the which thinges they haue euer to theyr powers resisted, and ofte desired the Archebis∣shop, that he woulde staye vntyll the counsell, or at the leste vntill the conuention of thempire, but all was in vayne. And nowe forasmuche as the state of the prouince is lamentable, & tendeth to greate vnquy∣etnes, & he will not be perswaded, they of necessitie doe flee to the laste remedye, and doe appeale to the Bisshop of Roome, and to Thempe∣roure, the hyghe protectour and aduocate of Gods churche and com∣mitte They ap∣peale to the Pope and Emperour. all theyr thoughtes vnto theyr tuition. The chief of this assem∣blye was George of Brunswicke, Duke Henry hys brother, Prouost of the same College. This thynge knowne, the Archebishop settynge forthe a wrytyng, sayeth, there is no cause of Appellation: For he had done nothynge contrary to hys dewty: therfore he reiecteth theyr ap∣pellation, and trusteth, that they wil leaue theyr enterpryses: but if not he wil procede not withstanding in those thinges that concerne gods glorye, and amendemente of Churches. And agayne in an other wry∣tynge, he confuteth theyr sclaunderous reporte of Luther and Bucer, and affirmeth that he was neither priuie to the condemnation of Lu∣ther, before he sawe it in print, nor consented to the decre of Auspurge. Luther was in dede condemned at Rome, but his cause not hearde, violently and tyrannically. But in the decree of Regenspurge, he and all other Bisshops were enioyned to reforme theyr Churches. And he sente for Bucer throughe the meanes of Gropper, who so ofte and so hyghly commended hym, in whom he also could fynd nothing blame∣worthye, And it is a greate tooken that he shoulde bee an honest man,
for that Themperoure amonges many, chose him to be one of the col∣loqutours as a man godly learned, & a louer of peace, the same iudge∣ment hath he also of the rest of the ministers of the churche by him ap∣poynted. After the peace concluded, Themperour sent the Bysshop of Arras, Granuellans son, and the Frenche kyng, Cardinall Bellaye, ioynctely to the kynge of Englande, to treate a peace, but it was in vayne, the king refusyng to restore Boloingue. In these daies also, the An Ambas∣sade to the Kynge of Englande. Duke of Orleans and the Cardinall of Turnon, and Ladyes of the Frenche courte came to Themperoure at Brusselles, for a mutual re∣ioysyng of the peace. Themperour had appoynted the captaynes and bandes of Spaniardes to wynter in Lorayne, & in the contrie there aboute. In Themperours prouinces annexed to the house of Burgū∣dye, many were euery where desyrous to know the gospel, but secret∣ly, for feare of Themperours proclamations & punnishment. In those parties is a Towne called Tournoye, the chiefest amonge the Ner∣uians. Thither came a Frenche preacher from Strasburge, beyng of Peter brulie them sente for, one Peter Brulye, of whom mention is made, in the twelfth booke. Whan he was commen thither in the moneth of Sep∣tember, beyng gently receyued, of them that sent for him, he began to instructe them priuately. And after, for the same cause, went to Lysle, a Towne of Flaunders, and retourneth aboute thend of Octobre a∣gayne to Tournay: but nowe was the matter brought to lyghte, and searche made for hym throughout al the cytye & the gates kept shutte. Being therefore in present daunger, and coulde be no longer hyd, the second day of Nouember, in the night season he was by serten of hys frendes let downe ouer the walles by acorde: whan he touched the earthe and satte downe on the grounde, one of them, laining ouer the walle, as softly as he coulde, bad him a dew, and whylest he thus ley∣ned, he fortuned to thruste of a stone, that cleaued not fast to the mor∣ter, whiche fallynge vpon hym as he sate, brake hys legge: who vexed partely with the ake of his legge, partely for colde, when he could not styrre thence, satte styll and bewayled hys chaunce and miserie. That That hearde the watchemen, and suspecting, as it was in dede, came vnto hym take hym and carye hym to pryson. When the brute hereof came into Germanye, the Senate of Strasburge, sendynge theyr let∣ters did intreate for him, the same did also afterwardes the Ambassa∣dours of the prote stantes, which wer that tyme at Wormes, but that was somwhat to late. And before these letters came, whiche were sēt in the name of the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue, he was dys∣patched out of the waye. This was on the .xix. day of Februarye. The 1545. Brulie burnte at Tourney. maner of hys executiō was extreme. For he was brent in a small fire, that hys torment might be so mutch the greaeer. He confessed his doc∣tryne constantlye euen to the laste breathe: And as he laye in prison,
comfortyng hys discyples by letters, which were fettred in chaynes, he exhorteth thē to be constāt. The sentence was pronounced against him, that he should suffer for transgressing themperours commaunde∣ment. For many yeres past themperoure had set forth most streit pro∣clamations, in all hys dominyons there awaye, agaynst the Luthe∣ranes. And they be red euery yere twyse, lest any mā should pleade ig∣noraunce. Whē he was sent for out of prison to be examined, ye Freers that wer diuines, axe him, before the magistrate, what his opinion of Hys exami∣nation. the sacrament of the altare, as they calle it, of the messe, of consecratiō, of adoration of the host, of purgatorye, of the worshipping of sainctes, of steewil, of good workes, of Iustification, of Images, of Baptisme, of vowes, of confession of synnes, of the Uirginitie of our lady. Wher∣unto he aunswered: that the verey body & blud of Christ is there recei∣ued, not with the mouthe, but in spirit through fayth, and neyther the substannce of breade nor wyne is chaunged: But whan the supper is distributed to the congregation after Chrystes institution in the vul∣gare tongue, than are they verely consecrated, euen by the wordes of Chryst. For that still and secret mutteryng wherwith the priestes doe treate, & speake to the breade and wyne, belongeth rather to inchaun∣ters and charmers, than vnto Christianes. The popissh masse to haue nothyng cōmon with the Lordes supper, but to be a seruice inuented by men, to the reproche & iniurye of Chryst: the adoration of the bread consecrated to be Idolatry: For there is worshipped a creature in the place of the Creatour, that he knoweth not, nor can fynde non other purgatory, sauing the bloud of chryst which forgeueth vs, not the tres∣pas only, but also the payne dew for our synnes. Therfore the masse & other praiers, which are applied vnto the dead, are not only of non ef∣fect, but also wicked, for asmoche as they are instituted besydes gods woorde: Sainctes can not be better worshipped, than yf we followe theyr faythe and vertues: What soeuer cometh besydes, is euyll, and they, whylest they lyued, wolde permit no worshyp to be donne vnto them. Therfore ought they not to be called on as mediatours, for that the same honour apperteyneth only to Chryst: through Adames sinne mans nature was wholy corrupted, and the wyll weakened, so that withoute Goddes grace, it can doe nothyng that good is: Howbeit a man regenerate, dooeth through Gods motion, as a good tree bryng forth good fruictes: How it is faith that bryngeth vnto vs saluation, yt is, when we trust vnto gods promesses, & beleue stedfastlye, that for Chryst his sonne sake, our sinnes are forgeuen vs. Traditions, wher∣vnto the mindes of men are bounden, ar not to be receyued: To haue Images in ye churches, is a thing full of daunger, for Idolatrie: Bap∣tisme is a signe of the league, that god hath made with vs, wherby he testifieth yt he forgeueth our sīnes. It is a signe also of cōtinuall morti∣fying,
and of a new lyfe, which ought to folow Baptisme. That thys Sacrament ought to be receiued of al men, and not somuche as little chyldren to be kept frō the same, which are also partakers of the god∣ly promission. There ought no vow to be made, that is eyther besides Goddes worde, or els cannot bee perfourmed by man: Howe euerye man ought daily to confesse hys sinnes vnto God, and craue his mer∣cy: moreouer, yf any scrupulositie trouble hys conscience, to axe coun∣sell of the minister of the church, for hys comfort and consolation. But that Auricular confessinge of Synnes, hathe neyther testimonye of Scripture, nor yet can bee perfourmed, but is a tormentynge of the mynde ryghte peryllous: Of the perpetuall virgynitye of our Ladie, he nothynge doubteth. Concernynge all these thynges, a fewe dayes before he stode foorthe, he wrote vnto hys wyfe, and to others of hys frendes, that requyred thys of him, vsing the seruyce of hys syster. And whan he was condemned to dye, he aduertiseth hys wyfe in an other letter, with what kynd of punnishmenthe should end his life the next daye, and also comforteth her, shewyng her, that the condicyō of a dis∣ciple, ought not to be better than hys masters, and geueth her certen instructions & preceptes of lyuing. The diuines of Paris had made decrees of relygion two yeares past as before is recyted. And now by A conuentiō of diuines at mellon. the kinges cōmaundement, they mete at Mellon, which is a Towne in an Iland of Seine, ten myles aboue Paris. The kyng was ther∣by in the Castell of Fountayne blewe, and had commaunded them to assemble, that forasmoche as peace was concluded, and the counsell shoulde shortely ensewe, they myghte after consultatyon had, resolue vpon suche artycles, for the Churche expediente as myght be thought mete to bee defended, in the counsel, and publycke Showe place of al Chrystendome. The ende of whyche consultatyon was thys, that all∣beit the altercation amonges them was greate, yet wolde they alter no iote of those thynges, whyche they had before setfoorth at Parys. After the example of the Parisiās, the Diuines of Louaine also draw out articles, and after, by Themperoures permission, set them foorth, The Arti∣cles of Lo∣vayne. to the nomber of .xxxii. of the same secte for all the worlde, as bee the Parysyans before rehearsed. Those doeth ye Emperour by hys procla∣matyon confyrme and ratyfye, publyshynge hys letters therof the day beefore the Ides of Marche. The Diuines wrytte, howe they tooke thys payne the more wyllyngly, for that they knewe the same shoulde be well accepted of Themperour, who had hertofore requyred of thē a moche lyke thynge. In the composytion of the pease, it was agreed, that Themperour and the Frenche Kynge, shoulde to the vttermoste of theyr power, restore the olde Relygyon, as they terme it: And those thynges that wee haue nowe recyted, seme to tende to the same ende. And the Cardinall of Tournon, which went with the Duke of
Orleans into Flaūders, is thought to haue furthered much that mat∣ter. But Luther aunswereth them of Louain with cōtrary theames, Luther aun∣swereth thē of Louayne. and calleth them heretickes, and bludsuckers, who teaching wicked thynges, that can neyther be defended by reason nor scripture, doe ad to vyolence, and persecute with fyre and sworde: For bothe they and also the Parysians propounde onlye bare propositions, and prescribe what they wyll haue followed, but alledge no place of Scripture to proue it, and incense the magistrate to persecution. The assemblie of Thempire was than at Woormes. Themperoure beynge diseased of An Assēble at wormes. the goute, was longe or euer he came: He had theyre hys deputes, the Cardinall of Auspurge, and Fridericke Countē of Furstemberg. The xxiiii. day of Marche, kyng Fernando, in Themperours absence, pro∣poundeth. Wherfore thys conuention is called, verely for the estably∣shyng of relygion, the lawe, and peace, and for the Turkisshe warre. He sheweth howe Themperoure wysshed to haue ben here in person, but hathe ben letted hitherto by reason of syckenes, and yet intendeth to come, so soone as he hathe recouered healthe. And because he wyll not longer hynder the common consultation, therfore hathe he requy∣red hym to commence the thynge, chieflye concernynge the Turkishe warre, for the which cause Themperoure made peace with the Frēch kynge, to thentente that all thynges beyng pacyfyed, relygyon maye be quyeted and refourmed, and after, all force and power bee prepa∣red agaynste the Turke. And after he hathe declared what trauell Themperour hathe euer taken to procure a counsell, fyrste wyth Cle∣ment the .vii. at Bononie, after with Paule the. iii, at Roome, Genes Nice Luke, and now lately at Busset. And because it is now brought to passe, and already in hande at Trente, Themperours aduise is, not to treate of Relygyon in thys Conuention, but to attende vpon the procedynge of the counsell, or yf there shalbe none, than before thende of thys assemblye, to appoynt an other conuocatyon of Thempyre for the same pourpos. But now requyreth them especially to cōsult of the Turkishe warre: For he is aduertysed by sondry letters & messengers that the Turke is comming into Hongary with a greater power thā euer he did, to thentente he may after inuade Germany. Let them cō∣sulte therfore, whether they thynke it mete to mooue warre agaynste hym or defende onlye, and what they shall determyne, to signifye the same to themperoure, who hath perswaded the bisshop of Rome & the French king to the Societie of this war, & trusteth also ye others will The Prote∣stātes make aunswer. not be behynd. Wherunto the protestantes, & with them also the arch¦bishop of Collon & the Palsgraue electour, the third day of April make this aunswer. How this cōuentiō was appoynted chiefly for religiō: and how yt in fourmer conuētions an entrie & accesse hath bē made to
come vnto an agrement. And therfore is there more hope now yt they should wholy accord. Wherfore they wolde right gladly begin first wt that matter & the state of Germany doeth require, it should be so, who yf the feare of God be before theyr eies, they doubte not to haue good successe. Howbeit, if either the weightines of the thing, or the shortnes of tyme, or els the presēt daunger of the Turke, wil not permit it: yet shall it be nedefull that the decree concerning peace be further decla∣red: For peace is in dede graunted to religion vntill the counsell, but they do not acknowledg this counsell of Trent for a lawful counsell, The counsel of Trēt vn∣lawefull. such as hath ben promised in the coūselles of thempire: And why they doe not accept it, they haue oft times heretofore declared. Therefore haue they nede of peace, who doe not depende of the popishe counsell, which may take place, til ye matter be godly & christiāly, determined. And because a firme peace can not bee had, except the execution of the law were ministred indifferentli: and how that should be don, it was in the last conuention at Spier decreed. They for theyr partes are re∣dy to accomplissh the same: Therfore if these two partes may be deci∣ded they wil not refuse to consulte of the Turkisshe warre. The reste of the prynces and states, amonges whom were the archebisshopes of The deuise of the popish Princes. Mentz and Treuers, do determine, that the case of religion shalbe re∣ferred to the counsell already sommoned, and the chamber to be esta∣blisshed according to the auncient lawes of thempyre, and iudgement to be geuen after the law written: and that certē should be chosen out of the whole nomber to conferre of the Turkish warre. To that of the Protestantes, kyng Fernando & the Emperours deputes make aun∣swer, howe the decree made at Spier touchinge peace, pleased them well enough than without exception, where as the counsel was that tyme called, and should beginne shortly after: In to the Senate of the Chamber also, shoulde mete men be receyued, accordyng to the decree made at Spier. And seyng it is thus, reason wolde that they shoulde requyre no more, but conferre with the reste of the Turkyshe warre. They againe saye, how it was inacted at Spier, first that ther should bee no troubled moue for Relygion, secondlye, that thys dissention should be accorded, through a godly and frendly disputation. For vp∣pon thys foundation resteth the peace of Germanye, neyther wolde they haue founde any lacke at all, yf the matter myghte thus haue re∣mayned. But nowe, inasmoche as the Bysshop hathe called a coun∣sell, to let and disturbe this reconcilement, wherin he alone with hys adherentes, hathe power to determyne, by whose decree also, moste men affirme, that the foormer pacification shoulde bee finished, they haue nede of a further assurance: howe they haue euermore refused, & that by solemne protestation, the Bisshoppes counsell, and haue many yeres synce set foorth bookes declaryng the causes of the same. Nowe
albeit there were non exception made of thys thyng at Spier, yet in case they should haue warre with the Turke, it is requisyte, that first all thynges be quyet at home? For the people must pay monye to thys warre. But by what equitie, or by what countenaunce can a man ex∣act mony of his cōmons, vnlesse he put them in a sure hope, that they with there wiues & children shal liue safely at home in their Religion. For euen for this cause doe they warre agaynst the Turke, that euery mans goodes, the cōmon welth, and trew religion may be cōserued: But to warre with the Turke, & in the meane seasō to be in daunger at home what great differente is betwixte these two. Therfore haue they iust cause to demaund a further suerty: Cōcerning the chamber, they are contēted, as they haue sayed, that it be established accordinge to the decree of Spier: And touchīg the charges of the same, they wil consult with the rest. They contended about these thinges frō the be∣gynning of Aprill, til it was the .vii. day of Maye. And than, hearing, that Themperour had taken his iorney, king Fernando differred thē tyll his cōming, and also requyred them in the meane tyme to consult with the residew, of the turkish matters. The princes were not there present, neyther Protestantes nor catholyckes saue only the Cardinal of Auspurge. The French kyng sent thither his ambassadour, Grini∣an, Grinian the French am∣bassadour. the gouernour of the prouince in Fraunce. In whose absence, ar∣rose great persecutiō in those parties. Ther be in the French prouince a people called Ualdois. They of an aunciente custome, doe not ac∣knowledg the bishop of Rome, & haue had alwayes somwhat a more The Ualdo∣is. pure doctrine, & after that Luther florished, gotte vnto thē gredely a more ample knowledge. For this cause were they ofte cōplayned vp∣on to the king, as though they contēned the magistrate, & wold make a rebellion. For this kinde of accusation many vse nowe a daies, more odious than trewe. There is of them certen Townes & Uillages, a∣monges the which Merindolum is one. Sentence was geuē against thē fiue yeres paste at Aignes, which is the high iudgmēt place of the The cruell sentence at Aygnes. prouince, that all should bee destroyed without respect, that the house should be pulled downe & the village made euē plain with the groūd, the trees also should bee cut downe & the place made altogether a de∣sert. Howbeit though it were thus pronounced, yet was it not thā put in execution, by the meanes of certē men that perswaded, the king to the contrary, & amonges thē, William Bellaye, who was at the same tyme the kinges Lieutenaunt in Piedemount: But at ye last, this yere the .xii. day of April, Iohn Miners, presidēt of the counsel at Aygnes, Iohn My∣ners. calling the senate, readeth the kinges letters, cōmaunding thē to exe∣cute yt sentēce geuen. Which letters, this Miners had obteined by the meanes of cardinal Tournō, through a fyt sollicitour, Philip Cortin. The Cardi∣nal of tour∣non. Therfore where he receiued thē in ye moneth of Januarie, he shewed
them not by and by, but kept them for a tyme cōuenient to worke the feate. When the letters were red, certen of the Senate wer chosen to execute the matter: when the Presidente Miners promised to assist, Miners pre∣sidente of Aygwes. for that in the absence of Grmian the gouernoure of the Prouince, he ruled the common welth. Now had he euery where by the kinges cō∣maundemēt mustered men before, for Thenglish warres, but he vsed them for this his pourpos: Moreouer at Marselles, Aygnes, Arles, & other great Townes, he toke vp all that were able to weare armure. He leuieth a power a∣gaynste the Ualdois. Then had he ayde sente hym oute of Auingnon and the places there aboutes of the Bisshop of Roomes dominion. Wherfore the fyrst im∣pression was made, not vpon the Merindolanes, but on the countrye aboute the Towne of Peruse. And at the Ides of April Miners, gar∣ded with a company of nobles, and captaynes, commeth to Cadenet: but in the meane season, certen Centurious set vpon a village or two by the Riuer of Druence, and there distroying al with slaughter, spoi∣lyng and fyrynge, dryue awaye a greate nomber of Cattell. The lyke also did others in sondrye places at the same time. The Merindolāes seyng all burne rounde aboute them, leaue theyr houses and flee in to The merin∣dolans flee into the woodes. the wooddes, and with a wonderful feare reste alnight at the vilage of Sanfalese. And than were the inhabiters there readye to flye also. For the Bysshop of Cauallon, deputie to the Bishops Legate, had ap∣poynted certen captaynes to go and slaie them. The nexte daye, they∣go a little further, and hide them selues in the woodes: For there was daunger on euery syde, and Miners had commaunded vnder payne of deathe, that no man shoulde ayde them with any thynge, but that they shoulde bee slayne withoute redemption, whersoeuer they were founde. The same proclamation was of force also, in the Bisshop of Roomes dominions therby, and it is sayde, how the Bisshops of that Countrie did fynde a great part of that armie. Wherfore they wente a werye and a paynefull Jorney, carying theyr children vpon theyre shoulders, and in theyr Armes, and in theyr swaddling clothes, & that did many women great with childe. And when they were commē to the place appoynted, thither was alreadye resorted a greate nomber whiche had lost theyr goodes, & saued themselues by flyght. Not long after it was shewed them, howe Miners came with all his power to geue the charge vpon them. This was in the euenynge. And because they must goe thorow rough and combrous places, they take counsel to leaue ther behinde the women, and children, and a fewe others to kepe with them, and amonges them the ministers of the churche: the residew were appoynted to go to the Towne of Mussie. And this did they vpon hope, that the enemye wolde shewe mercye, to the multy∣tude A lamenta∣ble depar∣tynge. of women & children, beyng destitute of all succour. What sighes ther were fetched, what imbracynges, and what lamentation, euerye
man maye easely perceyue. Whan they had gonne al nyght long, and passed ouer the great hyll of Leberon, they might see many Uillages and Fermes set on syre. After this Minerius diuidyng hys armye in∣to two partes Marcheth him selfe with thone towardes the Towne of Merindolum: And hauing knowledge by espiall, which waye the Meriudolans were fled, sendeth thother parte of hys armye to hunte them oute. Before they came into the wood, one of the soldiours mo∣ued with pitie, runneth before, and from the toppe of an hygh Rocke, where he iudged that the Merindolanes satte vndernethe, he casteth A soldioure, geueth them warnynge. downe two stones, & afterwarde calleth vnto them, though he could not see them, that they should immediatly flee from thence. And at the selfe same time, came two of those that went to Mussie, to shew them that theyr enemyes approched, and so cause the minister, and the resy∣dew of them that were leaft with the women, to Runne their waies, shewing them a narrow way through the wood, wherby they might escape all daunger. These were not so soone gone, but the Soldiours came streight waies in a great Rage, & drawing oute theyr swordes, with a greate outcrye, bad kyll these Heretickes. Neuerthelesse they seyng no men amonges them, absteyned from slaughter at that time. But whan they had done greate outrage, and spoyled them of theyre money and vittayle, they leade them awaye. Theyr pourpos was to haue handled them more shamefully, but beyng letted by a Captayne A Captayne defendeth the women. of horsemen, which comming in the meane tyme, threatened thē with punisshment, and cōmaunded them to goe streight waye to Miners, they forsake that filthye enterprise, and leauinge the women, dryue a waye theyr botye & cattell. The women were in nomber aboute fiue hondreth. In the meane season Miners came to Merindolum, & fyn∣dyng it without dwellers, spoyleth and setteth it on fyre, shewyng be∣fore A cruell fact of Miners. that one very cruell example. For fyndyng there one yonge man, he commaunded that he shoulde bee tyed to an Oliue tree and shot in with dagges. After he goeth to the towne of Cabrier, and battereth Cabrier yel∣ded. it with hys ordenaunce, and vsynge the seruice of Capitayne Polyne, that brought in the Turkes nauie, he perswadeth the Townes men, to open theyr gates, promisyng that they shoulde haue no harme. But a whyle after whan the soldiours were lette in, they were all slayne, without respect had, eyther of age or of womankynde. Many fled in∣to the Churche, and some to other places, dyuers in to the wyne sellar of the Castell. But beyng brought foorthe into a meddowe and strip∣ped naked, they were slayne eche one, not men onlye but also women greate with chylde. Miners also shutteth a fourtye women in a barne A terryble example of crueltye. full of straw and hey, after setteth it a fyre and burneth it: And where the sely women put of theyr clothes therewith to haue quenched the fyre, and when they coulde not, ranne to the great windowe, whereat
the hey is wont to be cast into the Barne to haue lopen out: but there being kept backe with pickes and Iauelyns they were burnt all to∣gether: this was the .xx. daye of Aprill. This done, Miners sent parte of his armie to winne the towne of Coste: whā they were marching on theyr way, they were found oute, who I tolde you a lyttell before, were fled into the wyne sellar of the Castell. Whervpon was Reysed an outcry, and as though there had ben, treason the soldiours are cal∣led backe, and distroy them all. The nombre of them that were slaine within the Towne and withoute, were aboute eyght hondreth. The infantes that escaped theyr furye, were baptised agayne of theyr ene∣mies. Whan all thynges were dispatched at Cabrier, there was sente a power to Costa: The lord of that Towne had denysed with the Ci∣tezens before, that they should carie all theyr armure into the Castell, and caste downe theyr walles in foure sondry places: Yf they wolde doe this, he promiseth them to obteine of Miners and that easelye, that there shalbe no displeasure wroughte there. They beeinge per∣swaded, folow his aduise, after he departeth, as it were to intreat for them, & going not farre, he meteth with the soldiours: They marche one notwithstanding, and the firste daie they were yet repulsed: The next day they assault it with a great violence, and hauyng burned all the suburbes aboute it, take it easely for that the night before many es∣caped ouer the walles by cordes. After the slaughter committed, they ranne into an orchard by the Castell, & there the women and maides that were fled thither for feare, they rauissh euery one, and when they had kept them ther inclosed a daye and a nyght, they handled them so beastely, that those that had greate belyes, and the yonger maydens, dyed shortely after. In the meane season the Merindolanes, & diuerse others, that wandered in the woddes and mountaynes, being inter∣cepted, were eyther sente to the Galeis, or slayne, many also dyed for honger: Moreouer, not farre from the Towne of Mussie before na∣med, certen went and hid themselues in a caue vnder a rocke, to the nomber of. xxv, but being bewraied, they were smothered with smoke and burnt all: so that no kinde of crueltie was omitted. Neuerthelesse diuerse, which had escaped this bouchery, came vnto Geneua, and o∣ther places nere. Therfore whan report herof was bruted in Germa∣ny, it offended the myndes of many: And in dede the Swyses, which The Swis∣ses intreate for the Ual∣dois. were not of the popisshe relygion, intreated the kynge, that he wolde shew mercye to such as wer fled: but the Kyng sayeth, how ther was iust cause for hym to doe as he did, neither ought they to be more care∣full what he doeth within his dominions, or how he punisheth offen∣dours, than he is aboute theyr affayres. In the yeare before these men A sharpe aunswer of the kynge. had sent to the kyng a confession of theyr doctryne comprysed in wri∣ting. Wherof yt articles were of god the father, creatour of al thinges,
of the sonne mediatour and aduocate of mankynd, of the Holy spirite, the comforter & instructour of all treweth, of the church, whych they The confes∣sion of the Ualdois doctryne. saye is the fellowship of all gods electe, wherof Iesus Chryst is head: of the ministers of the churche, whom they wolde should be remoued, vnlesse they doe theyr dewty: of the magistrate, whom they graunte, to be ordeyned of God, to defende the good, and to punnysh the trans∣gressours. And how they owe hym not loue only but also tribute, and custome, & no man herein to be excepted, euen by the example of christ who payed tribute hym selfe: of baptisme, which they saye is a visible and an outward sygne, that represēteth vnto vs the renewyng of the spirite, and the mortifycation of the members: of the Lordes supper, whych they saye, is a thankes geuing, and a memory all of the benefit receyued throughe Chryste: of matrimony, which beyng holy and in∣stituted of god, ough to be inhibited to no mā, of good workes, which they saye, we must obserue and exercise, as holy scripture teacheth: of false doctryne, whiche, because it leadeth vs a waye from trewe wor∣shippyng, they saye, it ought to be eschewed: to be brief, the order and rule of theyr faythe, they affirme to be the olde and new Testamente, and doe protest that they beleue all those thynges, that are conteyned in the crede of the Apostles. Finally, they desyre the kyng to geue cre∣dyt to thys declaration: for incase he be otherwyse informed, it is not trew, and that they say they wyll proue, yf they maye be heard. That tyme was the king occupyed with affaires of warre, and therfore the matter slept: but whē peace was made, it was renewed, and through the prouocatiō of many, brought to thys wonderful crueltie. I shew∣ed before of the Spaniardes, whom Themperour had placed in Lo∣rayne for the wynter season. They, after they had wrought moche e∣uyll in those parties, by Themperours cōmaundement depart thence in the moneth of Aprill, and trauelyng by Strasburge, whē they had there passed ouer the Rhm, they goe through Sweuia into Austriche, about three thousande footemen. At thys tyme ended hys lyfe, Lewis the Duke of Bauier, the brother of Wyllyam, hauynge no chyldren. For so it was accorded, that he should not marie, for the kepyng toge∣ther The deathe of Lewes Duke of Bauier. of thinheritaunce. The Duke of Brunswicke and he were excea∣dyng great frendes: For they were the chiefe captaynes of the league that was deuised against the protestātes: And whan Henry of Brūs∣wicke was dryuen oute of hys countrey, he fled fyrst vnto hym. After thys, the .xvi. daye of Maye came Themperour to Wormes. And the next daye after, Cardinal Farnesius: What was the cause of his com∣myng, Cardinall Farnesius his cōming to wormes. I am not able to saye, but it was thought for certentie, that he came to styre vp warre agaynst the Lutheranes: He did nothinge o∣penly, and comynge from Roome, he passed not throughe the lande of Wirtemberge, but whan he had stayed a tyme at Dilling, a Towne
of the Cardinalles of Auspurge vpon the Riuer of Danubius, he tor∣ned an other way. Kyng Fernando had written to the Duke of Wir∣temberge, that for his sake he wold let hym passe sassye, and shewe all the fauour that myghte bee: he made aunswer that he had rather, he wolde take some other waye, neuerthelesse, to doe hym pleasure, yf he were disposed to passe that waye, he wolde not let hym. But he, as I sayd, tooke an other waye, and came to Wormes, one daye after thē∣perour. Themperoure, so soone as peace was made with the French kyng, sollicited other prynces also to further and helpe forewarde the Counsell. And for thys cause only sente ambassadours to the kynge of Thempe∣rours Am∣bassadour to the kyng of Poole. Polle requyring hym to sende hys deputes to the counsell of Trente: who amonges other thinges sayed, that for asmoche as Themperour supposed, howe the Protestantes, whyche had ben euen stubburne, wold not forsake the cōfession of theyr doctryne, exibited at Auspurge nor also obey the publycke decrees of the counsell, the thinge it selfe re∣quyred, that kynges and princes should take the matter in hande, and yf they doe not obey, to bee auenged on them, as the disturbers of the publycke weale: and all godlye relygion. And where as he, amonges others, hath the comendation of a godly and a christian kyng, Them∣peroure prayeth hym, to thynke vpon the Turkisshe warre, subcribe to the counsell of Trente, and yf the Protestantes will not beframed to amendement, to assiste hym with hys ayde and counsell, as also o∣ther kynges haue promised. The king of Polle agayne made aūswer, how he desyred that he myghte see that day, whan chrystian kynges & The kinges aunswer to themperour Prynces, all ciuille warre and discorde layde a parte, shoulde bende theyr whole power at ones agaynste the Turke: For then wold he be none of the last. And as concernyng the counsell and the Protestātes, he wil doe all thynges that maye profite the publycke weale and trā∣quillitie of the churche, neyther yf nede repuyre, wyll in greate daun∣ger fayle Themperoure hys Frende and alie. The same tyme it was The pope most desy∣rous of war. wrytten from Rome, how the Bisshop, notwithstandyng that he had called a Counsell, and sente hys Legates thyther, was so desyrous of warre agaynst the Lutheranes, that hereunto he promised aide of. xii thousande footemen, and fyue hondreth horsemen. And that priuelye, also he hyred Centurions and Captaynes. And whan it was shewed hym agayne, howe the time was farre spent, and no great good could be donne that yere, and how they must tary for some better occasyon, he declared the same immediately to hys captaynes, and put them in hope of the next yere following. On the morrow after the feast of Pē∣tecost, A frere ob∣seruaunte, stireth Thē∣peroure to warre. a Frere obseruaunt, an Italian, made a sermon before Them∣perour, kyng Fernando, Cardinal Farnesius, the Bisshop of Auspurg and Granuellan, and in hys sermon makinge a digression to the Lu∣therans when he had inueyhed moche and spoken dispitefully against
thē, it is tyme no we, sayeth he, most victorious Emperour, that at the laste you doe your offyce: certenly it hathe ben delayed ouer longe: for the thyng shoulde haue ben don long since. God hath blessed you with many great gyftes, and ordeyned you defendour of his church. Wher∣fore extende youre power and dispatche out of the waye that pestife∣rous sorte of men: For it is not lawefull for them any longer to behold the sonne, whiche doe thus pollute and confounde althynge: Neyther say that you will doe it: For it shoulde haue ben done already, already I saye, and long syns: therfore may ther be no longer delay. For how many thousand people do you thinke to be in daunger of euerlasting saluation, through theyr madnes? All the whych God shall requyre at your handes, vnlesse you fynd the remedye. It is sayde how Granuel∣lan was moche offended with thys Trompete, eyther for that he fay∣ned so, or els for that he sawe, howe it was a warnynge to the Prote∣stantes. Not many daies after this sermō, Farnesius departeth secret∣ly by nyght, and retourneth to Rome with great expedition. In these dayes Luther setforth a boke in the vulgare toungue intitled against Luthers boke against the Pope. the Bisshoprycke of Roome ordeyned by Sathan, in the which booke he aunswereth fyrst to the Bysshoppes letters, wherby with so vehe∣ment wordes, he diswadeth Themperoure from the reformatiō of re∣lygion, lyke as you haue hearde before. After those places of scripture, which the Bisshop doeth vsurpe to establyshe hys supremacie, he con∣futeth moste aboundantly, and applyeth them to make agaynst hym. Before the booke he set a picture, whych by and by declareth the sōme of the argumente. The Bysshop sytteth in an hyghe chayre, with hys handes ioyned and stretched out in solemne apparel, but he hathe asse eares: And aboute hym are many deuelles, of diuers shapes, wherof some set a triple crowne vpon hys head, with a tourde in the toppe of it: others let hym downe by cordes into hell vnder neth hym, horty∣ble to be holde, some bryng wood and colle: others as ryght seruycea∣ble, staye his feete that he may descend rightly and softely. Not longe after came foorthe certene theames of hys, whyche he had heretofore disputed of the three gouermentes, Ecclesiasticall, politycke and Oe∣conomike. Luthers themes of thre gouern¦mentes. Whiche he sayeth God hathe ordeyned agaynste the furye of the Deuill: but he vtterlye excludeth the Bysshop from all these, for that he condemneth and oppresseth the Gospell, for that he bryngeth, vnder hys subiection all lawes, and euen the ciuile lawe: And in as∣moche as he forbiddeth matrymony to whom it pleaseth hym. Ther∣fore he calleth him the beast, which is named in Germany of the beare The wylde beaste. and the wolfe together. There is nothynge, sayeth he, more fierce and cruell then she. Wherfore when a token is geuen, and that she is once hearde of, streyghte wayes all men get them to theyr weapons to the intent they maye kyll her: And yf hapely she should take a caue or anye
inclosure, and gouernour or Iudges of the soyle, wolde exempte her; or also defende her, she shoulde be persecuted notwithstanding, and he that should let or disturbe the hunters myght be slayne lawefully. Af∣ter the selfe same sorte, must the Bisshop be resysted, if he doe attempte and moue warre, lyke a wyld and a rauenyng beast, with what aide someuer he is mayneteyned. For they that wil serue or helpe a theefe, ought to looke for the rewarde of the thynge which they deserue. Thā did he also sende foorth an other picture, very fonde in dede, but yet as it were a prophesye of the thyng to come. The Bisshop in hys prelates apparell sitteth vpon a greate sowe with manye dugges, whyche he Luthers pic∣ture against the Pope. diggeth in with his spurres: hauyng two fyngers of hys ryght hand nexte hys thume stretched ryghte vp as the maner is, he blesseth suche he chaunceth to mete with: In hys lefte hande he holdeth a new smo∣kinge tourde, at the smell wherof the sowe lyfteth vp her snowte, and with her wyde mouthe and nose thirlles catcheth after her praye: but he in derysion, blamyng the beast full bytterly, I shall ryde thee, saieth he, with my spurres, whether thou wylt or noe. Thou haste troubled me longe aboute a counsell, that thowe myghtest rayle on me at thy pleasure, and accuse me franckelye. Beholde nowe, thys same is that counsell, that thou so greatlye desyrest: by the sowe he sygnifyeth Ger∣many. These tryfles of hys, many mentaunted, as vnsemely for hym, and not verey modest: But he had hys reasons whye he did so, & was thought to haue had a greater foresyghte in thynges. And certenly in hys bookes are diuerse and sondry prophecyes, wherof the ende proo∣ved some trewe, the residew as yet are in the hande of God. In the meane season Themperoure taketh order with Granuellan and Na∣uius to be in hand with the protestantes touching the counsel and the Luther a prophet. Turkish warre: but after longe decision nothyng could be concluded. Grinian the french Ambassadour, for because he vnderstode not the latyn tounge, conprysed hys matter in wrytyng, and vttered it by an The igno∣rāce of Gri∣nian. interpretour, the .xx. daye of Iune: the somme of thys oration was to exhort them al to the counsell. This Grinian was a nere frende to the Cardinall of Tournon who is thought to haue ben the occasyoner of thys Ambassade, for he had ben with Themperoure at Brusselles, as I sayde before, and had treated of matters concernynge the counsell. And than was it thus agreed, that the kinge should sende an Ambas∣sadour, to exhorte them to the counsell, whych Themperoure and he had already approued: for thys was thought to bee a meane to make the Protestantes affraid. At this tyme dyeth Fraunces Duke of Lo∣rayne, leauing behynde hym a yonge sonne: Charles, a chylde of two The deathe of Fraunces Duke of Lo∣rayne. yeres olde. The Duke had a brother called Niclas Bisshop of Mentz betwene him and the childes mother Christien, Themperours Nece, arrose a contention aboute the wardeshyp: Al the Nobilitie fauoured
hym more, and lothed the womans gouernement, but through Thē∣perours mediation, they were bothe appointed gardins, yet so, as the mothers authorytie was chiefest. In those dayes also departeth the Daughter of Ferdinādo, which was maried two yeres before to the son of Sigismunde king of Polle. But out of Spayne was brought The birth of Charlessōns to kyng Phi∣lyp. glad tydinges, of the birth of Charles Themperoures Nephewe, the sonne of kynge Philip, for the whyche cause the Spaniardes made greate Ioye at wormes: But a few dayes after came worde that the mother of the childe was dead. To Themperoure being at Wormes came the Marques of Piscare, and broughte with hym certen of the chiefe inhabiters of Millan. It was thought, how Themperour was than determined to marye the Daughter of Kynge Fernando to the Duke of Orleans, and therfore had sent for these men to vnderstande the state of Lumbardie, whiche he had promised to geue hym for her dowarye. Whylest Themperoure helde this assemblie, the Duke of Brunsewicke goeth to the Frenche kinge. That time did Fridericke Rifeberge leuie a certen power of footemen, in the Borders of Saxo∣nie for the king of England: Henry of Brunswicke espying that occa∣sion, promyseth and perswadeth the frenche kyng, that incase he wyll geue him monie, he shall easely fynde the meanes to scatter thē again. And so getteth of hym certen thousandes of Crownes: but he neyther The Duke of Brunse∣wicke get∣teth monye of the Frēch kynge. letted Rifeberge, and cōuerted the monye receyued, to warre against the Protestantes, as shalbe declared herafter. Unto this conuentyon came no Princes as I sayde before, but after Thēperoure was there, the Paulsgraue Electoure came also, and at the request of the Prote∣stantes, maketh intercession. But whan Themperour saw, how they wold graunt nothyng to the Turkisshe warre, vnlesse they obteyned theyr requeste concerning the counsell and the chamber, he sendeth an Ambassadoure to the Turke for trewes, Gerarde Ueltuniche, a man Thempe∣roure taketh truce with the Turke. verye well learned, and experte in toungues. Duryng thys conuenti∣on, the Senate of Mentz maketh inquirye after suche as by the olde custome, had not receyued at Easter, and banisshed them the Towne, that were founde herein culpable. I shewed you before howe the cler∣gie and Uniuersitie of Collon had appealed to Themperoure and bis∣shop, The clergie and vniuer∣sitie of Collō against their Archebishop that they myght hereby hynder thenterprises of theyr Archebis∣shop: but where he stil proceded, and wolde not displace the preachers and ministers of the church whyche thyng they chiefly requyred, they renewe theyr sute to Themperoure, making of hym a greuous com∣plainte. Therfore aboute thende of this conuention, Themperoure by hys letters published at Wormes, receyueth them into hys tuitiō, and chargeth al men vnder the paine of outlawyng, that no man disturbe Temperour¦citeth the archebishop. thē in their religiō, right or possession. Againe in other letters he citeth the archebisshop, that within .xxx. dayes he come hym selfe or send his
proctour to aunswer to the accusations. And in the meane time com∣maundeth, that he intermeddle not, nor alter any thynge, & yf he haue chaunged ought, to restore it to hys olde place. The same commaun∣demente also geueth he to the Townesemen of Andernake, Bonna, Lyntz and Campene: for in these places chyefly had the Archebisshop appoynted Preachers to instructe the people. Agayne the .xviij. daye of Iulye, Paule the .iii. citeth hym after the same maner, that The Pope citeth the archebishop of Colon. within two monethes he appere before hym at Roome: he cyteth also Henrye Stolberge Dean of the Cathedrall Churche in Collon, and hys Colleges, whyche were all of noble houses, Iames Ringraue, Fryderycke Weden, Chrystopher Oldenburge, Rychard Rauier and Phylyp Obersten: For these bothe loued the Archebishop, and allow∣ed not the suite of the rest. The Bysshop of Roome had dyuerse yeres paste mislyked muche the Archebisshop, whyche was chiefly longe of Uergeryus Bysshop of Instinople, who beyng Ambassadour in Ger∣many and comming on a time to Collon, whan he heard that he was aboute the reformation of hys churche, he rebuked hym sore bothe by wordes and letters, and accused hym whan he came at home. After longe disceptation concernyng peace, the Chamber, and the Turkish warre, Themperoure, the fourthe daye of August maketh an ende of pleadynge. And because manye thynges coulde not be here determy∣ned, vnlesse the Prynces had been presente themselues, he prorogeth the whole treaty vntill the moneth of Ianuarye next followyng, and than commaundeth all the Prynces to come to Regenspurge, vnlesse they be letted by syckenes: and sayeth he wyll be there hym selfe: And forsomuche as he desyreth, that the controuersye in relygion myghte once bee accorded, he appoynteth an other conference of learned men, and foure collocutours on eyther side, and two auditours, commaun∣dynge them to bee at Regenspurge at the kalendes of December and to begynne the matter before the assemblye of Prynces shall repayre thyther. Then he recyteth the decrees of peace of the fourmer yeres, and confirmeth them, commaunding that no man attempt any thing The decre of Auspurg. to the contrarye: After he taketh order howe the money graunted in the yeare before to the Turkysshe warre, shoulde be leuyed and reser∣ued, the reformation of the Chamber he differreth tyll the nexte con∣uention. That parte concernynge the conference of Learned men the Catholyckes refuse, neyther wold they assent to Themperoure here∣in: the reste they doe not refuse. But the Protestantes doe repete the fourmer treatye, and saye that the faulte is not in them, that they had not treated of Relygyon, and that they had sayed beefore tou∣chynge the refusall of the Counsell, and the Chamber they inferre a∣gayue, and vrge the decree of Spyer made the laste yere, and where
as this decree of Themperoures dissenteth from that, they proteste that they doe not admit the same. How the ambassadours of the pro∣testantes followed themperoures campe the yeare past, & how them∣perour differred it tyll an other tyme, I shewed you before. Whersore in this assemblie the matter was throughly determyned vpon condi∣cions before mentioned. And whē the duchie of Brunswicke was by sequestration permitted to themperour, he by & by cōmaundeth Hen∣ry ye duke to trye the matter by the law, & abstaine frō force of armes: but he wyll not assente thereunto, & hereof maketh protestation: And what tyme themperoure againe chargeth hym extremelye vnder the The fro∣wardenes of the Duke of Brunswick. paine of outlawing, that he shold obey thorder taken, he not only dis∣obeyed it, but also wrote agayne bitterly, & raileth vppon his counsel∣lours, especyally Granuellan, and Nauius, and not content herewith secretly began to gather men, that he myght recouer that he had lost, as a lyttell after you shall heare. Themperoure goeth downe the Ry∣uer of Rhine from Wormes to Collon: And from thence retourneth to Brusselles. The Bysshop of Collon beynge cyted to appere before Themperoure, where soeuer he were, or to sende hys Proctour with∣in .xxx. dayes, Albeit that for the olde custome of Germany, and by the priuelege of the Princes Electours, he was not bounden to seke thē∣peroure withoute the limites of thempire, yet sent he thither his proc∣tour, which should defende hym. That time was the warre hote be∣twirte Fraunce and England: And was mayneteyned aswell by sea as by lande. And the Frenche king with moche a doe builded a forte, The warr of Fraunce & England. nere vnto Bologne, vpon the Sea coast, intending to cut of theyr vi∣tayle: And was driueu to fynde an Armye there, tyll the woorke was finisshed, which neuerthelesse was at the fyrst discōsited with a great deale lesse power of the Englissh men through the cōduite of the Erle of Herforde, and lost theyr tentes & caryage. And it greued the prote∣stātes to see these two kynges at such mortal warre together, which so many yeres before had been at peace. Wherefore knowynge that it The Prote∣stantes send Ambassa∣dours into Fraūce and Englande. shoulde not be displeasaunte to neyther partye: They sende Ambassa∣dours, into Fraūce, Christopher Ueninger, Iohn Bruno of Nidepōt, & Iohn Sturmius: Into Englād, Lewis Bambache, & Iohn Slei∣dan. Who coming to Amiens the tenth day of Septēber, heare there of the death of ye Duke of Orleans which was departed ye day before. He should haue ben eyther son inlaw or allied to thēperour, as before is declared, & as it wer a most sure bonde of perpetuall frendship. But The deathe of the duke of Orleaūce. what tyme the maryage was in maner appointed to be kept, he died of a short sickenes being a yong man of .xxiii. yeres of age. At the selfe same tyme Duke Henrye of Brunswicke beinge furnisshed with the The armye of the Duke of brūswick. French golde, as before is sayde, hyreth bandes of soldiours as secret∣ly as he can. Which after they were assēbled besides Uerded, aboute
a thousande and fyue hundreth horsemen, and eyght thousande foote∣men. He goeth to Rotburge, a Towne belōging to the citie of Breme that he myghte ioyne the munition of hys brother Archebisshop of Breme, & hys owne to gether, but that labour was lost: For the Se∣nate of Breme had sente thyther before, men to defende the place. Marchynge therfore through the countrey of Luneburge, where he did moche hurte by the waye, he commeth into hys owne prouince & taketh the Castel Stēbrucke by composition, after he worketh moche mischief in the coūtrie, spoylyng and fyreyng the houses: And sendeth worde to the Cities nexte hym as Brunswicke, Hanobrye, Minden, Breme, & Hamburge, that they shoulde recompence hym for the iniu∣tyes done, and forsake the conspiracie of Smallcald, for so it was his pleasure to cal it, or els he threateneth thē with vtter distruction. And other force of his aboute eyght hundreth horsemen, and thre thousand fotmen, whau they had spoyled & burned the coūtrie of Countie Dec∣kelburge, a fellow of the Protestātes, & done moch harme, they passed ouer the riuer of Uisurge, and ioyne themselues vnto him. Wherfore he goeth, & besegeth Warolbuttell the chiefe castel of his dominion, & constrayneth the people in all places to geue hym theyr saythe by an othe. In the meanetyme, the Lantzgraue, at the commaundement of The Lantz∣graue goeth against him his fellowes, gathereth in hys owne countrey, to the nombre of seuen thousande men, & thre enseignes of foote men, and aboute a thousand and sixe hundreth horsemen. With thys power, and with .xxiii. pieces of ordenaūce, he marcheth to Northeme, thither came vnto him duke Ernest of Brunswicke, the sonne of Philip, sent by the Duke of Sax∣on, with a thousande horsemen, and thre thousande footemen, & syxe thousande of them that were leuyed in hys owe dominyon, and with xii. felde peces. When the Duke of Brunswicke vnderstode this, lea∣vynge the syege of the Castell, whyche the garrison within defended manfullye, he tourned an other waye, and scrapynge together all the monye he myghte gette, payeth the soldiours, whyche were readye to slyppe asyde, and after marchynge forwarde, encampeth hymselfe at Calfelde, whyche Uillage was a myle from the Lantzgraues campe. In thys troublesome state Duke Ericus of Brunswicke and his mo∣ther a wydowe, Iohn Marques of Brandenburge, sonne inlawe to Duke Henry, with certen others intreate for peace. But the Lantz∣graue and the Saxons saye, howe they can doe nothynge herein but by the cōsent of theyr fellowes. Therfore doe they make suite to duke Moris praying hym to perswade the Lantzgraue hys father inlaw. He followeth theyr requeste, and whan he came into the Campe, the Duke Mo∣ris intrea∣teth a peace. xvi. daye of October, he propoundeth the whole matter, and desyreth that he myghte bee permytted to treate the peace. But the Lantz∣graue excuseth the matter as he dyd beefore. The nexte daye certen
bandes of Horsemen of the Duke of Brunsewyckes came nere vnto Northeme, and skermyshed with the Lantzgraues Horsemen, but beynge repulsed with shotte, they retourne into theyre Campe. The same daye at nyghte. Duke Mauryce sollyciteth agayne, the Lantzgraue. And for because he hathe promysed Duke Henrye and hys frendes to take paynes in the thynge, he desyreth to haue some condycyons propounded, whych yf Duke Henry shall refuse, he maye honestly leaue the matter. The Lantzgraue than propoundeth suche condicyons, as there was no doubte but they wolde be refused. Duke Morys sendeth Chrystopher Ebleb and Comerstrate, a Ciuilyan to make hym the offer. In the meane while came worde, how the Duke of Brunswycke was commyng with all hys power, to gette the hille that was nere vnto the Lantzgraues Campe. But the Lantzgraue came fyrste thyther, and leauynge three bandes of Horsemen and cer∣ten enseygnes of Footemen to defende the Campe, he remoueth hys whole Armye vnto the same Hylle: Not longe after they beganne to skyrmishe on bothe partyes. Whylest these thynges were a working, the Ambassadours of Duke Mauryce retourne, they shew hym how A skirmishe betwirte the Duke & the Lantzgraue Duke Henrye aunswered franckly, and committeth hym selfe wholy to Duke Moris, and wil no more impugne relygion from henseforth, the matter beynge debates to and froe, whan Duke Moris was ve∣rey ernest, the Lantzgraue sheweth hym howe thys is the onlye way to haue peace, that he put in sufficyente warrantyse for Relygion, that he yelde hymselfe into the custodye of Duke Morys, and delyuer hys whole prouince vnto hym, and looke what Duke Morys shal iudge hym to paye for the charges of that warre, for the harmes donne, and of the controuersye betwixte hym and the Cytie of Goslarye, the same to be ratifyed, these condycyons dooeth the Lātzgraue permitte that Duke Morys, as intercessoure shall propounde, whiche yf he wyll re∣ceyue, after conference had herin with the Duke of Saxon and the Cyties that bee nere, he sayeth shalbe concluded. With thys commis∣syon Duke Morys sendeth agayne hys Ambassadours: who, what∣tyme they retourned, bryng word that there is good hope, but in this hurly burly and conflictr together, ther can nothing be ryghtly dōne, and therfore had nede of a trewes durynge the treatye. Than was it almoste nyghte, and by the Lantzgraues permission, trewes was ta∣ken from that tyme tyll the nexte daye at nyghte. In the meane sea∣son goeth Duke Morys, and talketh with the Duke of Brunswicke, that he myght perswade hym: But he cleane refuseth all those condi∣cyons, and propoundeth others farre vnlyke them, and in communi∣cation The vani∣tie of the Duke of Brunswick. with some of Duke Mauryee counsellours, within these three houres, sayeth hee, it shall appere, whether the Lantzgraue, or I bee Lorde of the Worlde, as Haunyball sayde to Scipio. He also
brake the truse made, geuyng the charge vpon the Lantzgraues for∣ragers. Wherfore, the Lantzgraue hearyng, what condicyons Duke Henrye had propounded, he breaketh of all the treatye, and thanked Duke Moris for his paines, the .xx. day of October the Duke of Brū∣swicke by hys counsellours, proueth, againe Duke Moris, and requi∣reth that they maye mete agayne in a conuenyent place betwixt both campes: but the Lantzgraue wolde not. Than Duke Moris procla∣meth warre also agaynst the Duke of Brunsewycke, which thyng he tolde hym before, that he woulde doe, vnlesse he agreed of the peace, sendynge to hym hys letters from Mulluse. After thys whan it was farre in the nyght, the Lantzgraue sent before Conrade Haustē, with eyght guydons of horsemen, and aboute twelue thousande footemen, with the ordenaunce: he hym selfe with the rest of his force followeth after, accompanyed with the two Dukes, Moris, and Ernest. Whan the day began to appeare, the forewarde came to a certen strayte vp∣pon the toppe of an hill not far from the Duke of Brunswickes camp, after also the Lantzgraue with the resydew of hys armye. Here was a sore conflict, and by reason of the straytnes of the place, whych could not be passed but one way only, the fyght was a good whyle doubte∣full: But in that same instant the Lantzgraue shotynge of hys Orde∣naunce, A conflicte betwixte the Duke & the Lātzgraue. repulsed the enemye. After takynge delyberation, whan they had found other places also wher they might passe through, the Lātz∣graue auaunced some parte of hys armye, and shotte amonges his e∣nemyes, with hys greate pieces. There the Duke of Brunswicke sen∣deth a trompet to Duke Moris, and desyreth a comunication: but the Lantzgraue makynge no aunswer; fyrst bringeth through all his ar∣mye, than setteth them in order of battel, and dischargeth hys peces at them. Than agayne come other two messagers from Duke Henrye, making the lyke request: vnto whom the Lantzgraue made aunswer that other condicion of peace was there none, but that the Duke and hys eldest sonne muste come and yelde themselues vnto hym: If they so doe, well and good, yf not I wyll proue, sayeth he, what I can doe: thys shew hym, and conclude briefly. Here goeth Duke Moris in hād agayne with his father inlawe, all the armye sayeth he, is conueyhed through: Now what hope is therof peace? I wil, saieth the other, that Henry and his sonne shall submitte themselues vnto me: If they shall refuse, I wyll trye it by battell. Whan he had thys aunswer, Duke Moris goeth agayne and speaketh with Brunswicke. But the Lātz∣graue neuerthelesse prepareth for the battell, and styll shoutyng of his ordenaunce, approcheth nere hys enemye, and stayeth aboute fyue hō∣dreth passes from hym, and sendeth woorde to Duke Morys by Cō∣rade Haustē, how he cānot be in quiet, for that he feareth, lest through occasyon of talke, Duke Henry shoulde escape awaye, Duke Moris
sayeth, how he must nedes tary till he haue spoken with him, and prai∣eth hym so longe to absteyne. A little whyle after he retourneth, and sheweth how Duke Henry with plentifull teares, be wayleth his my∣serye, and wyll render hym selfe and hys sonne, and desyreth hym, that he wolde vse no cruell wordes towardes hym. When the Duke was commen and hys sonne Charles Uictor, the Lantzgraue sayde vnto hym: If I were in thy power, as thou art nowe in myne, thou wold∣est Duke Hēry and hys son yelde them∣selues. not suffer me to lyue longe. But I wyll vse thee a greate deale bet∣ter, then by thy desertes: what came into thy mynde, that thou woul∣dest not obey the Emperoure, refusyng the sequestration? for certenlye by thys meane, thouhadst wel prouyded for thee and thyne, speakyng on thys wyse, he appoynteth thē both vnto kepers. But in thys meane whyle, the Lantzgraues armye, had lyke to haue bickered with the enemye, and had not the Lantzgraue and Duke Moris with greate expedition runnen betwixte them, there had ben a wonderful slaugh∣ter. The Duke of Brunswickes armye, pourposed to depart wholy to gether in one companye, but because there was daunger, leste by oc∣casyon they shoulde attempte some newe enterpryse, the Lantzgraue followeth them, and ouertakyng them vpon a playne, compelleth thē that they should teare in pieces their enseignes, & promiseth hym vpō theyr fydelytie, that they shoulde not serue agaynste hym nor hys fel∣lowes, within these sixe monethes. Than taketh he a waie from thē, all theyr munition, to the nomber of. xviii, pieces with all that therun∣to belongeth, and marching foreward, recouereth the Castel of Stē∣brucke, and sweareth the people to be trewe to hym, and commaun∣deth to geue God thankes for the victorye. Then he punnisheth Iohn Schamburge, & Otto Ritberg, Erles, for aydyng hys enemie, and so discharging hys army, retourneth home. In thys tyme dyeth Albert The deathe of the Car∣dinall of Mentz. Cardinall of Mentz, and Sebastian Husestene succedeth hym. And the Bishopricke of Maydenburge had Iohn Alberte, hys cosen ger∣mayne, whyche was hys suffragan therebe fore. A reporte was after∣warde bruted by Duke Maurice, as though with disceiptefull & cap∣tious woordes, he shoulde haue brought the Duke of Brunswicke in∣to bondage: that knowen, he setteth foorthe a wrytynge, and sheweth for what cause, beyng requyred of the Duke of Saxō and the Lantz∣graue, he coulde not denye them, and recyting the whole matter in or∣der, declareth that he sustayneth iniury: And yet neuerthelesse intrea∣teth that he maye be deliuered: But Luther in a booke set foorthe, ex∣horteth the Prynces, that they wolde not let goe theyr prysoner: For thys victorye without bludshed, was geuen them of God. And in ma∣ner aboute thys tyme, Countie William of Furstemberge, whan he Coūte wil∣lyam deliue∣red. had ben prisoner at Paris, vntil now, paying .xxx. thousand crownes for hys raunsome, was delyuered, and passyng through Flaunders,
whan he had declared hys mysfortune to Themperoure, retourneth home. Themperoure wylleth hym to espye out some meane, whereby thys dammage may be recompensed: And herin promiseth him his fa∣uour & good will. Whan Henrye the Duke of Brunswicke & his sōne were takē, the Duke of Saxon & the Lantzssaue immediatly signi∣fye to themperour by letters the whole matter: & inasmoch as he, con∣tēninge all his proclamations, had disquieted Germany with a newe warre, they require, that both he & his fellowes, for breaking the pub∣lycke peace, may be outlawed, after the fourme and condicions of the Sequestratiō before conuenaunted. After thys, the last of October, ye The Lantz∣graues let∣ters to thē∣peroure. Lantzgraue accusing countie Ritberge to themperour, & making mē∣tion of the former letters, whan he had made the same request, he say∣eth, how after the Duke of Brunswicke was taken, he found sondrye letters of great importaunce, & of secret deuyses in hys tentes, which shew well enough, that he went about some great mischief, eyther a∣gaynste him, or kinge Ferdinando: For amonges others, ther is an e∣pistle, whiche a prince electour wryteth agayne to hym, how he maye not vpon such condicions come into that league & cōfederacy, but that it is rather his dewty, to vtter such maner of counsel: which doubtles he wolde haue done, had he not promised him vpon his fydelytie to haue kept it close. Wherfore let hym moue hym nomore in the matter from henforth, for yf he doe, it shalbe no counsell: these and suche other lyke thinges hath he to shew. If now he shall thynke, that anythynge concerneth hys person, he maye sende some trusty man of hys, & he shal shew him the letters, & let him haue a copie of the same. Themperour beyng that tyme at Bruges a Towne in Flaunders, the syxte daye of Nouember sendeth to the Lantzgraue Nicolaus Conricius with this Thempe∣roure to the Lātzgraue. message. He heareth, in what sorte the Duke of Brunswicke and hys sonne came into hys hādes: And albeit he wold haue wisshed, that he had accepted the condiciō of sequestration, yet seing the matter is cō∣men to this poynt, he supposeth it not nedefull, to punishe hym moreo∣uer for breakinge the publyke peace: hys truste is also, that he wyll so moderately vse thys victory, that no man shall nede to feare hys vyo∣lence: he admonyssheth hym moreouer, that accordyng to the auncy∣ente custome of Prynces, he doe intreate hys prisoners quyetlye and honestyle, neyther that he enforce them to any vnreasonable condicy∣on or vnworthye for them, but permytte, that the matter maye bee frendelye and indifferentlye hearde. Wherin verelye he, for hys offyce and place wyll omytte nothynge: And because neyther he nor hys confortes neede nowe to feare anye further daunger hee requyreth hym to dyscharge hys Armye and obserue peace: And yf he haue oughte to saye to any man, for the Socyetye of warre or ayde miny∣stred, he wolde trye it by the Lawe, and he wyll doe herein that shall
be reasonable. When Conricfus had thus declared the .xviii. daye of Nouember, the Lantzgraue the same day aūswered him at Cassels. For asmuch as the Duke of Brunswicke and hys fellowes haue moe wayes than one broken the imperial decrees, he trusteth that Them∣peroure wyll playnly declare in how euill parte he taketh thys theyr doyng: one of the chiefest of hys adherentes, is Otto Erle of Ritberge his client, whō he hath punysshed therfore: therbe also diuerse others, of whom he myght iustely be auenged: but to thentent Themperour and all men shoulde clearly see, howe littell he and hys fellowes loue trouble, he hathe done nothyng to them, and hath discharged hys sol∣diours. And seeyng it is thus, and that he tooke in hand a nedeful de∣fencion, he desyreth ernestyle, that Themperoure wolde bannishe the Duke & hys fellowes: for though he be taken, yet are hys adherentes to bee punyshed notwithstandyng whych also wyll shew themselues styll lyke enemyes: Hys prisoners are intreated metely lyberally: tou∣chyng the rest he will conferre with the Duke of Saxon and hys fel∣lowes. The Ambassadours whyche I tolde you before, were sente by the Protestantes into Fraunce and Englande, doe as they had in cō∣mission, but at the same tyme also Thēperoure sought to make a peace A treatie of peate bee∣twirt fraūce & England. & appoynted a daye at Bruges, for the Ambassadours of both kinges to mete. And the Frenche kynge sente Mounser Annebalde the Ami∣rall, and the kyng of England, Stephen, Bisshop of Winchester: But they could not accorde. In the meane season the Ambassadours of the Protestantes wrought so moch, that bothe the kynges were content to haue a further treaty. Therfore they send ambassadours, the Frēch kyng to Arde, the kyng of Englād to Cales and Guysnes. They mete in the mydde waye betwixt Arde and Guysnes the .xxvi. daye of No∣uember, in tentes pitched in the playne felde: And whan the Ambas∣sadors of the Protestants had propounded certen cōdicions of peace, the matter was longe, and moche debated betwyxt them. The Frēch mē wolde haue Bologne restored, & especially vrged that the Scotes myght be comprised in the peace. But both these did the Englishmen vtterlye refuse. Than was the matter reported by letters and messa∣gers to eyther kynge, but after moche intreaty ther was nothyng fy∣nisshed. Wherfore the syxte day of Ianuary the Ambossadours of the 1546. kynges and Protestantes depart, and retourne home. The next daye after the Frenchemen vitayled theyr forte, that the kyng had builded nere vnto Bologne. When the Englisshemen would haue letted that they fought together and many were slayne on bothe parties, and af∣ter The king of Englande warneth the Protestants of the daun∣ger. was the fort vitailed. What tyme these āmbassadours of the Pro∣testantes were in Englande, the kynge by waye of communication tolde them, howe they were lyke to haue a fore and a mortall warre: therof was he moste certen: He warned thē also, to wryte of the same
to theyr confederates. And after one of hys counsellours whych was than in hygh fauour, declared as moche to one of the Ambassadours, naming also certē practicioners & messagers, by whose meanes chief∣ly the thing was wrought. Moreouer the king semed to take in mar∣uelous euill parte, that Themperour had the yere before made peace with the French king, and was so moch the more offēded, for that as he sayd he made warre with the Frenche king throughe his procure∣ment, by reason of the Turkisshe league. In the moneth of Ianuarye the Protestantes conuented at Frankeforthe, there they consulted of the counsell of Trente, of augementyng theyr league, for the charges of the warre of Brunswicke, howe they will not forfake the Archebis∣shop of Collon, howe to solicite Themperour, in the assemblie of thē∣pire, that he wyll graunte peace for relygion, and refourme the iudg∣ment of the chāber. In thys cōuention the Ambassadours of the arch∣bisshop of Collon complayne of the iniuryes of the Clergye, and of the commaundementes and citations bothe of Themperour and also of the Bisshop of Roome. In the meane season the Paulsegraue prynce electour, ordeyned euery where ministers of the church and preachers The Palse∣graue ordei∣neth mini∣sters in hys Churches. of the Gospell, he permitteth also the whole supper of the Lorde, and the Mariage of pristes: And the tenth daye of Ianuary in stead of the Popissshe Masse, was seruice sayde in the head church of Nedelberg, in the Duche tongue. Wherfore the Protestantes, sending an Ambas∣sade, reioyse therat, and geuinge him thankes, that he aunswered the Archebisshop of Collon his Ambassadours so frankelye: they exhorte hym also to procede, & to professe the doctryne confessed at Anspurge, and to doe hys endeuour that in the nexte assemblye at Regenspurge, the peace and lawe maye be establysshed. Wherunto he aunswereth, that he hath bē euer desyrous of peace, and wilbe, so long as he liueth: for the Archebisshop of Collō he is right sory, that he is thus molested, especyally in hys olde dayes. Therfore what tyme they shal send their Ambassadours to Themperoure, and to the Clergie and Senate of Collon to intreate for hym, he wyll also sende hys with them: he had trusted these many yeres to haue had some agrement in religion: but in as moch as he seeth how the matter is daungerously differred, nei∣ther is theire any greate hope, he coulde no longer delaye the wisshe & expectation of hys subiectes. Therfore hathe he begonne a reformaty∣on of relygion, whych he pourposeth to anaunce furthermore, and to professe it openly. At the seuententh daye of Ianuarye, at Wesell mete the Ambassadours of the Prynces electours, which are named of the Rhine, those be Mentz, Collon, Treuers, & the Paulsegraue or Coū∣te Palatyne: for the dominions of all these stretche vnto the Rhine. The Paulsegraue vrged the Archebishopes of Mentz and Treuers, that they wolde sende theyr Ambassadoures with hys and with the
Marques of Brandenburges, to intreate for the Archebisshop of Col∣lon: but they fearynge to get displeasure, refused it. At thys tyme a ru∣mour A brute of war against the Prote∣stantes. was noysed abrode, that Themperour shoulde secretly mynde warre. Wherfore the Lantzgraue wrytyng hys letters to Granuellā the .xxiiij. of Ianuarie, sayeth howe it is reported not onlie in Germa∣ny, but also sygnyfyed oute of Italye, and otherplaces, that Thempe∣roure, and the Bisshop of Roome make preparation to warre vpon the Lutheranes, and wyll maynteyne the counsell, and beegynne the warres in the sprynge of the yere, and howe they intende to set vpon the Archebysshop of Collon with the force of the lowe contrie of Ger∣many, vpon the Saxons, out of Boheme, & to inuade high Almaigne with the power of Italie: How Themperour wil also haue ten thou∣sande foote men and certen trouppes of horsemen, to garde hym, and conduicte him to Regenspurge. This brute is not only spread abrode commonlye, but is also reported of head Captaynes and Centurions, wherof some make theyr boast that they haue receyued money of thē∣peroure already: And seyng Themperoure hathe peace with Fraūce, and hath also taken trewes with the Turke, as some do affyrme, ma∣ny men doe maruell to what vse and pourpose, he shoulde wage men to warre: Neyther he nor hys consortes, whylest they consyder the peace makyng of Norinberge, confyrmed after at Regenspurge Spi∣er, and other places, can be easelye perswaded, to beleue it shoulde bee trew, especially synce they haue done ryght good seruice bothe to thē∣perour and to kynge Ferdinando agaynst the Turke, and other ene∣myes also: Howbeit he thought good to declare these thynges frend∣ly vnto hym, whych are sygnyfyed to hym and hys fellowes, by many letters and messagers: For it maye be, that the like thinges are repor∣ted to Themperoure by malycious persons, of hym and hys confede∣ratours, whyche maye rayse a suspicion, cause trouble, and put them bothe to charges: he doubteth not, but that he wyll make hym an aū∣wer. And in asmuche as he hathe ben euer hitherto a counselloure of peace, he desyreth him, that from henceforthe also he wolde perswade Themperoure to the same. Granuellan wrote an aunswer to thys the Granuellan his aunswer to the Lantz¦graue. seuenth day of February: How Themperoure hathe neyther made a∣ny compacte with the Bisshop, leuyed soldiours nor geuen money to any Capitayne. Albeit that yf he shoulde haue some force aboute hym, no man ought to maruel there at, in thys daungerous tyme, & doubt∣full state of thynges, whan the kynges and Prynces nere aboute him doe moustre theyr men: for who shoulde reprehende this in hym, yf he fore see that hys countries susteyne non iniurye: but he sayeth, the re∣port is vntrew, as is also the rest of the ten thousand men, that should garde hym to Regenspurge: For Themperoure is now ready to take hys iorney, and that with a small treyne. And after he hathe declared
howe desyrous euer Themperoure hathe ben of the peace and tran∣quilitie of Germanye, and to be yet of the same mynde styll, he shew∣eth also howe frendely and gentlye he hathe vsed the Archebisshop of Collon, & fynally wissheth to the vniuersal common welth, but name∣ly of Germany, all thinges safe and fortunate. Aboute the end of Ia∣nuary, the Lantzgraue, & Fridericke the Paulsgraue, prince electour, mete at Frankeforte. They of Auspurge receyuing intelligence oute of diuerse places, of the warlicke preparation of themperour & bisshop of Roome, had sent Sebastian Scherteline a man of warre, to them Sebastian Scherteline. addicted, vnto the Paulsegraue & Lantzgraue, who shoulde instruct them priuely of al such matters. After therfore he had spoken with ey∣ther of thē seuerally, he brought to passe, that they bothe came thither to consulte, and the Paulsegraue was also accompanyed with Otto Henry hys cosyn germane. A fewe dayes after came thyther also the Protestantes Ambassadours out of Fraunce and Englande, & report their ambassade to ye Lātzgraue & his fellowes. The next day, which was the fourth day of February, the Lantzgraue departeth thence, & goeth to the Archebisshop of Mentz, newly created, whiche was but one Germane mile of, and amonges other thynges, intreateth him, yt in the nexte assemblie of Regenspurge he wold geue his aduise & coū∣sell for the tranquillitie of Germany. And shortly after was dissolued the conuention of Franckefort, and by a decree made the Protestātes sendyng theyr ambassadours to Themperour & clergie of Collon, in∣treate for ye archebisshop. Duke Moris of Saxonie was not in league with the Protestantes, yet had he an ambassadour there, Christopher Carlebice, a gentelmā verey well learned, who immediately after the conuention ended, went to Themperoure: the same time was Them∣peroure in Gelderlande, who before had ben aduertysed, that the pro∣testantes, had conspyred agaynst hym at Franckeforte: neyther wan∣ted The Pro∣testantes ac∣cused of con∣spiracie. the matter setters foreward, which, as the cōmon saying is, pow∣red oyle vpon the fyre, and wolde saye, how these assemblies of states and Prynces, were kept to hys contempte. Nauius was sent by thē∣peroure to the Archebisshop of Collon: And came from thence to the Archebisshop of Mentz, and to the Paulsgraue, and by the waye for∣tuned to talke with Renarde Counte of Solmen, a man of warre and of stoute courage, touching the present state of thynges, and how Themperoure is aduertised. And where the Erle tolde hym agayne what thinges were bruted of Themperoure throughout Germanye, he vtterly denyed it, and sayde it neuer came in themperours mynde: for so much he loueth peace, that al his owne affaires set apart, he will now to the counsel of thempire: neyther doubteth he, but if the Lātz∣graue woulde come vnto hym, he should be frendly vsed, and hys ad∣uyse is that he do so in any wyse: for so maye he, bothe pourge hymselfe
and hys fellowes, & because happely he wyll not goe to Regenspurg, know Themperours mynde, presently, and conferre with hym, of the comon welth: by this meanes also maye all suspicion and distrust bee taken awaye, which is reysed by misreportes on eyther side: And if he desyre to come to Thēperours speache, he shal dee well to come with a small company that he maye declare therby, what fayth and consy∣dence he hathe in Themperoure. When the Lantzgraue was aduer∣tysed hereof by Counte Solmense, the .xx. daye of Februarye he wri∣teth to Nauius and to auoyd suspicion, he sheweth him partely, what was donne at Franckefurte, after he declareth, how a report went of Themperoure, that he should prepare to haue warre: And amonges other Captaynes, had appointed Marques Albert, to leuie a thousād The Lantz∣graues let∣ters to Na∣uius. horsementhowebeit the Erle of Solmen, vpon hys report, affirmeth it to be vntrewe. And because Granuellan also wryteth the same, he will rather credite them, than such flyeng tales, as are talked a brode: For he and hys fellowes hope well, that Themperour wil not shrink from the conuenauntes and decree of Spier especially, seyng there is no cause geuen, whie he should so doe: And to come speake with Thē∣peroure, he will not refuse, but fyrst he must conferre with hys leage∣frendes, of whom som he wold haue present at the talke, and not ma∣ny. I shewed you before howe Themperoure had appoynted a talke The coll quie of the learned mē at Regēspurg. of learned men at Regenspurge, and had commaunded them to bee there all at the begynnyng of December. After he proroged this daye to the Ides of December. Thither came (sent by Themperoure) Pe∣ter Maluenda, a Spaniarde, Eberard Billicke a white Frere, Iohn Hoimester an Austen frere, Iohn Cochleus, Diuines, & as many hea∣rers. From the Protestantes came Bucer, Brentius, George Maior, and Erard, Schuepsius diuines, and with them also other soure au∣ditours. At the kalendes of Ianuary, came the presidentes of the dis∣putation, Moris Bisshop of Eistet, & Fridericke Counte of Furstem∣berge. And at the length beganne the conference, the .xvii. daye of Ia∣nuary: And the presidentes speaking of theyr charge, & thynges cōcer∣ning themselues, require the diuines, that in so graue & holy a busines they wolde not followe their affections, but treate syncerely, hauynge the feare of god before theyr eyes, and a respecte to concord. And her∣in promise theyr paines fidelitie & vprightnes. After they recite howe Thēperours cōmaundement is, that the doctryne of the Protestātes exibited in tymes past at Auspurge, shoulde in this communication be treated of, omittynge those thre first articles, of the Trmitie, of the in∣carnation of the word, and of originall sinne. For the two first are out of controuersie; and thys laste hathe ben sufficientlye debated alrea∣dye: But that all the residewe bee treated vpon in order, of iustyfyca∣tion,
of forgeuenes of sinnes, of fulfylling of the law, of faythe, of good woorkes, of deserte, of the Sacramentes, of purgatory, of praying for the dead, of the veneration, and inuocation of sainctes, of reliques, of Images, of monasticall vowes, of the mariage of priestes, of choise of meates, of holy dayes, of thecclesiasticall traditions of the churche, of the power of the keyes, of the sacred order, of the authorytie of the bis∣shop of Roome, of bisshops, of generall counselles. These thynges once declared, the Protestantes consideryng with what aduersaryes they were matched, request that all theyr talke and treaty myght be writ∣ten oute by notaryes, to thentent Themperour and princes may vn∣derstande the whole matter, and the argumentes, and probations of eyther partie. Contrarywyse the presidentes saye how that should be to longe a woorke, and that it shoulde suffice, yf the chiefest poyntes were noted only: Agayne they saye howe nothynge of that whiche is done, maye be vttered, and assigne the forenoone for the disputation. After muche debatyng, it was agreed, that two on eythersyde should commit al the talke to wrytyng, and that the same should be laied vp into a cheste fast locked, and shewed to no man, except the rest be pre∣sent, and yet to be kepte in silence. These thynges doethe presidentes agree to, so that Thēperoure be content, of whō they sayed they haue no cōmaundement in this behalfe. The protestantes also accept it vp∣on condicion to signifye the same to theyr Princes, whom it concer∣neth to knowe, and haue willed them to wryte to them hereof. Whā thys order was takē, Peter Maluāda, a doctour of Paris beginneth, Maluenda treateth of iustification. the fyrste daye of Februarie, and in hys preface speaking muche in the commendation of Themperoure, he discourseth at large the article of Iustifycation after the scoole maner. But Bucer interruptinge hym, sayde how that was agaynst the lawe of the conference, & order pres∣cribed by Themperoure: the confession of theyr doctryne lyeth before hym: he maye take the chapter of iustifycation, and yf he haue oughte to saye agaynste it, let hym confute it in order, or obiecte, and he shal∣be aunswered. He neuerthelesse procedeth, and so concludeth, that he attributeth muche to freewyll, and sayde that a man is not iustifyed by faythe onlye, but also by hope and charytie. The nexte daye Bucer declareth, howe the article of iustifycation was accorded in the talke Bucers aunswer. at Regenspurge a yeare synce, and sheweth what Themperoure and the resydewe of Prynces and states decreed touchyng the same, and desyreth that the same bee enrouled amonges the Recordes. Then followyng the order prescrybed by Themperoure, he repeteth the same Artycle, and deuideth it into foure partes: that a man is not iustyfyed before God, through hys owne woorkes or merytes, but to be freelye iustyfyed by Chryste, throughe faythe, what tyme he be∣leueth bothe that he is receyued vnto grace, and that also hys sinnes
for Chryste are forgeuen: howe Christe with hys deathe hathe made satysfactiō for our synnes: that God doeth impute fayth, for righteous∣nes. These thynges he doeth confyrme and declare by the testimonies of the scripture, & sheweth in what thinges he agreeth with Maluē∣da and what not, and confuteth hys argumentes. After Maluenda, the Carmelite Billicus taketh place, and confuteth amonges other thinges spoken of Bucer, that also of iustification, and denyeth that euer it was accorded. The .xiii. daye of Februarye, Maluenda aun∣swereth Bucer, and concludeth these three thinges, that workes doe dispose and prepare vnto iustification: that charytie is the fyrme iu∣stifying: that the workes of men iustifyed doe accomplisshe iustificati∣tion, and deserue eternall lyfe. Whylest they were treatynge aboute these matters, the .xv. daye of Februarie came Themperours letters, cōmaundyg them to receyue Iulius Pflugies Bisshop of Numburg, Pflugius a∣monges the Presidentes amonges the presidentes, that the nomber of Collocutours and addi∣tours be not augmented with extraordinarye men, and that there be none other scrybes appoynted, but suche as the presydentes had cho∣sen, that all promyse to kepe sylence by an other, and to vtter no parte of the conference to any man liuing, before it be reported to Thempe∣roure, and states of Thempire, that to the thynges accorded eyther parte shall subscribe, and suche as remayne in controuersie, to bee no∣ted with fewe wordes. When the letters were thus recyted, the pro∣testantes aunswer amonges other thynges, that they can not obserue that poynte of so strayte kepynge of sylence, for because they are com∣maunded to aduertyse theyr Prynces from tyme to tyme, of the state of the dysputation. Whereaboute was moche contention, whilest the presydentes sayde, they must followe Themperours cōmaundement: And the Protestantes agayne alleaged that they myght not swarue from the commaundementes of theyr Prynces. Wherefore the presy∣dentes at the last, wryte vnto Themperoure what theyr request was But in the meane season the Duke of Saxon who lyked not the con∣dicions of the disputation, after he had hearde thereof, sendeth for hys men home agayne, to vnderstande the whole matter. And when they were gonne, Bucer the .xx. daie of Marche departeth also, to declare, The collo∣quie dissol∣ued. what was doone, to the Lantzgraue. Whiche thing the presidentes tooke verye vnpatientely: And where they had before geuen ware∣nynge to suche as were presente, to remayne styll, nowe, that diuerse were slypped awaye, they exhorte and charge the reste in any wyse to attende Themperours aunswer: But they saye, that seynge theyr chefeste fellowes are gonne, it is but inuayne, for them to tarye: And yf the disputatyon shall contynewe, they promyse not to bee absente. The Papystes afterwarde in theyr Bookes setfoorthe, rayle vp∣pon them betterlye for the same cause: But those Bucer aunswereth
at the full, and what soeuer is to be sayde of the iustifycation of man, he treateth moste largelye. Wyth the Ambassadours of the Prote∣stantes, sente to Themperoure to intreate for the archebisshop of Col∣lon, Ambassa∣dours to thē∣peroure, for the archebis∣shop of Col∣lon. were ioyned the Ambassadours of the Paulsgraue and the Mar∣ques of Brandenburge, electours. Theffect of theyr request was this, that Themperoure wolde referre hys case, to the resydewe of mat∣ters of Relygion, and staye the processe commenced by hys Clergye: For yf any violence or wronge shalbe offered hym, they sygnifye, that they can not neglecte hym. Whan the Emperoure had hearde them at Utreyght the .xxvi. daye of Februarye, the seconde daye of March, he gaue them an aunswer by Nauius, declarynge what good wyl he had borne hym hytherto and howe frendely he had aduertysed hym what he shoulde and oughte to doe, whyche he hathe contemptuously despysed, trustynge to a vayne appellation whyche can take no place: Neuerthelesse takynge theyre Ambassade in good parte, for that he supposeth it to procede of a zeale of peace and reconcylement of Rely∣gion, he is contente, the rather at theyre requeste, to vse in thys mat∣ter, the aduyse and Counsell of Prynces in the next assemblye at Re∣genspurge: Whyther he is nowe ready to goe, and desyreth that theyr Prynces wolde come thyther themselues in lyke case: for albeit he is troubled with syckenes, yet to thentente an ende of controuersyes myghte once be had, he wyll refuse no trauell and payne. Aboute this tyme dyed Alphousus Daualus the Marques of Pis∣care, gouernoure of Millane, and in hys place succeded Ferdinando Gonzaga, that before was Uiceroye of Sicilie, I shewed you before Gonzage go uernour of Millane. how the Counsell was differred, at Trent vntill the Ides of March. Thither sent the Bisshop thre Legates Iohn Marimoūtayne, Mar∣celle Ceruine, and Reinalde Poole, Cardinalles, thither came also frō Themperoure, but not at the daye appoynted, Iames Mendoza, a The Popes Legates in the counsell of Trente. Spaniarde, who after he had spoken moche in the commendation of Themperoure, and of hys greate good will and zeale towardes the Counsel, and the Churche of Roome, he excuseth hys absence and pro∣myseth hys endenoure and furtheraunce in hys name, and where as the Bisshoppes be not yet commen oute of Spayne whyche Them∣peroure called, he sayeth it muste be ascrybed to the farre and payneful iorney, thys: was during the assemblye of Wormes. The Cardinalles hereunto make aunswer, albeit they neuer doubted of Themperours zeale towardes Religion, yet was thys oration of hys to them right acceptable. And in as much as the Bisshop, the trew vycare of Christ, and successoure of Peter, Prynce of the Apostelles, after conference had with Themperoure, hathe appoynted thys Counsell for the re∣fourmatyon of the Publicke weale, namelye of Germanye theyr truste is that the Emperoure wyll see there bee nothynge decreed
at Wormes concernynge relygion, but that al thynges be referred to the counsel: If it shoulde be otherwise, not only the auncient custome of the churche, but also the lawe bothe of God and man should be in∣frynged. Moreouer it shoulde be an euyll president, and wold deface the whole dignytye of the Counsell: As touchyng hym selfe, hys pre∣sence and persone is to them ryghte acceptable. Where therefore ma∣ny were long or they came, nothing was done that yere, but that cer∣ten Freres made sermons to the Bisshoppes, in the tyme of Aduente. Preachinge Freers. A bul of per∣donnes. The Bysshop also sendynge foorthe a bull of indulgences at the Ides of December, sayeth that the miserye of thys tyme is suche, by reason of the ouerflowyng of heresyes, that albeit he take neuer so muche la∣boure, trauell, and payne for the common welthe, yet can he scarselye satyssye hym selfe: therfore hath he called a counsel, that the woundes of the Churche myghte bee healed, whyche are made by wicked he∣retyckes: And because the saluatyon of all men consysteth therin, and agayne, that the fathers of the counsell beynge holpen by the prayers of others, maye to God be the more commended, he exhorteth al men in generall, that immediately they frame themselues to repentaunce, confesse theyr synnes to the priest, and that thre daies in the weke they tame theyr body with fastynge, and the same dayes to be presente at the diuine seruice, or in case they be sicke, & can not, than to geue some thing to the poore, and let the poorer sorte oftymes saye ouer theyr Pa∣ter noster, and after receyue the Sacrament. Unto al that obeye this, he graunteth pardon and remission of theyr synnes, and cōmaundeth all Bysshops, to declare these thynges to the people. After the seuenth daye of Ianuarye, whan the number of Bysshoppes was wel increa∣sed, The begyn∣nyng of the counsell. they beganne the Counsell: And whan all were commen into the Cathedrall Churche, and masse donne, the foresayde Cardinalles, the Bysshop of Roomes Legates had an oration to the fathers wrytten, wherin they declare howe the counsell is called for three causes chie∣fly, The oratiō of the popes Legates. that heresyes maye be weded vp by the rootes, that the dysciplyne of the Churche maye be restored, and that peace maye be recouered. And saye howe the whole blame of all thys presente calamytie, is to be imputed to the Clergie: for what heresies, warre or disorder soeuer there is, they haue geuen the occasyon of all these euylles throughe theyr auaryce, ambition, and naughtie lyuynge: therfore is it the iuste iudgment of God, that they are nowe thus contemned, troubled and afflicted, yet not accordynge to theyr demerytes: for there is not one of them that dooeth his dutye, therefore they admonisshe euerye man to acknowledge hys faulte, and studie to appease Goddes wrathe, Thē was∣g of Ese∣dras and Ne∣hemias. through the repentaunce and amendemente of lyfe, vsyng herein the example of Esdras, Nehemias and other Capytaynes, who at theyr
retourne, admonisshed earnestly the people of Israel, that confessinge theirs and their fathers offences, they shoulde call to God for mercye. Then come they to declare theyr owne duty, whiche are Iudges in thys case, howe they oughte to be free and voyde from anger, hatred, frendeshyp, and geue nothyng to affections, but to ascribe all honour vnto god only, who with his aungels beholdeth thys congregation, neyther can any mans thought be hidde from him; therfore must they worke syncerely, and exhorte the ambassadours of kynges and pryn∣ces to do the same. After this oration, was red the decree of the sinod, by Iohn Fonsseca bisshop of Castremarine, a Spaniarde. In thys al christians are warned, to amende theyr lyfe, feare God, many tymes A decree of the Sinode redde. confesse theyr synnes, go ofte to churche and praie to God for publicke peace: And that all Bisshops and other pristes be addicte to prayer, & also euerye seuenth daye at the leste, whiche is called Sondaye, saye masse and make intercession for the hygh bisshop, for Themperoure, & for the whole comō wealth, that they fast moreouer, & geue aulmouse to the poore: That in the head churche there be masse songe weekelye vpon the thursedaie in the honour of the holy ghost, that in masse time almen be attentife vnto the prieste, and refrayne talkynge: Moreouer that the bisshoppes leade a sober life and not fare sumptuously at their tables, and that they do eschew all light and Idle talke, and vse their familie to do lykewyse, that in speakyng, in apparel, and al behauiour they maye shewe an honestie. And in as much as the Synnode hath thys respect chiefly, how the darknes of errours & heresyes, that haue so many yeres ouerwhelmed the earth, being dryuen awaie, the light of the treuth maie shyne foorth, al ther be warned, chiefly the learned sorte, that they consyder diligentlye with them selues, by what waye thys maye best be brought to passe: And that in geuyng theyr voyces, they follow the decree of the coūsell Toletane, that they do it modest∣lye, not clamourouselye, that they be not contentious, nor obstinate, but pronounce all thynges temperately and quietly: there was an o∣ther sitting the fourth daie of February. Wherin was nothyng done, The seconde session of the Synode. sauing that they confessed the articles of the fayth, and a daie appoin∣ted for the third metynge, the eyght of Aprill. For they hearde of moe that were cōmyng, and therfore thought good to tarye for them, that the Authoritie of theyr decrees myght be somuche the more. Whylest thys was donne at Trent, Luther was sent for, to go to the Erles of Mansfelde, to set an agremente betwixt them, which wer at contro∣uersie Luther cho∣sen arbiter. for a piece of lande: he had nouer accustomed to treate of suche affayres, and had onlye applyed hys studye all the dayes of hys lyfe: But because he was borne at Issebie, which is a Towne of ye Erles of Mansfelde, he coulde not but take so muche payne for them and for hys countrye. Before he came to Issebie, whych was in the later end
of Ianuarye, he felte hym selfe skant well at ease: Yet did he accom∣plysshe the thyng he came for, and sometyme preached in the churche, and receyued also the communion. But the .xvii. daie of Februarie, he waxed sore sicke in hys stomake: he had with him three sonnes, Iohn, Luther is sicke. Martin, Paulle, and certen others of his frendes, emonges them al∣so, Iustus Ionas, the minister of the churche at Halles: And thoughe he was weake, yet did he bothe dyne & suppe with the reste. Whylest they sate at supper, speaking of sōdry thinges, he moued also this que∣stiō among others, whether that in the life euerlasting, we shal know one an other. And what time they were all desyrous to learne that of hym: what, sayeth he, chaunced to Adam? He had neuer seene Eue, but Whether we shall knowe eche other in the lyfe to come. what tyme God shaped her, he was caste into a maruelous depe and sounde slepe: But awakyng out of the same, whan he sawe her, he ax∣eth not, what she is, or whence she came, but sayeth, she is fleshe of his flesshe, and bone of his bones. But howe knew he that. Uerely beyng full of the holy ghost, & replenisshed with the trew knowledge of god, he spake thus. In lyke maner shall we also in another lyfe be renew∣ed by Chryst, and shall know more perfitly our parentes, wyues, chil∣dren, & what so euer is besydes: than Adam that tyme knewe Eue. After supper whan he went a side to praie (as he was accustomed) the payne of his stomake began to increase. There by the aduise of certen he dranke of an Unicornes horne in wine: After, he slept quietly in the trindle bed of the stowfe by the space of an houre or two. Than awa∣kyng, he goeth to hys chamber, and laieth hym downe againe to rest, and biddyng hys frendes good nyghte, that were with hym, he wyl∣led them to praye to god, that he wold graunt vs to kepe still the doc∣tryne of the gospell: For the Bisshop, and the counsell at Trente are a workynge some great mischief: Whan he had thus sayed, and al was hushte, he slepeth a good whyle, but the force of hys disease increasing vpon hym, at after midnight he complayneth of the straytenes of hys stomake, and perceyuing that thende of his lyfe drewe nere, he calleth to God with these wordes. O god my heauenly father, and the father of oure Lord Iesus Chryst, God of al consolatiō, I geue the thankes, Luthers last prayer. that thou hast reuealed vnto me thy sonne Iesus Chryst, whō I haue beleued, whom I haue professed, whom I haue loued, whom I haue set foorthe, & honored, whom the Bisshop of Roome and al that wick∣ed rabel doe persecute, and dishonour: I beseche thee my Lord Iesus Chryst, receyue my soule: my heauēly father, although I be taken out of thys lyfe, albeit I must now leaue thys body, yet know I assured∣ly, that I shall remayne with thee for euer, and that noman can take me out of thy handes. Not long after thys prayer sayde, whan he had The quiet de¦parture of Luther. ones or twyse cōmended hys soule into the handes of God, as though he had fallen a slepe, by little and littel he departeth oute of this lyfe,
withoute any paine of hys body that could be perceyued. And thus he dyed in hys owne natyfe countrey, whyche he had not seene of manie yeres, the .xviii. daye of Februarye, to the greate lamentation of ma∣ny. The Erles of Mansfelde were desirous, that he myght haue ben buried in theyr countrey, because he was borne there, but at the com∣maundemēt of the Prince electour, he was honorably caried to Wit∣temberge, and buryed the fyft daye after: of yeres he was aboute. lxiii for he was borne the yeare of oure Lorde a thousande .iiii. hondreth Luthers birthe. fourescore and three, the tenthe daye of Nouember, of ryght honest & good parentes, Iohn and Margarite: he learned hys fyrst prynciples at home, from thence beynge sente to Maydēburge, and then to Ise∣nacke, he farre excelled all hys fellowes. After he came to Erford, and gaue hym selfe wholie to the studye of logicke, and Philosophye: And whan he had ben there a whyle, makyng neyther parētes nor frēdes priuie to it, he professed hym selfe into the College of Austen Freres, & applyed all hys studye to the scripture, forsakyng the lawe, whyche he studied before. That time was an Uniuersitie newly erected at Wit∣temberge: wherefore Stupicious, of whom mention is made in the fyrste booke, hauynge the charge hereof, bryngeth Luther thyther to reade diuinitie. Than was Luther sent to Roome by the conuente of Luther sent to Rome. hys order, aboute a suite that hanged there in the lawe. Thys was in the yere of our lord .M.D.x. Whan he was retourned home, through the motion of hys frendes he commenced Doctour, at the charges of Duke Fridericke. What force and plētie of eloquence was in him, his Luthers elo∣quence in the Dutche tongue. workes doe sufficiently declare, certenly the Dutch toungue he beau∣tifyed and enryched exceadingly, and hathe the chiefe commendation therin, and hathe translated out of the latin toungue, such thynges as were thought vnpossible, and expresseth the matter with most apte & proper termes, and many tymes by one worde he setteth before youre eyes the whole matter. He wryteth in a certeine place of the Bisshop, howe he hathe polluted the Lordes supper, and hathe also applied the masse to them that be dead: he sayeth he hathe pearsed with hys masse not only in to all corners of Christendome, but also into Purgatorye it selfe: but he vseth the Dutche word, whyche representeth that noise, as is wont to be made, whan a man doeth rattle or shake together a nomber of dead mens bones, or cast aboute amonges them, he was of courage inuincible. What tyme he beganne fyrste to preache agaynst pardons, he knewe not what the matter mente, as he hym selfe con∣fesseth, The inuin∣cible constā∣cie of Luther and did that thing only, and therfore wrote than verey lowly, bothe to the Bisshop & others: but whan he had profited in the know∣ledge of scripture dayly more and more, and perceyued that his doc∣tryne was agreable to Gods worde, he withstode the violence of hys enemies, & the malice of the whole world with a most stoute courage,
and lyke awalle of Brasse remayned styll vnmouable, despysynge all daunger. Whan Themperoure helde a counsell of the states impery∣all at Auspurge, immediately after he was crowned at Bononie, by Clement the seuenth, a terrible tempest was lyke to enswe, as in the seuenth booke is specifyed. Than did he couinfort bothe hys Frendes priuately, & all others openly, and applying to thys pourpose the .xlvi. Psalme. God (sayeth he) is oure sure castell and Bulwarke: that olde enemye of mankynde, taketh the matter in hande now with all hys force and power, he layeth to all hys munition: And indede our pow∣ers is but small, neyther can we longe susteyne so greate a violence: Howbeit that noble champion, whom God hym selfe hath chosen vn∣to hym, he hathe put on Armure, and fyghteth for vs: If you are, who that is? knowe forcertentie that he is that Iesus Chryst, who muste nedes haue the victory and conquest: And albeit the whole compasse of thys worlde be full of Deuilles, yet are we not affrayde, but with a most assured confidence doe looke for a ioyefull successe: For although Sathangnasshe hys teethe, and rage neuer so fiersely, yet shall he no∣thyng preuayle agaynste vs: For he is iudged already, and throughe the worde only, falleth downe all hys armure. Thys worde shall not The victory and conquest of the word. the aduersaryes take from vs but will they nyll they, shall leaue it be∣hynde them: For he is in our tentes and armye, who with his spirite and gyftes defendeth vs: yf they take awaie lyfe, goodes, wife, & chil∣children, take it patiently: For they winne nothyng therby, and for vs is prepared a kyngdome euerlastynge. This Psalme, whiche at that tyme he applyed to relyeue sorrowe and heuynes, whan he had tran∣slated it into the vulgare toungue, somethynge wrastynge the sence, he made it also in metre, and set a note to it verye consonant to the ar∣gument, and a mete tune to styre vp the minde. And so euer synce that tyme thys Psalme hathe also been muche songe amonges all others. And that there was suche a decree made at Auspurge, he ascribeth all the blame therof, in a booke setfoorthe afterwarde, to Clement the se∣uenth, and hys Legate Campegious: but speaketh all honoure and good of Themperoure, whose name and authory∣tie they vsed for a clooke, and reporteth hym to bee blameles,
✚ The seuententh Booke of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte ❧ The argument of the seuententh Booke. IOhn Diaze beyng sent Ioinetly with Bucer, to the colloquie of Regenspurge, is murthered of hys owne brother Alphonse. The Lantzgraue commyng to Themperours speche declareth vnto hym the conditions of the counsell, whyche the Protestantes requyre: and afterward ma∣kyng his excuse that he cannot come to the assemblee, taketh hys leaue frendly of Themperour. Sentence of excommunication thondereth at Roome against the Archebisshop of Collon. Thē∣peroute, couertly maketh preparation to warre in Germany. Those of the Counsel of Trent make theyr decrees, and Peter Danes is Ambassadour there for the Frenche kynge. Themperoure, so∣liciteth certen cities of Germany and also the Swysses, through polycye to do them to vnderstand. The Protestantes hauinge intelligente hereof, take them to theyr weapons. The Tenure of the league betwixt the Pope and Themperour, is recyted. Themperour is so vrged by the Pope, that he letteth alone the Turke, and falleth vpon the Protestantes. The Castell of Erenberge and Tonauert surprysed. Themperoure by hys letters Patentes bannissheth the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue. The Popes armye commeth to ayde Themperoure. A Lyttle before was mention made of the confe∣rence Iohn Diaze a Spaniard. at Regenspurge. Iohn Diazius a Spa∣niarde wente thyther with Bucer. He had ben many yeres a student at Paris, in the diuinitie of the Sarbonites: but when he had red the bookes of Luther and others and dilligentlye studied the scriptures, that doctryne began to waxe vyle to him euery day more & more: And at the last to thentent he might profit so much the more, leauing Pa∣ris, he went to Geneua, where Caluine was minister of the churche. And whan he had there remained a while, went to Strasburge: and because Bucer perceiued in him much learnyng, and an ernest zeale, a few monethes after, whan he should go to the disputation at Regen∣spurge, he moued the senate, to appoint him to be his companion and felow that iorney. Commyng therfore to Regenspurge in the moneth of December, he goeth to this Peter Maluenda, whom he knewe at Diaze goeth to Maluenda Paris. He as one amased, bewayleth & lamenteth to see him in these parties, and that in the company of the Protestantes, whiche wil tri∣humphe more of one Spaniard allured vnto their opinion, than of a Fewe Spa∣niardes loue the Gospell. great meany thousandes of Germanes. And therfore begā to admo∣nish him, that he wold haue a respect to his name & not so shamefullye staine and spot his countrey and honest familie. Diazius aunswereth hym modestly commendyng the Protestantes doctrine, and so depar∣teth for that tyme.
And whā he came againe a fewe daies after, as was accorded, Mal∣uenda planteth al his ordenaunce, that he myght, to put hym in feare: And speaking many thinges of the authoritie of the bisshop of Roome he rekeneth vp at large, how daungerous a thing his curse is. Again, because Themperoure should come thyther shortely, he aduiseth him, not to tary hys commyng, which perchaunce will be daungerous for him, but counselleth hym to goe mete him by the waye, and fallinge downe at the feete of Themperours confessour, craue perdon for hys offence, and promiseth to be a furtherance to hym herein. Wherunto Diazius aunswereth stoutely and throughlye: And sayeth howe the doctryne of the Protestantes is consonant to the doctrine of the Apo∣stels and Prophetes, and lamenteth the miserye of Spayne his nat if countrey, which is in so great darkenesse: he rebuketh Maluenda and his fellowes which impugne the manifest veritie, and geue Thempe∣roure euill counsell, and ernestly warneth him to leaue, he refuseth his counsell, and sheweth hym how he wyl, through Gods helpe professe thys holsome doctryne, and wyll refuse no daunger of hys lyfe there∣fore. Whan Maluenda sawe hym so strongelye confyrmed, thy com∣myng hither (sayeth he) is in vayne: For here shalbe nothing determi∣ned. And yf you liste to doe any good openly, as you seme to boast, you shoulde haue gone to Trente. After this metinge, Diazius came no∣more in hys company. But Maluenda, wryting his letters to Them∣perours cofessour repeteth the whole matter, and exhorteth him most ernestly, to helpe the disease in tyme. When these letters were delyue∣red, there was a Spaniard by, Marquina, whiche came lately from Roome. Who vnderstandyng the accusation, beganne to excuse Dia∣zius, Marquins excuseth Di∣aze. whom he knew verye wel. And after a few dayes he retourneth home agayne, and declarech the matter to Diazius brother, Alphon∣sus, a Lawyer at Roome, what he had hearde of Themperours con∣fessour. In the meane season Diazius went from Regēspurge to Nu∣burge a Towne of Otto Henry the Paulsgraue, standyng by the Ri∣uer of Thonawe twelue myles aboue Regenspurge: the cause of hys goynge thyther, was to ouersee the correction of a booke that Bucer sent thyther to be prynted. Hys brother Alphonsus kyndled with the tale of Marquina, & haply also with the letters of som others besides, His brother Alphonse co∣eth into Ger∣many. immediately prepareth him selfe to take his iorney, and in greate hast cometh first to Auspurge, and from thence to Regenspurge. And whā he vnderstode, where Diazius was, he hasteth thyther. And to hym that marueled not a lyttell at his sodan comming declareth the cause. After he vseth in a maner the selfe same argumentes & reasons, as did Maluenda at Regenspurge. Whan he had assayed that in vayne he The tray∣torous mind of Alphonse. promiseth hym a greate yerely pension out of hys benefyces, so that he wil goe with him to Roome: When that wolde take no place nother:
After certen dayes, he confesseth himselfe to be vanquisshed, and fay∣neth as though he loued the doctrine of the gospel, and exhorteth him, that leauing Germany, which hath aboundance of learned men, and nedeth not hys trauell he wolde goe with him into Italye where he maye profit many. First they shall come to Trent, there be many men of singular learnynge and iudgement, which wilbe right glad of hys company: After they will goe to Roome and Naples, & so shall it come to passe, that when many shalbe ryghtly instructed of hym in sondrye places in Italye, by this occasyon the same doctryne maye be set forth also in Spayne: therfore he prayeth and besecheth hym, to follow his aduise herein: he promiseth to beare all hys charges, and what so euer is nedefull besydes. Diazius striken with great ioye and gladnes, re∣ioyseth bothe for hys owne cause, and also for hys brothers: And sen∣dyng his letters to Regenspurge, vnto Bucer and the rest requyreth to haue theyr counsell. They write agayne, and admonisshe hym, that he goe not with hym. Wherfore Alphōsus put quite besyde that hope, desyreth hym at the leste wise to goe with hym as farre as Auspurge. Whylest this gere was a brewyng, Bucer commeth to Nuburge, in∣tendynge to goe home, as before is sayde, and counselleth hym not to sturre one foote thence. And he himselfe departeth not before Alphon∣sus was gon, whiche was the .xxv. daye of Marche. But the daye be∣fore that Alphonsus went thēce, he talked with his brother most cur∣toisely, he exhorteth hym vnto constancie, & thynketh hym selfe a hap∣pye man, which hath profited so muche in a fewe dayes, throughe hys talke, in the trewe knowledge of God: he prayeth hym, that he wolde wryte vnto hym ofte: and promiseth all good wyll, and causeth hym to take .xiiij. Duckates, whether he wolde or noe, and thus with she∣ding of teares on eyther syde, he departeth, riding in a wagon to Aus∣purge, sixe myles from Nuburge. The next daye tarying and lettinge Alphonse re∣tourneth to Nuburge to kill his bro∣ther. the wagoner, by flattering woordes and rewardes, that he myght be before hym, taketh the same waye that he came, and bying an hatchet by the waye of a Carpenter, the .xxvii. daye of Marche in the dawe∣nyng of the daye, he commeth agayne to Nuburge, and leauynge hys horses without the gate, with the poste of Auspurge, whō he brought with hym, he goeth into the Towne, accompanyed with his man a murtherer, and commeth to hys brothers lodging. His seruant, lest he should be streyght waies knowen, had put on the apparell of a messē∣ger, that posteth with letters, and going before knocketh at the dore, and axeth for Diazius, vnto whom he hath letters: And being let in, goeth vp to hys chamber, but Alphonsus taryed benethe at the stayre foote, watching, that no man shoulde let theyr enterprise. Diazius a∣wakyng, and hearyng saye that a messenger was commen from hys brother, leapeth out of his bed, and hauynge nothyng vpon hym, but
hys clooke caste aboute hym, and hys nyghte gere, goeth foorthe into a dynyng Chamber next where he laye. By and by commeth he with the letters, and delyuereth them: it was skarce lyght daye. The effect of the letters was this. Howe he was verye carefull for the daunger he was in: let hym be well ware of Maluenda, & suche other enemies of the Gospell. Whylest Diazius was readynge this, the Murtherer standyng behynd his backe, letteth dryue at him with an hatchet that he had hyd vnder hys clooke, with all hys myght, & strake him in on The mur∣therer killeth Diaze. the ryght syde of hys head vp to the healue, so that he hauing sodainly hys braynes thus clouen a sonder, neuer spake worde. The murtherer leaueth the Axe stickyng styll in the wounde, and getting hym quick∣ly downe the stayres, immediatlye with the principall his master ha∣steth out of the Towne. There leaping vpon theyr horses, that were ready before the gate, when they were cōmen with exceadyng great spede to Bothmey, which is a bayting Towne in the mid waye bee∣twixt Nuburge and Auspurge, takyng freshe horses, whiche they had leaste there pourposely, they come to Auspurge. In the same chamber with Diazius ded ly, one Claudius Cenarcleus, a yonge gentleman Cladius Senaclyus. of Sauoye. But the murther was so secretly done that he in the nexte chamber perceiued nothing, vntil suche time as he hearde the spurres strike on the stayres whan the murtherer ranne hastely downe. Thā he arysyng, came forthe, and sawe that miserable and heuy sight: the brute of his mischeuous dede, and facte moste horrible, was immedi∣ately spred abroade throughout Nuburge, and diuerse of the princes seruauntes, that loued Diazius, tooke their horses and pursued after them: whan they were cōmen to Auspurge and coulde not fynde thē, being cleane out of hope, they determine to retourne backe agayne: But one of them, whiche was elder and stouter than the reste called Michell herffer, rideth forthe, with wonderfull spede, and as they were at rest in a village, for werines of their iorney, he getteth before them, & came sonner than they to Insprucke, & declareth the whole matter to the Maiestrate: And whan they came also not longe after he caused them to be apprehended, and accuseth them of murther, and writing to his Prince Otto Henry counte Palatine, aduertiseth hym where and howe they were taken. Whervpon the Prince sent two of his counsellours frō Nuburge to Insprncke to playde the case. They taking poste horses, came thither at the kalendes of Aprill, and to put the matter out of doubt, they bring with them the night cappe of Dia¦zius the bluddy hatchet that slewe him, and his brothers letters. But to fore they came there Alphōsus had gotē leaue to write to his frēdes in what case he stoode. The second day of Aprill, whan the Ambassa∣dours of Nuburge were cōmen before the magistrate & had informed
hym of the whole matter, they requyred that they myghte bee put to executyon, or yf they wyll stande in the denyall of the facte, that they might be racked. The magistrates referred the matter to other iudg∣es. When they came before them, the murtherers were permitted to take aduocates to pleade for them: by those was the matter differred from day to daie: At the last were the plaintines commaunded, to ex∣hibite theire accusation in Latin and in Spanisshe: After thys came Themperours letters, as he went to Regenspurge, wherin they were Thempe∣rours letters for a paraci∣de. commaunded to surcease and let the processe alone: for he and his bro∣ther will haue the hearyng of the matter at Regenspurge. Whē they coulde obteyne none other aunswer, Otto Henry and the electour of Palatine intreate the Senate of Insprinke, vpon a sufficient pledge to send the defendauntes to Nuburge where the murther was com∣mitted: but they make their excuse by Thēperous letters. What time thys murther was donne, Themperoure came to Spyer, goynge to Regenspurge, and by the waye, as he was at Bipounte, whyche is a Towne of Prynce Wuolfangus the Paulsgraue, his wife, the Lātz∣graues Thēperoure visiteth the Lantzgraue hys daugh∣ter. Daughter, laye in Chylde bed: whom Themperour went to visyte, and geuyng her moste gentle and comfortable woordes, dea∣leth great rewardes amonges her women: but hauyng no woorthye gyfte readye at hande to geue the Ladye her selfe, he sendeth it backe from Spier, whyther he came at the ende of Marche. The Lantz∣graue was admonisshed by Nauius (as before is sayde) to mete with Themperoure by the waye goyng to Regenspurge: the same woord was sent hym by Granuellan, in the moneth of Februarye, whan thē∣peroure was at Utrecht vpon the Mase. Wherfore receiuing saufecō∣duite of Thēperoure, he came to Spier. Thither came also the Pauls∣graue The Lantz∣graue com∣meth to thē∣peroure. Electour, and wyllyam Mansbach, ambassadour to the Duke of Wyrtemberge, this was the .xxviii. daye of Marche. Than goeth the Lantzgraue to Themperoure, and talkynge with hym priuately, by his Chauncelour, whan he had tolde him the cause, and occasion of hys comming: It is not in one place, nor in Germany only, but also in foreine Nations reported, moste myghty Emperoure, that throughe the Bysshop of Roomes procurement, you shulde mynd great displea∣sure to the Protestantes: There goeth abrut also that at the conclu∣syon of the peace, you shuld haue perswaded the French kyng to ayde you in punnisshyng the same: Moreouer, that you sollicite the Turke for a trewes, that you may so muche the easelyer, brynge youre pour∣pos to passe, and therefore (they saye) the Bisshop hathe called and cōmaunded a counsell, that vpon the decrees made in haste, the mat∣ter myght be put in execution: & it maketh vs the rather to think this report to be trewe, to see howe ernestly and busyly the suite procedeth
againste the Archebisshop of Collon. And certenly, forasmuche as we haue ayded you chargeablye against the French kyng and the Turk, and offered to doe more, as was declared at Spier, because we haue donne more also then euer our aunceters were accustomed, moreouer inasmuche as you haue graunted vs large warrauntes concerninge the peace and the law, bothe at Regenspurg & at Spier, these thinges chaunce to vs now beyonde all expectation. Yet we trust, that before you departe out of Germany, you wyll cause that relygion be establi∣shed, after the prescripte of Goddes woorde, by a prouinciall counsell of Germany, and in case the dissention can not be throughly accorded, yet that the peace whiche was promised vs at Spier, you wold com∣maunde to be wholy obserued, in suche wyse, as it bee neyther chaun∣ged nor taken awaye by the decree of any counsell. Hereunto Themperoure aunswereth by Nauius: Howe sondrie reportes haue commen to hys eares of them also, that they should at∣tempte some enterpryse, yet wolde he not credite the same, especiallye after he had hearde hys letters, written to Nauius, and nowe also beleueth it muche lesse: As concernynge that whyche he spake of the Frenche kynge, there is no man able to proue it: he hathe pease with him only, and nothynge els: It is the guise of Fraunce to braue and bragge of matters that bee vayne: he moued the Turke of a trewes, chiefly for the loue of Germany: for seyng that in sondrie assemblyes of Thempire, they complayned of the greate charges, and the pouertye of the people, he thought this the best waye to relyeue them, that du∣ryng the tyme of the trewes, they myght consulte, how to make war agaynste him, and to set an order in Religion: but herein as yet, is no∣thyng determyned, for hereof must he conferre with hys brother Fer∣nando: the Counsell, which they haue so many yeres requyred of him, is nowe, throughe hys greate suite and labour, assembled: And what so euer he hathe done therin, he hathe donne it of a good affectyon to the publicke weale: And where some perchaunce taketh it otherwise, it is not well donne of them: he hathe vsed the Archebisshop of Collon frendlye, but he coulde abyde no delaye at all: What is hys preparaty∣on to warre, he seeth presētly: there is no man with him, but his hous∣holde seruauntes, neyther doeth he gather any power: And the cause whie he sent for him, is for that he supposeth him to be a man that desi∣reth peace: And therfore requireth him, to declare his fantasye, howe Relygion may be appeased, or what he thinketh maye be obteyned of his fellowes. And if he list not now, he wil appoint of his coūsel, to cō∣ferre with him in ye matter. Thē the Lantzgraue speaking himselfe, yf it laye in me, noble Emperoure, to doe anye thynge for the welthe of The Lantz∣graue to the∣peroure. Germanye, and maynteynge of Amytye beetwene you and the
states of Thempire, certenly I wold spare no paines, & for this cause chiefly came I hither: I wisshed surelye to haue had some moe of my fellowes here, but that could not be for shortnes of tyme. The Duke of Saxō is to farre of, and Iames Sturmius is troubled with sick∣nes: I beleue ryghte well that you haue hearde sondrye reportes, but doubteles the trewthe is so as I wrote to Nauius, for there was no consultation had agaynst you at Frankefurte, but we treated onlie, howe we myght bothe perseuer in oure relygion, and also repulse vn∣iuste violence. Of the French king it was shewed vs, that for the affi∣nitie of the Duke of Orleans, the king had promised you ayde against vs: Many wise mē marueled, that you sued to the Turke for trewes, and supposed that no lyght cause moued you so to doe, especiallye ha∣uyng peace with the Frenche kyng: but now forasmuche as you saye it is done for the common welthes sake, I haue nothyng to obiecte a∣gainst it: For Germany had nede longe synce to haue ben vnburthe∣ned of suche charges: we desyred a counsell, the treweth is so, but the same to be free, godly, and holded in Germany: And why we doe not What coun∣sell the Pro∣testantes de∣syred. esteme thys of Trent to be suche, we did sufficientlye declare it vnto you at Woormes: For to shewe any waye howe to accorde relygion, I maye not, withoute the aduise of manye fellowes, and I perceyue well I should haue but small thanke of neyther partie: yet will I not refuse to conferre with your counsell herein, so it be not preiudiciall. I haue in dede no hope in the counsel, where all others secluded, the bis∣shoppes onlye, and such others as be the Bisshop of Roomes sworne men shall determyne all thynges, but I suppose a synode of Germany shulde not be vnprofitable: for as yet other nations differ muche from vs in opinions and doctrine. And the thyng is so farre entred in Ger∣many, that it can not be altered: Therfore were there nothyng better than yf you woulde permit relygion there to be free, yet so, as all men shulde obserue the peace. I suppose, you ordeyned the colloquie at Re∣genspurge of a verye good intent, but I heare by som that were pre∣sent, Freers be disturbers of peace. howe there be certen bitter Freers, which call agayne in questy∣on, the articles already accorded, and be of so naughtye a lyfe withal, that there is no good to be looked for at theyr handes. The Archebis∣shop of Collon is doubteles a goodman: And what so euer he dooeth in thys matter, he supposeth it to bee hys dewtye, especyallye, syth the decree of Regenspurge inioyned hym to refourme his Churche: And that reformatiō, he caused to be made as temperately as might be, ta∣king awaye no more thā was nedeful, & in the church goodes he alte∣red The boke of reformation at Collon. verie littel. And his boke is agreable to the holy scripture, & cōfir∣med with the testimonies of the auncient Doctours Tertuliā, Austē, Ambrose & others which wer nerer the time of the apostles: wherfore
if any violence should be offered hym for thys matter, the same might be awarnynge to others, that had altered a great deale more. (Than sayeth Themperoure) I leaue the treaty of Franckfurte, for I neither beleued the tales that wer tolde me, neyther haue I geuen anie occa∣syon that it shoulde so be. And I haue not procured the counsell for o∣ther intent, then to profite the common welth, not mynding, that yf a∣ny thyng be there decreed, there shuld any wrong be donne to the pro∣testantes therfore: for euen for this cause was appointed the conferēce at Regenspurge, the beginnyng wherof was very well, in case it had proceded. The Archebysshop of Collon, albeit he had promised to sur∣cease and differ the matter, procedeth neuerthelesse, and that by rigor, and compulsion, he putteth out the ordinary curates, and putteth in o∣thers at hys pleasure, he handeleth the Clergye extremely, he stayeth and witholdeth the reuenewes and customes of the Chanons, and is to precise in all thynges, so that I am constrayned, to assist the Clergie complaynynge vnto me of theyr iniuryes: that the talke betwene you and my counsellours shoulde not be preiudiciall therwith am I well contented. Hereunto againe the Lantzgraue, that you beare so good an affection towardes Germany, and my league frendes, most victo∣ryous Emperoure, I am ryght glad and ioyful, and beseche God that you maye perseuer herein: And surely yf accordyng to youre excellent wysedome, you doe well consyder, and waye with your selfe, what a commoditye Germanye is to youre magnificence, to youre Realmes and prouinces, you shall fynde, that there is nothyng more to be wish∣ed for, then that all states shoulde bee glad of you theyr supreme Ma∣gistrate: And that you agayne maye haue them styll louyng and obe∣dient, For certenly yf it fortune, that Germany shoulde be weakened, the same wylbe chiefly to youre discommoditie: And as touchyng my Lorde of Collon, the matter standeth euen so as I sayde before: In∣asmuche as he is a Sheparde, he wolde fayne haue hys flocke fedde with good and holsome foode: And thynketh hys dutye to be no lesse. Therefore hathe he caused a fourme thereof to be set foorthe: And they that are nowe hys aduersaryes, were at the begynnynge moste gre∣dye of this reformatyon: and now it is commen to passe, they refuse it, and drawe backewarde. Here themperoure interruptynge, ah (sayeth The Arche∣bisshop of Collō is ac∣coumpted vnlearned. he) what shulde that good man refourme? he scarselye vnderstandeth any Latyn: And in al hys lyfe he neuer sayde but three masses, wherof I heard two my selfe: he is not learned. But he readeth ouer diligētly the Germane bookes, (sayeth yt Lātzgraue) & as I am wel assured, he vnderstādeth religiō. Againe thēperoure: to refourme is not to bring in a new faith & religion. Neyther doeth he (sayeth the Lantzgraue) graunt, that he hath receyued a new Relygion, but he hathe renewed
that olde, that was leafte of Chryst and hys Apostles: And where he hath displaced certen Curates of the churche, and placed others, the same aperteyneth to hys charge & office. For yf the person be a naugh∣ty lyuer, or vnlearned, it is surely the Bisshops parte to substitute an other in hys steade, that is fyt for it: For within the iurisdictions of diuers Bisshoppes many churches lye Uacant, as I am able to saye, beyng destitute of Curates, where the people are fedde with no kind of doctryne, nor gouerned by no discipline, but lyke brute beastes lyue a barbarous and dissolute lyfe: where he hathe taken somwhat of his The igno∣rance of the people for lacke of tea∣chyng. Clergye, he hath thys reason for hym, that he imployed a greate some of golde on the Turkisshe and Frenche warres. And it is the maner of Thempire, that the Prince shal for this cause, commaunde his sub∣iectes to paye: therefore thys thynge deserueth no blame at all: And where it is commonlye bruted, that he did this for relygion, that had hys aduersaryes inuented to brynge hym in hatred. The nexte daye at the Paulsegraues lodging, mete the Lantzgraue, Granuellā, Na∣uius, and Masbacke. There Nauius began the talke, & repeteth some A communi∣cation of the Lātzegraue and others. parte of Thēperours cōmunication the daye before, declareth wher∣fore they are nowe mette, and sheweth howe desyrous Themperoure is of peace, and where for the same cause he appoynted a conference at Regenspurge he sayeth the diuines wēt a waie. Then aunswered the Lantzgraue that of theyr departure from thence, as yet he knoweth nothyng, but the Duke of Saxon and he were aduertised by letters, what vnreasonable condicions were offered them at the begynning, whan they might neyther haue theyr scrybes to wryte, nor see the co∣pye of the treaty, nor yet be permitted to write any thyng home: they hearde also howe vntemperately the Freers that were collocutours Freers vile in lyfe and learnyng. handled the matter, which both wolde ouer throwe the articles, that were there before reconciled, and tooke awaye all hope of concorde, and with the dishonest examples of life, where offense to many: Whe∣ther theire diuines departed therfore, being in dispayre of the matter, as yet he knoweth not, but certenly they were not called thence. Thē talked Granuellan, and fyrst speakyng much of Themperoures good nature, and loue of peace, he partely excused that of the condicions of the disputation: And where they were prohibited to sygnifye oughte home, he sayeth that was done without Themperours commaunde∣ment. There the Lantzgraue exhorting, that these thynges set a side, they wolde come to the present matter, commendeth the decree made at Spier in the yere paste concernyng peace, and order of lawe, and declareth that a prouinciall counsell of Germany, were moste expedi∣ent to accorde and quyet Religion, and in asmuch as Italyans, Spa∣niardes, Frenchemen, dissent so farre from the Germanes doctryne, in hys opynion a generall counsel shuld be to little porpos. Not with∣standyng
how soeuer the matter fall, and though none agrement can be made, yet sheweth he how they ought to obserue the peace, & that the decree of Spier mighte not be abolisshed: For now was the state of relygion suche in Germany, that whoso wolde assaye to extinguish it, muste distroye innumerable thousandes. Whyche shoulde be bothe an exceading great losse to Themperoure, whom the force of Germa∣ny hathe auaunced, & also to other nations, that loue them not, chiefly the Turkes, a greate reioysing and commoditie. The decree of Spi∣er, sayeth Granuellā, was made but for a time, neyther was the fault in Themperoure, that it was of no more force: but whom it was lōg on, it is knowen well enough: In priuate counselles of seuerall naty∣ons, ther hath ben redresse made only of vices & maners, but of faithe and religion, no mention made. And now are all thinges full of dissē∣tion and sectes, where touching the faythe, all are not of one opiniō: Wherfore this disceptation concerneth not only the Germanes, but al other chrysten people in lyke case: The moste parte of the Diuines are frowarde men, stubburne, and obstinate, with whom the case can not Diuines stubburne & obstinate. be dipatched: Therfore muste prynces and noble men be at the skan∣nyng therof, and & certen meane waie in relygion founde oute: for you your selues do not permitte religion to be free: For suche as are of a contrary opinion to you, are punisshed with imprisonment and by the purse. And seeyng Themperoure desyreth chiefly a concorde, he maye in no wyse graunte that thyng, which is vngodly: For yf all thynges were permitted to the common people, Than shoulde not the Magi∣strate liue in saftie. I doe vnwisely (sayeth the Lantzgraue) to reason of so weightie matters, my fellowes beyng absent: notwithstanding, by cause the matter is not handled to any preiudice I wyll procede: I suppose that Themperoure made the decree of Spier for a good intēt, and where the aduersaries of the same, were then content to suffer it, and so promised, they maye not nowe go backe with theyr wordes: A∣gayne, inasmuch as we gaue Themperoure stronge ayde agaynst the Frenche kinge, we truste surely, that the thyng, that was then agreed vpon, and confirmed with seales, shal not be broken. Moreouer, there is nothyng that ought to let a prouinciall counsel: For we professe the same faythe that the Apostles, the counsell of Nice, & Athanasius did, and oure diuines are agreed vppon the chiefe and principall articles: ther was in dede a controuersie amonges them cōcernyng the lordes supper, but the same is nowe appeased: for there is none but confesseth that the body and blud of Christ is there truly receyued: There be an∣abaptistes, Dauidians, and I know not who besydes, whom in dede we doe punnish. Therfore is it not nedeful that foreine nations shulde be present when these thinges shalbe determined neuerthelesse, if they gaue themselues to the knowledge of the trueth, it were chieflye to be
wished for: That certen meane opinions shuld be establyshed, & that by men of honour. I doe not greatly resist, but I thinke that cā hard∣ly be donne with out diuines: but if the sincere preaching of the gospel and the whole supper of the Lord, and the marriage of priestes might be permitted, as in tyme paste Paphuntius perswaded in the counsel Nicene, I suppose a concorde might be establisshed: I know no place, where men be constrayned to come to oure religion: we do not suffer a contrary and a sondry doctryne in the selfe same place, but we com∣pell no man, kyll no man, nor spoyle hym of hys goodes: And in case men of our relygion myght remayne harmeles in your dominiōs, and might haue theyr Churches seuerally, assuredly I coulde be contente for myne owne parte, to suffer youres to haue theyr Churches in lyke case, with in my rule and dominion: but for asmuche as you wyll not graunt to the same, we desyre also to haue oure doctryne equiualente: Therefore looke what I sayde before of the decree of Spier, and the prouincyall Counsel of Germanie, the same doe I take to be best now also. If there bee any man, sayeth Granuellan, in all the worlde, that loueth peace, assuredly it is Themperoure, who indede for the Bishop of Roomes pleasure, wyll not swarue one heare breadthe from equy∣tye: He hath kept also the decree of Spier, not without the greate of∣fence of the other partye, and also of the Bisshop. ea, Nauius and I doe sustayne no smal displeasure for the same cause: In a Counsell pro∣uinciall, I cannot see who shuld be Iudge: For al men doe not vnder∣stand the scripture after one sorte. And because that in the Conference of learned men, there appereth smal hope, doubtles som other meanes muste bee founde: Some Articles are indede accorded, but agayne there be moe yet in cōtrouersie. Moreouer those that be accorded, Bu∣cer doth interpret more largely than the thyng it selfe permitteth: and yf they shoulde nowe reste here, it were easy to iudge, what wolde be the state of Thempyre at the lengthe. I lyke it righte well (sayeth the Thempe¦roure ought to compell the Pope to do his dutie. Lantzgraue,) that you saye howe Themperoure hangeth not of the Bisshop his sleue: And wolde God he myghte brynge the Bisshop to hys dutye: In tymes paste, Bisshoppes of Roome did honour Them∣perour as theyr supreme Magistrate, And now Emperours ar boun∣den to them by an othe: In all controuersies Gods woorde oughte to be chyfe iudge, whyche is not obscure, so that che minde of men wolde frame themselues accordynglye. For it sheweth vnto vs synne, pro∣uoketh vs to repentaunce and amendemente of lyfe, and preacheth vnto vs Chryste, who hathe taken a waye the synnes of the worlde, in whose name also God the Father is to be called vpon, that he woolde graunte vs hys holye spiryte: Uerelye thys faythe and Doctryne hathe euer been, and styll remayned in the Churche, as the Lordes Prayer, the Crede of the Apostles: And dyuerse Songes beesydes
accustomed in churches doe instructe vs of the benefite of Chryst: nei∣ther must we here consyder, what the greatest multitude weneth but The ende of Scripture. what the trewthe is. For at Ierusalem also, what time diuerse of the Apostles and disciples wolde haue had the heathen people that had receiued the Gospel, circumcised, Peter and Paule, Iames and Bar∣nabas, were of a contrary opinion, & the errour of the residew shew∣ed, did abrogate that yoke of the lawe. At the whyche tyme, the grea∣test The beste thinges please sew∣est. parte of that congregation, gaue place and obeied the iudgement of a few, that were in the right. We verely doe not prescribe other na∣tions, but couet only, that the Germanes might agree within them∣selues: to treate of meane waies, I could be cōtent, so that they swar∣ued not from the decre of Spier concernyng the establisshment of the peace and lawe: and in other thynges it is to be sene, what may be e∣stablysshed by Gods woorde, and what maye not. But I wold haue also my cosen and frend here, the Paulse graue, who hathe ben at ma∣ny assemblies, and knoweth muche of matters past, to speake hys o∣pinion herin. Then he, speaking of Themperours good will and dis∣position, The mynde of the Pauls graue. sayeth howe the conference had at Regenspurge, was well and to muche purpose begonne: And if it were renewed, and the arti∣cles already accorded, no more decided, he thinketh they myght come to some tollerable agrement in the rest. Themperoure (sayeth Gran∣uellan) desyreth acōcorde verie muche, as hath ben ofte repeted: And excepte that be establysshed, it will surely redounde to the dammage of the publycke weale: And albeit Themperour hath not thus muche profyt by thempyre, albeit he hath not hys health also, yet for the loue of Germany, hathe he taken his iorney. He hath taken no secret coun∣sell, eyther with the French king or with others, neyther commeth he to craue ayde, but to prouyde generally for all men. Bothe Fraunce & Englande leuie great force of men, whiche is greatly to be suspected: Moreouer Thēperour hath to doe in Spayne, by reason of the death of hys Daughter inlawe: Yet all these thynges set a part, he goeth to the assemblie. But yf no Princes come thither, what shall he doe there alone? There is much calling and crying on hyn to refourme thinges, and yet wyll they not come to the place appoynted for consultation: Therfore it should doe well my Lordes (speaking to the Paulsgraue and the Lantzgraue) if you, whiche are two of the chiefest, wolde goe thyther. Albeit sayeth the Lantzgraue, that Themperoure hathe no greate reuenewes out of Thempire, yet, in asmuche as he hathe ayde alwayes thence agaynste the Turke, agaynst the Frenche kynge and others: And for that the dignitie of Thempire, getteth hym great au∣thorytie What pro∣fit hath thē¦peroure out of Germany amonges other kinges, and that he may leuye there alwaies force and power at hys pleasure, and maye assemble greate armyes in Germany, where others maye not doe the lyke, how muche is thys to
be estemed? Our aduersaryes are more clamorous than we, yet wyll they not follow good coūsell. For we bothe allowed ye decree of Spi∣erand the articles accorded fyue yeres synce at Regenspurge, we desi∣red to haue enrolled for matter of recorde, and admitted also, al reaso∣nable condicions of the laste conference: contrary wyse they, did none of al these, neyther wolde they be brought to any cōformitie: but with open protestation, at Wormes, refused the communication. Now can not I go to Regenspurge, the charge will be so greate. There is also a matter in controuersye betwene the Electour of Saxonye & Duke The Lantz∣graue is ar∣biter bee∣twirte the Dukes of Saxon. Moris, which because theyr counsellours can not determyne, it is put to my arbitrement: Neuerthelesse I wyll sende Ambassadours to the assemblye with large commission. Thus departing, a fewe houres af∣ter, commeth Nauius agayne to the Lantzgraue, he telleth him how this daies talke hath pleased Themperour, and solliciteth him again, to come hymselfe to Regenspurge, also he enquireth of hym, whether he wolde talke agayne with Themperoure the same daye in the eue∣nyng? he refuseth not, and whan he came, Themperoure geueth hym thankes by Nauius, fyrste, that he came thyther, secondely, for that he Thēperoure thanketh the Lantzgraue seeth that the Paulsegraue and he are bothe desyrous of a concorde: Howebeit, he supposeth the Collocutours wil retourne againe to Re∣genspurge: yf they doe not, he wyll sende for them agayne: but in the meane tyme, he requireth him, that he wolde come hym selfe to the as∣semblie, though not at the begynnyng, yet towardes the later ende. He hym selfe hath verely, all other affaires layde a parte, taryed these three yeres in Germany, to thentent he myght quyet the same. Wher∣unto the Lantzgraue aunswered, that of the departure of the Collo∣quitours, he hearde not before thys daye, he hath also recyted the cau∣ses, wherfore he thinketh it was done: But yf it be his desyre, and that his fellowes be content, that the same Diuines of the contrary parte doe retourne agayne, hys also shall not tary from thence: But for him selfe, he may not goo thyther, for that he hath ben at great charges in the warre of Brunswicke, and hath lately maryed a daughter, and is chosen vmpere betwene the Dukes of Saxon and for that he can not goe thyther with out a great company, and because that through hys absence, hys countrey might be in daunger by the confederates of the Duke of Brunswicke his prisoner. Than sayeth Thēperour, that hys intent is not to burthen hym with vnnecessarye charges, but he desi∣reth hym ernestlye to come, for that he supposeth, howe hys presence wolde further the whole consultation, and that the Saxons and o∣thers myght be so in couraged: And there is no cause that he shoulde be any thing affraide of Duke Heuries fellowes: For neyther is their power so greate, and thoughe they shoulde attempte any thynge, yet wolde he let it, and not suffer that any man shal disturbe the publycke
quyetnes. The Lantzgraue agayne recytyng the causes, saieth he can promise nothyng, neuerthelesse he wyll sende Ambassadours, whiche shall trauell for peace: whych yf they can not in all thynges obeye and gratifye hym, he desyreth hym not to take it displeasauntelye, neyther thynke it to be don of any obstinacie or mallice, but for feare of godes displeasure: For thys lyfe tyme is verey shorte and vncerten, therefore must they thinke of an euerlastingnes. Themperour againe speaking of hys owne paines taken (sayeth) the matter of Saxon maye be dif∣ferred: therfore let hym come, and set all lettes a parte: for he hym selfe beyng present, myght bothe counsell and cause hys league frendes to shewe themselues tractable, and be a meane, that the beginning of the treaty maye be reasonable. After this the Lantzgraue complayninge of dyuers, that had ayded the Duke of Brunswicke, maketh a briefe rehersall of the whole matter, and howe he was taken, (and sayeth) how Duke Morys & he, doe susteyne by them great iniurye: For they are light persons, and borne to styre vp trouble: amonges whom Fri∣derick Spedius tolde him yesterdaye, that yf he wolde heare hym, he Spedius a blabbe. wold open certen secret, and priuie deuises that are nowe a working: but in asmuche as he trusted not to the man, he refused to talke with hym, and wylled hym, to sygnyfye vnto hym by wryting such thinges as he wold haue tolde hym presētly. Whan the Lantzgraue had this declared, Thēperour was maruelous angrie with Spedius: wher∣fore after thys communication had amonges them, the Lantzgraue The Lantz∣graue ta∣keth hys leaue of the Emperoure takyng hys leaue of Themperoure, was bad farewel ryght frendely: And went from thence to Hedelberge, and after home. And Them∣peroure went streyght to Regenspurge. And the selfe same time, that is to saye, at the kalendes of Aprill, the Ambassadours of the Prote∣stantes, assemble at wormes, to consult of the whole matter. But be∣cause Themperoure sent awaye the Lantzgraue so gently, they recei∣uing letters from hym of the same, who in the meane tyme had repor∣ted the matter to the Duke of Saxon, the .xxiii. daye of Aprill depart, that they myght consulte of the same matters at Regenspurge, why∣ther they must go to the imperiall assemblie. In thys conuention they of Rauēspurge entred into league with the Protestantes. The eight daye of Aprill was the thirde sytting of the fathers in the Counsell at The thyrde session in the Syneode at Trente. Trent. There are recited the bokes of the olde and new Testament, and are cōmaunded to be taken for sacred and holy, no parte nor iote of them omitted: And the olde and common translation of the Bibell is only commaunded to be vsed in churches and Scooles: It is also decreed, that no man interpret the holy scripture after his owne sēce & vnderstanding, but that al mē follow herin the cōsent of the church, and of the aunciente fathers. Moreouer Printers are commaunded, that they prynte or set foorth nothing, but by consent of their ordinary
Bysshop: Furthermore it is forbidden ye any man shal vse the termes or testimonyes of scripture to triflyng thynges or vayne fables, about superstition inchauntmente or witchecrafte, or also in ralyng & slaun∣derous libelles, and a daye was appointed for the next syttyng, at the seuententhe daye of June. Themperours Ambassadour there at the The oration of the Em∣perours am∣bassadour. same tyme was Fraunces Toletane: and when he had spoken much in Themperours prayse, and had declared moreouer, howe ioyefull that daye was to Themperoure, wherin the bishop of Rome cōmen∣ced the counsel, he sheweth, that he is ioyned in commission with Di∣daco Mendoza, who hauing caught an ague, is retourned to Uenise to his olde Ambassade, and promysing hys seruice he sayeth, we must praye to God that he wold long continew this consent of myndes in the Bisshop and Themperoure, that is so godlye and holsome for the publycke weale, to the intent that vices refourmed, and euill weedes plucked vp by the rootes, the Lordes felde maye receiue the auncient tillage. In the eleuenth daye of Aprill the Bisshop addresseth hys let∣ters by Hierome Franch, whom he sent than backe to the Swysses, vnto the Bisshoppes of Sedune and Chur, and to certen Abbottes in those partyes. Howe he hathe called all the prelates of Christendome to a generall counsell at Trent: And it is reason, that they which, re∣presente The Popes letters to the Bisshops of Sedune and Chur. the Churche of the Swisses, shoulde come thyther chieflye: For the people of that nation are vnto hym more derely beloued than the rest, for that they be as it were the peculiar children of the See A∣postolicke and defendours of the Ecclesiastical liberties: and to Trēt are commen alreadye, verey manye Bisshopes oute of Italy Fraūce, and Spayne, and the nomber encreaseth daylye: Wherefore it is not semely, that those which dwell so farre of, shoulde preuente them that are nere hande: A greate parte of theyr people are infected with He∣resyes, and had so muche the more nede of a Counsell: Wherefore let them nowe with dilygence, recompence thys slackenes, and get them thyther immedyatelye, all delaye set a parte, vnlesse they wyll incurre the penaltye, by the Lawes prescribed, and the cryme of neglectynge theyr dewtie, and playne dysobedyence. The reste shall hys Ambassa∣dour tell them, vnto whom he prayeth them to geue credyt. The cler∣gie and Uniuersitie of Collon, followed theyr suite at Roome against theyr Archebysshop verey ernestlye. Wherfore the Bisshop of Roome the .xvi. daye of Aprill, for asmuche as forgettyng hys owne saluatyō, he hath offended diuersesly, agaynst the ecclesiastical rules & doctrine, agaynst the traditions of the Apostles, rites & ceremonyes of the chri∣stiane religion, in the church accustomed, cōtrary to the censure of Leo The Arche∣bisshop of Collon excō∣municated by the Pope the tenth, setfoorth against Luther and his fellowes, he doeth excom∣municate him out of the communion of the church, & depriueth him of his Archebishopricke & al others his benefices, priueleges, & dignities,
and commaundeth the people of hys iurysdiction, in generall, that frō henceforch they obey hym not, he releaseth them also of theyr othe by the whyche they are bounden to hym, and commaundeth hym to sy∣lence, and awardeth hym to pay to the contrary parte costes and dō∣mage. With them of Collon ioyned the Byshops of Liege, and of Ut∣reiche, and the Uniuersitie of Louain, this sentēce was after imprin∣ted at Roome, in the moneth of August. When Themperour came to Regenspurge, and was infourmed of the whole matter by the presy∣dentes Thēperoure commeth to Regenspurg of the conference, he toke the going awaye of the Diuines in most euill parte, and dispatching hys letters throughe out Germany, complayneth greatly therof, and exhorteth the princes moste ernestly to come themselues. From the Protestantes came Ambassadours on∣ly: but thyther came Duke Moris Ericke Duke of Brūswicke, Iohn & Albert of Brandenburge, the Bishoppes, of Trent, Auspurge Bam∣berge, Wirciburge, Passawe, & Hildesseme. Aboute thende of Maye came also kyng Ferdinando. The second daye of Iune, ye Protestāts goe to Themperoure and complayne of the murtheryng of Diazius, and desyre that the murtherer may suffer accordyngly: Themperour, The mur∣ther of Diaze vnpunished. (sayeth he) wyll consulte wyth hys brother: Ferdinando moued also, maketh the lyke aunswer. With the Protestantes then were the Am∣bassadours of the Paulsgraue, of the Archebysshop of Collon, of Mū∣ster, Norinberge, Regenspurge, and Norling. The thirde daye after, Themperoure calleth before him al the states, and declareth the cause of callynge thys conuention, and after he hath complayned muche of the absence of the Prynces, he fyndeth hym selfe no lesse greued that the Collocutours were so sodaynely broken of and departed: where∣fore inasmuche as he coueteth greatlye, that Relygion myght be set at some staye in Germany, he desyreth theyr aduise and counsell, what is further to be don herein: moreouer how the iudgment of the chamber maye be refourmed, & he vnburthened of the charges therof. Fynally, he sheweth them howe for the relyfe and quyet of Germany, he hathe throughe the meanes of the Frenche Kynge, taken trewes with the Turke for one yere, but seeyng the trewes commeth oute at October nexte, & as his brother king Ferdinando telleth him, is broken also al∣ready, and he knoweth not what wylbe the ende therof, he supposeth, that they shalbe fayne whan tyme requyreth to geue hym that ayde, whych heretofore they promysed, and he wyll, for the defence of them∣pyre, mynister all the helpe and counsell he is able. The Princes Electours were wonte to consulte and conferre toge∣ther: But at thys tyme the Ambassadours of Mentz and Treuerse, forsake the Ambassadours of Collon, Palatyne, Saxon & Branden∣burge, Adiuision a∣monges the electours. & reuolt to the Catholickes, and after conference had with thē,
they approue the counsell of Trente, and exhorte Themperoure, that he wolde maynteyne the same, and perswade the Protestantes, that bothe they wolde goe thither, and also submytte them selues, vnto the decrees and iudgement of the Synode: But the Protestantes desyre Themperoure, that he wolde establyshe a fyrme peace, and vpryghte iustyce, that he wolde referre the cause of Religion to a laweful coun∣sell of Germany, or assemblie of thempyre, or to the conference of lear∣ned men to be had vpon certen condycions, and shew how the coun∣sell of Trente is not the same, that hathe ben promysed by the decrees of Thempyre. Whylest they consulted aboute these matters, behold it The brute of warre against the Prote∣stantes. was bruted a brode that Themperoure, Kynge Ferdinando and the Bysshoppe of Roome made greate preparatyon for warres. For inso∣muche as Themperoure had peace with Fraunce, and trewes with the Turke for thys yere, the oportunytye of tyme semed fytte, to work theyre feate in. Certen Bysshoppes, and Themperours Confessoure, with whom the Bysshop of Roome had practysed, were thought a∣monges others to haue been a greate occasyon hereof. Wherefore, whan Themperoure was fullye resolued to haue warre, the .ix. daye of Iune, he sendeth the Cardynall of Trente in greate poste haste to Roome, in message to the Bisshop, to procure the ayde promysed: two dayes after, he dispatcheth awaye Captaynes and chieftaynes with money, to goe leuie men incontinentlye. He had before commaunded Marimilian the Erle of Bure, to bring him out of the low countries, al the force he could get, bothe of horsemen and fotemen: he commaū∣deth also Marques Albert, and Marques Iohn of Brandenburge, The false∣hod of Mar∣ques Albert and Iohn of Branden∣burge. & Wulfangus, the master of the order in Germany, to gether bandes of horsemen. And those two, though they were of the Protestantes re∣ligion, and Marques Iohn also in league with them, yet for asmuche as themperoure sayde, howe he attempted that warre, not for religi∣on, but agaynst certen rebelles, they promysed hym their seruice: And Marques Iohn had maried the Duke of Brūswickes daughter, that was prisoner with the Lantzgraue, The Ambassadours of the Pro∣testātes, being troubled to heare of these matters, and taking care for the cōmon daunger of Germany, desyre the other states of thempire, that they wold goe with thē to themperoure, to intreate, that he wold haue no warre: but that was in vaine: especially the ambassadours of Mentz & Treuers vtterly refused them. The Lantzgraue, who had The Lantz∣graue is cir∣cumspecte. good espialles euery where, sēdyng oft his letters to Regēspurge, ad∣uertised them, what intelligence he had out of sondry places, & admo∣nished them, that the bandes of horsemen, whiche for the suspicion of warre they had hyred before, shuld be styl reteyned, & newe taken vp and prouyded: but they, for asmuch as thēperours demaundes pretē∣ded no likelynes of warre, but Lenitie and desire of peace, thoughte
verely there shuld haue ben no warre that yeare: But what tyme the thing it self declared, that the brute was not vayne, whan nowe not only in Germany, but also in Italy powers were leuied, and moreo∣uer the force of Spaniardes did approche, the .xvi. daye of Iune they goe to Themperoure, and for because all places are full of warlycke motions, they inquyre of hym, whether these thynges be don through hys commaundemente: For in asmuche as the reporte goeth, that he myndeth no warre agaynst the Turke nor other foreine Prince, they maruell to what ende all thys preparatyon tendeth. And with them were the Ambassadours of Collō and Palatine: hereunto had them∣peroure appoynted Nauius to make them aunswer. With what loue he hath imbraced Germany, euer synce he fyrst, was Emperoure, it is no nede to recyte: And is nowe of the same wyll also, neyther hath he any other pourpos, but that peace and iustice maye be obserued in thē∣pyre, and that all states may be reconcyled: herein such as shall obeye hym, he commaunded them to looke for all good wil of hym, & against those that shall doe otherwyse, he sayeth howe he must procede accor∣dyng to hys ryght and authorytie. The nexte daye addressyng his let∣ters Thēperours letters to the Cities of the Protestātes. to dyuerse Cities that were in league with the Protestantes, es∣pecyally to Strasburge, Norinberge, Auspurge and Ulmes. I doubt not (sayeth he) but you know well enough, howe derely beloued Ger∣many, the common countrie of vs al, hathe ben to me alwayes, what trauell and paynes, I haue taken, and what charges I haue been at, not with out the great dammage of my realmes and kyngdomes, to thintent that weightie & daungerous dissention of religion, might be appeased. Wherin doubtles I haue not sought myne owne priuat cō∣moditie, but alwayes don my indeuoure, that offences taken a waie, Germany might be in quiet: For this the decrees doe testifye, so oft by me renewed, albeit that certen doe enterprete these thynges other∣wyse, and doe falsely ascribe vnto me the contrary. Moreouer in thys my gouernemente of the common welth, I haue had euermore an es∣pecyall care for the preseruation of the free Cities, that they shulde not be oppressed by certen, whyche yf they myghte fynde an occasyon, to brynge theyr pourpose to passe, wolde not fayle to do it. Which thing I suppose, you, as you be wyse mē, haue marked, by former actes don: Nowe, though certen men haue oftentymes attēpted diuerse thinges to the hynderaunce boothe of you, and of other states, and of me also, Thēperours crafte. yet, in asmuche as I could not without a greate sturre redresse them, I haue suffered hytherto, in good hope surelye, that I shoulde at the lengthe reape the fruyte of thys my pacyence and lenitye, to the pro∣fyt of the publycke weale: whiche doubtles had so commen to passe, had not some men by secrete and wonderfull polycyes letted thys a∣gremente, certes not for thys cause, that eyther they loue Relyon, or
respect gods glory, but that vnder a certen pretence of holynes, wher∣with they myghte cloke theyr wickednes, they myght oppresse other states, and bryng theyr goodes and landes into theyr owne handes: For the reuenewes of some they haue vsurped already, and violently deteyne the same, to the greate iniurye of many. And nowe that they haue brought the matter to thys passe, that iustyce set asyde they now feare nothyng, they shoute now at my office, by moe wayes than one, and raseshely demynisshe the same, for thys intente certenly, that they maye subdewe the states of Thempyre, and especyallye the Cytyes, partely by force, and partely by craftie meanes. Whose talke maketh me to beleue the thynge to be certenly trewe, whan they bragge, as I am credebly infourmed, and threatē also, that they wil attempt force and warre agaynste me. The same thyng is wytnessed by so many of theyr forged sedytions, and famous lybelles and pictures, which they setforthe, to reyse sedition, and inflame the people againste me. Ther∣fore can I haue no hope, that euer they shulde, through my lenitie and pacience waxe the better, & amend, or leaue these insolent facciōs. For certenly hitherto I haue so littell profyted by this meane, these many yeres now that they are not only become nothing at al the better, but also worse then themselues, more obstinate, more rebelles, and despe∣rate. Whiche thing certenly tendeth to the distruction of the publycke weale, and vnlesse a remedy be found, it wyll come to passe, that Ger∣many shall fall from hys auncyent lybertye, into a moste greuous bō∣dage and tyranny: but that maye I neyther beare nor suffer anye lon∣ger, neither cā it by any meane be excused, though I wold. Wherfore, to thintent my dygnytie may be preserued, that peace and iustice maie consist in their vertu and strength, & that the iminent daunger may be repulsed, from the Empyre, and from youre heades, I haue prefixed to bring those disturbers of the common welth to theyr dutye, and to re∣store Germany, to her olde beautie and lybertie. Which intēt of myne I thought good to sygnifye vnto you, that you shuld geue no credite vnto such, as haply shal brute a broade, that my pourpose is otherwise For I doe assure you vpō my honour, that I doe it for none other res∣pect, thē for the same that I haue now declared. Therfore I trust also that you will not faile me herein, that bothe their boldnes may be re∣pressed, & that youre dignitie may also be recouered. If you shall thus doe, I bed you looke for all goodwill at my handes, which I wil fur∣ther declare, incase you send me an Ambassadoure touching the same: the like thing in effect, he wrote also to the Duke of Wirtēberge. The same daye, wherein these letters were in dited, Granuellan, and Na∣uius calle vnto them, the ambassadours of the cities beforesaide, and speaking to euerie of them seuerally in maner after one sort (saye) how this warre is not ment nor prepared against the Cyties but againste
certen rebelles, that haue committed treason, and infringed thempe∣rours authoritye, which haue taken the possessions of certen Princes and bishops, whiche in dede by occasyon, wil not spare the cities ney∣ther: Wherfore looke they shewe theyr fayth and allegeaunce to Thē∣peroure, and ayde not his enemies, that Themperoure haue no cause of displeasure agaynste them, vnto whom he wissheth well let them wryte thys whome with spede, and exhorte theyr cyties to remayne in theyr de wtye: Themperoure will also wryte vnto them, & like wise sende ambassadours. The same daye at Trent, it is ordeyned, that in A statute of Trente. the Abbeies of Monkes & Chanons, there be some learned man ap∣pointed to reade a lecture of diuinitie, & herunto some benefyce assige∣ned out in steade of a pension: And that no man be admitted to the of∣fice of reading, but of whose learning, maners, and lyfe the Bishop or Abbot be certayne of: And because the preachyng of the Gospel is no∣thyng lesse necessarye, than the readyng it selfe, the Bisshops and al o∣ther prelates of the churche, are commaunded to instructe the people, or yf they haue any lawful impedimēt, to substitute others that shall: Moreouer the headpristes & pastoures of the people are charged, at ye lest euery sondaye, to declare vnto men those thinges that are necessa∣ry for saluation, and that they exhort them vnto vertu, and feare them from vice and syn: And a penaltie appoynted for such as neglect their dutye. The Bisshops also are admonished to note dilligentlye, what thinges are taught, and incase heresies or absurde opinions be sowen abrode, to vse the remedie by the lawes prescribed. After are decrees made of originall synne, and saye that the whole spot thereof is taken A decree of oryginal sin. awaye through baptisme: And that there remayueth in dede in them that be baptised a motion to synne, or concupiscence: And albeit Paul sometyme calleth it synne, yet is it not done because it is synne in dede and properly so, but because it inclineth to sinne: But the Uirgin Ma∣rye is not comprysed in thys decree, and that is to be obserued, which in tyme paste was ordeyned by Bysshop Sirtus the fourthe of that name, Than is the nexte daie limited to sit in, the .xxix. of Iune, Now did this Sixtus the fourth make a decre, wherin he did excommuni∣cate them as heretickes, whyche teache that the Uirgyn Mary was conceaued in oryginall synne, and that the daye consecrated by the churche of Roome, in the memoryall of her conceptyon, oughte not to be kept holy. Thys decre is written in that part of the Byshops law, that is called extrauagātes. In this foresayd counsell & sitting, Peter Danese, ambassadour to the French king, made an oration, and spea∣kynge The oration of the Frēch ambassa∣dour. Danese. many thynges of the desertes and godly zeale of the kinges of Fraunce towardes the Churche of Roome, begynnynge from kynge Clodowey declareth, howe kinge Fraunces descendinge of the same
progenitours, is in no kynde of dewtye inferyour to them, who was lynked with Leo the tenth in a continuall bonde of amytie, and like∣wyse with Adrian, Clement, and now with Paull the third, whyche in all this tempestuous storme of Religion, hathe ben well ware, that no alteration hath ben within hys dominions, for that he wold haue the whole iudgement of the matter to be referred to the church, for al∣beit he be of hys owne nature moste mercifull; yet hathe he put them to most greuous tormentes, which by a certen priuate rashenes, haue assayed to diminyshe the state of the church, through the which dilly∣gence and seueritie, he hath this obteined, that he deliuereth now vn∣to them all Fraunce in peasable wyse: For in it, is no new, nor straūge doctryne, which is not of auncient custome and olde discipline confyr∣med. And where he hathe alwayes thought it profytable for the pub∣lycke weale, that in the church, there shuld be one, namely the bisshop of Roome, as the successour of Peter, vnto whom all others, as to the head, myght referre all theyr doynges, he hath ben euermore carefull, that thys magistrate myghte styll kepe the supremacye: and albeit he hath often times with large offers ben moued to the contrary and to He vnder∣standith this of the kynge of England. followe thexample that an other hathe shewed before hys eyes, yet coulde he neuer bee remoued from hys pourpos, and of late whan the counsell was called, & that he hearde howe certen fathers were there assembled, forthewhich he commaunded certen of hys cheife Bisshops to repayre thyther, & whan after a few decrees were made & brought into Fraunce, he appointed hym and his fellowes to come and declare hys lykyng opinion touchyng the same: Therfore his fyrst request is, that they wold ones establishe in generall, what thyng in relygion is The Frēche kynges ∣quste. to be followed and beleued: And agayne that for thecclesiasticall per∣sons, they wolde prescribe a moste sharpe disciplyne of lyfe & maners: What so euer they shal decree, let thē put no doubte, but that through hys commaundement it shall be obserued in all Fraunce. Moreouer, for as muche as the kynges of Fraunce haue done very muche for the churche of Roome, that they wolde not suffer, any thyng to be dimis∣shed or altered, the possession wherof the kynges of Fraunce haue had euer synce Lewis surnamed Pius, the sonne of great Charles: Final∣ly, that of all the Frenche Churches, whereof he hathe the patronage left hym of hys elders, they wolde confyrme all ryghtes, priueleges, and lybertyes. With the letters before mentioned, and with further credite also, came Lazarus Schuendius to Strasburge, ye .xxiiii. daie of Iune, when he had by the waye spoken with the rest of the cytyes. An aunswer of them of Strasbo∣rough to thē∣peroure. But the Senate, sendyng hym awaye, not long after wrote vnto thē∣peroure, and for that they made no directe aunswer to Lazarus, they saye it was for the straungenes and difficultie of the thing, which did not concerne thē only, but others in lyke case. Nowe where he saieth,
that he beareth such a loue to Germany, they geue hym great thākes, and besecheth hym to perseuer in the same, and suffer not hym selfe to be styrred vp to ciuyll warre: where he complayneth moreouer of cer∣ten, that doe not theyr de wtie, neither shew theyr dew obedience, they were sory to heare it, yet they trust, that there be none of theyr Religi∣on culpable in so greate a crime: For the fault hath not ben in vs (saye they) that relygion hath not ben accorded. For you knowe ryght wel, noble Emperoure, howe willinge and confyrmable we haue been, to haue a recontilemente, bothe fyue yeres paste at Regenspurge, and also synce and before at all tymes, where certen others, through thad∣uise and perswasion of the Bishop, haue refused the same, and referred althinges to Roome: But the Bisshop intendeth through violēce and power to reteyne styll those greate errours for the whyche arrose all The Pope & Tyrante. thys dissentiō in the church & doeth so handle the matter in al thinges, that we maye not cōmit the cause vnto his iudgment: wherby it may wel be perceyued, that we susteyne wrong, yf any man shulde lay the blame in vs, that thys controuersye is not appeased. And where it is obiected vnto them, that they shulde seke to plucke the church goodes in to theyr owne handes, vnder the pretence of relygion, it is vnfrend∣ly sayde: For you haue heard and knowen, Cesar, why oure fellowes coulde suffer no longer that monkishe lyfe in theyr dominions, which was growen so farre out of order, and howe they haue conuerted the The clergie abused the churche goodes. same to better vses, as fyndyng of Scooles and releuing of the poore. Where agayne it is well knowne, howe men of the contrary relygiō heape vp the churche goodes, and abuse them to all voluptuousnes, & yet nothyng spokē of: furthermore, you your selfe haue made decrees, bothe at Regenspurg, and lately at Spier, how, for a common quiet, those goodes oughte to be vsed: Nowe incase there be any man, that hathe not obserued a measure herein, we doubte not, but yf the same were called forthe, and heard speake, he wolde abyde iudgement, and geue none occasyon, that Germanye shulde therefore be layde waste through warre. They obiect to our men, that they haue subuerted the ministration of iustice: but you are not ignorant, moste mightye Em∣peroure, wherfore they haue cōplayned of the iudges of the chamber, and howe ernestly they haue desyred a redresse, whiche albeit, it hath ben ofte promised, yet neuer came it to effecte. Therfore for the preser∣uation of peace, you did displace them lately at Spier, takynge order howe the Chamber shoulde hereafter be established: Which order we were alwayes cōtent to obeye, and so declared at Wormes: but oure aduersaryes did vtterlye refuse it (and sayde) they had rather haue no iudgement at all: therfore is all the blame of this matter to be impu∣ted vnto them: Finally we could neuer perceiue that euer any of oure league frēdes did aspire or couet your office, or wēt aboute to oppresse
others, or els boasted or threatened to woorke any kynde of violence. And certenly we beleued that these thynges be beatē in to your head by the Byshop of Roome and his ministers for the hatred, which they beare to relygion: Howbeit we doe suppose, that you haue perceyued our good wil towardes you, by the warres which you haue had with foreine nations: And wold god he that incenseth you nowe agaynste vs, had borne you euer the same good will, that we doe: for then had The good∣wyll of the Protestātes toward thē∣peroure. some warres either not ben attempted at al, or els much soner ended. Nowe in those seditions and warres, that haue chaunced in Germa∣ny, synce you were Emperoure how they haue demeaned themselues towardes you, and howe frankly oure men haue geuen theyr ayde a∣gaynst the Turke, it is openly knowen, and chiefely for the defence of youre countries of Austriche. Forasmuche therfore as we doubt not, but those states are free, and giltles in those crimes, whych are repor∣ted vnto you, and yf they might be heard, were able to declare theyre innocency, before you and all others, we moste ernestlye requyre you most merciful Emperoure, and father of the countrie, and for the loue of God, and for the preseruation of Germany beseche you, to laie aside thys so great preparation, and to call them before you in iudgemente, that are so heynously complayned vpon to your hyghnes, accordynge to the auncient maner to your predecessours accustomed, whiche we trust that you will not omitte, And yf you thus doe, we put no doubt, but that you shall soone perceyue how they haue suffered iniurye, and beare there greate good wylles towardes you. And in thys consulta∣tion, beholde, we beseche you, the miserable state of Germany, both by reason of the continuall dearth of thynges, and also for that terrible & cruell enemye the Turke: consyder what fydelytie bothe theyr elders haue shewed to your auncetours, and they also vnto you and to kyng Ferdinando your brother, whan bothe agaynste the Turke, & against youre other enemies they haue sent you more aide thā any other haue donne, whyche they doe not refuse to doe nowe also: Ponder & weye with your selfe, what a mortall warre thys wylbe, what calamitie & euilles shall redounde therby to the innocente people, as chyldren, in∣fantes, women and suche other lyke: And doe not, through theyr per∣swasion, whyche for mainteyning theyr rule and power, doe malygne An heape of euylles of ci∣uill warre. our men, brynge the matter to that passe, that the noble countrey of Germany, or any parte therof, vnto you doubtles moste addicted be∣ynge wasted through her owne force, and sore afflicted, be not able a∣ny longer to resyste, and withstande the Turkishe violence. Wherfore we ryght humbly beseche youre excellencye, that you wolde complish oure request: we shall take the same in steade of a great benefyte, and yf there shalbe any man, which after the matter hearde, will refuse to obey you contrarye to lawe and equitie, we will not only not allowe
his doynges, but wil asmuch as lieth in vs, ayde you, our high prince, and Magistrate, geuen vs of God, and euermore showe all dew obe∣dience. Duke Moris which came to Regēspurg the .xxv. daie of May, Thēperoure had secrete talke with Duke Moris after he had long and much talked with themperoure priuely, depar∣teth the .xx. daye of Iune. But what theffect of theyr communication was, the thinge itselfe shal after declare. Whan the Ambassadours of the Protestantes saw that all thinges tended to warre and violence, neyther that they could with out daunger, eyther consult of thynges nedefull, or wryte home to theyr states, they cōueyhed themselues one after another, and retourned home. At the Ides of Iune, Thempe∣roure sent hys Ambassadour, Iohn Muschet, treasurer of hygh Bur∣gundie to the Swysses, and in the preface speakynge of hys loue and Thempe∣rours anbas∣sadour to the Swysses. zeale towardes the common wealth, namely of Germanie, and desire of peace: he sayeth therbe certē princes of Germanie, which vnder the pretence of the Gospell, doe many thynges seditiousely, and subuert al lawes, that when there is no iudgement, they nede not to feare what they doe: Whose boldenes now hath so far proceded, that they attēpte thynges agaynst his office and dygnytie, and threaten him with war and violence, and are non otherwyse lyke, but that in hys absēce, they intende to inuade and oppresse the common countrey: for the whyche considerations, he is constrained to moue warre, that for the dignitie of hys place and office, he maye repulse the daunger from the commō welth, and restrayne them from doing such outerage, neyther distru∣steth he, but that God will further his enterpryse: And supposeth also, that other states whose welth consysteth herein will assiste him with their ayde ad counsel: wherfore he requireth them, that they wold not be otherwyse perswaded by hys aduersaryes, which hatefully & spite∣fully deuyse many thinges agaynst him, neither that they atempt any matters through theyr perswasion, or permit ought to be done with in theyr limites, wherby this his enterprise might be impeched or hin∣dered, For this warre is taken in hande for the welth of al Germany, and for non other cause: Let them remayne therfore in the olde amy∣tie and league, which is betwixt them: For he will doe nothing to the contrary, nor suffer that any of hys shall, and whan occasion shal serue he wyll shew them all loue and fauoure, as in dede he hathe done hy∣therto: whiche thinge may be diuersely perceyued, but chiefly in thys, that he neuer made league, with other kynges & states, but they were comprised in the same. The Cities of hygh Germanye, and the Duke of Wirtemberge, hearing of Themperours aunswer that was geuen The Cyties of Wirtem∣berge puton armure. by Nauius, as before is specifyed, immediatly sendyng their letters to the Duke of Saxon & the Lantzgraue, the captaynes of their league shew what is nedefull to be donne, and promiseth al theyr aide & fide∣litie, doe leuie as many bandes of fotmen, as they were able to make:
and were in the felde the fyrste of al men. And theyr armie was deui∣ded in two partes: the one company was the Dukes of Wertemberg conteining .xxiiij. enseignes of foote men, and amonges thē wer many noble gentle men: The other was hyred of the Cities. When all these were assembled at Ulmes, the .xxi. day of Iune they marche to Gun∣sperge, and the nexte daye whan they were mustred, encamped in se∣uerall places. Theyr Captaines were Iohn Hedecke, Scherteline, Balthazar Gutling, Sebastian, Besserer, Mathew Langemantell, Iohn Harder, and Ioyce Roseberge. They doe fyrst bynde the pow∣ers of the Cities, by an othe, as the maner is, charging them to follow and obey Scherteline, vntill the Princes them selues come, that be Captaynes of the confederacie. Than going to the Dukesmen, when they had done lykewyse, they appointe Hedecke their captayne, after the same sorte. That done, Balthazar Gutling a noble mā borne and The oraiion of Balthazar to the soldi∣ours. counsellour to the Duke of Wirtemberge, by the consente of the reste, speaking to hys princes soldiours: My derely beloued fellowes (saieth he) Sathans Uicar the Bishop of Roome intendeth againe to kindle such a fyre, as shall inflame & burne all Germany, the natyle countrey of vs all, and vtterly distroye the same: For bothe the wonderfull ha∣tred that he beareth to trew relygiō, and also the desyre of vengeaūce, for the calamytie receyued in the fourmer yeres by the Almaignes, when Rome was taken and sacked, doe moue him herunto. Therfore hathe he styred vp Charles the most puissaunte Emperoure, to attēpt warre against our princes & states, that ar lincked in a godly league, trusting, that through violence & great crueltie, they shall cōpell them to the seruice and obseruaunce of theyr wicked and deuelish religion. For it is reported for certentie, howe that proude and detestable bōd∣slaue of the Deuil, hath leuied already no small force bothe of horsemē & foormen, which he wil send to Thēperoure: We heare for a treweth also of yt approching of Spaniardes: But what euilles will enswe to our cōmon countrey, by foreine soldiours, what distructiō, & mischief, euery man of vnderstanding may easely perceiue: Therfore our prin∣ces, & states, forasmuch as they knew it to be their dewtie, not only to repulse al violence & iniurie frō the people of theyre dominiōs, but al∣so to trauel & forsee, that they be not desceaued with false religiō, & run in daunger of euerlasting dānatiō, are wholy prefixed, through gods help, to defend this war, which is moued against thē, not only beyōde al expectatiō, but also contrary to conenauntes & promesse. And ther∣fore haue hyred you & others moe with al the spede that might be: but in asmuch as the chieftanes of the leage are yet absent, & wilbe heare within these few dayes, the most noble prince of Wirtemberge, Duke Ulriche, to thentent that in the meane time, the whole matter may be gouerned by an order, neyther that yt enemie may espie any occasiō to
hurt vs, hath appoynted to be your Captayne, Iohn Hedecke a man of a noble house and parentage. Wherfore hym you shall obeye, and so demeane your selues in all thinges, that the same worthye and nota∣ble fame, whiche oure elders in tymes past haue goten in sondry bat∣tels, foughtē with foreine nations, not without much māhod & blud∣shed, may be also bequethed to oure ofspryng and posterytie: Al other∣thynges we shal committe to almyghtie god, who doubtles in this so iuste a cause, and godly defencion, will prepare suche meanes for vs, as vnto his diuine maiestie, shal seme good and expedient. I told you before howe the Protestantes ambassadours departed from Regen∣spurge whan there was no longer place of consultation there: But now that their armie was leuyed, as we haue here shewed they assē∣bled at Ulmes, to consult what is to be donne. Wherfore the .xxi. day The Prote∣stātes letters to the Uene∣tians. of Iune, they adresse theyr letters to the Duke and state of Uenyse & complayning of the iniurie of the Bishop of Roome, desyre them that they wold not suffer hys force to passe through theyr dominion, and if the Bishoppes power shulde be augmented, they shew by the exam∣ples of fourmer tyme, what they, and other people in Italie may loke for. They dispatche theyr letters also to the moste of the noble men in Germany, and admonishe them, that they doe not stop the soldiours, that repare vnto them. Agayne, because they of Rhatia and Tirall, were sore vexed, for the commyng of foreine soldiours, the laste day of Iune they exhort them by their letters, not to suffer them to passe, and hereunto promise them ayde. They are also assistaunce of the Cytie of Norimberge (but they saye) they cannot, for that they haue skante mē sufficient to defend theyr owne frontiers. Moreouer they commaund Scherteline the second daye of Iuly, to inuade the enemies that wer in mustering vnderneth the Alpes. And finally send Ambassadours to the Swisses. I shewed you before of the Cardinall of Trente, whō Themperoure sent so hastely inpost to Roome. Wherfore through his A leage bee∣twyxte the Pope & the Emperoure solliciting, the league, whiche before was conceaued and penned, the xxvi. daye of Iune is decreed vpon these couenauntes. Forasmuch as Germany hathe nowe these many yeres perseuered in great errours, in somuch that a great daūger is to be feared therby, for theschewing wherof the counsel was called at Trent and commenced the last yere past in the moneth of December: and the Protestantes doe reiect the same, and saie it concerneth them nothyng, therfore hathe the Bishop and Themperoure, for gods glory, and for the preseruatiō of the pub∣lycke weale, but chiefly of Germany, concluded betwene them selues vpon certen cōdicions. And fyrst in dede that Themperoure shall pre∣pare an armye and althynge nedefull for the warre, in the moneth of Iune next enswyng, and that he be furnished with all thynges, and that such as refuse that counsell, & maynteyne those errours, he reduce
by forte of armes to the olde relygion, and obedience of the holy See: but yet that he do endeuour and proue al meanes, yf he can bring it to passe without warre: That he make no peace nor composition with them, that shalbe preiudiciall or hurtefull to the churche or relygion: The Bisshop, besydes those hundreth thousande Dukates, whyche he hathe alreadye defrayde, shall laye downe as muche more at Uenise, whych after hys Lieuetenauntes shall imploye vpon the warres and to no other vse: And that yf no warres be, he shall receyue hys money agayne: Moreouer he shall furnyshe Themperour in this warre with twelue thousand fotemen of Italians and fyue hondreth lyght hors∣men at hys owne charges for a halfe yeres space, ouer which power, he shal place a Lieutenaunt Captaines and Centurions: And if it for∣tune the warre to be finished, before the end of syxe monethes, to take the commoditie therof: It shalbe lawfull for Themperoure this yere, by the Byshop of Romes permissiō, to take the one halfe of the church goodes in Spayne, moreouer it shalbe lawful for hym to sell as much Abbey landes in Spayne, as shal amounte to the summe of fyue hun∣dreth The church goodes in Spayne to be imployde herein. thousande Dukates, and all thys only for the mayntenaunce of this warre, but yet vpon condicion, that he laie to thē againe in mort∣gage so mutch of hys owne landes: And because the thing is straūge, he shal make them sufficient warrantise, at the arbitrement of the bis∣shop: If any man wyll impeche or let thys theyr enterprise, hym shall they ioyntly resyst with bothe theyr forces, and the one help theother, and they bothe to be bounden thus to doe, so longe as the warre shall indure, & syxe monethes besydes, after that the warre shalbe finished: it shall be free for euery man to ioyne hym selfe vnto thys league, and to be both partaker of the charges & the gaine: This composition also shall the Senate of Cardinalles confyrme, and that which is spoken of Iune, to be vnderstande of the moneth of Iune thys present yere, wherin they bothe haue subscribed now to the leage before cōceaued. The copie of thys confederacie the Bishoppes legate, Hierome Frāch shewed after to the Swisses, as shalbe declared in his place. Aboute thys tyme was a peace concluded betwene Fraunce and Englande, Peace be∣twixt fraūce and Englād. and the French king permitteth the kyng of Englande to enioye Bo∣logne vntill suche tyme as he hath payed hym hys money dewe. And where at the same tyme Hēry the Dolphin had a daughter borne cal∣led after Isabell, for the better confyrmation of that frendeshyp, the kyng of England was desyred to be godfather at the fountstone who sent hys deputie into Fraunce. Sir Thomas Cheynie knight, Lorde Warden of Cinke portes. Then also was the Cardinal of Saint An∣drewes The Cardi∣nall of Scot∣land slaine. in Scotlande in hys owne Castell aboute diner tyme, slayne by a certen gentleman, whose brother he had euyll intreated for Lu∣theranisme. And he that did the murther fled into Englād. The third
daie of Iuly the byshop of Rome sendeth his letters to the Swisses, & threatning vpō them kindnes, for the frenship that had ben betwene The Popes letters to the Swisses. thē & his predecessours, he bewayleth, that som of thē, are through the disceipt of the deuil, & law breakers, plucked from the apostolicall re∣lygion & frō him, as the most deare children out of the bosom & armes The teares of the Cro∣codile. of a most louing father: Notwithstanding it is the great gift of God, that many of them haue perseuered cōstant in the faith towards god & the church, to thintēt verely that others, which through the talke of wicked men, haue ben disceaued, should haue an exāple set before their eyes, & at the length conuert vnto the religion of their forefathers: for it is a great token of gods goodnes, that in this discention of religiō, they be at peace with in themselues, wherin other places, for this oc∣casion hath ben great sedition & tumultes: The whiche to appease, he hath euer since he was first bishop, vsed al ye gentle remedies he could deuise, and now also is fled to the last refuge, calling a generall coun∣sel at Trent, a Towne of Germany, within the limites wherof, this euil sede of heretikes hath chiefly increased: vnto the whiche Towne they might safly com, and there defend their matters, yf they wold: for he trusted, that inso sacred a senate, to the which alwaies all christen kinges and nations, haue attributed very much, & in the assemble of so many bishoppes, which through the instinctiō of the holy ghost, shuld treate of religiō, no man wold be so wicked, that he wold not submit him selfe to so great an authoritie, and which shuld not incontinently casting awaie his wicked opinions, imbrace the iudgement of the ca∣tholicke church: And that he hath now also the same opinion of them, and by reason of theyr concord at home, hath good hope that so many of them as haue continewed faithful and constant, will obey the coū∣sell, and that the rest, which of no set purpos, but through a certen cre∣dulytie, haue ben broughte into errour, will not dispyse the authoritye of the counsel: which thing that they wold doe, & come vnto the coun∣sell, as vnto a certen heauenly Senate, ouer the which God himselfe is presydent, he exhorteth them moste ernestly, as he hathe donne also before: And sayeth howe it hathe ben a greate grief to hym, that dy∣uerse in Germany, yea, of the same number, that are called Prynces, whyche not only doe proudely and insolently contemne the counsell, but also bayte it with cursed and raylyng wordes, and saye how they wil not obey the decrees therof. But he was chiefly sory for this cause that through the contumacie & disobedience of these obstinate persōs, he is dryuen to attempt the matter by warre: For he coulde no longer The Pope attempteth the matter by force of armes. suffer ye losse of so many soules, whych through theyr heresies, perished dayly, nor yet the oppression of christians, wherof that other belōgeth to his office pastorall, and this to the dignitie of the degre wherin he is placed: And whyleste he was thynkynge vppon a remedye, and
prayed God, to shew hym the waye, it chaunced luckely, that Them∣perour, a prynce of most godly zeale, offended with the like faultes in a maner, that he was, thought good to auenge the cause of religiō, a∣gainst those wicked heretikes, by force of armes: For where as by his intercession and meanes, a counsell was graunted vnto Germany, it semed vnto him, that such as refused and contemned that, dispised al∣so his doing & authoritye: wherfore this occasion offered euen of god, he tooke holde of it right gladly, & prefixed him self to further this no∣ble myde of Themperoure, as wel with his owne treasure, as also of the church of Rome: for if he shuld otherwise do, & handel ye thing neg∣ligently & slackly, ther is no doubt, but god wold require at his hādes, as of their father, the soules of somany children, as wer lost throughe the falsehead of heretickes: and for this cause doeth he open his mind & counsell vnto them, that they maye see, with what carefulnes he is vered, and may ioyne theyr prayers with his, that is, with God & re∣ligion: They haue don verely many godly actes, but neuer non more noble then this, if they wil kepe the olde amitie with god as their el∣ders haue don, if they shew to the churche of Rome, which hathe euer don for them, their olde loue & fidelitie, yf in this now so godly a cause they wil geue theyr ayde & assistaunce: Which thing he desireth them: grealy, they wold doe: The ambassadours of the Protestantes in the vpper part of Germany come from Ulme to Baden to the conuentiō The Prote∣stantes Am∣bassadours to the Swis∣ses. of the Swisses, & declaring their message, were delaied to ye moneth of August. Their requestes were, that they wold suffer no foreine sol∣diours to passe through their countrey, & that they wold permit their men to serue them in their war, if the thing so required. At this time also, they of Brunswicke, Goslarie, Hildessem & Hanobrie, at the com∣maundement of the Duke of Saxon & the Lantzgraue, Rase Wuol∣butel, the chief castel of the Dukes of Brunswicke, which they had hi∣therto kept with a garnisō. The Paulsegraue, prince electour, in this The Pauls∣graue axeth the cause of the warre. hurly burly maketh suite to themperoure at Regenspurge, by his am∣bassadour, Sir Wuolsie Affesten, knight, to knowe what is the cause of this war & against whom the preparation is made: he desyreth him also to leaue warre, & besech him to geue him licence to be an interces∣sour in the cause. A few daies after, themperour maketh him aunswer by Granuellan and Nauius, that it is not hard for him, to know both what is the cause, & whom the war concerneth. After, he reciteth the same thinges in effecte that he did before in his letters to the Cities, A pretence of mouing war that they obey him not, that they haue practised thinges against him in Germani, and in forein nations, vnder the pretence of religiō, how they wilbe bounden to no lawes, take other mens goodes and posses∣ons bothe sacred and prophane, styre vp other states to Rebellion, re∣iecte the Decrees of Thempire, and woorke altogether by crueltye and a kynde of Tyrranye: Therefore he purposeth in thys Warre
to appease not only relygion, but all other displeasures in lyke case, & restore peace & libertie vnto Germany, and such as shal do their dew∣tie to defend through his protection, and those that be disturbers of ye cōmon quiet, & be oppressours of libertye to punnish sore and extrem∣ly according to theyr demerites. This aunswer of Themperoure, the The Palse∣graue seketh to reconsile the protestāt to Thempe∣roure, Paulsgraue, the tenth day of Iuly, when it was brought him the day before, sendeth to the Duke of Saxō, the Lantzgraue, & the Duke of Wirtemberge, & declaryng the common daunger, that hanged ouer Germany, especially by the straunge soldiour, if the war should waxe mortal, he besecheth them, to condescend & graunt to as much as they maye: For albeit the likelynes of thinges is sharpe & sorrowfull to be holde, yet he supposeth, that in case they wold make their submissiō to Thēperoure, & follow his mynd in certen thinges, it wolde be agreat furtheraunce to bryng the matter to a concord. And these be thinges, wherby he perceiueth Themperoure wilbe appeased, fyrst if they wil craue perdon for theyr offence, secondly, if any mā hath don any thing vniustly, that it be amēded: fynally, yf they possesse ought of any other mans, that they wold permit that to Themperoure, or to some other as they shall thynke mete: Wherin if he maye doe any good, he promi∣seth hys fayth & trauaile. In the meane time the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue, to whom this soden tumult chaunced much vnloked Duke of Saxon and the Lentz∣graue prepa∣reth to war. for, especially, for that themperour lately departed so frendly frō Spi∣er, being aduertised of the whole matter, with great diligence gather theyr forces also, and warne their fellowes to do the lyke, & not to suf∣fer thēselues to be diswaded, through the craftie counsel of certē. And whan they were assembled to take counsell, the fourthe daye of Iuly sendyng their letters to themperoure, we haue heard (they saye) most mercyful Emperoure, by our Ambassadours sent at your cōmaunde∣ment to Regenspurg, how what time they had heard of preparation Their let∣ters to Thē∣peroure. for warre, the fellowes of our league & religion did sollicite you dilly∣gently, that you wold force, that Germany susteined no dōmage: And albeit you aunswered so at that tyme, that we myght wel suspect som¦thing, yet wer we in a good hope, yt the same war had not ben moued against vs, or any state of thempire, for so much as being called of you to that assēblie, we sent our ambassadours thither with ful authoritie who also consulted vpon your demaundes, & shewed, what their ad∣uise was, in so much as we could suspect no displeasure: moreouer that aunswer of youres, doeth cōcerne thynges past, but yet to come, whi∣lest you saye that you will establishe the common welth, & accordyng to youre authoritie, punnishe those that shalbe disobedient: Wherfore we could not thinke, that before you had published your demaundes, and before we had made any aunswer, you wold haue prepared war: But at lengthe, whan by manye coniectures, and chyefely by youre
letters, adressed to certen prynces and Cities, and also by the wordes of Granuellan, and talke of Nauius, we perceyued that youre pur∣pose was to punyshe certen Prynces that were disobedyent, and the brute was euerye where, that the warre was bente agaynste vs we tooke it in dede heuely, and greuousely as becommeth vs no lesse, and thought good to sende thys epistle to you, to pourge oure selues. And fyrste, we are truly able to affirme, that we & oure leagefrendes haue alwayes dorne the common charges imposed vpon vs more than o∣thers, whan some also haue gonne free: Moreouer, the ayde, that you desyred in the last assemblie at Spier, we found the meanes that you had them graunted, and perfourmed the same oure selues: And now that after all these seruices donne, we shulde be charged with disobe∣dience, it doeth not only greue vs, but is also muche displeasaunt and bytter: We wolde haue wished surely, and it had ben also reasou, that we shulde fyrst haue ben accused and hearde, before it had commen to hande strypes and that oure accusation had ben thus blased abrode: For so shulde we bothe easely haue proued our owne innocencye, and cōfuted theyr sklaunder, that of vs to you haue thus cōplayned: How louingly you dealt with vs, bothe lately at Spier, and also fiue yeres synce at Regenspurge, it is openly knowen, so that to vs can be obiec∣ted no rebellyon, or dede vnworthy: we will omytte that, at youre re∣quest, we put the possession of the Dukedome of Brunswicke, to arbi∣terment one yere paste, and were in daunger therby to haue lost oure lyues and goodes: Furthermore you are not ignorant, what time you wer created Emperoure at Frankefurt, in what sort you bound your selfe to Thempyre, what you promised by a moste sacred othe, howe Thēperoure periured. your doynges shulde be accordyng to the lawes of the Empyre, whā any such crime, as you now obiect vnto vs, shuld be layd to any mans charge: And where you intende to worke violence agaynst vs before oure matter be hearde or knowen, we will committe that vnto god, and when we shall heare, of what matters you doe accuse vs, we shal so make aunswer, that all men shall vnderstand, that we bothe suffer iniurye, and that you also, through the instigation of the Roomish an∣tichrist, and the wicked counsell of Trent, do attempt this war, to the intent both the doctrine of the gospell, & also the libertie of Germanye The au∣thors of this war. may be oppressed, and wil proue that there is none other cause: the cō∣dicion & state of our thinges requyreth, that we shuld thus muche de∣clare vnto you: you shall take it therfore in that part. For it had ben a a great deale more pleasaunt for vs, to haue gratifyed you, and appro∣ued our fauour and dilligence. Themperoure, the seuēth of Iuly, wri∣ting Thēperours letters to the Archebishop of Collon. letters to the Archebishop of Collon, for the welth of Germany, (sayeth he) that is to saye, that common quiet, right, & equitie, the dig∣nitie of this our office & libertie of Thempire may be recouered, which
thynges in dede, certen seditious persons, haue almoste expulsed out of the cōmon welth and vnlesse they should be restrayned, wold take them cleane a waye, I am constrayned to attempte war, that I may reduce them to theyr dewtie: And for as muche as I heare saye, how they goe aboute all that euer they can, to allure you, & others to their fellowship, I commaund you, fyrst, that throughout your whole pro∣uince you let proclame, and doe foresee that no man serue in this war, vnlesse he serue me and my captaynes suche as shall haue commission to shewe, secondly, yf any be gonne foorthe already to serue, that you call them againe immediately, and commaund them to tary at home, and attende vpon our commaundement: And suche as will not obey, that you punnish them extremelye, & so demeane youre selfes, that I maye perceyue, that you loue the quyet of Germany: except you thus doe, know for certentie, that it shalbe to your great daunger, & losse of all that you haue. These letters, whan the Archebishop had receiued, he published in all places, and commaunded they shuld be obeied: Be∣sydes he gaue commaundement that they shulde praye in Churches, that God of hys mercy wolde tourne awaye the greate daunger that nowe hanged ouer Germany. At the same tyme the Protestantes sēd their ambassadours, to the kinges of Fraunce and England, newely reconciled, making suite to them for ayde. After the Duke & the Lātz∣graue had wrytten thus to Themperoure priuately, as before is sayd, at yt Ides of Iuly, they set forth a publicke writing also, wherin they Thēperours polycie. declare, howe thys warre is made againste Religion, and this to bee Themperours intent, that vnder a serten pretence of rebellyō, and as though he wolde punnysh but a fewe, he myght plucke awaye the fel∣lowes of the league, one from an other, and so muche the more easelie at the length subuert them all. And hereof they bryng manye proues, and reporte what kynge Fernando, what Granuellan, what Naui∣us and others spake priuately at Regenspurge, verelye that the con∣tempt of the counsell was cause of thys warre. Moreouer (they saye) howe Themperoure sent commaundement to them of Rauensburge, whyche had lately receyued the doctryne of the Gospell, that within a few dayes they shuld for sake theyr enterpryse, or els wolde he geue theyr Citie and Landes to be deuyded amonges the Soldiours: but the Messager was called backe with the letters by the waye, leste it shuld come forthe a brode that the war were agaynst relygion: Foras∣much also as the byshop of Rome hath geuē sentēce against I ye Arch∣bishop of Collon, for the reformatyō of doctrine & hath depriued him of The Cardi∣nall of Aus∣purge the firebrand of thys warre. hys dignitie, & for that Thēperoure in a maner doeth & threatneth the same, doeth not yt sufficiētly declare the cause of the war? For it is a cō∣mon brure, how theyr drift is, yt the Cardinal of Auspurg, who hath set this matter a fyre, shall throughe violence be substituted in hys place:
It is reported moreouer, that when they bee vanquished, bandes of Soldiours shalbe placed in all partes of Germany, whych in Them∣perours name, shall see the decrees of the counsell concernyng relygi∣on maynteyned and put in execution: Furthermore, it is wrytten by dyuers men, howe the Archebysshop of Toledo chiefly, and such other prelates in Spayne, do geue a great summe of monye to thys warre which they wold not haue donne, if it had not ben for religion: It is wel knowen also, what maner of decree was made at Auspurge .xvi. yeres synce, what tyme Themperoure protested, that he could not a∣byde thys secte and doctryne of Luther, but that to distroye the same vtterly, he wold bestowe all hys force, treasure, lyfe and blud also: For yf they were once oppressed, as God forbid, than shuld it quickely ap∣pere, whether they wolde spare thys religion, and wolde not rather slaye the ministere of the churche, inforce theyr wyues and their chil∣dren, and restore Monkes and Freers and all that relygious rabbell: But Themperoure may not lawfully worke force agaynst any state, nor bannish any man, before his cause behearde, nor bryng foreyn sol∣diours within the bondes of Germany, or chaleng to hym self any in∣herytance or succession belonginge to thempire: For he is bounden to these condicions, and hath confyrmed them by an othe: For yf it were lawful for him to doe otherwise, the state of the publycke weale could not long endure: And what cause of displeasure shulde haue agaynste them, they cannot in the worlde perceiue: For touching me (saieth the Duke of Saxon) what so euer dissention was betwene him, his bro∣ther Fernando, and me it was wholy quenched, two yeares paste, at Spier, and for a nerer frendship, the lady Elenore daughter to kynge Ferdinando, was promised freely to my eldest sonne, so that we could agree in religion. The same did Themperoure than cōfyrme, & what tyme I shoulde retourne home from that assemblie, he sent to me into my owne lodging Granuellan & Nauius, & with moste large wordes offered all good wil and frendship to me, and my children & my whole countrey. And what great cryme haue I commytted synce that time, that he should intēd this crueltie against me? But doubteles the mat∣ter is euē so, as we haue shewed you before: because we refuse the bis∣shoppes counsell, we incurred displeasure: But reason wolde, that he shulde not imagine these thinges againste the house of Saxon: For he knoweth, how, after the death of Maximilian, mine vncle Duke Fri∣dericke, hauing the crowne imperiall offered hym, through hys voyce Duke Fride¦ricke chosen Emperoure. and meanes gaue it vnto hym, to omitte in the meane tyme many o∣ther benefites which the house of Saxon hathe imploied on the house of Austriche. And in case he were offended for putting Iulius Pūu∣gius from the Bishopricke of Nunburge, I haue in bookes setfoorthe declared my ryght and tytle of Patronage, and if Themperour wold
appoynte indifferent iudges, offered to abyde theyr iudgment. Nowe concerning my owne parte (sayeth the Lantzgraue) I was through∣ly reconciled to hym fyue yeres synce at Regenspurge. And for that I intended a fewe yeares past to haue warred on certen Bisshops, and for that afterwardes I did helpe my cosyn the Duke of Wirtemberg, to recouer hys owne, all thys and what so euer I had haply don be∣sydes agaynste the lawe wrytten or decrees of Thempire, eyther pri∣uely or apartely, it was for geuen me, and wrytinges made therof, cō∣firmed with handes and seales: Therfore can not I deuise or imagin what should be the cause of thys grudge: Againe whan I spake with him nowe lately at Spyre, he shewed hym selfe so frendelye bothe in wordes and countenaunce, that I could perceyue no sparke of displa∣sure. And it was couenaunted fyue yere synce at Regenspurge, that if he shuld attēpt any thyng herafter agaynst the Duke of Cleaue, that I shuld not meddle in the matter: After, he moued war agaynst him, and I kept touche and promise: And than what time he receyued the same Duke agayne to hys fauoure, whiche was before Uerlone, he perdoned all yt had serued or assisted hym with ayde. But yf he should take in euill parte our absence, that we came not our selues to Regē∣spurge: we haue bothe made oure excuse, the Duke by hys Ambassa, dours, and I by presente talke with hym at Spier. But what is then the lybertye of Germany, or state of ye publicke weale, yf we must haue warre therfore, whan bothe in others heretofore, and also in this con∣uention nowe at Regenspurge, many other Prynces are absent: And as for the warre of Brunswicke, we are not to bee blamed: For it is lawfull for all men, to saue them selues from violence. We haue often It is lawsul to repulse a violence. tymes desyred in sondry assemblies, that hys vyolence myghte be re∣streyned: but more than wordes & letters we could obteyne nothing: And yet in those letters, whych Fernando at our request wrote herof to Duke Henry openly, wer other letters inclosed, wherby he myghte easely perceyue, that he neded not to obeye the others. These Letters were founde in the castel of Wuolsbuttell, subscribed with the kinges owne hande, and are foorth commynge, and nede be: But in case the lyke seueritie had ben extended to the Duke of Brunswicke, as them∣peroure sheweth nowe vnto vs, albeit we haue not deserued it, there had ben no warre at all: But in asmuche as he impugned vs, who for the profession of the Gospell doe susteyne greate hatred, they coulde winke at hys myscheuous actes. And Thēperoure knoweth, how we commytted the prouince taken, to gardience, and for the defence takē in hande we offered our selues to abyde the order of the lawe, and ar∣bitrement by hym appoynted: yf he would haue taken the same way, and had not, forsaking the Arbiterment and contemnyng Thempe∣rours order, attēpted a new warre, but wolde haue tryed the matter
with vs by the lawe, the way had ben easy enoughe. For if we, being conuict in iudgement, had not obeyed, than shulde Themperour haue had iuste cause to put the lawe in execution: but nowe, that he shulde thus doe, he hath not at al. Finally, from the time that this Duke and his son were taken, themperoure did neuer demaunde thing of vs for the same: therfore there is no cause, wherfore we should be accused for negletynge oure dewtie. And in case it shoulde bee ascribed to vs, as though we shuld impeache the law, then haue we to muche wronge. For in asmuche as of many yeres now, those only were receiued to be iudges of the chamber, whych hated our religiō most bitterly, for that The iudges of the Chā∣ber be Pa∣pistes. the same iudges, all cōpositions set a part, gaue sentence against vs & our fellowes in matters of religion, & also in ciuill causes wolde let vs haue no iustice, we did, as we myght doe euen by order of lawe, neces∣sarely and lawfully refuse them, as suspected & our aduersaries, prote∣styng that we wold declare more at large the causes of the refusal, be∣fore chosen iudges. Therfore can there nothing be imputed vnto vs in this be halfe: Moreouer two yeres past it was decried at Spier, that the chamber shuld be establyshed vprightly, & why it was not so don, it cānot be ascribed to vs nor our fellowes: And it is not vnknowē to themperoure, how the last yere in the assēblie at Wormes ther did no man resist this decree of his more, than they themselues, whiche wyll seme to be loyall & obedient princes, for this intent verely, that where as they be oure aduersaries, they myght be oure iudges also. We doe heare moreouer that this is layed to our charge as much blame wor∣thy, that we seke to allure vnto vs certē of the Nobilitie: But maruell it is, that we should be reproued for this matter: For it is to be founde & proued, that this hath ben alwaies the maner in the dayes of oure forefathers, that they should ioyne vnto thē not only the gentelmen of their owne coūtries but the bishops also: And though there wersom fault therin, it is therfore lawful to moue warre against vs, our cause The leage betwixte the thre houses. not heard, and albeit, that in the league of in heritaunce, which is be∣twene the houses of Saxon, Brandenburg & Hesse, themperour is ex∣cepted, yet ought this to be so taken, if he do not abuse his authoritie. Wherfore, let Albert & Iohn of Brandenburge, cosins, who haue pro∣mised to serue Themperour against vs, consider with thēselues dilli∣gently, what they doe, & remēber their othe, wherwith they ar boūdē: we wold they shuld haue this knowledg and warninge, as they also, which being our clientes, take wages vnder thē in this war. Neither are they excused, if haply they wil say, how thēperour is pourposed to punnish certen princes for disobedience: For they knewe themselues, howe there can be no such thing imputed to vs iustly: But if Them∣peroure had accused vs of any crime, as reason wold haue requyred, & that we could not haue confuted the same, he shulde not haue neded
to vse all these polycies, and sollicite our fellowes to withdraw them∣selues from vs. For yf he coulde haue shewed our offence, they wolde haue forsaken vs, of theyr owne accorde, and in a cause that had not ben good, few wold haue a biden the commō daunger. Furthermore, what tyme we with the rest gaue hym ayde two yeres synce, against the Frence king, he promised than, that when that warre shulde be fi∣nished, he wolde goe into Hongary hymselfe agaynst the Turke. And nowe doe the Turkes inuade Hongary, and the places ther aboutes with great force & power, as in dede it is reported of many, & doubte∣les therbe in those parties both at Offen and Pest great garnisons of Turkes: But the poore mens liues of yt countrie are neglected, which are now cast vnto theyr enemyes, as a praye, and in the meane while they seke howe to make slaughter in Germanye, and that all thynge maye swymme full of theyr blud, that professe Chryst. And seing it is so, we trust surely, that moste men will pitie and lament our case, and wil not assist our aduersaryes, whiche seke only to extinguish the doc∣trine of the Gospell, as they haue donne in all others places of theyre dominions, and bring vs into extreme bondoge, but wilbe content for reasonable wages rather to followe oure campe, than theirs, wherin is the Romish Antichriste, and his adherentes, whose chyfe endeuour Thintent of the Papistes is thys, that euen with the slaughter of all Germany, they maye esta∣blish agayne, and confirme theyr wicked and deuelishe doctryne. And in asmuche as after muche intreatinge for peace beyng of no crime as yet cōuicted, we are enforced to warre, to defend our selues from vi∣olence, we trust that God will assist the treweth agaynst lyes and in thys hys cause, wilbe our hygh Emperour & enseigne bearer againste the wicked deuises of the bishop. Unto him verely doe we commit the whole matter, and beseche hym, to confounde the cruell counselles of blud thirsters, and euer more and more to auaunce the maiestie & glo∣ry of hys name. The same daye they wryte to Iohn Marques of Brā∣denburge: And because he is bothe in the league of the Protestantes, The Prote∣stātes letters to Iohn mar∣ques of brā∣denburge. as by his owne letters can be proued, and agayne in priuate confede∣racie with them of olde tyme, they admonishe hym, that he weare no armure agaynste them, but doe accordynge to the conuenauntes and bonde of league: for otherwise they will vtter the whole matter, & de∣clare openly, how farre agaynst hys dewtie, are hys doynges, Wher∣vnto he aunswereth, how he serueth Themperoure, he doeth not de∣nye, forasmuce as he hath put him oute of doubte, that he warreth not against religion: he is indede of the Protestantes league, but only by meane of the confession of Auspurge: As touchyng the pryuate league, therin is Themperoure excepted by expressed wordes: And seeyng it is so, there is no cause, why they shuld be offended with hys seruics, or to saye that he doeth ought agaynste hys faythe and promyse.
When that aunswer was geuen, they set foorthe a publycke writing, and amonges other thinges, they confute that, which he sayed of the confession of Auspurg, and proue by hys owne letters, that he is boū∣den to helpe them and theyr leagefrendes, yf the matter shuld come to suche a passe, albeit that any man did pretende & fayne an other cause of war agaynst thē, as thēperoure now doeth. Wherfore they admo∣nish dilligently almē, but chiefly captaines & soldiours, yt they serue not vnder him, which hath broken his faith. At ye Ides of Iuly the bishop publishing a wryting, & speaking much of his care & zeale towardes ye The Popes bull against the Prote∣stantes. common wealthe, & mens saluatiō, of the counsel begonne alreadie of the obstinacie of heretickes, which contemne and refuse the same, and haue moued warre agaynst all godly men, he exhorteth all men in ge∣nerall, to fast & praye vnto God, confesse theyr synnes, and euery man chose him a ghostely father where he lyste, and than receyue the sacra∣ment, to the intent that god intreated, may prosper this warre, which Themperoure and he haue nedefullye attempted, to roote out Here∣sies, and restore the peace of the Churche. And albeit Themperoures intent was, that leuying powers in euery place as secretly as might The diligēce of the Prote∣stantes in le∣uying theire armye. be, he might set vpon the Protestantes, before they wer prouyded, yet was theyr dilligence so greate, and the courage of men so cherefull to defend this warre, that at the .xvi. daye of Iuly the Lantzgraue was in the felde with hys men, not withstanding that in the lowe Duch∣land, Coūte de Bure had in maner hys whole armie in readines, nei∣ther was it certenly knowen, whom he wold first inuade. Before the Lantzgraue marched out of hys owne countrey, he sent William his eldest sonne of .xvi. yeres of age, to Strasburge, an exceading stronge The Lantz∣graue sent hys sonne to Strausburg Citie. At his departure from home, the Duke of Brunswicke his pry∣soner, sent him word, that if he wold geue hym the hearyng, he wolde open vnto hym, what tyme it was deuysed, and what thentente and pourpos of thys warre is: But the Lantzgraue, who supposed he said it but for a craft, eyther to lesson his owne offence, or to get hym liber∣tie, refused to talke with hym: And he wolde vtter it to no man but to hym selfe alone, The fyrst explocte that the Protestantes did in highe The fyrst en¦terprise of the Prote∣stantes. Germay, was agaynst the enemie vnder the Alpes. For where it was reported by sondry messagers, yt the bishop his power hauing already almost passed ye Alpes, approched nere Germany, they thought good to preuent them. And thus standeth the case. They that come oute of Italy, do passe by Trent, to Iusprincke, a Towne of king Ferdinan∣do. Frō thence is there two wayes to goe into Bauier, eyther downe the Riuer of Oeno, by Copsteyne, or els on ye left hād ouer the middes of the Alpes Kynge Fernando hathe almost at the going oute of the Alpes, the Castell of Erenberge situated vppon an exceadyng hyghe The Castell of Erēberg. mountayne, & the nature of the place is such, by reason of the straitnes
and holownes of the waye, and the headlong and pitchehill stepenes to looke dowewardes, that who so hath this passage, maye prohibit, beit neuer so great an armie for passing that way. Wherfore in the mo¦neth of Iuly thither wēt Sebastiā Scherteline with a meane pow∣er at the commaundement of the Protestantes Ambassadours, assē∣bled at Ulmes, as I sayde before, and by the waye takinge Fiessa, a Towne of the Cardinalles of Auspurge, which standeth on the riuer of Leyche, the tenth daye of Iuly, taketh also that foresayde passage & Castel, by composition made, with the soldiours of the garrisō with∣in. His intent was, to haue marched on through the Alpes, & to haue taken also Insprucke, and fortyfyed it with a strong garryson: For so shulde he haue kept both waies, wherby they come out of Italye into Germany, and so shulde he haue shut vp Themperour from hauynge eyter soldiours or vitalles out of that partyes: But in thys greate tu∣multe, when by the commaundement of king Fernando all men wer called to armure in the countie of Tirol, there came a great power to Insprinke, vnder the leadyng of Fraunces Castelalte, gouernour of Trent, who leauing a garisō to defend the Towne, kept those waies Sherteline retireth. and passages. Wherfore Scherteline placing soldiours in the Castell of Erenberge, & Towne of Fiessa, retireth, & with hys force repareth to the armye assembled in high Germany aboute the Riuer of Danu∣bius called in duche Thonaw. The armie which Counte Hedeck led, taketh Dilling, a Towne and Castell of the Bishops of Auspurge, by composityon, and sweareth them to be trewe to hym the .xxiii. day of Iuly. Aboute the same tyme, Maurice Bishop of Eistet, sendeth Am∣bassadours to the Chieftaynes of the warre, praying them, that they wold spare him & his: he promiseth also to geue them passage through hys prouince, & vitaile by couenaunte. Beneth Dilling is the Towne of Donauerde, whiche being sommoned to render, had refufed. But Donauerde taken. what time the armie came before it, and the ordenaunce was plāted, they yelded vnto the protestantes. In the meane season the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue marche forward with theyr armie, and passing through Frankome, whan the Bishop of Wirciburge, had put them in sufficient suertie, not to stoppe theyr vitaile, they wente & ioy∣ned with theyr fellowes. At the same tyme in theyr Campe were the Ambassadours of the Marques of Brandenburge prince Electour, & of Duke Moris, sent about the permission of an in treatie: but where they referred the matter to theyr fellowes, there was nothing donne. Certen ryche men, that dwelt at Auspurge, had packed vp theyr short endes, and were gonne out of the Citie: And because the brute wente, that they lent Themperoure monie, the ambassadours that were thā at Ulmes, sending theyr letters & Messagers to the Senate of Aus∣purge, shewe howe vnworthye a dede this is, and admonish them er∣nestly,
that they wold sorsee, that the like ben not don hereafter. The Senate maketh aunswer, howe they had long before, geuen out their monie for interest, as their maner is, because it shuld not be vnoccupi∣ed, knowing not of the warres: But now they suppose there is no mā, that geueth out hys monye to lone, nor none shalbe suffered to doe it vnpunnished, if they maye know it. Al this time was themperoure at Regenspurg, & besides thre thousand Spaniardes, & about fiue thou∣sand Thempe∣rours power fotemen of Almaignes, and seuen hundreth horsemen, he had no more power commen to him at that time. He had sent for the Spani∣ardes out of Hongary: And it were the same, whyche after the peace concluded with the French kyng, wintered in Lorayne, & after went through Germany into Hongary as I shewed you in the laste booke. The peace lately made betwene Fraunce & England, chaūced lucke∣ly for the Protestantes, for that the Almaignes which had serued the French king, came vnto thē, through the cōduite of Counte Bichling, & George recrode, which was client to the Lanzgraue. Thēperour, yt xx. day of Iuly, by his letters patens doeth outlaw ye Duke of Saxō The duke of Saxon and the Lantz∣graue ar out lawed by Thēperour. and the Lantzgraue. In the beginning he accompteth at large, what paynes he hath taken hytherto, yt Germany myght throughly be quy∣eted, what decrees he hath made for the same, that no force shulde be don to any man, for any kynde of matter, but that al thinges might be don by law and custom: Agayne, he sheweth, how the states of them∣pyre be bounden to him, and what fidelitie they ought to perfourme. But all these thinges (saieth he) neglected, Iohn Fridericke Electour of Saxonie, and Philip, Lanzgraue of Hesse, by a certen rash bolde∣nes, haue at all tymes, as muche as in them laye, hindred all oure tra∣uaile and paynes taken for the publicke weale, neyther haue they ben obedient, and haue not only them selues resisted vs, but haue also inti∣sed other states to doe the lyke, and with them to make vnlawful cō∣spiracies. And the Lantzgraue certen yeares past, pretending a cause I knew not what, attempted war against som of the chiefest states of thempire, and inuading their dominions, did extort agreat somme of monie. And after, they both together, set vpō an other prince of them∣pyre, the cause not knowen, and droue him out of his prouince, & kepte it to them selues. They haue also gotten into theyr owne. gouernmēt, sondry Bishoprickes and offices as well Ecclesiasticall as Ciuile, the Lordes wherof are of an auncyente custome vnder the iurisdiction of Thempyre, & haue theyr place in the consistory amonges other states, and as yet also, thoughe they haue ofte complayned and sued to vs in all assemblies, they deteine them styll in that seruitude. They haue al∣so spoyled many of theyr goodes and yerely reuenewes, and receyued into theyr tuition the clientes and subiectes of others.
And nowe lately also, throughe a certen singuler boldnes, haue solli∣cited diuers states, that they should not come at thys conuention, to thintent they myght let our procedynges and brynge vs in contempt. And all these thinges doe they so much the more boldely, for that they contemne iudgementes, and neyther acknowledge nor feare the ma∣gistrate: For throughe theyr fault the hyghe iudiciall place of Them∣pyre is taken awaye: the lawes kepe silence, and of a long tyme now there hathe ben no iustice ministred, to the great losse and domage of many, and after a straunge example, suche as hathe not ben hearde of before. And that which is worste of all, they worke all these thynges, The Prote∣stantes ac∣cused of trea∣son. vnder that goodly and pleasaunt name of Religion, peace, and lyber∣tie: For these vse they, as clokes, to couer theyr doinges, where they desyre nothyng lesse, than eyther the agrement of relygion, or of Ger∣many the peace and libertie: certes they can proue by neuer a place of scripture, that it is lawfull for them obstinately to resiste theyr hyghe Magistrate in any case: but the contrary is most manifest, aswell by holy scripture, as also by autenticke historyes, that those auncient pro∣fessours of the christen doctryne, which confirmed their faithe, not in wordes only, but also by theyr dedes and death, did obey heathē prin∣ces. Wherfore doubtles they ought much lesse to denie vs theyr dew∣tie, vnder the pretence of religion. And when they denie that, they de∣clare euidently, that theyr intente is, to take frō vs the crowne impe∣riall, scepter, and all oure authoritie, and vsurpe the same to thēselues, and when they haue confounded all thinges, to oppresse religiō, law, peace, and lybertye: And thus auaunced hyghly, with new honours and possessions, to bring all men vnder theyr tyrany. For this do their wordes testifye, ful of malicious threatninges, and also their famous libelles and pictures dispersed into all places, to the great mockerye & contempt of our name Moreouer, they haue not only made leagues againste vs, in those their conuenticles, but haue also styred vp forein kinges against vs, & secretly aided the same with theyr helpe & coūsel. Ther be somme olso that cantel what they haue attempted, to induce yt Turke into Germany. Which thing is the rather to be credited, for that the same shuld be verey fitte and commodious for their pourpos. Wherfore by these theyr doinges, they breake theyr allegeaunce, that they owe vnto vs, and infringe the dignitie of oure office, they reiecte all decrees, which they neuer estemed otherwyse, than yf they had bē made for thys intent, that others myght not repulse violence frō them selues, but that it were permitted to thē only, to doe iniurie to all mē. Therefore they haue fallen into that moste heynous crime of treason, and into the condygne punishement for suche an offence by the lawes prescribed. And because theyr doinges beknowen, there is no nede to declare thē. And albeit yt through the authoritie, yt we haue, we might
haue punnished them long synce, according vnto their demerites, yet for the loue of peace, and to auoyde trouble, we haue fauoured them verye muche, graunted to them ofte in many thynges, more also than became vs, and herin haue oftener than once hurte our owne consci∣ence, and minished oure authoritie, and not well prouyded for others. Thus did we fyue yeres synce at Regenspurge, deale moste gentlye with the Lantzgraue, & two yeres past at Spier with the Duke of Saxon, of thys hope verely, that they beyng vanquished through our great lenitie, pacience and clemencie, shulde at the length leaue theyr vngodly deuises, and shuld nede of no extreme remedy. But where in dede I perceyued, that this did no good at all, & that they abused our gentlenes, inasmuche as contemning the decrees of thempire, & brea∣king conuenauntes, they procede obstinately, & throughe a licencious lust to rule, take other mens landes & possessions, and wilbe bounden to no lawes: But seke, to subuert the whole state of ye publicke weale. And certenly, vnlesse they be first put to silence, neyther can Relygion be accorded, nor the other partes of the cōmon weale established and refourmed, we are constrayned to vse agaynst thē, the authoritie, that god hath geuen vs. And because theyr rebellion is manifest, insomuch as they themselues cannot denye, agayne, for that they woorke by vi∣olence, and will abyde no iudgment. Therfore doe we outlaw them, as false rebelles, seditious (of treason giltie) and disturbers of the cō∣mon quiet, and we are prefixed to punnishe them, as they haue deser∣ued, to thintente we maye haue libertie by them afterwarde, to esta∣blish the common wealth, and doe suche thynges, as properly concern our office: therfore we straytly charge and commaunde, that no man ayde thē in any case, neither take theyr parte: they that shall doe other wyse, shall in curre the daunger both of lyfe and goodes: And let such as are happely gon already to serue them, retourne as soone as they possible can. But let all men geue theyr ayde vnto vs, and fynde no let or cauillation throughe any league, or priuate conuenauntes. For we make all these thinges frustrate. Moreour we release all the No∣bilitie and commons of theyr dominions, of theyr allegeaunce & othe, wherby they are bounden to them, and assure them to be in saftye, yf they doe obeye: But suche as shall refuse, to be punnyshed, in lyke sort as they. The .xxii. daye of Iuly, Gerarde Uelduuiche is sente agayne from Regenspurg to Cōstantinople, frō whence he was but lately re∣tourned. Thēperour, whan nothing could here be determined, proro∣geth the conuentiō of thēpire vntil ye kalends of February in the next yere following: of the bishop of Romes letters, sent to the Heluetiās, The Popes letters to the Swysses. I haue shewed you before: whiche after the Bishops legate, Hierome Franch had receiued, he sent them from Lucers, and writeth to them,
also hym selfe the .xxv. daye of Iuly. That thre dayes synce were deli∣uered vnto hym the letters of the Bishop & Senate of Cardinalles. And albeit they are in a maner of the same effecte, as wer hys former letters, yet, for that they conteyne somewhat more, he sendeth them nowe a copie of the same with spede, and at the nexte conuention, he will shew them the principal. And forasmuche as in the same league, whyche lately nowe at the ende of Iune the Bishop and Thempe∣roure made, there is leafte also aspace for others, that will come into the same confederacye, moreouer, because it was couuenaunted, that Themperoure shoulde trye, whether that hys aduersaryes, and ene∣myes to the Churche of Roome, myghte haply with out warre be re∣duced to theyr dewetye and amendement, the Bishop doeth ernestlye require of them, that they wolde pronounce with expresse wordes, whether they wilbe of thys league, and whether they wyll obey the decrees of the Counsell of Trente: And where they haue appoynted hym a daye, at the nexte assemblie at Baden wherein they will make hym an aunswer to hys former demaundes therefore he hathe nowe wrytten to them also, to the entente they maye consulte in the meane season. Therefore he dooeth beseche them, in the blud of our sauioure Chryste, that they wolde dilygently consyder with themselues, what a noble and famous acte thys wylbe, and howe profytable for them and theyr ofsprynge, yf they wolde bothe helpe to quenche this fyre in Germany, and approue also the decrees of the Generall counsell. Where the bishop vttered the cause of the league, summe men suppose The Pope bringeth the Emperouro into hatred. it to bee donne of hym for a craftie polycie that he myghte by thys meanes put Themperoure to his narrowe shyftes. For it is most cer∣ten, that he tooke it verey displeasauntely, that Themperoure preten∣ded an other cause of warre, as shalbe declared herafter. At thys time Alberte, sonne to the Duke of Bauer, maryeth the Ladie Anne, the daughter of Kyng Fernando, and the Duke of Cleaue the lady Ma∣rye and other of hys Daughters. For when the Duke of Cleaue had Mariages in the broyle of warres. longe looked for the Daughter of Nauaire out of Fraunce, in vayne, as before is sayde, the Byshop of Roome graunted hym a lycence to marye an other. Wherefore he maryeth these same, and bothe maria∣ges were solemnised at Regenspurge in the myddes of the vprores & tumultes of warre: eyther Maryage did concerne a newe bonde of amitie. A daye of syttyng was appoynted for the fathers at Trent, as before you haue hearde at the end of Iuly, but the matter was def∣ferred till the begynnynge of the nexte yere, as in hys place shalbe de∣clared. There were at Trent besides the Cardinalles, the Bisshoppes legate and the Cardinalles of Trent and Pacher a Spaniard, foure The num∣ber of the fa∣thers at trēt. Archebishops .xxxiii. bishops, & of them two Frenche, fyue Spanishe,
and one Slauonishe, the residew were all Italyans. Doctours of di∣uinitie, relygious .xxxv. of others yt had not professed religion, twelue, for the most parte all Spaniardes. But amonges those foure Arche∣bishops, two of thē bare but the name only, Olans Magnus of Up∣salya, and Robert Uenaut, a Scotte. And that chaunced thus. Whā The king of Swecia re∣ceyueth the Gospell. Gustaue kynge of Swecia, nere vnto Denmarke, altered relygion, which was in the yere of our lord about a .M.D.xxxvii. Iohn Mag∣nus, Archebishop of Upsalya, who mislyked that alteration, forsaking the countrey fled vnto Roome, and came thyther with a meane com∣pany. Afterward going to Uenyse, he became Suffragan to the Pa∣triarche of that Citie: But in fyne waxing werye of that state, he re∣tourneth to Roome, and beyng broughte to an exigente, and a verey lowe ebbe, what tyme he had solde hys horses, and in a maner putte awaye all hys seruauntes, the Bishop of Roome placed hym, in the Hospytall of the holy ghoste, wherin he ended hys lyfe full poorelye: there was with hym hys brother Olans. Unto whom the Bysshop gaue that Archebishopricke of Gothlande, thoughe it were out of the precincte of the Church of Roome, and commaunded hym to be at the counsell, and geueth hym .xv. crownes a moneth to paye for hys bord, the other, a Scotte, whan he had infourmed the Bishop of the Arch∣bishopricke of Armacane in Irelande, he obtayned of hym the name and title therof. This Scotte was blynde, and yet did not only saye masse, but also wold ryde in Post. Wherfore the Bishop wolde haue these two in the counsel, for ostentation only, as though those two na∣tions so farre of, the Gothes and Iryshemen, did acknowledge hys Authorytie, where they in verey dede, had nothyng but the Shadow and bare name of the thing. It is mentioned before how Duke Mo∣ris, after priuate talke had with Themperour, departed from Regē∣spurge: whan he was cōmen home, king Fernando followyng short∣ly after, he goeth vnto hym to Prage. After, the fyrst daye of Auguste, Thēperours letters to Duke Mo∣ris. Themperour sendeth to Duke of Moris From Regenspurge, a copie of the proscription before rehearsed, and writing his letters commen to him & to his people, he reporteth in a maner the same thynges, that are comprised in the table of on Lawerie. And because he is allied vn∣to the outlawes by kinred & affinitie, so nere, that he may haply claime som ryght in theyr landes & possessions, he chargeth him most ernest∣ly, that he assist hym with all his force, to wynne theyr countries, yea, & that he get all him self so soone as he can, and holde it for his owne∣ryght, for els wil it come to passe, that all shalbe his that can catche it, who so euer he be, neyther shall the ryght of consinage or compactes profet hym any thynge. And agayne, for contemnynge hys Empe∣rours commaundemente, he shall incurre the same penaltie, that the others doe, he commaundeth also the Gentelmen and the peo∣ple,
to obeye hys proclmatiō, and to serue theyr Prynce faithfully, vp∣on the like penaltie. The letters written to Duke Moris were com∣men also to his brother Augustus. Now was the whole armie of the The Prote∣stantes let∣ters to the Duke of Bauer, Protestantes commē to the Riuer of Danubius. There the Duke of Saxon and the Lanzgraue & counsellours of the warre, wryte theyr letters to Willyam Duke of Bauer. the .iii. daye of August: to speake much of Thēperours preparation to war, it is no nede: For he know∣eth the whole matter. And albeit they haue omitted no kynd of dew∣tye towardes Themperour, & supposed there had ben no cause of dis∣pleasure, yet haue they hearde longe synce, bothe by his aunswer, and also by the talke of others, that he intendeth to war on thē, as though they should be disobedient, where as yet they are neither conuict of a∣ny crime, nor haue done wrong to any mā: And beit so, that the offēce were most trew, that he imputeth to them, yet were it not lawful for him, before the case be examined, to attempte the matter by force of armes: but this enterprise of his, is agaynste the ryght and lawes of Thēpire, against couenaunt & custome of former time: For if Thēpe∣rours had any matters against any state, the same hath bē euer accu∣stomed to be examined opēly: Now, he knoweth, how of many yeres there hathe ben meanes deuysed, that Germany myght lose her liber∣tie. And without all doubt, thys warre also tendeth to suche an ende: And albeit they haue alwayes hitherto perceyued in him a desyre to mainteyne common lybertie, and although he lately promysed manye thinges touching his good will to wardes them, and sent them word that he wold not suffer the foreine soldiour to passe through his coun∣trey, yet is it reported vnto them, that he hath geuē them waye alrea∣dy, and also vitayle and munition: whiche thinge greueth them not a lyttel, and suppose, that he is perswaded, so to do, through false sclaun∣ders. But where as by theyr writinges lately setfoorth is declared a∣boundantly, how iniuriously the Emperoure dealeth, and howe ma∣ny couenauntes, aswel publicke as priuate, are in thys one thing bro∣ken, they trust yet, that in the defēce of lybertye, he will assist thē with hys ayde and counsell, especiallye, seynge he put them in hope of the samethynge nowe lately by hys messager. Therfore he shall doe well to cōmaunde Themperours soldiours to depart out of his Townes of Roene and Ingolstad, or els to permit them to place as manye of theyr men there also. And that he geueth them free and safe recourse throughe hys countrey, and relieue them with victualles, and assure them hereof by wryttynge. And albeit they thynke he wyll not saye them naye, yet they desyre an aunswer within syue dayes: For yf he shulde otherwise doe, than muste they doe as theyr counsell shall serue them. At the seuenthe daye of Auguste, in Machlin (a veraye fayre Towne of Thēperours in Brabant) gunpowder that lay in a Tower
vppon the walles, catching fyre through lyghtning, first ouerthrewe the same Towne from the foundacion, & thē lighted vpon the houses Lightenyng caused of struction at Machlin. within the Citie and without, aboue fyue hondreth pases in circuite, wherof some were brente, some ouerthrowen, many shaken in pieces and tourned vpsydedowne, and of the same houses many heuge and exceading great stones flewe threscore pases of through the violence of the powder, which so tearyng a sonder the houses, and shakynge & breaking the glasse windowes in euery strete, defaced in a maner the whole citie, it singed trees and turned them vp by the rootes. In that calamitye perished two hondreth persons, or there aboutes, partly cō∣sumed with fyre, partly by the ruine and fall of houses, stones & tyles ouerwelmed, besydes those that were sore wounded, and yet escaped death, wherof the nomber was great. Many of them two dayes, and three, somme foure dayes after were found and drawen out of the sel∣lars and caues vnderneth the grounde, wherunto they were fled, di∣uerse of them dead, whiche perished, eyther for honger, or for lacke of breathe some a lyue, which fynding theyr vitayles layde vp, susteyned theyr life. Moreouer a great nomber of horses, and other beastes wer burnt vp stables and all. And the wal itselfe, where the Toure stode, was throwen downe flat with the grounde, aboue two hondreth pa∣ses in length. At the .ix. daye of August, the Swisses mete agayne at Baden, and the fourth day after, maketh aunswer to the protestants The Swy∣ses aunswer to the Pro∣testantes, Ambassadours, whom they appoynted to be there at the same tyme, as before is mentioned, not all the Swisses, but suche only as wer of the popishe religyon. Who sayde they were very sory, that this warre was moued betwene Themperoure and them, neyther was there a∣nything that they had rather, or wished for more, then peace. There∣fore they wolde not intermeddle in this warre to nor fro, nor incline themselues to either partie, howbeit, they wolde kepe out foreine sol∣diours, and not suffer them to passe thorow theyr dominion, and staie their owne men at home, as muche as in them lyeth: And for the same cause haue geuen strayte commaundement already, that no man goe foorth to serue in the warres, but attend vpon the Magistrates plea∣sure, and looke to the defence of theyr countrey: yet this notwithstan∣dyng, many are gonne a warfare, whom they haue takē into wages: which thing is a great grief to them: therfore they desyre them, to dis∣charge the same, and suffer them to retourne home agayne: Besydes the former demaundes, the protestantes requyred of them this more∣ouer, that they wold not enter into that confederacie of Themperour and Bishop of Roome, nor ayde thē with any men, wherunto the bis∣shop especially moued thē, but that they wold assist them, whych wer constrained to defend vniust warre, and repulse from them violence. And reporting many thinges of the Bishops iniquitie, who wyll both
rule the counsell, and be iudge also, and holdeth the same in a place set for iniurye, vpon occasyon speake of the death of Iohn Diazius, and The deathe of Diazius is vnpuni∣shed. shew how that destable murther is not only to this daie vnpunished, but is so much commended of many also, as though it were worthy a great rewarde: which thing is a warning to them, how daungerous and vnmete it is for them to come in suche places, where theyr aduer∣saties haue al the gouernement, & amonges them, the bishop of Trēt, lately made Cardinal, depely bounden to the Bisshop by moe wayes than one. For asmuche as the Protestantes with all theyr force were at the water of Thonawe, Themperoue whiche as yet was not ful∣ly fournished, in the begynnyng of August, leauing Regenspurg with a garnison, went to Landshut, a Towne of the Duke of Bauers, by the Riuer of Isara, and pitcheth his tentes without the walles. The Duke of Saxon the Lantzgraue and theyr felowes, sendyng theyre The Prote∣stantes pro∣clayme war. agaynst thē∣peroue. letters from Donauerd, the eleuenth daye of August, declare of what mynde they are towardes hym, after the maner and lawe of Armes, and the last moneth (saye they) we made our purgation to you by let∣ters, Emperour Charles, of suche thynges as we are accused of: And albeit reason wold, that eyther you shuld haue layde a side your war∣like furniture, or at the least haue declared the cause of the warre, and hearing vs speake lykewise shuld haue don accordyng to the custome of Thempyre, and your fayth promised by an othe, yet forasmuche as you doe neuerthelesse procede, we are also compelled to put on armure to beare of thys vniust violence muche vnworthy your personne: For that you nowe seke to extinguishe the doctryne of the Gospel, and ly∣bertie of thempyre, by sondry of your actes it may be proued. For you knowe youre selfe, what maner of consultations, you haue had nowe many yeres, with that Roomish Antichryst, and foreyne kynges, that you myght eyther ioyne them with you, or incense them agaynst vs. And agayne, without the aduise of the Princes and states of Them∣pyre, you haue taken trewes with the Turke, contrary quite to youre promesse. For what tyme Germany gaue you ayde, two yeres paste, agaynst the Frenche kyng, you affirmed, that the same warre beynge finished, you wold goe your selfe with an armye agaynst the Turke: But nowe haue you made a composition with hym, verely, to thintēt you myght the better accomplish the thyng which you haue intended agaynst vs. And nowe in thys conuention at Regenspurge, you haue set a newe collour & face of the matter, speakyng much of youre owne industrie and zeale to the cōmon wealthe and countrey of Germanie, and of the contumacie of certen others. Whice doubtles was done of you for this intent, that you might seuer vs one from another, that ar confederated for relygion. For you are not able to charge vs with a∣ny faulte of neglectyng our dewtie, & distrusting your cause, you haue
not sommoned vs to appere, and come to our aunswer before the Se∣nate of thempire, yea, you did not somuche as once name the parties: The crafti∣s of them∣peroure. and yet in the meane season, wryting your letters to dyuers Princes and Cities, you dissembled ful craftely, as though you attempted not warre against religion, but to punnishe certen rebelles. But it is ma∣nifest enough that you shoote at relygion, and appereth herof sufficy∣ently, in that you sollicited the Bishop for a counsell, wherin, besydes his clientes and adherentes, no man maye haue place, nor libertye to speake, There were a very fewe, that were somwhat franke in spea∣kyng, Lybertie is exiled out of the counsell. but a meane was founde that they were called awaye, & worse placed in theyr steade. What maner of decrees also, ye fathers at Trēt haue made now, it is knowen to al men: wherfore this is not the coū∣sell, that hath ben so often promised in the assemblies of Thempyre, as we shewed you the laste yere at Wormes. And the same thinges we sayde than, we will, shuld be nowe repeted: Moreouer that it is your pourpos, to cōpell vs, to approue the counsell, it is to be proued by the Bishops letters lately sent to the Heluetians, wherin he complaineth sore of diuerse in Germany, which reiect the authoritie of this counsel, and sayeth how this is the cause, for the which he attempteth warre: And because you were also prefixed to warre for the same matter (he sayeth) howe it chaunced to hym luckely, and therefore wold imploye therupon, all the force and treasure of the churche of Roome and hys owne also. Wherefore seeing the Bishop hathe vttered that pretensed pourpose of youres, which you wold haue cloked by an other coloure, who can doubt any longer, but that you pricke at relygion? Certenly we knowe oure selues faulty in nothyng, which eyther we wold not shuld be heard openly, or that we can wel aunswer: but it had concer∣ned your office, after the example of your predecessours, to haue called vs before the Senate of Prynces, and lykewyse, to haue hearde oure reasons. Neyther did it become you thus to vse vs, to call vs to the as∣semblie, to propound of the common wealth, to axe our aduise & coun∣sell, and in the meane whyle to prepare warre agaynste vs. For what kynde of thing is thys, to leaue the Turke, and to bend all the furye & rage of warre againste vs, as thoughe we were a greate deale worse than he? But we truste assuredly that God will impeche and hynder thys so vnworthy a facte: For if there were any grudge or displeasure betwene you, youre brother Fernando and vs, the same was wholye forgeuen at Cadame, Uienna, Regēspurg and Spier: Therfore you maye paynte and set out the matter as muche as you lyste, yet knowe we for certentie, that there is no other cause, but that trewe relygyon shuld be oppressed, and Germany lose her lybertye. You wryte in dede to diuerse, and go aboute to perswade, as though you desiered great∣ly, that the doctryne of the Gospell myght be auaunced, but the opini∣ons
of the vniuersitie of Louayne, confyrmed by your iudgement, a∣gayne the execution of Godly men within your Realmes, and domi∣nions. The articles of the Uni∣uersitie of Louayne. And this confideracie made with that Romish Antichrist, de∣clare and shew well enoughe what your intente is, verely euen this, that you myght recouer and establysh agayne all kynde of Papistrie, quenching the trew doctryne, that we professed at Auspurge. And se∣ing the case is thus, and that we made our league for this pourpos, that we myght perseuer in thys Relygion, and defende it ioyntely to∣gether, although any man els shuld pretēd some other cause of disple∣sure, agaynst any of vs, we were dryuen of necessitie to stande to oure owne defence, whyche bothe Gods lawe and also the lawe of nature doeth permitte and graunt vs. And albeit, that by reason of this your enterprise, we are in nothing bounden to you, and therfore neded not to declare vnto you any part of our mynd, yet for a further assurance, we renounce the allegeaunce and dewetye, wherby we were boundē to you, not that we wold deminishe the ryght and commoditie of thē∣pyre, but rather preserue and mainteyne the same. This therefore we protest openly, and that in solemuwyse that we are of this mynd, that we purpose to repulse from vs, thys warre of you, and your fellowes. For in so godly and honest a cause, we ought to refuse no perill. They sent these letters by a yong gentelman and a Trumpeter, as the ma∣ner Thēperoure woulde not receyue the Protestants letters. is, to themperoure in hys campe before Landshut: Whiche he did not only refuse to receyue, but also cummaunded in paine of theyr life, to cary it agayne where they had it: And added this moreouer, that if any man from hencefoorth came vnto hym from them, he shoulde in∣steade of a chayne of golde, be rewarded with an haulter. Then deli∣uereth he vnto them the Table of prescription before saied, and geueth The table of prescription. them a most streight charge to delyuer the same to theyr princes. Be∣fore they sent thys epistel, it was debated, howe themperoure shulde be termed or spoken to. And the Duke of Saxon wolde not haue ge∣uen hym the name of Themperoure, for otherwyse it is not lawfull to warre with hym: but the Lantzgraue was of a contrary minde. And eyther of them had soothers, and vpholders of their saing. And at the length thys meane waye was diuised, that they shulde call hym, as it were he, that vsed the place of Themperoure. After they consult, whi∣ther to goe: some sayde, to Landshut, where Themperoure was: but when they that were experte in the knowledge of the countrey, had shewed them howe they must goe through fennes, where the wayes were so narrowe, that oftentymes, by the space of a myle, there coulde goe but one horseman at once, alteryng theyr purpose, they determine to goe to Regenspurg, where Themperoure had leaft a garnison and munition: For there was bothe a place commodious to incampe in, and if themperoure wolde come to rescowe them that were beseged,
they myght trye the matter with hym in the playne felde. Wherefore remouing theyr Campe, they march foreward, howebeit verey flow∣ly. And in maner aboute the same tyme, whyche was at the Ides of The Popes armie com∣meth to thē∣peroure. August, arriued at Landshut the Italians or Bishoppes force, which were ryght welcome to Themperoure, who beyng aduertised by es∣piall, of the progresse of hys enemyes, sente diuers and sondrye messa∣gers, exhortynge them to make haste. The footemen were teen thou∣sande, and fyue hundreth demilaunces. Ouer al these had the Bishop made hys nephewe, by hys sonne, Octauius Farnesius, general. Un∣der hym serued many noble Captaynes, Alexander Uitellius, Iohn The Cap∣taynes of the said armie. Baptiste Sabello, Ssortia Palauicino, Fridericke Sabello, Paul∣lus Uitellio, Iuly Ursine Alexius Lascaris, Hierome of Pise, Iohn Mary of Padowaye, Niclas Plumbine, Niclas Petilian. With this power also Cosmus Medices, Duke of Florence, sente two hundreth horsemē at the conduite of Rafe Balion, and Hercules Duke of Far∣rare, a hundreth, by Alphōso his bastard brother. The bishop had ioy∣ned with Octauius, the Cardinall hys brother, Alexander Farnesi∣us, as it were to espie what Themperours doinges were, & also to be aspurre vnto hym to prycke hym forewarde, yf nede required. Whan Farnesius departed out of Italy, he shulde saye as it is reported, that he wolde make suche a slaughter in Germany, that hys horse myghte swymme in the bludde of the Lutheranes. Not longe after came also the Spaniardes, whom themperoure had called out from Naples & Millan, aboute syxe thousande, olde and expert soldiours all. Theyre∣chieftaynes were Philip Lauoye, Prince of Sulmone, Aluar San∣dey, Alfonse Uiues, Iames Arzie. Themperours lieutenaunte was The Capi∣taines of thē∣peroures ar∣mie. Fernando Toletane, Duke of Alba: ye next place after hym had Iohn Baptiste Castalde. The Cardinall of Auspurge was head commissi∣oner for vitayle. There serued Themperour also, Maximilian of Au∣striche, Emanuell Philiberte, sonne to the Duke of Sauoye, Ericus Duke of Brunswicke, and Philip the sonne of Duke Henry prisoner, George Duke of Megelburg, George Duke of Brunswicke, brother to Henry, a man of the Church, Friderick Furstemberg, and Renard Solmen, Erles, with diuerse others. In the tētes of the Protestātes, were Iohn Ernest Duke of Saxon, brother to the Prynce Electour, The princes of the Prote∣stantes cāpe. and Iohn Fridericke the electour hys sonne, Philip Duke of Brunse∣wicke with hys foure sonnes, Ernest, Albert, Iohn, and Wuolfange, Fraunces Duke of Luneburge, Wuolfang Prynce of Anhalde: Chri∣stopher Henneberge, George Wirtemberge Albert Mansfelde with hys two sonnes Iohn and Uolrate, Lewis Oetingen with his sonne of the same name, William Furstemberge, Christopher Oldenburge, Hubert Bichling, and Iohn Hedecke, Erles all. Moreouer Recorde, and Rifeberge, and eyght Enseignes of Swisses. Wherfore whan all
these forces were commen together, besydes that power which Cosi∣te de Bure brought oute of the lowe countrie, the Emperoure remo∣uyng hys Campe, marcheth towardes Regenspurge. That knowen, many beganne to suspect, that he wolde into Meyssen and Saronie. Wherfore they made Bridges and transported theyr armye ouer the Ryuer of Thonnawe. And when they had marched a little waye to∣wardes Norgouia, they had intellyngence that Themperoure wente frō Regenspurge to Ingolstad. Then tournynge againe ouer Rough an vneuen wayes they repare to Dannbius, leste Themperour shuld take Nuburg, which is thre miles aboue Ingolstad, and Donauerd, and so shoulde haue the waye open into the lande of Wirtemberge. Whan they were comen to Nasielse, the nexte daye the Lantzgraue wente foorthe with no greate company of Horsemen, to take the vieu of Ingolstad, knowyng not that Themperours armye was there. For he had hearde only of a fewe Spauiardes, that laye therin gar∣rison, The Lantz∣graue rioeth foorth to es∣pye. and them wold he haue prouoked to escarmouche: But whylest he marcheth, there appere certen horsemen of the Prynces of Sul∣mone. The charge beyng geuen, dyuerse were slayne on both partes, but yet moe hurte and taken. It was knowen by them that were ta∣ken, that Themperoure wolde encampe the same daye at Ingolstad. Thys facte of the Lantzgraue, the Electour of Saxon toke displea∣sauntly and greuousely, and yf he doe the lyke hereafter, without ma∣kinge hym priuie to it, he protesteth, that he wyll departe. After mar∣chynge foorthe a little waye with theyr whole armye in suche order, as yf they shulde haue foughte a battell, they retyred with theyr soldi∣ours, to theyr campe. The same nyght followyng, when men were in theyr fyrst slepe, the Spaniardes enter the campe where Counte He∣decke laye, who was appoynted vnder the Duke of Saxon, and kyll The Spani∣ardes inuade the Prote∣stantes cāp. to the number of an hundreth of hys fotemen, and lost dyuerse of their owne men also. Wherfore there was a greate vprore throughoute all the campe, whych by reason of the darknes, was also more encreased. The nexte daye, whyche was the .xxix. of August, certen Centuryons and Captaynes were sente oute to vieu the situation of theyr enemies Campe. Upon whom the horsemen of Italy breakyng out of an Am∣bushe, gaue the charge sodaynely. And when many were slaine on cy∣ther syde, they retourned agayne, without theyr pourpose. Wherfore the nexte Mornynge the Lantzgraue, accompanyed with a fewe o∣thers, chosen oute of the whole number, goeth foorthe to knowe some certentye, and fyndyng a foorde, where the Horsemen that were sent oute before hym, sayde there was nonue at all, he retourneth backe to the Duke of Saxon, and sheweth hym, howe Horsemen maye passe the Riuer. The laste daye therefore of Auguste they were agreed to
setfoorthe in the mornynge as soone as daye appered, and to take the hygher grounde, where in tymes paste stoode the watche Tower of Ingolstad, and there to plant certen pieces of Ordenaunce to shoute into theyre enemyes Campe, to see yf they can perauenture prouoke Themperoure to battell. When it was far foorthe nyght, the Duke of Saxon aduertysed the Lantzgraue twyse, at sondrye tymes, that Themperoure was departed, and how hys Campe smoked: But he, geuynge no credite to that reporte, sente foorthe Whilliam Schacht with fyue bandes of hys owne Hersemen, to kepe the foorde, and to make Brydges for the Munition and footemen: shortly after follow∣eth he with hys whole power, and Munition in greate haste. When he was commen to the watersyde Schachte shewed hym, howe Themperoure was not remoued oute of hys place. When he had sente the Duke of Saxon intellygence hereof, he marcheth to the hylle beforesayde, and there planteth part of hys Ordenaunce. He placeth hys menne also on the lefte hande and on the ryghte: The same did the Duke of Saxon, whan he was commen thyther with hys companye.
✚ The eightenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte ❧ The argument of the eyghtenth Booke. THe Erle of Bure passeth the Rhyne, by meanes of the Archebyshop of Mentz. The coun∣sell of the Lantgraue is not allowed to set vpon the Emperour. The Switzers wyll not meddle in this warre: Wherfore the Duke and the Lantgraue sollicite the Bohemers: & aunswer fully to the accusations and dissemblinges of the Emperour. They remoue theyr Campe to cutte the waye from the Erle of Bure. Peter Strosse kepeth not promyse, to lende them money. Touruert being rendred to the Emperour, Duke Maurice holdeth an assem∣blee of his states against the Duke of Saxon, vnto whome the Lantgraue aunswereth. The Duke of Saxons countrey is set on fyre and destroyed by the Hongarians, and Duke Moris sur∣priseth certen of his townes. Fourtene Martyrs brent at Meanx. The Protestauntes hauyng leuied their campe, are pursued. The Duke of Wittēberg and certen cities make their peace with the Emperour. The father of Trent, establish the Article of the institution of man. After the death of kyng Henry the eight, the Gospell had fre passage in Englande. Marques Albert is taken prysoner by the Duke of Saxon. WHan Maximiliā the Erle of Bure, of whō is mētioned before, had assembled al the po¦wer The Erle of Bure lea∣deth an Ar∣my to them∣perour. he coulde, in the lowe coūtrey, which were foure thousand horsemen, and ten thousand fotemen, and emonges them cer∣ten bandes of Spanyardes and Italians, whiche had serued the kyng of England in his warres against Fraunce, marching for¦warde with the same out of Brabāt in the moneth of August, passeth ouer the Rhine aboue and beneath Mentz, whersoeuer he coulde get shipping, notwithstandinge that the Protestauntes had layde a power on the other syde, at the leading of Christopher Oldenburge, and Riseberge, which shuld haue stopped their passage. The Archbishop of Mētz, was thought to haue holpen much in this matter. When the whole armie of the Protestauntes was come to the forsaid place, they shot of al their ordinaūce into themperours cāpe most terrible. Euen ther the Lantgraue, calling before the Duke of Saxō, ye counsellours & captains of y• war, if I had y• gouernmēt alone, The bould & profitable counsell of y• Lantgraue. saith he, as I had what time I restored y• Duke of Wirtēberg, I wold first vndertake to geue y• charge vpō thēnemy wt ii. legiōs, & bring ye piōners to cast down their trēches, & that done, assaile thē wt the whole force & power, but herein whilest thopiniōs of mē were diuers, & some diswaded y• thing, as ful of most peril, & others misliked not y• same, so yt ther wer no daūger to be feared of the townes men, which had great store of shot & munition, &
that the horsemen were also at the first charge giuen: nothyng was attempted. Whiche thing doubtles is so much reproued of many, that this same errour is thought to be the cause and be∣ginning The cause of the Protest. misery. of their calamitie, and of the Emperours victory. For they farre excelled in horsemen, and than was the Emperours campe intrenched but with a lowe ditche only, so that it was but of small force. But what time the Emperour had susteined the shot and brunt of that day, the next night followyng he so well fortified his campe, that after he was of better confidēce, and might endure more easely all stormes that came. But they saye, how in this so great a daunger the Emperours harte and Feare in the Emperours Campe. courage was wonderfull good, and not only declared no token of feare him selfe, but also boldened others exceadingly, and of∣fered to take suche part as they did. How the Emperour solici∣ted the Switzers by his Treasurer of Burgundy, I shewed in the last boke. Unto those requestes was aunswere made in the assemblie of Baden, holden in the moneth of August, as before is mentioned. How they wil not infringe the league that they The Swis∣ses aunswer to the Empe¦rour. haue with the house of Austriche and Burgundy. Moreouer, they wyll call home agayne, suche as are gone forth a warfar, and vnlesse they shall obeye, punyshe them accordingly. Thus aunswered those nyne townes, that are of the popysh Religiō: But they of Zurich, Bernes, and Basill, and also the Schafu∣sians, for as muche as the Emperours and Byshoppes letters did not importe one, and the same cause of this warre, againe, in as muche as the copy of the Emperours and Byshoppes lea∣gue, which was shewed them by the Byshoppes Ambassadour, spake playnly, how this warre was attempted, to roote out the Religion of the Protestauntes, they tolde the Emperours Ambassadour, that they would take deliberation in makyng an aunswere, and attende, vntyl suche tyme as the Emperour had aduertised them, whether he would permitte them to kepe styll their Religion in safitie. Whan the Emperour harde of The Empe∣rour to the Swisses is a Gospeller. this, the seuen and twenty day of August, he addresseth to them his letters out of the Cāpe before Ingolstad. Where they haue not made the same answer, that the rest haue done, he can not perceiue the cause, & supposeth yt this is done through ye craft of his aduersaries: For he heareth how in the former assembly of Badē, they went about to perswade wt them, as though he had moued war, not to punish rebellious princes, but against certē cities, to thintēt yt through ye bishops aid, ye doctrine of ye Gospel & also ye libertie of Germany might be oppressed, he hereth mo∣reouer, how thei haue sollicited thē, not only for aid agaīst him
but also concerning a league, wherof as he vnderstandeth they haue put them in good hope, & that in the next assembly, they shal make thē a direct aunswer: And as touching the cause of y• war, for as much as they haue vnderstāden the same, as wel by his priuate letters writtē vnto thē, as such also, as he hath pu∣blished opēly, it nedeth not here to be repeted. For that he hath ether molested any man for Religion sake, or giuen occasion of rebellion, it can not be shewed nor proued: but yt streight wayes frō the beginning of his preparatiō vnto war, he treated frēd∣ly & gently with diuerse more also, thā was decent for his per∣son, to do to men of so meane estate & degre. Nether can this ex∣cuse their rebelliō, for yt the byshop of Rome doth assist him, for not only the Princes of Italy, but certen also of Germany, and diuerse gentlemen of right noble houses, & emonges thē som of the religion & league of the Protestauntes, do ayde him now, & wil venter their liues, & spend their blud in this war: Whiche doubtles thei wold not do, in case the matter stode as these sedi¦tiouse The Profe∣staūtes one against ano¦ther. persons do falsly report. And yt they haue alwayes gone about, vnder the pretēce of religion, to resiste their hygh magi∣strate, to oppresse religiō & the libertie of Germany, & bryng al other states into their subiectiō, it is by many of their doings so well knowen, that it nedeth no further declaration. For ve∣rely vnder the swete name of Religion, they haue allured into their cōfederacie ye chiefest cities of Germany, & through their Force ought not to be v∣sed in Reli∣gion. force, & furniture, haue gottē the landes & possessiōs of others. How they now also go to worke, & compelle other Princes sub∣iects to take their partes, and disturbe many in their religion, and inforce them to another kinde of lyfe, cast also diuerse in pryson and fetters, and threaten them cruelly, and robbe and spoyle churches, the thyng it selfe declareth. For this is the ve∣ry cause, why they couet to haue them in their league, that by this meane being made stronger, they might the more easely accomplyshe their pretensed purpose: he doubted not, but they also perceiue these thinges, and vnderstande ryght well, what incommoditie, or discommoditie they may loke for, by their so∣cietie. And seing the matter is thus, and inasmuche as they ar not ignoraunt both of his good will & also of the causes of the warre, he trusteth that they wyl refuse their league, and kepe their soldiours at home, and call home suche are gone to serue into the warre, vnder a set penaltie, and doe nothing contrary to the auncient leagues, and by the example of the residue, ob∣serue peace and amitie. For this shall both redounde to theyr owne prayse, and shalbe to hym also ryght acceptable.
vnto the which letters they wryte again after the same sort as they answered thambassadour before, and desire him to accept in good part their delay in answering: And in asmuch as he af¦firmeth, that this war is nether to oppresse Religion, nor yet ye libertie of the countrey, they say how they will do again none other wyse thā shal become thē: For if any be gone out of their confynes a warfare, the same is done without their leaue and knowledge as oft times it chaunceth: And their maner is, not to call thē again that go forth without their licēce, but what time they retourne home, to punish them. And as they did mo∣ue the Swisses, so likewyse the Duke of Saxon and the Lant∣graue sollicited the Bohemers: but thei made such aunswer as The Prote∣stauntes sēd to the Bohe¦mers. it appered wel, yt their myndes were alredy perswaded through thaccusation of king Ferdinando. Whan they perceiued this by their letters, about the end of August they wryte again, and shewe them manifestly, that this war is attempted against re∣ligion, and sent vnto them the bokes whiche haue bene lately set forth concerning the same, and require thē to worke no dis∣pleasure against them, and last to signifie vnto thē, what they intend to do. About the same time also thei publish a wryting, wherin they say how they are aduertised by them that are cre∣dit worthy, how the bishop and Antichrist of Rome, an instru∣ment The Pope hireth men to poyson o∣ther. of the deuil, & authour of this war, who in certen yeres past, by his hired ministers, set many townes of fire in Saxon, hath now sent forth impoysoners, to infecte their welles, and standing waters, to thintent that the same which war and yt sword can not distroy, these may dispatche with their poyson. Wherfore they do admonish vniuersally al mē, but chiefly their owne subiectes, to waite narrowly, that such men be apprehē∣ded, and being put to torture, whan they shall haue tried their mischief, that they suffer accordingly. And within a fewe days after, the Duke of Saxon his sonne, Iohn William, in his let∣ters published, geueth warning to his coūtrey, yt they take dili∣gent hede to thē selues. For lately not far frō Weynmar a town of Turing, a certen Italian was taken of suspiciō who cōfessed that he & diuerse others had money giuē them at Rome in the byshops name, yt they shuld, with fiering & poyson, do as much hurt in Germany as they possible might. Cōcerning their out∣lawyng, & how themperour sent a copy therof to ye Duke & to ye The Prote∣stauntes an∣swer to the table of out∣lawery. Lantgraue, I haue shewed you before: Wherfore whā they had receiued it, in their cāpe at Ingolstad, ye secōd day of Septēber, in ye defēce of their honor & estimatiō, they answer in a very lōg wryting. That he so highly cōmendeth his zeale & good wil to∣many,
it is nothing but dissimulatiō: for since the time he was first chosen Emperour, he hath always sought meanes, how to bring it in bondage. For this was verely the cause, why he lea∣uing Spaine and his other countreis, hath retourned so oft in to Germany, and bene at so importunate charges. Of like sort is the same, which he speaketh of religiō. For his purpose hath bene alwayes, ye hauing oportunitie he might oppresse the sin∣cere doctrine. For so oft (say they) as he graūted peace vnto vs & The Empe∣rours crafte towarde the Protestants our religiō, he did it craftely, for a time only, vntil we had giuē money to serue the publique vses & necessities of thempire. Af∣ter he called the decrees made, in doubt & into question, & helde the matter so long in suspence, till he had made peace with the French king, & taken truce with the Turck, & that the bishop & he espiyng a time conuenient, had appointed the counsell of Trent, & concluded vpon a league: but hereof wil we bring pro∣bations. Fiue yeares past at Regenspurg, he made a decree of religion, and wher as in diuerse pointes we misliked the same, he declared his minde more at large, and gaue it vs in wryting sufficiently: The same in other assemblies after, his deputies & king Ferdinando did cōfirme. And yet two yeres since, in the cō¦uention at Spier, whan mention was made therof, he sayd, how he did remēber no such declaratiō. The last yeare in the cō¦uention at Wormes, the Byshop of Hildesseme, said openly be∣fore al the Princes, how themperour promised the catholikes, yt the decree of Spier shuld take no place after the Frēch warres. A few monethes past, when he went to the conuention at Re∣genspurg, Granuellan spake it to me, sayth the Lantgraue, in the presence of the Paulsgraue, of my counsellours, & the Am∣bassadour of the Duke of Wirtēberg, how that decree of Spier was applied vnto the time: And that now themperour can not longer mainteyn the same against the other states. Sixe yeres past at Hagenaw, king Firdinando, whan he sheweth his com∣mission The Empe∣rors decrees made for fear to the catholiques, said, that vnto vs should no decrees be obserued: For they were made for fear of the Turkish warre, what time he had nede of our ayde. What thinke you? Was not this a goodly cause and a fetch to supplant vs & our felowes. They confesse the craft thē selues, wherby they licked vs of our money. Therfore it is playn, that he intended alwayes the di∣structiō of religiō, as the late cōfederacie declareth & taried but only for a time to serue his purpos, & because he wold appere to haue ye matter lawfully decided, he was euer in hād wt vs, yt we shuld submit our selfs to ye bishop of Romes coūsel, but why we might not so do, it is sufficiētly declared ī our bokes set forth of
And his purpose was, to maintain & execute the decrees of the counsell, for the accomplishement wherof he had longe before sollicited certen forrein Princes: but fearing lest by this mean he should set in his top, all that cleaued to religion, he preten∣ded an other cause and fained rebellion, that he might with∣drawe our fellowes, and whan he had vanquished the chiefest, myght after compell the residue to obey his commaundement. And albeit that he and his brother thought to kepe marue∣lous secret this their subtill and craftie counsell, yet through the singular goodnes of God, it commeth to lyght dayly more and more. For the Bishop himselfe, by his Ambassadours decla∣red to the Switzers, the cause of the warre, and copie of the league. Wherby it is manifest that not, they alone, but al other that professe the same doctrine, are in the lyke daunger, & that this is their indeuour, to restore papistrie in all places. Let all men iudge therfore how truly this matter was handled, when lately in the conuention at Regenspurg, they went about to perswade, and cōcluded also, that for the appeasing of religiō, they would vse lawfull and quiet remedies. He tolde me hym selfe sayth the Lantgraue, lately at Spier, that he was in no The dissimu¦lation of the Emperour. league with the Byshop: The same affirmed Granuellan. This is verely that same fatherly mynde and affection: This is that zeale and loue of peace, wherof they speake so muche. Did euer man heare of the lyke thing, that he wold perswade the Prin∣ces quite contrary, to that whiche he hath had so long prefixed in his minde? We know right well, what dutie the Princes owe vnto the Emperour, and againe, what he ought to per∣fourme vnto them: For as we are bounden to hym, so is he a∣gaine bounden also vnto vs: And wher as our cause not heard, he doth outlawe vs, and seketh to put vs besides our lādes and possessions, in that he breaketh the bonde of the ciuile lawe, wherby the patrone is bounden againe to his cliente. Nowe where he chargeth vs with rebellion, it is nothing, and he him selfe knoweth, that he doth vs wrong. For euen for the same cause, saith the Lantgraue, he gaue me thākes lately at Spier for that I haue omitted no diligence to appease religion. But where he sayth, that I prepared warre, & punyshed certen sta∣tes by the purse, I denie it not, and there was iust cause so to do: Neuerthelesse it is openly knowen, how through the me∣diation of Lewys the Paulsgraue, and Richard the Archby∣shop of Treuers, all this matter was quietly ended: he him self also, writing his letters, all be it he had taken the matter dis∣pleasauntly, yet for as muche as I had discharged mine armie,
signified that he required no more: Again, what time he spake to me of the same sixtene yeares synce at Auspurg, I made my purgation in suche sorte before king Ferdinando, Friderick the Paulsgraue and certen others, that he was contēt and satisfi∣ed. Wherfore he ought not to make that mattir any part of oc∣casion of this warre. And where as I restored Ulriche Duke of Wirtemberg, at the intercession of George Duke of Saxō, and The Archbishop of mentz, I was for that matter reconciled by composition, which he ratified. And after at Regenspurg, vpō his faith and assuraunce, he toke away cleane and abolyshed al displeasure. Now he speaketh also of ye warre with the Duke of Brunswick: but the cause therof we haue expressed in wryt∣ting, and after that, in a moste frequent audience of the Em∣pyre, he him self being also present, we declared more at large two yeares paste. The Duke that tyme made answere, but the Emperour refused to heare our confutation of the same. And why wold he not heare and examine dewly the whole matter, and by the aduyse of the Princes, haue taken some ordre in the thing? Certenly because he desyred ayde for the Frenche & Tur∣kyshe warre, of a purpose he let it slepe, and wold haue it put to gardens, and herein we fulfilled his desire at Wormes, & were content that Frederick the Paulsgraue and his Cosin Iohn Simmer, should kepe and gouerne the prouince by vs taken, vntill such tyme as the matter should be lawfully decided and determined. That done, he assured vs, that the Duke of Brun∣swick should also assent to the same, and wryting his letters, charged hym earnestly, that he should obeye, but he cōtemning his commaundement, raysed warre against vs, and was taken therin, as it appereth by a wryting set forth by me and Duke Maurice. Therfore did we nothing in this warre contrary to our dutie, nothing against the lawes, and herein we appeale to egall iudgement. But here by it is to be sene, what fauour he beareth to Religion. For albeit that the Duke of Brun∣swick contemned his commaundement most rashely, although at what tyme he heard of the sequestration, he spake of Them∣perour many lewde and opprobrious wordes, yet, because he The Duke of Brūswi a bitter ene∣my to ye pro∣testants. was a moste bitter enemy of our Religion, he did althyngs vn∣punyshed. Where he sayth, that we haue brought certen vnder our subiection, it is farre otherwyse, and we haue ofte made aunswere to the same. This in dede may be wel verified of him whiche hath brought vnder his iurisdiction diuerse prouinces of the Empire, and also Byshoprikes, and against this present warre, hath assembled nobles and gentlemen, that he might al
lure them to him for our distruction. This verely we graunt, that we haue receiued diuers into our tuition & fidelitie, that if they should be in daunger for the doctrine of the Gospell, we should defende them: And that we suppose to be our duty, for God commaundeth to succour the afflicted. And none haue more nede these many yeares nowe of helpe and defence, than those that are taken for Lutherians. But in other things that do not concerne Religion, we defend them not, no, we haue al∣ways exhorted them to geue the magistrate their right and ho∣nour due. He obiecteth to vs, that we should haue exhorted som not to repare to the Assemblie: But that is both vayne and ab∣surde: For where as our Ambassadours wer lately assembled at Wormes, and he went to Regenspurge, we commaunded thē, that (al other thinges set a part) they should go also to that as∣semblie. Unto all other assemblies of thempyre, ether we haue comen our selues or always sent our Ambassadours. Concer∣ning that he sayth of the chamber, and iudgement, it hath ben ofte confuted heretofore. Moreouer he maketh mention of an Heathen Magistrate, to declare that we might not resist hym. But we haue not only done our duty, but also more than we ought to do, & haue geuen him more, than euer our auncesters haue accustomed, to our great losse and hinderaunce: And that he hath no cause of complaint at all, it shall appere by that we shall here recite. A certen Ambassadour of the Frenche kyngs sent vnto hym The french Ambassador disswadeth the Empe∣rour from this warre. lately (by occasion fell in talke of this warre) He saieth, it is a very great enterprise that he taketh in hand, and aduiseth him to consider with him selfe, how great is the force of Germany, and how muche daunger is in the thing: And if perchaūce one or two haue offended, there may a meane be founde, how to pa∣cifie the matter without warre. Wherunto he made this aun∣swere, there nedeth no pacifieng of the matter: For he wil con∣quer Germany, or hazard all that euer he hath in the worlde. The Empe∣rour will cō∣quer Ger∣many. For the power therof is not so great, that he nedeth muche to feare it: For twenty yeares synce and more, hath he layde the foundation of this matter. Oftentymes they haue giuen hym ayde, in sondry and many warres, lately also against the kyng him self. They haue bene at great charges, in many assēblies of the Empyre. Moreouer in sondry warres they haue lost a great number of their mē, & so is their strength decayed. And al theft thinges hath he done for this intent, that Germany might he distitute of power, & voyd of force and strength: therfore is this tyme commodious to worke this feate in. He that heard this
talke of his by the mouth of the Ambassadour, an honest man and worthy of credit, reported the same vnto vs. Why should he than impute the cause of the war to vs, seing he hath intended the same, of so long tyme before? Whan we were than priuate persones, and drowned in the dregges of the Romish Religion? And if he had stande to his decrees and conuenauntes, than we wold haue done our duty: but in asmuch as he hath brokē the same, and the chief obedience is dew vnto God, let him ascribe the faulte vnto him selfe. For considering that he intēdeth de∣struction both to Religion and libertie: he geueth an occasion, wherby we may resist him with a good conscience. For in this case is it lawful to resist, as it is to be proued both by sacred & prophane histories. For God is not the authour of vniust vio∣lence, God is not the anctour of wrong. nether are we bounden to him otherwyse, than if he ful∣fyll the conditions, for the whiche he was created Emperour. He graūteth that he hath agreed with vs priuatly, and that is to vs a great pleasure to heare: Wherfor thē doth he moue war for those matters, for the which once a faithful agrement was made? For it can not be proued that we haue committed any re¦bellion, ether before or after the same compositions. But thus the case standeth. He made a decree at Wormes .xxv. yeares past, and set forth a proclamation, against Luther and such as imbraced his doctrine, & appointed moste extreme punishmēt. And that same acte now in this warre he intendeth to put in execution. His Crown and Scepter we neuer coueted: For we are content with our owne landes and reuenewes, and praye God, that in his feare, we may kepe and maynteine the same. If it be true that he sayth, why haue we so oft geuen him ayd, and lately but two yeares synce, against the kyng of Fraunce? For the whiche desert and benefit he ought in dede to forget al displeasure, though no reconcilement had bene made. We ne∣uer reported him euil, but for the opinion of his vertu, haue al ways commended hym highly. And as for famous libelles and pictures, nether haue our diuines nor yet any others set forth against hym: Yea our diuines and learned men haue euer more extolled him with great prayses, & exhorted the people in their sermons to do the same, and praye to God for his preseruatiō. Perauenture they haue set forth somwhat against the byshop of Rome: but there was no cause why we should inhibie them so to do. But how vilaynously and slaūderously Cochleus, and Hadamar, the White frere of Collon, haue rayled against vs, our fellowes, and diuines, euen now at Regēspurg, whan the The Rable of Papistes. assemblie was holden to appease the controuersie, it is mani∣festly
knowen. He obiecteth vnto vs conspiracies, and conuen∣ticles wherin he doth vs great iniury, as in all other thinges. For we are borne and bred in Germany, where men be far void of suche crafty deuises, as haue bene wrought against vs these many yeares past, and now first bewray them selues. Howbeit that we might defende our selues against vniust violence, we made a league, and denie it not, and did it only to defende our selues, and to iniury no mā, and wherfore we made it, we haue now in two seuerall writinges declared. And fiue yeares since saith the Lantgraue, when I went through with the Empe∣rour at Regenspurg, Granuellan sayd then to me, and to my chauncelour, how the Emperour was nothing offended with our league, but could be content also, that we should receiue in to the same as many as we would. After he speaketh in darke wordes, as though we should haue moued the Turke to inuade Germany: But this shall the thing it selfe confute. For we haue always giuen ayd against the Turke, yea more than euer our progenitours haue done, and that at suche tymes as we were not bounden, for that the couuenauntes were not kept, and whan diuerse others, whiche had promysed ayde perfour∣med nothing. But you haue heard already how he and his brother haue deuised so with the Turke, that he might oppresse sodainly vs only and our fellowes. He had ayde giuen him la∣tely by a publique decree against Fraunce: Than he promysed, that whan that warre should be finished, he would go streight against the Turke. After he made peace with the enemy, with∣out their knowledge, with whose money he had made warre, & behold now, he bēdeth al his force against vs. Is it not a good∣ly matter to se the munition brought out of Austriche to the warre in Germany, and in the meane season to suffer Hongary to be ouer runne with the Turkes? The seditions, cōspiracies, and treasons, wherwith he chargeth vs, are none at all, nether is ther any other cause of war, than the same before rehearsed. He sayth, he hath graunted vs ouer muche, and wynked at our doinges, to the grudge of his own conscience: but this is fay∣ned also. For his desire was long since to haue made warre a∣gainst The Empe∣rour preten¦ded this war long before. vs, and could not, being impeched hitherto, and was of necessitie constrained to differre it, till he had quieted the Duke of Cleaue, the king of Fraunce, and the Turke. For what hys mynde hath bene, those extreme and moste greuous executions of godly men in his coūtreis do declare. And that also he agreed with vs heretofore, we now first perceiue, that it was done for this intent, that being dispatched of other affaires, he might
entent, that being dispatched of other affaires, he might intēd this warre only. Wherof assuredly I coulde suspecte nothyng, sayth the Lantgraue, by reason of the great good wyll and hu∣manitie that he shewed me lately at Spier. At the which time also Nauis wylled my Chauncelour, that in any case this talk might be kept secret. Finally the ende of his accusation is, to pluck our fellowes from vs. And therfore ascribeth vnto vs Ty¦ranny, extortion and disturbaunce of the clergie, but vndeser∣uedly. For we punysh extortions and murther in our dominiōs extremely, and therby haue purchased no small hatred to our selues. But lately that innocent man, Iohn Diazius, was so cruelly and detestably murthered, as neuer man was, from the beginning of the worlde vntyll this day: That Fratricide his brother apprehēded and accused. Certen Princes made request that so horrible a fact myght be punyshed: but what insued therof, the matter it selfe declareth. He imputeth the cause of all displeasure and trouble vnto vs: But his decree of Wormes The decres of Wormes was the trō∣pet of this warre. was cause of all together, wherunto our aduersaries cleaued as to a moste sure foundation, especially the Duke of Brun∣swick, whiche made a confederacie with diuerse, before the con¦uentiō of Auspurg, where as, what maner of decree was made, it is openly knowen. Certenly those cruell and fierce wordes ther pronounced, caused vs to make the league and cōfederacie that we are in at this daye. The Byshops adherētes haue bene euermore busy with vs, in al assemblies, and would haue com∣pelled vs to the choise of meates, and holy dayes of their owne makyng. Moreouer we permitted the Emperour at Auspurg, whan he promysed vs faire and largely that he should appoint preachers. But it is knowen wel enough, how wicked and how ignoraunt men he assigned to that office. It is an auncient cu∣stome The custom of thempire in assēblees. of thempire, that whā any Prince is minded to retourne home, from thassemblie he may do it by the Emperours leaue. How be it, my father (sayth the Duke of Saxon) what tyme he was at Auspurg, could not obtaine licence of him to departe, and heard it also reported, that in case he prepared to goe, he should yet be stayed against his wyll. And albeit my vncle Fri∣derick had done muche for hym, yet would he neuer, as long as my father liued confirme hym in his own Dukedome, only be∣cause of the decree of Wormes and Religion. Seing therfore that the cause of this warre is manifestly knowen, we desyre all men to geue no credit to the contrary, and defende with vs their common and natife countrey. As for our own subiectes and clientes, whom he hath released of their allegeaūce which
they owe vnto vs, we doubt not but they wyl do their duty vn∣to vs as they are bunden. The protestaūtes letting slippe that occasiō of fight at Ingolstad, as before is sayd, and remayning there thre dayes after, whan the Emperour in the meane sea∣son had fortified his Campe strongly, the fourth day of Septē∣ber, they remoued thence, that they might encountre with the The Prote∣stauntes re∣moue their Campe. Erle of Bure, or stop his passage: Notwithstanding that some were against it, and said how they nede to go no further to seke the enemy, which was in sight, and before their eies. They pit∣ched the next tyme at Neuburg, which they had fortified with a garnison before, two days after they marched to Donauerd. The tenth day of September they encāped besydes Uending, a towne of the Erles of Oeting, sending from thence espialles to bring them some intelligence of the Erle of Bure. That per∣ceiuing the Emperour, sent aduertisement to the Erle, who turning out of his way, and marching from Norinberg to Re∣genspurg, came to the Emperour at Ingolstad in safitie. Wher¦fore the Protestauntes being frustrated of their hope, the third day after returne vnto Donauerde. Hether came vnto them Christopher Counte Oldenburg, and Friderick Rifeberg with two legions, and the Erle of Bichling with fiue enseignes of fotemē. In the meane tyme the Emperour remoued his campe to Nuburg: And whan no aide came, the souldiours of the gar∣nyson rendred the towne. The Emperour pardoned them al, ta∣king stipulation of them, that they shoulde no more weare ar∣mure Nuburg rē∣dred vnto ye Emperour. against him. Than the report went, how the Emperour would to Auspurg. Wherfore the Germaines passe ouer Tho∣nawe, to let him of his iourney: But whan he leauing a garni¦son at Nuburg, marched toward Marxeme, they returne back into their former campe. I tolde you before how they had sent Ambassadours for ayde both into Fraunce and Englande, but that was in vaine. And the king of Fraunce in dede excused the matter, for that hauing made peace with ye Emperour, he sayd he could not. How beit, for that he would not haue the Empe∣rours Fraunce de∣ed to ayde ther Protest. power increased, he desyred Peter Strosse (a Florētine, a man of war and exceading riche) to lende them thre hondreth thousand crownes, and to the intent he might the easelier doe it, he payeth a great somme of money, that he ought him. He was content, for asmuche as they of Strasburg, Auspurg, and Ulmes became suerties, & goeth forth with Iohn Sturmius, that was sent Ambassadour into Fraunce, to the Princes in their campe at Donauerde. Whan he came thither, he was ho∣norably receiued, and departed in suche sorte, as he would assu∣redly
defray the money: but when the tyme came, that he shuld disburse it, he could no where be found in all Fraunce. Many men suppose that this was wrought by the policie of the Car∣dinall Peter strosse disceaued ye Protestātes. of Tournon. Who for the hatred he bare to Religiō, wy∣shed all aduersitie to the protestauntes, and was than chief in authoritie with the king. About thende of September, the pro¦testauntes write again to them of zurick, Bernes, Basill, & to the Schafusians, and shew them what themperour intēdeth, & The Prote. write to the Swisses go∣spellers. what daunger they shal stand in also, in case he get the victory, and will them to consider, whether it be not wisdome for thē, to declare them selues ennemies to the Emperour and byshop of Rome, & after to inuade the Emperours countrie next thē. If they wyll so doe, they promyse them all ayde and fidelitie. Wherunto they make aunswere. Howe not they only, but all the rest of ye Swysses in lyke case, haue a league by inheritaūce with the house of Austriche and Burgundy: out of the whiche Their aun∣swer to the Protestātes. countreis, they haue all their wyne and bread corne: Whiche league if they should them selues infringe, the Swisses their fellowes, whiche be of a contrary Religion, should haue iuste cause to assiste the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando, and to opē the strayte passages in the Alpes, whiche they haue through their great labour shut vp and closed, and so ioyne with their ennemies. Moreouer, wynter is now at hande, so that albeit they would neuer so fayne, yet can they do no great thing this yeare, and if they should leaue their owne countrey naked, it is to be feared, leste others would take possession in the meane season. Therfore it is muche better that they tary styl at home: For so shall not their fellowes styre, as they haue already decla∣red. It is not vnknowen, that they beare them ryght good wil, and wyshe them to prosper, after their owne hartes desyre, howebeit they thinke it not mete for thē, to enter into so great daunger. And therfore desyre them to take it in good parte. The Emperour remoueth from Marxeme, to Donauerde: but fyndyng no place conuenient to encampe in, he tourneth on the left hand, and the thyrde daye of October, marcheth to Monheyme. It fortuned than to be a great myste, and the es∣coutes that were sent out to knowe whiche waye the Empe∣rour went, brought contrary reportes: but in fine, whan Le∣wys the Erle of Oetinge, brought certen worde that he was passed with a great part of his Armie ouer the Ryuer of Wer∣nize, they followed after immediatly about two of the clocke at after none, and towardes nyght, pytche their Tentes, not passing halfe a myle from the Emperour.
Hitherto came vnto them messengers from the city of Norling who seing themperour so nigh, required ayde, who were auns∣wered The Empe∣rours & the Protestātes campes nere together. frankely. The nex day again it was a myste. The fore∣warde led the Duke of Saxon, the Lātgraue the middle ward, and George Malspurg and Rifeberg the rerewarde. The Duke of Saxon marching forwarde with fiue legions & with many troppes of horsemen, approcheth nere vnto thennemy, & there was ryding & pricking & coursing vp & down on both partes. Whan it waxed clere, themperour perceiuing ye the vantwarde kept on ye way towardes Norling, & that the rereward was not come yet in sight, he auaunceth al his horsemen, as though he would geue the battell. The Lantgraue therfore being in the mids, what time ye whole armie of his enemies made towards him, asketh coūsel: some aduised him to folow ye Duke of Saxō, but because the reward was yet far behind, which through his departure, he sawe shuld be like to fal into the lapse of their en∣nemies, he thought not good to depart, but sending messēgers, both to haste them forward, & to cal back the Duke of Saxō, he kept the hilles, that he was vpon, & stired not. In the midway betwixt both armies was ye Riuer of Egra, which was in dede but smal, yet hard to passe ouer, especialy for themperour, if he wold haue foughten the battel. Unto this riuer was come the Erle of Bure with his power. And whan it was very like, that they shuld haue ioined in battel, themperour calleth him back, & cōmaundeth him straitly to go no further. Thus they retur∣ned both into their campe, & the protestauntes pitched not far frō Norling. On the next daye certen troupes of themperours horsemen, ryde nere vnto their enemies, & gaue thē a very hote skirmysche. In this conflict was hurt Albert Brunswick, the sonne of Duke Philip, going vnaduisedly after he had wel tip∣pled: Albert of Brunswick hurt. he was caried to Norling, where he died not long after. The Emperour remayning there certen dayes, sendeth in the meane tyme Octauius Farnesius with his owne force and with the Almaigne fotemen and munitiō to take Donauerd. Fortune fauoured the mans deuise: And settyng forwarde by night, whan he was come thither as sone as day appered, and was auauncing his ladders to scale: the townes men yelded them selues. The souldiours of the Garnyson were fayne to Donauerd rendred. saue thē selues by flyght. This done, themperour marcheth to Donauerd. The protestantes intent was, to haue assaulted the Emperour in his campe, but his departure altered yt purpose, & it is thought how themperour had some intelligence therof by espial. In those days the Duke of Alba, sent to demaūde of the Lantgraue, why he kept so much the hilles and mountaynes?
why cometh he not downe into the plaine fielde, and trye the matter in battell? The Lantgraue sent him word again, howe The duke of Alba raūteth ye Lātgraue. he and his fellowes were fiue dayes together in the plain fiel∣des before Ingolstad, and offered battell: why would he not fight? Why did he not bicker at Norlinge, where he taried for him the whole daye? Whylest this was done in Sweden, there fell a great alteration in Saxonie. How the Emperour had de¦uised Alteratiō in Sauonte. with Duke Maurice at Regenspurg, and Ferdinando at Prage, again, how the Emperour commaunded him to inuade and enter in possessions of the Electours of Saxonie and the Lantgraues countreis, it is before specified. Wherupon Duke Maurice in the first beginning of the warre, retourning home from Regenspurg, calleth a conuention at Chemnice of al the states within his dominion, and there cōsulteth what is nede∣full to be done. They counsell him to know certenly of the Em∣perour, Duke Mau∣rice consul∣teth against the Protest. whether he wyll permitte them to kepe their Religion safely, secondly that he, and the Marques of Brandenburg E∣lectour, should make intercession. And in case they may be in as¦suraunce for Religion, and that intercession wil take no place, they exhorte him, that in as much as he is bounden in al other matters besides Religion, to obey the Emperour, he would sit quiet, & hire a power to defende his countrey. Unto the which thing they promise him ayde, & chouse syx out of the whole nū∣ber, to assiste him at all times with their aduise & counsel: But whan themperours cōmaundemēt before said came, vnto hym, and king Ferdinando also mustred men in Hongary, & leuied a power in Boheme, he holdeth another assembly of his states at Fridberg the eight day of October. There he reciteth ye former treaty, & sayth, how after their aduise, the Marques of Brandē¦burg & he haue solicited the Duke of Saxon & the Lantgraue, to permitte yt they might intreate the matter, & haue earnestly admonyshed them also, what perill is in the thing, & that they would ponder it diligently. How be it as yet in dede they haue receiued no conuenient aunswer, and libelles are set out, & the matter come to hand stripes, & they haue bickered together, & haue had sondry smal cōflictes: and albeit yt thei haue at diuers times required his ayd, yet forasmuch as themperour hath gi∣uen him sufficiēt warraūtise for religiō, therfore hath he, follo∣wing their coūsel, stired nothing, but hath kept soldiours for ye defence of his prouince, & conferred in matters of coūsell wt the six chosē. But now is the time so troublesome & perillous, yt the thosē say, how thei ar not able to beare so great a burthē: wher¦fore at their request, is this assēbly called. For thēperours cōma¦undementes
are brought vnto hym, which he will shewe them, that are sore, and of moste importance, and of such sorte, that in case they be neglected, the whole countrey therby is like to come in a wounderfull daunger. Moreouer, the Bohemers and theyr fellowes prepare warre, and are comen out of their countrie al ready, purposing to inuade the prouince of Duke Iohn Fride∣rickes. And albeit that he hath first by letters, after, by his Am¦bassadours, last of al going him selfe also, intreated king Ferdi∣nando to the contrary, yet could he obtayne nothing. And in asmuche also as he supposeth that the same is done by Them∣perours commaundement, he neither may, neither lieth it in his power to resist it, he would in dede right gladly, that the ci∣uile warre being once appeased, the Turkish violence might be repressed. How beit they knowe in what sorte both coūtreis be lincked together in hope of succession. And howe he hath siluer mines also comon with the Prince Electour. And to suffer all these thinges to be plucked away from the house of Saxonie & Siluer my∣nes cōmon to ye Dukes of Saxon. to come into a straungers handes, it should be a great grief to him. Moreouer, the whole coūtrey lieth so intermingled by per celles, that in case foreine soldiours should inuade his Cosyns prouince, it were a daunger lest his countrey shuld also sustain great hurt therby. They se also, how it is not good, that forein nations should remaine in these parties. And seing the matter is thus, he desyreth them both in his own, and also in his bro∣ther Augustus name, that they would way the whole case dili∣gently, & help him with their ayde & counsell. And he eftsones wyl omitte nothing, that shalbe his duty ta do agayne for thē. The matter being debated, they condescended, immediatly to aduertyse the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, of the Em∣perours commaundement, of the preparation of kyng Ferdi∣nando, and to desyre them both, that for auoyding of destruc∣tion, they would permitte that Duke Moris myght enter into the possessions of their countrey. For so shuld they both eschew The vnrea∣sonable re∣quest of Du∣ke Mauris counsell. forein warre, and kepe safe their Religion, & after, whan mat∣ters appeased, a great deale more easely obtayne the same a∣gayne at his handes, thā of others. Therfore writing their let∣ters to this effect the eleuenth day of October, thei desire them to way with them selues the whole matter, & be cōformable to this counsell, which is doubtles the best, that may in this trou¦blesome tyme be geuē. They requyred also the Lātgraue in his letters, that he would perswade the Prince Electour to take ye same way. Duke Moris wrote also his letters to ye Lantgraue his father in lawe, of much like inportaunce. And because the
foreine soldiour was now at hande, he sayeth, howe he must of necessite prouide, that Saxony be not ouerrunne. After that, he promyseth hym muche good wyll and amitie, and sheweth that he desyreth nothyng that is his. He sayeth moreouer, how the kyng of Polle wyl be a petitioner to the Emperour, which thyng he is glad to heare of, wherfore let hym so be content, and not be exasperated with any wordes, and lykewyse to per∣swade the Electour, neyther that he refuse to submit him self to the Emperour. For this is in maner the only waye to come to a reconcilement, and that he wil also helpe to make a peace. To the conuention at Fridberg, Iohn William the Electour, sonne of Saxonie, whan he heard of the preparation of kyng Ferdinando, sending Ambassadours, requyreth Duke Moris, that according to the league of inheritaūce, he wold ioyne his force with his, to saue the common countrey from daunger. Duke Moris sayth again, how he hath spared no payne, that the matter might haue bene appeased. And seing he hath takē that labour in vaine, and that they be now in armure, he may do nothing against the supreme Magistrate, whome also that aunciēt league doth except. It was song or euer ye protestaūtes heard of the Emperours going to Donauerd. The nex day ther purpose to go to Lawging a towne vpō the Riuer of Thonaw thre miles aboue Donauerde, & that by night: but whan they were vncerten, whether the Emperour were gone forward, & if they should leaue him at their back, many said it was daunger lest he should take Norling, and after by the vale of Remsie, in∣uade the lande of Wirtemberg, altering their purpose, they re∣mayned there one day. This toke Scherteline displeasauntly, as likewise other thinges, & going to Auspurg, from the which Scherteline departeth from the pro¦test auntes. citie he was sent forth into the warres, he leadeth away ye gar∣nison that was at Lawging, & returneth no more to the field. In the meane season themperour marching forward frō Dona uerde, taketh by cōposition Dilling & Hochstet, & shortly after, Lawging, & Gundelfing, by ye riuer of Brent. Wherfore hauing gotten the possession of the water of Thonawe, he had great cō¦modities to serue his purpose, & leauing algarnisō at Lawging The Empe∣rour win∣neth the Ri∣uer of Tho∣nawe. whan he had passed ouer Brent, he pitcheth his Tentes at the village at Sontheyn, in ye way to Ulmes, which was thre my∣les from ye same place. The .xiii. day of October, the protestātes at the length remouing their campe whan they heard that the Emperour kept on his iourney towardes Ulmes, the nex daye came to Sieng a town by the same Riuer a litle aboue Son∣theim, so as the water was in the mids, betwixt both armies,
As they staied here, and had not yet pitched their Tentes, they espie certen horsemen on the top of the next hyll. Amongs the whiche was thēperour him self, who rode forth wt the Duke of Alba to escoute abroad, the same day the Duke of Saxon had ye forewarde, and hasteth spedely toward the enemy, and sendeth also worde to the Lantgraue, to make haste after hym: But what time the enemies fled, he slacketh the matter, and tarieth for the Lantgraue on the hyll. There as it is thought, was lost The occasiō of taking the Emperour loste. agayne a moste goodly oportunititie of well doing. For there was no foorde to ryde ouer the Ryuer, and but one brydge in al those parties, and though the Emperour peraduenture had e∣scaped by the same, yet had his chief Captaines bene in great distresse, as thei them selues afterward ar reported not to haue hid. The Emperour omitting his iourney to Ulme, lest that le∣uing his enemies behinde his back, he should lose the vitall of Thonawe, he goeth another way to worke, and at the Ides of October, in the next wood he laieth an Ambusche, of thre thou¦sand Arcubusiers: And whan the Prince of Eulmone had of∣fered A warlike pollicie of ye Emperour. them the skermysche with his light horsemē, & the charge being geuen, infayning that he fled, had allured them to the wood side, thei by & by breake out of thēbuschemēt & discharge at them. That seing the Lantgraue, came streight wayes to re¦scue his company that were in daūger, which were fowre ban¦des of horsemen. Wherfore there was a sore conflicte all day till it was night, and the field pieces were brought to the bicke∣ring. This whyle the Duke of Saxon abode with the armie, that in case the Emperour should in this tumulte haue assaul∣ted their Campe, he might be ready to gyue him the repulse. Whan this wold take no place, the Emperour attempteth the matter by a Camisade in the night, and chouseth out of the whole nombre the fotemen of Almaignes and Spanyardes, & An other pol¦licie. cōmaundeth them to put on whyte shirtes ouer their harnesse, he appointeth them also horsemen, and the Duke of Alba to be their Captain, and sendeth them forth at night as sone as the watche was set, that they myght go styll and closely to their enemies campe: And he him selfe immediatly after, followeth with the rest of his power. Whan they came thither, they per∣ceiued that the nomber of the watchemen were increased, and that they were vp in armure. Wherfore this enterpryse was in vayne, for as muche as they vnderstode the matter by espiall, a fewe howres before. For the wante of forage and vytayle, the Pestilencein the Emper. Campe. tyme of the yeare, and continual rayne, they died sore in them∣perours Campe, and about this tyme also Cardinall Farnese
departeth out of the Campe homeward with certen bandes of Italian horsemen. The Emperour also for the same cause was compelled to chaunge his place, and retourne into his old cāpe besides Laweging, the daye before the kalendes of Nouember. Unto the letters of the states of Duke Moris dated at Frid∣berg the .xi. day of October before sayd, the Lantgraue answe∣reth the xx. day of ye same moneth. How he is hartely sory that The Lant∣graue aun∣wereth the states of Du¦ke Moris. warre should be attempted again those countreis, and muche more that in common daunger, they doe ioyne their forces to∣gether, after the example of their elders. And where they doe not consider that this warre is against Religion, that semeth to hym great maruel, seing that both the Byshops letters to ye Swisses, and the league made betwixt him and the Emperour and shewed vnto the Heluetians by the Byshops commaunde∣ment, doe opēly testifie and plainly declare the same. For since that league was made, great forces haue commen to the Em∣perour out of Italy, and all the Italians that are taken do af∣firme this certenly, that they were purposely sent, to warre a∣gainst the Lutherians. Moreouer, their fellowes of the same Religion are in this war much more cruelly handled than any others with spoyling, firyng, & robberies: That the women & maydens are wickedly defloured, and yong chyldren & infātes, The crueltie wrought by the papistes. haue their handes and fete cut of, euen for the hatred of this doctrine. Where the Emperour hath warraunted them for Re∣ligion, it is but dissimulation. For in case he were demaunded whether he would, that Luthers Religiō should be submitted to the authoritie and decrees of the Byshops counsell, there is no doubte, but the craft would sone appere. Wherfore let them not truste to his promesse. And where they are affrayd of them∣perours sentence of outlawyng them, he marueleth greatly, where they knowe, that the same is not lawfull for hym so to doe, vnlesse the parties had first bene sommoned, and conuicte in iudgement. But the greatest grief of all is, that the noble house and people of Saxonie shuld be thus deuided: For if they were of one mynde, and would ioyne their forces together, the daunger that is so feared, might easely be repulsed. He hath ve¦rely talked with the Electour herein, but he is nothing agrea∣ble to that waye, whiche they do shewe. For if he should, at the chaunge of fortune, require the lyke of Duke Moris, he doub∣teth not, but that both he would refuse it, and they also would counsell him to the contrary. Wherfore he doth not lyke theyr coūsel, and the worse, for that Duke Moris hath lately writtē to them both, how he was sory to heare it bruted, that he shuld
couet to possesse his cōsyns prouince. For the reporte was vn∣true and iniurious to him, and therfore praied them not to cre¦dit the same. Whan they had receiued these letters, they were contented with that excuse, and thought no more of the mat∣ter: And if he shold now sease vpō his coūtrey, thei se, what men would iudge, he desireth therfore, that they would impeche the thing, that it were not done: For otherwyse not only forreyne warre, but ciuill also wil ensue vpon the same. For in case he susteyne any iniury, by reason of the Emperours proscription, neither he, nor his fellowes, which stande in the same case can not but helpe him. And than what wilbe the ende therof, it is not hard to iudge. Therfore let them indeuour, that the houses of Saxō and Hesse be not deuided, but that Duke Maurice doe assiste him and his fellowes. For this shalbe chiefly for his ho∣nour and welthe also. He wrote the same day also, to Moris of like effect, and admonisheth him, not to waye the Emperours proclamations, and outlawyng, but cal to his remembraunce, what the Electour and he haue done for him & his father. For where as Duke George his vncle had made his wil that them∣perour should possesse his whole prouince vntil his brother did The Proie. benefites to Duke Moris forsake the Protestauntes Religion, he knoweth, what benefit than he receiued of them both. Moreouer, where Duke George gaue vnto his father a yearly pension, and that ther was some feare, least he woulde haue denied the same, for the hatred he bare to Religion, the Protestauntes than promysed hym, that if it so came to passe, they would of their liberalitie gyue hym asmuche yearly. Wherfore let hym surcease of his enterpryse, & attempt nothing in the Duke of Saxons prouince without his loue and leaue. For otherwyse, he shall not want his fello∣wes ayde. The Ambassadours of Pole were in dede in the Em∣perours Campe, and haue signified to the Duke of Saxon and him what they haue done: But the condicions are of suche sort as they make nothing at all for peace. And of lyke importaūce, the councellours of the warre, wryte to Duke Moris and his states, and proteste, that if any force be done to yt Duke of Sax∣on, they wyll not neglecte his iniury. The Electour him selfe, made them none aunswere at that tyme, as shall further be de∣clared hereafter. The same day also the Lantgraue and the counsellers write The Proie. letters to the cities. to the cities of Maydenburg, Brunswyck, Breme, Hamburge, Goslary, Hildesseme, Goting, Hanobrie, Embeck, Minden, and to the Duke of Pomerane, Dukes of Luneburg, and to Prince Anhalde: They shew them what daunger is toward Saxonie,
but chiefly to the Electour, vnto whose frountiers the enne∣mies are comen already: The beginning cometh of kyng Fer∣dinando, who hath enforced the Bohemers vnto this warre, & Duke Maurice taketh his parte, and pretendeth a cause for that the Emperour hath outlawed him: howbeit, they haue sende to Duke Moris, that he should not medle, for than shall not the Duke of Saxon wante helpe. And in as muche as that whole countrie standeth in present daunger, and the Duke as∣keth helpe of them, they can not but ayde him. And were in mynde once to haue delyuered hym part of their Armie, which they haue together, but because their ennemie is not far of, & are in good hope that the matter shall shortely be tried by a mayne battell: Wherin all their welthes do consist, they thinck it not wysdome at this present, to make them selues so muche weaker. For this is the fetche of their ennemie, that being mo∣lested with other warres, they should not auaunce their whole force against him. And seing ye case standeth thus, they require them, that in all their names they wold sende him ayd of fote∣men, so sone as they can to Wittemberg and Weinmar, & that also the rest of the money which is dew by the league, they pay vnto the Electours sonne and counsellours, for the case is cō∣mon to them all, and whan their fellowes are ouerrunne, the lyke misfortune wyll the soner chaunce vnto them. I haue spo∣ken before of the Bohemers: They serued Fardinando in dede, howbeit full sore against their willes, by reason of an aunciēt The Bohe∣mers serued against the Duke of sax on vnwil∣lingly. league that they had with the house of Saxon. And agayn for that they said how this war was not nedeful, & many thought that the Electour also had wrong. But Ferdinando brought them to it, & sent for a power out of Hōgary & Silesie, so that he might constraine them whether they wold or not. The hors∣men of Hongary are commonly called Hussares, an exceadyng Hussares. rauenous and cruell kynde of men. Wherfore leuing their force also, whan they were now passing out of their owne limites, Sebastian Weittemulle, general of the armie, sending his let∣ters, the .xx. day of October, proclameth warre to the Duke of Sarons people. For that certen yeares past, their Prince sea∣sed Ferdinando his depute proclaimeth to Saxonie. into his handes the Abbeye of Dobrilug, and that he renoū¦ced lately his fidelitie to the Emperour and his confederates, breaking the league, that was betwene the Bohemers and the house of Saxon. And albeit the thing requireth no declaratiō, for as muche as he is outlawed by the Emperour, yet, lest any thing might appeare to be omitted, he would for his discharge geue them this aduertisement. About this tyme the Ambassa∣dours
of the Protestauntes assemblie at Ulmes, for common cō¦sultation to be had. And wher as out of Saxonie came diuerse messages, of the state of things there, the Electour sending his letters the .xxvii. day of October, chargeth his Ambassadours that were at Ulme, to declare the whole matter to their Fello∣wes, and require them to consider his case, for asmuche as he The Duke of sarons re∣quest to hys fellowes. hath spared no peryll nor paine, that he might defende this hi∣gher part of Germany from distruction. The counsellours of the warre, a few daies past sent worde to the cities of Saxony, that they should helpe hym: But what they wil do, he is vncer∣ten, and though they would, yet feareth he greatly, that they shall not be able to resist so great a multitude of enemies, and that there is daunger, lest or euer they be ready, the enemy wyl haue inuaded his countrey. These thinges therfore let them re¦quire of their fellowes, first, in asmuche as it should be a great grief and discommoditie for him, in this extremitie, to leaue a∣ny longer destitute his wyfe, children, & people, that they wold geue him counsell herein. Moreouer, that they would graunte him more ayde, wherof the Lantgraue, and the counsellours of the warre haue put him in hope already. Finally that they do make no peace with the ennemy before he haue recouered yt he hath lost. Hereunto the Ambassadours aunswere franckly, & chiefly they intreate him that he would tary with the armie, tyll the Emperour shall haue broke vp his campe for this wyn∣ter, and shewe what daunger it should be if he now departed. And if Ferdinando and Maurice doe him any wrong, they pro∣myse him ayde, and say, how ther is no doubt but his fellowes both Princes & states, wyll according to their league, be faith∣full and helpfull to hym, and wyll conclude no peace before he haue recouered his owne. And in case he thought good, they would also, in lyke maner, as the Lantgraue and counsellours of the warre haue done, signifie so much to Duke Maurice. They trust also vndoubtedly that suche states as be of their cō∣federacie in Saxony, wyll doe their dutie herein. The forsayd .xxvii. day of October, Duke Maurice wryteth Duke Mau∣rice letters to the Elec∣tours. his letters from Dresda to the Prince Electour, that what the Emperour hath commaunded hym to doe, and in what peryll the matter consisteth, he hath heard lately by the letters of the states of his countrey. And now for so muche as the Emperour hath assured him and his people concerning Religion, therfore is he determined to the intent that both the Emperour may be satisfied, and that his ryght also may remayne vnto hym whole, through the aduise of his counsel, to fynde the meanes,
that his lande and prouince doe not come into the handes of straungers, and this doth he, both in his owne and also in his brother. Augustus name denounce to hym. And if in tyme to come, he shall be agayne reconciled to the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando, he wyll not refuse if they wyll suffer it, that the states of his iurisdiction shall treate betwyxt them both for an order in the whole matter. The selfe same wordes he writeth also to Iohn William, the Electours sonne, and warneth hym to see the letters adressed to his father, conueyed to him. In the meane whyle the Bohemers, and Nussars, make inuasion into Uoetiande the next cositrey of the Electours, sleying, spoyling, The Elec∣tours coun∣trey nuaded burning and rauishing out of measure. But the Bohemers ta∣ried not long, for because as I sayd before, they serued vnwyl∣lyngly, and at the eleuenth day of Nouember, forsakyng their enseignes, slyppe home euery man. But the Hongarians & such The Bohe∣mers slyp a∣way. others as Ferdinando had hyred, ioyne them selues vnto Duke Maurice, who taketh by rendring, first Swiccauie, after Ecne berg, and Aldeburg, and for the moste parte all the Electours townes, and sweareth them vnto hym, sauing Gothe, Isenack and Wittemberg. The newes therof being brought into them∣perous campe, styred vp great ioy and gladnes, which the Em∣perour declared by a great peale of ordenaunce, as is accusto∣med. In these dayes the Emperour chaungeth his Campe a∣gaine, for lyke causes as he did before and chouseth a more com¦modious and drye ground, that he myght somwhat refresh the poore souldiours, and releue them also with vitaile. All others for the moste part counselled him, that the souldiours might retire vnto places where they should wynter. But he him selfe was of opinion, to continew the armie in the field, and main∣taine warre. All men for the moste part cried out vpon Duke Duke Mau∣rice  of ali men. Maurice, whiche serued him so sknekyshely, whome he oughte to haue honoured as his father, who was in a maner ye only au¦thour of all that he had, & he to requite him with such vnthāk∣fulnes: And ther came forth in his reproche and dispraise, both libelles and verses moste bitter, whiche charged him with fal∣sefying his fayth, with treason, and moste ingratitude, and so muche the more, that he wold do nothing herein at the intrea∣ty of neyther his wyfe nor his father in lawe. That thing knowen, he publisheth a wryting, to purge him His excuses. selfe, and sheweth, what maner of Religion is in his countrey, what he hath promised the people, and how for the furtheraūce of Religion, he hath founded certen Scholes. After he saith, how the Emperour hath assured him and his people, and not
hym only, but other Princes also concerning Religiō, and pre∣seruation of the lybertie of Germany, neyther is he of wyll, that any thyng be done violently, but that the cause maye in lawfull wyse be appeased, accordyng vnto many decrees of the Empyre already enacted. Wherfore he geueth credit to his pro∣messe and letters, by the ensample of those Princes, whiche do now serue hym, and doe not only at home, but in the campe al¦so, and a warfare professe this Religion. For suche as be fami∣liar with hym, and are dayly in his sight, may easely knowe his mynde, and in case they perceiued any such thyng, without all doubt they would not tary with hym. And where as the bi∣shop aydeth him, that is done, for bicause the warre is attemp∣ted against thē that are the chiefest aduersaries of his errours and authoritie: neither is it so muche to be considered, what moueth him, as what is the Emperours minde, which maketh the warre. Wherfore seing that Religion is assured, he seeth no cause, why he should not obey themperour in al other thinges: For Christ commaundeth to geue both to God and also to the Emperour, that whiche is his. What trauell and payn he hath taken, that this matter might without ciuile warre haue ben pacified, it is not vnknowen to the Emperour, to kyng Ferdi∣nando, and to diuerse others. But where as no peace could be graunted, and the Emperour sent out streight cōmaundement to sease vpon the landes of Iohn Friderick, and that also kyng Ferdinando hauing leuied the forces of Hongary Boheme and Austriche, was ready to inuade, and would not be intreated, but sent in his armie; and had taken already certen syluer my∣nes, whiche were common betwene his cosin and hym, he was dryuen of necessitie to prouide, that they got not the resydue, or inuaded further. And what his purpose was, he first declared boeth to the Lantgraue, to the Duke his Cosyn, and also to his Sonne. And seing it is so, he desyreth that no man mi∣stake his doyng, nor credit suche thynges as shall haply be re∣ported Duke Mau∣rice nothing coucious. by hym: For in mainteyning of Religion he wylbe con∣stant, and hath none other respecte in this thinge than that the landes and dignities of the house of Saxon shuld not come into straungers handes. About this tyme began again persecutiō in Fraunce. There Persecution in Fraunce. is a town in those parties called Melda, ten miles from Paris the byshop therof in former yeares was Williā Brissonet: Who being desirous of purer doctrine, appointed good preachers & instructours of the people, excluding al freers. And what tyme for the same cause the diuines of Sorbone procured him some
daunger, he shewed no constancie, but refused his enterpryse. Notwithstanding the remnaunt of that doctrine remayned in the mindes of many, and this yeare about thre score townes men consulting of the matter, chouse them selues a preacher of the worde, and assembling in priuate houses, whan the Ser∣mon was ended, on certen dayes, they receiue the Lordes sup∣per; after the order of the Gospell, and Christes institution. This thing could not long be kepte secret, especially, sythe that dyuerse also came to them out of the countrey. Wherfore, beyng taken whan they were all together, they are put in pryson, and after their examination, caried to Paris in cartes. There receyuing sentence of death, and caried home agayne, fourtene of them, bounden to seuerall stakes, were burnte quicke all at one tyme, the residewe were whypped and banni∣shed. As they were retournyng home warde from Paris, one commeth runnyng to them out of the next village, and exhor∣teth them to perseuer to the ende. Wherfore beyng apprehen∣ded, he suffered lyke punyshement as the others did. Before ther were brent, they were put on the torture, to the intent they should vtter the fellowes and followers of theyr doctrine, but they could extorte nothyng out of them. Many supposed this to be done of pourpose to breake the amitie, that was than in knitting betwene the kynge and the Protestauntes. Duke Maurice letters of defiaunce to the Duke of Saxon, were delyuered in the Campe the syxt daye of Nouember. In the fourmer booke I haue shewed you, howe the Byshop, the .xvi. daye of Apryll, gyuing sentence agaynst Tharcheby∣shop of Col∣lon appea∣leth frō the Pope. the Archbyshop of Collon, depriued hym of al his ecclesiasticall offices. Nowe where he heard fyrst therof for any certentie, the fourth daye of Nouember, as he hymselfe mentioneth, a fewe dayes after settyng forthe a wryting, and declaryng the cau∣ses, why he can not acknowledge the Byshop for hys iudge, who is accused already, both of heresy and idolatrie, he appea∣leth from that sentence, vnto a lawfull counsell of Germany, and whan the same shall begynne, he sayeth he wyll persecute his suite against the Byshop. The Protestauntes Ambassadours, whiche I shewed you before, were assembled at Ulme aboute the ende of October, whan they could not agree in sentences, in the moneth of No∣uember they went to the Campe at Gienge, that the consulta∣tion might be the easier. There is propounded, for so muche as some fellowes of their religiō geue no ayde, & of their cōfedera∣tes, they of Luneburg & Pomerane, & certen others, and again
the rest of the States and cities in Saxonie helpe not muche, and nothyng is brought out of Fraunce, and by reason that the soldiours doe dayly slippe awaye for the tyme of the yeare, and other discommodities, the armie is deminished, they must chouse one of these thre thynges, eyther to geue the battell, or departe the field, retyring the soldiours into places where they may wynter, or els make peace and truce. The matter being debated, they condescended to make mention of peace, and they assigned Adam Trotte, who through the cause of the Electour of Brandenburg, had accesse to Marques Iohn his brother, to breake the matter. But where as the Emperour, whiche by e∣spiall knewe throughly before all their case and discommodi∣tie, and had lately receyued glad tydiuges out of Saxony, pro∣pounded verey harde conditions, it is determined, that all the reste of their force beyng led into Saxonie, a thousande horse∣men, and eight thousande fotemen, should wynter there in cer∣ten places, at the coste and charges of the Duke of Wirtem∣berge, and the cities of the vpper partes of Germany. After the thre and twenty day of Nouember, they retyre, makyng fyrst a decree, that an other Ambassade should be sent into Fraunce and Englande. And at the two and twenty daye of Ianuarye, to mere agayne at Frankefurte. And thus was the warre go∣uerned nothyng luckely, of the whiche misfortune this was The vnluc∣ky successe of the Protest. warre. thought to be the the principal cause, that the matter was not wrought by the order and wyll of one. For where the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue were in authoritie egall, it chaunced that many goodly oportunities, through disceptation, were omitted. The same whiche was Authoritie cānot beare equalitie. also decreed of placyng their Soldiours, came to none effecte. whan many refused to be contributaries any longer. After the Emperour had intelligence of theyr departure, he ma∣keth forth horsemen immediatly to vnderstande of their iour∣ney. And shortly after commaundeth the Duke of Alba and the Erle of Bure to followe, and he him selfe also goeth forth with the Horsemen of Germany, leauing the fotemen, and cōmaun∣ding them to remayne. The moste part of the protestātes were already in their campe, where they should reste al nyght: But the Lantgraue, albeit he led the forwarde the same day, yet he taried with the Duke of Saxon, and either of thē had ten gui∣dons of horsemen only, and about fiue hondreth gūners. With these they stayed vpon an hill, and plāted redy such field pieces as they had with thē. And thus abiding their ennemies, whan it was almost darke night, the Emperour calleth his mē back,
and than went they also softely forwarde tyll they came to their Campe be besydes Heydenem, in the lande of Wirtem∣berg, escapyng moste present daūger. For if the Emperour had The peril of the Protest. geuen the charge, they whiche were so fewe in nomber, in com∣parison of their ennemies, had bene all either taken or slayne, and so they let not to saye them selues afterwarde. But them∣perour, who knewe not what force they were of, and supposed them to be many mo thā they were, was nothing hasty on thē. And the same night commaunded he the fotemen to marche forward and followe him, to the intent verely, that he might haue foughten with them the next day: But they as I said, go∣yng secretly away by night, were nowe come to their Army. Wherfore the Emperour retourneth to his Campe, and there made his abode two daies, to refreshe his soldiours. After, be∣cause he supposed that they wold wynter in Franckonie, a fer∣tile and a plentifull countrey, he thought to preuent them. Af∣ter therfore that he had taken by rendring, Bophing, Norling, the cositie of Oeting and Dingelspulle: he hasteth with great expedition to Roteburg, a citie of the Empire standing by he Riuer of Duber. The Lantgraue going to the Duke of Wirtē∣berg, after he had deliuered his force to the Duke of Saxony, retourneth home. And at the kalendes of December came to Franckfurt. But the Duke of Saxon, although he wanted the Senewes of warre, yet marching forwarde with his army, he battred Gemund, a towne in Sweden, and hath it rendred to him, and causeth the Senate to geue him a somme of money, whiche was gathered of euery man. After, the twelfth daye of The Duke of Saxon ¦acteth mony of the Papi∣stes. December he came with his Army before Frankefurt, and get∣teth of thē nyne thousand crownes: And imposeth to the Arch∣byshop of Mentz fourty thousand. And proceding on styll, he handleth the ryche Abbot of Fulden, and certen others of the Romishe Religion, after the same sorte. The Lantgraue retur∣ning home, sendeth his letters to Duke Maurice, his sonne in lawe, signifiyng that he wyll come to him, so that he wyll as∣sure him by saufe conduite: For he woulde intreate a peace be∣twixt him & the Duke of Saxon. Duke Maurice doeth assure him in dede, & sendeth him letters of the same, but therin were so many conditions, that he thought not good to goe, but sent Ambassadours, Herman Hundelsuse, & Henry Lersuer. And all be it they laboured the matter ernestly, yet could nothing be cō¦cluded. Whilest Maurice said, he might not accorde, wtout Thē∣perours cōsent, & the Duke of Saxon, which had his army rea∣dy, wold haue no delay, but yt he wold attēpt war against him.
Therfore whan there was no hope of peace, the Lantgraues soldious retourne home. Howbeit Recrode, that brought fote∣men of Almaines out of Fraunce (as before is sayde) remayned styll with the Duke. Whan the Emperour was at Rotburg, he sendeth away the Erle of Bure, and gyueth hym in charge, to fynde some meane to get Franckefurte. After, about the Ides of December, wryting his letters from thence, to Ulrich Duke of Wirtemberg. Al beit, saith he, that for the war, which certen The Empe∣rours letters to the Duke of Wirtem∣berg. yeares past, the Lantgraue and you attempted against my bro¦ther, kyng Ferdinando, and taking of the Dukedome of Wyr∣temberg, reason would, that I should haue punyshed both him and you extremely, yet did I forgeue you al the iniurie and pe∣naltie, and shewed you all fauour. And nowe of late, about the begynning of this warre, although your desertes were farre o∣therwyse, in as muche as you exercise Tyranny, not only vpon your owne people, but also ouer certen states and cities of the Empyre, neither will obey any lawe or iudgement. I sente to you an Ambassadour a man of honour, whiche shold declare vn¦to you the cause why this war is enterprised, and also requyre you to sit quiet, and than should you loke for all fauour at our handes. But al these thinges neglected, and not regarding the allegeaunce that you owe vnto vs, you haue associated your self with outlawes and their confederates, and haue incurred the lyke cryme of Rebellion, as they haue done, and first hast ta∣ken certen townes of my brother Ferdinando, and of other sta∣tes, & than of myne also, and of the Empyre vpō the soden, with men of their owne faction. And not content with that, whan these thinges were a workyng, you denounced warre against vs, by a certen mallaparte boldenes, and with moste opprobri∣ous wordes, haue hurte our fame and estimation, goyng a∣bout to take from vs, this degree of hyghest honour and digni∣tie, and deniyng vnto vs the fidelitie, streyghtways with your conspiratours, durste leade forth an Armie against vs, doynge outtrage vnto many clientes of my brother Ferdinandos and myne. Wherby you haue fallen into the penaltie, whiche is dewe vnto periured outlawes, and conuictes of hygh treason. And seyng it is thus, and all be it we haue iuste and lawefull cause to be auenged on you moste extremelie, accordynge to your demerytes, yet for our accustomed clemencie, and that the myserable people maye be spared. We strayghtely charge and commaunde you, that immediatlye vppon the syghte hereof, you doe submitte vnto vs your selfe, your countrey & all that you haue in the world, without condition or exception,
that we may ordre and vse the same at our pleasure: For vnles you shall obeye the same, we shal persecute the and thine with sworde and fyre. For those letters whiche you sent foure dayes synce, doe not content vs, neyther be they sufficient to pourge or excuse thyne offence. He sendeth a copie of the same his let∣ters vnto his subiectes also, and chargeth them to obeye hym no longer, but sende Ambassadours vnto hym to know further of his pleasure, he releaseth also their allegeaunce and othe, wherby they are bounden to hym. This if they wyll doe, he wil prouide, he sayth, that they shall lyue in a better state hereaf∣ter: If not, he threatneth them with lyke punishement. What time the Emperour wrote this, the Duke of Alba was with his armie at the borders of the countrey of Wyrtemberg: But Duke Ulriche was goyng to his Castell of Tuel, standing vpon an high hyll without the Region, and where the Empe∣rours letters were delyuered vnto hym by the way, the .xx. day The Dukes letters of submissiō to Themper. of December, he wryteth vnto hym moste humbly and with great submission. For that he is brought thus into his hygh di¦spleasure, he is most hartely sory, neither could there any thing haue chaunced vnto him more greuous. And where as diuerse had intreated for him, and he him selfe also acknowledge his faulte, & craued pardon, he had good hope, that his displeasure should haue bene appeased. And the same hope he reteyneth styll, for that he hath tried and experienced his clemēcy, which he is wonte to vse, towardes all suppliauntes. For hereof ar¦mo examples than one, shewed not many yeares since vnto cer∣ten Princes, whiche happely gaue somwhat more occasion of displeasure, than he hath done. But in case he wold haue heard his Ambassadours, he doubteth not, but that he woulde haue wrytten muche more gently. Wherfore he craueth his mercy, and besecheth him for Christes sake to forgeue hym, and not worke any extremitie against hym, beyng a myserable Prince. nor yet against his poore subiectes. About this tyme came vnto the Emperour the men at Ar∣mes of Naples, to the numbre of fiue hundreth, at the leading of Iohn Baptiste Spinello. After this, the Emperour goeth marching to Hale, a towne of Sweuia, vnto him lately recon∣ciled. Thether came vnto hym Fridericke the Paulsgraue The Pauls∣graue as∣keth pardon of Themps. Prince Electour, he had ayded the Protestaūtes with foure hondreth horsemen, whiche came vnto them at Ingolstad. Wherfore he goeth vnto the Emperour, and sheweth hym that this was not done to resist him, but to fulfyll a league wherby he was bounde to the Duke of Wyrtemberge.
Themperour taketh him vp sharply, & accompting how much he had done for him, blameth him sore. Neuerthelesse he remit∣teth the offence, and warneth him, that hereafter, he do recom∣pence this fault and errour, with a more trusty fidelitie. Alitle before the warres, whan the Paulsgraue intended to haue set an ordre in his churches, he had sent for Paulus Fagius, a mā learned and eloquent, to come to him from Strasburg, to He∣delberg, Paulus Fa∣gius. that he might be a guide in the doctrine of the Gospel, and shew the way vnto others. But in this successe of the Em∣perour, all that was there begonne, was quite dasshed. A fewe daies after came to him Ambassadours from Ulme, who after Ulmes recō∣ciled to the Emperour. they had made their submission and craued pardon, were recon¦ciled. This citie was of chiefest force and authoritie in al Sue∣uia. Wherfore their breaking of, frō their felowes, was a great matter, but they writing their letters to their frēdes at thende of December, signifie how the cause why they so did, was that the Emperour was prest to haue beseged their city roūd about, and they were vtterly forsaken of their fellowes, and sawe no mans helpe that was able to defende them against so great a power. Moreouer, for that certen of the chiefest of the confede∣rates sued vnto the Emperour priuatly to be reconciled. The Emperour condempneth thē in a hondreth thousand crownes and twelue pieces of ordenaunce, and put into their citie ten enseignes of fotemen. In this meane whyle the Erle of Bure, inuadeth the Lantgraues dominion, liyng aboue Franckfurt, and the towne and castell of Darmestat, he wynneth partly by force, partly by surendrie, he fireth the castell, and spareth the Darmstat wonne. people: For none defended it but the inhabitauntes, and a com¦pany taken out of the coūtrey. After, he passeth by Franckfurt. And where as he was out of hope, to wynne the same by vio∣lence, especially that tyme of the yeare, and his soldiours in so euyl plyght he sendeth away parte of his army before to passe ouer the Rhyne, and willeth them to tary him at Mentz. And whan he thought nothing lesse and was now returning home behold, they of Franckfurt, sending Ambassadours, offer to ren¦der, Thes of Frā¦kefurte ren∣der to therle of Bure. and say they wilbe at commaundement. He without any tariyng, turneth backward with them, and entryng the town with his armie, bringeth them in subiectiō to the Emperour: And as he was a Gentleman of a plain nature, whan the Se∣nate gaue him a supper, he iested with them, as it is reported, for rendryng so lightly and timourously, saiyng, howe they of Darmstat are worthy to inhabite Franckfurt, and they to be remoued and dwell at Darmstat. Which towne in comparison
of Franckefurte is but a village. Howbeit the cause why they did so, amonges others, was for that they sawe howe Ulme, and the Duke of Wirtemberg, should be reconciled. And again fearing lest the marte should be taken from them, for all their welth standeth by the same. Neither were thei ignoraunt, that they of Mentz and wormes, laboured for it to the Emperour, either citie for them selues, to haue it frō them. After, sending Ambassadours, they are receiued againe into the Emperours fauour, paying him foure score thousand crownes. Whan the Duke of Saxon was come with his armie to his own frōtiers the .xxii. day of December, sending his letters to the states of Duke Maurice, where as I made no aunswere, sayeth he, to The Elec∣tours letters to the states of Duke Maurice. your letters bearing date the .xi. daye of October. I did it pur∣posely, and would tary to se the ende: but what hath ben done in the meane tyme, it is openly knowen. Howbeit, by reason of the Cosynage, league, and amitie that is amonges vs, and for my benefites toward your Prince, certenly I loked for no suche thing, either of him or yet of you: Nor I woulde neuer haue thought, that euer he would haue vsed me and my people in suche sorte as hs hath done: Much lesse, that you wold geue him suche counsell, as shoulde tende to the destruction of the whole countrey, and your owne dommage also. But I thinke this tyme semeth vnto you conuenient, wherin should be vtte∣red the craftie deuises and counselles of certen of you, contri∣ued many yeares since, but of God alwayes repressed. For con∣sider with your selues, what an acte of yours was this, whan you counselled Duke George, to disherite his brother and hys brothers chyldren, because of their contrary Religion, and to make the Emperour & king Ferdinando his heires, vnles they would professe and restore the byshops Religion. And where as the wyl and legacie toke no place, but the whole inheritaunce was reduced to his brother Henry, and the doctrine of the Go∣spell reteyned, that was chiefly wrought through the meanes and industrie of me and my league frendes. And albeit that he professing our Religion, entred into our league also, and wry∣tynges made of the same, and sygned, aswell in his owne as al¦so in his sonnes name, yet did you, for as muche as your fyrste hope was frustrate, moue him, as much as you might, to swar∣ue from this his couenaunt. And whan he was departed, hys sonnes also followed the steppes of their father, vndoubtedly through your counsell. And like as that inheritaunce, against your willes descended vnto Henry and his sonnes, so did also the frendshyp, that I had with Henry, not a litle greue, you &
full ofte haue assayed that the same might be vntwyned. Ney∣ther was your enterpryse altogether frustrate, and that which you could not bryng to passe whylest he liued, you haue now at the last obteined of his sonnes, especially of Maurice, of whom I had conceiued in my mynde moste hope of vertue and frend∣shyp. For fiue yeares synce, not long after he was made a Ma∣gistrate, you styred him vp against me, whiche had not deserued that at his handes, and that in suche wyse, as the matter wan¦ted not great daunger. And albeit that the tempest was blowē ouer, through the mediation of the Lantgraue, and a bonde made, that no suche thyng should be attempted hereafter, but that the matter should be ordered on both parties according to thaunciēt league, yet haue you, in my absēce perswaded hym & his brother Augustus, to sease vpō my prouince. Which thing assuredly greueth me so muche the more, for that he, both wry∣ting and receiuing again ryght frendly letters, did signifie no suche thinge. Againe, that he would do nothyng herein at the request of the Lantgraue and his fellowes. The calamitie of the innocent people and of my subiectes greueth me, and that The calami¦tie of Saxo∣ny. exceadingly, whome he bringing foreine, cruel, and barbarous soldiours, hath plaged with robberies, spoyling and murther. It greueth me also, that the ministers of the churche and prea∣chers, ar euery where driuen out and put to flight, yea virgins and matrones defiled: Which autragious crueltie, I doubt not but God wyll ones auenge. But muche more greueth & trou∣bleth me, the handlyng of the thing so trayterously, spitefully, and vnloked for, attempted through your coūsell vndoubtedly, whiche after the example of the traytour Iudas, are hyred vn∣to it with bribes and rewardes. There is a cause pretēded, why he should take possession of my landes, for that Charles hath so commaunded, and Ferdinando vrgeth hym. But Cosinage and nere aliaunce, and the league and conuenauntes whiche are commen to both houses, ought to be preferred far aboue theyr proclamations. For touching al thinges, that concerne not re∣ligion, Charles, Ferdinando and I were agreed long synce, and the crimes that are ascribed to vs, are false, and we ar troubled for Religion only. If his commaundement doe moue you, why doth not the vnworthines of the thing it selfe moue you more? Why did you not consider, whether your Prince might lawful∣ly execute so wicked a commaundement, and grounded of no reason? But you brought to counsel with you a cankred mind, & long synce corrupt with affectiōs, & you & your Prince, liked my Dukedome better, than you did equitie it selfe, or true iud∣gement.
For otherwyse reason would haue shewed you, in as muche as we are condempned, and came not to our aunswer, that the same outlawing or prescription is against the lawes, decrees and conuenauntes wherby he is bound to the Empire. Maurice also might easely haue sene, that it had not ben law∣full for him, to obeye so wicked and wylfull a commaundemēt, and shuld haue regarded more the preseruation of the cositrey: But he had rather walke in the fotesteppes of wicked Doeg, & Duke Mau∣rice follo∣weth Doeg. with a fayned necessitie of dutie, cloke & couer his fact. Neither maketh it for the matter, where you saye that he woulde haue done no suche thyng, had not Ferdinando approched my lande with an Armie. For the matter is farre otherwyse, and it hath bene reported to me by credible men, first, that you your selues and Maurice through craftie and subtill counselles moued all these thynges to the Emperour and Ferdinando, at Regens∣purg, and also at Prage, as the tyme it self hereafter wil bring to lyght. Moreouer, that the same was not done by the commō assent of all, but that this mischeuous acte was contriued, by a fewe chosen out of the whole nomber. Nowe therfore, in as muche as through the goodnes of God, I am retourned home with my armie, I am fully determined to requite your Prince with lyke thankefulnes, and to attempte all thinges whiche are requisite for my defence, and recouery of my prouince. In the whiche thing verely, I will so reuenge me vpon you, espe∣cially whiche were authours of so mischeuous a counsell, ac∣cording to the wickednes hereof, that you shal wel vnderstand, how cruell was the iniurie and wrong that I haue susteyned. It greueth me suerly, that the matter is come to this passe, & I am sory for the dommage of the common countrey. But sythe the beginning commeth of you, and the thing it selfe requy∣reth that I should defende myne owne from violent wrong, I proteste, that what euyll so euer shall hereafter come therof, it is not to be imputed to me. If there be any of you also, fre from this misdede, that wyll trie their innocencie before me, it shall be lawfull for them so to do: I wyll vse them courtesely & gent∣ly. The king of Denmarke ayded not yt Protestātes. The king of Denmarke, albeit he was a cōfederate, yet gaue he no ayde to the protestauntes. The Emperour remouing from Hala to Hailbrune, and re∣ceiuing the townes men into fauour, sendeth the Duke of Al∣ba to inuade the lande of Wirtemberg, as is sayd before. He ta∣king 1547. Conditions imposed to yt Du. of Wir¦temberg. certen places by rendryng, doth verey muche harme. But through the sute of the Paulsgraue, the Duke of Wirtemberg, the third day of Ianuary, is reconciled vpon these conditions.
For so muche as he is sicke and can not, let him sende Ambassa∣dours, to make his submissiō, and desire the Emperour mercy: Thesame shall he doe in persone within sixe weakes he shal ob∣serue the Emperours decrees concerning the common wealth. He shal giue no ayde to the Duke of Saxon and the Lātgraue, but assist the Emperour, that the proclamatiō of outlawry set forth against them, may be put in execution. He shall permitte the Emperours ennemies to haue nothing to doe within the precinct of his dominion. He shal make no league at any time, wherin both the Emperour, kyng Ferdinando, and the house of Austriche, shal not be comprised: If any of his subictes shall fortune to serue against thēperour, king Ferdinādo & the house of Austriche, he shall punishe them moste extremely. Moreouer he shall bynde the nobilitie by an othe, that none of them serue against him. As oft as it shal please thēperour to passe through his countrey, he shall make him way for all thinges. The mu∣nition whiche his fellowes haue left within his prouince, he shall deliuer euery piece with the furniture: Towardes ye char∣ges of the warre, he shal pay thre hondreth thousand crownes, the one half out of hande, and the residue within .xxv. dayes: For assuraunce he shall deliuer, Asperge, Kirchene, Schoren∣dorffe, that the Emperour may place in them garrisons at his pleasure. He shall compound with suche as he hath iniuried in this warre, if he can not, he shall stande to the Emperours ar∣bitrement. Both he and his sonne shall followe the custome of the court of high Burgundie, whan they shall haue any mat∣ters in the lawe in those parties. He shall not be auenged vpon his subiectes, whiche haue rendred vnto him. That the Title of kyng Ferdinando remayne vnto hym whole. That within syxe wekes his sonne Christopher, and his people doe confirme and ratifie the same. That his brother George shall not inioye the benefite of this peace. What time these thynges were dra∣wen out in wryting the third day of Ianuary, as before is said the Ambassadours of Duke Ulriche, Balthasar Gultting, Le∣wis Frauenburg, and Iohn Fesler a Ciuilian, the fift daye af∣ter came to Hailbrune, and falling prostrate at Themperours feete, saye, howe the Duke is letted by sicknes, & can not come, and hath gyuen them in charge to make his excuse. And howe he confesseth his fault openly, and is wonderfull sory for the of fence committed, and desireth for Gods loue, that he might be receiued to mercy, and that no extremitie be shewed to him, & his poore subiectes. For he doth both ratife the conditions of peace, and also, as sone as he is able, will come him selfe to re∣quyre
the same, and wyll neuer forget so great a benefit. Here∣unto the Emperour maketh aunswere by Nauius. Forasmuch as he acknowledgeth his faulte, and asketh pardon, he is satis∣fied, and sayth, howe he wyll of his mercy spare the people and pardon his offence, so that he obserue conuenauntes, and from henceforth omitte not to do his dutie. After them came the Am¦bassadours of Memming, Bibrach, Rauensburg, Kempten, & Isnen, and making their humble supplication, desyre pardon Thecities of Protestātes. send Ambas¦sadours to yt Emperour. of their fault, and that they haue offended him, they saye it is to be imputed, partly to their owne errour, partly to the occa∣sion of others. And that they flie now vnto him for refuge, as vnto the welspring of mercy, and beseche him, that he woulde forgeue them, and restore them to their olde estate, and to demi∣nishe nothing of their priuileges and fredome. The Emperour than byndeth them by an othe, that they be faithful vnto him from henceforth, that they obeye the same lawes, that other states doe, that they forsake the league of the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, and ayde them with no kynde of thinge, nor make no league against him from henceforth. This done he taketh them to mercy, and condēpneth the citie of Meming, in fifty thousand crownes. Before they came into the Empe∣rours The Empe∣rour wyll heare no mē¦tion of Reli∣gion. presence, they desired to be assured not to haue their Re∣ligion chasiged. But Nauius, whom the Emperour vsed chief∣ly for interpretour in suche matters, warned them in any wise to make no mention therof: For incase they did, the Emperour would surely ascribe it, to a certen distruste they had in hym. For at the beginning of the warre, he declared his mynde here in sufficiently: Therfore let them holde them content, and re∣quyre no further assuraunce. And this was thought to be done for this intent, lest, if they should haue had a nay, it might ap∣pere, that an other thing were intended, than the Emperour had published in his letters before. But and if it shold be graū∣ted them by expresse wordes, the same shold offende the Byshop of Rome, whose purpose was, that by this warre, the doctrine of the Protestauntes might vtterly be extinguished. In these daies arose a rebellion at Gene, against the house Rebellion as Genes a∣gaist yt hous of Aurie. of Aurie, the Prince wherof at the same tyme was Androwe, the most expert man on the Sea that than liued, and through the Emperours auauncemēt, the chiefest of that cōmon welth. The chief captaine and ringleader of this vprore was Counte Fliscane, and in the same, amonges others, was murthered the Cosin of Androwe Iohannine Aurie, a mā of a great courage. And if the Erle of Flisca had not chaunced to slippe into the
Sea, and drowned, it is thought, that there would haue bene a blacke daye, and muche euyll done: But whan he was gone, the fellowes of that conspiracie, shranke away immediatly, & streightwayes after that Tempest followed a great Caulme. The Emperour affirmeth the Farnesians to be the authours of this enterprise, especially, the Byshops sonne, Peter Aloisse, Duke of Placence, as shalbe declared in his place. The sitting of the fathers at Trent, whiche shuld haue ben at the ende of Iuly, was adiourned vntill this tyme, and the xiii. day of Ianuary, what tyme the fathers were assembled in the Cathedrall churche, as their maner is, they make a decree, of the iustification of man, and there are they condēned, which affirme, that since the fall of Adam, man hath not had fre wyl, A decree of ye counsell at Trent of iu∣stification. that man is iustified by fayth only, & in that Christe imputeth rightuousnes, and say that iustification is nothing els but a confidence in Gods mercie, who forgiueth sinnes for Christes sake, or saye it is necessary, that a man beleue assuredly, and doubte not, but his synnes are forgeuen, and that he is of the nombre of Gods elect, and suche agayne as saye, that a man is not able to kepe the commaundementes of God, no, though he be iustified, whiche saye that iustification receiued is not kept and increased thorowe good workes, whiche, after baptisme, af¦firme that iustifications lost, is recouered by fayth only, with out the sacrament of penaunce, and saye that a penitent syn∣ner hath his offence wholy forgeuē, and that there remayneth no punishement for the same, neyther in this worlde, nor in the lyfe to come, through purgatory, finally whiche affirme that these decrees are a derogation to Gods glory, & to the merites of Christe. Whan the Duke of Saxō was coming with his Ar∣mie, Duke Maurice fortifieth Lipsia with a garnison, & bur∣neth the suburbes. The same tyme came the ther aboue a thou∣sand horsemen of the Hongarians. The .xiii. daye of Ianuary, began the siege, but the townes men defending them selues The Duke of Saxon be segeth Lip∣sia. moste valiauntly, about the ende of the same moneth, the ene∣my departeth without his purpose. Howbeit the towne, with the nomber of shot that went of as thicke as hayle, was won∣derfully rent and torne, & vtterly defaced. The Duke of Saxon departing from thēce, did not only recouer shortly after al that he had lost in the countreys of Thuring and Meyssen, but also wan all Duke Maurice townes, sauing only Lipsia & Dresda: He bringeth also into his possession the Byshoprike of Magde∣burg Maurice lo∣seth his tow¦nes. and Halberstat, making a composition with the Byshop, Iohn Albert. The daye before he assayled Lipsia, kyng Ferdi∣nando
commaunded the Bohemers, that they shoulde take ar∣mure and goe ayde Duke Maurice. They obeyed him in dede, but after they retourned home without cōmaundement: Wher¦fore the king at the ende of Ianuary cōmaundeth them again likewyse. There did the commons of Prage, whiche citie is of moste authoritie in those parties, desire the Senate, to sue to ye king, that he wold stay that cōmaundement, which is both a∣gainst The Bohe∣mers refuse to warre in Saxony. their libertie, & suche as they can not honestly obey. For there is no cause, why they shuld haue warre, with the Prince Electour of Saxon. And in moste thinges, their religion is all one with his. Moreouer, he hath always shewed him selfe lyke a noble Prince, and aided them against the Turkes. Wherunto Ferdinando made aunswer, amonges other thinges, howe the warre was attempted against him not for religion, but for re∣bellion. And where they say, howe he hath geuen great aide a∣gainst the Turke, the matter is far otherwyse: For he sent mes∣sengers to ye Turke, a few monethes past, which might procure him to moue war, to Hongary and Boheme, and that he shuld take no longer truce, & that he should infringe the same which he had graūted. And to the intēt the thing might haue the bet∣ter successe, he would not fayle, to inuade on the contrary syde. Whan themperour vnderstode, how the matter went in Saxo∣ny, and was aduertised by sondry letters of Duke Maurice, he sendeth certen bandes of horsmen and fotemen to ayde him, at the leading of Marques Albert, & than cōmaundeth the forces of Spaniardes & Italiās to follow, wherof Sandey & Marig∣nane wer captains. Marques Albert departeth frō Hailbrune with his cōpany, the .ix. day of Ianuary. Themperour also re∣moueth Marques Al¦bert sent to ayde Maur. frō thēce to Ulmes: by ye way they of Liudaue & Esling were recōciled to him. Of the byshop of Rome it is told before, how he gaue sentēce & depriued tharchbishop of Collō of his ec∣clesiastical fūction. Whā he thus did, he gaue away al his right & authoritie at the self same tyme vnto Adolphe Erle of Scha∣uenburg, Adolphe sub¦stituted to Herman Ar¦chebyshop of Collon. whome a fewe yeares before that: the Archbishop had amōges all others, chosen vnto him for his Coadiutour. Wher∣fore the Byshop sending his bulles, warneth all the states of ye countrey to accept and acknowledge him for their Archbishop. Moreouer he vrgeth themperour, that he shuld execute his sen∣tence. And where as the Archbyshop beyng at sondry times ad∣monished, to leaue of his enterprise, sayde euer, he could not do it with a safe conscience. The Emperour hauing almost nowe gotten the victory, sendeth to Collō Ambassadours, Philip La¦lenge, gouernour of Gelderlād, & Uiglie Zwicheme a Lawyer.
By them he calleth an Assemblie of the States of the whole prouince, that cōmyng at a certen daye, they shuld forsake their Archebyshop Herman, and goe to him that before was his Co∣adiutour, vnto whome they should shewe al fidelitie and obser∣uance as to their high prelate. The Clergie in dede was ready to graunt vnto it, for they were the very occasion hereof. But the Nobilitie, and many of the Clergie also that were of noble houses, and againe, the Ambassadours of cities, declare that it is not lawful for them, to forsake him, whom thei haue so long tyme obeyed, and so many yeares founde a good and a Godlye Prynce, vnto whome they owe their fayth, and allegeaunce by an othe. The matter stickyng at this harde poynte, the Duke of Cleaue his next neighbour, for the auoyding of further trou¦ble, sendeth his Coūsellours thither to make intreatie. Whiche after long and much decision, obteyne of the Clergie, that they wyll be quiet, tyll suche tyme as the other States may declare the whole matter to the Archebyshop. Wherfore Theodoricke Manderschitte, and William Nuenarie, Erles, the chiefest of all the nobilitie, were sent vnto hym. Who through their sin∣gular wisdome and eloquence, do perswade hym, that for the compassion of the people, leste the whole countrey should be di∣stroyed with warre, he would be content to geue place. What tyme therfore he had released all men of their othe and allege∣aunce: Herman le∣ueth his by∣shoprike. His forsayd Coadiutour, whome he had loued as his owne brother, doeth succede hym. This was the .xxv. daye of Ianuary. The Archebyshop had a brother, named Fridericke, who I tolde you in the tenth booke had bene Byshop of Mun∣ster, and was nowe prouoste of Bonna. He was also depriued of his office, and that had Gropper, for his Share. The lyke chaunced to Counte Stolberge, Dean of Collon, who had de∣fended the Archebyshop ryght constantly. By and by through Gropper had the spoyle of Friderick. out the whole Prouince, by the commaundement of the newe Byshop, the Religion agayne was altered, and what so euer Bucer had set forth, quite abolyshed. Whan the Ambassadours of the Protestauntes, had bene with the Frenche kyng, they went into Englande that they myght bring the same to passe with them both. But nowe was king Henry sore sicke, and his disease increasing, he departeth out of this life about thend of Ianuary in ye .xxxviii. yere of his reigne, whā he had by legacie The death of Henry the eight kyng of England made his son Edward of .ix. yeres his heire, & after him had sub¦stituted his daughter Mary, by his first wife, & Elizabeth by his secōd wife. Howbeit, before he died he condēneth Thomas ye duke of Norfolke, whose authoritie was always gret vnto per
And beheaded the Erle of Surrey his sonne, for speaking certē wordes, ouer muche suspected of the king liyng sicke. After his death insued the alteration of Religion, as hereafter you shall heare. For albeit he had expulsed out of all his dominions, the Alteratiō of Religion. Bishop of Romes authoritie, albeit it was death if any mā did acknowledge him, for the chief head of the churche, albeit, that in the cōmon prayers of ye churche, he detested him as a Tiraūt, Kyng Hēry banished the Pope but not popery. & very Antichrist, yet kept he still the popish religion, as hereto fore hath ben declared. He had caused his sonne to be well in∣structed from his childhode, and whan he should depart, he ap∣pointed him counseilours, to the nombre of .xvi. and amonges them, Edwarde Erle of Herford, the yong Princes vncle. Unto whome afterward, because it was supposed, that he would be moste faithfull to him, was cōmitted chefest part of his protec∣tion by the rest of the counsailours, and an honorable style ge∣uen him, that he should be called the Protectour of the kyng & his Realme. He was also created Duke, whan the king had ge∣uen The Duke of Somerset him the Dutchie of Somerset. He both loued the Gospel, & did his indeuour also that the same might be receiued, & moued the king his nephew to imbrace it in like case, and herein had a companion and helper, Thomas Cranmer, Archebyshop of Thomas Cranme pri¦mate of En∣gland. Canturbury, a man of notable learning, and primate of Eng∣land. About this time also dieth the wyfe of king Ferdinando, Quene Anne, the mother of many children: For whom the Em¦perour maketh a funerall at Ulme. In the meane season they of Auspurg, moued by the example of their fellowes & by their They of Au¦spurg make their peace with Them¦perour. owne daunger together, & hauing intercessours fit for the pur∣pose, & amongest others Anthony Fugger, are receiued into the Emperours fauour, being condemned in a hōdred & fifty thou∣sand crownes, xii. great pieces of ordenaunce furnyshed, and to fynde a garryson within theyr Cytie of ten enseignes of foote∣men. In the Citie was Captaine Scherteline, and had serued them many yeares for their wages. Whome the Emperour and Sherteline moste hated of Themp. kyng Ferdinando hated chiefly, for takyng the Castell of Eren∣berg vpon the Alpes. Wherfore, albeit the Senate intreated muche for him, yet, seing the Emperour did stifly refuse, & other wyse wold not accorde, he was constrayned to flie the countrey, & so went with his hole family to Constaunce, a citie in ye bor∣ders of Swisserlād. During the siege at Lipsia, the Electour of Brandenburg intreateth a peace, and sending Ambassadours to thē both, requyreth thē, that he myght be permitted to take The Elec∣tour of Brā∣denburg in∣treateth a peace. vp the matter. The Electour was content, but Duke Maurice blaming him sore, ye he made so sharp war, ye sixt day at ye length
he answereth somwhat straūgly, whan he saw that the towne was able to hold out thennemy. Wherfore the Marques imme∣diatly doth signifie the same to the Lātgraue, praiyng hym to perswade Duke Maurice. And for so muche as this ciuile war in Saxony can not well be appeased, vnles that publique war of themperour shuld cease also, he desireth him, that he would geue his minde here unto: and the rather perswade him, he she∣weth him, in how great daunger he standeth. How that all his fellowes for the most part are already recōciled to themperour. And how the Duke of Wirtemburg hath accorded vpon moste straite conditions. How thēperour prepareth a new army. And in as much as he alone is not able long to resiste so great a po∣wer, he admonisheth him, yt he wold not refuse to submit him self, and condescende vnto these conditions, which he him selfe hath cōceaued, and sent him now by his Ambassadours. For in as much as for many causes themperours minde is sore irrita∣ted, the thing it selfe requireth, that with a certen humble sub¦mission he do craue pardon. Wherfore let hym haue a respect to him selfe and his chyldren and to the common multitude, and dryue not the nayle to the head, neyther bryng the matter in to extreme daunger. He wryteth also the same in effecte to the Duke of Saxonie. The Emperour, a lytle before, that the Pro∣testauntes departed in Nouember, had appointed certen, to le∣uie Thēperour leuieth a new army. streight wayes a newe Armie, and to make warre in the next partes of Saxonie, leste the States and Cities there, should ayde the Duke and the Lantgraue. Ouer this Armie, whiche was to the nombre of .xxi. thousande fotemen, and a thousand and two hondreth horsemen, he made general, Ioyce Grunninge, Gouernour of Selande. They compell Conrade Erle of Deckelburg, in league with the Protestauntes, and the cities of Osnabruge and Mynden, and the Erle of Lippen, with certen others, to obeye their cō∣maundement, and take the Castell of Ritberge, and marche from thence to Breme. This was in the moneth of Februa∣ry. Here serued the Emperour, Philippe Ebersten Erle, Chri∣stopher Urisberger, Frideriche Spedie. Whan the Electour of Saxonie hearde of the Emperours successe, addressing his let∣ters The Elect. of Saxons lettern to thē of strasburg. to the Senate of Strasburge, the .xiii. daye of February, he signifieth vnto them howe he hath recouered his owne, and wonne almoste all that Duke Maurice had in the countreis of Thuring and Meyssen, & caused his Nobilitie to be sworen vnto him, & hath allotted vnto him ye by shoprick of Maidēburg And where as the Duke of Wirtemberg, and the most part of yt
cities in vpper Germany, haue compounded with themperour vpon conditions moste vnreasonable, & omitting the mention of religion, haue promised themperour ayde against him & his fellowes, that hath chaunced vnto him beyond al expectation, and is altogether repugnaūt to the maner of ye league. How be it he heard say how they remained constant, & that was great pleasure to him. Wherfore let them holde on, and fainte not, & doe as becometh confederates, and if the thing require so, let them defende & maintein thē selues with the ayde of the Swis¦ses and the French king, his desire is assuredly, to shew them al¦loue and fidelitie, but he is letted by domestical warre, wherin if God will make an ende, to his cōmoditie, they shal not want his helpe. The Ambassadours of the states & cities of Saxony, be already assembled at Maydenburg, with whom he treateth of those matters, for the which the conuention was appointed at Franckfurt, and his trust is, that they will perfourme their dutie, especially the cities, & wil not forsake the cōfederatie. At the Ides of February cometh to Strasburge an Ambassadour from the Frenche kyng, Mendoza, a Spaniard, an exile, & pro∣miseth Mendoza, Ambassa. from the frē∣che kyng to Strasburge. largely: But the Senate had already decreed, to send to themperour an Ambassade for peace. And so he departed with out any thing done. The Ambassadours to thēperour were Ia∣mes Sturmius, Matthie Pharrer, & Marke Hagie. The cause of their Ambassade was, that going to Ulme, thei should know for certentie, vpon what conditions themperour might be cō∣pounded with. Themperour had than of his counsel. Anthony, bishop of Arras: For his father Granuellā, was gone to Besan¦son, & Nauius the same time had chaūged his life for death. In whose roume afterward succeded George Selde a Ciuilan, & to The death of Nauius. him were annexed, by reasō of so much busines as was in Ger∣many, Iohn Marquard of Badē, & Harry Hasie, who had bene consellour before to the Paulsgraue, & very lately to the prince of Bippount, right expert in matters of Germany. Kyng Fer∣dinando, to the intent he myght styre vp the Bohemers, that Kyng Ferdi¦nando mo∣ueth the Bo¦hemers to warre. refused to serue, as I saide before, the sixte daye of Februa∣ry, marcheth forth with Ferdinando his sonne, and commeth to Letmerice, a Frontier towne of Boheme. What tyme he ta∣ried there a day or two, for the nobles and states of the realme, he had a longe Oration. And for as muche as Duke Maurice, desyreth his helpe, he exhorteth them to put on Armure, as wel for the auncient league betwene both the people, as also for that they are thēperours clic̄tes. And because diuerse say, that their libertie herby is infringed, he promiseth thē assurāce, yt it
shalbe no hinderaūce to thē in time to come. The states whiche than were present, say, how they can determine nothing, with out the consent of the rest. They require him therfore, so shortly as he can, to call them altogether. Certen others of them pro∣mise their seruice & duty. Those were gouernours of townes, vnto whome the king gaue thākes, and to the others declared at large, how this was no time to stande in question, when the thing it selfe requireth a present remedy against the ennemie: What time the warre shalbe finished, he wyll not refuse to call an assemblie, & will deminishe no part of their liberties, wher∣fore let them stande content, and follow him. At the length fea¦ring his displeasure, whan the king had taunted thē somwhat sharply, thei gaue their assent also, and in case thei serue not in persone, they promise to finde others. About ye Ides of Februa∣ry, the nobilitie, and men of Prage, writing their letters, pray the king, in so muche as he perseuereth in his cōmaundemētes after a new and straunge example, that against the .xx. daye of Marche he wold cōmaunde all the states to be at Prage. Or if he can not, in case they do assemble than, and determine some thing, they desire him not to take it displeasauntly. He again, reciteth what was done at Letmerice, and promiseth an assem¦blie against the .xviii. day of April, and warneth them in the meane time that they attempt nothing, neither assemble toge¦ther in any wyse. The fourth day after they had thus wrytten, The league of the Bohe¦mers. thei make a league, to maintein their libertie. After that Mar¦ques Albert was come into Saxony, Duke Maurice assigned him to lie in the towne of Rochlice. The reuenues wherof had the Lantgraues syster a wydowe, daughter in lawe to Duke George. That knowen, Iohn Fridericke Prince Electour, who was than at Aldenburge, three myles from the same, at the kalendes of Marche, sendeth before Ernest Duke of Lune∣burge, and Uolrate Erle of Mansdfelde with certen guydōs of horsmen, and after them Recrode with his legion of fotemē by night. He him selfe with the rest of his armie followeth after. In the next morning before it was day lyght, a few horsemen, sent before to escoute, did set vpon the watche, and some they toke, the rest fled into the town. In the suburbes were foure en¦seignes of fotemen. They accompanied with certen horsemen, The winig of Roclice. going forth as sone as day appered, giue ye charge: But hauing the repulse, they retourne back into the suburbes. But whan the Electour was come with the rereward, and shot of his orde¦naunce into the town from the next hill by, the fotemē also en∣tring perforce, fyred the suburbes. Those forsaid enseignes of fotemen flye awaye by the brydge, & the horsemen also through
the Riuer of Mulda. wherfore the fotemen, which already pos∣sessed the suburbes, go to the assault of the towne with a lusty courage wynne it, spoyle it, and taketh the ordenaunce from ye ennemy. Whylest these things were thus a working, Marques Marques Albert takē prisoner. Albert seketh whiche way he might escape, and taketh the Ry∣ner, but he was intercepted by ye Duke of Luneburg, & brought to the prince Electour. The garrison within the town was six enseignes of fotemen. They putting them selues into a ringe, by ye helpe of the other horsmen, stand to their defence, but van∣quished with a multitude they were taken all and striped out of their armure. And whā they had made promyse not to serue against the Duke of Saxon and his fellowes, of six monethes after, they were so let go without raūsom. The horsemen pour∣suing after those .iiii. enseignes of footemen that escaped ouer the bridge, did slea a great numbre of them: which were all for the most part, Italians and Spaniards. Marques Albert had, (what of Kyng Ferdinando, & what of the Emperour) as good as a thousand and fiue hundred horsemē, ten enseignes of foot men, and .xiiii. field pieces. Thei fought from the breake of the day tyll none. The Duke of Saxon lost not many of his men, & amonges them, Wuolfie Theodorick, a man of a noble courage who beyng stryken with a gunne, lefte his lyfe a fewe dayes after. The nombre of them that were slaine within the town, was accompted a thousand, without the town and in the Ry∣uer thre hondreth. After the conflict, the Electour with Albert his prisoner retourneth to Aldenburg, and after signifieth the whole matter into Boheme, & sheweth that he wil do nothing against the league, and desireth to haue those punished, which had attempted against his subiectes with sword and fyre. The Duke of Wirtemberg had condicioned, so sone as he might for his sickenes, to come make his submission to the Emperour, he commeth therfore to Ulme, in the moneth of Marche, han he The Duke of Wirtem∣temberg cra¦ueth pardon of the Emp. was not yet recouered, and sitting in his saddel, by the Empe∣rours permission, in asmuche as he could not remoue nor bowe him self, by his coūsellors kneling for him, he desireth to be par¦doned of his fault, promising from henceforth aldew obediēce. Whan themperour hereunto had made a gentle aunswere, he departeth immediatly, & for the war of Saxō, he goeth to Nor∣ling. Whilest the Duke of Wirtemberg on this wise made his submission, there was a great resort and concourse of people, which hauing therof knowledge before, came thither flocking thicke and threfolde. In those thre forsaid places of the land of Wirtemberg, the Emperour had placed garrisons a good while before, for the most part all Spaniardes.
✚ The nyntenth Booke of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte ❧ The argument of the nyntenth Booke. THe fathers of Trent make their seuenth sessions. The Emperour hauing accorded with them of Strasburg, marcheth forth with his armie. Fraunces the Frenche kyng dyeth shortly after the kyng of England. The counsell of Trent is diuided. The Duke of Saxō taken in battell, notwithstanding his condemnation to death, remayneth constant in Reli∣gion. Wittemberge being rendred, the vniuersitie is destroyed. Suite is made for the agre∣ment of the Lantgraue, who coming to the Emperour is stayed prysoner. Kyng Ferdinando ap∣peaseth them of Prage. A commotion at Naples by reason of the Spanish inquisition. The coro∣nation of the Frenche kyng is described. The citie of Maidenburg is outlawed. An assemblee is holden at Auspurg. Peter Aloesse the Popes sonne, is murthered. The Duke of Somerset wyn∣neth a great battell of the Scottes. Whan the Princes of the Protestauntes were vanquyshed, the cities were made afrayd. Stryfe aryseth for the imprysonyng of the Lantgraue. Request is made that the Fathers should retourne to Trent: but the Pope and suche as were gone to Boloigne le grasse, stode styf in their opinions. in so muche that there is great disordre in the counsell of Trent. THe third day of Marche, was the seuenth The seuēth Session at Trent, of ye Sacramēts. Session of the fathers at Trent. In this are condēpned al suche as either say there are fewer Sacramentes of the church thā seuen, or that al were not of Christes insti∣tution, who deny that one is of more dig∣nitie than an other, who say, they be only externall signes of grace, or that rightu∣ousnes is receiued through Christe & faith who deny that grace is geuen through the receiuinge of the same, who say that through Baptisme, Confirmation, and or∣ders, is not imprinted in the soule a spirituall token or marke that can neuer be scraped out, or ye al men haue lyke authoritie to minister the same, or that the accustomed ceremonies of the churche, in the administration of the same, may be omitted, or altered, whiche say that the doctrine of the churche of Rome, mother and maistres of al others, concerning Baptisme, is not sincere, whiche saye, that Uowes made after Baptisme, are of no importaūce, and are rather a derogation of the faith which they haue professed. And say that Confirmation is an Idle Ce∣remony, and was in tymes past nothing els but an instruction of youth, and deny that the vertue and instinction of the holye
Ghost, is not present at Confirmation, which ascribe the cōfir∣myng of children not to byshops only, but take it to be the fūc∣tion of any other priest. After this, decrees are made of ecclesia∣sticall benefices. That Byshops & other Prelates of the church Of ecclesia∣sticall bene∣fices. be lawfully begotten, that they be of yeares, maners and lear∣ning sufficient. That no man, of what estate or degree soeuer he be of, do enioy do Byshoprickes than one, and they that pos∣sesse many, may kepe styll whiche of them they liste, and within one yeares space shall put away the rest. That suche as haue cure and charge of soules, be them selues resident, neyther let them substitute others in their place, vnlesse it be for a tyme, & so, as if they haue declared a cause of their absence to the By∣shop, and he hath allowed the same, whose part it shalbe to for∣see, that the people be not neglected, and that priestes offences be punished, and such vices as reigne amonges them, be strait∣ly corrected. After was the .xxi. day of Aprill assigned for the next assemblie. Whan king Ferdinando was come to Duke Maurice at Dresda, the eight day of Marche, he writeth to the Bohemers, howe Iohn Friderick is prefixed to inuade them. Therfore let them take hede to their matters, and obeye Weit∣temulle, whome he hath appointed his deputie in his absence. The Ambassadours of Strasburg, whiche as I sayde, went to They of Strasburg compounde with them∣perour. Ulme, returning home, where the Senate did not mislyke the conditions prescribed of the Emperour, they are sent agayn to cōclude throughly. As they were traueling, they fynde the Em∣perour at Norlyng, there liyng sicke of the Gowte, and the .xxi. day of Marche, making their submission, thei were reconciled. The conditions were very tollerable. For neyther the Empe∣rour charged them with any garrison, and was content with xxx. thousand crownes, and demaunded not aboue .xii. pieces of ordenaunce. The Prince Electour of Brandenburg, was an ernest suter for the Lantgraue, and also preferred the matter to kyng Ferdinando. But the conditions were moste vnreaso∣nable. Those were, that he should allowe without exception al Conditions offered to the Lantgraue. the decrees of the Empyre to be enacted hereafter, that he shuld geue one of his sonnes for a pledge: That he should release the Duke of Brunswicke Henry and his sonne, and here in stande to the Emperours arbitrement. That he should ayde hym a∣gainst the Electour of Saxonie and his fellowes with certen centaynes of horsemen, and eight enseignes of fotemen at his propre costes and charge, for the space of syx monethes. That he do submitte hym selfe to the Emperour, and cōfesse his faultes openly. But these conditions he refused, and vnlesse they were
mitigated, in as muche as he can not with his honour assente vnto them, he signifieth in his letters to his frendes, that ra∣ther he wyll abyde what fortune soeuer happen. Themperour, the same daye that he accorded with them of Strasburg, depar¦ted from Norlinge, towardes Nurrinberg. And the next day af∣ter, adressing his letters to the States of Duke Maurice, for as much, saith he, as Iohn Friderick, that outlaw, retourning home by flight, hath not only recouered those places, whiche Maurice Prince Electour toke from him by our commaunde∣ment, but sutch also as my brother Ferdinando had seased in those parties, for that they were vnder the tuition of Boheme. We are entred verely, vpon our iourney to represse his boldnes and rebellion. Wherfore we will that you first, foresee, that in suche places, wherby we shal passe with our armie, there want nothing that is necessary, and that the souldiours be wel vsed. Moreouer, that contemning all the others cōmaundementes, you perfourme vnto your Prince al loue and due obedience, as in dede you haue done hetherto. For euen for this intent haue we taken this warre in hande, that his fiersenes being oppres∣sed, peace & quietnes may be for you recouered. The same daye also he wryteth to the counsellours and gouernours of Prage. How he is prefixed to be auenged vpon Iohn Fridericke accor∣ding vnto his demerites: Let them prouide therfore, that his campe may be vitayled out of their countrey. The .xxiiii. of Marche, the nobles and cities of Boheme, whiche had lately made a league, whan they were assembled at Prage, as it was determined, they make warlike lawes, and suche as are requi∣site for the warres if nede requyre, and committe the chief go∣uernment to Caspar Phulgius. About this tyme king Ferdi∣nando, Duke Maurice, and his brother Augustus came with Caspar Phlugius Captaine of the Bohe∣mers armie their forces to Priccie. Whiche the Bohemers toke in displea∣sure, that thei were entred already vpon their Frontiers. Wher¦fore they requyre Ferdinando by their letters, that he woulde not suffer straunge nations to inuade their countrey: For the example is straunge and perillous. They wryte moreouer to Duke Maurice and his brother Augustus, that they departe immediatly out of their limites, without any hurt doyng. For otherwyse wyll they doe, as their counsell shall serue them. Wherunto Ferdinando aunswereth the .xxvi. daye of Marche, howe they shall not nede to feare: For they are come only into those parties, to the intent they might ioyne them selues with the Emperour nowe approching. Againe, he wryteth to them of Prage, that they bestowe no superfluous coste: For the Duke
of Saxon is retyred. The electour had sent into the land of Bo∣heme an Ambassadour, Nicolas Minquit, to renew the aunci∣ent league: But he falling sicke by the way, whan he was not The Duke of Saxō sen∣deth an Am¦bassadour in to Boheme. able to go to Prage, wryting his letters desyred them to sende some mē of credit to him, with whom he may treate & cōclude. Whan these letters were receiued, the Noble men of Boheme, wryte to the Duke of Saxon from Prage, the .xxviii. daye of Marche, signifieng what Minquit required, and howe desy∣rous they be, to gratifie him herein, and graunt, that reason would, it should so be. Howe beit they are impeched by reason of this troublesome tyme, and present disquietnes. For Duke Maurice and his brother are come with their force into Bohe∣me, intending to doe some mischief, and all through the procu∣rement of kyng Ferdinando: praying him not to take this so, as though they would not that the league should be renewed. For they wyll both kepe the same, and perseuer in the olde ami∣tie, as well as if it were already renewed. They wyll also doe their indeuour, that it shalbe confirmed again as sone as may be. For therfore is this power lenied, & force prepared against them, for that they refuse to breake the league, & to moue war against hym. They require him therfore, yt in case Duke Mau∣rice do procede, he wyl vouchsaufe to ayde them. If he shal this do, there is no daunger so great, that they wyl refuse to venter vpon for his preseruation. They saye how Ferdinando is nowe at Priccie, and from thence wyll marche with his armie into the Uale of Ioachime, as it is reported. If he so do, they ar pur¦posed a fewe daies after, to marche with their armie, and leade the same thether as nede shall require. The last day of Marche sauing one, they wryte to ye Lordes of Morauie, exhorting thē, according to their mutuall league, The Bohe∣mers letters to the Mors∣uians. that they would take armure and come to them with spede, to the intent their common countrey may be defended from that wicked and Sodomiticall kynde of men, the Spaniardes and Hussars, buggerers, which the Emperour and kyng Ferdinādo bring with them. Fraunces the Frenche kyng, whan he had reigned .xxxii. yeares, he ended his lyfe the last daye of Marche at Rambolet, The death of the Frēch kyng. whiche is a dayes iourney from Paris. Whome his sonne Hen∣ry succeded, a man about .xxviii. yeares of age. He immediatly sendeth for the Cōstable, Annas Momorancie, who had for the space of sixe yeares liued a priuate life out of fauour, and resto∣red him to his former dignitie, and had him in great estimatiō. Againe, such as were in chiefest authoritie before, partly grow
out of fauour, partly are displaced, and committed to prison. Alteratiō in the court of Fraunce. Those were the Cardinall of Tournon, Anebalde the Admiral, Grinian, the gouernour of the Frenche prouince, the Duke of Longeuale, Bayarde, Poline, & especially she, whiche had bene the kinges darling, Madame Destampes. The death of kinge Fraunces chaunced vnfortunately for studentes & learned mē. King Fraū∣ces the fau∣iour of lear∣ning. For he loued all liberal sciences, no man better, or that shewed more liberalitie to auaunce the same. Through long vse & cu∣stome, he had gotten muche knowledge. For dining & supping his talke was commonly of learning, and that moste earnest∣ly vsing many yeares for ye same purpose Iames Coline, a lear∣ned His know∣ledge. man, and in the vulgare tonge moste eloquent. And after him Peter Castellan. Of these two had he learned, whatsoeuer was wrytten in the bokes of Poetes, Historiographers, & Cos∣mographers. Moreouer he knew perfitly, whatsoeuer Aristo∣tel, Theophraste, Plinie, and suche other like, haue wrytten of the nature of Plantes, Herbes, Beastes, Metalles & Precious stones, and by dayly vse and hearing did remember them. He was wont also to deuise muche of the Mathematical sciences, and to reason oft of the Scriptures. About his table stoode al∣wayes the notable men of eche degree. And in as muche as the talke was inferred of sondry argumēts: it was harde, but that one or other would alwayes propounde some matter: And that might euery man do lawfully, in case he were any thing kno∣wen. The example also, and this desire of the kyng excited men vnto great diligēce, that they might in reasoning before him, deserue prayse. In his owne tongue he was always accompted right eloquēt and graue. Throughout Grece and Italy he had The notable library of kyng Fraū∣ces. that sought and copied out for him the workes of olde writers. And he made a goodly librarie, whiche yelded certen notable bookes afterwardes. The keper wherof was Castellan. Alitle before his death, he had sent to the Duke of Saxon, and the Lantgraue: for the mayntenaunce of the war, to eyther of thē an hondreth thousand crownes, and what tyme he departed, ye mony was scarsely deliuered. About the same tyme also, the Ambassadours of the Protestauntes retourne out of England into Fraunce, that they myght finishe vp the rest of their mat∣ters. And lyke as they found kyng Henry there whan they fyrst arriued, so now, retourning from thence, they fynde king Fraū¦ces extremely sicke. Wherfore this happened also to the reste of the Emperours good fortune, that those two moste mightie kynges, which neither wanted oportunitie, nor (as many men than supposed) wyll also: to impeche and hynder his enterpry∣ses,
died both in a maner at one tyme. That force of the Empe∣rours, whiche after they had oppressed certen noble men, and The death of two kin∣ges was hap¦py for the Emperour. taken the citie of Mynden (I sayde) went marching to Breme, at the ende of this same moneth, had such an ouerthrowe, that he lost the chief captaine of the warre, Grunninge, gouernour of Selande. And whan the power of the Bremers was increa∣sed by the accesse of Hamborough men, Urisberger, who after The ouer∣throwe of the Emper. armie. the death of Grunning, had then the chief gouernment, remo∣uing his campe, and fetching a long circuite about, for the fen∣nes that lay in his way, began to beseige the citie on the other syde. Thither came shortly after also Ericus Duke of Brun∣swyck, whom the Emperour at the Ides of Marche, sent away from him at Norlinge, to the intent he should leuie a newe po∣wer of horsemen and fotemen, and leade them into those par∣ties. The Emperour remouing from Norling, to Norinberge, went from thence to Egre, a towne of king Ferdinādos in the borders of Boheme. The king had at sondry times admonished the citie of Prage, their weapons. The residue of the states by them therof aduertised, the fourth day of Aprill, wryte againe. That the cause why they haue put on armure, & led forth their armie, is to defende their countrie from vniust violence, especi∣ally in his absēce. And pray him, to intreate themperour, that he war not against the Duke of Saxō, but suffer that his case may be frendly debated. They desire also to haue a parlament, as the promise was. At the which time the Emperour cōming to Egre, and the. vi. day of April, whan Ferdinano & Maurice were come yt day before, he writeth to all the states of Boheme, The Empe. letters to the states of Bo¦heme. and repeting briefly what he had writtē in the moneth before, sheweth thē, that he seketh only the Duke of Saxon. Wherfore let them bring forth their vitayle, furnishe them of corne, & re∣tourne home. As concerning religiō, they nede not to feare, for in all this war, he hath molested no mā for religiō. At the same tyme the commissioners that were at Prage, dispatching their letters into all partes, warne the states moste earnestly, that they would put on armure, and come with all haste possible, to desend their countrey, for the matter is brought to an extreme daunger. Ferdinando the eleuenth of Aprill, aunswereth their Ferdinando to the Bohe∣mers. last letters from Egre, of lyke effecte in a maner as the Empe∣rour did. Therfore let them leaue their enterprise, or els wil he fynde the meanes to represse their rashenes wel enough. Where they intreate for the Duke of Saxon, he can not a lyttle mar∣uell: For he hath not deserued so, neither of the Emperour, nor of him, nor yet of the lande of Boheme. Touching their request
for a parliament, he wyll doe herein as shall become hym. In the meane tyme the Duke of Saxon taketh from Duke Mau∣rice Fridberge and Misen, a towne by the Ryuer of Albis. And about this tyme the Fathers that were at Trente, re∣moue Part of the counsell of Trent flitt to Banonie to Bolonia la grace, neither after that session wherein they treated of the Sacramentes, made they any decrees at al. The cause of their departure (as it is sayde) was, for that the ayre of this place was not greatly holsome, after the opinion of Hierosme Fracastor, Phisition to the Fathers of the coun∣sell, who had of the Byshop of Rome therfore, threscore ducka∣tes a moneth. The Emperour toke this matter moste displea∣sauntly, and commaunded the Byshoppes and Diuines of hys dominions, not to remoue from thence one fote. Wherupon, parte of the counsell was at Trente, and an other parte at Bo∣nonie. What tyme the Emperour marched from Norlinge to Norinberge, the Erle of Bure, whiche kept Frankefurte with twelue enseignes of fotemen, and about foure hondreth horse∣men, being sent for, came thither. And whan he was come a∣gayne to Franckefurt, the .xii. daye of Aprill, he putteth two to Two execu∣ted at Fran¦kefurte. death, wherof the one Iohn Uerden, was of the same towne, the other William Gelluse, was a subiect of the Lantgraues. The cause of their execution was, for that they were sayde to be sent by the Lantgraue, that they should bye of a Smyth the keyes of one gate, that they should set the town on fyre in foure sondrye places, that they should dryue in Iron nayles into the Canons and other great pieces, so that they might not be shot of. That whylest others were quenching the fyres, they with the helpe of their fellowes should slaye the Erle of Bure and his familie, the Consull and the Senate. That they should in∣fecte the welles of the town with poysō, especially that, which serued the Erles kitchin, and an other whiche is in the Court. After came forth a wrytting, pourporting howe they confessed in pryson this cōspiracie, and perseuered in the same whā they were led to execution. But the Lantgraue pourgeth hym selfe, The Lant∣graues pur∣gaon. and affirmeth that synce that tyme that Franckefurt came in to the Emperours handes, he hath attempted nothing, and cō∣futeth the crimes obiected with many weighty wordes: he had at sondry times in dede cōmaunded Geluse, to vnderstād, which way themperour & the Counte of Bure marched with their ar∣mie, & but that thing only. But in case thei being vāquished by the sharpnes of the torture & extremitie of ye payn, haue spoken Unreasona∣ble torment isaperillous matter. yt is false, & haue not iniuried others only, but him also, he desi∣reth, that the same be not wrasted, to his disdayne and hatred.
For all racking and torture, that exceadeth a meane, is vncer∣ten and perillous. A probation wherof is, that such as they be∣fore had nominated to be fellowes of their conspiracie, after, whan they were had to the place of execution, declared them to be innocētes. The .xiii. day of April, the cōmissioners of Prage wryte againe to the states of the Realme, and warne them er∣nestly to cleaue vnto the league, that they haue with the house of Saxon. They complayne also that diuerse haue infringed ye same already. Wherfore thei commaunde that from henceforth no man offende against it. The same daye they sende letters to king Ferdinando, beseching him, that neither he nor thempe∣rour, wold be offēded with this their warfare. Moreouer, that he war not against the Electour of Saxony, first, for the mutu∣al league, secondly, for that he desireth the matter might come to hearing. The selfe same day, Ferdinando sendeth Iohn By∣shop of Olmuce, & certen other counsellours to the parliament Ferdinādos Ambassad. to the Bohe¦mers. at Prage, whiche he had assigned at the .xviii. of Aprill. By thē he maketh his excuse, why he can not come. Againe, he requi∣reth them to abolishe their newe league, & laye a part their ar∣mure & weapons: for otherwyse can not the counsell be holden free. If this were denied, thā had the Ambassadours in cōmaū∣dement, that they shuld treate no further. But if they did obey, than to procede as was prescribed them, not to determine any thyng, but referre al to him. Themperour the same daye depar∣teth from Egre with his whole armie, accompanied with his The Empe. iourney a∣gainst the Duke of Saxon. brother Ferdinando, who had with him of men at armes syxe hondreth, of the Hussares a thousand, and ten enseignes of fote men. There were also the two brethrē Maurice & August, with like forces. Whan he had marched continually ten dayes toge∣ther, at the length the .xxii. day of April, he commeth nere vnto Misen, where the Duke of Saxon was. Who hauing intelli∣gence therof, forsaketh the towne. And whan he had fyred the bridge, he pitcheth his Tentes nere Mulberge, by the Riuer of Albis. But the Emperour fearing lest he should haue retired to Wittemberge, the strongest and chiefest town of his Dukedom, sawe he had nede to make haste, commaunding therfore his ar¦mye to marche forewarde, whan they had reposed them selues one daye, the .xxiiii. day of Apryl, they come to the water in the mornyng by tymes. The Duke of Saxon had placed certen on the contrary banke with field pieces, to let the Emperour, that he should neither make a brydge nor finde a foorde to transport his armie. And also might defende that brydge whiche they them selues had there ready made of boates and small vessels.
But what time thei sawe the Emperour come with his whole army, and a force of Spaniardes to the nomber of a thousand, rushed into the water with a great violence vp to the chynne, and holding their armes aboue the water, and shot of fiersly their pieces. They caste fyre into the bootes which were partly burnt therewith, and by litle and litle shrinke away from the banke towardes the myddle streame. There certē Spaniardes, threwe them selues into ye Riuer naked, carieng their swordes ouerth warte in their mouthes, and thus swymming ouer all moste to the other syde, lay holde on those bootes, which (caried downe with the streame) the Saxons had broken of, from the rest of the bridge, and although they were shot at with many pieces, and wounded sore, yet they bryng them away. Of those vessels, and suche others as themperour brought with hym by cariage, was made a bridge ouer the Riuer, so that the fotemen and cariage might passe. In this tourmoile of thinges, ye Duke of Saxon, who that time was hearing of a Sermon, sendinge his cariage before, followeth him self after, & marcheth toward Wittemberg. But themperour, which sawe how ye whole mat∣ter rested in spede, finding a foorde: first cōmaūded the Hussars The Empe∣rours celeri∣tie in ouerta king yt Du. and all other light horsemen to passe ouer, after goeth he hym selfe also with the horsmen in complete armure, & tariyng no∣thing at al, neither for the carriage nor fotemē, hasteth on stil, And thre miles beyond yt Riuer of Albis, at ye wode of Lochan, he ouertaketh the Prince Electour. There, after he had encou∣raged his men through an exhortaciō vnto battel, he giueth yt charge: His army was deuided into two partes. In yt forwarde were the Duke of Alba, Lanoie, Anthony Toletane, Baptiste Spinelle, & Duke Maurice. The rerewarde led themperour & king Ferdinando with his two sonnes, & the Duke of Sauoye his sonne. The Duke of Saxō might wel haue resisted all this force, & perchaunce haue discōfited the same, in case he had had The Empe. fighteth a battell with the Duke of Saxon. his whole armie together. For there was a great parte of hys force at Wittemberge, and strong garrisons left in euery place. And William Thumserne with his power was absent, neither could al the rest be put in ordre in so great expedition of them∣perour. Wherfore, being at the lēgth vanquished wt the greater nomber & multitude, whan they had fought till it was night: He him selfe receiuing a wound in the left cheke, in defendyng him self māfully, was taken, & brought first to ye Duke of Alba, The Duke taken figh∣ting. & after presented to thēperour. Into whose sight whā he was come, I yelde my self prisoner to you saith he, most merciful em¦perour, desiring you that I may be kept & vsed lyke a Prince.
Am I now thy Emperour sayeth he? I shall handle thee as thou hast deserued. But Ferdinando toke hym vp with sharper wordes, and chargeth him that he sought to dispossesse hym & his chyldren of all that euer they had. With hym was taken al¦so Ernest of Brunswick, Duke Philippe his sonne: The Elec∣tours eldest sonne, although he was sore woūded, yet escaped & came to Wittemberge. Of prysoners the nomber was great. They that escaped by flight, to the nomber of foure hondreth, recouered Wittenberg for their refuge, amonges whome was Counte Bichling, & Recrode. The horsmē following the chace make great spoyle, and take all the munition and cariage, that the Duke had sent before. Than did the Duke of Alba cōmit ye Duke of Saxon and Duke Ernest of Brunswitck, to the custo∣dy of Alphonse Uines. What time the Emperour came nere vn¦to Misen, which was the .xxii. of April, & agayne, the next daye and the same day that he passed the Riuer, and fought the bat∣tell, and certen daies after, the Sunne loked pale and dimme, & was inuironed as it were with a certen darkenes, so that the A perdigieof the Sunne. sight was sorrouful & greuous to beholde, in so muche as they whiche were a great way out of Saxonie, & knewe nothing of this matter, iudged that it did pourtende & signifie some great trouble. And this was not obserued in Germany only, but also in Fraunce & England, & that this was so in dede, many thou∣sandes can testifie. Of Ferdinando his Ambassadours sent to ye conuentiō at Prage, I haue spokē before. The Peres of the Re∣alme, hearing their demaundes, make answer, that where they haue made a league, & put on armure, it is neither done amisse nor against ye custome of Boheme. Again they determine to send an Ambassade to king Ferdinādo, which might declare yt same, and also require him, to intreate themperour for the Duke of Saxon. But tofore thambassadours were sent, came newes frō king Ferdinādo, of themperours victory, & how the Duke was taken. Then chaunging their purpose, they promise corne & vi∣tayle, and desire the king, to make meanes to themperour, that al that armie may be led into Hongary against the Turcke, of whose comming report went daily. And that other kinges also might be moued vnto yt societie of this war. Which thing if it may be brought to passe, thei wil not be behind wt their partes. Whan yt Duke of Saxon was taken, themperour marcheth to Wittēberg, & came thether with his armie the .iiii. day of May The Duke condempned to lose his head. and thre daies after, he condemneth Iohn Friderick to lose his head, as he saith for treason. But he, whan he heard therof she∣wed no signe nor token of a minde discouraged, but aunswered
now he had thought the Emperour would not haue dealte so with him. Neuerthelesse, if this be prefixed and determined, he desireth, to haue certen knowledge, to the intent he maye take order in matters concerning his wyfe and his children. The Prince Electour of Brandenburg, after he had heard of the bat¦tell, taketh his iourney immediatly, and comming to the cāpe the sixt day of May, doth mitigate the Emperours mynde, so that altering his sentence, he saued the Dukes lyfe. Wherfore the Emperour propoundeth conditions, which after the Duke had confirmed the .xviii. daye of May, he redemed his life. A∣monges others was wrytten this also, that what so euer the Conditions wherby the Duke rede∣med his life. counsell or the Emperour should decree concerning Religion, he should approue. But where he would in no wyse assente to that, and perseuered in the same, and herein respected no daun¦ger, the Emperour commaunded that part to be crossed & blot∣ted out. And the rest of the conditions were these. That he re∣nounce the dignitie of Electourship, for him selfe, and for his chyldren, and permitte the Emperour to dispose it at his plea∣sure. He deliuereth vp to the Emperour Wittemberge and Go∣the, the second fortresse of his dominion, yet so as he may take a way all his stuffe and prouision, sauing the munition, and the third part of the vytayle: The Emperour permitteth the soldi∣ours of the garrisons to departe, yet without enseignes. The Duke of Saxon frely releaseth Marques Albert without raū∣some, and restoreth such thinges as were taken from him. The Emperour againe setteth at libertie Duke Ernest of Brun∣swick, taking first a promesse of his fidelitie. The Duke of Sax¦on restoreth suche thinges as in this warre tyme haue bene ta∣ken away from the Erles of Māsfielde, the Marques of Prusse, and them of Solmen. He renoūceth his title of Maydenburg, Halberstate and Halles. He promyseth to obey the iudgement of the chamber imperiall, whan it shalbe established by Them∣perour, and to geue towarde the charges therof. He assenteth that Duke Hēry of Brunswick and his sonne shalbe deliuered, neither wyll he commence any action against them. He forsa∣keth all leagues made against the Emperour and king Ferdi∣nando, neither wyll he make any frō henceforth, wherin they, their prouinces and fellowes shal not be comprised. The Empe¦rour doth confiscate all his landes, and geueth the same to his brother Ferdinando, and Duke Maurice, yet so, as Duke Mau¦rice shall paye yearely to hym and his children fifty thousande crownes. If the Emperour thinke good, the Duke of Saxō, by the promission of Maurice, shal kepe still the town and Castel,
of Gothe, with al the profite, howbeit he shal rase the Castell, & not fortifie the towne: For so muche as the Duke of Saxon is greatly indebted, to the intent those debtes may be payed, whiche were dew, before the league of Smalcalde, Duke Mau∣rice shall geue to his children as a subsidie an hondreth thou∣sand crownes. Moreouer he shall paye suche other debtes, as depende vpon the landes confiscated, and geuen to him by the Emperour, and and by this meane shall the suites and contro∣uersies betwixt them haue a finall ende. The Duke shall at∣tempte nothing against them, that haue serued the Emperour in his warres, nor yet against the kyng of Denmarke. He shall obserue the lawes and statutes, that the Emperour and the sta¦tes of the Empyre shall decree. For as muche as he is released of execution and bodely punishement, he shall remaine from henceforth in the custody of themperour, or of his sonne, prince of Spayne. The goodes before mentioned his children shall vse and enioye, so that they and the people also do ratifie the condi¦tions of peace. Out of this peace are exempted Albert Erle of Mansfield and his children, Counte Bichlinge, the Ringraue, Recrode & Thumserne, who neuerthelesse, if he shall discharge his armie within this moneth, shalbe therin comprehended. Before these thinges were conditioned, the Emperour out of his campe before Wittemberge the syxte daye of May, summo∣neth An assemble of thempyre at Ulmes. all the states of the Empyre, to mete at Ulme at the Ides of Iune, to the intent to make a league. He sendeth thether Ambassadours, the Cardinall of Auspurg, Marques Iohn of Brandenburg, Lirane and Henry Hasie. The same doeth kyng Ferdinando. Unto that whiche the commissioners of Prage, Kyng Ferdi¦nandos let∣ters to the Bohemers. had lately sayd, concerning the league made, as though it were no newe thyng, nor against the custome of the countrey, Ferdi∣nando aunswereth from the campe before Wemberge at the Ides of May. That it is plainly a new and a straunge enter∣pryse, and whiche appertaineth vtterly to his iniury. Moreo∣uer he declareth what they haue attempted in his absence, and how many wayes they haue rebelled, and by sondry reasons goeth about to proue, that this same league was made against the Emperour and him. Wherfore he chargeth and commaun∣deth them, to abolyshe & defeate the same, to restore vnto euery man his seale againe, and deliuer a copie of their league to his Ambassadours: Unlesse they obeye this accordingly, he wyl doe as his counsell shall serue him. Albeit the Emperour had accor¦ded with the Duke of Saxon, as before is said, yet the garrison that kept Wittemberge to the nombre of thre thousand soldi∣ours,
and the citezens also refused to rendre, except the Prince him selfe did so commaunde them. For the townes men feared chiefly the oultrage of the souldiours, whan they might see in a maner of the towne walles what hurte they did in the coun∣trey, especially the Spaniardes and Hongarians. The Duke of Saxon therfore the .xxi. day of May, whan his brother, hys sonne and certen counsellours, came out of the towne to hym, doeth release them of their othe for the warres, and commaun∣deth them to departe thence, before thre daies be ended. Whan this commaundement was geuen, the townes men make re∣quest to the Emperour, that he would bryng in no foreine soldi¦ours. Wittēberge rendred. He made them promesse, and kept it, and gaue them mo∣reouer authoritie, to kepe out all suche as shuld prease to enter without his expresse commaundement. Whan they had surren∣dred, ye Duchesse of Saxon, Sibille of Cleaue, going forth with her sonne, and her husbandes brother, cometh into the campe, and making her supplication moste humblie, besecheth them∣perour with plentifull teares to be good to the Duke her hus∣bande. The Emperour enterteined her ryght curteously, & put her in good comfort. After he licenseth the Duke to go into the citie there to remayne eight dayes with his wyfe and his chil∣dren. The same daye that the souldiours issued out of Wittem∣berge, at the Duke of Saxons commaundement, whiche was the .xxiii. day of May, the Emperour sent in Almaigne fotemē at the leading of Nicolas Madruce. Two dayes after king Fer∣dinando and his two sonnes, came into the towne accōpanied with the Electour of Brandenburg, and Duke Maurice, to see it only, and making no long abode retourneth into the campe. At after none also the Emperour hym selfe entreth, and whan he was come into the Castel, he saluteth the Duchesse, & again comforting her, wylleth her to be of a good chere. I shewed you before of the death of Fraunces the Frenche The buriall of kyng Fraunces. kyng. Who the .xxiiii. day of May, was buried in the churche of saint Denis, consecrated for the buriall of kynges and with him his two sonnes, Fraunces and Charles, wherof the one de¦parted .xi. yeares past, and the other two yeares since, as before is sayd, and remayned vnburied hitherto. In the meane season that the funerall was in preparing for kyng Fraunces, his pic∣ture for a certen space appareled with riche array, with hys crowne, Scepter, and other ornamentes, was layde vpon his bed, wherunto at certen howres both dynner and supper was serued, with lyke solemnitie, as was accustomed being a lyue. After were these garmentes taken away, and mourning appa∣rell
put on. There were continually present .xlviii. Monkes, suche as are commonly caled begging Freers. Those sange Masses and Diriges for hym, without ceasing. About the dead corps were set .xiiii. great tapers, and ouer against, stoode two aultars, wherupon from the first day light, tyll it was noone, was sayde Masse continually. There was also a chapel iust by, wherin were burning innumerable Tapers & lightes. About the chariot wherin the coarse was caried, went .xxiiii. Freers with so many Tapers. And before them, went fiue hondreth poore men, in mourning apparell, with euery man a torche. Besydes other nobles of Fraunce, there were present .xi. Cardi∣nalles. The funerall Sermon made Peter Castellane, Byshop of Macon, of whome is mentioned before. He, amonges other thynges declareth howe the king was prefixed to buylde a Col¦lege, wherin all artes and tongues should haue bene red and taught. And that sixe hondreth shuld haue bene founde there to learning. And to the same vse, had assigned out fiftie thou∣sand crownes yearely. I shewed you before how Duke Ericke of Brunswick went to Breme: Howbeit at the .xxii. day of May, he departeth from the siege, to defend his owne coūtrey from spoyling. The same did Urisberger, whiche led an other part of the armie, and they first agreed vpon a place, where they should mete againe with their powers. This Duke chaunceth vpō his ennemies. Which Duke Erick discomfited. was the force of Hamburge, that came to ayde the Bremers. They fought sore till it was within night, and in fine: Duke Erich being discomfited, and driuen backe with his horsemen into ye Riuer of Uisurge, lost many of his men. Neuerthelesse, he him selfe escaped, but lost all his munitiō, and after comming to the Emperour, layde all the faulte in Urisberger, that came not to helpe him. With the Bremers and their fellowes, were Counte Albert of Mansfelde, Erle Hedecke, Thumserne, Con∣rade Phenninge, and diuers others. But after the Duke of Saxon had cōdicioned with the Emperour, al these forces slip∣ped away. Whilest these thinges are a doing: the Electour of Brandenburg and Duke Maurice, intreate diligently for the Lantgraue. And to the intent the thing might the more conue¦niently Duke Mau∣rice and the Electour of Brandenb. intreate for the Lant∣graue. be accōplished, they sende for him to Lipsia: but where the Emperour would in any wyse, that he should submit him selfe without condicion, and deliuer all his Castels and muni∣tion also, he retourneth home without concluding any thing, and the same day cometh to Weissefelse, foure miles from Lip∣sia. The next day by the waye ryding, as he talked with Chri∣stopher
Eblebe of the condicions that were propounded, and of his fortune and estate. If I knew, sayth he, that the Emperour might be intreated, to suffer me to retourne home againe, and to let me haue one of my Castels furnished with ordenaunce, I could be content for a common quiet, to Rase all the reste, and deliuer all the munition accordingly. Than sayeth Eblebe, I wyll reporte this tale vnto Duke Maurice, and within a fewe dayes, wyll eyther repare vnto you agayne, or aduertise you of the certētie hereof by letters, in the meane season I desire you to surcease from other deuises. Going therfore vnto Duke Maurice, not long after, he retourneth with letters to hym frō Duke Maurice and the Electour of Brandenburge, bearyng Duke Mau∣rice letters to the Lant∣graue. date the fourth day of Iune out of the campe before Wittem∣berge, whiche were of this importaunce. That so sone as they vnderstode more of his mynde by Eblebe, they became agayne peticioners to the Emperour, and what they haue obteyned, that doth the copie it selfe and conditions of peace, whiche Eb∣lebe bryngeth him, declare. And in as muche as the conditions are tollerable, they doubte not, but he wyll admitte the same, especially considering in how great daūger he standeth. Their aduise is therfore that he refuse them not, but submitte hym selfe to the Emperour without condition: For he nedeth not to feare, lest the Emperour shuld burthē him with great thinges, or deteine him prysoner, for they wyll become suertie for that matter. And if any thing should chaūce vnto him, besydes that whiche is conteined in the copie of peace, that he shall now re∣ceiue by Eblebe, or if he should be deteyned styll in captiuitie, they wyll not refuse, to abyde the same fortune, and being cal∣led vpon by his children, wyl offer them selues to make him re∣compēce. And for Religion he shall haue the same assuraunce, yt they, and Marques Iohn, haue already. And seing it is so, and in as muche as this composition shalbe not only for hym selfe, but also to the common wealth expedient, they hartely require hym that he would come withall expedition, and bryng with him the Duke of Brunswick and his sonne, and receiue the cō∣ditions, and followe their assuraunce and fidelitie herein. And let him not be afrayd, that his prysoners should be taken from him by the way. For they will beare him out of all that daun∣ger, and whan he shall be entred on his way, he shall mete with horsemen of theirs, that shall conduite him in saufetie. The co∣pie of the peace was this. That he do submitte him self and his prouince to the Emperour without condition, that he come to the Emperour him selfe, and humbly require to be pardoned.
that he behaue him self to the Emperour from henceforth obe∣diently, and according to his dutie. That he obserue suche de∣crees as the Emperour shall make, for the preseruation of the common wealth. That he sende ayde against the Turke, at all suche tymes, as other Princes do. That he forsake all confede∣racies, but namely the league of Smalcalde, and deliuer to the Emperour all suche kynde of wrytinges. That he make no lea∣gue at any tyme, wherin shall not be comprysed the Emperour and king Ferdinando. That he do forbid the Emperours enne∣mies to come within his dominion. If the Emperour lyke to punishe any man, he shall not take vppon hym to defende the same. He shall geue the Emperour leaue to passe through hys countrey, whan the thing shall so require. That such subiectes of his, as shall serue in the warres againste the Emperour, or kyng Ferdinando, he punyshe extremely. And suche as do serue at this present, that he calle them home againe, so that with in these .xiiii. days they forsake their enseignes, and vnles they obey, to make thē forfeate all their goodes, whiche shall than come to the Emperours vse. For the charges of the warre, he shall pay to the Emperour within foure monethes an hōdreth and fifty thousand crownes. That all suche Castelles and for∣tes as he hath, saue Zegenheme or Cassell, he shall rase them down to the grounde, and the garisons and and Captaynes yt he shall place in the same, he shall sweare to be true to thempe∣rour, That hereafter he fortifie no piece, but by the consent of the Emperour. That he deliuer to the Emperour immediatly all his munition, the Gunnes with their whole furniture: Of the whiche the Emperour shall graunt him so many as shalbe sufficient for the defence of that place, whiche he wyll permit him to kepe. That he obey the iudgemet of the chamber, which the Emmperour shall establyshe, and beare his part towades the charges of the same. That he set at libertie Hēry the Duke of Brunswick, and his sonne, and rēder vnto him his prouince, and release his subiectes of their othe, & compounde with him for the harmes done. That he restore suche thinges as he hath takē from the Marques of Pruse and frō others by force. That he attempte nothing against the king of Denmarke or any o∣thers, for that either they ayded him not, or that they toke the Emperours part. He shal deliuer all the prysoners, that serued vnder the Emperour, without raunsome. He shall aunswer all men, that wyll trie any matters with him in the lawe. These conditions shall his sonnes also confirme. The same shall his Nobilitie and subiectes do lykewyse, and if he shall not obserue
conuenauntes, they shall apprehende and delyuer him to the Emperour. For all these thinges the Electour of Brādenburg, Duke Maurice, & Woulfange, the Paulsgraue, his sonnes in lawe, become suerties, and except he accomplishe the premisses: The Lant∣graues sons in lawe. promesse to bende and ioyne all their forces against him. Whan he had receiued and perused these thinges, by the common ad∣uise and consent of all his states, the Lantgraue admitteth the same: yet so, as he desyred a further declaration in diuerse poin∣tes. The sixte day of Iune, whan the Emperour should remoue his campe, he calleth again his souldiours out of Wittēberge. And immediatly Duke Maurice putteth in his, and the same daye calling the Consulles and Senate into the Castel, saith: that he will demishe no parte of their priuileges and liberties, and so causeth them all to be sworne to him. For Wittemberge is the principall towne of the Electourship, whiche the Empe∣rour had lately geuen to Maurice, confiscating all Iohn Fri∣derickes Wittēberge a town of e∣lectorship. landes, as before is said. The townesmen, and the No∣bilitie after this: desire Duke Maurice, that he would repare their Scoole, whiche was fallen in this tumulte of war. This promiseth he to do, and commaundeth that the countrey men, The Scoole fallen there. whiche were fled, to be sent for againe, & promiseth them stuffe for the building, and Wheate for seede and bread corne, to the poore, frely, and to lende it vnto the rest. Than putteth he Iu∣lius Perflugius, in possession of the byshoprike of Numburge, and displaceth Nicholas Amstorfe, instituted by Duke Iohn Fridericke, as is mentioned in the .xiiii. boke. Moreouer Laza∣rus Schendie was sent with a force of men, both to rase the castel of Gothe: And also to deliuer Marques Albert, that was there in captiuitie. The laste wynter, the Archebyshop of May∣denburge had made a composition with Duke Iohn Friderick and geuen place to him in his prouince. But at this chaunge of fortune (when both the Emperour and also the clergie toke it in euill parte) he had a Coadiutour assigned him, Fridericke, sonne to the Prince Electour of Brandenburg. Kyng Ferdi∣nando retourning from the Campe of Wittemberge into the lande of Boheme, stayed a whyle at Letmerice, a frontier town there. From thence at the beginning of Iune, he wrote his let∣ters to al the states of Boheme. Wherin he complaineth again of the league, saying that the same is made against him. Wher¦fore he commasideth them to forsake the thing, and that euery man wryte vnto him seuerally, what his mynde is therin. For he knoweth that many haue fallē for lacke of experiēce, whom he is mynded to pardon, and to moleste no man, but suche as
haue cōmitted high treason against his Princelyke Maiestie. Whan the states were come to Ulme, the Emperours Ambassa¦dours before named, recite with a long circūstaunce how great¦ly The treatis of Ulmes. the Emperour and king Ferdinando haue traueled for the peace of Germany, aswel in publique as also in priuate affay∣rs. But ye Duke of Saxon & the Lātgraue, hauing no respect to the same, haue not only rebelled them selues: but also procu∣red others to do the like, and breaking al lawe & equitie, haue tourmoiled al thinges in Germany. Therfore hath thēperour bene driuen, by reason of his office & dignitie, to attemp warre not without the great daūger of his life, & losse of goodes. And what harmes these rebelles & outlawes haue done to the lord∣ships of Mentz, Maydenburg, Halberstat, Eistet, Auspurg, Ful¦den, Stolberg, Mansfeld, & the citie of Gemund, in this warre, it is to wel knowen. And in asmuche as themperour seketh all meanes that Germany might haue quietnes, he thinketh it ve¦rye requisite that some league were made, cōcerning the peace therof. Of the same mynde is also king Ferdinando, and will come both into this cōfederacie, to thintent that both this pre¦sent tumulte, and if any other shall hereafter aryse, it maye be lightly repressed. For euen for the commoditie of the cōmon coū¦trey, they will omitte no diligence. And loke againe that they should do the lyke. This cōsultation of theirs, was interrupted by a vehement plage. Wherfore at the length, they remoue to Auspurge, where as themperour was prefixed to holde a great assemblie, as shalbe declared hereafter. Whan themperour had taken order for thinges at Wittemberge, he remoueth to Hale in Saxony, a towne by the Riuer of Sale, to go from thence in to Hesse, vnlesse the Lantgraue did compound. Wherfore the Lantgraue standing in this perplexitie, whan he sawe no bet∣ter remedy, trusting to the assuraūce of Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandēburg, he taketh his iourney, and the. xviii daye of Iune, he cometh to Hale in the euening, ryding in the middes betwene Duke Maurice, and the Electour of Brandē∣burge, The Lant∣graue com∣meth to the Emperour at Hale. whiche went to mete hym at Numburge. One houre af¦ter, came thether also Duke Henry of Brunswick, that had ben prysoner with his sonne Charles Uictor, and his second sonne Philippe, and Duke Erricke of Brunswick, who after that he was ouerthrowen in battell, came thether, as before is sayde. The next day in the mornyng Christopher Carlebice comming to the Lantgraue, exhibiteth the composition of peace, that he should subscribe to it. In the same was added, that the Empe∣rour myght interprete euery article therof.
Wherfore the Lantgraue, in asmuch as that was not in yt copy that thelectour of Brādenburg & Duke Maurice sent, sheweth the byshop of Arras, that he might not subscribe therunto. He saith how it was omitted through the negligence of the wry∣ter, & again vrgeth thesame, so he folowed his mynd. Thā doth the bishop of Arras require more of him, yt for asmuch as he wil haue assuraūce for religion, as Duke Maurice & thelectour of Brādenburg, ar assured, he again to warraūt & promise thēpe∣rour, yt he wil obey ye decrees of yt coūsel of Trent. Contrariwyse he saith, that neuer was this thing mentioned to him before, nor cōteined in yt cōposition of peace. How he had rather want themperours warraūt, that he also shuld nede to make no assu∣raūce. And whā they had lōg cōtended about it, & threatnings also geuē, how themperour was already set in the hal, & taried for him, and tooke this delay displeasauntly. Therfore, let him make spede, lest peraduenture he cōceaue some extreme displea∣sur against him. At ye last the Lātgraue subscribeth with these wordes. How he wold obey the decrees of a fre, godly, & general coūsel, wherin shuld aswel be reformed yt head, as the rest of the mēbers, in like case as Duke Maurice & the Marques of Bran∣denburg shuld do. For thei had promised him not to shrinke one whit frō the doctrine professed at Auspurg. This done, about. v of the clock at after none, whan themperour was set vnder his cloth of estate at home in his own lodging, the two Electours beforesaid, bring the Lātgraue before him, who, whā he came nere vnto themperour, falleth down vpō his knees, & next him his chaūcelour Guntherode, which reciting by writing as fol∣loweth. The Lant∣graue kne∣leth to the Emperour. For asmuch, sayth he, moste mighty Emperour, as the Lantgraue in this fourmer war, hath sore offended your high∣nes, so as you haue iust cause to be auenged on him, for this is he hartely sory. And therfore, as he promised before, he submit∣teth him self to your wil & pleasure, & also moste humbly bese∣cheth your Ma. after your great clemēcy to pardō his fault, to redresse the outlawery dew for his offence, to restore him to his old place, & receiue al his thinges into your faithful protectiō. This wil he accept in stead of a gret benefitie, & wil declare vn∣to you frō henceforth al fidelitie, seruice, & dew obedience. Thē∣perour, after he had paused & taken deliberatiō, answereth her unto by George Selde. That albeit he hath deserued moste greuous punyshement, as it is both openly knowen, and he The Empe∣rours aun∣swere. hym selfe also confesseth. Yet is he contente, both of his owne benignitie, and for asmuche as certen Princes haue intreated for him, that he shall escape the outlawerie and the punishmēt
that he hath deserued, and nether to suffer perpetual imprison∣ment, nor to be indaūgered furthermore than is in the compo∣sition of peace prescribed. He pardoneth also his Nobilitie and subiects, so be it that they kepe conuenaūtes, and wil acknow∣ledge from henceforth this his so great a benefite. There were present at his submission, Maximilian of Austriche, Philibert Prince of Piedmount. The Duke of Alba, the Marques of Prusse. The Byshops of Arras, Numburge, and Hildesseme, the Dukes of Brunswicke, Henry Ericke, Charles and Philippe, the Ambassadours of Rome, Boheme, Denmarke, Cleaue, and of certen hauon townes, besydes many others of the nobilitie. The Lantgraue, whiche had thought all had bene saufe and well, geueth the Emperour thākes, and where he suffered hym The Lant∣graue is dri∣uen into the net vnwit∣tingly. to knele very long, he arrose vnbidden. A litle whyle after, the Marques of Brandenburg cometh to him, & sheweth him that Duke Maurice and he must suppe with him, at the Duke of Alba his lodging. And yet could ye Lātgraue perceiue nothing. Whā thei came to the Duke of Alba, thei suppe, & after supper, Duke Maurice & the Marques fall to talke with the Duke of Alba, and the byshop of Arras. In the meane while to passe a∣way the time, the Lantgraue playeth at the cardes. Whan it was nowe far in the night, Duke Maurice & the Marques of Brandenburg call him vnto them aside, & by the mouth of Eu∣stace Schlebie declare vnto him, how they haue al their life ti∣me, dealt faithfully as becometh Princes to doe, & if they haue promised any thing, haue perfourmed the same diligētly. And lobed also to haue founde the like fidelitie in others. But now do the Duke of Alba & the byshop of Arras tel them, ye he muste remayne there that night prisoner: Which is the greatest grief The Lant∣graues cap∣tiuitie. to them that euer chaunced. Howbeit they will speake with ye Emperour him selfe, and truste that he shall not be deteined. Than he sayed, how he loked for any thing soner, thā that this should haue happened, howe he came thether trusting vppon their assurance. And that they knowe wel enough, howe they are bounde to him and to his chyldren. Wherfore let them dis∣charge their bonde and promesse. And whan he must nedes ta∣ry, Duke Maurice and diuerse of the Marques coūsellours, a∣bode with him al that night. The next day they go to thempe∣rour and make a greuous complaint, and shewe howe much it concerneth their estimation. For in case they had conceiued the least suspition in the world of this matter, neither would they haue counselled him to haue gone thether, neither woulde he euer haue come there, where he shoulde haue lost his libertie.
Wherfore they require him to haue some consideration of thē that were intercessours, and let hym goe at libertie, whiche thyng they haue promysed hym vpon their fidelities, that he should. The Emperour sayeth, that in dede he made a promesse to restore him againe vnto libertie, but not immediatly. For his meaning was only herein that he should not be kept in per petual prison. From him they went to his counsellours, chiefly to the Byshop of Arras. They after long and sharpe contentiō, shewe the Lantgraue that he may departe: Ryght gladly saith he, so that I may be conducted home safely. Here do these two Princes intreate agayne for his saufe conduite, but al in vain. Two dayes after, it is shewed him, that he must wayte vpō the Emperour forth. That he vtterly refused to doe. And sayeth he wyll not go one fote with him, vnlesse he be drawen forth by violence. Than Duke Maurice & the Marques intreate him exceadingly, and beseching him that he wold not refuse to go. And to perswade him the more, they take him by the righthād, and in the presence of diuerse noble men make him promesse, yt they wyl not departe from the Emperours courte, before he be deliuered. And ryding forth with him to Numburg, they go af∣ter to the Emperour, to make suite for him. Thre dayes after, whiche was the .xxv. of Iune. They sende vnto him Carlebice. And where as they followe themperour no further they desire him not to take it displeasauntly: For he hath vtterly forbiddē thē yt thei shuld not. For if thei do: he wil send him into Spain. Neuerthelesse if that .C. & fifty .M. crownes were payd, & that he make him assuraunce to performe the rest of the cōuenaūtes thei perceiue so much, that he shuld be deliuered within a four∣tenight after, & how thei wil shortly ryde to thassemblie at Au∣spurg, & wil omit no ernest paines, nor diligent suite for hym. He, which toke his chaunce most vnpatiētly, saith yt for the pai¦ment of y• mony & rasing of his castels, he wil deuise & care for, & trusteth that loke what thei promise, shalbe performed. After warde passing out of the borders of Thuring wt the Spāiardes whā he came to Greuetalle, he sheweth the Duke of Alba ye let∣ters of saufecōduit, & assuraūce by obligatiō: he saith, how thē∣perour graūted nothing to ye intercessours, but of perpetual im¦prisonmēt. Why thā saith ye Lantgraue, what measure or ende may this captiuitie haue, or wtin what time shal it be expired? Although saith he, he detein you prisoner .xiiii. yeres or lōger, yet shal thēperour do nothing against his promise. But he to ye intēt he might soner recouer his libertie, not lōg after, paieth al his monie, defaceth his castelles, & deliuereth his ordenaūce.
But the nomber of the battering pieces which the Emperour gate partely of him and of the Duke of Saxon, partely of the The nōber of great gun res takē frō the Protst. Duke of Wirtemberge, and the cities in vpper Germany, was great. And as it is reported, to the nomber of fiue hondreth. Wherof he sent afterwarde diuerse to Millan, some to Naples, and some into Spaine, the residue he bestowed in sondry pla∣ces of his lowe countreis belongyng to the house of Burgūdy, as monumentes and tokens of victory. The Lantgraues cap∣tiuitie, Ebleb a noble Gentlemā, that was messenger betwixt toke moste heuely, and as many men iudge, for very thoughte Ebleb dieth for sorowe. and sorowe, died shortly after. The Emperour had intended to warre vpon the citie of Magdeburg on the Riuer of Albis two dayes iourney benethe Wittemberge. For they in maner only did not compounde nor agree with him. But at the same time Henry the Frenche kyng toke vp men in Germany, by Seba∣stian Uogelsberge, about ten enseignes of fotemen. That mat∣ter did the Emperour suspecte. Wherfore both for this cause, as it is thought, & also for that he supposed thei might be repressed by an other meane, departing from Hale, he toke his iourney into the hygher partes of Germany, and the .xxvii. day of Iune he sēdeth the Marques of Marignaue to aide his brother Fer∣dinando with eight enseignes of Almaigne fotemen. That ty∣me was Ferdinando at Letmerice, attending for the oportuni∣tie of tyme to worke his purpose: And hearing of themperours successe & taking of ye Lantgraue, at ye kalēdes of Iuly, wryting his letters to Prage, he cōmaundeth them to be before him in the castell of Prage the sixt day of Iuly, there to make answer. After he came thither with his force, he declareth in open con∣sistory, Ferdinando cometh with his army to Prage. their whole doynges past, and howe many wayes they haue trespassed against him, and saieth howe they haue cōmit∣ted the offence of treason, and commaundeth them to answere vnto euery pointe. There do they in most humble wyse submit them selues to his will and pleasure, and desire him not to trie the matter with thē, neither by lawe nor otherwyse. Wherupō the king, whan Ferdinādo his sonne, August brother to Duke Maurice, and certen others were suters for them, the .x. daie of Iuly propoundeth these cōditions. At the next assemblie, they shal vtterly abolishe ye league made, & pluck from it euery mās seale. That they deliuer vnto him al their charters, & writings The Bohe∣mers subdu¦ed by Ferd. of their Fredom & priuileges, to thintēt he may correct some, & such as shal like him graunt vnto them again, & confirme thē. That they deliuer also al ye writinges cōcerning fraternities & fellowships, for yt diuerse of thē haue ministred occasiō of trou|
Moreouer that they deliuer vp their Castelles and fortresses with all their iurisdictions and customes, and againe all the wrytinges of ye league that they haue both made with others, and also with Iohn Fridericke. That the same excise of Bere, that was promysed for thre yeares, be payed from henceforth continually. That they bryng all their munition and warlike furniture into the Castell, & all their priuate armure into the towne house. If they shall thus doe, he sayeth, he wil spare the multitude, except diuerse, whiche he wyl reserue vnto such pu∣nishement as they haue deserued, and deteyne them prysoners, for the commoditie of the common wealth. Whan the matter was reported to the commons, after he had released about fifty prysoners, it was cōcluded. Certen of the Nobilitie beyng sent for, where they did not appere at the daye prescribed, sentence was pronounced against them, to lose both life and goodes. Certen other cities and Noble men, followyng the example of them of Prage: do submitte them selues without condition. But Caspar Pfluge, whome the confederates (as I said before) had made their generall is condempned of treason, and procla∣mation made, that who so could bring him quick or dead, shuld haue fiue thousand crownes in rewarde. After at the next con∣uention, whan they had disanulled their league, & brokē their seales: he obteined of thē in a maner all that he had demaūded. Whilest the Emperour triumpheth in Germany, ther arose Sedition at Naples for yt Spanish in∣quisition. a sore seditiō at Naples, the cause wherof was, that Peter To∣letane, the Uiceroye, would after the Spanish maner, inquire of euery mans faith and Religion. The citezens toke this vn∣paciently, whiche lothed the Spanyardes gouernmēt also be∣fore. And after muche slaughter on both partes within the cy∣tie, the Spanyardes at the length preuailed, by reason that they kept the fortes and Castell. Wherfore some they put to death, the residue they banyshed. This Spanishe inquisition, whiche is so vniuersall at this day, was first ordeined in those parties, by king Ferdinando and quene Elizabeth, against the Iewes, whiche after Baptisme kept still their lawes, and cere∣monies. But nowe since the name of Luther was published a broade, it is practised against all men in generall, which be ne∣uer so little suspected, and that both sharply and sodainly. In these selfe same dayes, seuen Cardinalles of Fraunce, by the The Cardi∣nals of Fraū¦ce sene to Rome. kynges commaundement go to Rome, and there be commaun∣ded to remain, till thei receiue further aduertisemēt. The same was thought to be done for this intēt, that through their mea∣nes the Byshop might be wholy inclined to the kynges frend∣ship,
and if he should fortune to dye (for he was already foure score yeare olde) an other myght be chosen, that fauoured the kyng of Fraunce. Howbeit some saide this was wrought tho∣rowe the policie of the Conestable, to get them out of the way: that he might rule the king alone, for they all in a maner wold be at the kinges heles, whethersoeuer he went. The Byshop had a litle before sent his legate into Fraunce, Hierome Ro∣mane with a moste large commission to graūt many thynges, whiche are forbidden also by the lawes and decrees of the coun¦sell. He created also Cardinall at the same tyme, Charles of Guise, the sonne of Duke Claudie, Archebyshop of Rains, in whom he knew the kyng delighted much. Again ye Frēche king, to purchase further amitie offreth in mariage his bastarde doughter, about .ix. yeres of age, to Orace Farnese, the Bishops granchilde by his sonne. The Emperour remouing from Hale, cometh to Bamberge that being so nere, he might be a greater terrour to the Bohemers, and a strengthe vnto his brother. Whilest he was here, the third daye of Iuly, he calleth an assem¦blie of the Empire, and cōmaundeth that all mete at Auspurg An assemble at Auspurg. the first day of Septembre, the Princes them selues in persone, the residues Ambassadours with full authoritie. And saieth he was letted by the warres, that he helde not a cōuention at the kalendes of February last past, as he had determined at Regen∣spurge. But now that he hath the authours of trouble in his custody, he would no longer differ, but that the corrupt mem∣bers of the commō wealth may be healed. And the consultaciō shalbe of suche matters, as should haue bene treated vpon at Wormes, and a yeare synce at Regenspurge. This conuention should haue bene at Ulme, but for the infectiō of the plage, the place was chaunged, as before is also mentioned. After from Bamberge he goeth to Norinberge. As he there was he recei∣ueth into fauour certen cities of Saxony, and the .xvi. daye of Iuly, he publisheth a wryting, wherin he declareth what hath bene done with the Lantgraue, and vpon what conditions he hath pardoned him. And because that he is carefull, leste that many should haply through ignoraunce worke violence to his landes and subiectes, therfore, at his request, doth he straightly charge and commaunde all men to absteyne, and if they haue any matter against him, to trie it by ye lawe. In this self same Duke Mau∣rice intrea∣teth liberal∣ly the Diui∣nes of Wit∣temberge. tyme, Duke Maurice sendeth for Melanchthon, Pomerane, Cruciger, diuines of Wittemberge, and receiueth them ryght gently at Lipsia, and speaking muche of his zeale towardes re¦ligion, committeth vnto them the order both of the church and
Scoole also, requiring them to procede after their wonted ma∣ner, he appointeth them stipendes, & as they them selues wryte sendeth thē away not without great rewardes. For Pomerane in a litle boke that he set forth after, commendeth highly his liberalitie and gentlenes. The Frenche kyng that succeded his father at the kalendys of Aprill, the .xxv. day of Iuly, cometh to Rains to be crowned. The corona¦tion of the French king and the ma∣ner therof. And being receiued before the cathedral churche with thr Car¦dinalles, he is led to the hyghe aultar, and after he had kissed there the relickes of saintes enclosed in gold, & said his prayers he goeth to supper. After supper retourning, and making his prayers againe, whan he had confessed his synnes to a priest, he departeth and goeth to bedde. The next day he sendeth certe of the nobilitie to intreate the Abbot of saint Remige, that he would bring the boxe of holy oyle, whiche they say came down from heauen. After resorte to the churche those that are called the Douzeperes of Fraunce, which are twelue in nomber. The Byshop of Rains, Landune, Langres, Beauuois, Noion and The twelue Peres of Fraunce. Challon. Than the kyng of Nauarre, the Dukes of Uandome, Guise, Niuerne, Mompenser, and Anmalle. These represented the Dukes of Burgundie, Normandie and Guienne, moreouer the Erles of Tolouse, Flaunders and Champaine. Of the By∣shoppes were chosen two, Langres and Beauuois, also two Cardinalles, to go fetche the kyng to the churche. Whan they came into his chamber, after certen prayers sayde, they lift vp the kyng liyng on his bedde, as the ceremony is, and accompa∣nied with a multitude of priestes, leade him to the church, and the Conestable beareth before him the sworde drawen. The king, what tyme he had prayed before ye aultar, was led by the Byshoppes to his seate. And in the meane whyle, tyl that boxe cometh the Archebyshop of Rains. After he had finished the prayers conteyned in the boke of ceremonies, sprinkleth with holy water the kyng and all the reste. And whan worde was brought that the boxe was coming, whiche in the absence of ye An holy box sent down from heauē you may be sure. Abbot, the Prior of the monkes brought, sitting vpon a white hambling palfrey, and accompanied with the Monkes of hys order, and the Noble mē that the king had sent for it, as before is sayd: the Archebyshop with the other byshops, goeth to mete him at the churche dore with the crosse borne before him, & ther receiued of him the boxe, deliuering hym a gage to restore it a∣gaine. And whan he came agayn to the aultar, the king rysing out of his seate, doeth him reuerence. After the Archebyshop goeth into the reuestrie, and there being solemnely decked in
his pontificalibus, cometh forth and taketh his othe and fide∣litie of him, by the whiche after an auncient custome, kynges are bounde to the churche. Than is the king led to the aultar by two Byshops. There putting on other garmētes, he kneleth downe, and is girded with a sworde, which he, as thei terme it, hath consecrated with many prayers. After this, the Archeby∣shop prepareth the oyle in a redines, & whylest the other priests synge their seruice, prayeth softly with the kyng, lying both grusselyng on the groūd. Than he annointeth the kinges head, breste, and both shoulders, and the elbowes of either arme, in saying that accustomed prayers. That done, the kyng hath put on him new garmentes, like a minister of the church, and is an¦nointed in the palmes of his handes. After he layeth both his The king is appaeled like a deach. handes on his breste, and putteth on hallowed gloues, as they call them. But the Archebishop putteth a rynge vpon his fyn∣ger, and deliuereth him the Sceptre in his ryght hande. And in the selfe same moment the Chauncelour calleth forth the Dou¦zeperes. In their presence, the Archebyshop taketh frō the aul∣tar the crown of Charles the great, and whan the Peres haue touched it, setteth it on the kinges head, and bringeth the king into a roiall throne, whiche is made in an higher place, the whole company of Nobles followyng. And there hauing ended his prayers, kisseth him. Likewyse do the Peres and Nobles, & making a great shoute and acclamation, pray all, God saue the kyng, and to reioyce mens hartes, the Trompettes blowe. Af∣ter is gold and syluer throwen amonges the common people. Than goeth the Archebyshop to Masse. And after that the Go∣spell is done, the king carieth to ye aultar, certen pieces of gold, bread and wyne. And whā Masse is ended, receiueth the lordes supper after their maner. And than go al to dyner. For this vse and purpose, to the intēt nothing should disquiet this corona∣tion, the kyng would seme to haue hired the Almaigue fotemē, through the conduite of Uogelsberge, as afore is mentioned. In the meane tyme the Emperour demaundeth of the residue of the states imperiall, money for the charges of the warres, whiche, he sayeth, was chiefly attempted for their sakes & the welth of Germany. Moreouer, all the Nobilitie and suche as serue with the Protestantes, are put to their fine throughout all Germany. And the somme of that money, which the Empe∣rour The Empe▪ eacieth mo¦ney in Ger∣many. leuied of the Princes and cities, aswell of the Catholikes as Protestauntes, amounteth aboue .xvi. hondreth thousande crownes, as appereth by accomptes made. And some also them perour refused as rebelles, and vtterly denied them his fauour.
And amonges others, Doctor George of Wittemberge, Albert Erle of Mansfelde, Iohn Hedecke Erle, Lewys Counte of Oe∣ting, the father and the sonne. For he punished him in such sort as he gaue all his landes clerely to his other sonnes, Friderick and Wuolfange, whome for their fidelitie & seruice done hym, he fauoured. So the Erle of Oeting exiled with his wyfe and the rest of his children, and tourned out of all that euer he had: came to Strasburge, and after that, wandered vp and downe many yeares in sondry places, vntil an alteratiō of time came, that the Emperour forgaue them, as shal be spoken hereafter. Furthermore, the Emperour by his letters publyshed, outlaw∣eth them of Maydenburg. And also king Ferdinando, for the They of Maydēburg outlawed. warre attempted against his countreis, doth exact money of ye Protestauntes, especially the Cities, and fleseth Auspurg and Ulme, of a great some of money. After he commenceth processe against the Duke of Wirtemberge for his whole Dukedom, as though he had broken fidelitie and conuenaūtes, made in four mer yeares. Neither did it auaile him any thing at all, that he had so lately redemed peace of the Emperour vpon most strayte condicions. Lykewyse the Cardinall of Auspurg, doth extorte also of the citie a great quantitie of gold. Moreouer the Cardi¦nall of Trent asketh them money, saying, howe he ayded kinge Ferdinando with men, to recouer the passage in the Alpes, ta∣ken, as is sayde, by Scherteline. Themperour also moueth the Swisses vnto a newe league: Yet doeth he exempte, Basill, Zuricke, Schafuse and certen others, for that he sayd they ap∣perteined The Empe∣rour moueth the Swisses to a league. to the Emperour. They by one assent make aūswere, how they haue a league alredy, with the house of Auslrich and Burgundie: wherunto they cleaue surely, and other confede∣racie will they none make. The same do they loke for agayne of him also. About the end of Iuly, the Emperour cōmeth to Aus∣purge, with the Duke of Saxon prysoner. And the Lantgraue he left at Donauerde, garded with Spaniardes, whiche dyd many thynges dayly in his contempt and mockery. This was an armed assemblie. For there was a gaison in the citie be∣fore, An armed assemble. of .x. enseignes of sotemen. And in the countrey round a∣bout were forces of Sparnyardes and Italians. Of whome to be voyde and free, they of Meming payde thirty thousand, and Kemptem, twenty thousand crownes. Besydes, there came out of nether Germany about syx hondreth horsemen, whome the Emperour bestowed in the coūtrie nere vnto the citie. Twelue enseignes of Spaniardes, whan they had wyntered a whyle at Bibrach, they were led into those parties that border on the
lake Brigantine. At Wisseburg a town of Norgouie, wyntered seuen hondreth horsemen of Naples. Gerarde Uelthuiche, who went to the Turke, as I sayd in the .xvii. boke, retourneth to the Emperour the .xii. daye of Auguste, hauing made truce for fyue yeares. After the Emperour came to Auspurg, he taketh the head churche and certen others to him self, and leaueth the rest for the Senate and people: But his chaplaines before they wold saye any seruice in their churches, pourged and hallowed The chur∣ches new ha¦lowed. them againe with many ceremonies, as suspended and pollu∣ted with Lutheranisme. The Emperour appointed preacher in the Cathedral churche, Michell Sidonie, Suffragan to the Archebyshop of Mentz. He amongest other thinges, made di∣uerse Michel Sido¦nie a great masmonger sermons of the sacrifice of the Masse, whiche after he set forth in print. And where as in their churches came in maner none of the citezens, the catholikes, as it is reported, offered money to the porer sorte to come & be present at their seruice. This assemblie was maruelous great. All the Princes Elec∣tours were there, and amongest them Adolphe Archebyshop of Collon, and Duke Maurice. Thither came also kyng Ferdinā∣do, and the Cardinall of Trent, Henry the Duke of Brunswick the Duke of Cleaue, the lady Mary the Emperours syster, and his Niece, the Duchesse of Lorayne, wydowe. At the kalēdes of September they began to sytte. There, whan Maximilian of Austriche, had in the Emperours name made a short preface, the Emperours Secretary declared by wryting, what thinges should be there decided, whiche were chiefly two, how Religion might be accorded, and the controuersies about the same ap∣peased. And again how the chamber should be established, & the lawe there ministred, wherin he requireth them to geue theyr faithful aduise and counsel. The tenth day of this moneth, Pe∣ter Aloise, the byshop of Romes sonne Paule the thirde, was slayne at Placence, at home in his own house, and shortly after Peter Alois the Popes sonne slayne Ferdinando Gonzage, the Emperous lieftenaunt in Lumbar∣die, taketh the citie. The newes hereof within a fewe dayes came to Auspurge. And as the matter was reported to the Em∣perour, the same story as they sayd, was communicated also to the Princes, and deliuered vnto them in wryting. The whole discourse redoundeth to the infamie, and disprayse of Peter A∣loise. And thus the case standeth, as the same wrytyng speci∣fieth. Whan after the exchaunge made, Peter Aloise was crea∣ted Duke of Placence and Parma, he did many thinges cōtra∣ry to lawe and equitie, and through his rigour offended all sortes of men. And amonges others, he depriued Hierome Pa∣lauicine Hierome Pa∣lauicine.
of all his landes and possessions. And where he to e∣schewe the daunger, fled to Creme, a towne belonging to the State of Uenise, he caste his wyfe and his chyldren in pryson. Where as the same matter was like to growe to some great cō∣motion, the Cardinall of Trent, who bare good wyl to ye house of Farnese, by his letters wrytten, intreateth the matter: but ye Duke aunswered frowardly. His sonne Octauius came after to Trent, retourning from the Emperours campe homeward. Unto whome the Cardinall declareth the whole matter, desy∣ring him to be a peticioner to his father in the same. He promi¦seth so to do, and after letteth him vnderstande, that Hierome may be receiued againe into fauour, so that he wyll come hym selfe, and humblie require pardon. And where it was to be fea∣red, leste contrary to faith and promyse, some greater mischief should be wrought against him: the Cardinall, with a small trayne goeth to Creme, & sendeth for Hierome to come speake with him. But he fearyng treason, came not before, he knewe assuredly that it was the Cardinall. Whan thei had talked and conferred together, and the Cardinall promysed largely to tra∣uell in his cause, they take their iourney both together. And the Cardinall sent one or two of his company before, to aduer∣tise the Duke of their comming. Than doth he cōtrary to that Octauius had signified sende playne worde, howe he can not restore him. And albeit the messengers sent, being men graue & witty, spake many things to mitigate his fury, yet perseuered he styl in the same. Wherfore ye Cardinal, whan he had brought Palauicine agayne to Creme, retourneth to Trent. Nowe had certen of the Nobilitie before this, whiche hated hym also, con¦spired his death. They hiring certen desperate murtherers, wayte an occasion, and many tymes seuerally come abroade A conspira∣cie against ye Popes son. with the same garde after them, and eche of them pretende to do it for their priuate enemies. And in the meane season euery of them demaunde of their men priuely, whether thei wilfaith fully take their parte in reuenging a wrong done vnto them, as they sayd, by the Dukes Stewarde. Who promyse their ser∣uice not only in that, but also to kyll the Lorde himself. About this same tyme, his father Paule the third, wryteth vnto him, that he should take hede to him selfe the tenth daye of Decem∣ber: For the starres do prognosticate vnto hym some great mis∣fortune the same day. For the byshop was much geuen not on∣ly to Astrologie, but also to Negromancie, as it is certenly af∣firmed. The Pope a Negroman∣cier. Whan the Duke had receiued his fathers letters, he was in feare and carefulnes. And whan that day was come, he
goeth out of the castell, in his horse litter, with a great compa∣ny to view the fortification of the towne, that he had begone. The conspiratours were there also: but whan they coulde not there accomplishe the thing desired, they staye, and whan he re∣tourned home, wayte vpon him, and as it had bene of duty, goe before him, to the nombre of .xxxvi. And whan he was come with his horselitter into the castell, they plucke vp the drawe bridge immediatlye, that no mo shoulde followe after, there by and by they approche him with their swordes drawen, and calling him bitterly tyraunt, sleye him within the horselitter, and murther at the same tyme with him, his chaplayne, the maister of his horse, and fiue Almaines of his garde. After they runne vp and downe the castell and spoyle altogether, finding great treasure and sommes of mony, whiche he had appointed for the fortificatiō of the citie. In the meane time was a great concourse of people about the castel, inquiring what the mat∣ter ment, that they heard suche noyse and crying within: They make aunswer from aboue, that they haue kylled the tyraunt, and recouered the aunciēt libertie of the citie. But where they could hardly make them to beleue the thing, whan the citezens had warraunted their liues, and assured them of pardon, they hange out the dead body by a chaine ouer the walle, and after they had swynged it a whyle to and fro, they let it fall into the ditche. The people came running to it, iobbed it in with their The hatred of the cite∣zens towar∣des Peter. daggers, & spurned it with their fete. So great and mortal ha∣tred they bare him. After, cōsulting of y• matter, they aduertise Ferdinādo Gōzage by their letters sent in post, what was chaū¦ced, geue thē selues wholy to thēperour tuitiō, & desire to haue ayde sent thē with al spede. Who sending thither a garrison in hast, taketh the citie, & sweareth thē to be true to themperour. After, he writeth of al things to themperour, desiring to know his pleasure herein. They of Parma wer also moued to submit thēselues vnto themperour. But they sending letters to ye By∣shop of Rome, say they wyll stil remaine vnder his obeysaunce, and refuse not, the Father being slayne, to doe homage to his sonne Octauius, and acknowledge him for their Prince. This is the somme of the newes, which were reported to be sent vn∣to the Emperour, and wherof the states were made partakers. But others declare y• matter to be far otherwyse, & saye it was pourposly done, & that a fewe howres after, y• the murther was cōmitted, Gōzage was at ye gates of the citie wt a garrison: but I can affirme nothing. How soeuer the matter was, al mē con¦fesse, yt Peter Aloise was a very wicked & a mischeuous fellow, &
there be bokes in Italiā which recite his vngracious & detesta¦ble lustes, amonges the whiche, this is one of all others moste notable, wherby he is saide to haue enforced & buggered with The mon∣strous lustes of hym. Cosmus Cherie, Byshop of Fanen, by the ayde of his seruaūtes that helde him. Whiche filthie acte so inwardly greued that o∣ther caytif, that shortly after he died for sorow and shame of the very thing. And some do suppose that he gaue him poison, that he should not vtter that wretched dede to themperour. The Bi∣shop notwithstanding, loued his sonne derely, and applied his whole study to auaunce him in honour. And where oftentimes he heard of his lewde prankes, he toke it not very greuously, as it is reported, and wold say this only, that he learned not these vices of him. I shewed you before how the fathers of the coun∣sell leauing Trent, remoued to Bononie. And the same did the Emperour take in high displeasure. And cōming to Auspurge, The coūsell of Trent of two partes. caused the Senate of Princes to wryte to the Byshop herein. Wherfore the .xiiii. day of Ianuary, sending him their letters, they declare the perillous state of Germany, whiche they saye might haue bene eschewed, if a remedy had bene founde for the disease in time, that is to wite, a general counsel, for the which themperour hath oftener than ones ben a suter, that he might haue procured ye same within the precincte of Germany: to the intent the byshops of the same countrey whom it chiefly cōcer∣ned, might there be present. For where their iurisdictiō is gret, it is not expedient, yt they shuld, especially at this tyme, be far from their own charge. At the lēgth through themperours in∣dustrie, whan no man wold come at Mantua, nor Uicēce, a coū¦sell in dede was called and begonne at Trent without the bor∣ders of Germany, which rather belōgeth to Italy. For ye which cause also few Germanes came there. Neither could they espe∣cially in time of war, whan al wayes & passages were stopped & closed vp. But now that this tempest is blowen ouer, and the shippe at the hauons mouth, & all men were brought into a ve∣ry good hope, besides al expectaciō, that the counsel shuld thus he remoued or rather diuided, wherin the preseruatiō of the cō∣mon wealth consisteth it greueth them not a litle: because of ye daūger that is like to ensue therby. For these .xxvii. yeres hath Germany ben tormoyled with newe & pernicious sectes & opi∣nions, & the byshops in maner beare no authoritie. And in this dissolute oultrage, and cōfusion of things: innumerable thou∣sandes are in daunger of their saluation. Briefly, through this same pestilent euill is infected & corrupted, whatsoeuer before was clere, & the states of thempire plucked a sonder, do obserue no frendship amōges them selues. In these so many and great
euils their only refuge is to the Apostolicall churche. Wherfore they hartely pray him, euen for the wealth of Germany: that he would restore the counsell. Whiche if he would, there is no∣thing, but he myght loke for at their hādes. But if not, they cā¦not see from whence they should seke remedy. For stormes and tempestes arrise on euery syde, whiche all to repulse, God hath ordained the holy churche of Rome as a certen bulwarke and rocke moste strong. Let him haue therfore a consideration of their requestes, and thinke no lesse but it may be, except he pro∣uide for the contrary, that some other meanes and deuises may be founde, to dispatche this matter. For the rest, they pray him, to take these thinges in good parte: For their duty and state of tyme compelleth them so to wryte. In these dayes also the Englyshmen vanquish the Scottes in a maigne battell, and slewe of thē many thousandes, at the Muskelbo∣rough field. conduict of the Duke of Somerset the kinges vncle. The cause of the warre was the same, that was before, during the lyfe of kyng Henry, that is to witte, for that the Scottes would not geue their Quene to wyfe vnto king Edward as their promise was. After this victory the Englishe nation wan a great part of Scotlande, and enlarged their limites farre. Concerninge the Emperours demaundes, all men were not of one opinion. For the Electours that were of the clergie do vrge the counsell of Trent without conditiō. But the Ambassadours of ye Pauls∣graue, Duke Maurice and Marques of Brandenburg, refused not the same, sobeit, it were fre and Godly, wherin the Byshop should not be iudge, and should release other Byshops of their othe, and that their diuines also might haue licence to reason, and the decrees already made be retracted. But all other Prin∣ces and states were desirous that the counsell might be conti∣nued, that the Protestauntes going thether by saufeconduict, may be heard & constrained to obey the decrees of the counsell. Themperour hearing al their mindes, the .xviii. day of Octob. answereth, & desireth them al to submit them selues to the coū¦sell, and treateth with the Paulsgraue and Duke Maurice se∣uerally, that they shuld geue their assent. And the Paulsgraue in dede was put in feare vnlesse he consented, by reason of the The Prote∣stauntes in∣tised or fea∣red. late offence in the yeare before, where as that sore was not throughly healed. Duke Maurice again, which both coueted yt the Lantgraue his father in lawe shuld be deliuered: And was also muche auaunced of late by ye Emperour, sawe wel he must nedes do some thing. Wherfore whā themperour had by messen¦gers sēt betwixt promised largely of his good wil towards thē,
and desired instauntly that they would committe the thing to his fidelitie, they at the last the .xxiiii. day of October consente therto. The rest were only cities, whiche sawe what a daunge∣rous matter it were to submitte them selues to the decrees of the coūsell without exception. With them did Granuellan and Hasie intreate longe and muche. And the meane whyle it was bruted throughout the citie, howe they were franticke and out of their wyttes that refused the thyng whiche all the Princes had than approued. There were heard moreouer threatnynges that they should be scourged worse than they were of late. In fine a meane was founde, that both the Emperour was satis∣fied, and they also assured. For being called before the Empe∣rour. They saye it is not their parte to correcte the aunswers of Princes and delyuer hym with all a wryting, wherin they testifie, vpon what conditions they doe admitte the counsell. The Emperour hearynge their tale, aunswereth them by Sel∣die, howe he is verey glad and ioyfull, that after the example of others, they referre the matter vnto hym, and geue their cō∣sent with the reste. So did he attribute more vnto them, than they desyred. For they did not assente to the reside we, but to a∣uoyde displeasure, they woulde finde no faulte with the sen∣tence of the Princes. And yet leste any thyng should be preiudi∣ciall to them hereafter, they declared by wryting, in what sort they lyked the counsell, that in tyme to come myght remayne a testimony of their myndes. This was about the ende of Octo∣ber. And the same tyme came thyther Kyng Ferdinando, and after also the Electour of Brandenburge. The Emperour ther∣fore immediatly in the beginnyng of Nouember, sent the Car∣dinall of Trente to Rome in poste, to moue the Byshop to call agayne the Synode to Trente. In the moneth of Nouember, Christine, wyfe to the Lant∣graue, his sonnes and certen choise counsellours in their let∣ters Letters for ye Lantgraue to themper. wrytten to all the Princes and States of the Empyre, de∣clare, by what meanes he was taken at Hale, commyng thy∣ther vnder saufe conduite. And in as muche as all the condi∣cions by ye Emperour prescribed, that could or ought to be per∣fourmed, are accomplished, the monie payd, the Duke of Brun∣swick & his son set at libertie, al the letters of the confederates exhibited, the oth of ye nobilitie, & assurasice of ye suerties made. al his munition deliuered, & his fortes rased. Moreouer, in as much as thei are ready, neither refuse thei to be pledges thēsel¦ues vntil such time as ye rest be fulfilled also, they can not wout the gret grief & vexatiō of mind se him in this miserable case &
For before he went to Hale, he was in no suche case but that he might haue kept his castelles an honest tyme against the force of the ennemy. And that also can the Emperours commissio∣ners, whiche sawe the thinges afterwarde, testife. But for the compassion he had of the people, chose peace before war. Wher∣fore they moste hartely praye them, to intreate the Emperour in his behalfe, and fynde the meanes, that being shortly resto∣red to libertie, he may retourne home. For in case he should be longer dteined, it would be doubtles to the vtter decaye of his health. And to haue the better successe in their sute the Lant∣graues wyfe came her selfe to Auspurg. And both her selfe, and also by Duke Maurice and the Electour of Brandenburg, sol∣liciteth the Princes to sue for him. Whiche thing knowen, the Emperour, before intercession was made, the .xxv. day of Nouē¦ber, declareth to ye states, that he heareth what report is made The Empe. aunswer to the states. vnto thē. And in as much as the talke of men is diuerse, he wil declare vnto them the plain truthe of the matter, & so reciteth from the beginning, how ofte, and by whome the Lantgraue had bene sued for. And howe he aunswered thē al, that he shuld yelde and submitte himself without condicion, rase his castels, and deliuer his munition, and than he tolde Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandenburg, that he should neither suf∣fer Toe condi∣tions wher∣by the Lant∣graue sub∣mitted hym¦selfe. bodyly punishement, nor be deteined in perpetual prison, or further punished in his goodes than was in the composition of peace prescribed. This was the thing only, & in none other hope did he put them, as they can beare witnesse. And after de∣clareth howe he came to Hale and submitted hym selfe vnto hym. And howe he hath bene synce intreated, nothyng against promesse. This tale of the Emperour the same daye, the states do reporte to Duke Maurice and the Marques. The next daye they make suche aunswer, as they neither blame themperour The answer of Du. Mau¦rice and the Marques. greatly herein, neither wyll much contende whether the fault were in the counsellours or how the matter was mistakē. But how someuer the matter was, for a common quiet and peace of Germany, they did perswade the Lātgraue, whan they suspec∣ted nothing at all of imprisonment or captiuitie, to come vnto Hale, desyre pardon, and not to refuse the conditions of peace. and that he hath lost his libertie, & is kepte prisoner hitherto, not without ye great peril of his health, how much yt is against their honour & estimatiō, euery mā seeth wel enough. Therfore they require thē, to be petitioners with thē, & intreate thempe∣rour, yt he would rather haue consideration of thē, which haue done faithful seruice to the Empire, than of the Lantgraues
offence, and not to suffer them to runne in obloquie and sclaun¦der, but restore him vnto libertie, especially synce the conditiōs are all in a maner fulfylled, and the Emperour put in ryght good assuraunce for the rest. Thus therfore with one voyce and assente they made intercession. The Lantgraues wyfe had in∣treated the Lady Regent the Emperours sister to be a meane for him: But it auailed nothing. And because Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandenburg, sayd how they were bound to the Lantgraues sonnes by dede obligatorie, so longe as he was deteined, the Emperour sendeth Iohn Lirane to the Lāt∣graue at Norling, whether as ye Spaniardes had caried him. And willeth him to deliuer all the wrytinges of assurasice and dedes obligatory. He saieth, that they are not in his custody, The Empe∣rour requi∣reth the wi∣tinges of the Lantgraue. but kept by his sonnes and counsellours. Albeit he shuld write yet were it in vain. For thei told him when he came away, that they would not departe from them, vnlesse he were first deliue∣red. Neuerthelesse if he might knowe of the Emperour any cer∣ten tyme of his deliueraunce: he would do what he coulde, that they should be deliuered. The Emperour not contented with this aunswer, taketh from him all his seruauntes, except one or two at the moste. About the ende of Nouember, Peter Mar∣tyr, a Florētine, leauing Strasburg, where he had taught fiue yeares, to his great commendation, hauing leaue of the Se∣nate, Peter Mar∣tyr goeth in to England. goeth into Englande, being sent for by the Archebyshop of Canturbury, at the kinges commaundement, and is appoin¦ted to reade the diuinitie lectour in Oxforde. He had a compa∣ignion of this iourney, Barnardine Ochine of Sene. Who be∣yng had in great estimation amonges the Italians for his elo∣quence & vertue, forsaking the monasticall kinde of lyfe, gaue him selue to the doctrine of the Gospell. And coming first to Geneua, and after to Auspurge, set forth certen Sermons in print. And muche about the same tyme were the syxe articles, made in the life of king Henry, as is sayd in the .xii. boke, disa∣nulled A reforma∣tion of Reli∣gion in En∣glande. by acte of parliament. And Images and pictures remo∣ued out of the churches. This was the beginning of reforma∣tion there. The .ix. day of December the Cardinall of Trent in the presence of the byshop, and a great Senate of Cardinalles, propoundeth his matter, as he was commaunded, and with The oratiō of the Cardi¦nall of Trēt many weighty wordes declareth, what perils and paynes the Emperour hath taken for the counsell, and now is the matter brought vnto that passe, as he sayeth, through his industrie, & authoritie, that all states wyll obeye the counsell. Wherfore he requireth for Goddes loue, in the name of the Emperour, kyng
Ferdinando and the whole Empire, that he will cōmaunde the fathers that are at Bononie to retourne to Trent, to finish vp their worli begon, ryght necessary for the cōmon wealth. More ouer that he send an Ambassadour or two into Germany, that by their aduise some meane howe to lyue well may be estably∣shed till the ende of the counsell, and that there may be a refor∣mation of the olergie. Finally, let him consider also and decree, that if the Byshop chaunce to departe during the tyme of the counsell, whether the authoritie of Election shalbe in the Fa∣thers of the counsell, or in the Cardinalles, leste happely if the matter shall so come to passe, it may styre vp newe commotiōs. The fift day after, that the Cardinall of Trent had thus playd the oratour: Iames Mendoza, by the Emperours commaūde∣ment, in the same audience, speaketh to lyke effect. And sayeth, that if the Byshop make any delay or excuse, he hath in com∣maundement, that calling to hym the Ambassadours of other kynges and Prynces, he shuld openly proteste, that the counsell is corrupted. The same daye being the .xiiii. daie of December, The Oratiō of the bishop of Rains to the Pope. the Archbyshop of Rains, that was made Cardinall the sōmer before, sent by the Frenche kyng to Rome, made a long and a flattering Oration to the Byshop and the Cardinalles in the prayse of kyng Fraunces and other kynges of Fraūce, but chief¦ly in the commendation of Henry the newe kyng, who, as he sayeth nothing degenerating from his moste noble progeni∣tours, beareth such a zelous affection to the churche of Rome, that he maketh not only his submission, and as a most louing, The Frēche king conten¦deth with ye Emperour for eldership and obedient childe, offereth hym selfe in to the bosome of the same: but also as the first begotten sonne of the churche, & chief captaine of the Christian nation, promiseth in the defence and maintenaūce of the dignitie hereof, to imploye al the force and power of his Realme, his owne treasure, and person Roialle, with many suche other thinges full of great assentation. The Frenche kyng vnderstāding well what rancour and malice the Byshop bare in mynde for the slaughter of Peter Aloise, & saw that through the remouing of the counsell from Trent, the dis∣pleasure was increased, he iudged this a tyme cōuenient, wher¦in he might frame all thinges to his commoditie and purpose. Wherfore sending oftentimes Ambassadours to the Byshop, he promised him assistaūce, and incouraged and strengthened his mynde. Whan the Byshop had heard the requestes of the Cardi¦nall of Trente, and of Mendoza, he sayeth he wyl consult with the fathers that be at Boloigne, and also make relation of the thing vnto other Christen Princes. Wherfore whan the Cardi∣nall
of Trente could get none other aunswere, he retourneth home, leauing there Mendoza, whome the Emperour had com¦maunded to finishe vp the rest. And the .xvi. day of December, the Byshop wryting to his chief Legate in the counsell, Iohn The Popes letters to his Legate. Mary Mountane, Cardinal, signifieth, both what the Cardi∣nal of Trent, and also Iames Mendoza had demaunded in the Emperours name, and how he, after conference had with his Cardinalles, thought mete to conferre also with the fathers of the counsell, leste any thyng should be done rashely. And to the intent that the decrees already made, aswell that of remouing the counsell, as also the reste myght wholy remayne. Therfore, sayeth he, for so muche as I am both carefull for the welth of Germany, and for the Emperours sake would haue no long de∣lay, I commaunde you, that calling for the assistaunce of the holy Ghoste you declare the whole matter to the fathers. And what answere shalbe made to the Emperour, you wryte hither with all spede. Cardinall Montane, as he was commaunded, bryngeth the matter in counsell, after wryteth agayne to the Byshop. Albeit the counsell were lawfully remoued frō Trent to Bononie. Albeit that in the session of the Fathers, the same daie, that the decree was made of remouing the Synode, al mē were openly warned, to repare to Boloigne. Although he, and the other Fathers, wryting their letters after to Trent admo∣nished thē louingly to take their iourney, yet do some remaine there vntyll this daye. Whiche thing verely aperteineth to the contemt of the counsell, and offendeth many. Therfore the Fa∣thers do not see, howe they should, sauing the dignitie and esti∣mation of the Synode, consulte of their retourne, vnlesse that suche as be at Trent, do first come to Bononie, ioyne thē selues with the residue, & acknowledge the authoritie of ye counsel. A∣gaine, it is nedefull, that the Fathers be put in assuraūce, that Germany will submitte it selfe to the counsell, and allowe the decrees therof, that either are made already, or heafter shalbe, in such sort, that they be retracted of no man. Moreouer, in as muche as the brute goeth, that it shalbe a counsell to the peo∣ple agreable, the fathers desyre also to haue assuraunce in that behalfe. For if that should take place, all order and maner of counselles synce the Apostles tyme vnto this day, shuld be chaū¦ged. They desyre also to know, how they shalbe assured, yt they may all there safely and frely remayne, and whan they shall thinke good, departe thence, no man to let them. Finally this assuraunce is also requisite, that whan for certen causes it se∣meth good to the moste part, it may be lawfull for the Fathers
to go some where els, and remoue the counsell. Furthermore, whan it shall appeare, those matters to be sufficiently aunswe¦red, for the whiche the counsell was called, the fathers may be at libertie to surcease and make an ende. These are the thinges whiche the fathers, after great deliberation, whan they had called for the grace of the holy spirite, haue answered vnto his requestes, praiyng his holines, to take them in good worth. Whan these letters were deliuered, the Byshop, the .xxvii. daye of Decēber, at after Masse, sendeth for the Emperours Ambas∣sadour Mendoza, into the senate of Cardinalles, and sheweth him, what the Synode of Boloigne hath answered, whose opi∣nion The pope to Mendoza the Emperours Ambassad. he saieth, is not misliked either of him, or of the Cardi∣nalles, as consonant to right and reason. For his part there is nothing that he would not wyshe to do for Germany. And this can the Emperour witnesse. For nothing that concerned the dutie of a good pastour, and a moste louing father, hath bene of him omitted. He perceiueth in dede what the Emperour, what king Ferdinādo and the States of the Empire require, but he supposeth howe they desire it in suche wyse, as it may stande with the peace and commoditie of other nations, and with the libertie of the churche. Whan Mendoza sawe howe the Bishop toke that company at Boloigne for the counsell, he was fully mynded to haue protested to the contrary immediatly. But through the intercession of certen Cardinalles and the Deane of the College, he was content to aduertise the Emperour of this aunswere, and to awayte for his letters, and differre the protestation vntill the .xx. day after. Whan therfore Mendoza had signified the whole matter to the Emperour: The Byshop also made aunswere to the former letters of the Germane By∣shops, at the kalendes of Ianuary. Wherein he commendeth their vertue, and interlaseth his owne prayses amonges. He 1548. The Popes letters to the Byshops of Germany. sheweth how desyrous he hath bene euer of a counsell, and first called the same at Mantua, after at Uicence, & last at Trente, whither came many Bishoppes of other nations, but fewe or none out of Germany. Moreouer, what holsome decres were there made and how proftable for the commō wealth, and that they departed from thence without his knowledge, yet doeth he defende their doinges to be lawefull. Further more he de∣fende their doinges to be lawfull. Furthermore he discourseth The pope is ignoraunt of all thinges. at large what the Cardinall of Trent, and Mendoza demaun∣ded in the Emperours name, whose requestes, in asmuche as they were with theirs agreable, he would not answere, before he had aunswered the Emperour. Finally, where they say, it is
to be feared, lest if he be slacke, other meanes wyl be found, that can not moue him, for as muche as he hath omitted no part of his duty, whome God hath placed in this seate of dignitie, as it were in a hyge watche toure, to haue charge of the whole slocke, but especially of those that go astraye from the rest. A∣gaine it may be that newe deuises shalbe attempted against The pope is a watchman the authoritie of the Sea of Rome. For Christ him selfe the ar∣chitectour therof, what tyme he layd the foūdation of ye church of Rome, did prognosticate of great stormes, but that their en∣terpryse should haue any lucky successe, he feareth not, for that Christe hath buylded the same vpon a moste strong Rocke. Di∣uers haue heretofore attempted the lyke thinge, whome God The constā∣cie of the Ro¦mish church. hath made an example for all men to beholde. And if there be any at this day whiche are not affrayde of the plages and pu∣nishment of others, set before their eyes, he sore lamēteth their case, for the destruction that will ensue. Howbeit he exhorteth them chiefly to remayne and perseuer still in that faith vertue and constancie, which they haue perfourmed hetherto. And suf¦fer no counselles to take place in their cōuentions against the dignitie of the churche. Whan therfore the Byshop and Synod assembled at Boloigne, dwelt stil in their opinion. The Empe∣rours The Emp. Ambassad. sent to Bo∣loigne le grasse. Ambassadours for the same cause sent to Bononie, Fraū¦ces Uargas, and Martin Uelascus, the .xvi. daye of Ianuary, whā they had desyred a Senate, they come before the cōsistory. There was present Cardinall Mountane, and about .xliiii. bi∣shops and prelates of the churche. There Uargas reciteth his commission wherin the Emperour had geuen him and his fel∣lowe authoritie to pleade, whiche he had also exhibited lately before. And beginning to speake, was interrupted by Cardinal Montane President of the counsell. In this commission and wrytyng, the Emperour calleth it not the counsell, but conuen¦tion of Bononie. Wherfore sayeth Cardinal Mountane, albeit this assemble is not bounde to heare your Oration, forasmuch The Popes Legate to ye Emperours Ambassad. as your commission exhibited doth not concerne this holy Sy∣node, yet, lest any man should haue any cause to complayne, we refuse not to heare you, yet vpon condition, that this pleading do neither hinder vs, nor profite you, and that it shalbe free for vs neuerthelesse, to continew, and procede in the counsell, and to appointe suche punishment against al disobedient rebelles, as by holy lawes and constitutions is determined. After this, the Emperours Ambassadour Uargas, desyreth to haue this re¦corded The Empe. Ambassad. to ye fathers. in the common recordes, that he was impeched and let∣ted that he could not speake first. Afterwarde in as much, saith
he, as you haue already sene the Emperours letters of credit, now wyll I declare what our commission is. We appeare here before you to treat of a matter most weighty, and not only we: but also the whole common wealth of Christendome, with ear¦nest prayers do beseche you, that you would shew equitie in the same. For all men iudge this certenly, that in case you wyll ob∣stinatly perseuer in the opinion, whiche very vncircumspectly you haue ones embraced: it wyll tourne to a maruelous cala∣mitie of the common wealth. But if you will surceae, and be ordered by themperour, all thinges shal luckely succede. Which thing that all men the better may vnderstande, we shall repete the whole matter more depely. For so shal it appeare, how fow∣ly you shall erre, vnlesse you alter your pourpose. And how gret good wil ye Emperour beareth to the commō wealth. And here∣in wil adde no word of our own, but wil treade in the fotesteps of the commaundement we haue receiued. There agayne Car∣dinall Mountane, I am here also (sayeth he) president of this The mala∣pertnes of ye Legate. sacred counsell, and deputed Legate of Paule the third Bishop of Rome, the successour of Peter, and Uicar of Christ in earth. Here be also these most reuerende fathers, to procede in the coū¦sell, lawfully remoued from Trent, vnto Gods glory, and salua¦tion of mankynde. Wherfore we desire the Emperour, to alter his sentence, and assiste vs in this matter, and commaunde the disturbers of the counsell vnto silence: For he is not ignoraunt that who so euer they be that are any let or impediment to ho∣ly counselles, do deserue moste greuouse punishemēt, by the pre∣script of the lawes. But how so euer the matter falleth, and what terrours so euer be threatened, yet wyll we cleaue fast to the libertie and dignite both of the churche and counsel, and of our own also. After whan Uargas had openly recited the let∣ters of their commission, his fellowe Uelascus readeth the pro∣testation. In the beginning is raccomted, how oftentymes the The letters of protesta∣tiō from the counsell. Emperour hath desired a counsell of Leo, Adriane, Clement, & last of Paule the third, what time the Germaines were erneste suters to him for the same. Again how Paule the third first at Mantua, after at Uicence, finally whan it could not be kepte in those places, appointed the same at Trent, by the assent of the Emperour and the other states: for so muche as the same place was commodious for Italians and Spaniardes, French men, and Germaines, and wanted not thinges nedefull. Ther∣fore what time this seate was chosen for the Synode: The By∣shop sent thether Cardinals, Parise, Morone, and Poole. And in the Emperours name also came the Byshop of Arras, & his
Father Granuellan and Iames Mendoza. But where as that tyme semed not to the Byshop conuenient enough, the matter being differred, againe there came newe Legates from Rome, Mountane, Crucei, and Poole Cardinalles. And from the Em¦perour thesame Mendoza and Fraunces Toletane. The Am∣bassadours of other Princes came also, and others out of all partes repared to Trent in great nōber. And at the same time, the Emperour had warre in Germany, chiefly for the defence & maintenaunce of Religion, that suche as he could not rule by reason, he might compelle by force of armes. And what time he hauing lucky successe in his warres, had in a maner vāquished all, and had called into the way againe such as contemned the counsell before tyme, beholde you, whiche vsurpe vnto you the name of the Legates of the See of Rome, sodenly without ma∣king the Byshop priuie, as you say your selues, faining a cause I can not tell what, do propounde of remouing the counsell, & geuing scarsely any tyme to consulte in, departe from Trent in great haste, where as many worthy and vertuous fathers did not assent, but sayd how the cause of this flitting was not rea∣sonable, and protested that they would remaine at Trent. In the meane season the Emperour going into Saxony, vanqui∣sheth the ennemy at Albis, and taketh both the Captaines of the warre in battell and by submission, and neuerthelesse both before and after the warre was finished, he desired the Byshop oft by letters and messengers sent, that he woulde commaunde the Fathers to retourne from Boloigne to Trent. For other∣wyse would the matter be daungerous. After, he called a con∣uention at Auspurge, wherin, at the Emperours request, the Prynces and all states with whole cōsent did approue the coū∣sell of Trent, and promised that they wold obeie the same with out any condition. Whan he had this obtained, he sent forth with the Cardinall of Trent to Rome, whiche might declare these thinges to the Byshop and Senate of Cardinalles, and in the name of the whole Empyre myght require the continu∣aunce of the counsel at Trent. He commaunded the same thing also to Iames Mendoza his Ambassadour. But the Byshop toke delay in aunsweryng, and thought mete first to consulte with you, and receiued an answer from you ful craftie, subtile, and captious, and eftsones did aunswer the Emperour vnsit∣tingly, and by his starting holes & backsteppes declareth well enough, how little he careth for the common wealth. For to proue the cause of remouing, ther had neded witnesses worthy of credite. The Emperour, kyng Ferdinando and the Prynces,
sending their letters and a moste honorable Ambassadour, de∣clared what the opinion of all States was cōcerning the coū∣sell. But omitting their testimony, the Byshop would rather geue credit to vile and abiecte persones. Howe many tedious and painful iourneis hath the Emperour taken for this coun∣sell: The Emp. carefulnes for the coun∣sell. And what costes & charges hath he bene at? And shall all these thinges be lost? Upon moste weightie and necessarie cau∣ses, at the request of ye Emperour, through the suite of the Ger∣maines, and by the assent of other Christian Princes, was the counsell both called & also cōmenced at Trent. Wherfore with out the publique authoritie of al states cōsented therto, it may not be holden els where. For there was no cause of remouynge the same, but some thing was inuented for an excuse. Uerely certe agues and infection of the ayre. And herein they follo∣wed the aduise of certen Phisiciōs, but chiefly of their maydes The Au∣thours of re∣mouing the counsell. and cookes. But howe trifelyng and vaine a cause that was, the thinge it selfe, and ende declared. You saye that you depar∣ted not making the Byshop priuie: But his letters wrytten vn¦to you, and aunswer sent to the Emperour do testifie farre an¦other thing. Certenly you ought not to haue remoued or chaū∣ged the place, without the consent of the Emperour, vnto whō is committed in charge the tuition of all counselles. But you went so hastely away, that you reiected suche as sayd how you ought first to aske aduise of the Emperour and Byshop. And if you must nedes haue remoued, at the lest you should haue obser¦ued the decrees of holy counselles, and haue remayned within the borders of Germany, to the intent the Germaines, whose cause was chiefly in hande, myght come to the counsell safely. But nowe haue ye chosen Bononie, a citie in the middes of I∣taly, and subiect to the churche of Rome, whether you are assu∣red that the Germaines will not come. And therfore haue you chosen the same, that to the decaye and reproche of the vni∣uersall weale the counsel myght either be dossolued or handled and vsed at your pleasure. The Emperour therfore requireth, & that moste earnestly, that you wold retourne to the same place, whiche before contented all men, especially synce all thinges are safe and quiet, neither remaineth there any further cause of feare. Whiche thyng if you shall refuse, I doe here in the na∣me, and by the commaundemēt of the Emperour, proteste this remouing of the counsell to be vayne, vnlawful, and the whole doyng to be voyde & of none effect. And do also testifie ye answer of yours, to be fond & full of lies, and ye the cōmodities yt hereaf¦ter shal insue to the cōmon wealth, ar not to be ascribed to thē∣but
vnto you, and affirme moreouer that you haue no authori∣tie to remoue the counsell. And in asmuch as you haue neglec∣ted the publique health of men, the Emperour as Protectour of the churche, wyll take charge therof, so far forth as he may by the lawes and and decrees of holy fathers. Whan he had red these thinges, he deliuereth the copie of the Protestation writ∣ten, and requireth that it maye be recorded for matter of re∣corde. There Cardinall Mountane, by the consent of the Fa∣thers, speakyng grauely, declareth that they are not well vsed, Mountane striken with a fury. and taketh God to witnesse, and saieth howe they are ready to dye rather, than to suffer suche an example to be brought into the churche, that euer the ciuile Magistrate should at his wyll and pleasure comptrolle the counsell. The Emperour in dede is the eldest sonne of the church, but neyther Lord nor Maister. But he and his colleges are Legates of the See Apostolicke, & refuse not presently to rēder an accompt both first vnto God, & after also to the Byshop of their Ambassade. And that more within a fewe dayes their Protestation shalbe auns∣wered. In maner to the same effect, and about the same tyme, Mendoza, whan letters were come from the Emperour, wherby he was commaū∣ded to procede, did proteste at Rome before the Byshop and Cardinalles, callyng therunto, as he was cemmaunded, the Ambassa∣dours of foreine kynges and Princes.
✚ The twenty Booke of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte ❧ The argument of the twenty Booke. THe treaty is of a controuersie, whether the lande of Prusse belong to the kyng of Poole, or to the Empyre. The Pope maketh an ample aunswere to the protestation before made by Mendoza: Wherof the Emperour being aduertised, leauing all hope of a counsell, begyn∣neth to set forth his Interim. The Protectour of Englande, wryting to the Scottes in ample wyse, demaundeth their Quene. Uogelsberge is beheaded. The Emperour in his campe before Wittemberge gaue to Duke Maurice the ryght of Electourshyp, and nowe crea∣teth him with all solemnities. Bucer refuseth to subscribe to the Interim. The Pope himselfe cō∣demneth the Interim. Lykewyse do some of the Electours and Prynces: Certen also refuse it, al though that the Emperour had caused it to be proclaimed. The Duke of Saxon prysoner with great magnanimitie refuseth it. The Lantgraue by letters set forth in his name, maketh semblant to consent therunto, to be deliuered. Whilest the Masseis abolished in England, the cities and townes of Germany are sollicited to accept the Interim, and aboue all others Strasborough, yea with threatchynges. IN the fourmer bokes is declared, howe Al∣bert of the house of Brandenburge did ho∣mage to the kynge of Polle, howe he alte∣red the state of the cōmon welth in Prusse, and was therfore outlawed of the chāber. Againe, howe the kyng of Polle in commō assemblies of the Empyre, had oftentymes sued to the Emperour and other States, that, in as muche as he was his Cliente, they would reuerse his outlawerie. But where as nothynge was obtayned vnto this daye, and in this great victory of the Emperour it was to be feared lest the matter should haue come to further daunger, the kynge of Polle vnto this assemblie sen∣deth an Ambassade, the chief wherof was Stanislaus Lascus. He, in the moneth of Ianuary, deliuereth to the Emperour and Senate of Princes, an Oration wrytten, the effect wherof was this. Howe the cause of Prusse had bene oftentymes de∣bated. The oration of the Kyng of Pols am∣bassadour. But for as muche as it hath bene alwayes differred vn∣tyll other assemblies, he is nowe cōmaunded, agayne to declare the same. And the kinges truste is, yt inasmuch as they haue at al times made him gētle answers, ye cause it self being rightful
they will haue some consideration, and mynde of hym, yet not not as Iudges, but as Prynces worthy all honour and reue∣rence. And first of all, sayeth he, I wyll speake diuerse thynges, of the order of Prusse, to the intent the thyng may be manifest. In times pait the kynges of Polle gaue a great part of Prusse∣land to the order of knighthode in Dutche land, vpon cōdicion, The begin∣ning of thor∣der of knight had in Duch¦land. that they might haue their seruice against the enemies of chri∣stendome. But they very vnthankefull, breakyng conuenaun∣tes, tourned their force against ther owne Lordes. So had they oftentymes warre, and oftentymes their conuenauntes were renewed: Which by reasō of antiquitie, it is not requisite to rehearse. But that whiche in maner chaunced in our me∣mory I shall recite. Kyng Casimire, father vnto Sigismunde, subde wyng them in a great battell, brought them to conditions of peace. Than The victory of King Ca∣simire. amonges other thinges it was accorded, that from henceforth they should acknowledge the kynges of Polle, for their Magi∣strate, geuyng thē their fidelitie by an othe. But afterwardes certen Maisters of that order brake conuenauntes, geuynge them selues in to the tuition of others. Of the whiche Albert of Brandenburge was one, who being bounde by conuenaunt to doe homage vnto the kyng his Uncle, within the half yeare, wold not. Wherfore the kyng; albeit he loued peace, yet was of necessitie constrayned to attempte warre. And albeit they ne∣uer ioyned in battell with their whole forces, yet by Roades made, fyryng, spoyling, and escharmoushing, was much harme done, in so muche that Alberte being to weake, came vnto the kyng to take truce. But at the selfe same tyme came a force of Germaines to ayde hym. For the whiche cause he departed without concludyng the same, and began to renewe warre. But not long after, beyng of them forsaken, where he dyd but dissemble before, than was he constrayned in sadues to intreat for peace. Whiche being ones concluded by the mediation of certen, it was conditioned that he should geue his fayth to the kyng by an othe, and doe all thynges as becommeth a faythful and trusty Cliente. It is certen therfore that the lande of Prusse, hath euer synce the memory of mā, and from the tyme, they fyrst receiued Albert recey¦ued into the tuitiō of the king of Pol. the Christen Religion, both by the lawe of armes and also by sondry conuenauntes, aparteyned to the Realme of Polle. For if any others haue made any title or claime to it the same hath ben through the arrogancie & wrong of ye maisters of thorder, who being through y• kinges permissiō, Germains borne, haue
about oftentimes to intitle others in the ryght of Prusse. Whiche thing assuredly hath bred muche distention betwixte the Germaines and Polonians, and caused also this same de∣cree, wherin Duke Albert was outlawed. But what ryght haue they to outlaw an other mans cliente? For in yt he came not to iudgemēt when he was sited not of his iudges, that ded he by the kynges commaundement, vnto whome all the faulte is to be imputed, in case there be any at all. But if he should be outlawed for this cause, that he acknowlegeth the king for his Magistrat, that were very vnreasonable, that any man should suffer punishemēt for doing his duty. Wherfore most triumphāt Emperour, and states most noble, the king doeth hartly requy∣re you that this vniust and vnlawfull decree of outlawery, pre∣scription may be repressed. Neither is there any cause why any man should thynke, that ye kyng would for any ambition or de∣syre to enlarge his kyngdome, bryng Prusse vnder his subiecti∣on. For he that hath refused most Goodly prouinces, that haue bene frely offred him, how should he come then into the suspici¦on of this matter? Certenly that coūtrey is not so much worth vnto hym, but that, if he myght with his honour, he coulde be content to forgoe it: But sith it doth properly belong vnto his dominion, he can not other wyse doe. For the cause, why often∣times trouble & cōtētion hath risē about it, was euer through Prusse belō∣geth to Pole the faulte of the Maisters of the order, as I shewed you before. And God in dede hath often plaged their bolde enterpryses. And these thinges knew ryght well, most noble Emperour and king Ferdinādo, your grandfather Maximilian, who remem∣bring the iniuries, which he and his father Friderick, receiued of them, made a faithfull promyse to kyng Sigismunde, what tyme they met at Uienne, & promised as well in his owne as in your names also, that he woulde geue no maner of ayde vnto this order. And this dyd Maximilian, after no newe example, but followyng the trade of his auncestours. For both the Em∣perour Sigismunde, metyng wt kyng Ladislaus, grādfather to the king my Maister, did not this much only, but also promised aide against them. And ye Emperour Friderick, your great grād¦father The war of Emperours and kynges of Pole aga∣inst this or∣der of knigh∣tes. ioyned his force and power with Casimire, the father of king Sigismund, against Matthie, kyng of Hongary, and this foresayd order, of one cōfederacie. And although that kyng Ca∣simire, being let & impeched with ye warres of this ordre, could sende themperour Fridericke that time no ayde of men, yet did he ayde him wt monie, so much as his couenāt was. Wherby it is euident, how this order hath always ben enemies to ye hous
whiche hath euer bene linked to Polle with bondes of leagues and affinities. Wherof king Sigismūde requireth you to haue some consideration. For in case there be any of the same order, that thinke them selues bounde, to fight for the christian faith and Religion, there is nothing for them to do in Prusse. For all that be round about it, doe professe the christiane religiō. Ther¦fore must they seke vnto other places, where they may exercise them selues. For now of many yeares, Hierusalem is possessed of a barbarous ennemy, for the defence of the whiche place, it is said how this order was in times past instituted. Constanti∣nople also is kept of the same nation: Here lieth their worke & busines. Or if this be thought ouer olde or to far of, there are many strong cities of Christendome wonne lately. Why do not these worthy knyghtes go thether, that thei might either reco∣uer that is loste, or defende the rest frō the ennemy? But if they delight more in ciuile warre, than euery man may iudge, howe vnworthy they are of that name. But thus the case standeth: this order hath bene alwayes without order. For the whiche A disordred order of knightes. cause also they were expulsed not out of Prussie only, but out of Boheme lyke wyse, well nexe an hondreth and fiftie yeares past. And yet hath no man hetherto desyred the same places, out of the whiche they were expulsed, as common and vacant to be geuen them. But only Polle sement fit to be molested herein, whiche ought moste of all to be fauoured. For albeit that order hath offended many, yet hath it done moste hurt of all to the Realme of Polle. For sauing a few of the first, scarsly were there any maisters of that order that did their duty, but contrariwyse, for the moste part, leauing the Barbarous enne¦mies, haue tourned their weapons against their Magistrate, kynges of Poolle. And not yt only, but haue brought into their confederacie also the Tartarians, a cruell kynde of people, and mortall ennemies to all Christians, as is wrytten of Michell Cochmester. Wherfore if any man would make the rekening, & cōsider ye paines, perilles, charges, warres, tumultes, battails, slaughters & desolations, wherof this order hath chiefly bene cause of, he shal find yt it is hardly so much worth. And ye kinges desire is, that there myght ones be an ende of these euils. For if any man should attempte warre against Albert Duke of Prusse, the kyng wyll not altogether sit styll and see hym take wrong, for as muche as he is both Uncle to hym and Patrone. There are threateninges and menaces brought to the kynges eares, whiche doubtles he is sory to heare. For he loueth peace and quietnes, but chiefly the concorde of Christendome. Howe
be it in case any man shall attempte violence, he wyll in dede vnwillyngly put on Armure, yet for all that wyll he doe it, to defende him and his. He desyreth the frendshyp of all Prynces, but chiefly yours moste mighty Emperour and kyng Ferdinā∣do, and wysheth the same to continue for euer. He hath often times heretofore intreated you by letters and messengers, that the prescription decreed against Duke Albert, might be aboly∣shed. But where the same is not done hetherto, he doeth not so muche impute it vnto you, as to the aduersitie of tyme. But nowe that alwayes are made playne, and lettes taken awaye, he supposeth, you haue occasion now to perfourme the thyng, whiche you haue right franckely promysed, whan not by one lettre or two, you haue signified how that you were more rea∣dy in wyll than in power to gratifie hym. But in case this or∣der wyll not cease, but steare vp warre and trouble, he trusteth that after the example of your progenitours you will kepe assu¦redly the conuenauntes of Maximilian and Fridericke Empe∣perours. An other thing that I haue in commission, appertei∣neth to the cities Danske and Elunige. For these albeit they be vnder the dominion of Polle, yet are they called to the assem¦blies of the Empyre. Wherfore the kyng requireth that they be not so vsed hereafter, but synce that no man besydes him hath to doe with them, they may from henceforth be suffered to vse his owne lawes. Whan the Emperour had heard his demaun∣des, he made relation therof to the states of the Empire, and ge¦ueth a copie of the Oration to Wuolfange Marques of Prusse. Who the .xxiii. daye of Ianuary maketh aunswere in the vul∣gar tongue, and after a certen preface. In this, saith he, resteth The Oratiō of the Mar∣ques of Pru¦se. the whole controuersie of the matter, whether Prusse be vnder the dominion of Polle, or of the Empire. If I shall proue the later to be true, the matter shalbe easy to determine. And thus standeth the case, moste triumphant Emperour, moste mighty kyng, and moste noble Princes and states, as I shall declare. About foure hondreth yeares past, whan a publique war was attempted against the Barbarians, whiche vexed sore the men of our religion throughout al Asie & Affricke, this order, wherof we speake, was instituted, whiche both Emperours haue libe∣rally The Origi∣nall of this order of knighthode. auaūced, and the high Byshops also confirmed. After the knyghtes of this same ordre for the space of certen yeares, kept great warres in those parties, for the vniuersall Christen weale, but in fine hauing a great ouerthrowe, they were dis∣comfited and dispersed into sondry places. At the same time it The Duke of Muscouia fortuned that Conrade, Duke of Moscouia, was greuously as∣sayled
by the Prussians being than the ennemies of Christen Religion. And whan he was no longer hable to mainteine warres and defende him selfe against them, he sued first to the Byshop of Rome, that he, setting forth a celestiall and immor∣tall rewarde, as the maner was, would incourage men to this warre. After he adioyned to him this order of ours, and gaue them all the countrey of Culmen borderyng vpon Prusse, and the rather to encourage them, gaue them al the land of Prusse, to holde for euer. This dede of gift the Emperour Friderick the second confirmed, & permitted Herman Salcie, that than was Maister of the order, to moue warre against the Prussians, and if he did subdue them, to inioye their lande for euer. This was in the yeare of our Lorde, M .CC. xxvi. Thus verely did my or∣der, through the ayde of the Emperour, Byshoppes of Rome, & Princes of the Empyre continewing the warre by the space of liii. yeares, at the last conquer the lande of Prusse, and bring it to the christian Religion, beautified it with certen Colleges & Byshoprikes, and builded therin also both Castels and Cities, that there might be in those parties as a walle and fortresse of the Empire, and a refuge for the Nobilitie of Germany. And so hath parte of the same Region remained in our gouernement, vnto the yeare of saluation, M .CCCC. l. and an other parte therof tyll Albert of Brandenburg. After what tyme the Li∣tuanes and Tartarians together, made warre against the Po∣lonians and Moscouites, our knightes remembring their pro∣fession and order, toke armure and cleane disconfited the Litua¦nians, inuading far within their limites. For the which cause we had long time peace and amitie with the Polonians vntill suche time as a certen Prince of Lituania was created king of Polle. Who to auenge the losse and shame of his nation, moued The Prince of Lituania, made king of Pole. warre against vs sodenly, and ayded of the Barbarians, did ve∣ry muche hurte. But being of our men repulsed, and put besi∣des, and a great part of his Realme, had no ioyfull ende of that warre, in so muche as he made his complaint to the counsel of Constance. After came forth a decree that suche part of Polle as our men helde by the lawe of armes should be restored. Thus beyng againe reuiued, he forgot the benefit receiued, and rene∣wed warre, and contended that certen prouinces of our order, belonged to the dominiō of Polle, And albeit that through the intercession of the two kynges of Hongary and Boheme, the matter was taken vp yet the sore brake out agayne, and at last the case was referred to the Emperour Sigismunde, who ap∣proued the fourmer composition, that the kynges had made.
Howebeit the king of Polle could not reste thus, but attemp∣ted warre agayne, whiche the .xxiiii. yeare after was accorded A composi∣tion of peace at Tournie, whan Ladistaus was king. In the whiche compo∣sition of peace, he forsaketh all suite and strife, neither calleth he him selfe Lord or inheritour of Prussie, and byndeth all his successours, that within one yeres space after they come to the Crowne, they shall sweare to accepte & ratifie the same peace, and compelle the byshoppes and other states of the Realme to take the same othe, and that euery tenth yeare this othe should be renewed. This was also cōdicioned at the same tyme, if any king of Polle shall hereafter moue warre vpon the Maister of Prussie, that the people be not bounde to obeye or assiste hym, but that peace be continually kept on either partie. And this composition was confirmed with two hondreth Seales, as it is to be shewed. Yet did not ye peace indure aboue .xiiii. yeares. For in the yeare of our Lorde .M.CCCC.I. the people, making The people rebell. a rebellion, conspired against the maister. And albeit that the Byshop of Rome and the Emperour Fridericke the thirde, did outlawe them. Albeit the maister desired that ye matter might be heard, yet did they so litle regarde all this, that about .lxx. townes and castels revelled in one daye. Unto this conspiracie of theirs ioyned him selfe the kyng of Polle, Casinure, father to Sigismunde, and brought vs vnto suche a perplexitie, that Lewys Erlinsusie who than was maister of the order, constray¦ned through feare of the present daunger, as a moste constant man might doe in such a case, to the intent he might both hepe still his prouince, and also saue him selfe in the same, accorded with him vpon conditions moste vnreasonable, without the authoritie either of the Byshop or the Emperour, or yet the sta¦tes of the Empyre. The cōditions of this peace amonges other thinges are these. That the Maisters of Prussie frō hence forth shal within sixe monethes after he be chosen Magistrate, come The condi∣tions of pea∣ce betwixt ye king of polle and the kni∣ghtes. vnto the king of Polle, and by an othe acknowledge hym for their Souraigne, and shall ayde hym against all men, they shal also receaue into the order aswell Polonians as Germaines, & shall admitte them to beare office, and for suche landes as they shall wynne hereafter, to do homage to the kynges of Polle. Whiche conditions verely do not only cōcerne the priuate losse and rebuke of my order, but also the publique domage and re∣proche of the Empire & Nobilitie of Germany, Wherefore, since that time haue there bene maisters. Which considering the vn∣reasonablenes of the thing, haue made greuous complaintes hereof to the Byshops of Rome and Emperours, yet haue they
bene constrained to sweare. And certenly Prussie remained in the tuition of the Empyre, till Friderich of Saxon, and Albert of Brandenburg, were Maisters of the order. For they would do no homage to the kynges of Polle, for that neither the By∣shop nor the Emperour had confirmed that cōposition of king Casimire. And that in the yeare .M. CCCCC. the Emperout Maximilian in the assemble at Auspurge made a decree, wher¦in he commaunded them to geue their fayth to the Empyre on∣ly. And where after to appease the controuersie, Maximilian had appointed a daye at Passawe, in the yeare a M .D. x. sen∣ding thether Ambassadours, there could be nothing at all con∣cluded. Wherupō ensued that last warre. Moreouer Albert him selfe .xxiiii. yeares past in the conuention at Norinberge as a Prince of the Empyre had his place amonges others, and sig∣ned the decree there made. Wherfore it is euident that the king of Polle hath no right to Prusse, and that it was not lawfull Prusse belōg¦eth to them yere. for Albert to withdrawe him self vnto his tuition and protec∣tion. Nowe where the Ambassadour reproueth my ordre of vn∣thankefulnes and breakyng of conuenauntes, herein he doeth vs wrong, and it is to be proued by olde wrytinges, that scar∣sely haue any kinges of Polle kepte touche and promesse with vs. Was there euer wryting sene confirmed with mo Seales, than ye same wherby we accorded with king Ladislaus? might there any more assuraunce be made? And yet breaking the sea∣les and wryting, the warre was renewed against vs. This re∣compence had we of them for restoryng vnto them Sarmatie & a great part of Lituania. He named certen Emperours of four¦mer tyme, and sayeth how they were offended with our order. But the truthe is farre otherwyse. For Sigismunde did not only sequestre strife and geue sentence with vs, as before is mē∣tioned, but also gaue vs ayde against the enemie. Againe the Emperour Fridericke, what tyme the people rebelled, as I said before, shewed vs all the fauour that might be, and banyshed the cōspiratours, and for the same cause helde an assemble of ye Empyre at Norinberge, in the which conuention a decree was made to ayde vs. The lyke good wyll and fauour did Maximi∣lian she we vs. For he neither would that we should sweare to the kyng of Polle, and therfore both in his owne name, and al¦so of the whole Empyre he wrote sondry letters to kyng Sigis∣munde, and made than a decree for vs right honorable. This o∣ratour procedeth, and in the waye of mockery, demaundeth of vs why we do not recouer Hierusalem and such other like pla∣ces? surely I am not so cleane without experience, but I could
taunte againe, neuerthelesse by reason of this honorable au∣dience I wyll refrayne, & wil aske him but this question only. First why ye kyng of Polle doth not recouer those places, which the Prince of Moscouia hath taken frō him within these fewe yeares? Whiche are in comparison as muche as all Prussie. A∣gaine, why in so great fortune, he doeth not defende his owne limites from the dayly inuasions of the Tartarians? Uerely these are plages for breaking his fidelitie. He sayeth, our order in tymes past was expulsed out of all Boheme. Why he should thus saye, I knowe not, vnlesse that by this example he would shewe, that they myght also lawfully spoyle vs of our goodes, and tourne vs out of landes and possessions. For the distruction of ye tyme touched not only our order, but pearsed also through out all the lande of Boheme, and was extended vpon thē chief∣ly, The commo¦tion in Bo¦heme for the doctrine of John Husse. which followed the olde Religion, what tyme great tumul∣tes were reysed there for the doctrine of John Husse. Dur order hath warred with kinges of Polle, I confesse it, but that euer they gaue the occasiō of warre, I denie vtterly. For they neuer attempted warre, but either to defende their right, or els to re∣couer their owne. He sayeth, we haue made leagues with the Cartarians. This may well be verefied of them. For it is ma∣nifest, that they haue vsed their ayde, against men that professe the Christen religion. Againe the situation of the countrey de∣clareth easely, whether the Tartarians lie more commodious and nerer vs, or them. And that whiche he spake laste of the ci∣ties Danske and Eluinge, is grounded vpon no reason: For ey∣ther citie is of our dominion & belongeth to the Germane Em∣pyre neither hath the kyng of Polle any other title there: than that whiche he hath obtayned through the rebellion and trea∣son of the citezens, as it may be proued by sondry reasons. And seyng these matters are thus, moste redoubted Emperour, most mighty kyng, and States most honorable, I besech you, that ye sentēce already geuē, may be put in executiō. For this to obtein at your handes, ought both the equitie of the cause, and digni∣tie of the Empyre, and State of Religion, and the honour & all so cōmoditie of the Nobilitie of Germany. The Ambassadour of Polle, had prepared a contrary wryting, but did not exhibit the same. For whan the reasons were heard on both partes, certen were chosen out of the whole nōbre to examine the mat∣ter, whose determination was, that the sentence pronounced against Albert should be maynteined. But yet consideryng the great difficultie that would be in the execution of the same, they referre all to the Emperour. And shortly after kyng Sigil
munde departed, for pure age, whan he had reigned .xlii. yeres. He was sonne vnto king Casimire, as before is sayde. He had The death of Sigismsid king of pole thre brethren. Wherof Ladislaus was kyng of Hōgary and Bo∣heme, the father of kyng Lewys and Anne. Iohn Albert, and Alexander, whan they had reigned in order after their father Casimire, leauing behinde them no children, passed ouer the go¦uernment to their yongest brother Sigismunde. Unto whome nowe succeded his sonne of the same name, who had maried ye daughter of Ferdinando kyng of Romaynes. I shewed you of Mendoza in the fourmer boke, how he pro∣tested at Rome concerning the counsell. Wherunto, at the ha∣lendes of February followyng, the Byshop, calling a Senate of Cardinalles, made this aunswere. What tyme Mendoza, thou The Popes aunswer to Mendoza. saidest how the Emperour had commaunded thee, to make pro∣testation against the counsell, thou madest vs right sorowfull. But after we had more diligently wayed the letters of thy com¦mission, we were comforted agayne. And first I wyll speake of the cause of our grief & heuines. For that maner of protesting is after an euill example and chiefly vsed of suche, as are either reuolted wholy from dewe obedience, or haue begon to wauer therin. Therfore did it greue me exceadingly, whiche haue al∣wayes borne a fatherly loue to the Emperour, and as becom∣meth the pastour of the church, haue euer desyred concord. And it greued me and the Senate of Cardinalles so much the more, for as muche as at this time we loked for nothing lesse. For the Emperour hath made warre with his aduersaries and the en∣nemies of the churche, and hath done it through the ayde of myne armie. And albeit Mendoza thou semest to esteme thys lyghtly, yet ought it to be accepted for a great benefite. For the The warre finished by ye Popes army ayde was exceading great, that I sente, in so muche that it far surmounted the abilitie and power of the holy treasure, & came to him moste in season. What thing therfore could lesse be loked for, than that after the victory obtained, and that so lately, the Emperour should rendre vnto me suche fruicte of Godly zeale & beneuolence? Uerely, that the ende of the same warre, should be the beginning of protesting against me. Certes, it hath chaun∣ced vnto me, that the Prophet complayneth of, that lokyng to gather grapes, I should fynde wylde beries. I haue euer synce the tyme I was first called to this dignitie pastorall, with ear∣nest study tilled, cherished themperour, as a moste noble plante, that I myght once haue a plentifull vintage. But this enter∣pryse of his hath almoste taken away frō me al hope of fruicte. Thou hast heard the cause of our grief: heare also, how we were
relieued of the same. Thou, as though thou hadst had autho∣ritie geuen thee, to proteste against me and this sacret senate, hast so vsed the same, as is neither vnto vs honorable nor mete or condigne for the Emperour. But in the letters of cōmission, there is not one worde, that sheweth it to be themperours wil, that thou shouldest thus procede. I say there is not one worde, to the intent thou mayest better vnderstand it, that geueth the authoritie thus to do. The Emperour cōmaūdeth his deputies at Boloigne, that they should proteste thus before our Legates there whiche haue chaunged the place of the counsel. Which af¦ter thou didst perceiue once done, thou woldest vse the same ma¦ner of protesting here also in our presēce. But herein hast thou passed the bondes of thy cōmission. And if thou hast not percei∣ued this before Mendoza, acknowledge now at the last hauing warning. For themperour cōmaūdeth yt to protest, not against vs, nor before this presence, but against our legates, yt were au∣tours of that remouing. Wherfore thēperour hath done herein the duty of a tēperate Prince, which hath stayed within those bondes & limites, & wold not that ye protestation shuld be made before me, whom he knoweth to be the lawfull & only iudge of al suche causes. For if I had refused to haue heard the matter, than shuld be haue had iust cause of protestation. But thou Mē¦doza, not taking the way yt thou shuldest haue done, didst not de¦sire me to examine the matter, but requirest yt I shuld disanul ye decree made of remouing the counsel, & cōmaunde the greatest part of the fathers to geue place to a few, ye remained at Trēt. And what thing can more deminish thauthoritie of the whole coūsel than this? Had it not ben much more reasonable yt those few which are at Trent, if thei had any cause of cōplaint of the fathers which be at Boloigne, shuld haue made the same vnto me? Certenly, I wold neither haue refused their requestes thā, nor yet wold at this presēt. Where therfore it is certen, yt them∣perours minde is not cōsonāt or agreable to your fact, we haue cause to giue God thankes, which ruleth his minde after thys sort. We may reioyce to our selues, & thou thy self mayst be glad for thy Princes sake. And albeit yt by this same, which is saide already the foūdatiō of your pleade is so fallen, yt I nede not to answere thy protestation, yet, lest ye through silence I might ap¦peare to acknowledge thine accusatiōs, & by the same thing of send many, especially such as be ignoraūt I will cōfute thē all. And first what time yu hast set this marke before rhine eies, yt thou mightest declare me to be negligent to draw backward, & seke delayes, yu the coūsel shuld not be holdē, but thēperour to be
carefull for the common wealth, Uigilaunt and industrious, and wholy addicte to the kepyng of the counsel, thou procedest in speakyng thy pleasure. Assuredly I doe not, nother ought I to enuie the Emperours prayses. And if thou haddest stayed The Empe. prayses set ye Pope a fyre. there, I had had nothinge to aunswere. But in as muche as thou doest extolle hym, to depraue me, so laude and commende hym, that thou myghtest bryng me in contempte, whylest thou sayest, that he hath desyred a counsell, not of me only, but also of my prodecessours, Byshoppes of Rome. The thing it selfe re∣quyreth, that I should aunswere thee to the same. For if thys were alwayes the Emperours mynde and desyre, that a coun∣sell myght be holden, of the same mynde haue I bene euer as well as he. Agayne, as I am his elder in yeares, so haue I desi∣red this thyng before him, as the moste honorable Cardinalles can tell, whiche were of the same nomber at that tyme. And whan I was chosen Byshop, I continued of the same mynde styll. And hauing the leste occasion in the world, I called a coū∣sell, first at Mantua, and after at Uicence. But thether came none at all, and hether but very fewe. And the Legates, which I sent, taried there halfe a yeare, lokyng for the other Bishops, whiche I had summoned, sending a broad letters and messen∣gers into all partes. Howbeit thou sayst, that these cities were not commodious for other nations to repare to, but that Trēt was fit for the pourpose. But al men knowe that Trent is not to be compared vnto these, neyther in quantitie, nor plentie of all thynges. Therfore the incommoditie of the place was not the let, but the warres of Prynces. Nowe consyder with me, whether was more feruent in this behalfe: The Emperour, whiche letted the counsell with warlyke tumultes or the By∣shop, whiche was euer a peace maker, who neuer ayded any Prynce in warre, sauing the Emperour only, and that in the same warre, whiche semed to open the way vnto the counsell? Whether the Emperour were constrayned to warre, & brought vnto it against his wyll, I dispute not. But certen it is, that the counsell was let by the warres. I come vnwillingly vnto this comparison, because the con∣tention is of the prayse of vertu, which is al dewe vnto God a∣lone, but thou Mendoza hast geuen the occasion. I will not be tedious, and will only warne thee to cōsider euery yeare of my byshoprike, and marke wel what care and study I haue taken. For verely these two thinges haue bene euer before my eyes, to make peace amongest Princes, and to kepe a coūsel, and herein haue spared, neyther coste nor payne, for all myne olde age.
But neyther doest thou reproue any thyng, before the counsel, and blamest only my Legates, in that they remoued to Bolo∣igne without my knowledge. Moreouer this doeth offende thee, that I call the congregation of the Fathers at Boloigne, a counsell, and thynkest that they susteyne iniurie therby, that remayne at Trente. But what euill is in that? For thus all men speake, howe the Counsell is remoued from Trent to Bo∣nonie. Wherfore if I should doe the dutie of an vpryght iudge, I ought so to call it, tyll I knowe it to be otherwise by contra∣ry probations, especially sythe the moste parte of the Byshops are gone with our Legates thether. For not the lesse parte, as thou affirmest, but the greater, ought to preuayle in doubtfull matters. And it is euident, that the Counsell hath power to remoue els where. But whether it were lawfully remoued, wherin is al the cōtrouersie, I reserue vnto my self the iudge∣ment So I will, & so cōmaund. of that thyng, whiche is offered me. And in the meane tyme doe attribute vnto that congregation, the name of the Counsell. But thou affirmest those, that were causers of the re¦mouing, to be vnto me addicted. Thynkest thou this thynge worthy of reprehension? Than thou praysest suche as remay∣ned at Trente, for bycause they fauour me not. But consider what daunger herein is. For of this thing are wonte to arryse dissentions, and scismes, vnto the churche moste perillouse, what tyme the Byshoppes withdrawe them selues from the o∣bedience of their hygh Prelate. But if you vnderstande by ad∣dicted, suche as be factiouse, that wyll take my parte, whether it be right or wrong, verely I knowe none suche. For I haue none other partakyng, than that which is the part of a father towardes his children, or of the pastour to ward his flocke. Nei∣ther hath there chaunced as yet any suche controuersie in the Counsell, that I neded any suche addicted and vowed men. But this I requyre of the Byshoppes chifly, that they prouide for the libertie of conscience, and gaue an especiall charge to my Legates, whan they went vnto the counsel, that thei shuld se in any wyse, that the byshops shuld haue no cause to cōplain of taking away from them their libertie in geuing of voices. You finde much fault also, that I can not be perswaded by no requestes of thēperour, nor of king Ferdinādo, nor al ye states of thēpyre, & gatherest hereby, ye I take no care for Germany, espe∣cially, whan thēperour hath through his great labour & pains brought to passe, that suche as were lately swarued from the church, do not now refuse the decrees of ye coūsel, so it might be continued at Trent. Certes I neuer refused by determinate
wordes, but that they myght retourne to Trente, so that the same may be lawfully done, and without offence of other nati∣ons. But how desirous I am of the health of Germany, hereof it is euident, that twyse I haue called a counsel thither, twise A counsell called at Trent twise sent my Legates, whiche after they had at the first tyme, by the space of seuen monethes, loked chiefly for the commynge of the Germanes, Parise, Morone and Poole Cardinalles, thou knowest thy selfe, howe there came none at that tyme. Thither came in the Emperours name Granuellan, the Byshop of Ar∣ras, and you your selfe Mendoza, and you can all witnes, how great was the patience of our men in abyding for the rest. But what was the ende therof? Not so muche as you your selues would tary. And albeit my Legates intreated you, that at the last one of the thre myght remayne, for an example to others, yet alledging a certen excuse, you departed not many dayes af∣ter. Agayne two yeares after, in a tyme more commodious, thei met there againe. And I sent Legates thither, Mountane, Crucei and Poole Cardinalles. Thyther came you also, and Fraunces Toletane. And you remembre howe longe was the expectation, and how many monthes were consumed in vaine tofore they could begynne. And after they were come to the matter, and many holsome decrees were made, you know how fewe of them came the ther, that chiefly neded that remedy. Of the Byshoppes came none at al: A fewe of them sent their proc∣tours. Briefly there appeared no signes nor tokens that they would come to amendement. And whan many resorted thether out of Spayne, Fraunce, Italy and further Prouinces, out of Germany, whiche was next of all others, hardely came there any one. But nowe you saye that the state of Germany is otherwyse, and that the Em∣perour, whose power and authoritie is nowe augmented, doth vndertake that in case they retourne to Trente, all the Ger∣maines wyll followe the decres of the counsell. I beleue, Men∣doza, if it be true thou sayest. But if the Germaynes be of that mynde, why doe they not playnely submitte them selues to the counsell, where so euer it be. And yet I woulde not that this should be so taken, as though I passed greatly in what place the Synode be holden. But you so sticke vnto Trente, that vn∣lesse it be finished there, where it firste began, you wyll saye that Germany is vndonne. But take hede what you doe. For whylest you bynde vs to the walles of one Citie, you doe iniu∣rie to the holy Ghoste.
In olde tyme God ordeined Hierusalem, as a peculiar place, wherin he wold be worshipped, for it pleased him thā: but whā the ceremonies & shaddowes of the lawe were abolyshed. After that our sauiour Christ, the sunne of rightuousnes shone forth he would be serued in all places. Therfore you bryng in a newe bondage, whan you would compell vs to a place. But seyng that Germany should be cured, it is nedefull that the counsell he kept there. why than, if the Danes, Gothians, or Britans be vexed with lyke diseases, should euery of them haue a gene∣rall counsell kept in their owne countreys? No not so: For in as¦sembling of counselles, there is not so much consideration had of them, for whom the lawes are made, as of those whiche doe make and prescribe the same. They be Byshoppes and other fa∣thers, whose commodities are chiefly respected. For it is to be The fathers must be pro∣uided forwel proued by sondry examples, that counsels haue oftentymes bene holden, out of the countreis where the heresies sprange vp what, whether were not this an vnreasonable thing, that  Germaynes only should take vpon them to appointe the place of the counsell, and the Election and libertie be taken a∣way from all other nations? This is to declare, that this bit∣ter protestation of yours neded not. But nowe to the rest of the same, you saye howe the auswere we made vnto the Emperour was vnsitting and full of lyes, and grounded neither vppon ryght nor reason. These thynges are vnreuerently spoken, and herein thou doest vs wrong, but because thou bryngest no rea∣son, I can not aunswere thee distinctely. Howe be it, I suppose it greueth you, that we desyre the decrees may be ratified, and they well assured that shall repare to the counsel, that the same maner and order of pleading be styll reteyned whiche hath re∣mayned in the churche from the Apostles tyme vnto this daye, finally, that the saufe conduicte be ready. But in these demaū∣des is nothing straunge or vnreasonable, and are wont to be prouided for as wel by lawes of the Byshops as also of Empe∣rours. Nowe where you saye, that whatsoeuer incommoditie shall arryse in tyme to come, the Emperour wyll ascribe it vn∣to me. And also in this my negligence wyll take vpon hym the charge of the church. Uerely so far forth as God wyll geue me grace, I wyll so demeane my selfe, that I wyll geue no iust The Pope may be wea∣ke & negligēt cause, to be thought negligent in matters cōcerning the chur∣che. Neuerthelesse, if it so fortune, through the imbecillitie of mans nature, I shall not be offended, if my negligence, maye styre vp and sharpen the Emperours dilligence, to succour the Churche, so that he staye hym selfe within the precincte and
limittes prescrybed, that is: If he followe herein the rule of ryght and lawes of the holy Fathers. Finally, as concerning the chiefe point of your Protestation, where you contende the remouing of the counsell to be vnlawfull, in as muche as the effecte of all the controuersie theron dependeth, I take vn∣to my self, the examination therof, by vertue of my power and authoritie, and committe the hearing of the same to the moste worthy Cardinalles, Parise, Burges, Poole and Crescent. And commaunde, that in the meane tyme whylest they do examine the thing, no man what so euer he be, attempte any thynge to the contrary. And also charge the fathers, aswell that be at Bo nonie, as also at Trent, that if they haue any thing to saye or alledge in this matter, they do it within this moneth. And lest I should seme in any point to hinder the commoditie of Ger∣many, I wyll not refuse to sende myne Ambassadours thether, suche as may cure the infirmitie of their people, if I shal vnder stande the same not to be vnthankeful to them and to the Em∣perour. Besydes all this, whan the iudgement is ended, in case it shall appere, that they did not wel to remoue vnto Boloigne I will deuise by all meanes, that the Synode may be cōtinued at Trent. And at fewe wordes, will do what I can, that in fine the auncient Religion may agayne be restored to Germany. The Cardinall of Trent was before this retourned to Aus∣purge, as I said. Whan the Emperour than, hearing his talke, and also receiuing letters frō Mendoza dated at Rome, about the ende of December, sawe but small hope of the counsell, the xiiii. daye of Ianuary declareth the matter to ye states, in what case it standeth, and how he hath signified to his Ambassadour Mendoza, that he should make protestation at Rome, concer∣ning the remouing of the counsel. After the same shal be done, he wyll gette them the copie to wryte out. And albeit the hope of the counsell is not vtterly to be neglected, yet, by reason of ye long delay whiche is like to come betwixt, he thinketh it to be requisite, and necessary, that in the meane tyme there be some meane founde, to conserue the peace of Germany. They haue in dede committed vnto hym the charge of this matter: but he thinketh it expedient, that out of the whole nombre be chosen a fewe good and well learned men, to haue the doing hereof. And he wyll also appoint certen to consult with them. Wher∣fore he requireth them to be wylling hereunto, and al affectiōs layde asyde, to cōsider what commoditie it were for the cōmon wealth, and euery of thē also that a reconcilement were made. Let them call to remembraunce, howe before this dissention,
Germany was the moste florishyng Region of all others: and as a mirrour and a spectacle for al nations to beholde. Let thē consider moreouer, that where he toke so muche trauel & pain, that the counsell might be continued at Trent, that he ded the same of his duty, and of a singuler zeale to the cōmon coūtrey. Therfore were dyuers chosen to treat of the matter: but when they coulde not agre, the whole matter was referred to them∣perour. Wherfore he appointed certen, to penne articles of doc∣trine, ceremonies, and reformation of the clergie. Those were The Auct∣ours of the Interim. Iuly Pflugie, Byshop of Numburge, Michaell Sidonie, Iohn Islebie Agricola, who .xviii. yeares past had defended the doc∣trine of the Protestauntes with Melanchton and Brentius, as is wrytten in the seuenth booke. These therfore, wryte a Ihon Isleby a reuolte. boke of Articles, but very secretly, and whan they had bene lōg about it, and had printed it sondry tymes, at length, exhibite the same to the Emperour, as I wyl shewe you hereafter. Ioa∣chim the Electour of Brandenburg, whiche laboured sore for a reconcilement, deuising first with Iames Sturmius, intrea∣ted the Senate of Strasburg by his letters, that for the cause of Religion they would sende vnto him Bucer. For in asmuche as the Byshop had withdrawen the coūsell, the Emperour had taken an other way, and that there was great hope of a refor∣mation. Whereupon Bucer is sent, who taking his iurney pri∣uely about the ende of Ianuary, whan he came almoste to Aus¦purg, Bucer is set for. stayed there, tyll the Prince sent for hym. In the former boke is declared, how the Englyshemen ouercame the Scottes in a mighty battell. But where the Scottes would not relent, nor chaunge their pourpose, and trusted to the Frenche kynges promesses, the Duke of Somerset, Protectour of England, and the rest of the counsell, the first day of February, wryte vnto thē a long exhortation vnto peace. Albeit, say they, it were requi∣site, The coūcell of England wryte to the Scottes. that the beginning should procede of you, whiche in the cause are inferiours, and goe by the worse. And albeit we pos∣sesse a great part of your dominion, yet can we not but admo∣nishe you of your wealth and preseruatiō. The last yeare before the battel, we prouoked you to peace and amitie, and declared what our mynde was, but yt wryting was suppressed by your captaines and gouernour of your Realme, and not suffered to come to your handes. For so that they may do wel them selues, they care full litle what chaunceth vnto you. Wherfore, if they shall now also vse the same disceiptfulnes, & not suffer you to vnderstande any part of our wyll and counsell, in this wryting we do openly proteste, that we haue omitted no part of our du∣tie.
Englande hath oftentymes kepte warre with Scotlande, and that exceading great. And there is no doubt, but they that Ciuille war betwene En¦glande and Scotland. shall reade the histories, or heare of the feates done, would mar∣uell muche, that the people of one countrie and langage, shuld be at so great dissention amonges themselues, and woulde ac∣compt it a thing chiefly to be wyshed for, if the whoale Ilande might by some meane agree in one, & be ruled by one gouerne∣ment. But al men do confesse, that there is no redier waye here unto, than by mariage. And this way God hauing compassion vpon you, hath shewed you, and offered you a moste goodly occa¦sion as it were into your bosome. Your kyng, whan he had bro¦ken his promesse, & had an ouerthrow in battell, died shortly af∣ter, whether it were for sorowe, or for some other cause. He had thre children, two sonnes & a daughter, and they indede might haue ben a let, so yt ther shuld not haue ben made an attonemēt betwixt vs. But God toke thē away both in a maner in one day whan thei were infantes, & left but one inheriter, a daughter, borne a litle before ye death of her father: And vnto vs hath geuē a king of great exspectatiō, Edward, sonne & heire vnto Hery ye eight. What do you not se a bond prepared of a perpetual & euer lasting amitie betwene vs? It hath bene oftētimes wished for, but in these eight hondreth yeares past, chaūced neuer so good an opportunitie. And this can not they deny, which hinder the peace amongest you. But by this meane say they, we wold pro∣cure to our selues lordship, & to you bondage. But ye haue we in our letters sent to you ye last yeare past, sufficiently cōfuted, and now take God to witnesse, that ye king is minded to ioyne with you in moste assured frendshyp. If you shal refuse, & prouoke vs againe to warre through your frowardnes, vnto whome shall the faulte of common euilles be ascribed? You haue promised the daughter & heyre of your Realm in mariage to our king, by common assent of parliamēt. Writinges were made of the same and confirmed with the common seale of the Realme. Many & The daugh∣ter of Scot∣lande assiaū¦ced to yt king of England. great assuraunces were deuised, & you were cōtented to put in pledges, till they came both to lawfull age. These wrytinges of yours are in our custody, as a perpetuall witnes againste you. At all the whiche thinges, Hamelton, Erle of Arraine, go∣uernour of your Realme was not only present, but President also and chief doer. But the same, after the Cardinal of Saint Andrewes, and certē other prelates of the Clergie had put him The gouer∣nour of Scot¦landa leage breaker. in feare and terrour, and shewed hym agayne great hope an other waye, he broke his faith and conuenauntes. In whome assuredly, of what so euer euils is chaunceth in the meane
tyme the whole blame is to be imputed. In that you haue lost so many fortes and Castelles, that after the battell foughten, you wanted so many thousandes of your men, that we haue so farre inuaded your Realme, it is chiefly to be ascrybed vnto hym. But what ende at the length doe you loke of this obsti∣nacy and vuloyaultie? Hauyng the victory, we offer you peace. We possesse a great part of your kyngdome, and yet make Eng∣land common to you. The same that men vanquyshed are wont to suffer as a great ignomie, that what tyme they are vnited with the people that haue the victorye, they should forsake and lose the name of their owne nation, that doe we frely graunte vnto you, and refuse not to receiue yt auncient name of Britai∣nes, common to both nations. What thing, for the loue of God, can of vs be more performed? Will not as men iudge this, that we haue iust cause to warre, whan they shall knowe that so li∣berall, so reasonable and honest condicions could take no place with you? We set open for you always to come vnto our frend∣ship, neither do we expulse your Quene out of your Realme, but wil also establish her and her daughter in England. Again, we intende not to abrogate your lawes: For both Englande, and Fraunce, and the Emperours countreyes also, do vse son∣dry lawes. They that seke to hinder the peace, doe put you in suche feare: But they prouide only for their owne commoditie and pleasure, and care not for your wealth. But tourne you awaye your eyes and mynde from them, and consider the state of your common wealth. You haue a mayde, inheritour of your Realme, she must doubtles mary at the length. Therfore she shall eyther be maryed to one of your owne nation: or to some foreine Prince. If she mary at home, our ryght and title remayneth yet neuerthelesse vnto vs whole, and that thinge wyll styre vp ciuile tumultes and dissention. If she take a stra∣unger, ye shal both haue vs your continual ennemies, and in a How misera¦ble is it for ye Quene to mary a stra∣unger. moste miserable bondage shall ye serue a foreine nation. You must seke for ayde that is farre from you. And the forces that shall be sent, it can not be spoken, what hurt they wyll do you, and howe prowdely and arrogauntly they wyll deale with you. For thus wyl they be perswaded, that in their ayde and de∣fence consisteth your whole preseruation. What? they wyll take from you, your Quene and Princes, and trāsport her whe∣ther they lyste, and if they shall haue warre on any syde, as it may be they shall, they wyll be wholly addicte to defende them and theirs, and not care for you, but leaue you vnto vs for a pray. And if it fortune that they sende no soldiours, but cap|
only. They shall prescribe and commaunde you, and if any thynge shall be well done, wyll haue all the prayse therof. But if any misfortune chaūce, the whole storme shall lyght in your neckes, that lose your lyfe and bloud. What daunger also it is It is daūger to vse forain aydes. to vse foreyne aydes, a domesticall example may teache you. The Brytaines, the people of this same Ilande sente for the Saxons in tymes paste to ayde thē, and after by the same were expulsed out of their countrie, and dryuen into the mountanes The Brita∣nes expulsed by yt Saxons and fennes. Some tyme there dwelte betwyxt Englande and Scotlande, the Pictes, a fierse and a warlyke people, whome the Scottes after they had a while defended from the ennemy, The Pictes, by yt Scots. at the length so oppressed, that their name remayneth not at this daye. Did not the same happen to the Frenche men by thē of Frankonie, to the Grekes not longe synce, and to the Hon∣garians in this our memory, whan they vsed the ayde of the Turkes. &c. Did not the Gothians in tyme paste, by the same meane wynne all Italy, and the Lumbardes the whole coun∣trie, that nowe is called Lumbardie? Longe not you, and ye wyse be, to proue the insolent pryde and arrogancie of the fo∣reyne Soldiour, but compare that infinitie Rable of euylles, with mariage, infinitie, and an honourable peace. And herein set before your eyes. The maner and example of Nations nere Coūtryes v∣nited by ma∣ryage. vnto vs. The Emperour Charles the fyft, by this meane posses∣seth Spayne and Burgundy. The Frenche kynge by the same meane hath annexed litle Brytain vnto the crowne of Fraūce. The lyke also doe other nations. For there be but two wayes, whereby warres are finished, that is either by force and victo∣ry, Two ways, to finish war or els by mariage. If you hate force, why doe you not admit the other, whiche is offered you, and whiche once you conue∣naunted and graunted to? We are not ignoraunte, who they be, that diswade you from holsome counsel. Uerely this do cer∣ten of the Clergie, and the gouernour of the Realme also. But take you hede, lest they whiche so ofte haue broken their fideli∣tie, do lose your whole libertie, leste they beyng corrupte with brybes as with the hyre and rewarde of treason, delyuer vp your Castelles and Fortes to Straungers. Whiche thyng, whan they shall doe, they wyl fayne in wor∣des that they doe it, to the intent that they shall defende them from vs, but in very dede, that thei being assured through their ayde, may them selues brydle you as they lyste. And than who seeth not in what case you and your Realme shall stande in? O miserable and wretched frowardnes. We are inclosed on euery side with the Dccean Sea, as with walles & ditch most strong.
If there were only the agrement of mindes amongest vs, there wanted nothynge to hyghe felicitie, and we myght than e∣stablyshe a moste florishyng Monarchie. But if thys waye moue you nothynge, at the leste wyse let the calamitie lately receyued, and the mysery nowe hanging ouer your headdes perswade you. Let the feare of Goddes vengeaunce also moue you. For God is the reuenger of faith and conuenauntes brokē, and detesteth al desire of warre, and plageth the same with gre¦uous punishementes. We desire your Quene as is conuenaun∣ted, and the waye of peace, whiche God of his infinitie good∣nes hath shewed the same we followe, and wyshe that you also wold walke in the same steppes. And if we can obtain nothing we protest that of necessitie we must attempt warre, & through Gods conduite, whose worde and voice you contemne, we wyll prosecute our right with sword & fire. Wherfore if there he any good men amōgst you, which are sory for the calamitie of their countrey, whiche thinke that faith and promyse is to be kepte and obserued, they may come vnto vs safely, whosoeuer they be we shall shewe them all loue and fauour? That the trafficke al¦so of marchaūdise may frely be vsed amongst vs, the kyng hath lately prouided & set forth by proclamation, to the intent there might be a token of his beneuolence towardes you. And if he shall perceiue this benefite to be wel imployed, he intendeth to bestowe vpon you greater, & hath cōmaunded all these thinges to be signified to you in his name. In ye former boke, I shewed you of Sebastian Uogelsberg, which brought the French kyng out of Germany ten enseignes of fotemē: Who in Autumne re∣tourned home, and discharged his bandes. For that he serued ye Frenche kyng, the Emperour toke it greuously & displeasaūtly, and seking an occasion, he commaunded Lazarus Schuendie to se if he could apprehende him. Who commyng to Wisseburg, where he had a hous, toke him and brought him to Ausburge. Uogelsberg apprehēded. Streight waies was he put vpon the Racke, and examined by torture of diuerse others that were had in suspicion before, as though they fauoured the Frenche partie. And although that through a valeaunt stoutnes both of body and mynde, he vtte∣red nothing for all the tourment, yet, for that he was reported to haue bene in societie with rebelles, to haue broken the Em∣perours proclamations, and deuised crafty counselles, he was condemned to die, and two other Cēturions with him, Iames Mantel, & Wuolf Thomas. Wherfore ye seuēth day of February, he was brought forth into the marketh place, foure days after he came thether. There were certen enseignes of fotemen in ar
mure, and great resort of people. Whan he was come into the higher place of executiō, loking about him with a bold & stoute His constācy at his death. courage, for asmuch as the noblemen of all degrees loked out of the wyndowes & houses on euery side, he saluteth thē with great reuerence, and speaking of the kinde of his life, declareth how he hath heretofore serued the Emperour in his warres, & sayth the only cause of his death is, that yt last yere, he brought the Frenche king a force of men, what time he was crowned at Rains. Now was this Uogelsberg of a goodly & comely perso∣nage, and where he shewed no toke at al of any terrour or feare of death, he allured all men to beholde him. After him were he∣headed the Cēturions before named. Two iudges gaue the sen∣tence, whiche followe the Emperours court & campe alwayes, the one Biruiesca, a Spaniarde, the other a Germane, Niclas Zinner, both lawyers. He had blamed Schuendie, as though he had bene circumuented by him. But thei setforth a wryting and declare wherfore he was executed, excuse Schuendie, & af∣firme that he did nothing but the Emperours cōmaundement and proteste that accusation to be false. At this tyme through out Fraunce, but chiefly at Paris, was burning & persecution Persecution in Fraunce. renewed for Lutheranisme, where contrariwyse in Englande they consulted vtterly to abolishe the Popish masse. Thempe∣rour as I sayd before, had geuē to Duke Maurice the dignitie of Electourship & the greatest part of the Duke of Saxons coū¦trie, in the campe before Wittemberge. But in this conuentiō by a publique & solemne ceremonie, he putteth him as it were inpossession, and receiueth him into the tuition of him & of the Empire, which thing he had promised him thā. This was done the xxiiii. day of February, which was Thēperours birth day. And that cerimony was after this sorte. In the market place was buylded a pauilion of bordes, of a great breadth, wherūto The ceremo¦nie wherby Duke Mau∣rice was cre¦ated Elect. they went vp by steps. Thither came themperour about thre of the clock at after none, accōpanied with ye Princes Electours. After he goeth frō hence into an house by, and putteth on his solemne Robes, both he, & the Princes Electours. From thence he cometh forth again & sitteth down vnder his cloth of estate. Likewise do they, euery man in his place, on the backside ouer themperour vpon a stage were placed the Trompetters. Than cometh forth ye first band of Duke Maurice, & runne their hor∣ses to themperours pauilion, as the maner is. In ye meane sea∣son Duke Maurice wt an other band staieth right ouer against them, accompanied with a nōber of Princes, & next before him were .xii. Trompetters. Immediatly issued out of y• same band,
Hēry ye duke of Brūswick, Wuolfāge prince of Bipoūt, brother to ye elector of Palatine. And albert ye yōg duke of bauer, & whē thei had coursed their horses to ye place before said, they alight, & go vp to thē per hūbly require hi, yt he wold auāce duke moris for ye commō benefit of thempire, to ye digniti of electorship. Themperor cōsultīg wt thelectors, maketh answer by tharchbishop of ētz yt he is cōtēt so to do, in case he wil cōe hī self, & demād ye same, whē he had recei∣ued yt answer, duke Moris cōmeth riding forth wt the hole troupe: before him wer born .x. enseignes wt the armes of as many regiōs, wherin he desired to be inuested, whā he was come vp before them∣peror, he kneled down vpō his knees, & desireth y• same, Hoier earl of Māsfeld was sent of his brother august, to make ye like request. Wherfor themperor answereth by tharchbishop of mētz, chāceler of thempire. Forasmuch as they both haue don hī faithful seruice, he wil geue vnto duke Moris & his heires males, or if none be, to his brother Augustus, & to the heirs of his body, thelectorship of saxo∣nie, & al ye lāds of Ihō Friderick, so much excepted as is alredy grā¦ted to his childrē. Afterward, tharchbishop of Mētz readeth ye oth, wherwt thelectors are boūdē, and whā Duke Moris reciting it af∣ter him, had sworn, themperor deliuereth vnto him the sworde, & wt this ceremony putteth him as it wer into full possession. He geueth thākes, & promiseth al fidelity & obeisāce. After, those bāuērs of ar∣mes before mētioned, whē duke Moris had receiued thē of thempe¦ror, wer thrown down amōgs the people, as is accustomed, al these things might Duke Ihō Friderick, behold out of the house, where he lodged: & did so wtout fail: for it was in the same market place. Bucer, who was sēt for to Auspurge, came at the last to thelector of Brādēburge. And now was the boke finished, which I shewed you before was cōpiled of religiō: which the marques deliuereth to Bu¦cer, The Mar∣ques of Brā¦denburge of fended wyth Bucer. & desireth him to subscribe. Whē he had red it ouer, for yt he saw the bishop of Romes doctrine therein established, he said, he could not allow the same: Thelector toke this displesātly, & was much of fēded wt him, & iudged the wryting moderat, for so had Islebie per¦swaded hī. Granuellā also vrged Bucer by messēgers, & if he wold subscribe, promised hī ample rewards: & whē he might not preuail Bucer is in daunger. by large promises, he begā to threatē him, so he returned home, not wtout dāger, sor throughout al the lād of Wirtemberge were bāds of Spaniardes, as before is said. In the month of Aprill tharchbi∣shop of Collō, lately made priest, sāg his first masse, as they term it. Wherat were themperor, king Ferdinādo, and of other Princes a great nōbre. After, he maketh them a moste sumpteous dinner. A∣bout this time also came to Auspurge Muleasses, king of Tūnes, Muleasses Kinge of Tunnes. whome the Emperour .xiii. yeres paste had restored to his kinge∣dome, and expulsed barbarous, as I shewed you in the ninth boke.
Now had his eldest son put out both his eies, & vsurped the crown: wherfore like a miserable exile he came hither to themperor out of Barbarie. And not lōg after came thither also his secōd sōne. The boke cōpiled of religiō treateth first of ye state of mā, before & after The cōtents of the Inte∣rim. his fal of our redēptiō by Christ, of charity & good works, of ye cōfi¦dēce in ye remissi of sinnes, of the church, of vowes, of authoriti, of ye ministers of ye church, of ye high bishop, of the sacramēts, of the sa¦crifice of the masse, of the memorial, inuocatiō & intercessiō of sain∣tes, of the memorial of such as haue died godly, of the cōmunion to be annexed to the sacrifice of ceremonies, & vse of sacraments. And these things amongs others are taught, yt those workes, which be∣sides the cōmaūdemēt of god, are godly & honestly wrought, which are cōmōly called ye works of superogatiō, are to be cōmēded: y• mā Worckes of superogatiō, cānot wtout distrust of his imbecillity, beleue yt his sins be forgeuē: how ye church hath autority to interprete ye scriptures, & oute of the same together & setforth doctrins, power to minister ye law, & to iu∣dge of doutful matters by a general coūsel, & to make lawes: and yt ther is one high bishop, which is aboue al y• residue, for the preroga¦tiue graūted to Peter: vnto whō the gouernment of the vniuersall church was committed of Christ, yet so, as other bishops also haue part of the cure euery mā in his own church, yt by cōfirmatiō & chris¦me is receiued y• holy gost, so yt they may resist the deceits of ye deuil the flesh & the world, & that the bishop only is minister of this sacra¦mēt: how the sins must be rehersed to the priest, such as come to me∣mory. That by satisfactiō, which cōsisteth in the frutes of repētāce, especially through fasting, praying & almosgeuing, are cut of ye cau¦ses of sinnes, & temporal punishment, ether taken away, or mitiga∣ted: that holy vnctiō hath bene in the church since the time of the A∣postles, yt ether it might help the body, or the mind it self against the firy darts of the deuil: wherfor it must be vsed, what time the hour of death apeareth to draw nere: how mariage contracted wtout the cōsēt of the parēts ought to be ratified, but yet are the childrē to be admonished in sermons, yt they folow thaduise of their parēts: how christ at his last supper did institute ye sacramēt of his body & blud: first, that the same might be receiued of the faithful, as the holsom meat of the soul, secondli, yt it might be offred vp in memorial of his death: For ther be in al .ii. sacrifices of christ, the one, blody vpō the crosse, thother, wherin, vnder ye form of bread and wine, he him self Two sacrifi¦ces of Christ after these in terimistes. offred vp vnto his father, his body & blud, & after, deliuered y• same to his apostles & successers to be don in ye memorial of him vnto the worlds end: by ye first was mākind reconciled to god the father, but through this same yt is not blody, Christ is represēted to his father not yt we shuld agaī deserue yt remissiō of sins. but yt we might apply vnto our selues y• recōcilemēt prepared by ye death of Christ, and yt
in this sacrifice, wherin we celebrate ye death of Christ: ye morial of saints must be renued, yt they may make intercessiō for vs to god the father, & help vs by their merits: we must also remēber the dead, & cōmend thē to almightye God. After this is prescribed yt the old ce∣remonies accustomably vsed in baptisme, be stil obserued, the xorsis¦me, renouncing, cōfession of the faith & Chrisme. Moreouer, yt in the ceremonies of the masse, ther be nothing chaūged: that in al towns & great churches ther be saide daily .ii. Masses at the least, & in the country & villages one, especially on holy daies: and yt in the canō of the inasse, nothing at all be altered, and that al the rest be obserued, after thold vsage: yet if any thing be crept in, yt may geue occasiō to superstitiō, let it be takē away: Let vestments, ornaments, vessels, crosses, altars, cādels, & images be kept stil, as certein monumēts: let not those ordinari praiers, & godly singing of Psalmes be abro¦gated, & wher they be takē away, let thē be restored: let the obits for the dead be kept after the maner of thold church, & also sainctes ho∣ly daies, yea, let thē be worshipped also, vnto whō it is decreed yt sup¦plicatiō shuld be made: The day before Easter & Witsontide, let the water in the fōtstone be hallowed after a solēne maner: let riot be refrained, & to thintent to stir vp the mind to godly exercises, certen daie let mē fast & abstain frō flesh: finally, though it wer to be wi∣shed, yt ther be diuers & many ministers of the church foūd, yt would liue chast, yet, for yt many haue wiues euery wher, whiche they will not forsake, nether can this now be altred without a great tumult, therfore must we tary herein for a decre of a generall counsel: like∣wise The Interi permitteth Priestes to kepe their wiues stil. are we cōtēted to bear with thē yt receiue the Lords supper vn¦der both kindes, yet so, as they shal not reproue others yt do the con¦trary. For vnder ether kind the body & bloud of Christ is conteined wholy. After this sort was the boke setforth at the last, as after you shal heare, but not so pēned at the beginninge. For it was oft correc¦ted, An euil cōpi¦led boke ofte corrected. & the copy yt Bucer saw was somwhat purer. Wherfore, after it had ben tost lōg, & much among the states of thempire, it was sēt al¦so to Rome. For albeit yt al papistry in a maner was therin establi∣shed, yet for asmuch as certē things wer permitted to the contrary part, they thought it first expediēt to make the bishop priuy. Who af¦ter openet themperor by cardinal Stoudrate these notes or any inaduersiōs. That a priest which hath takē ordres shuld mary & exe¦cute Notes of the Interim bi ye Bishoppe of Rome. stil y• holy ministry, was neuer hard of: yt the vse of receiuing ye Lords supper vnder both kinds, is abrogated, nether hath any mā¦autority to permit yt liberty, sauing ye bishop of Rome, & the sinode: yt the folowers of ye old religiō are not to be boūdē vnto these doctrins but if any Lutheranes wil forsake their opinions, thei are not to be refused: That of the .ii. masses ought only to be vnderstād of ye Lu∣theranes: yt the singing of Psalmes ought to be restored in al pla∣ces:
yt on holy daies they must celebrate ye memoriall of the patrone of the church: that suche as are priestes already, or hereafter shalbe, muste abstayne frō Mariage: that a spedy restitution of the church goodes and iurisdictiō must be made: For the Robbery is manifest, nether must they folow herein thordinary proces of the law, but de∣termin of y• thing that is euidēt, & execute the matter by regal pow¦er. Whē this cēsure was inferred, tharchbishops of Mētz, Treuers & Collen, vnto whō it was deliuered, answer thēperor directly af∣ter the same sort, & especially vrge restitutiō, declaring the same to be right necessary, if christē religiō shuld be maintained, & in places wher it is abolished, shuld again be restored: Moreouer the cōmon peace cā not otherwise be established: wherfore it is chiefli to be pro¦uided yt religious houses be wholy restored. And in as much as the spoil & extortiō is manifest, they must go spedeli to work, yt gods ser¦uice may withal spede be recouered: Finally they desire him to take these things in good part, & with his protectiō to defēd the mēbers of the church. The .iii. other electors, wer not of the same opiniō, es∣pecially Thelectors dary opiniō. ye Paulsgraue & Duke Moris, yet ether of thē had causes, why they shuld not gainsai themperor. The rest of the princes, whi∣che wer for the most part bishops, answer in like maner as did the iii. Archbishops. As for the cities ther was no great accompt made of thē. Themperour therfore at the Ides of Maye, calleth all the States before him. And in the preface speaking of his zeale towar¦des Germany saieth, we perceiue by manifest arguments, & by the thing it self, ye neither the peace can be established, nor law & iustice ministred, vnlesse the cōtrouersie of religiō the first appeased, which hath now many peares sturred vp thempire muche grudge & dys∣sention, hatred, discorde & ciuile warres. This hath bene verely the cause, why by many cōuētions & cōferēces we haue often sought a remedy: But in the meane time not only in Germany, but also into other natiōs and people of Christēdome hath this same cōtageous infection pearsed, in so much that ther appereth no more present re∣medy, than a general coūsel: which at the lēgth at your request, we procured to be holdē at Trēt, and moued you also at ye beginning of this conuentiō, to submit your selues to thauthoritie of y• same. And that y• charge might be cōmitted vnto vs in ye meane seasō, to deuise some godly meanes, wherby they might liue quietly ye meane while in Germany, which cōtētatiō and cōfydēce of youres, was vnto vs both thā & now also right acceptable. What time therfore we gaue our selues wholy vnto this carefulnes, & demaūded your opinions, we than perceiued not without the great grief of our mynde, that the disagrement in religion was thoccasion of all the former euils. And vnlesse it be foresene, hereafter wylbe. Wherefore we thought it not good, to leaue the matter in that troublesome state, vntyll the decree of the counsell, but that it oughte to be broughte to
some moderation, especially, sith yt oftentimes new sectes did arise. Whilest we were pōdering these things, certain of high degre & no∣bility desirous of peace, & louers of the cōmon weale, exhibite to vs in wryting theyr opiniō cōcerning religiō, & promise due obeisāce. We than receiuing y• wryting, deliuered the same to certaine good & learned deuines, yt they shuld among thē selues consider al things diligētly, which after they had perused it, made report, that y• same being wel vnderstand, did not impugne the catholike religion and doctrine, nor ye lawes and cōstitutions of the church, two opinions only excepted, wherof thone is of the mariage of priestes, thother of the Lordes supper: but said it was wel deuised, to establish the con∣cord of Germany: which thing dousles vnto vs shuld be most of all acceptable: for what more ioyful thing could happē, thē to se al sta∣tes in mindes agreable, follow one & the same forme of Religion? And seing it is euē so, we require such as haue obserued hitherto ye lawes & custome of ye catholike church to their great cōmendation, that they perseuer in ye same, & alter nothing, as they haue promised vs heretofore: And those also which haue chaūged their religiō, we desire most earnestly to passe wt thother states, & professe the same religion yt they do, or els to cōfyrme their doctrine after the order of this boke, & in euery poynt to follow the steps hereof, & besides that to ordaine nothing: but to stay within these boundes & limites, and neither by wryting nor preaching to attempt any thing to the con∣trary, but obediētly to attēd the decre of a general coūcel: & that the same may be had as shortly as is possible, we wil indeuor wt al dili¦gēce: & now ar occupied in this thing wholy, how to cōceaue a forme for the reformatiō of the clergie. Whā he had spokē thus by his secre¦tary, as is accustomed, he cōmaūded the boke to be red. Ther tharch The craft of tharchbishop of Mentz in a prouing of y• Interim. bishop of mētz, which occupieth ye chiefest place amōg thelectors, not seking what thopiniō of stats shold be, ariseth vp, & as it wer in the name of al ye rest geueth vnto thēperor for so much trauel, pain, care diligēce, & loue of y• coūtrey, imortal thāks: & in asmuch as thei haue already cōmitted the thing to his fidelitie, & now paines hath bē ta∣kē therin, he saith it is reason, yt they should wt most willing minds, acknowledg thesame, & obey the decre. This thāks geuing did thē∣peror take for a cōmon assent & cōfirmatiō, & after wold admit none excuse, as I shall herafter declare, & cōmaundeth the boke to be set forth in print both in latin & duch also. The iiii. day after, he decla∣reth to the stats wt how much labor & cost he hath restored peace vn to Germany, & because the thing it self requireth yt it be also proui∣ded for in time to come, he supposeth it veri mete & necessari, & some great treasure of money beleuied, and in certeine places be kept the common treasurie, that if it fortune at any time, anye commotion
to arrise within the Empire, or without the same may be alwaies in a readinesse. And when a fewe daies had passed betwene, kynge Ferdinando raccompteth, how he for waightie causes, whiche they King Fernā¦do requireth monet of the states. them selues vnderstand wel inough, and nede not to be recited, sen∣dinge an Ambassade, made truse with the Turke for fiue yeares, wherof one is past: And albeit he hath commaunded his men, to do nothing to the contrary, yet he requireth them neuerthelesse to geue him that aid which they haue already promised, to the intent that if he breake couenauntes, he may be easely resisted: Again, inasmuch as he doth fortifye his frontier Townes, with stronge garrisons, that he also be negligent in this behalf: Therfore is he purposed to fortifye in all places, and to kepe garrisons: but for the intollerable charges of the warres in these former yeares, he is not hable to su∣staine so greate a burthen: Wherfore he requireth them, that whi∣lest this truse shal indure, they would pay the mony yerely to be im¦ploid vnto these vses: For this concerneth the quiet and preseruati∣on of them all. In the meane time Maximilian, the eldest sonne of king Ferdinando, departinge from Auspurge, goeth into Spaine, Maximilian marieth hys cosen. to take in Mariage, the Lady Mary, the Emperours eldest daugh¦ter, his cosin Germane. The Cardinall of Trent was sente wyth him, and a fewe monethes before, the Duke of Alba. At the ende of Maye the horsmen of Nalpes, that before were in Norgouia, come into the contrie neare vnto Strausburge, and there remaine by the space of three Monethes, and hardly can it be expressed, how arro∣gantly they vsed them selues. Many times woulde they come into the Citie, neither wanted that thinge great suspicion. Duke Moris not long after the Emperours decree was setforth, departeth thēce: But Marques Ihon of Brandenburge, the brother of Ioachim the electoure, goeth to the Emperour, and kinge Ferdinando stan∣dinge Iohn Mark. of Brand. refuseth the Interim. by, besecheth him to fauor him in this matter, and speakinge somewhat of his seruice towardes him, saieth, that he vppon this affiaunce chiefly serued him in this last warre, for that he had assu∣red him touchinge Religion. The Emperoure sheweth him howe this is the consente of the states imperiall, and saieth that no man oughte to swarue from the same: he replied againe, that all had not assented, and aunswered him plainly that he could not with a good conscience praise the same decree, and still vrged his promesse and couenaunt. Whan the Emperour might not preuaile, he commaun¦deth him to departe, whiche men suppose to be done for this cause, least he should through his example and talke cōfirme the mindes of others. Wherfore the same day towardes euening, he taketh his iourney homewardes, and in all his dominion altered nothing. The Prince Electoure his brother, who indeuoured alwaies to
please themperoure, made no assistaunce: Nor yet the Paulsgraue hauing the Emperoure at the same time not his very good Lorde. The Ambassadoures of the Cities, suche as were of the confession of Auspurge, when they were vrged, did intreate, that they mighte firste aduertise their Senates, to the intent they might answer ac∣cording vnto their mindes: which thing was permitted them to do. The Emperoure commaunded Wuolfgange Prince of Bipount, of The cōstāce of the Duke of Swebrig the house of Palatine, which had his Ambassadours there, to come him selfe: And whan he came, he doth instaunt him to confirme the decre. He saieth, he knoweth none other Religion saue that, in the which he was borne and brought vp in vnto this day: Wherfore, he requireth him, to haue some consideration of him, and saieth he wil do herein whatsoeuer he maye with a safe conscience. The Empe∣roure for that time letteth him so departe, but afterwarde he vrged him sharply by letters and by messagers, as shall be rerited in his place. Whilest the Senate of Auspurge consulted, the Emperoure placeth souldiours throughe out the Citie. There was a righte fa∣mous Minister of the Church Wuolfgange Musculus: he, seinge Musculus de¦parteth to Bernes. Godlinesse go to wracke, and the Senate tunorouse, and could not approue the booke, departeth from thence, to Bernes in Swisser∣land. At Hale in Sweuia was Ihon Brentius. He was in greate daunger two yeres past, what time, as the protestantes retourned The labor & perill of Brē∣tius. home, the Emperour came vnto Hale, and now was in much more daunger. For then a little before the Emperour came thither which was in the beginning of Decembre certain Spanish souldioures, comming into the Towne, went straightwaies vnto his house, and require to be let in, or els threaten much cruelty. Which beinge re∣ceiued, did many thinges fierselye and arrogantlye. Wherefore he biddeth his wife and his family, hauing none other place to repare to, to get them into the hospitall house of the City, and a little after followeth he him selfe, leauinge one at home to geue them vitailes and thinges necessary. But the next daye commeth a noble man of Spaine, which was of the Cleargy, and thrusting them oute at the dores, kepeth the whole house to him self, and going into his studie, searcheth all thinges. There, whan he had founde certaine letters wrytten to Brentius from his frendes concerninge the trouble of this time, he seketh to procure him much displeasure, whan he had vttred the same to his Countrye men. Wherefore, he followinge the aduise of his frendes, in a cold and sharpe winter nighte, conueieth him self into the country, least by his presence he should hinder his Citezens. But when the Emperoure was come thither, and shewed clemency, and semed to be nothing offended for anye kinde of Doc∣trine taught there, Brentius at the last retourned thither, and exe∣cuted
his srunction vnto this time, that the Emperoure woulde haue all men to receiue the decree made concerning Religion. For beyng commaunded as many other learned men were thorow∣out Germany, to declare what he thought of that boke: Albeit he vn¦derstode The plean∣nes and god lines of Brē¦tius. his owne daunger, yet, to thintent he might perfourme hys duetie to the cōgregation, he pronoūceth the same to be contrary to the Scriptures, and so declareth it by writing. Which after yt it came into the Bishops handes, Granuellan in themperours name, cōmā∣ded thambassadours of Hale, that they should finde the meanes, that he might be brought bounden to Auspurge. But beinge admonished by his freindes, he steppeth a side into the countrey by: And not longe after commeth to Hale a bande of Spanierdes: the Captaine wherof goeth immediatly to the house of Brentius, and seketh euery where diligently, if he might find any pray to cary away: but the most part of his stuffe was conueied by his frendes & alies, vnto another place. Thus therfore he, whiche had taught there xxvi. yeares, was exiled: And his wife also, thoughe she had a greuous sicknes (whereof she died shortly after) was banished withall his family. Wherefore she His wife and his childrē ba¦nished. pore wretch wandred vp and downe with .vi. children, and knewe not where to become, or to haue any refuge, all men were so sore a∣fraid of the Spaniardes: And this thing augmented her disease & sorow, that she knewe not in the meane while, what was become of her husband. But whan Ulrich, Duke of Wirtemberge hard of the misery of Brentius, all be it he him selfe was in great daunger, yet gaue he relief secreatly to him and his family. Furthermore the Ci∣ties of Sweuia following all for the moste parte the Emperoures authority, promised to accomplish his commaundement. Wherfore the preachers euery where remoued out of diuers places, least they should commit any thing vnworthy their profession. Andreas Osi∣ander Godlie prea∣chers flee. for this cause leauinge Norinberge, wente into the lande of Prusse: Spire and Woormez had but ether of them one, which fled also to saue them selues. William the Earle of Nassowe, suffred E∣rasmus Sarcerius to depart for ye same cause: Moreouer the Duke The fearful∣nes of yt duke of Wyrtem∣berge. of Wirtemberge, in whose country were garrisons of Spaniardes, euery where, as hath bene saied, whan the commaundement came from the Emperour, caused the Boke setforthe to be recited in the Pulpit, and commaundeth that no man do any thing to the contra∣ry, and if any man wil say Masse, he geueth them liberty, and char∣geth his subiectes, that they disturbe no Priest, and putteth awaye those Ministers of the Church, which would not allow the boke. Amonges whome was Erardus Schueffius. The Emperoure by The constan¦cy of the duke of Saxonie. Granuellane and the bishop of Arras moued the Duke of Saxon captiue to obey the decree, and followe the doctrine of the Boke set∣forth.
And albeit they assaid him with fair promises, and shewed him some hope of deliueraunce, yet he perseuered constante in his opini∣on. And the laste yere, saithe he, amōges the condicions whiche the Emperoure propounded, this was wrytten also, that I shoulde ap∣proue the decrees that shoulde be made by him, and by the Counsell concerning Religion: but whan he perceiued that I coulde not be induced through the terroure or feare of any pearill, to assent, he re∣leased the same condicion, and after that neuer moued any thing to me concerning religion. Whiche certenlye I toke than in steade of a great benefite, and being cased hereof as of a most waighty burthē, al the other conditions, which the Emperoure at his pleasure deter∣mined on my parson and all my goodes. I suffered the more easelye, and with the better wil, trusting that from henceforth I shoulde be permitted to kepe my Religion free: but now, for so muche as he vr∣geth me againe, and commaundeth me to subscribe, I do heare pro∣test yt I was so brought vp in my youth, and after by the reading of holye scripture so confyrmed, that I do beleue this doctrine to agree throughly with the wrytinges of the Prophetes and Apostles, ney∣ther can it be conuicted of any erroure. For the whiche cause verelye bothe my father & I, and certaine other Princes, exhibited in times past a confession of the same doctrine comprised in wrytinge, and re∣ferred it to a lawful counsel, considering therfore that God hathe il∣luminated me with the knowledge of his word, it is not lawfull for me to forsake the truthe knowne, vnlesse I woulde purchase to my self euerlasting dampnation. Wherfore if I should nowe admit thys decree, forasmuch as the same dothe in manye and moste waightye He that doth agaist his co∣science, pro∣cureth to him¦self hell fyre. places dissent from the holy scripture, I should condempne the doc∣trine of Iesu Christ, which I haue professed hitherto. And in word and speach should allowe, that I know to be naughte and wicked. But what thinge els were this, than with painted and glosynge wordes to delude the deuine Maiesty, and the Emperoure also? Than the which thing, what more wickednes can be committed? For this is that same sinne against the holy ghost, wherof Christe Sinne agaist the holy gost hath so diligently warned vs, which shall neuer at any time be for∣geuen. And seinge it is so, and that my conscience is tied with these bondes, I most earnestly and for the mercy of God, which he gaue vnto mankinde through the oblation of his sōne, pray and beseche, that the Emperoure would not take in displeasure this my refusal. For where as I do reteine the doctrine professed at Auspurge, I do it for my soules health, and setting all other thinges a parte, do imagine howe after this miserable life, I may be made partaker of the life and ioy euerlasting. I heare say moreouer howe it is re∣ported to the Emperour by diuers, as though I nothing regarded
religion, but sought for a vaine glory, and what thing els I know not: I beseche you what thing coulde happen to me in this worlde, more to be wished for, especially being thus grose of bodye, then li∣berty, then to retourne to my wife and children, than quiet and rest at home? And I take God to witnes, and than will also, what time he shall take an accompt of vs all for our doinges, that I respected The Dukes godly mind. nothinge els, than that, throughe the true worshippinge of God I might enioy the inheritance of the heauenly kingdōe. Which thing I hartely desire that the Emperour would certainly beleue and be fully perswaded of me. In all other thinges my will hath bene al∣waies ready to gratify him, and euer shalbe, and the infidelity and promesse which I haue made him, that will I kepe as becommeth a iuste man, and borne of noble parentage. Furthermore I beseche him to remit all displeasure, and at the lengthe to deliuer me from this continuall captiuity. That I be not reported the first of all o∣ther Princes that should lead his life with him prisoner. Where he perseuered thus constant and immouable, they began to hādle him somwhat more hardly, and toke from him his bokes of Scripture Cruelty she∣wed to D. of Sax. Priso∣ner. and was commaunded on daies forbidden to abstaine from fleshe: The same preacher also, whome by the Emperours licence he kept vntil this time, whan he sawe present daunger hanginge ouer his head, he chaunged his apparel, and conueied him self awaye priue∣ly. At the same time came abrode out of the Emperoures court let∣ters which the Lantzgraue was saide to haue wrytten to the Em∣peroure. In those he saieth, he hath commaunded his wife and coū∣selloures, that they should fulfil all the reast of the conditions, and satisfy such as complaine for the warre past: Againe he saieth, how he hathe the boke wrytten of Religion: And albeit there be manye thinges which he doth not wel vnderstand, and the which he cānot affirme by the scriptures, yet, for somuch as they ground their thin∣ges of antiquitie, and authoritye of holy fathers, he will not make him self wiser then they, and doth both allow that wryting, and wil deuise also, that his subiectes shall obserue the same. After this he offereth him his faith and seruice, whether he shall warre with the Turke, or with the Bishop of Rome, or any forain kinges, or with the Swishes, or els wil vse him in Germany: but he besecheth him for the loue of Christ and all saintes, that he would lay awaye all displeafure, and set him at liberty: For now hath he bene deteyned prisoner a whole yeare, and suffred punishmente inoughe, and is brought to extreme misery. Moreouer, for a further assuraunce he will geue his two sonnes pledges, vntill he be fullye satisfied. And whatsoeuer way he shall prescribe, that will he be ready to accom∣plishe. But he preuailed nothing for all these praiers, & was oftē∣times
by his kepers, which were Spaniardes, remoued frō place to place, first from Donauerde to Norling. Than to Hailbrune, af∣ter Whilest the Masse is set vp in germa¦nye, it is put down in eng¦lande. Thobstinat mind of win¦chester. to Hale in Sweuia. Whilest the Emperoure attempteth these thinges in Germany, the Masse is abrogated in Englande by acte of Parlaiment. And not longe after was apprehended Stephen, Bishop of Winchester, who contended that the lawes whiche were made in the kinges noonage, were of none effect. He was commaū¦ded the yere before to kepe his own house, and not to come abrode: but being newlye enlarged, whan he was thoughte to haue thaim∣ged his opinion, he made a Sermon before the king and his coun∣sell, in the which whan he had declared his minde, he was commit∣ted to warde. The Emperoure the. xiiii day of Iune commaundeth to be red vnto the Cleargy the fourme of reformation, as they call it. In the The Eccle∣siastical refor¦matiō of the Emperour. which were contained these Chapiters following, of ordeininge of the offices of the ecclesiasticall state, of Monasteries, of scholes, of hospital houses, of the ministration of Gods word, of the ministra∣tion of the Sacramentes, of the Ceremonies of the Masse, of the Ceremonies of the Churche, of the discipline of the Cleargye and laietie, of the Pluralitie of benefices, of visitations, of Saintes, of excommunication. And amonges other thinges are these setfor the chiefly, that such as come to take holy orders be diligentlye exami∣ned of their belief, of maners, and learning, but especiallye of here∣sies spread abrode chiefly in this time, and whether they beleue the same that the catholicke, apostolicke, and Church of Rome doth be∣leue: The inquisition of manners is commaunded to be made, as s. Paule prescribeth in the thirde chapter of the firste Epistle to Ti∣mothe but that same, which Paule amonges other thinges admo∣nisheth, that the minister of the Church shoulde be the husbande of one wife, which could well gouerne his house, and had obediēt and faithfull children, is cleane omitted: That no man be admitted to the office of a Bishop, except he be first Priest, or promise to receiue the reast of the orders so shortly as is possible: That Bishops take cure of their shepe, and fede them with doctrine and with the sacra∣mentes: That they also visite ofte their Churches, and ouersee that other Ministers do theyr dutye, that the wolues do not wortye the flocke: That the monasticall life be instituted againe, in places where it is left: That in scholes be nothing taughte, excepte it be a∣greable to the Catholike Church: That the Sacramentes and Ce∣remonies of the Churche be ministred in the Latin tounge, least if the people vnderstand them, they should come in contempte: That the Canon of the Masse remaine whole, and be spoken softlye, to the intente those tremblable misteries maye retaine theyr aunciēt
dignitye: That in accustomed Ceremonies nothinge be aultered: The trēbla∣ble misteries of ye Masse. that Salte, Water, Hearbes, the Paschall Lambe, newe frutes, al¦so Temples, Churches, Chappels, Chalices, Aultares, Coopes, Uestmentes and Uessels belonginge to the Churche be hallowed throughe Prayer againste the deceites of the Deuill, and inchant∣mentes: That Tapers shall burne in the Churche, and Incense be sacrificed. Moreouer that supplications be made at the Churches dedi∣cated to Sainctes: let the Cleargye liue temperatelye and sobrely, and eschue whoredome: let them put awaye their Concubines, or els be punished: That the ciuile Magistrate shall assiste the By∣shoppes, that a reformation be made of manners and Discipline. And that the Ecclesiasticall liberties may be wholye mainteined, let the Saintes in euerye diocesse be put in vre againe, and kepte twise euerye yeare, wherein shall inquisition be made of euerye mannes manners and vices, suche as may not otherwise be refor∣med Excōmuni∣cation. shall be excommunicated: let al men flee theyr speach and com∣panye, and not to be receiued againe into the Communion, before they humbly desire forgeuenesse, and promesse amendment. This reformation being red the day before saide, the Bishoppes after a little deliberation, do confirme, and saye that shortlye after they be come home, they will kepe Saines: howe be it in diuers thinges, they desire that the Bishoppe of Rome maye be moued to geue his assente. This boke also was after put forthe in Printe. I shewed you before of the Ambassadoures of the Cities, howe they signified the matter home: but whereas they of Strausburge, whiche were the chiefest of them, were longe or euer, they aunswered. The Em¦peroure calleth vppon them by Granuellan: who the .xxviii. day of Iune sendeth for the ambassadoures, whereof Iames Sturmie Menes made that Straus∣burge shulde receiue thin∣terim. was the principall, and there by Henry Hasy, which was interpre∣toure, saieth: howe they knowe in what sorte the states requested the Emperoure, and put him in truste to deuise some meane which mighte be obserued till the Counsell: whiche thinge he hathe done accordinglye, and hathe caused learned men to compile a Booke, which al the Princes, a fewe excepted, and the chiefest Cities haue approued: And wheras they and certaine others intreated them∣peroure that they might aduertise theyr Senate at home, he graū∣ted them, and hathe loked euer sence for an aunswere. And that he hath heard nothinge hitherto, he is somewhat offended, and there∣fore hathe commaunded him to knowe what theyr meaning is. They, whan they had declared the cause of their longe scilence ex∣hibite Theyr aun∣sweare. letters addressed to the Emperoure from the Senate. Howe they wished for nothing more, than that they might gratify him in
all thinges: but they and theyr Citezens were perswaded, that in case they should throughly admit this decre they shuld bothe hurt their owne conscience, & also osfēd God most greuously: & seing he of his wisedome can consider, how terrible a thing that were, they desire him for Christes sake, that in so waightye a matter, whiche concerneth not landes or goodes, but the saluation of their soules and life euerlasting, he would haue some consideration of thē, and as he hathe done to others of the contrary parte, so he woulde per∣mit also that they mighte vse the Religion confessed at Auspurge, vntill the decree of the generall counsel as ofte times in assembles hathe bene determined, and not compell them to professe otherwise with their mouth, than theyr heart thincketh: and they wil againe foresee, that in their City be nothing done vnreuerently or against Religion, and that euill opinions take no place. And that no cause of complaint be geuen to their neighboures, Whan Granuellā had heard these letters, he saieth, how the Emperour hath had alwais a good opinion of their Citie: and for as muche as all for the moste parte haue commended and ratified the decree made, let them not thincke to be exempted. For they are commaunded to admitte no suche kinde of aunswer: therefore is this Supplication in vaiue: wherefore let them aunswere plainely what the minde of the Se∣nate is. Hereunto they saye: where the matter was committed to the Emperoure, that did they and the other ambassadours vnder∣stand euermore of Politike matters, and not of Religion, for that they supposed, it to be alwaies referred to the counsell, that there both partes being heard, the determination might be made: but in this boke are determined in a manner all articles of religion: whi∣the if they should now admit, without any due examination before had, or the learned men of their part heard speake, than should they be no longer in controuersy, neither neade they the authority of the counsell: and wher diuers Princes and states haue allowed the de∣cree made, it is no maruel: for the same is for their commoditye: for those haue al things permitted them safe and whole, but they haue Uyolence is not to be v∣sed in religi∣on, but reasō and truthe. a fourme of religion prescribed them, and are commaunded to for∣sake those opinions, which haue bene euer in controuersy, the mat∣ter neuer heard: where notwithstanding in all assemblies, yt whole cause hathe bene referred to a generall counsell: For certainlye to compel any man that he should do any thing against his conscience is a heauy matter, yea though he be in errour, before it be detected: They suppose that ther be many good men on both parties, which yet notwithstanding may differ in opinion and iudgement: against whom no force is to be vsed, but the matter to be decided by reason, truthe, and argumentes: Wherefore consideringe that in all other
thinges, whiche do not concerne Religion, they commit vnto the Emperoure whatsoeuer they haue, they desire him: that he woulde preferre vnto him this one suite of the Senate: They know, howe greate the Emperoures power is, and what daunger they take vp on them in case he will attempt to try the matter by force: where∣fore vnlesse they were parswaded, that God woulde be greuouslye offended with the confirmation of this decree, it were starke mad∣nes, if they should not obey him herein. There Granuellan, whan he had repeted their former sayinges, affirmeth, how they, at what time they were reconciled to the Emperoure, promised to obserue such thinges as he should enacte for the wealth of the Empire: of the which sort is this decre made by the aduise of learned men, and by the moste parte approued, therefore maye it not be refused, for∣so muche as it agreeth and consenteth with the Churche: and wyll they take so much vppon them, that they should thincke to se more than the whole Church doeth? And shoulde make a departure from the reast? They ought not to haue altered Religion, but by the com¦mon consent of the whole world: wherefore if they haue none other commission, let them know of their Senate, whether they wil obey or no? Where they say, how they vnderstode it only of Politike go∣uernement, whan the cause was committed to the Emperoure, it skilleth not how they vnderstode it, but howe the moste part of the states toke the thing. Againe they saye, howe they and suche other like Ambassadours, were estranged and excluded in manner from all consultation, neither were they called to counsell thā, what time this cause was referred to the Emperoure: wherefore they did not otherwise take it, than before is sayed: yea and certain Princes al∣so toke it after the same sort: what time they made their peace wyth the Emperoure, they toke vpon them no obseruaunce, for that they feared least the same should in fine be applied vnto religion: which thing is not vnknowen to his sonne, the bishop of Arras, who then also in the Emperoures name promised, that the whole cause of re∣ligion shoulde be referred to a lawfull Counsell: but wher he saieth how this decree must be receiued as a common act of the Empire, they do refuse no burthen of the common wealth, but this presente No mā oug∣ht to be cōpel¦led to his faith. cause do the concerne theyr soules health, and life euerlasting: and againe, the whole burthen of the decre should reast vpon the godly people for the other multitude, whiche contempne religion, careth nothing, what be ordeined: but no man oughte to be constrained to imbrace his faithe: they put no doubte in the Emperoure, but he lo∣ueth peace and concorde: yet neuerthelesse, if this waye be taken, that men shall be compelled againste their conscience to speake and do, it is muche to be feared, leaste so sodaine an aulteration do raise
vp greate commotions. That boke was in dede compiled of certen learned men, of whome some had the knowledge of the truthe: for the same dothe well appeare: but certaine others haue intermixed many thinges, which are not consonante to the scriptures and doc∣trine of the fathers, as it is to be proued, if place were permitted to speake it: They haue made no separation from others, but in the chiefest articles do agree with the true Churche: wherfore they de∣sire him againe, that the letters mighte be deliuered to the Empe∣roure, to the intent they might so aduertise the Senate: For other thing haue not they in commission to say. Than began he to speake more angerly and vrged them with the decree, and made a digres∣sion to other thinges, and saide howe the nobles in Fraunce made theyr boaste, that they of Strausburge would not admit the decre: which thinge was reported to the Emperoure, and raised some sus∣picion the conclusion was, that he said how the Emperoure requi∣red a plaine and direct aunswere: and that no man is in dede to be inforced vnto any faith: but that is to be vnderstand of such as are no Christians: for those that do denye the faithe, whiche they once professed, may be compelled to it by the fire. Wherevnto the ambas∣sadoures aunswere, what brute the Frenchmen haue raised they know not, but certaine they are, that the Senate hath as yet made no decree, nor anye thing els done, than this same which they now do sollicite: seing therefore they refuse to deliuer their letters to the Emperoure, they will no further intreat them, but make reporte to the Senate: by fire may a man be taken out of this life, but can not be compelled thereby to beleue otherwise: and thus ended theyr talke. They had treated with the Ambassadours of other cities se∣uerallye in sort much like, and menaced them with threatninges, and assigned a day, by the which they shoulde make answere, and commaunded to tarye till they had aunswere, broughte them from home, but no such thinge was prescribed to the Ambassadoures of Strausburge. Touching the monye which the Emperoure requi∣red to be leuied for chaunces to come, the states, thoughe muche a∣gainste their willes, approued and promised also kinge Fernando euery yeare duringe the truse, an hondreth thousand crownes: but they desire the Emperoure againe, that he woulde take awaye hys Garrisons, and discharge his Souldiours, which were placed o∣uer all Germanye, and did much hurt both in towne and country, and releue the pore that complained much thereof, especially since all thing is now quiet and peaceable. The Emperoure saieth there be vrgent causes wherfore he can not at this time discharge his forces: and concerning the hurt done The Empe∣rour wil not discharg hy souldioures. there is none to his knowledge: for seing he doth paye them, it is a∣againste
reason, and his will also, that they shoulde do anye man wronge: suche lyke thinge hathe bene reported to him heretofore, but whan inquisition was made, there coulde nothinge in a man∣ner be founde: Neuerthelesse he will do what he can to knowe the certaintye: For no man shall escape vnpunished, that hathe oughte offended. At this time also the states do graunte that the Emperor maye at his pleasure constitute the iudgemente of the Chamber, and ioyne vnto them other iudges for assistaunce. And they them selues promise to beare the charges of the same. Of the treatye be∣gonne concerninge a league before saide, the winedinge vp was this, that the Emperoures prouinces, whiche he hathe in Germanye and lowe Dutchlande, and all that be∣longe to the house of Burgundy, should be vnder the tuition and defence of the Empire, and be contributaries vnto publicke affaires, yet so, as they maye vse their owne lawes and iurisdiction: And that Ger∣manye shall againe looke for the like aide and de∣fence of the Em∣peroures Pro∣uinces.
✚ The .xxi. Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the syfte. ❧ The Argument of the .xxi. Booke. THe authoures of the Interim are rewarded, which neuerthelesse many impugned, where∣of the Duke of Saxon is accused. They of Constance were so vrged to admit the Interim that ambushes of fotemen were laied to surprise the Citie, whiche at the laste receweth the Interim. They of Strausboroughe make theyr purgation to the Emperoure. A commotion chaunseth at Bourdeux. The dispaire of Spiera is recited, and the conuersion of Uergerius. The Scottishe Quene transported into Fraunce. Maydenbourge is setforth for a praye. The Admirall of Englande is beheaded, they at Strausboroughe are at contention with their By∣shop. They of Wittemberge are accused to be Adiphoristes, to wit, indifferent or newters. A dis¦putation in Englande touchinge the Lordes Supper. Ueruine is beheaded in Fraunce. Pur∣sute against them of Maidenburge, the death of Pope Paule, and the horrible actes of the same. The description of the place of election at Rome, and the maner of chusinge the Pope. Masse againe at Strausborough, a proclamation in in Fraunce against Lutheranes. Pope Iulius and his little Cardinall. THe last day of Iune the conuention was dis∣solued. In the. xix boke I shewed you howe the Emperor perswaded all men, to submit them selues to the Counsell, and that on his warrantise, who wold se that thaction shuld be lawfull: Nowe therefore a decre is made, that the counsel shuld be continued at Trēt, and the Emperour saith, he will deuise, that it be there recommēced so shortly as may be. Which thing whā it shalbe brought to passe, he requireth that they all, especially of the clergy, & of the religion of Protestants, which come thither vnder his saufeconduit: for he wil take order, than the promes sawefull counsel repe∣ted. whole matter shalbe godly and christenly decided and determined, according to the holy scriptures and doctrine of the fathers, all af∣fections laid apart, and that they thē selues also shalbe hard speak so much as shalbe thoughte requisite. After, are other decrees red, as is accustomed, especially that of religion, & a strait charge geuē, that al men obey the same, as was also before declared at the Ides of May, the .iii. authors of the boke are before named: of whō Ihō Islebie receiued for his paines taken a liberal reward bothe of the Islebi rewar¦ded of them∣peroure. Emperour, and also of king Ferdinando: And Michel Sidonie af∣terward was made bishop of Merseburge in Saxony. Wherof a∣rose a iest, how they defended the bishop of Romes oyle & chresme, as an holy thing, and necessary to saluation, to the intent they them selues might therby be the better gresed & auoynted. Not long af∣ter
the Emperour sent his letters to the princes that were absent, especially vnto those, where he thought most nede was, & comman∣deth them immediatly to obey this decre. And the tēth day of Iuly he wryteth to Erasmus, bishop of Strausburge to see the thinge which he had brought to passe through his great trauel put in exe∣cution, & if he wanted conueniēt ministers, to take them els wher. The report of this decree was incontinentlye spread abrode farre and wide. And the Uenetians make proclamation the .xix. daye of The decre of the Ueneti∣ans. Iuly, that whosoeuer haue any bokes, wherin is any thing wryt∣ten against the catholicke faith, they bringe them vnto certen men within .viii. daies: for after shall inquisition be made, and suche as haue deserued, shalbe punished: & to the promotours they promise a reward and to kepe their counsel. The Bishop of Rome hath his ambassadours there continually, as in kinges courtes also: They with the eies and eares of many do se and heare muche, and often∣times are causes that such decrees be made: but yet the Senate of Uenise vseth this prouision, that they suffer not the Bishops or in∣quisitors The wisdōe of the Uene∣tians in mat¦ters of religi¦on. of Rome to geue sentence of iudgemente, but ioyne with them alwaies their officers and lawyers which shall heare the ex∣amination and se that nothing be done malitiouslye or cruellye a∣gainst any man within their iurisdiction. This law made they in the yere of our Lord .M.D.xxi. what time those inquisitours vsed great cruelty against pore men in the countrye aboute Brixia, as though they had bene inchauntors, and had medled with the deuil: and now sence Luthers doctrine was depely roted & spred abrode, the same law is of force stil, though the bishops gnashe their tethe at it, and wold neuer so fain haue it abolished. About this time did the French King send aid into Scotland against the English men, and amonges others the Ringraue with a force of Germaines. But the Emperoure banisheth the Earle of Bichlinge, Huberte, and Sebastiane Scherteline al in one wryting, and shortly after Who were out lawed by the emperor. the Ringraue, counte Hedecke, Recrode, and Riseberge, and also desireth all foreine Princes, that they would not maintaine them, but gratify him herein, and biddeth them whan occasion shal serue, to loke for the like at his hand. The Ladye Iane, daughter to the King of Nauerre, which was affianced and Maried .vii. yeres be∣fore Daughter of Nauarre ma¦ried to the Duke of Uā¦dome. to the Duke of Cleaue, as we haue specified, is now ioyned in Mariage with the Duke of Uandome, a Prince of the bloud royal. Elenor the French Quene, sister to the Emperor, leauing Fraūce, goeth into Flaunders. Duke de Ammalle sonne to the Duke of Guyse, whan he had bene a longe suter to the Emperoures Nece the Duchesse of Lorayne, he marieth the Daughter of Hercules, Duke of Farrare.
About this time, Lewes Auila, a Spaniard, setforth in print the history of the Germane warre, done by the Emperoure, wryt∣ten The story of Lewes Aui∣la, of the ger¦mains war. in the vulgare tonge: where he speaketh of the takyng of Mar∣ques Alberte at Rochlice, he sayeth how he was so intangled with the wantounesse of women, that he coulde not prosper. The same booke came forthe afterwardes in Italian, Latin and Frenche. Althoughe the Emperoure had moste straightlye commaunded, that no man should in any wise impugne the boke set forth concer∣ning Who impug¦ned the Inte¦rim. Religion, yet were diuers wrytinges published, whiche did condempne the whole Doctrine thereof, and warned meune to be∣ware and eschewe the same as a mooste presente Pestilence. One of these was Caspar Aquila, chiefe minister of the Church of Sal∣uelde in Thuringie. Thoccasion why he wrote, was Islebie, who retourning home from Auspurge, gloried muche in the boke by the way, and said there was now a golden world toward, and that A∣quila had also assented: After he hearde of this, he answereth moste vehementlye, and reproueth him for his liynge, and affirmeth the boke to be ful of erroneous opinions. And in Fraunce also Robert, bishop of Abrincen wrote against Robert of A∣brincē wrote against thiu∣terim. it, how be it after a contrary sort, and chieflye dispiseth the boke, for so much as it permitteth Priestes to marrye, and the common peo∣ple to receiue the whole Supper of the Lord, and so taketh occasi∣on to inuey against Bucer with most opprobrious words, for ma∣ryinge his seconde wife. Moreouer one Romeus generall of the Austen Friers at Rome wrote againste it for the same purpose. Thus doth the boke incurre reprehension on euerye side. Thempe∣rour sent an ambassadour to them of Norinberge, and to certain o∣thers to perswade them vnto this decre. Whan he came by the way The godly constancie of the Duke of Saxons chil∣dren. to the duke of Saxons sonnes, he moued them hereunto, but they constantly denied it: wherfore at his returne to themperour, he de∣clareth the whole matter: wherupon themperour solliciteth againe the Duke theyr father prisoner, and complaineth of his sōnes how they contemne the decre lately made, & suffer men to speake against it both in theyr preachings & wrytinges: he requireth therfore that he would treat with them, to content him in ether thing. Wherunto he maketh answer, howe he lately declared the cause, whye he hym self could not allow the doctrin of the boke setforthe to Granuellan and the bishop of Arras: wherfore he can not perswade hys sonnes to do that thyng whych he hym selfe can not with a quiet conscience: he besecheth him to take it in good part, and defēd both him and his childrē. This cōstancie of his, & magnanimiti in so great aduersity The duke of Saxon belo∣loued of al¦men. got him great loue euery wher amōgs al men. Like as in Saxony
they of Breme and Maidenburge, so also in high Germanye onlye they of Constance, borderynge vppon the Swisses. were not yet reconciled to themperor: but at the last obtaining a saufcōduit they send ambassadors to Auspurge to treat a peace. Themperor pro∣poundeth They of Cō∣stance wryte to the Empe¦roure. right hard conditions, and amōgs other things also, that they shuld admit the boke setforth, & after that to frame their reli∣gion. Thambassadors require to haue the cōditions mitigated: but that was in vain, and are commaunded to make answere by a cer∣ten day. That knowen the Senate wryting their humble letters ye xiii. day of Iuly, do beseche him, yt they be not constrained to do any thing against their soules health, & their own conscience: how they se theyr owne daunger, and are in a greate parplexitie: for vnlesse they do obey, they stand in pearill to lose both life and goods: but if they shuld follow his appetite, they must abide the vengaunce and iudgement of God. Wherfore let him spare them, and put not them pore wretches to so great an extremity, especially seinge they haue no more offēded than others, and haue for thempire, & for the house of Austrich, suffred in time past exceding great misery, & now do re¦fuse no charge that cā & ought of them to be performed: & although their treasure is very smal, & their substance not great, yet wil they geue for amendes .viii. M. crownes, and .iiii. greate peces of orde∣naunce: but they beseche him, to permit the same Religion, whiche they haue kept now these .xx. yeres, vntil the decre of a lawful coū∣sel, and unpose no heauier burthen to the Citye, than it is hable to beare. Their bishop, Ihon Wesel, who was also called Archbishop of Londen, as is mentioned in the .xii. boke, had threatned thē sore at Auspurge, after the Emperors boke was setforthe: but within a few daies he died of the same disease, that he praied might fal vpō them, yt is of a sodē palsy. Where they say, how they haue sustained great domage for the loue of the house of Austrich, thus it stādeth. The Emperoure Maximilian, by the aid of the Sweuical league, wherof we haue spoken in the fourthe boke, made warre with the Maximilian warred a∣gainste the Swisses. Swisses: wherfore the Citye of Constance, being than of the same league, and lieth nexte them receiued much displesure. The Swis∣ses were aided by them of Rhoetia, of Seon, and Sāmaurice whi∣che were lately made their felowes, and also by the Frenche Kynge Lewes the .xii. At the length by the intercession of Lewes Sfortia Duke of Millan, the matter was pacified aboute the yeare of oure Lord a thousand and fiue hundreth. Maximilian had in Mariage Mary Blancke the sister of Sfortia. Themperor, the third day of August, calleth before him the con∣suls, and all the Senate of Auspurge, and diuers others of ye chie∣fest Citezens, and by Seldus the Ciuilian, speaking muche of the
good wil & zele that he and his progenitors haue borne to them, he saith their common welth hath now these many yeres bene euill & seditiously gouerned, the cause wherof hath bene, that men of none experiēce & crafts mē, for nothing les mete thē to haue gouernmēt, haue bene chosen senators: wherfore he, who beareth good will to their city, to thintent this euil may be remedied, displaceth them al not for any reproche vnto them, but for the common welthes sake. After he cōmaundeth their names to be red, whō he hath apoynted The Empe∣rour maketh newe Sena∣toures. senators, of the which nōbre were the Welsers, Relingers, Būtgar¦ners, Fuggers, Pētingers: whō he bindeth after by an oth, & assig∣neth vnto euery of thē his office & function, & cōmandeth thē strait∣ly yt they loue the cōmon welth, obei the decre of religion, & be vnto him obedient. He doth also abrogate al fraternities, & cōmaundeth vnder pain of death, yt from henceforth ther be no conuēticles or as∣sēbles He abroga∣teth fraterni¦ties. made. And cōmaundeth yt al wrytings of gildes & fraterni∣ties, of priuileges & fredō, be immediatly deliuered to the new Se¦nate, & cōmaundeth this state of publike weale to be proclaimed by an officer of armes, & geueth charge vnder pain of death, yt no man do impugne the same. The Senate geueth him thankes, & promi∣seth al due obeisāce. In the meane while yt these things were in do∣ing, al the gates were shut, and the souldiours set to warde. There had bene a lōg sute many yeres betwene the Lantzgraue, & Willi∣am the Erle of Nassow, for the lordship of Chats: which now at the length themperor in these daies decided, geuing sentence againste the Lantzgraue. The .v. day of this month, themperour answereth thambassadours of the City of Constance by the bishop of Arras, and sendeth them away withoute their purpose, and because he se∣eth them so little careful for peace, he saith, how he wil deuise an o∣ther way. The same day the Spaniardes, which we said went in∣to Spanyardes go to cōstāce. those parties to the nombre of thre thousand fotemen, go straite to Constance. And departing from Uberlinge, parte of them passe through the woodes, to the intent at the springe of the daye, what time they knewe the people were in the Churche at the Sermone: they might inuade the City, part againe remained in the woodes, lokinge for the oportunity of time. And it fortuned, that .iii. watch∣men of the Towne, hearing an noyse in the wode by, as they went further to see what the matter was, chaunced into theyr handes. Whome the Spaniardes toke, and manacing them with deathe, if they made anye signe or token, leade them awaye with them. After they couche them selues in a pece of grounde, by the lake side verye closelye: yet were they espied, and the watche men that then were in the Suburbes beyond the Rhine, geue knowledge to their Captaine, that there was some ambush laid. He immediatly signi∣fieth
the same to the consul: this was at .ii. a clocke after midnight. The consul by and by calleth the Senate, & commaundeth al mē to arme them selues, though no man knew what the matter was. In the breake of the day, the Spaniards by little and little do appere, yet but fewe, to know what nombre of watchmen there were. Ther againe the captain of the watch signifieth to the consul, that he pro¦uide in time: for whē ther is dāger at hand. Wherfore yt matter was debated, about four of the clocke were sent oute of the Citye aboute two hondreth Citezens into the Suburbes. After they were come forth, and found in manner nothing, they begin somewhat to slack: but beholde whan it was nowe daye lighte, the Spaniardes with theyr ordenaunce beate downe a timber walle, that deuided theyr ditche in the middes, and by the same ditch being than almost dry, assaulte thicke and fiersly the watchmen of the towne: straightway also those whiche we saied remained in the woodes, shewed them Constance assalted. selues in like case, and by great force and violence breake open one of the gates, but the Citezens fought most valeauntly, and shoting of theyr ordenaunce, slewe their Captaine, Alphōse Uiues, by and by at the first incountre. But whan they were scarsely able to with stand the force of so great a multitude, by little and little they retire and on the bridge ouer the Rhine they foughte a longe time, and hardlye at the laste were receiued againe into the City: and where the ennemies battered the gate sore. They discharged at them the great pieces of the walles, and from ouer the gates, and slue ma∣ny: whome they by and by tomble of the bridge into the Rhine and whan they sawe how theyr laboure was in vaine, they recule back into the Suburbes, and set the Bridge ende on fire, to the ende the Townes men shoulde make no salt out. After, whan they had ful∣filled theyr filthy luste, they gather on a heape the dead carcases of their felowes, and burne them and the suburbes together, that no man should vnderstand how many were slaine, of the townes men were killed aboute an hondreth. Whan the alarme was geuen at Constance, as the manner is, the Swisses that were neare neigh∣boures, came in theyr armure to healpe them, but the gouernour of theyr Country, who at that time was of Lucerna, called them back vnder a greate penaltye, for hatred he bare to Religion. Howe the Ambassadoures of Strausburge reasoned the matter with Gran∣uellan, it is before declared: at their retourne home after thassēble, they report the whole matter to the Senate. After deliberation, the Senate wryting their letters to themperor in Frenche, for that he The Empe∣ror delited in the Frenche tonge. most deliteth in that tong, our ambassadours, say they, retourning lately frō the cōuentiō, haue declared vnto vs what hath ben done. And had sent vs the boke wrytten of religion lōg before. Their de∣sire
was, most puissant Emperor, before they departed from Aus∣purge, to haue exhibited to your highnes a supplicatiō in wryting: but the same wold not Granuellan receiue: for the which cause we wryte vnto you at this present. And first certēly we desire nothing The letters of strausburg to the Empe¦roure. in the world more, thē to gratify you in all things: but touching the decre of religion, thus it stādeth, calling vnto vs the deuines of our city, we haue perused it ouer, righte diligentlye: and albeit there be things in it, which do not vtterly dissent frō the holy scriptures, yet in as much as they are so written, yt in many things a furcher decla¦ratiō is required, it shuld be very hard for vs & troublesome so to re¦ceiue thē. For we are most throughly perswaded, that our doctrine & ceremonies are agreable vnto gods word, nether cā we without gods displesure & hurt of our conscience forsake or alter ye same, be∣fore it be duely examined, & our men also heard. For this hath bene the custome since the beginning of the primitiue church, that such doutful matters as are in cōtrouersy, shuld alwaies be discussed by lawful coūsels. This way also semed euermore best in al conuenti∣ous of the Empire, that the whole matter shoulde be permitted to a Godlye Counsell. Wherefore we beseche you of all loues, and for the bloude of Christe that was shedde for vs, that the de∣crees of thēpire may take place in this thinge, & that we may kepe this religion, vntil the thing be determined by thautority of a law∣ful counsel. For ther can no better way be foūd nor more profitable to establish peace, or lōger to indure, but in case you shal refuse this our request, & require of vs obedience herein, we desire you moste earnestly, yt our deuines may first be hard, to thintent they may de∣clare in what places we do iudge ye same decre to swarue from the holy scripture, which if thei mai be permitted to do, we trust assured¦ly yt both you shal vnderstād thequity of our cause, & will mitigate ye same decre. Certenly we do nothing frowardly or obstinatly, but yt feare of God & consideration of our souls helth moueth vs thus to intreat you. For in al other thinges we shal so demene our selues, yt you may rightwel vnderstand, in howe greate estimation we haue your most excellent maiesty. with these letters, & with further cōmis¦siō was Lewes Grempie a ciuilian sent to themperour: But he ma¦keth him such like answer as he doth to others, & saith there can be none other thing determined: nether is now time to stād in questiō, & that in the coūsel they shalbe hard sufficiētly. Wherfore he geueth cōmaundement, yt within a month, they shew plainly their mindes. After the way before mentioned toke no place, themperor in letters published, doth outlaw them of Constance. Ther began much bu∣sines in the city: for the remembrance of the late daunger, and thex∣pectation of the misery to come troubled thē excedingly, especially
sith ther appered no mans helpe nor succour. Ther were diuers al¦so of the citizens which with their leud talcke did heape on all these matters: the Senate therfore cōstrained through their oportunity, intreateth certaine Princes, and also the Swisses by letters, to be meanes for them to the Emperoure. The Swisses therfore imme∣diatlye call assembles, and agree to it: but those that are of the Ro∣mish religion promise vnder this condicion, if they shall receiue the decree of the Empire lately made concerning Religion, and admit againe the Cleargy into the Citye. Wherefore whan the Citezens did sore vrge it, the Senate doth publish the same decre: after they go to it by voyces, and they preuailed, which said it was to be recei∣ued, For they all cried oute they were vtterlye vndone, in case they shuld longer remain in that state: and that themperors power was exceading great and almoste infinite, which they were neuer hable to resiste. Whan this ordinaunce was made by the people, the Se∣nate aduertiseth the Swisses what was done. They sende ambas∣sadours to the Emperoure, to fele his minde, whether he coulde be conte to suffer an intercession: and also intreate him to vse them with mercye. The Emperoure made them suche aunswere as they mighte easelye perceiue, that he liked not their sute. For he saide he maruailed greatly that they would do any thing for suche as were outlawed. Wherefore many within the City, that misliked the alte∣ration of Religion, got them vnto other places, amonges the whi∣che was Ambrose Blaurer the chiefest minister of the church ther. The Lindauians whiche dwell ouer againste Constance on the o∣ther Ambrose Blaurer. side of the Lake, had aunswered the Emperour before righte stoutly: but now being afraid, by the example of theyr neighbours, they receiue the decree also. Whan the Ambassadoure of Straus∣burge was retourned home from Auspurge, and had informed the Senate of themperors commaundement. Ther was called a great court, as they terme it, which is neuer wont to be done, but in mat∣ters of great difficulty and most waighty importaunce. They be in numbre. iii C .xx. of euery tribe. Whan they gaue their suffrages, yt most part thought mete to stand to it stoutly, and not to receiue the decre: after a few daies, they consult again: there theyr voices were somewhat abated, and permitted to certen chosen Senatours that At Straus∣burge they cōsult of the Interim. they shuld deuise the best way for the common welth. The horsmē of Naples, were not far from the City, as before is said: And wher themperor at the same time departed frō Auspurge, it was thought verely yt he wold haue come to Strausburge, and that was a terror to many men yt chanced lately at Constance, wherefore very many both gentlemen, Marchauntes, and diuers others, fearinge to lose their substance, and loth to displease themperor, whē they had in ye
Senate house renoūced their fredome of the citie, wēt to dwell els where, not without the reprehension of many. The Empe∣rour remouing from Auspurge, and leauing there a garrison, for the alteration of religion & state of the cōmon wealth, mar∣ched with the rest of his force to Ulme. Whan he was come thi∣ther, he displaceth the Senatours and ordeyneth new, and cō∣maundeth the ministers of the churche to prison, amongest the whiche was Martin Frecht, for that they refused the decree of Religion. The Senate being wholy addicted to Themperour, receiueth the decree. During the conuentiō at Auspurg, at the request of Granuellan, they had desired Frecht to repare to Au∣spurg, and helpe forwarde the cause of Religion, and to be ei∣ther with Plugius, Sidonie, or with Islebie. Who, for that he suspected ye matter, & that no mā of other cities was ther of his vocatiō, refused it. Being after cōmaūded to declare his minde what he thought of the decre made: he cōprised thesame in wri¦ting. And now whē themperour was come to Ulme, ye Senate calleth for him & thother ministers of ye churche, & asketh theyr opinion. They answer as before, & shewe what thing in the de∣cree The constā∣cie of the Mi¦nisters. they like and what they mislike. Being demaunded, where the preachers of Auspurge haue receiued the same by an othe, and yet neuerthelesse preache the Gospell, why they can not do likewyse? They saye, how they neither knowe what they haue done, neither is it their part to render an accompt of other mēs doinges. They verely at the first, what tyme they were admit∣ted to this vocation did promyse by their fidelitie, to preache the doctrine of the Gospell purely and syncerely, without the traditions of men. If the Senate nowe do mislyke that waye, they requyre them, to release thē of their othe. Being commaū∣ded to go home, at after none they are called for againe. There certen chosen men of the Senate say vnto them, the Emperour this day doeth arreste you prisoners, and you shal forthwith be caried to his pallace. God strengthē you with his spirite. They for as muche as it pleaseth God so, saye, they wyll refuse no pe∣ryll, and pray for them agayne. Thus departing out of the Se∣nate house, they were led by Sergeauntes to the courte, thyn∣kyng that they should haue come before the Emperour. After long expectation, and great resort of people, thei were caried to a Senatours house called George Besser, where Granuellan and the Byshop of Arras lodged. At the last, beyng let in, after long debate, whan Granuellan did instaunte them to obey ye Emperours decree: & they declared why they myght not so doe, thei were taken vp wt sharp rebukes. After, the residue were cō∣maūded out, & to go a litle aside, & thā thei assay Frecht wt gētle
But where he perseuered still in his opinion, they treate also with the rest seuerally. Of the whiche foure remained constāt, two reuolted. With Granuellan & the byshop of Arras, were al¦so Pasius & Seldus. Immediatly thei were fettered in chaines and caried to the cōmon Geale with Spaniardes & Germaine soldiours, ouer whome Iohn the Erle of Nassow was captain. And as they passed by Freights house, his brother George chaū¦ced to loke out at the wyndowe, & being desired of him to loke Freight ca∣ried to prysō with others well to his wife & his familie, he praieth God to strengthē him & his fellowes, & biddeth them be of good cōforte, for the which saying he was also caried to prison. This was the .xvi. daye of August. Thus being deteined four daies, the fift day, whā thē∣perour went thence, being fast bonde in chaynes, they were ca∣ried in cartes to Kirchene, & garded wt .CC. Spaniardes. There whan they had remained by the space of eight daies vnder Al∣testege Captaine of Germaines, they were cōmitted to ye custo∣dy of Madronio a captayne of Spaniardes. From Ulme came thēperour to Spire, at thend of the moneth of August. Whilest he was there, came one frō him to Strasburg, to fetche away yt xii. great pieces which they had promysed to geue him yt yeare before. The day before the kalendes of Septēber, the byshop of Rome, at the request of thēperour, sendeth into Germany thre byshops, of Fane, Uerone, & Ferento. What their cōmissiō was, shalbe declared in their place. Themperour making no long a∣bode at Spire, whan he came to Mentz, he went down the ry∣uer of Rhine into lowe ducheland, & leadeth away captiue the Duke of Saxon, & the Lātgraue, who was lately brought thi∣ther frō Hale in Sueuia, whā his wife had eftsones ben an hū¦ble The Duke of Saxon & the Lātgra∣ue led away prysoners. suter for hym, and put them in suerall boates. There is by the Ryuer of Rhine a towne of the Lantgraues, called San∣guner, and a Castell set vpon the toppe of a stepe hyl. Whan the Emperour came hither, he was benighted and rode at Ancker, and setting a lande the watchemen only, commaundeth al the reste to remaine within borde. The Senathe of Strasburge was commaunded as is sayd before to aunswere within a mo∣neth. Whan themperour therfore was come to Spire, Ambas∣sadours were sent vnto him the second day of September. Ia∣mes Sturmius, Matthew Giger, & Lewys Grempe. Finding him not at Spire, followed after vnto Mentz. And what time thei had geuē knowledge to thēperour of their cōming, & ye Ger¦main coūsellours were out of the way, which serued Thēpe. in those affaires, thei were byd follow to Collō. In yt mean time yt bishop of Strasburg, sēding letters to yt clergie wtin the citie, yt
of September, willeth them to obey the decree of thempyre, & ordeyne the thyng after the fourme prescribed. And with al sen¦deth themperours letters touching the same matter, which I sayde were writtē the tenth day of Iuly. Moreouer, he writeth to the Senate also, that they would not impeche them. Tham∣bassadours of Strasburg after thei were come to Collon ye. viii day of September, exhibite to themperour, from the Senate, an other epistle wrytten in Frenche, of this importaunce. Al be Letters of Strasburgh to Themp. it, moste triumphant Emperour, what time we were recōciled vnto you. We made no promise to obserue such things as shuld be decreed. Albeit we neuer assented that the cause of Religion should be handled on this wyse, yet, in al thinges yt we possible may, we are ready to gratifie your Maiestie not only in ciuile, but also in diuine matters. We perceiue wel enough that your highnes & the rest of the Princes will haue no consideration of our doinges, & that it is reason, that we shuld folow your fote∣steppes. Yet this notwithstanding, we beseche you eftsones to consider, that for so muche as euery mā must render vnto God an accōpt of his own doing, we haue iust cause to be careful for our saluation, & to forsee, yt we do nothing at any tyme against our conscience, for which cause also we were in very good hope that after you had heard our diuines, you would haue mitiga∣ted the decree. But considering that you referre vs to the coun∣sel, & say how the matter shall there be debated according vnto holy scripture, we are thus contented. And least we shuld seme contentious or obstinate do not refuse, but that the Byshop of Strasburge recitueth yt Interim. our citie may set forth that order of yours in certen churches wt vs, by men of his facultie. And we shal deuise with hym for the churches, neither wil we disturbe him in any thing, neither for bid the citezens to repare thither, but yt it may be fre for euery man to followe suche religion as he shal thinke good hym self, yet vnder this condicion, yt we may haue again a few churches in ye which Gods worde may be purely taught, & the sacramēts ministred, as it is decēt, & that in ye vulgare tongue. We wil pro¦uide also yt the people shalbe kept in order, & that nothing be o∣therwise done than is semely. Againe we shal cōmaund yt holy daies, & fasting daies be kept, & wil suffer nothing to be done, ei¦ther in sermōs or other places yt may be any offēce vnto others. And for so much as this doctrine hath now these many yeares ben so depely roted in mens mindes, that it can not without yt hurt of cōscience, be taken away so sodenly. And againe, for so much as by this meane, which we haue shewed you, your high∣nes decre may take place amōgst vs, we besech you in ye hartiest
maner yt we can, to graunt our requestes, & to suffer vs in this religiō vntil the tyme of the counsel. Which shalbe both a most thākeful duty vnto God, & make chiefly for yt peace of our citie and whole Prouince. After themperour had heard this letters And besides such thinges as Iames Sturmius with his great eloquence declared at large, he made answer by Seldie, & spea∣king many thinges of his zeale towards Germany, after long debating, at yt length he sendeth thē away after this sorte, that they should go through with their bishop, yet vpon this condi∣tion, that if they can not agre, they should stande to his arbitre¦ment. Whan themperour was come into Brabant, it was his pleasure to haue the Duke of Saxon with him, but the Lant∣graue he sent to Audenarde, a towne in Flaūders. On the bor∣ders of Brabāt, he dischargeth all those forces that he brought with him from Auspurg. I haue spoken before of the iudgemēt of the chāber imperial, how the states permitted themperour yt he shuld establish the same. The first day therfore of October, as The refor∣matiō of the Chamber. before was enacted, it is renewed, & thre Aduocates are displa∣ced for suspicion of Lutheranisme, & al the rest amongest other thinges were cōmaūded, that they shuld perseuer in ye doctrine of ye catholike church, or els to be remoued frō that place. There began Henry the Duke of Brūswicke to cōmence suite against the Protestātes, for ye former war what time he was expulsed. He had in dede conditioned, whā he was deliuered out of prison and that by an othe also, yt he would attempt nothing. But he went from that conuenaunt, & not he only, but also tharchby∣shop of Mentz, the maister of Prussia, the Erle of Nassow, & Re¦uart counte of Solmen, with others, moued suit against yt Lāt¦graue. The mē of Cōstānce, lately outlawed, wher as they were in great perplexitie, & sawe no way how to saue thē selues, flee They of Cō∣stance, geue thēselues to the howse of Austrich. vnto yt last refuge, and geue thē selues to the house of Austriche for euer. Wherupon kyng Ferdinando receiueth them into his tuition, & sendeth thither immediatly a noble man to be their gouernour. Who about the middes of October propoūdeth vn∣to them these conditions. That they shall acknowledge Ferdi∣nando and his children and heyres for their Lordes from hence forth, and shewe vnto them al faith and dew obedience, & shall not reuolte from them at any tyme, neyther make any league or confederacie. Suche lawes and statutes as Ferdinando and his deputes shall make, concerning Religion and other mat∣ters, they shal throwly obeye. In warre and other affaires, thei shall be ready at all tymes to ayde and serue kyng Ferdinando, his children and heyres obediently, as the rest of his subiectes.
The same conditions afterwarde they receiue by an othe, two daies after, the gouernour calleth the Senate, and demaūdeth of them, what is the somme of their cōmon treasure: that their gunnes with al their fourniture be brought into an accompt. He cōmaundeth also, that no townes man do weare any longe sworde, that no man presume to come to the fortifications, nor where the watche is. That their names, whiche during ye war admonyshed the citie of daunger, be reuealed. That an inuen∣tory of their goodes be taken, whiche are absent, and flit from thence, and that the same be deteined. That they delyuer vp all publique writinges. And that some man that is expert therin, declare whereunto euery of them aperteineth. After this, he cō¦maundeth all the ministers of the churche to depart out of the citie within eight daies. In this moneth Augustus, brother vnto Maurice Duke of Saxony, taketh to wyfe the lady Anne Augustus maried a wyfe. the daughter of Christian king of Dēmarke. In the cōuenaūts of mariage it was condicioned, that Duke Maurice, should as∣signe him his portion, not out of the lādes of Iohn Fridericke, but of his owne inheritaunce. The same time was a great cō∣motion in Guienne, for saltpits & customes. The head citie of all that countrie is Burdewx, a great towne, of much welth, & lieth open to the Sea, which in time past was vnder the domi∣nion of Englād. They also chiefly rebelled, & had slaine ye kings A cōmotion at Burdeux Lieftenaunt. Wherfore whan so shrewed an example was she∣wed, & the thing tended to a further daunger, the French king sent thither the Conestable of Fraunce & Duke Danmal with a power of .xxxi. enseignes of fotemē, wherof .xi. were Almaig∣nes, and a force of horsemen. Which thing once knowen they of Burdeux, make meanes to ye Conestable, & say yt they are cōten∣ted, that he shal enter with the Frenchmē armed, but they bese¦che him not to suffer the Germanes to come within their citie. He made answer, yt thei shuld not prescribe him: the Germains serue the king aswell as the rest. Therfore wil he doe herein, as he shall thinke good. And albeit they set not open the gates of their citie, yet hath he keyes wherwith to vnlock yt same. Wher¦fore thus he entred the, xix. day of October. And whā he had pla¦ced his men here & there in due order, and also planted his orde∣naunce in place conuenient, first he cōmaundeth the citezēs to bring forth al their armure & weapons, & the same to be caried into the castel, so were spent two daies. The third daye they be∣gan to make inquisitiō from house to house, & a great nōber of The slaugh∣ter that was at Burdeux. sedicious persones were apprehēded. After they came to an hor¦rible slaughter: For they wer not executed wt one kind of death.
There were also brought forth .xiiii. Gentlemē, with haulters about their neckes, wherof one or two were executed. But the Almaine Captaines made intercession for the rest, and begged their pardon of the Constable. This soroufull and bluddy spec∣tacle lasted .xii. daies. And besides those that were put to death in this tyme, very many were also condempned to the Galees. Moreouer all wrytinges, wherin their fredomes and priuile∣ges of the cōmon wealth were conteined, were burnt all, they themselues making the fyre. And because they had murthered the kynges Lieftenaunt, the Constable driueth them to scrape vp the earth, wherwith he was couered and buried, without any toole, euen with their nayles and fingers. Whan they had thus scraped ye dead coarse out of his graue, the same was bu∣ried againe with a great & solemne pompe of Freers & priestes. All the citezens folowe after to the nomber of fiue thousande, with euery man a candell in his hande. And as they came be∣fore the Conestables lodging, the Bere was set downe, and sta∣yed betwene times. Than doe they fall downe there vpon their knees, and with a lamentable crie beseche him of mercie, they deteste their owne offence, and geue thankes vnto the kyng, for that he hath not punyshed the same more extremely. Whan all these thinges were finished, the .ix. daye of Nouember they de∣parte thence, leauing behinde them a garnison. About this tyme there chaunced a maruelous thing in Italy. There is besydes Padwey, a towne belonging to the state of Uenise, called Citadella. Herein dwelte a citezen named Fraū∣ces Spiera, an experte man in the lawe, and a great pleader Fraunces Spier a La∣wier. of causes. Who with a wonderfull feruent zeale, began to im∣brace the doctrine of the Gospel. And whan he profited therin dayly more and more, he declared not only at home amonges his frendes, what he thought of euery article, but also abroad amonges all men wheresoeuer he came. This thnig could not long be hidde, and at the length was reported to the Boshop of Romes Legate, whiche was than at Uenise, Iohn Case, Arch∣byshop of Beneuento. Whan Spier vnderstode this, he percey∣ued easely in what daunger he stode. Whan he had therfore ta∣ken long deliberation, and cōsulted euery way, what was best to be done, at the last he resolued, being sent for, to goe speake with the Legate. Wherfore going to Uenise, and confessing his errour (as he thought, or els said for feare) craueth pardon, and promiseth obebience from henceforth. The Legate, although he were glad of this voluntary cōfession, yet for an example to all others, he commaundeth him, that retourning home he do
openly suche thinges as he hath spoken before. He was cōtent: And albeit he began euen than to repent him of his doing, yet His recanta¦tion. through the instigation of his frendes, affirming that ye whole hope not of him only, but also of his wyfe, children, and sub∣staunce consisted herein, he did obeye. But shortly after he fell into sickenes both of body and minde, and began to dispayre of Gods mercy. Therfore by the aduise of his frendes, he was ca∣ried from Citadella, to Padwey, that he might haue ready at hand both helpe of good Phisitions and cōfort of learned men. The Phisitions, Iohn Paulus Crassus, Bellacata, Frisimele∣ga, as sone as they sawe him, iudged by & by the disase to come of a vehement thought, and that there was no better remedy, than the cōsolation of the mynd. Wherfore many learned men resorted to him daily, and by the testimonies of holy scripture, whiche declare vnto vs the great mercy of God, they endeuou∣red to cure his mynde. But he sayd, he could not in dede denye these thynges, howbeit they concerned him nothing. For in as muche as he had once abiured the truthe knowen for feare of perill, he affirmed that he was appointed to euerlasting tour∣mentes, and that in his minde he felte and sawe them already, neither could he loue God, but hate him exceadingly. And here in he perseuered neither would he nowe eate any more meate, Spier wold receiue no comforte. and whan it was crommed into him by violence, oftentymes would spitte it out againe. It were long to recite all thinges, whiche eyther he him selfe spake, or other men alledged out of the holy scriptures, to bryng him from desperatiō. What tyme therfore all their counselles were spent in vaine, and both the infirmitie of his body, & also the anguysh of his mynde increa∣sed daily more and more, he was caried home againe, and there He dieth in dispaire. died miserably in the same state and desperatiō. As he lay sicke at Padwey, there came often to comfort hym amongest many others Peter Paule Uerger, Byshop of Instinople, whiche is in Histria, a towne vnder the dominion of the state of Uenise. It hath bene declared in the fourmer bokes howe the By∣shoppes of Rome Clement, and Paule haue vsed the seruice of Uergerius before in germany. Certes he was in hygh fauour with king Ferdinando, whilest he was in Hongary, in so much that whan his daughter Catharine was borne, Uergerius, & George Marques of Brandenburge, and Iohn Archebyshop of Lunden, were her godfathers at the fountestone. But after he reuolted from the Byshop of Rome by a wonderfull occasion. A wōderfull conuersiō of Uergerius. Whan he was sent for to Rome from the conference of Wormez whiche was in the beginning of the yeare .M. CCCCC. xli, as
before is said. The Byshop going about to make newe Cardi∣nalles, appointed him also amongest others. But there were some that priuely whispered in his eare, yt he was now through muche familiaritie with the Germains become a Lutherane. After that Uergerius had heard this by Cardinall Ginucius, vnto whome the Byshop had tolde it, he was maruelously asto∣nied. And to the intent he myght pourge hym selfe, he goeth home into his countrey, and begynneth a boke, whiche he inti∣tuled, against the Apostatas of Germany. And whylest to con∣fute their argumentes, he tourneth ouer diligently the boo∣kes of his aduersaries, and pondering depely their reasons: he feleth hym selfe taken and vanquished. Than casting away all hope of his Cardinalshyp, he goeth to his brother, Iohn Bap∣tist, Uergerius vanquisshed with the for∣ce of truth. Byshop of the citie of Pole, and reciting the whole matter, asketh his counsell. His brother being afrayde at ye beginning, lamenteth his case much. But after he was perswaded by hym to applie hym selfe to the searching of the Scripture, and had considered diligently that article of iustification, comparinge the sentences together, he geueth place, and iudgeth the bishop of Romes doctrine to be false. Wherupon they reioysed the one to the other. And as the very duty of Byshops is, began to in∣struct the people in Istria, and preache diligently the benefite of Christe imployde vpon mankynde, and declare what workes God requireth of vs, to the intent they myght call men againe to the true Religion. But there sprang vp many aduersaries, especially Freers, suche as are called obseruauntes, who repor∣ted the thing to the inquisitours, the chief wherof was Anni∣ball Gryson, and ioyned with him in commissiō Hierome Mu∣tius, Inquisi∣tours agaist Uergerus. whiche after wrote an inuectiue against Uergerius, and not that only, but set forth a boke also, wherin for the Hatred of Religion, he diffameth Germany with moste sclaunderous & rayling wordes. Whan Grison was come to Pole and to Iusti∣nople, he rusheth into mens houses, and searched if they had a∣ny bokes prohibited. Than, whan he had spokē many thynges in his Sermon, he cursed all those, that wold not presente such as were suspected of Lutheranisme. Yet he promysed a lesse pu¦nishment vnto suche as would come to amendement, & of their owne fre wyll aske hym pardon. But on those that would not wyllyngly cōfesse their crime, and were after accused of others, he sayde he would be auenged by fyre, and entringe into euery house, feared all men. Wherfore there were founde diuerse that accused them selues, & for feare refused nothyng: Of the which nomber the rycher sorte pryuely, and poorer openly were con∣strayned
to confesse their errour. Suche as confessed, how they had red the newe Testament in the vulgare tongue, he disswa∣ded moste earnestly to abstayne hereafter. Than, the common multitude, whose myndes were stryken with feare, accused one an other full busely, without any respect had, eyther of kynred, frendshyp or benefites. For the sonne spared not the father, nor the wyfe her husbande, nor the cliente his Lorde and patrone. The complaintes were all for the moste parte of triflyng mat∣ters, suche as one reprehended in an other for superstitiō. Here∣unto were added preachinges against the doctrine of Uerge∣rius. And on a certen daie, whan there was a great audience of people assembled in the head churche of Iustinople. The inqui∣sitour Grison, whiche sayed masse than pourposly, getteth him vp into the pulpet in a rych vestiment, & amongs other things to the intent he might thrust in his sting, at this time saith he, and these certen yeares past, you haue had many stormes and much vnseasonable weather, which destroyeth one whyle your Oliues, an otherwhyle your Corne: And nowe marreth your Uines, now eftsones your cattell & other goods. And the cause of all these euilles commeth of your Byshop, and the other sort of Heretikes. And neuer loke for any better, vnlesse they be first restrayned. Therfore the next way is to set vpon them & stone them. Through this their violence Uergerius was constreined Uergerius repareth to Mantua. to repaire to Mantua, vnto the Cardinall Hercules Gunsage, with whome he was familiarly acquainted. But where bothe diuerse at Rome, and also Iohn Case, ye Byshops Legate with the Uenetians, admonyshed the Cardinall by letters and mes∣sengers, that he should no longer mainteine suche a man, he goeth to Trent, where the coūsel was holden at the same time, to make his pourgation. Whan the Byshop of Rome knewe therof, albeit he had rather haue had hym deteyned prisoner, yet least any suspicion should aryse namely in Germany, as though the counsell were not free, he wryteth agayne to his Legates there, that they permitte hym not to haue any place in the session, but that they commaunde hym to departe from thence. Being after this sorte repulsed, he wēt to Uenise. Here He isputont of yt counsell the Bishops Legate before named, exhorteth him by al meanes that he would go to Rome: But he, whiche vnderstode his daū∣ger, refused. Than the other a fewe daies after cōmaunded him in the Byshops name, that he retourne no more to Iustinople. Therfore went he to Padwey. And whylest he there was, he be∣helde this miserable example before rehearsed. Wherewith be∣ing wehemently moued, whan he had sene presently the wrath
of God, wherwith that wretched man was stryken, he began more and more to be confirmed, and than he determined plain∣ly, to forsake contrie and all that euer he had, and go into volū∣tary exile rather, and to be in place where he might frely pro∣fesse Christe. Whiche he did within a fewe monethes after, and taking his iourney out of the countrey of Bergome he came in to Rhetia, bordering vpont the same. And whan he had prea∣ched the Gospel there, and also in the vale of Tely that ioyneth Uergerius preacheth yt Gospell in Rhetia. next vnto Italy, certen yeares, Christopher the Duke of Wir∣temberge sent for hym to Cubinga. Before he departed out of Italy, the Byshop of Polle his brother was dead, and it was su¦spected that he was poysoned. Moreouer many notable mē be∣sides Uergerius, sawe Spiera in the same state, and amongest others Matthewe Gribalde, a Ciuilian of Padwey, who com∣pry sing in wryting the whole matter whiche he presently saw and heard, set it forth in printe. As Uergerius did also, and Si∣gismunde Gelowe a Polonian, and Henry Scotte. The Arch∣byshop of Beneuento, before mentioned, compyled a booke of The abhomi¦nable filthy∣nes of an Ar¦chebyshop. Buggery, and so filthy as nothyng can be deuised more. For he is nothing ashamed to extolle and prayse the moste detestable vice of all others, yet commonly vsed in Grece and Italy. In the meane tyme the Archebyshoppes of Germany, especially of Mentz, Collon, and Treuers, euery man in his owne diocese holde conuocations, to thintent to refourme their churches af¦ter the order prescribed by the Emperour: For this had they pro¦mised him to do. In the prouince of Collon Bucer had taught before, as in the .xv. boke is specified, and there were diuerse mi¦nisters of the churche, that had maried wyues. But although the Emperours decree did permitte the mariage of priestes, tyl the counsell should determine the same, yet sayed the Bishop of Collon, how that appertained only to the Lutherians, and not to suche as folowed the churche of Rome. Wherfore by a de∣cree made, he disanulleth matrimonies contracted, and decla∣reth Maried prie∣stes pluct frō their wyues them to be incestuouse, and commaundeth the children be gotten of suche to be bastardes. The Archebyshop of Treuers hath but a small prouince, conteining only thre Byshoprykes, Metz, Tully, and Uerdon. There neded no suche lawe. For the priestes in these places, had rather haue cōcubines thā wyues. But in the Archebyshopryke it selfe where there appered to be more daunger, he decreed as his fellowes did. The iurisdiction of Mentz, is moste large. For vnder hym be .xii. Byshops, and almost all Hesse is also win his prouince. Therfore he began to instaunt and vrge them to obey ye Emperours decree. Like wyse
did the Archebyshop of Treuers, who had also some iurisdictiō there. But the Lantgraues sonnes, and the other rulers and counsellours, heard these thinges with deafe eares. The Arch∣byshop of Mentz sent also to Frāckfurth his suffragan Michel Sidonie. Who first hallowyng the churches there, preacheth & teacheth after his maner. The Byshop of Auspurge compelled certen priestes that were not constante, to abiure their religiō and doctrine. I spake before of the Frenchmen, which in som∣mer went to ayde the Scottes. They at the last bryng away in to Fraunce, Mary the yonge Quene, daughter and heire to the kyng that dead is, beyng thā syx yeares of age, that they might The inheri∣tour of Scot¦land led into Fraunce. thus take away from the Englyshemen all hope of optaynyng her. This yeare yt Byshop of Rome created Charles Uandome, a Frencheman, Cardinal. After that Maximilian of Austrich, was arryued in Spayne, and had maried the lady Mary them∣perours daughter, Phylippe the Emperours sonne, a younge Prince of .xxi. yeares of age, being sent for of his father, prepa∣reth him selfe to take his iourney. And leauing behinde hym his cosin Germane, & the same his brother in lawe, to gouerne The Empe. sonne com∣meth into Flaunders. the common wealth in his absence, whan he was imbarked & had set vp sayle, the .xxv. daye of Nouember he arriueth at Ge∣nes with fiftie Galeis, and as many shyppes of burthen, by the conduite of Androwe Daurie, who had transported Maximi∣lian, accompanied with a great nomber of Nobles, & amongest others the Duke of Alba and the Cardinall of Trente. A fewe dayes after his arriuall, he remaineth wout the walles in the house of Androwe Daurie the Admirall, in the meane tyme yt the Shippes were vnlading, and preparation made in the ci∣tie. The second daye of December, he entred and was receiued moste sumptuously, and being there furnyshed aswell of money as all other thinges mete and requisite to trauell by lande, he departeth thence the eight daye after, and passing by Alexan∣dria and Pauie, goeth to Millan. At Pauie were the great bat¦tering peces, which the Emperour had taken from Iohn Fri∣dericke Duke of Saxon, and sent thither, as before is sayde. At Millan, where he arriued the .xix. daye of December, were set vp in euery place triumphant arkes, pageōs, and images, with honorable posies written. At his entring were ready to receiue He is recey∣ued at Millā him the Duke of Sauoye, the Ambassadours of Uenise, Flo∣rence, Ferrare, & Seines. About this tyme at Bruisselles, died Maximilian Erle of Bure, of a disease in the throte called the Quinancie, whan his Phisition had tolde hym before as they saye, the very houre of his death as sone as he sawe him, whose
name was Andrew Wessel. I shewed you before of Duke Man∣rice, how after the decree of Religiō was red, he departed from Auspurg. Whan he was come home, he assembleth the Nobili∣tie and the other states. And propoundeth the whole matter at Misene, declaring vnto them what the Emperours mynde is. They vrge the Emperours promesse and his also, and requyre instauntly, that they may be suffered to kepe styll the Religion professed at Auspurge. After it was agreed, that the diuines of Wittemberge and of Lipsia, should be called to counsell. Wher∣fore they met first at Begge, after at Celle, last, at Iuterbock. Thither came also Iohn Islebie sent frō the Marques of Brā∣denburg. Here was a decre made of thinges indifferent, suche A meting of Diuines in Saxony. as are called Adiaphora, the last conuention of all was at Lip∣sia. Here was a fourme of Religion written, whiche all men should obserue vnder the dominions of Duke Maurice. Which boke afterwardes bred much contention, as shalbe declared in his place. In the meane tyme the Emperours sonne procedeth on his iourney, and passing by Mantua and Trent, he cōmeth to Auspurge, and so to Spire. After he passeth through the lād 1549. of Luke to the Emperour his father, accompanied amongest others with the Cardinall of Trent: The Emperour had sente to mete hym in Germany a goodly nomber of Horsemen, at the conduite of the Duke of Arescot. Duke Maurice goyng forth to mete him as farre as Trent, rode forth with a small cōpany to see Mantua and Uenise, and was moste honorably intertey∣ned of the Senate. He intreated diligētly the Prince of Spain that he would be a meane to the Emperour for the Lantgraue his father in lawe, whiche after also he signified vnto him. & for as muche as the other had promysed right gently, he byd∣deth hym be of good comfort, yet neuerthelesse admonyshynge hym to dissemble the matter, and not to be acknowen therof. At this tyme was muche trouble in the partes of Barbarie & Affrica. For one Zeriphius (as they say) arrising of a smal be∣ginning, Ciuile war∣res in Affri∣ca. and atteyning to a kingdome, had erpulsed Fesanus a kyng by hym out of his Realme, who came after to the Em∣perour at Auspurge, complayning of his misfortune, and desy∣ryng ayde. Nicolas byshop of Metz, the son of Anthony Duke of Lorayne, and Tutour to the Duke his Nephew, as I shewed you in the xvi. boke, forsaking ecclesiasticall order, maried one of the house of Eckmount, whiche was an inheritour in Bra∣bant. So the Bishoprike returned to the Cardinal of Loraine. In what sorte the Ambassadours of Strasburge treated with the Emperour at Collon, is before declared. Whan they were
retourned home, shortly after they began to conferte with the Byshop, who callyng before hym the Nobilitie, sheweth them what the Emperours pleasure is to haue done, and commaun∣deth them all to obey. He chargeth also straightly the Clergie of Strasburg, to followe the same. And where he propounded ouer harde thinges, the Senate the .xii. daye of February, sen∣ding Henry Cope, Ambassadour with letters to the Emperour saie, howe they haue treated diligently with their Bishop, but Strasburgs wryteth let∣ters to the Emperour. that he propoundeth suche conditions, as if they should admit, they can not retayne those thinges, whiche the decree lately made at Auspurge, doeth permitte and graunt them. For after muche debating we haue, sayeth they, declared vnto him, how we shall geue commaundement to our citezens, that they shall obserue the holy dayes, and absteyne certen dayes from fleshe. Moreouer we haue bene in hande with the Ministers of the church. And certen of thē we suppose wil of their owne accorde leaue the office of preaching. Wherfore it shalbe lawfull & free for hym, for all vs, to establyshe Religion according to the order prescribed at Auspurge. For we shalbe no let vnto him, and wil also commaunde our citezens, to doe nothing to the contrary. And seing it is thus, we beseche you moste victorious Empe∣rour, that you would permitte vs ministers of the churche, euē such as be maried amongest vs, and put vs to no further extre∣mitie, especially considering that we wyll both shewe all mo∣deration, and geue none occasion of offence. I shewed you before of them of Magdenburg, how the Em∣perour had outlawed them: And where they refused the decree of religion, lately published, the displeasure was augmented. Where vpon the Emperour setteth forth against them new pro¦clamations, and maketh them a praye vnto all men, and ear∣nestly Thei of Mai¦denburg are made a pray for their god lines. admonisheth the Princes and states that are their neigh¦bours, to make warre against them, and to annoye them by all meanes possible. It hath bene tolde you before, howe the Em∣perour caused ye preachers of Ulme to be apprehēded. Thei were at the length, in the seuenth moneth, enlarged the third day of Marche, & set at libertie, whā they had payd for their charges. At this time yt state of England waxed troublesome. Edwarde Trouble in England. Duke of Somerset, yt kings vncle, & Protectour of the Realme, had a brother that was lord Admiral, of whom he had cōceiued a suspiciō, or at least was cōtent so to be perswaded, as though he did aspire to yt crown, & wold bring yt king vnder his custody. The Admi. of England b. headed. Wherfore he cōmaūdeth him to be apprehēded, & after examina¦tion had, he was condēned to die, & yt xx. day of Marche was be|
He had maried Quene Catherine, the laste wyfe to kyng Hen∣ry the eight, and that same also increased the suspicion muche. But the emulation and enuie of a woman was thought to ha∣ue bene the greatest occasion of this misauenture. The Bishop of Strasburge agayne warneth the clergie, to obeye the Empe¦rours decree. There is a churche of sainct Thomas the annual reuenewes wherof, are, by the cōsent of the Senate, imployed vpon preachers and learned men, whiche teache and bryng vp yougth. With thē he traueled chiefly, and desired to know, with in what tyme they would obeye the Emperours decree, and sa∣tisfie his expectation, moreouer what mete men they had for this purpose, and what ornamentes of the churche were, yet re∣maining. Thei take a time for a further deliberation. Thomas Cranmer, Archebyshop of Canturbury, and primate of Eng∣lande, Thomas Cranmer a furtherer of learning & Godlines. a man of excellent learning, was wholy geuē to further good learnyng and auaunce Godly religiō. Who seing the state now of Germany, and the daunger of learned men there, solli∣cited with sondry letters Bucher chiefly, and Paulus Fagius, moste expert in the Hebrew tongue, to come into England, pro¦mising them all loue and frendship. Wherfore by the consent and will of the Senate, at the first of Aprill, they take their iurney, that they might there sowe the sede of pure doctrine. Their comming was moste acceptable both to yt kyng him self, Bucer and Fagius com¦into Englād and in maner to the whole Nobilitie and people. And what tyme they had staied a whyle with my Lorde of Canturbury, they were both sent vnto Cambridge, to be readers there. The first day of Aprill, Philippe of Austriche entreth into Brussels, with a wonderfull pompe, where his father that tyme was. There were the Ambassadours of Duke Maurice and the Elec¦tours of Brandenburg, sent to sollicite the suite vnto Prynce Philippe and the Cardinall of Trent, who was a great frende to Duke Maurice. And albeit they put the Lantgraue, which was than at Audenarde, in good hope, yet was nothynge brought to passe. And a lyttle whyle after, whan the Lātgraue being sickely would haue eaten fleshe on a certen daye forbid∣den, the Captaine that garded hym, commyng in the way, tur∣neth vp the dishe botome, and casteth the meat on the ground. At this same tyme the Byshop of Strasburge, in the eight The byshop of Strasb. singeth his first Masse. yeare at the least, taketh holy orders, as thei terme it, and saith Masse, he calleth a conuocation of all his Clergie at Taberne, and maketh Decrees commodious for theyr pourpose. After thys he sendeth messengers to the Senate of Stras∣burge, requiring them to reedifie the Aultars, and to geue
him libertie to appointe the Mynisters of the Churche. That they woulde release the Clergie of their Othe, restoore all their priuileges, and rendre agayn the ornamentes of the chur∣ches. But he commaundeth the Thomistes, to aunswer direct∣ly, whether they wyll obeye the Emperours decree, or no? They speaking first of the reuerence they beare to the Emperour, af∣ter, of their duties and vocation at large, declare vnto hym, what euery man teacheth and doeth, that is to wytte, diuines, Phylosophers, Logicians, Rhetoricians, and suche other lyke, whiche are al not only profitable both for the Scole or youth, but also necessary. Than shewe they by whom they were admit¦ted into the College, by the consente of the Senate, and after a long declaration, they desyre hym very lowely and louingly, that he woulde not disturbe this order so well establyshed, nor wyll them to be occupied with thinges lesse nedefull. Contra∣rywyse the Ambassadours alledge, howe that College was not founded for suche exercises of Scolars, neyther ought the olde order to be chaunged. If there be any amongest them, whiche finde themselues greued, and can not obeye with a good con∣science, the Byshop surely is not he, that wyl perswade them to do any thyng against their wylles, but that it shalbe lawfull for them to geue place, and as the common saying is, let them either drynke or departe. For in case the Senate wyl haue pro∣fessours of Artes & learning within the citie, it is reason that they fynde the same, and beare their charges, not of the abbey landes, which were aunciently appointed to an other vse, but of their common treasure. The Byshop & his predecessour haue nowe bene many yeares impeched in their iurisdictiō, but this may no longer be suffered. Thus whan they had much conten∣ded in wordes, they departed without any thynge concluded. And the Senate, whan they knew therof, make intercession to the Byshop, and in their moste gentle letters desyre and praye hym, that he would at the least haue some consideration of the yought, who taketh great profit and rypenes of the wyt by the same Schole. Thus was the matter by letters and messengers sent betwyxt, long and muche debated, tyll at the laste it was taken vp by arbitrement, as heafter shalbe sayde. The Bishop, whiche was euer accompted to be of a mylde and a quiet na∣ture, was not thought to haue done this so muche of his owne accorde, as through the instigation of others that were about hym, whiche affirmed that this occasion of recoueryng his iu∣risdictiō was not to be neglected, & sayd moreouer that vnlesse he were earnest in yt matter, he might feare thēperours displea|
He vsed for his chief doer in these cases, Christofer Welsinger a Ciuilian, who sometime was student in the vniuersitie of Wit¦temberge. Againe the clergie of the head church of Strasburg, had for their aduocate Iohn Tischel a doctour of yt ciuile lawe. In the last boke is mention made of Wuolfgange Prince of Bipounte, how after the decre of Religiō was enacted, he was The duke of Swaybrig molested for Religion. sent for to Auspurg. Whome the Emperour had pressed with sō dry letters, that he should obeye the decree. And for so muche as he had referred the matter to the Byshoppes, the Emperour demaundeth of hym, whether he wyll ratifie the decree? And whether he wyll displace the ministers of the churche, that wil not obeye the same? Wherupon he writing his letters to them∣perour in Frenche, repeteth in fewe wordes, what was done in the somer before at Auspurg. And saieth, howe at his retourne home, he set forth vnto the people that part of the decree, that concerned holy daies and fasting daies, cōmaunding the same to be obserued. Howe he hath also red ouer diligently oftener than once the decree of Religiō: and graunteth that therin are many thinges which are consonant to his faith, by the which he loketh for eternal saluation. And that ther be many things also, which differ much from the same. Neuerthelesse he hath charged the preachers & ministers of the churche, to way euery thing diligently, & after to declare vnto him how they suppose the thing may be instituted. But where al they with one voice affirme, that they can not allowe the same in al thinges with a quiet conscience, he thought it not his part, to compell them to worke against their conscience. Wherfore he required the by∣shops. yt they them selues wold take some order in it. But what thing they haue aunswered, he hath certified heretofore, being in good hope, that nothing more of him shuld be required. But now saith he, in as much as you wil haue a direct answer, most mightie Emperour, I wyl say, what myne opiniō is. And first His playne trouth. as concerning the religiō, rites & ceremonies, which haue bene certen yeres obserued within my dominiō, verely I was borne & brought vp in the fame, as I haue also shewed you before, Ce¦sar, euē vntil this day; & neuer heard any other kind of doctrine moreouer I haue bestowed my study & paines therin, & so farre forth as my wyt is able to cōceaue, it appereth plainly to be a∣greable vnto Gods worde. For this must I nedes confesse, seing I am asked the question, least I should both hurt myne own cō¦science, & litle regarde my saluatiō. This is the cōsideratiō also why I can not approue y• decre, otherwise most willing & ready after yt maner & exāple of mine auncestours, to do any thing for
Howebeit, your highnes, whiche is the supreme Magistrate, maye determine herein, what shall seme good vnto you. It is wholy at your pleasure. This only I beseche you that I be not constrayned to doe against myne owne iudgement, nor yet the people that be vnder my dominion. As touching the ministers of the churche, I desyred you in my last letters, that they might tary through your licence for the christening of chyldren, and visityng of the sicke chiefly, tyll others were substitute in their place. Notwithstanding if you shall commaunde them to de∣parte immediatly, not abydyng tyll others come, albeit thesa∣me shalbe a great grief and hynderaunce to the people, yet shal it be done accordingly. For many of them are gone already, and in those thinges that may or ought to be perfourmed, I know that all loialtie & obeysaunce must be shewed you. What time in the dominions of Duke Maurice, there was a great appa∣rence The Inter. confuted by them of Lu∣beck and o∣thers. that Religion should be altered, the ministers and prea∣chers of Lubeck, Luneburge, and Hamburge, compiled a boke, wherin they confuted at the full the booke and decree of Au∣spurge: Wherof the chief authour was Iohn Epine. Moreouer the doctours of Maydenburg, Nicolas Amstorfe, and especially Matthie Flacie, borne in the citie of Albone in Slauonie, & Nicolas Ganles, bende them selues earnestly against the diui∣nes of Wittemberge and of Lipsia, and in many little bookes set forth, do reprehende them, as though they should deale dis∣semblyngly, and shoulde through their indifferent, or meane thynges set open a waye to the Romish Religion. Finally they Adiaphora. place this as a generall Rule, that all rites and ceremonies, al though they be of their owne nature indifferent, be no longer meane thynges, whan force, an opinion of holines, and necessi∣tie byndeth men, and whan occasion of wickednes therby is ge¦uen. This Flacie had bene certen yeares, Phillippe Melanch∣thons schollar, but in this contentiō, he went to Magdēburg, setting forth a boke afterwarde, wherin he declareth the cause of his so doing. Furthermore they of Hamburge addressinge their letters to them of Wittemberge, especially to Melanch∣thon, doe recite what they call indifferent or meane thynges, and declare in what cases they ought to be admitted, desyryng them also to wryte, what thynge they would haue comprysed vnder that name, to the intente men maye haue some certen thynge to followe, and not to wauer in theyr myndes, and least that name of indifferent thynges geue occasion to sondrye er∣rours, whiche may crepe in by lyttle and lyttle. Unto ye which epistle Melanchthō maketh answer, & amōgst
other thinges sayeth, how some bōdage is to be borne withall, so it be not annexed to wickednes. The Archebyshop of Mentz, Melanchton defendeth yt Adiaphorist. in the beginning of May, holdeth a counsell prouinciall. The decrees wherof he setteth forth in a boke afterward. Lykewyse do the Archebyshoppes of Treuers and Collon, who hath also a large prouince. That booke amonges other thynges estably∣sheth for confession, that no mā be admitted to the Lordes sup∣per, vnlesse he be first confessed. Of the hallowyng of Salt, wa∣ter and other thynges, which through exorcismes and praiers, are prepared, as they say, for the vse of faithful men. Of the Re∣liques, of the inuocation and adoration of Saincts, of Pilgri∣mages, of prayers for the dead, of pourgatory, of fasting, and choyse of meates, of the canonical houres, as they terme them, of the tremblable misteries of the Masse. Unto this Synode came Maurice Byshop of Eistet: The residue sente Ambassa∣dours. But that ordynaunce of hallowyng and consecratyng, aparteineth to many matters. Euery seuenth daye, whiche is called the Sonday, whan there be many people in the churche, the priest exorciseth, as they terme it, first Salte, after Water. And whan he hath mixed the salte and the water together, he The force of holy water. sprincleth the people withall. And this sprinklyng is thought to geue health both of body and soule, and to dryue awaye the disceiptes of the deuyll, & clense not only men, but also things without lyfe. For it is cast vpon the grounde, and vpon stones, and throwen into dead mens graues, & the priest praieth God to geue it that vertue and strength. After the same sorte also is salte handled at the christening of chyldren. And whan it is consecrate, the priest putteth it into the chyldes mouth, and cō∣maundeth the deuil to come out, and thrise ducketh the infant in the water, and with oyle, wherin he dippeth his thombe an∣nointeth the brest and shoulders of the childe. Women also af∣ter their childebed, whā they come to be churched, at their first entring in at the churche dore, are purified with this water. Finally, it serueth for many, vses, but chiefly, whan they haue to do with spirites in the nyght, and practise coniuryng. And they hallowe with certen prayers, whatsoeuer apperteyneth to the apparell of Priestes. Moreouer the water of the fount∣stone, tapers, candels, palmes, the Paschall lambe, as they ter∣me it, made of waxe, Egges, Fleshe, Chese, Bakō, Flowres, Her∣bes, and fruictes of trees, and vpon all these thynges is cast the forsayd water. When any churche must be buylded, the Byshop or his suffragan layeth the first stone of the foundation, and Hallowyng of churches. throweth on salt water. And when it is edified, he goeth thrise
about it, and first he sprinkleth the vpper walles, than the mid¦dle, and after the lowest of all. And with his crosiers staffe ma∣keth the signe of the crosse vpon the highest walles, that the de∣uill do not approche. After entring into the churche, whan cer∣ten songes are ended, the priest stroweth ashes after the simili∣tude of a crosse. Which done, the Bishop with his staffe wryteth Greke letters in the ashes, at the left syde of the crosse: and La∣tin letters on the ryght, and afterwarde casteth on an other water, mixed with salte, wyne and ashes, wherwith he sprin∣cleth the churche agayne, and exhorteth the people to bounte∣fulnes & liberalitie. In lyke sorte are the belles vsed. And first forsouth, they must hange so, as the Byshop may goe round a∣bout Hallowyng of belles. them. Whiche after he hath sayde certen Psalmes, he con∣secrateth water and salte, and mingleth them together, wher∣with he washeth the belle diligētly both within and without, after wypeth it drie, and with holy oyle draweth in it the signe of the crosse, and prayeth God, that whan they shall rynge or sounde that bell, all the disceiptes of the deuyll may vanyshe away, hayle, thōdryng lightening, wyndes and tempestes, and all vntemperate weathers may be aswaged. Whan he hath wipte out the crosse of oyle wyth a linen cloth, he maketh seuē other crosses in the same, and within one only. After saying cer¦ten Psalmes, he taketh a payre of sensours and senseth the bel¦within, and prayeth God to sende it good lucke. In many pla∣ces they make a great dyner, and kepe a feast as it were at a so∣lemne wedding. And they hallowe their aultars thus. They take oyle, cresme, a pounde of Frankēsense, a panne with hote Hallowyng of aultars. coales, salt, water, wyne, ashes, hyssope, one canuas clothe to wipe with, and an other finer and softer, to couer with: fiue crosses of waxe, a chalice, morter, two tapers, finally whatsoe∣aperteineth to the furniture of the aultar. In the meane sea∣son the Byshop and the priestes saye certen Psalmes and pray∣ers. Than doeth he sprinkle the altar in fiue sondry places, so bestowyng the water, that it representeth ye signe of the crosse, than goeth he seuē tymes about the aultar, and casteth theron water tempered with wyne, hyssope, and Asshes. Moreouer, he tempereth morter with water, and powreth it out aboute the aultar. Streight wayes are brought forth solemnely the reli∣ques of Sainctes, whiche after they be sensed, are agayn sayde vp in their place. After the Byshop swingeth the aultar thryse about with the sensours, which than he deliuereth to yt priest, who senseth continually, til the hallowyng be al finished. And whan he hath drawen out vpon the aultar thre crosses of oyle
in seuerall places, he powreth out the oyle and suppleth it in, and takyng fyue small pieces of Frankensence, and as many crosses made of waxe, he placeth them here and there, and after setteth them on fyre. The asshes that are gathered therof, are kept for holy thinges. Finally, he anoynteth the foure corners and edges, and also the forefront of the aultar, & singeth masse. But the oyle and chresme as they call it, is made euery wheare on Maundy thursday in the passion weke, next before Easter. These were in tymes past had in great reuerence and esti∣mation with all men. But whan Luther and after hym o∣thers taught, howe al creatures were cōsecrated by the mouth Luther brought in cōtempt the popysh cere∣monies. of God, what tyme he created the whole worlde, all this gere came in contempt and mockery, as full of iugglyng and trom∣pery. Nowe therfore the Byshoppes of Germany hauynge the wynde at wyll, restore the same and bryng them home agayne, as it were from death to lyfe. And touchyng the makyng of ho∣ly water as they terme it, there is a decree in the Bishop of Ro∣mes lawe, whiche they ascribe to Alexander, the fifte Byshop after Saint Peter, to the intent the thyng may be of more cre∣dite and authoritie, by reason of the antiquitie therof. Howe The Popes Legates to yt Emperour. the Byshop of Rome had sent thre Byshoppes into Germany, it is spoken of before. Whan they came to themperour at Brus∣selles, the .xxv. daye of May they declare first their commission. In the beginning the Bishop of Rome reciteth how ful of care he is, for them, that haue torne the Lordes cote. Howbeit two thynges do comforte hym chiefly. First, for that Christ him selfe did prophecie, that Sathan should assault the churche, but yet in vayne. Secondarely, that by a generall counsell may be ta∣ken away al suche thinges as are wickedly crept in. And for so much as ye fruict of the coūsel is come already to other natiōs, but amōgs the Germains as yet is nothing done, by reason of diuers dissentiōs in religiō ther, therfore hath he, partly of his own mere motion, & office pastoral, partly also at themperours request, by the consent of the Senate of Cardinalles, sent forth certen byshops, whiche haue authoritie to receiue vnto grace, such as ar willing to retourne into the bosom of the churche, & to promesse them al ioyful thinges of his clemencie & great be∣nignitie, so that they be content to receiue lawes & not to pre∣scribe. Which benefite verely he graūteth to al men in general, no degre at al, nor also no crime of that sort excepted though it haue continued neuer so many yeares, yet so, as they yt be such offendours, do confesse their errours & sinnes to some catholike priest, and do suche penaunce as he shal therfore inioyne them.
But for open confession, abiuring, and satisfaction, by the la∣wes prescribed, he doeth vtterly remitte, and forgeue them. He hath geuen also to the Byshoppes that be his Ambassadours full power and authoritie, to vnlose suche as are bounden to the Lutherians, by conuenasit promesse or othe, from all those bondes, to absolue monkes that be fallē into heresie, and haue forsaken their houses, and to permitte them, chaunging their coates to serue in an other vocation of the churche. Moreouer to geue pardon to eate milke, butter, chese, egges and fleshe, ha∣uing The Pope graunteth li¦cence to eate fleshe. a respect to the place and persone. Finally to permit thē to receiue the whole Supper of the Lorde, who laying asyde all other errours, shall allowe the decree of the counsel of Con∣stance, whiche will openly confesse, that there is as muche re∣ceiued vnder one kynde, as vnder both, and that the churche er∣red, not for making that decre of one kynde only. And that this may be graunted them, for a certen tyme, as shalbe thought mete, yet so, as they them selues doe this seuerally at an other tyme and place, and not at the same tyme, whan others doe receiue vnder one kynde only. Lastly, they haue authoritie to compounde with the possessioners of churche landes, for the fruictes receiued and spent, so as they wyll departe from the possession from hencesorth. Furthermore to punishe obstinate persones by the censure of the churche, and herein to craue assi∣staunce of the Magistrates. And lykewyse to chouse and substi∣tute Byshoppes throughout Germany, whiche shall put the thing in execution. These Ambassadours of Rome followynge this commission; in such places as they thought moste nedefull did substitute Byshops, wherof the Byshop of Strasburg was one, whome they commaunded to execute thinges before reher∣sed. And so finally to receiue into fauour ecclesiastical persons, if they first would forsake and put away their wyues. And mē saye, howe they went to the Emperour, to haue cōference with hym touchyng the measure and maner of execution. And after they vnderstode, that it was not possible for them to go vnto al places, whiche had nede of remedy, of necessitie they suborned others. This graunte or indulgence, as they terme it, of the by∣shoppe of Rome, the Emperour sendeth immediatly to the by∣shoppes of Germany, and warneth thē all seuerally, to handle the matter gently and peaseably, and that they first trye and The Archby¦shop of Meiz to the coun∣celloure of yt Lantgraue. and assay al wayes, by fayre speach, exhortations and praiers, before they come to excommunication and cursyng. Wherfore the Archebyshop of Mētz addressing his letters both to diuerse others & also to the gouernours & counsellours of yt Lātgraue.
And speakyng many thynges of his cure and charge pastorall, and of the Emperours fayth and dilygence, requyreth them to exhibite this order sent from the Byshop of Rome, to the mini∣sters of the churche, commaunding them to obeye the same. The preachers being moued herein, saye how their doctrine is consonant to the doctrine of the Prophetes and Apostles, the The Godly answer of yt Preachers. lyfe it selfe in dede doeth not aunwere to the profession, but yet do thei acknowledge no errour in their doctrine. Wherfore thei haue no nede of the Byshops indulgence. They haue preferred mariage before the filthie sengle lyfe, accordinge vnto. Gods worde, neither can they forsake their children & wyues, whome Christ him self commaundeth to embrace with all loue, fideli∣tie, and beneuolence. Where ther churches do receyue the Lor∣des supper wholy, the same is done by the commaundement of Christe, and after the custome of the primatiue churche. And they wyll admit no alteration herein. In the moneth of May, was an open disputatiō at Oxforde, betwene Peter Martyr & An open dis¦putation at Oxforde. the Diuines of the same vniuersitie, cōcerning the Lordes sup∣per, and the presence of Christ his body. These conclusions dyd Martyr set vp and defende. That the substaunce of bread and wyne is not chaunged. That the body and bloud of Christe, is not carnally or corporally in the bread and wyne, but to be vni¦ted to them sacramentally. Afterwarde there was set forthe a boke of the same, wherin the presidentes of the disputation, ap¦pointed by the kynges commaundemēt, do sufficiently declare, that Martyr had the maistrie in that contention. The tenth day of the moneth of Iune, the Quene of Fraūce was crowned at Sainct Denis, as is accustomed, by the Cardinalles of Bo∣lon, Gwise, Chattilion; Uandome and Bourbon, for al the rest were at Rome. The .vi. daye after, the kyng with a maruelous goodly trayne and richely apparrelled, entreth into Paris the The king is receiued in to Paris. head citie of his Realme, where he had not bene yet sene opēly synce the death of his father, & two days after him the Quene. Whyles he soiourned there, diuers were put to executiō for Lu∣theranisme, whiche, as it is sayde, he behelde him selfe. After Erecution done in his sight. The king cō¦maundeth to go on proces¦sion. that, the fourth day of Iuly, he cōmaundeth to go on procession in euery church. The next day after he publisheth a wryting in prynte, declaring this to be the cause therof; that he might ge∣ue God thankes for his manifold benefites imployed vpō him. And that he might praye to God for the preseruation of hym selfe, his wyfe and his children, and of the whole Realme and commō wealth, and cōmende vnto him the soules of godly mē, but chiefly the kinges of Fraūce, his progenitours, & his father
lately departed, after whose example, he was fully prefixed to vndertake the defence and tuition of the catholique fayth, Re∣ligion, the authoritie, and liberties of the See Apostolique, & ministers of the churche: amōgest the causes this also to be one principall, that it mygh be openly knowen howe muche he ab∣horreth them, whiche contrary to Christes commaundement, contrary to the traditions of the Apostles, and consent of al an¦tiquitie, denie the presence of the body and bloude of Christe, whiche take away all vertue and strength from Baptisme, pe∣naunce, good workes, and Sacramentes, whiche do vtterly cō∣temne the authoritie of the churche and order archepreistship, whiche reiecte the praying, adoration, and reliques of saintes. Moreouer that by that deuoute supplication he might testifie what his opinion and mynde is, verely, that after the example of his progenitours, and by a certen imitation of inheritaūce, he doeth so thinke and beleue of all opinions, as doeth the Ca∣tholique churche the Crede of the Apostles, the first counsell of Nice, and many other counselles of the holy fathers. Further more, that he is fully determined to bannish out of his realme and dominions, the heresies long since condemned, but in this tyme partely reuined and partly inuented by Luther, Carolo∣stadius, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Melanchthon, Bucer, Caluine, and suche other Archeheretikes, monstrouse and pesti¦ferous persones, and to punishe moste extremely suche as shall offende herein. This wryting setforth in the vulgare tōgue, he sendeth abroade into all partes of Fraunce, commaunding thē to go a procession in all places, and declare the same vnto the people. Not long after he beheaded Monsour Ueruine, for ren∣dring Ueruine be∣headed. the towne and castel of Boloigne to the king of Englād, as is spoken in the .xv. boke. And his father in lawe Mouns. Dubees, an aged mā, which was gouernour of al Boloignois, and one of the foure Mreschalles of Fraunce, he cōdemneth to perpetuall prison. He had diuerse monethes past, sollicited the Swisses to renewe the league whiche they had made with his father. And although the Emperour by letters and intermessē∣gers did greatly disswade them, yet they neuerthelesse, for that they thought it more expedient for their pourpose, assente ther unto, first in dede those that are of the Romishe Religion, and the Lepontians and Ualesians, and after also they of Basill, & the Schafusians, wherat many men marueled greatly, by rea∣son of those forsayd proclamations and executions. For moste men supposed, that they ought not to enter into league and so∣cietie with him, whiche so cruelly persecuted the true Religiō,
and cōdemned their churches and doctours by name. But they of Bernes and Zurick, followyng the counsel of Zwinglius, as I haue shewed you in the third and sixt boke, abstained frō this league. The conuocation of Lipsia, is before mentioned. A cōuocatiō at Lipsia. But where many sayd and complained, that the Romish Reli∣gion was by litle and litle restored, Duke Maurice, the fourth day of Iuly, addressing his letters to his lieftenauntes, sayeth how he heareth that ther be many, which partly for ouermuch carefulnes, partly being so perswaded by others, feare, least the olde errours should one after an other be restored. And that cer∣ten ministers of the churche, with other busy braines, and trou¦blesome persones, are not fre from this sclaūder. He hath vere∣ly at sōdry times heretofore declared by opē wryting, what his minde and purpose is, and for those sclaunders doth repete the same againe, to the intent he may shewe & testifie, that he hath an especial care of Religion. Wherfore he desireth those, which either for lightnes of belief, or through the perswasiō of others do feare an alteration, to lay al feare aparte, and geue credit to this his wryting and testimonie. And as cōcerning them, that bring vp suche reportes, let them not thinke, to escape vnpuni∣shed, if they so continue. Howbeit out of the decree lately made at Lipsia, were gathered certen chapters by his commaunde∣ment, which should be taught and preached. Let them inquire therfore and learne to vnderstand, whether the ministers of the churche do followe this fourme, or whether they reprehend the same in their sermons. What so euer it be, he commaūdeth thē to aduertyse him, and if any doubtes shall aryse, to repare to yt diuines of Wittemberge and Lipsia, and that these thinges be declared vnto the people. In these daies departed ye Lātgraues wyfe, mother in lawe to Duke Maurice, whiche pined awaye through care & sorow for her husbandes imprisonment. About this time the people rebelled in England for two causes. One was for landes & cōmons enclosed. For the people complayned, Rebellion in Englande. that the Nobilitie had taken in much groūd, whiche before lay cōmon, & had inclosed & imparked the same for dere, & for other priuate vses. The others in Deuonshire demaūded thesame al¦so, but they were chiefly offēded with thalteratiō of religion, & wold haue the syx articles, wherof is mētioned in the .xii. boke to be restored. What tyme therfore they flocked together in ar∣mure, and the matter was ful of daunger, neither would admo¦nitions take any place. The kyng and his coūsel, though moste vnwilling, sende forth a force against them, and disconfite thē in sondry places, and certen thousandes were slayne.
The French King espiyng this occasion which gaped after Bolain that was lost, prepareth an army spedely, and partly by force, part∣ly The French king stealeth fortes. by surrendrie, taketh certain castels and fortes, by sea coaste be∣twixt Bolain and Caleis, and by that meanes putteth the soldiors of Bolain to an extremity. The Lordes of England toke this mis∣fortune most greuously: and because the Lorde Protector ye kinges vncle had the gouernmente, the whole faulte was imputed to him that he had not in time furnished the places with things necessary. This blame and enuy increasing daily, the protector in the begin∣ning of Octobre, was by common assent of the nobles, appreheded at Windsore, where the king was at the same time, and brought to the Towre of London prisoner. The Lords afterward declare vn∣to the people the causes, & charge him with euil gouernement of the common wealth, and setforth a proclamation of the same in Print, wherunto for a further testimony, euery mā subscribeth his name: amonges the which, Ihon Earle of Warwicke was principal. In the meane while, that the French king attempteth these thinges a¦gainst the Englishmen, themperour leadeth about his sōne throu∣ghe King Philip inuested in Flaunders. Flaunders, Henault, and Artois, and sweareth the people to be true and loyall vnto him. After they both retourne to Andwarp about the .viii. daye of Septembre. There was themperors sonne receiued with Pageauntes and showes most sumptuous, not only by the Townes men, but also by marchaunts straungers, Spani∣ardes, Italians, Germanes, and English men. After this accōpa∣nied with his aunt the regent, he goeth also into thother prouinces & receiue theyr fidelity by an oth. I tolde you before of the Senate The Senate of Straus∣burge do cō∣pounde with their bishop. of Strausburge, how they sent an ambassadour to the Emperour to abate the controuersy, they had with theyr Bishop, wherefore by themperors permission there were chosen certain arbitrers on bo∣the parties. Whan they were met in the monthe of October, after long disceptation, the Senate permitteth the Bishop .iii. Churches that he may establish therin Religion, according to the decree late∣ly made. Moreouer, he receiueth the Cleargye into his faithe and tuition. The Bishop againe couenaunteth and graunteth to the Senate, the Colledge of Saint Thomas, for the maintenaunce of the schole, and the rest of the churches. The Cleargy also payeth to the Senate an yerely tribute & some of mony, in other thinges they obtain their immunity and fredome. The Emperour setforthe pro∣clamations The pearil & fear of them of Mayden burge. against them of Maydenburge, as I haue declared be¦fore, and called on the states in Saxonye for aid: many refused not, so yt thother states not only of Saxony, but also of thempire would do the same. The menne of Lubecke and Luneburge, by consente
of themperors deputies, going to Maidenburge, assaied to make a reconcilemente, but all in vaine. At that tune did no man impugne them openly: but for so much as they were outlawed: they were e∣uermore in daunger, nether might they withoute pearill of life and goods depart out of yt city: For it was lawful for euery man to trye fortune against them. Therfore the Senate, where they had before cōplaind of thiniuries of their neighbors by publicke letters. Now they setforth another wryting vnto al men in general, but chiefly to their next neighbors, and say how they are selanderously reported, Theyr Pur∣gation. as though they should arrogantly and proudly demeane thē selues against themperor & thempire, and that they should forsake peace, & wryte many contumelious things: but herein they sustain great wrong: for they do acknowledge Charles themperor for theyr su∣preme magistrate, and haue opēly proclaimed that nothing be said a misse against him or any state: nether is there anye other cause of displeasure say they, than that we professe the Gospell and word of Why they cā¦not get par∣don. God: for thother slaunders are deuised and forged by theyr enue∣mies: howe desyrous they be of peace, it is not vnknowen to them, which haue bene at a few of the last conuentions: for they do not only vnderstand, but also know by experiēce, how swete is ye name of peace, and how comfortable a thing it is: and againe what euils warre bryngeth. Moreouer, it shuld be greuous and displesaunt to them, if theyr neighbours should for theyr sake, be in daunger, or receiue any do∣mage: Furthermore they do confesse that neyther is it lawfull for them, neyther is it in theyr power, obstinately to resist themperour and thempire, but that beyng dryuen of necessitye, to defende them selues and theyrs from iniury, they haue beaten downe certayne buildinges, and haue taken certen holds, smal townes, & villages in the time of warre, not minding to kepe them for them selues, but that they shuld not come into the hands of foraine nations: neyther do they refuse to rendre the same again, so that theyr neighbors do attempt nothing. And that there is two causes chieflye, wherefore they can not obteyne peace: fyrste, for that they do retain the doctrin of the gospell, and refuse that Romyshe Idoll. Secondlye, for that the condicions of peace propounded, are to them not only greuous, but also intollerable, and altogether such, as cannot be performed. For if they shuld betray theyr liberty, geuen thē by themperor great Otto, the first of that name, and the which they haue receiued of theyr elders, and maintained vnto this day, it can by no reasō be defended or excused in time to come: Nowe also it appeareth, and is manifestly sene, what thing the authoures of the booke made at Auspurge intended, and where about they went: for they indeuon∣red
to plucke awaye from men the chief article of doctrine of iusti∣fication, the very force of saluation: They called in doubte also the Lordes supper, and marriage of priestes: Moreouer they teach the inuocation of deade men, and what so euer dependeth of the same: furthermore they go about to restore all papistry, as hath bene de∣clared of many excellent learned men: certainly this so great a wic∣kednes woulde not be winked at, or passed ouer in silence, yea God is to be called on with continuall praier, that he suffer not the glory of his name to be thus polluted: for assuredly it is an heauye and a sorowful sight, that men should be violently inforced to false Reli∣gion and Idolatry, the ministers of the churche cast into prison, or wyth theyr wiues and chyldren dryuen into exile, some also myse∣serablye slaine: it is as much to be lamented, that albeit these thin∣ges are openly sene, especiallye in the vpper partes of Germanye, yet there should be men that dare affirme, that Religion is not im∣pugned: Howe be it, is no newes: for euer synce the worlde began, the state of good and godly menne hathe bene alwaies to suffer af∣fliction: Againe there be many examples both in the old and newe Testamente, that declare the constancy of holy men, which they v∣sed, whan Kinges and Princes setforth theyr Proclamations con∣trary to Gods word: For in suche cases was this alwaies of force, that is wrytten in holy scriptures, howe we oughte rather to obeye God than men. This hathe Chrisostome, Austen, Ambrose, and o∣ther holy men not only taught, but also perfourmed in dede, whan Emperoures commaunded any thinge againste the commaunde∣mentes of God: in like case are they at this present: They se the dā∣ger they are in, and yet may not otherwise do: for they must soner a∣bide all pearill, than to praise and receiue manifest errors. It is wrytten of Gordius the martir, who beinge requested of The sayinge of Gordi{us} the martyr. his frendes, whan he was caried to execution, that for sauinge of his life, he woulde forsake his opinion, aunsweared, that the tonge ought not to speake any thinge in reproche of him that made it: the which thing aswel apperteineth vnto al mē: For this is the opiniō bothe of the aunciente Churche, and also of certaine of the fyrste They betray the truthe yt hold it in sy∣lence. Bishoppes of Rome, that they do not only betray the truth, whiche teache false Doctrine, but also suche as dare not professe openlye and defende the truthe knowen: wherefore the whole case muste be cōmitted to god, nether ought they, ether for yt plesure of any mā or fearce of any peril, to forsake the professiō of yt Ueritie, but to set before their eies thexample of Daniel, who cōtrary to yt proclama∣tiō of king Darius, worshipped God wt the windowes set open on euerye side. Certes, he mighte haue done the same priuatelye and closelye, withoute any daunger, but for as much as the same thing
concerned the profession of his faith, and glory of gods holy name with a great and a constant courage, he called vpon God openlye, and had no respect of any daunger, which being procured for him by his aduersaries, lighted after on theyr owne heades. Wherefore they beseche all men, to attempte no force nor warre againste them, whiche are members of the true Churche, and that they woulde followe herein the steppes of the Christiane Souldi∣oures of former time, whych in dede would not obey, whan them∣peroures in the warres required theyr seruice againste the Chri∣stians, as is to be proued by the example of Saincte Moris the martir: howe greuouslye also God was offended with the Israe∣lites for that they being afraid of the multitude of their ennemies did not healpe theyr weake felowes, is expressed in the boke of iud∣ges, that it mighte be a doctrine for al men, not only not to forsake in their necessitye the brethren and fellowes of their Religion, but also to ayde and succoure them: They doubte nothing, but yt good men will be moued by these thinges: For God liueth, & is immor∣tall, which hath full oft in times past shewed the mighty power of his right hande, and nowe can also declare the same. They desyre them also hartely, that they would cause these letters to be exhibi∣ted to the Emperor, to king Ferdinando, and to other princes and states, and also to make intercession for them, that no extremity be wrought against them: for they wil refuse to do nothing, that may be godly and honestly performed: they require moreouer, that they would commend them vnto god by their praiers, to thend verely, yt through the xample of the Niniuites, they may from the bottom of their hartes bewail their sinnes, & hartely sigh vnto God, that they may boldly professe this doctrine of the gospel, whiche hathe nowe these .xxx. yeares bene preached, and may set it forth with the god∣lines of life, that they may shew the worckes of loue vnto all men, but chiefly to the ministers of the church, now banished and exiled, and to theyr children and wiues and suche other miserable people: And that they may kepe this holsome doctrine pure and safe from the deceites of them, which vnder the pretence of restoringe Cere∣monies, do now bryng in againe the whole rabble of the Romishe doctrin. In the month of Octobre, Fraunces Duke of Mātua, the sonne of Duke Fridericke, marieth the Lady Katherine, daughter to Ferdinando Kinge of Romaines. After, the tenth day of Nouē∣bre departeth out of this life the bishop of Rome, Paule the thirde, The deathe of pope paul the third. whan he had liued .lxxxii. yeres. The daye before he died, he relea∣sed the customes which he had imposed vpon Saltpits and diuers other thinges, not without the sighing of the people.
Certaine monethes before, he had treated with the Emperoure for the restitution of Placence: but that was in vaine: and if he had li∣ued longer, he was thought verely, that he woulde haue taken the French kinges part. For euer sence the murther of his sonne Pe∣ter Aloise, he imagined how to be reuenged. His bodye was caried into the chappell of bishop Sixtus, and there remained .iii. daies. Many people resorted thither to kisse his fete, which were put out A boke in I∣taliā against the Pope. at an Iron grate, as the manner is. Before he lefte his life, there came forthe an Italian booke againste him sore and vehemente, vnder the title of Barnardinus Ochinus, but compiled as it is thoughte, of others, with a preface to Aschanius Colomnois, whom he had banished. This boke amonges other thinges, which were ouer longe to recite, adressinge his talcke towardes him, and callinge him Anti∣christe, In the time that Innocentius was bishop of Rome, thou wast, saieth he, committed to prison, a prelate moste abhominable, for two detestable murthers, and for committing Paracidie, that is to wit, for poysoninge thy Mother. and a Nephew of thine, that the whole inheritaunce might descend vnto the. And after bēing set at liberty, where you were nothinge ashamed to sue for the Purple His Sister a whore made him cardinal hat, a man of so greate wickednes, and were thrise repulsed by the colledge of cardinals, your owne natural sister. Iulia Farnesia, at the length obteined your sute. For where she threatned the high bi∣shop, that she wold be no longer at his commaundement, the bishop Alexander the sixt fearing her anger and displesure, chose you into the fellowship of cardinals. After this also you poysoned an other sister of youres, which was more than halfe whorishe, after the cu∣stome of your familye. Whan you were ambassador in the prouince of Aucona, what time Iulye the seconde was bishop of Rome, full naughtely you begiled a maid of the same citye, dissemblinge what you were: For making her to beleue, that you wer a gentleman, at∣tending vpon the ambassadour, you defloured her, which shameful acte the maides vncle, Cardinall of Aucona, charged you most ear∣nestly before Cleinent the seueth than Prysoner after the citye was taken. Nicholas Quercey toke the with his wife Laura Farnesia The mon∣strus lechery of the Pope. thy Nece, and gaue the a iobbe with hys Dagger, that the scarre thereof remaineth to this daye. What shoulde I speake of thy Daughter Custaunce, wyth whome thou haste so ofte offended? For to the end thou mightest haue her more frelye at thy pleasure, thou diddest poysone her husbande Bosius Sfortia. Who percei∣uing your wickednes, toke such an inward thoughte, that he was neuer sene mery after. In filthy lust assuredlye you passe farre the
Emperours Commodus and Heliogabalus: and that may be well proued by so many bastardes as you haue. Lot lay with his daugh¦ters ignorauntly, and whan he was made droncke: but thou sobre hast medled not only with thy Nece, but also with thy Sister and daughter. Nowe that same whiche thine vngratious sonne Peter Aloise did to the Bishop of Fane, how shameful is it to be spoken, and how horrible a crime. When Bishop Clemente was deteined prisoner in the Castell Aungele, and sente the Ambassadour to the Emperor for recouering of his liberty, thou wouldest not take thy iourney, before he had geuen the Bishoppricke of Parma to thy Nephew Farnesius, who than was but ten yeres old. That done, you disceiued him neuerthelesse: for whan you came to Gene, you fained your selfe sicke. But what Marchaundise haste thou made with the Church goodes being Cardinall? And since thou waste The Popes rauening. made Bishop, liuing God, how filthelye haste thou consumed the goodes of the Church of Rome? Art thou not ashamed to haue be∣stowed the high office and gouernemente vppon thine vngratious Sonne, with forty thousande Ducats yearely, and as muche in a manner to thy Nephew Octauius? I speake not what vnreasona∣ble substaunce, thou hast wasted vpon all the wemen of thy house, and vppon thy Neces Sanflorians After thou darest make men∣tion of the Turkes, which are like now to inuade pore Italy. Which thou doest for this intente. that thou mightest haue some occasion to polle the people, whiche vnder thy gouernmente do su∣staine a mooste heauy and intollerable burthen. Thou diddest sell to the Duke of Farrare Mutina and Reso. Thou hast aliened the Cities of Parma and Placence from the church of Rome, whiche were neuer begotten by the, and the which Bishop Clemente was verely ashamed to do. To thintent thou mightest enrich thine own house and family, thou hast handled others contrary to righte and equity, and such as could not, or refused to beare that burthen and bondage, thou hast persecuted with warre, that do the Perusines declare, amongs others, and Ascanius Columnois. He that taketh yerely of his subiectes more than ordinarye, iii .C. M. Ducates, he that oft imposeth new customes, one while of Salt, an other while of other thinges, he that exacteth now the tenthes, and nowe the moytie of the fruites, he ought verely to be taken for the enemye of Christen bloud. The Turkish nauy during your bishoppricke, sai∣led by the costes of the Church of Rome without damage, and that not long sence, what time Barbarous entred into our seas. Wher∣fore that secreat trafficke, that thou haste with infidels, cutteth of from the all occasion, that thou canst not hereafter pretend yt name of the Turkishe warre. And yet in the meane season, you dare be
bold to taunt the kinge of Fraunce, for kepinge frendship with the Protestantes, and the Emperoure with the King of England, is it not a great shame, that thou shouldest wholy depend vpon Astrolo¦gy, Paule geuen to Astrology & coniuratiō and Necromantie? the thing can not be denied: for the expert mē in these sciences, thou hast auaunced with honors, giftes and pro∣motiōs, as Cesius, Marcellus, Gauricus a portugal, with others. Which thing vndoubtedly doth manifestly reproue the of vngodli∣nes and misbeliefe, and is a cause sufficiente enoughe, for whyche thou oughtest to be deposed from thy seate. Many suche other like thinges are contained in the foresaid boke, which is to be hadde in Printe. Now let vs retourne to the dead coarse. The .ix. day after began the buriall to be made nine daies together. In the meane An assemble of Cardinals to chuse a newe Pope. season the Cardinals that were absent repare to the Citye with all spede, Trent, Mantua, Cibo, Montane, Auspurge, Auria, Urbine and all these were at the buriall. The firste that came thither was the Cardinall of Trent. For he was than at Mantua, at the mar∣riage before mentioned, whan word was broughte him, of the Bi∣shops death. The funerall charges did amount to the some of fifty thousand crownes. The .xviii. day of Nouembre, when masse was done, they went into the Conclaue, as they call it, to chuse a new bi∣shop. The fourth day of December, Cardinal Pacieco a Spaniard came thither from Trent, and the .xii. day came Cardinall Bellay, Uandome, Chastilion, Guise, Tournon, & at thend of yt same Mo∣neth, Bolon, Ambois, Lorayne, after also Bourbon, a man of great yeres, Frenchmen all, and many were at Rome before, whome the King had sent thither two yeres past, as I shewed you in the .xix. boke. And in so muche as we are come to this place it shall not be a misse, to declare here certain things. Ther is a Palace at Rome in Mount Uaticane, ioyning to the Church of Saint Peter, wherein dwell the high Bishops, and there, whan occasion serueth, they do call the Senate of Cardinals. In this palace amonges other buil∣dinges, be fiue halles, and a galary thre score and ten pases longe, and two Chappels. These together make that same that is called yt Conclaue. The one chappell is appoyne to saye Masse in, and to take theyr voyces in. The other, and the foresaid Haulles, the Car∣dinals haue theyr mansion. And at this time after the deathe of Paule, for as much as the Cardinals were in nombre fifty & four, there were so many chambers prepared. The Conclaue in tymes past had many dores: but nowe were they all shut vp, sauinge one dore only. Moreouer there be no glase windowes, but in the chap∣pels, and they be of such an height, that no man can reach them. Wherfore nether ayre, nor lighte pearseth thither, but burne waxe lightes both day and night. Nowe haue they theyr chambers buil∣ded.
xiiii. fote wide, xvi. fote long, and .xii. fote depe, nether of brick, stone, nor timber, but of cloth, ether Uiolet or Grene. And because some be more commodious then others, they draw lottes to auoid displeasure and enuy. Euery hall hath .ii. rowes of Chambers. In this space, and within these limites, must the Cardinals kepe them selues, with their family and houshold stuffe. And euery Cardinal is alowed .iiii. Seruauntes, to lie in his chamber, and alwaies to wait vpon him, whilest the reast make the beds, and do other thin∣ges necessarye. Againe there be .xii. appoynted in generall, whiche make cleane the chambers, and conuey the filthe and ordure to a place assigned. Those that be once within, are compelled to remain vnlesse they fall sicke, and whan they be once gone out, they are re∣ceiued no more in, except they be cardinals. Whan they be come in to the Conclaue, to the election, straightwaies are chosen .iii. or iiii cardinalles, which shall prouide all thinges necessary, and answer the ambassadours of Kinges and Princes. They haue one key of the same gate that I spake of, the Nobility of Rome hath an other the third haue the bishops. And the fourth, the masters of the cere∣monies. This gate is not vnlocked, after they be once comen into the Conclaue, vnlesse it be at the comming of some cardinals. And The masters of ceremonis in the same gate is a little wicket, wherof the masters of the cere∣monies haue the kay, and at the time of dinner and supper it is o∣pened only. For than is the meat brought in by the same from the kitchins, which are without, and there be ready certain bishops a∣poynted for the same purpose, which search diligently euery piece of meat, that there be no letters conueied therin priuely. Of thē doth masters of the ceremonies receiue the dishes, and deliuer thē to the cardinals seruaunts, in at the same wicket: for no man els may be suffred to approche neare. The meat is serued in earthen platters, and the wine in flagēs of glasse, and are daily brought in new. For loke what vessels are once serued in, the same of an old custom are the fees of the masters of the ceremonies, who gather thē vp right diligentlye. For they be fine bothe in stuffe and workmanship, and are sold deare. This time watched without, not farre from the pa∣lace, gate, v .C. fotemen, Italians, at the leadinge of the county of The custody of yt Cōclaue Petilia. Againe the garde of the Swisses, that serued Paule the thyrd, and the light horsmen. After, the gentlemen of Rome, than the ambassadors of Kinges and Princes, last, and next to the gate, the Bishops before mentioned, that are searchers of the meate. For the defence of the city, were placed .iiii. M. souldiours at the cōduit of Oracius Farnesius, besides that in the priuate houses of Car∣dinals, and noble men were also certain bondes of souldiors. Now wil we speake of thelection. Albeit they were wonte in olde time to
enter into the conclaue the x. day after the bishoppes departure, yet now after the death of Paule the thirde, the matter was differed vntil the .xix. day, which was the .xxix. day of Nouembre, as before is said. That day the cardinals entring into the conclaue a litle be¦fore the euening, binde vnto them by an othe, the nobility of Rome the capitaines and centurions, appoynted to the defence of the city. after they resort euery man with his family into his owne cham∣ber, and commaund all others to depart out of the conclaue. Some of the cardinals be bishops, some priestes, and other some deacōs. Before they went to the election, certain lawes were recited, which they thē selues vse to make, according to yt state of the time. They do concerne the fredomes & priuileges of the cardinals. First ther∣fore The othes of the cardinals they be all sworne, that if it be there chaunce to be chosen By∣shop, to obserue all those thinges exactly. Moreouer that they wyll chuse him, whome they shal thincke most comfortable for the com∣mune weale. After they go to the matter. This was the second day of December. There, the masters of the ceremonies by ringing of The maner how to chuse the Pope. a little Bell in the conclaue, calleth them al to Masse, that finished there is brought vnto euery cardinall a chaire, and therin a pece of paper conteining the names of all the cardinals. After this, before the aultar of the chappel is set a table, couered with a purple cloth, where vppon is set a chalice, and a siluer bell, and about the table, sixe stoles. And euery cardinall wryteth his voyce in a little paper and afterward foldeth vp and signeth it in such sort, that his name only, which is chosen, doth appeare. Than euerye man arisinge in order, goeth and kneleth downe before the aultare, and when they haue prayed, they put the Paper into the chalice, and sit downe a∣gaine in theyr places. That done, two Bishops, so many Priestes, and as many Deacons, sit them downe vpon those sixe stoles. The fyrst bishop taketh out of the chalice all the papers in ordre, and so deliuereth them to the first deacon: who vnfoldeth the same, & with a loud voyce, readeth the name of the elected, but not also of thelec∣taure. There by and by the cardinals which haue euery one of thē papers, wherin all theyr names be wrytten, as I said before, adde vnto euery name that is red and pronounced the nombre of voyces geuen to the same. The accompt being thus made, the firste priest, who hath also a paper conteining the names of the cardinals, doth pronounce how many voyces euerye man hathe. If the nombre be not such as is required, the papers are cast againe into the chalice. Than doth the other deacon ring the siluer bel: straightwais com∣meth the masters of the ceremonies, that tarieth without, and brin¦ging in a fire panne with coles, burneth all those little papers. And euery cardinall maye at one time, geue foure seuerall voyces to di∣diuers
men, but that chaunceth seldome. And this verelye is the manner of theyr election: Nowe let vs retourne to our purpose. The Cardinals being thus inclosed, the second day of Septēbre, as before is said, begin the matter, how be it they wēt to it but slow¦ly, for that they heard say, how the Cardinals of Fraunce were cō∣ming. Many men supposed, that they should haue sene a newe bi∣shop of Rome, before Christmas, but their expectation was vaine, The Cardinalles were all deuided into thre partes or factions, Thre factiōs of cardinals. whereof one was with the Emperoure, another with the Frenche king, and the third was of the Farnesians. The Frenchmen wold haue chosen the Cardinall of Traues, Saluiate, Rodulphe, Lo∣rayne, or Theatine. And the imperialles, Pole, Burges, Carpes, Crucey, Moron or Sfoudrate. And of Poole and Saluiate, there was a great brute raised in the City. For all be it they would that the thing should be kept very closely, as before I haue said, yet for as much as oft times diuers went oute of the Conclaue, eyther for cause or faining of some sicknes, it is could not be kept secreate, in so much as it is said, how the Emperoure and the Frenche Kinge, were aduertised of all that was done. And the cause which Cardi∣nall Poole obteined not the place, was throughe the meanes of The cause why Pole was not Pope. Cardinall Theatine, who said (as it is reported) that he smelled of Lutheranisme. For many both in Italy, and others also, bear wit∣nes, that he was of a right iudgemente concerninge the true Doc∣trine, as is said in the tenth boke. At the same time were very ma∣nye Pilgrimes were at Rome, whyche were come thyther oute of diuers countries and nations, to thentent they might at the begin∣ning of the new yere, which was than, as it is commonly called, the yere of Iubeley, receiue cleane remission and forgeuenes of theyr sinnes. Upon Christmas euen, they resorted all to the porche of S. Peters Church, hoping wel, that the same, which is called the gol∣den gate, should haue bene opened by the newe Bishop. And albeit that long delay was to them very displeasaunte, yet thoughte they not good to depart before the election were paste. And that matter The yeare of Iubiley. standeth thus, Bonifacius the .viii. Bishop of Rome, in the yere of oure Lorde .M. CC .xcv. ordeined the yeare of Iubiley firste of all men, and commaunded that it should be renued euery C. yere, and promised vnto all such as shuld than come to Rome, and ther make their deuoute prayers, at the Sepulchres of S. Peter and Paule, ful remission of al theyr sinnes. After his death whan thys distance of time serued ouer long, Clemēt the sixt reduced the same vnto fif∣ty yeres. Whose decre also remaineth, wherin he commaundeth the angels, that they should carry vp into the heauenly kingdome, such as died in the time of this Pilgrimage. And Sixtus the fourth de∣creed,
that this benefite should be graunted to men euery .xxv. yere. Whan therfore the yere after the incarnation of Christ, a .M.D.& L. was at hand, Paule the third, a fewe monethes before, sente a∣brode his letters vnto all nations, most earnestly exhortinge them, not to let passe so goodly an occasion of vnburtheninge thē of theyr sinnes, and obteining the kingdome of heauen. He him self also re∣ioysed much, that he had liued vnto this time, & sayd that day wold be to him most delectable, wherin he should deserue so wel of man∣kinde, but this his ioy was not effectuall, for a fewe wekes before Paules ioye was vain. that same day, which he so greatly desired, he departed, as before is specified. Paulus Fagius, which went with Bucer into Englād, about the end of Nouembre, died at Cambridge of a Feuer Quar∣tane. How the matter was taken vp by arbitrement betwixt the bi∣shop of Strausburge and the Senate, I haue shewed you before. Now had the bishop intended to begin the thing in his churches at Christmasse, and had prescribed the cleargye an ordre whiche they should followe: but for that they were not fully furnished, he differ∣red it till the first of February. Than, in those thre temples, which the Senate by composition, had graunted him, the Priestes begin 1550. againe fyrst to sing theyr Euensong, and the next day masse, which for the space of .xxi. yeares, hadde bene omitted: there was a great concourse, especially of yong people. For vnto them it was a strāge A straunge sight & neuer hard of. sight, and before neuer heard of, to see there so manye with shauen crownes, and in a new kind of apparel; whiche sange that no man could vnderstand, Tapers and Lampes, burning at noone dayes, smoking and perfuming with sensours, to se the priest and his mi∣nisters standing at the aultare, pronouncing al thinges in a strāge language, vsing manye curtesies, and sondrye gestures, bowynge downe with his handes fast closed, one while castinge abrode hys armes, an other while bringing in the same; somtime turning him self about, now crying out a loud, and now again muttering some∣thing in great secreatnes, somtime loking vp a loft, somtime down to the ground, and cannot stand stil in a place, but remouinge now to the right hand, and now to the left hand of the aultare to crosse & blesse with his fingers, to breethe in the chalice, and lifte it vp on highe, after to set it downe againe, in certaine places to name, one while the quicke, an other while the dead, to break the host, as they call it, and put it into the chalice, to knocke on his breaste wyth his fist, to sigh, and to wincke as thoughe he were a slepe, to a wake a∣gaine, to eat one part of the bread, and suppe of the reaste wyth the wine, least any drop should remaine, to washe his handes, to crosse and blesse with the gilt patent, to put the same to his foreheade and breast, to kisse one while the aultare, another while an Image in∣closed
in timbre or metall: these thinges, I say, and such other like, the yong people beheld not without great maruel and wonder, nor certainly without laughter, and could hardly be kept vnder. At af∣ter none, a certain priest, whom they had procured thither from an other place, maketh a Sermon in the head church, wher he had no great audience, yet diuers resorted, as they are wōt in a new thing There did a certaine yonge man make a noyse, I know not what: A trouble in the thurch of Strausburg. whome one of the Sergeaunts rebuked, and made a busines with him as though he would haue caried him to pryson. By and by the youth came al flocking about him, and as in suche a case it is com∣monly sene, there arose an vprore and tumult, while euery man in∣quireth what the matter is, and stirre vp and down in the churche. Wherupon the preacher, who thought verely there had bene a sedi∣tion raised, being sore afraid of his owne part, went downe sodenly out of the pulpit, & by his fellowes let into the chauncel which was fēsed with dores of Iron. For al the priestes were there, & amongs them were certain prebendaries of the same church, borne of noble houses, which sitting neare the pulpit to heare, conueied thē selues in also quickly, knowing not what would come therof. The whole matter immediatly was declared to the consul and Pretour, who with the reaste of the Senate were hearinge Sermones in other churches. They came in all haste to appeass the Tumulte: but be∣fore they came all was quieted, for besides a fewe younge men, no man once stirred. Wherefore the Senate, amonges others, sent to them Iames Sturmius, who declareth to the principal of the clar∣gy before said, that the Senate is sorye for this disturbaunce, and sheweth thoccasion therof, and affirmeth that there was no citezen found in the same, and for as muche as it was done withoute theyr knowledge, prayeth them not to take it displeasauntly, and promi∣seth them, that they wil se to it from this time forward, that no such like thing happen. But they woulde not thus be satisfied, and saye plainly how they wil no more from henceforthe put theyr lines in such a daunger, and the next day they depart in great displeasure, leauing of their work begon, and reparing to the bishop at Taber∣nes, complaine of theyr misfortune. Thus therefore was the mat∣ter discontinued for a fewe monethes after. In the meane time they had complained to the Emperoure of the whole matter, as shall be declared hereafter Many men suppose, how they reioysed inward∣ly in theyr mindes, they had so good an occasion to leaue. For so lōg as the Masse was abolished by a decre of the Senate', they had li∣ued most at liberty, and receiued theyr whole reuenewes withoute any paines taking: but now, that they are bounden to daily seruice, although the laboure be not great, yet was this occasion thoughte
vnto them right acceptable, wherby they might shake of that yoke of bondage: especially seinge theyr doinges were derided and con∣tempned of the common people, and they them selues poynted at with fingers, and hated of most men. The Senate, after inquisiti∣on made, could perceiue no fault in anye townes man. Aboute the beginning of February, the ambassadors of England and Fraūce mete, to treat a peace. For the Englishmen hauing lost those fortes before said, were driuen to an narrow issue. Aboute this time also The Protec∣tor of englād the Protectoure, the kinges vncle was deliuered out of the towre, wheras the counsel perceiued that the same should please the king wel: and for so much as the Earl of Warwick was the chief occasiō of his apprehension, this meane was found, that theyr frendshippe should be renued through affinitie. Wherefore the Earle of War∣wickes sonne marieth the Duke of Somersets daughter. And af∣terward the Kinge gaue vnto the Earle of Warwicke the Duke∣dome of Northumberland: but this frendship lasted not longe, as shalbe declared hereafter. In the meane season at Rome was all full of factions and partakinges: especiallye the Farnesians were very earnest that one of theyr side might be chosen, and at the first in dede Alexander, that was Nephewe to Paulus, and certatne o∣ther Cardinals his clients ioyned them selues to the Cardinalles imperials: but when the frenche Cardinals gaue theyr voyces to Cardinall Saluiate a Florentine, Alexander, fearing least at the next session, Saluiate shoulde be pronounced Bishop, reuolted to the French part, taking firste an othe of them, as it is reported for certaintie, that they shoulde not chuse Saluiate. By this meane at the lengthe, Ihon Mary Mountane, whome we saide before was high president of the counsel at Trent and Bononie, the .vii. day of February was created Bishop. And he was euer accompted to be a moste earnest fauourer of the French partie, and also of the Fer∣nesians. The cause why Farnesius bare no good will to Saluiate was reported to be this, for that he feared, least if he should obtain the dignity, he would cut short both him, his brethren & kinsfolkes of much riches, which they had heaped together by right & wrong, and would auenge the Iniury done to his house by Paulus and the Farnesiaus. And it is said, how Cardinall Farnesius woulde not promesse the good will of him and his to Mountane, whome Paule the third made Cardinall till he had assured him by his fi∣delitie, that he would frely permit Parma to his brother Octauia∣nus. The bishop after an old custome, chaungeth his name, and is called Iuly the third of that name. At the same time the Frenche King setforth a proclamation againste the Luthexanes And a pe∣nalty also appoynted for the iudges that are slacke and negligent
in executing the same. Before the bishop was elected, departed out of this life two Cardinals, Uerulan and Rodulphe: therfore there The French kynges Pro∣clamation a∣gainst Luthe¦ranes. remained in the conclaue lii. wherof there were .xiiii. frenchmen, ii Germains iiii. Spaniards, ii. Portugals, and one Englishe man, al the residue Italians, and of the .xi. Romains. The .xxii. daye of February, Iuly was consecrated bishop, by Cardinall Cibon: two daies after, he openeth the golden gate as they cal it, wheras, was Iuly yt third. infinite nombre of people, to obtain remission of theyr sinnes, as be¦fore is said. The bishop striketh on the gate with a golden mallet: Thopenyng of the golden gate. for so standeth the Ceremony, which afterward he is wont to geue a way to some man, in token of honour. For there be some yt thinck them selues happy men if they may get it: and at this time the car∣dinal of Auspurge obteined it through much intreaty, and caried it with him into Germany. Whilest the bishop beateth on the gate with his mallet, worcke men breake it open with crowes of Iron. there the people, which striue, who may first thronge in, gather vp full busely the morter and rubbishe that falleth by the ruine of the same, and kepe them as precious Iewels. Many men iested vpon the fact of the Cardinal of Auspurge, whan they heard therof, say∣ing, A iest of the Cardinall of Auspurge. that he intended with yt same mallet to knock the Lutheranes in the head. Than came to Rome to salute the Bishop, & to do theyr duty to him, the duke of Urbin, the duke of Farrare, the ambassa∣dors of Uenise, of Sauoy, of the duke of Florence, Genes, Senes Scotland, Fraunce, and after also themperors. The bishop did not only restore Parma to Octauius Farnesius, but also gaue & made him the high gouernor, whome they call Confalonier, and restored also Ascanius Colunnois, whome Paule the third had exiled. The new bishop, of an auncient custome, geueth his Cardinals hat to Ganimede nouryshed of Poope Iuly. whome he list: and this bishop Iuly, what time he was Legate at Boloigne, loued a yong man, Innocentius out of measure: whom although the reast did mislike, yea spake against him, he chose into the nombre of Cardinals, and receiued him again into his daily fa¦miliarity, geuing vnto him his surname, and armes also. It was bruted at Rome, and libels setforth of the same, how Iuppiter kept Ganymedes, although old were deforme: yea the bishop him selfe would not let to tel it to the Cardinals, and as it is said, would re∣cite in his mery mode, how wanton a lad it was, and howe impor∣tune, Whilest they were occupied in the Conclaue, there were let∣ters Dute of the Conclaue came most fil thye letters. takē, which Camillus Olius, one about the Cardinal of Mā∣tua, was reported to haue wrytten to a certain louer of his, Anni∣ball Contine, the .xxvi. of Ianuary, and verses wrytten in the vul∣gare tounge, where he speaketh of his affection, and loue of hym that his absent, he vseth such detestable and shameful wordes, that
they can not without offence be spoken againe. Wherupon a rose a iest of them, that said, some filthy bishop was signified to come out that Conclaue, which yelded such kinde of letters. The .xiii. day of The Empe∣rours letters to the ates of thempyre: March, themperour addresseth his leters to the states of the Em∣pire. Howe after the conuention at Auspurge, he retourned into Flaunders, that he might binde the people of his dominions to his sonne, whom he sent for out of Spaine for the same purpose. Hys intent was, that thing once finished, to retourne straightwaies in∣to Germany, but because the winde serueth not to saile at al times and the distaunce of the places were farre a sondre, therfore was it long before his sonne came out of Spaine: and after his arriuall, the hole Sommer, and a great part of Haruest was spent aboute necessaries affaires: and albeit that winter was than at hand, yet had he fully prefixed to haue gone into Germany, but at the selfe same time he chaunced into the disease of the gout, and not long af∣ter, word was brought him of the death of Bishop Paul: whersore he chaunged his purpose, tarying thelection of the new bishop: af∣ter how Iuly the third had both aduertised him of his election, and had also promised very franckly and largely of his good wil & zele to the cōmon wealth and religion: which thing known, he thought mete, not to let slip so great an occasion and longe wished for, of ac∣complishing the thing desired, especially, cōsidering how the whole wealth of Germany consisteth herein: therfore some way muste be deuised, that such thinges as in the last assembly were decreed and commenced, may be accomplished: again, it must be foreseue, that yt causes of dissention be taken away, and certaine obstinat parsons and rebels straitly punished: for these causes verelye he intendeth to hold a counsel of the states unperiall: wherfore he commaūdeth them, that against the .xxv. day of Iune, they be readye to attende vpon him at Auspurge, and to finde no manner of let, but that they come them selues, vnlesse it be sicknes, which thinge not withstan∣ding they shall be bounden to iustify by an othe. And that they send theyr Ambassadours with large and full commission of all thinges concerninge the common wealth, to thintent that in con∣sultation there be found no let nor delay.
✚ The .xxij. Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The Argument of the .xxii. Booke. PEace is concluded betwixt England and Fraunce. They of Maidenburge make their pur∣gation by wryting. The Emperours proclamation against the Lutheranes astonied manye Marchauntes of hys Countryes. Whilest the assemble was holden at Auspurge to con∣tinue the Counsell at Trent, Granuellan disceaseth. George Duke of Megelburge, persecuteth them of Maidenbourge, who going by the worse, haue also Duke Moris and other to their enco¦nues. Pope Iuly publisheth a Bull of a very straunge sorte. Duke Moris being made Chief∣taine againste them of Maidenburge, propoundeth conditions of peace, againste whome also, the Cleargy publish letters to charge them. Wherunto they aunswer fully, and purge them selues. Osiander inuenteth a new doctrine of mans iustification. The decree of this assemble is to geue saufconduit to go to the counsell, Bucer dieth in England. Thre Sunnes and thre Mones are sene. The Pope citeth Octaulan Farnese Prince of Parma, againste whome also themperoure publisheth his letters Patentes. Upon this the French King maketh hys excuse to the Pope. The Duke of Saxon prisoner, healpeth and comforteth the Ministers of the Church banished by the Emperoure, an other beginninge of a Counsell at Trent, and the order of the sessions in the same counsel, the meane how to deuise and frame Articles of the faith, the beginning of the warre of Parma. ABout this time thambassadours of Englād A peace con∣cinded be∣twixt Frāce & Englande. and Fraunce, whan they had longe debated the matter, at the last conclude a peace. And that was so much the more easy to brynge to passe, for that they both saw, how there were some, vnto whome this contention of theyrs should in time to come, be profitable & gain∣ful. Wherfore the Englishmen, restore to the Frenchmen Boloigne, which they had kepte nowe sixe whole yeares, not without the greate maruell of many: and the Frenchmen pay them Mony: In that peace were also the Scottes comprised. After, sending ambassadors on bothe parties, the two Kinges confirme the peace with a new amity. For ye french King was made Knight of the Garter in England, and the Kinge of England againe of the French order. Whiche verelye amonges great Princes, is as it were a cognisaunce of moste assured frend∣ship. Where they of Maidenburge were defaced with sondry Pro∣clamations by themperour, the .xxiiii. day of March, they publishe an other wryting, chiefly to the next inhabiters about them. First they proue, that they can neither by Gods lawe, nor mans
law be conuicted of rebellion: after they declare, how such as put on armure against them, do make warre against Christ him selfe. Thirdly they confute the crimes obiected, and shewe that they be sclaunders, surmised by theyr aduersaries, And albeit, saye they, that through theyr prouocation the Emperour hathe exiled vs, yet may we truely affirme, that we haue as yet refused no reasonable condition, so that we might inioy stil the doctrine professed at Aus∣purge, and the liberties that oure elders haue lefte vs: of the same minde be we now also, neither refuse we anye kinde of dutye that ought to be done to the Emperoure, or to the Empire, and take god to witnes, that we haue geuen none occasion of any warre or trou∣ble, but couet chiefly to obserue peace with all men, and by ye meane of the true religion and doctrine to attaine to the life euerlastinge. And this doubtles is the cause of all the hatred, that is raysed a∣gainst vs. Now is it deuised by the law, that the inferioure magi∣strate shall not impeche the right of the superioure. Moreouer, if it so fortune that the Magistrate passe the boūdes of his authoritye, and commaund any thing that is wicked, that he should not only be obeyed, but also, if he attempte any force, be resi∣sted. There is no man, we thincke, that can denye, but that all rule and gouernement dependeth of God only: againste whome if anye proclamation come forthe, or if any decrees be made, the matter is clearely out of doubt, that the same oughte to be reiected and refu∣sed, but of this sort is the decre made at Auspurge concerning reli∣gion: Therfore can not we obey them, that woulde make vs to re∣ceiue the same Mauger our heades, and take from vs the lighte of the Gospel, and setforth that Romish Idoll, that they might draw vs into euerlasting damnation. And seinge the case standeth thus, ther can no rebellion of right be obiected vnto vs: again, euery mā may easely perceiue, how vnlawful it is to worke anye violence a∣gainst vs, for in yt are not we only assaied, but this thing is wrou∣ght: to thend that the professors of the true doctrine might vtterlye be extinguished, that through our side mighte be wounded Christe him self, and al godly people, For we are al the members of Christe. Wherfore such as defile them selues with so wicked a facte, what thing els may they loke for, but Gods vengaunce? Touchinge the fortes and villages taken, we haue spoken in our last former wry∣ting, neither is it neadefull to repeate the same. For so sone as we shalbe assured of peace, we will restore them to the right owners. Where also our enemies haue raised a brute, as though there were vsed amonges vs an intermixed & vncerten lechery, it is a most im¦pudēt lie. Therfore we beseche you for the honor of God, yt ye do not defile your selues with innocent blud, but pray God that he would
confound the bloudy coūsels of the wicked, & if it fortune to be war yt they wold not deny them their aid. After, in the month of Aprill, the ministers of the church, setforth a wryting, wherein they recite A confession of faith by ye Ministers of the Churche there. the confession of their doctrin, and declare how it is lawful for the inferior magistrate to defend him self against the superior, compel¦ling him to forsake the truth: and here they speke vnto and beseche themperor, that he wold geue no credit to suche, as incense him to practise vniust and wicked cruelty, but that he wold first truly and duely examine ye whole matter. Finally, they make earnest request that they may haue no war, and if the thinge come so to passe, they desire aid also of the inhabiters next them. Of the trouble that I said fortuned in the head church at Strausburge, the bishop made complaint to themperor: but the Senate, by an ambassadour sent, declareth that ther was no fault in them: wherfore themperour a∣dressing his letters to the bishop, commaundeth him to renue hys worke omitted, & to procede therin. The bishop taketh firste assu∣rance by othe of the Senate, that ther shuld be no violence shewed, nor any disturbance in theyr doing. Thus at the length the clargy at the feast of Pentecost, which was than the .xxiiii. of May, began The cleargy of Straus∣burge renu∣eth their mi∣steries. their matter again. A few daies at the first, the consuls, & certen o∣ther Senators wer ther in thother side of the Cathedrall church, least any tumult shuld be raised. And the clargy of the said church had inclosed that part of the chauncel, as they go into the reuestry with grates of yron, yt no man could come nere. At thend of May, themperor departeth from Brussels with his sonne Phillip, & go∣eth to thassembly at Auspurge, leading with him the duke of Sax∣on prisoner, & leauing the Lantzgraue at Machlin. Not long after A proclama∣tion againste the Luthe∣ranes. his departing thence, ther was setforth a proclamation against ye Lutheranes, which was written both in French & Flemish ye .xxix. day of April, and that was after this sort, albeit saith themperor, I haue alwaies indeuored, that thauncient and true religion, might within al my dominions be obserued: albeit I haue bene euermore wholly bent, that therrors, sectes & heresies, which haue now these many yeres bensowen ouer al christendom might vtterly be aboli∣shed, albeit that for the same cause, I haue setforth sōdry proclama∣tions, wt most extreme penalties, yet hearing saye, not without the great grief of my mind, that not only men of our own dominiō, but also strāgers which dwel within our prouinces, & occupy the trade of marchandise, haue spread abrode thinfection of this mischief far and nere: in such sort as it is doutles requisite to lay to this disease some corrasine or other sharp medicine, & make diligent inquisitiō after the offenders, that the same plage maye be plucked vp by the rotes, as in the last assemblies prouincial I admonished the states
and gouernors, yt euery man for his part shuld diligētly apply him self hereunto, and stil remain in thold and catholick religiō. Espe∣cially cōsidering how it is openly sene of al men, what tumultes & commotiōs this infection hath stirred vp, to speake nothing in the meane time of the losse of saluation, & of soules. Wherfore by thad∣uise of our most derely beloued sister, and assent of oure nobles, we make this new law, & straitly charge and commaund, that no man whatsoeuer he be, haue, bie, or distribute any bokes of Luther, Oe∣colāpadius, Zwinglius, Bucer, or Caluine, or any other bokes set forth xxx. yeres past, without the names of the authors, as in the A register of the deuines of Louaine. registre of the deuines of Louain is furthermore conteined: more∣ouer that no man kepe any Image or picture made in contempt or mockery of our Lady or other saincts, nether that he cast down or breake any Image painted or pourtraied in the honor of any saint: that no man open his house vnto priuy conuenticles, wherin bothe erroures are wont to be sowen, men and wemen rebaptised, and al¦so conspiracies made against the church and the common wealth: that no man either priuely or apartly dispute of the holy scripture: especially of hard and doubtfull matters, or take vpon him thinter pretation of the same, vnlesse he be a deuine aucthorised by some commendable vniuersity: they that shall otherwise do, shalbe puni∣shed as seditious persons and disturbers of the common tranqui∣lity, and if they be men, they shal die with the sword, and womē shal be buried in the ground quick, in case they wil forsake theyr error: but if they will be obstinate, they shall be burnt, and theyr goodes confiscated, whether punishment so euer they suffer. Againe they shall haue none authority to make any will, and whatsoeuer they shall do herein since the time they first began to infringe thys oure law shalbe frustrate and take no place. Furthermore we charge & cōmaund that no man receiue into his house, or aid with any thing such as he knoweth to be suspected of heresy, but that he aduertise immediatly thinquisitour or gouernour of the place, and shal suffer punishment if he do it not. Such as not of obstinate malice, but throughe infirmitye haue fallen into errour and heresies, and yet haue not transgressed thys To talcke of faith is for bidden. our law, and haue done nothing seditiouslye, but of their owne ac∣cord haue retourned to amendement, and after they haue abiured, be receiued again to grace, shal after yt haue no conference amongs them selues of matters appertaining to faith and religion: if they haue, to suffer, as those that are returned to their vomit, he that be∣ing not conuicted, but vehemently suspected of heresy, shalbe condē∣ned, ether tabiure or to do open penance, if ye same man shalbe after accused of heresye, he shal suffer as one that is reuolted. Unto such
as be spotted with heresy, and stained with like crimes, shalbe ge∣uen none honor nor dignity, nether shall they beare anye office in the common wealth. Unlesse a man bring with him a testimoniall from the Curate of the Church, where he dwelt last, let him not be suffered to haue any habitation or dwelling. For suche ought to be had for suspected. That the gouernors of peace, and all other oure Clients, euery man in his prouince, inquire diligently for such as shall breake this law, and that they assist the inquisitoures and ec∣clesiasticall iudges, so that those whiche be founde culpable, maye suffer according to che fourme prescribed: excepte they so do, they shall suffer for it at oure pleasure. Let the common Proctoure also know, whether they do their duetie, and if they shalbe found negli∣gent, let him commaund them to come to iudgement, and if it shall appeare that they haue offended, let them either be depriued of theyr office, or otherwise punished, as shalbe thought expedient. Besides this, let all Bishops, Archdeacons, and Abbots with such other like Prelates, search with all diligence, if any of the Clear∣gy be infect with this disease, and punishe it extremely. They that know any man defiled with this Pestilence, or in what places the Heretickes lurcke and frequent, let them presente them immediat∣ly, vnlesse they do so, to suffer the same punishment that the others should. The promotour, if the accusation be not false, shal haue the Rewards for promotours one half of his goodes. Which goodes in dede shall not exceade the summe of vi .C. crownes. For whatsoeuer shalbe aboue this sōme, the tenth part therof shalbe alotted vnto him. He that shal detect to thinquisitour priuy conticles, although he were of theyr Counsell, shall not be punished, so that he thinke well of Religion, and from henceforth refraine theyr company: but he that shall present them, being not of their followship, shalbe rewarded, as before is said, let the punishments, yt we haue appoynted, be so executed accordingly nether shall it lie in any mans power to alter or mitigate the same, which we perceiue is oftentimes done, for the iudges that offende herein, shal not escape vnpunished. They that being accused of he∣resy, and cited to appere haue fled, and haue bene after outlawed, whan they haue heard that the cōpanions of their offences be dead, are wont to make sute, that they may be suffred to make their pur∣gation, for so much as they suppose, how the crime can no more be proued, & by this meanes it chaunceth, that retourning again, they sow abrode false doctrin and errors: but that the same be in no wise done, it is for the cōmon profit. Wherfore we cōmaund, yt ther be no place geuen to their requests, but yt al such, as after they wer cited haue appered, but sought to saue thē selues by fleing, shalbe accōted for conuictes, & persons condemned. They that shal make any sute
for suspected, fled, banished, or for Anabaptistes, let them be taken for supporters of heretikes. And that iudges & gouernors receiue none such into fauor, vnles it be ether by the permissiō of vs, or of ye Quenes sister. Those yt shal do otherwise, shalbe depriued of theyr A proclama∣tion for prin¦ters. gouernmēt. That no printers or bokesellers, do print, sel, or vtter a¦ny thing cōcerning the scripture, but by theyr aduise & consent, vnto whō this charge is cōmitted: & for so much as there is a register of bokes, which thuniuersity of Louain hath reiected, let ye stationers haue ye same hāged vp in their shops in opē sight, least after, either thē selues or the biers, plead ignorance: again yt they haue another register of al theyr bokes, he yt wil not obey shal lose an C. crowns. Finally yt no man take any children to teach, vnles it be through ye permission of the magistrat, and the chief minister of the church au¦thorised, & that he teach or instruct the youth in nothing, but accor∣ding to the form prescribed by the deuines of Louaine. When this decre was proclamed, many were sore astonied, especially the high duch & English marchants, which occupy the traffick of marchan∣dise in themperors townes & countries, especially at Andwarpe a great nōbre. Wherfore they wer of this mind, yt vnles the decre wer mitigated, thei wold remoue to another place: yea mani of thē shut¦ting vp their shops purposed to depart, for thauoyding of ye dāger. The Senate of Andwarp also, & thother citezens ther, which saw what a wōderful losse this wold be to thē, wer in a great perplexi∣ty: & Andwarp a∣stonied at the Emperors proclamatiō whē thinquisitors came thither, they wtstode thē withal theyr indeuor, & riding to the Lady regēt, declare vnto her, what a losse it shuld be not to thē only, but also to the whole region, if this decre take place. Wherfore the matter was, in the same city, for ye which the decre was chiefly made, by reasō of sōdry natiōs & people there, appesed for yt time. This decre being after trāslated into the highe duch tōg, Matthie Flacie, of whō mētiō is made in ye former boke, setteth forth, & most sharply tāteth Iselebie, & the Adiaphoristes, as he termeth thē, which assay to perswade the people, as though reli∣giō wer not impugned. But the form of inquisition, which they cal an instructiō, conteineth a most ample authority. For it is lawfull for them to cal before thē not only al priuate persons, but the magi∣strates thē selues also, and to compel them by an oth to answere to interrogatories, & to vtter what they know. And the questions cō∣cerning religion are in nombre. xxxviii, wherin such ar are presen∣ted or suspected be examined, & amōgs others, whether they beleue the sacrifice of the masse to be auailable for the dead, so yt they may be deliuered hereby from the pains of purgatory: whether they be∣leue yt S Peter was prince of thapostles, Uicar of Christ, & high bishop of the church of Rome, and yt those also are to be accōpted for
which do lawfully succede in his chaire: whether they beleue that it is lawful to forsake thobedience of the high bishop, being nether he¦riticke nor Scismatick: whether they beleue that Matrimony pri∣uely cōtracted, is lawful: whether they beleue the Lutherans, Bu∣ceranes, and suche others to be of the Churche. The Cardinals of Fraunce remaind at Rome a certain space, after that Iuly was e∣lected: The death of the cardinall of Lorayne. and than they return home again. Howbeit by the way, whē he was come now into Fraunce before he had sene the Kinge, died Ihon Cardinall of Lorayne, who had bene all his life time a most pleasaunt gest and companion with king Fraunces. By this occa∣sion Robert Lenoncourt Cardinall, obtained the Bishopprycke of Mentz, who was afterward supposed to haue holpen greatly, that the towne of Metz, a city of thempire, came into the hands of Hēry the french king, as hereafter shalbe declared. In the last session at Trent, was decreed amōgs other things, that such as had mo Bi∣shopprickes than one, should kepe of them which they list, & forgoe the rest, as before in the .xix. boke is specified: Neuertheles, so long as Paul liued, the thing was not put in executiō: but whē this mā was made bishop, the cardinals of Fraūce obeyed it in dede in apa∣rence, but to no losse of theyrs. For wheras diuers of thē had ii. or iii bishoppricks, & many others aspired to yt dignity, by an exchāge made, they permitted some other to inioye one, and in steade of one bishoppricke, which they left, they had of them again many abbot∣ships, or such other like promoitōs. In the month of Iuly, Adolphe bishop of Colon, making a composition with the Senate, entreth The archby∣shop of Col∣lon entreth the city with pompe. the city of Colon, with an exceading great pomp and train, hauing gotten together all his Clients, kinred and alies, yt they might ho∣nor him with theyr presence the same day. He was accompanied as they report, with ii .M. horse & aboue. And the duke of Cleue vere∣ly had brought him a notable bād of horsmē, he had lately a daugh¦ter born by his wife Mary, the daughter of king Ferdinando. Her Godmothers at the fount stone, where both the Emperors sisters, Elenore the French Quene, and Mary Quene of Hongary, and tharchbishop of Colon was her Godfather: but not long after ther arose a great dissention betwene the Duke and the Archbishop, a∣bout thecclesiasticall iurisdiction. The .xxvi. day of Iuly, the Em∣peror beginneth the counsel imperial at Auspurge. Wherin he pro∣poundeth of followynge the generall Counsel, of obseruing the de∣cre of religion, lately made at Auspurge, of punishinge rebelles, of restoryng the iurisdiction and goodes of the Church. This assēbly was armed also, albeit yt the state of things was sōwhat more qui∣et. The princes of Mentz and of Treuers were presente, the reast of thelectours sent ambassadours? Moreouer there were presente
Wuolfgāge master of Prusse, and the bishop of Wirciburge, Eistet Costintz, Auspurge, Trent, Cambray & Merseburge: and none of thother princes besides the duke of Bauier, & at the length also Hē¦ry the duke of Brūswick. The matter being debated, the most part The protes∣tation of D. Moris agaīst the counsell. were content, yt the counsel should be followed: but duke Moris by his deputies declareth yt he can allow the same none otherwise, vn∣lesse the whole matter from the beginninge may be retracted, & the deuines of the protestants not only heard, but yt they may also haue power to decide matters, yt the bishop of Rome do submit him self to the counsel, & not occupy the place of a iudge there, and that he re∣lease the bishops of their othe, to thintēt they may speke their mind frely. After this protestation of his was red opēly, his deputy wold haue had it recorded, as the manner & custom is, but the same was denied him, ye whole doing of such matters is in the power of tharch bishop of Mentz, chauncelour of thempire. Themperor afterward moued the bishop for a counsel. The seuenth day of August, the car∣dinall of Auspurge, in his Sermonne, inueighed soore againste The knaue∣ry of Spany∣ardes. the Lutheranes. And a few dayes after, certain Spanyardes, in mockery and contempt of the Citezens, which were than hearing ye Gospell preached, plaied certain partes in the church, in such sort, yt the matter was like to haue tourned to some great tumult. But at the comming of the Consull, the thing was by a goodly meane ap∣peased and quieted. About thend of the month of August, Granuel¦lan, The death of Granuellan. who came lately from Bezonse, a Towne in high Burgundie, to Auspurge, leaueth his life, not withoute themperoures greate heauines, as it is reported, he had succeded Marcurine, Castinarie Cardinal, as I shewed you in the .vii. boke, and by the space of xx. yeares had ben in chief authority, and was priuy in manner alone to all themperours secreat counsels and working. In whose place and function succeded his sonne Anthony, bishop of Arras, a man of great learning, who before in thabsēce of his father, was wōt to answer the matters of ye common welth, & was very familier with themperor. In the mene seasō Henry the duke of Brunswick laieth Duke Henry besiegeth the Citye of Brunswick. siege to ye city of Brunswick, to the which he had born great hatred these many yeres, for religiō, & for other things: & whan he had don theyr coūtry much harm by firing and spoiling, & yet could not win the city, through the mediatiō of certen, themperor cōmādeth both partes to leue theyr war, and pleade theyr cause before him. Thys was in the month of Septembre. The Emperours army besieged than Affrick, a towne of Barbarie, some men suppose it to be Lep∣tis, howbeit Liuie maketh also mentiō of ye city of Affricanes: that city kept Dracutus a notable Archpirate, who had lately ioyned hī Dracutus an archpirate. self with the Turke. Themperor had cōmitted the chiefe gouerne∣nient
to the Uiceroy of Sicilie. Who after he had beaten the town wyth his ordenaunce a certain time, being certified that Dragutus was comming with a newe army, saw he had nede to make haste. Wherfore the tenth day of Septembre, he geueth the assault bothe by sea and land, and within a fewe houres space, taketh it by force. The Knightes of the Rhodes, that were vpon the sea, did thempe∣ror that day good seruice: but the Spaniards which fought by lād, The taking of the city of Africa. and excelled in nombre, whan the City was taken, had the mooste part of the spoyle. The nombre of the prysoners was great, aboute an .viii. thousand: which being put into Shippes, were led awaye captiue into Sicilie, Sardinie, and to other places. The situation of the city, is said to be very pleasant, by reason of grene medowes A goodlye si∣tuatiō of the same. and hilles set with Oliues & palme trees, and fair springes of wa∣ter. Not far from thence is reported to be a goodlye corne Country, which with a most ample increse yeldeth again to the plowmē that it hath receiued. Cosmus the duke of Florence sent themperor men in this war vnder the conduit of Iordane Ursine, & Alastor Bali∣on. For because winter was now at hand, and vitaile coulde not be prouided, the Uiceroy, leauing there a garrison of Spaniards, re∣tourneth with his army into Sicilie: Dragutus fled to the Turke, traueling to Constantinople. This thing was thoccasion of a new warre, which the Turke attempted afterward, not only againste ye Emperour, but also against King Fardinando. Whan themperour had commaunded Duke Henry, and the Senate of Brunswick to lay a side their weapons, their armies were discharged on bothe parties: but all those forces afterwarde, George Duke of Megel∣burge, the sonne of Albarte, a younge man that had serued Duke Henry, allured vnto him. The cleargy of Maidenburge, and Pre∣lates of the head church, most of them gentlemen borne, who were chiefly offended with the city, had waged him with great rewards & promesses, as it is reported, that through his aide they might a∣uenge thē selues, but this do they deny, as shallbe declared hereaf∣ter. And their archbishop Ihō Alberte was lately departed: wher∣fore they promised him ye gouernment of ye hole prouince, in case he could subdue it, & by wrytings laid to pledge to him iii. principal ca¦stels. Thus he marching first through ye coūtry of Halberstat, cam after into ye prouince of Maidenburge, & ther practising slaughter, spoyling & burning, surpriseth the towne of Wancelebe, spoyleth & setteth it on fire: and whan he had there attēpted the castel in vain, & lost diuers of his mē, he marcheth forward, & which way so euer he wēt, did exceding much harm. Wherfore ye people of the country & villages, whē they saw their goodes & cattel taken and driuen a∣way, come to ye Senate of Maidēburge, crauing their aid & succor
and declare how they wyll refuse no peryl nor coste herein. The Senate therfore assigned them a daye, wherin they shoulde be all in a redines: That was the .xxi. daye of September. Than went out of Maydenburg together with the husband men the citezens iointly and the soldiours of the garrysons, with thre bandes of horsemen, with field pieces and other furniture, and reste that night two myles from the citie. In the mornyng be∣fore daye lyght, auauncing their campe, they marche streight∣waye towardes their ennemie, and when they came into his syght, put them selues in order of battell. In the forewarde, where was thought moste daunger, stode the citezens and sol∣diours: After them were placed the countrie people. The Duke of Megelburge perceyuing this order, sodenly tournyng about his rankes, inuadeth the husbandmen, a kynde of people ney∣ther well armed, nor exercised in feates of warre, and that vpō suche a soden, that he gaue the charge, before the others coulde tourne them selues, with their ordenaunce, or be able to re∣scewe them. So therfore they casting awaye their weapons, The ouer∣throwe of ye Maidenbur∣gians. fled, who myght runne fastest, and breaking the rankes of their fellowes, make the waye open for the ennemy to get the victo∣ry. The moste part of thē all, what at the geuing of the charge, and what after in the chase were slayne. Of the citezens and soldiours were not many loste, but dyuers taken. The gunnes, carriage and al warlyke furniture came into the handes of the ennemies. In the meane season the Emperour was very in∣stant, that both decrees made at Auspurge, should be obserued, and maketh a greuous complaynt of the cities of Maydēburg and Breme. For they only of all the cities remayned constant, albeit the Bremers were not outlawed. But the Princes make intercession, and require that they myght haue the hearyng of the matter. And whan the Emperour had cōsented, they adresse their letters to eyther citie, the .xxii. daye of September and The princes letters to thē of Mayden∣burg. cite them to appere at Auspurge the second day of Nouember, and by saufe conduicte to come aunswere in their cause, sen∣dyng their Ambassadours with full power and authoritie to conclude. There was a certen woman at Auspurge, a citezen of the towne, who seing the priest passe by, who caried the hoste to A woman in perill for a light worde. a sycke man, with lyght borne before him as the maner is, mar¦uelyng therat demaunded of hym, why he caried that lyght at noooe dayes? For so saying she was apprehended, and in great daunger of her lyfe, but through the great intreaty of women, and finally at the intercession of the Emperours syster beyng pardoned of her lyfe, was bannyshed.
For Mary Quene of Hungary Regent of Flaunders, was come thither, boeth for other matters and also for this cause chiefly, that the proclamation lately set forth in Flaūders and those parties myght be mitigated. For vnlesse it were so, she sayde it would come to passe, that Andwarpe, whiche is nowe the beste frequented marte towne in the whole worlde, shoulde fall in decaye and lose her former beautie. Moreouer that ther was great daunger in all places of an iusurrection, in case the thinge should be put in execution. The Emperour very hardly acconsented at the laste, and altering those thinges that con∣cerned marchauntes straungers, taketh away the name of in∣quisitione abhorred The procla∣mation for religion is mitigated. of all men, the residue he commaundeth to take place & to be obserued. Whylest the letters were cōueyed to the Bremers & thē of Maidēburg, the Princes & states inquire of the Emperour, vpon what condicions he will accorde with them. Wherfore he propoundeth for the Bremers these, that they submit them selues vnto his power, humbly craue pardō, forsake al leagues, & make no cōfederacy wherin he & his whole familie be not comprised. That they obey the chāber imperial, and be contributaries to the charges therof for their portion. That they agre with their Archbishop, if they can not, to stand to the arbitrement of suche Umperes as he shal appoint. That they accorde also with the whole clergie. That they restore the munition taken from Duke Erricke, and recompence hym for the harmes done. That none within their iurisdiction serue in the warres against him. That they paie vnto him an hondreth and fiftie thousand crownes, and deliuer .xxiiii. pieces of orde∣naunce furnished. That they obeye the decree of the former cō∣uention, and suche as shalbe now decreed. And to them of May denburg, he imposeth in maner the same lawes. This was ad∣ded moreouer, that they should aunswere all men to the lawe, and obeye the sentence geuen. That from the tyme of theyr re∣bellion, they commence no action against any man. That they Rase their fortifications and bulwarkes. That they receyue into their citie hym and his Lieftenauntes, at any tyme, with what power someuer they brynge, without any condicion. That they paye two hondreth thousande crownes. That the publication of theyr goodes be ratified, and the Possessours thereof not disturbed. The reporte of the battell of May∣denburge, was immediatly sowen abroade farre and nere, and within syxe dayes was brought to the Emperour at Auspurg. And where as many men thought, they had now bene almoste vndone, beholde, they publyshe a wrytynge the fyrste daye of
October, wherin they recite the whole matter, and saye that they haue not lost aboue two hondreth of their Citezens and souldiours. And they whiche appered to nede comfort, do them selues confirme others. For God say thei, would by this meane trie our constancie. And of his infinite goodnes towardes vs, we doubt nothing. And albeit it be his will, that we shal thus wholy perish & be oppressed, yet can there be no euil therin. For how much better were it, to abide thextreme peril, than forsa∣king the profession of the truth, to reuolte to the Romish Anti∣christ? For such as either for feare, or for a certen couetousnes & ambition do relent, & submit them selues to the coūsel of Trēt, and do admit & allowe that wicked decree made at Auspurge, there is no doubt, but that they, both in this life, & in the life e∣uerlasting, shall suffer most greuous tourmentes, except they re¦tourne to amendemēt. We know also that God hath appointed our aduersaries boundes & limites, which they shall not passe. Wherfore we desire all men, that they wold ioyne their praiers with ours, & attempt no warre against vs. For if we be once op¦pressed, the selfesame calamitie shall redounde vnto al Germa∣ny without any respect. And seing the case standeth thus, cer∣tenly the very zeale, loue, and preseruation of our natiue coun∣trey, require this of you, that you should with your ayde assiste vs, whiche for the doctrine of ye Gospel are afflicted. After they of Maydenburg had this ouerthrowe, incontinently very ma∣ny prepare them selues vnto warre. And amōges others Duke Maurice, the Electour of Brandenburg, with his cosyn Mar∣ques Forces bent against May¦denburg. Albert, and Henry Duke of Brunswicke. Moreouer the whole Nobilitie were also called vpon to bring horsemen. Ma¦ny supposed these forces to be leuied for this intent, that the Duke of Megelburge myght be expulsed out of the contrey. And at the first in deede certen would seme to haue taken ar∣mure for this cause, that he should not straie to farre. But whā they were all assembled, the eight daye of October marchyng forewarde, they incamped not farre from the citie, and the syxt daye after, at nyght, they runne forth with a great clamoure euen to the ditches and gates of the citie, to proue what the townes men coulde or durst doe. But they beyng repulsed with great shotte, loste many of theyr men. And as they retyred them selues to their Campe in hyghe displeasure, by the waye they set on fyre the poore Lazarus house, cleane contrary to the lawe of armes. The next daye they bickered agayne, whan the Townes men had made saley out. For they were full of cou∣rage, and where as dyuerse others, very many also of the No∣bilitie
repaired thither for the hatred of the Duke of Brun∣swick expert men of warre & worthy captaines. The .xii. day of October was truce taken & certen Ambassadours came into yt citie to treate a peace: But that was in vayne. Whylest these An Ambass∣ade againste them of May denburge. thinges were in working, yt states of tharchbishoprike of May∣denburg, amongst whom the clergie is principal, mete at Hale & the .xv. day of October sende Ambassadours to themperour & Princes of thempire. Whā they came to Auspurg the .x. day af∣ter, thei accuse moste heinously the senate & people of Mayden∣burg. And for somuch as Duke Maurice had taken vnto him ye power of yt Duke of Megelburg, & they had also thē selues sent him ayde, neither lyeth it in their abilitie: to susteyne so great charges long. They require, yt the Princes woulde finde some meane to quenche this common flame, & that so shortly as may be, how both the soldiours may be paide, & also those naughtie outlawes punished, tofore they recouer againe their strength & courage after their late ouerthrow. For els wil the souldiours reuolte to thennemy. Which thing wilbe a moste present daun∣ger, not only to thē that ar next thē, but to al other states also. For they intende nothing els, but the destruction of yt high Ma¦gistrate, & are wholy addicted to steire vp the people to rebelliō throughout the whole Empire. And they demaunded ayde of viii .M. fotemē, & a .M. & .CC. horsemē. The same day were red the aunswers of the Bremers, & senate of Maydenburg, which they made to yt Princes letters, as befor is said. And yt Bremers first declare how greatly thei alwaies haue desired peace, & the Emperours frendship, & how ofte they haue sued vnto him for peace, not only by their own Ambassadours, but also by yt king of Denmarke & the cities ye border on ye sea, & shew what strayte condicions were offered. And yet to thende it may appere, how much they esteme themperours authoritie, they saye, that they wil not refuse to sende Ambassadours, & promyse that if they may haue their Religion & libertie permitted thē, they can be contente to do any thing. And they of Maydēburg: how in the The answer of the May∣dēburgians. fourmer assemblie of the Empire, they made great sute to the Emperour for peace, but the condicions imposed were intolle∣rable, and saye that synce that tyme, they haue susteined great dammage, & where there was no ende nor measure of wrōges, they repulsed from them violēce, yet moderatly. And the cause of all the hatred to be that they couet to retayne the trew doc∣trine, and to flee Idolatrie. As concernynge the daye prescri∣bed, because they are commaunded to sende Ambassadours with full authoritie, they can fynde none that wyll go in that
sorte. Moreouer, how George Duke of Megelburg hath lately moued warre against them, and confesseth openly, that he doth this by the commaundement of the Emperour and thempyre. And nowe also the ennemies armie lieth before their citie. If they may be remoued, and their Ambassadours well assured, & shall and may reporte the demaūde vnto them, they refuse not that some be sent. About the beginning of Nouēber, dieth Ul∣riche The death of Ulriche Duke of Wirtemb. Duke of Wirtemberge, the suite hanging stil, that he had with kyng Ferdinādo, as before is sayd. His sonne Christopher succeded him. After the Emperour had receiued the aunswers of the two cities, concerning the Bremers, he thinketh good to tary for thē, in asmuch as they say, they wil come: But as tou∣ching them of Maydenburge, for so much as the thing is farre otherwyse than they say, and because they aunswer frowardly and in a maner contemptuously, he requireth them to procede in consulting, what is to be determided against them, & chiefly that they wold waie diligētly the requestes of the states of the Byshoprike, & herein do that thing whiche may both be for the commoditie & dignitie of thempyre. The Princes & states per∣ceiued right well, that there would neuer be pacificatiō made vpon these conditions. Wherfore thei require that more gentle thinges might be propounded. But the Emperour perseuereth A cruell de∣cree against the Magde∣burgians. in his purpose. So they at the length, albeit against many of their willes namely of the cities, assente vnto him, & promyse their ayde. But againe they desire the Emperour, first, that he him self would be cōtributory herunto. Secondly, that in case he can not be at this warre him selfe, he would appoint a ge∣nerall. That charge they cōmit to Duke Maurice, if it seme so good vnto him, & say that ye charges of this war must be borne of yt same mony, that is now already leuied for the vses & affay∣res of the cōmō weale. Themperour again replieth what char∣ges he had ben at in ye fourmer war, ye he might restore peace vn¦to Germany, & requireth thē to haue cōsideration therof. Tou∣ching Duke Maurice, he is wel pleased, & saieth yt he knoweth no man at this present time, yt is more fit for yt charge, than he, & that for diuerse causes. And yt the mony shuld be taken out of the cōmon treasury, he doth allow & permit, so yt so muche as is takē frō thēce, be within a certē time restored. For yt mony was not gathered for this vse. And he exhorteth thē to followe this thing wt their whole indeuour, yt they may be punished accor∣ding to their demerites. Which he sheweth may thus be don, if yt citie be inuironed wt a trēche & a bulwark made, & the siege cōti¦nued, til thei be subdued. For vnlesse yt licēcious & obstinat rebel¦lion
be repressed, they se how gret a daūger & shame it wilbe to thempire. Thus therfore Duke Maurice, whiche had busied him self herein as I said before, was by cōmon assēt made high. Duke Mau∣rice general of this war. generall of the warre. And for the charges of the war were ap∣pointed .lx. thousand crownes monethly, and an hōdreth thou∣sand crownes payed for the charges past. Concerning the coun¦sell, the Emperour affirmeth to the Princes, that it shalbe con∣tinued againe at Trent before Easter: For so doeth the Byshop promyse him. Yet doeth he in the meane season vrge the decree of Auspurge, and commaundeth them to declare the causes vn∣to hym, why those orders that were wrytten two yeares synce, of Religion, and reformation of the Clergie be not obserued? The Archebyshops Electours saye, howe they haue omitted no¦thing, and are yet wholy about the same. But the cause which letteth that they are not fully accomplished, is the exemptions and priuileges of certen. The deputes of the Electours absent, say they haue applied the thing diligently, but the long conti∣nuaunce of tyme, hath bene a hinderaunce. For this Religion can not so sodenly be plucked out of mens myndes, & that they had nede to be instructed, that men might by litle and litle ac∣custome them selues, who are thorowly perswaded, that thesa∣me decree dissenteth much from the holy Scriptures, that no∣thing can be violently altered without trouble and sedition. And if any man should cōstraine ye prechers to it, ther would no man serue in yt churche. For hardely can there any one be found that wyll abase him selfe hereunto, for the state of the syngle lyfe, and condition of the Lordes supper. The residue of Pryn∣ces and states of the Romyshe Religion, alledge these causes, yt The causes that the de∣cre is not ob¦serued. Scholes wherin yougth is not ryghtly instructed. The Mini∣sters of the churche that diswade the people from the same de∣cree. The want of priestes: The negligēce of Magistrates. And saye moreouer, that this thing is an hinderaūce, that many of the spiritualtie liue vitiously. Again, that many inuey & rayle vpon the decree made with bokes of reproche vnpunished. Iuly the Byshop of Rome being oft treated with by the Emperour, about the eight day of Nouember, sending forth his bulles, cal¦leth Pope Iuly somoneth a counsell. a coūsell, affirming it to be coincident to his office, to call and directe counsels. That he coueteth also to prouyde for the trāquillitie of Germany, which hath alwayes ben most obedi∣ēt to the church & Byshops of Rome, who in earth are Christes Uicars. Wherfore let all men repare to Trente, against the first day of May, whiche either by ryght, custome, or priuilege haue interest to be there, and suche as Paule the thirde hath called
before, what tyme he somoned the counsell in the same place: For that daye shall the counsell be there continued. And if it so Thei repare to Trent bē¦fore contem¦ned. fortune that either for age or sicknes or affayres of the commō¦wealth he can not himselfe be present, yet will he by his Lega∣tes, be president of the same. This bulle he sent after to them∣perour. Duke Maurice being made chiftayne, attempteth the thing with great force, and buylding vp certē bulwarkes, that the souldiours myght wynter therin, about thende of Nouem∣ber he assayleth the citie. Whiche citie is diuided into thre par∣tes. Maurice be∣segeth May∣denburg. Wherof one, whiche is called newe, he surpriseth by nyght, scalyng the walles and gates, and neither drumme went nor trompet blewe tofore he had brought in his souldiours. The citezens reised vp with the clamour, so many as were found in armure are put to the sworde, the rest being taken and spoiled, are expulsed. Wherfore they of the citie, to the intēt they might take away from the ennemy this commoditie, sendyng forth their souldiours, burne that part, that was theirs. Agayn: the other part, whiche is called Sudeburg, they sette on fyre also, receiuing the townes mē into the citie. About this tyme came Lazarus Schuendie, into the campe to Duke Maurice, that he myght in the Emperours name gyue his counsel. The same tyme was Erle Hedeck in Saxony, whome the Emperour had Hedeck and Mansfeld dis¦comsited by Duke Mau∣rice. outlawed two yeares past, as before is mentioned. He and Al∣bert Erle of Maunsfeld do leuie bandes of souldiours in the ci∣ties by the Sea coaste, to ayde them of Maydenburge. Duke Maurice therfore in the moneth of December, goeth vnto thē with part of his armie, and scattereth them, and allureth vnto him foure enseignes of the same men, and after also counte He decke, as you shall heare. The .ix. daye of December the Empe∣rour in a long proclamation, and with heinouse words inuei∣eth The Empe. proclamatiō against thē of Mayden∣burge. against them of Maydenburge, and commaundeth that no man ayde them, and straightly chargeth the Captains and sol∣diours, whiche be within the citie, that within fourtene daies after these letters be deliuered they departe out of the citie, & geue knowledge hereof vnto Duke Maurice, or in his absence to Lazare Schuendie. If they obeye, he promyseth pardon, if not, he appointeth extreme punishement. There was in the ci∣tie Albert Erle of Mansfelde, whome the Emperour in dede had not banyshed, but had tourned him out of al his possessiōs, what tyme he perseuered in the fidelitie and frendship of Iohn Friderick Duke of Saxon. Howe the Emperour left the Lant∣graue at Machline, taking his iourney to Auspurg, it is before declared. Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandenburge,
were earnest suters that he might be deliuered, but aunswere was made them, how not he only, but also his sonnes and coū∣sellours so demeane them selues that as yet he might not be de¦liuered. His kepers also said vnto him, how he should be caried into Spaine. Wherupon he requireth ayde of his sonnes, ad∣monishynge them of the faith and duty they owe vnto hym, & The Lant∣graues sōns sue for their father. commaundeth them to sue Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandenburg, that they yelde them selues prysoners accor∣ding to the forme of their obligation, and fulfill their promise. His sonnes obey him herein, and sending Ambassadours most earnestly and oft admonish and sue them. But they, one whyle ioyntly together, another whyle either of thē seuerally by him selfe, some tyme by messengers, sometime presently excuse the matter, and declare that it is not expedient either for them or for their father, that it should so be, & euer bring newe reasons, wherby they trust he may be deliuered without any daunger. Therfore they desire them to forbeare thē a whyle, and to geue them respite. But ye Emperour who before had moued the Lāt∣graue by Lirane, to deliuer those obligations, as is declared, whan he was further sued vnto, he sendeth Lazare Schuendie to his sonnes and counsellours, commaunding them not only from henceforth neither to cōmence action nor sue Duke Mau¦rice and the Marques of Brandēburg, but that also they sende vnto him all suche maner of wrytinges, & surcease their sute: vnlesse they obeye, he threateneth thē with the greatest punish∣ment that may be deuised: But that was yet in vayne. Moreo∣uer he releaseth by his letters the Princes bounde, and pronoū¦ceth them fre from that bonde. Wherfore whan the Lantgraue The Lant∣graues pur∣pose. sawe no hope, he was fully prefixed to make an escape if he might, and deuiseth sondry meanes with his seruauntes, whō he had sent for out of Hesse, some of them Gentlemen of good houses. But they being afrayd of the daunger, sought delayes. At the last he perswadeth two, Conrade Bredesten, and Iohn Rommelie, which all the waye from Hesse vnto Machlin layed post horses, whiche he might leape vpon and escape. But the matter came to light by a certen man of his, who had told one Frendely at Machlin, that within a fewe houres his maister shuld be at libertie. The same going from one to an other, was reported to the captaine of the garde, in the very same moment His deuise of fleing be∣wrayde. and instant that he should haue fled in. Than was al that mat∣ter dashed, and two of his seruauntes were slayne out of hand, others taken and beheaded, and he him selfe caried to a straiter pryson. The Emperour, when he knewe therof, toke it most dis∣pleasaūtly,
and wryting his letters to Duke Maurice and the Marques of Brandenburg, signifieth that this so bolde an en∣terpryse, apperteineth to the iniury of hym and his dominion, and saith he wil be sore auenged of them, that haue geuen him either aide or counsell herein. The copie of these letters they sende to William the Lantgraues sonne, and amongest other thynges they saye that in case there be any suche parte played from henceforth, they wyl stande no more bounde to them. Yet neuerthelesse Duke Maurice seuerally comforted them, and to deliuer their father, promyseth to spende not only his goodes but his life and bloud also. And than sayeth ther shalbe a tyme conuenient to yelde him selfe, whan the state of thinges shalbe suche, as the displeasures of certen are lesse to be feared. The .xix. daye of December, all the fotemen and horsemen of Maydenburge, that were not appointed to the watche, issue out of the citie at after midnight, that they might oppresse the The issuyng out, & victory of the May∣dēburgians. stoute courage of their ennemies in a vyllage not farre of. The enterpryse was very daungerous, for yt they must passe through theyr ennemies campe: But yet it chaunsed luckely, for before the ennemy could be armed, thei had taken the Uillage, and set it on fyre in diuers places. They had all put ouer their harnesse white shirtes, as the maner is in Camisado. So many of their ennemies as resisted wer slayn, which wer many noble gentle∣men. Diuerse fought out of the houses, but the same being set on fire, they were burnt. Uery many of ye Nobilitie wer taken, and immediatly brought into the citie, with two hōdreth and lx. horses. On the morrowe as sone as the daye appeared, they retired home warde, and by the way met a troupe of horsemen, whiche were led by the Duke of Megelburge, who at the laste The Duke of Megelb. takē prisoner geuing the charge, whan the horsemen pressed him before, and the fotemen gaue the onset at his back, was takē and brought into the citie, euen he, whiche had first begon the warre. In these dayes also came out of Spaine to Auspurg Maxi∣milian Marimilian cometh out of Spayne. of Austriche, the Emperours sonne in law, created king of Boheme in his absence, called home by his father king Fer∣dinando, betwene whom and the Emperour was than a great contention, about the succession of the Empire, for the whiche cause also the Emperour was sayde to haue sent for his syster Cōtentiō for the Empyre betwirte the Emperour & Ferdinando Mary, who retourned thither in the moneth of Ianuary, that she might be a meane, where she had departed from thence in September before. For the Emperour, who knewe what com∣moditie it were to annexe Germany to his inheritaunce, coue∣ted to establishe his sonne, whiche should reigne ouer so many
large and diuers Regions, with this as a sure fortresse. But kyng Ferdinādo hauing the same respect thought that nother his nor the expectation and commoditie of his children ought to be diminished herein. Moreouer Maximilian who was a Prince of great towardnes, & could speake sondry languages, especially the highe dutche, and in Prince like maners excelled, was very muche fauoured and beloued of all mē. Those letters wherby the counsell was denunciatour, as before I haue said, the Byshop promulgat at Rome at the latter ende of Decem∣ber. what things offend many In the whiche are many thynges whiche myght offende mens myndes, of the which sorte is that he sayth it is his part to gouerne counselles, that he calleth hym selfe Christes vicar, that he will haue the action continued, and not repeted from the beginning, that he chalengeth to him self the place and au¦thoritie of the president, that he semeth to call thither only mē of his own order. These thinges also the Emperour, whan the letters were deliuered hym, is sayde to haue noted right well, & to haue required of him, that suche thinges as were somwhat rough, might be altered, fearing, as it was thought, least the Germaines being affrayde of these thinges, as mariners be of Rockes, would either refuse the sommoning, or els fynde some let or delay in this busines, which he with so great labour had brought to passe. I wyll not affirme this to be true, and suche maner of coūselles ar wont to be kept secret. But if it be trwe, it is manifest, that he obteined nothyng. For the same fourme that I spake of, the Byshop published, not one worde altered. Yea there be some that suppose he dyd it of a sette pourpose, that he might feare awaye the Germaines from the counsell, that they should not come there, or if they came, he might haue them intrapped by certen snares. Certenly Paule the thirde, was reported to haue vsed this policie, as I haue sayde in the ix. boke, that after he had learned by his espialles, what ye Pro∣testauntes could beare and what they refused, calling than a counsell, he would vrge and propounde those thinges chiefly, where with he knewe their myndes to be moste offended, as a man may aso perceiue in this bull of Iulius, whiche is framed after that same of Paule the thirde. In these dayes, Duke Maurice and the Electour of Bran∣denburge, offer conditions of peace to them of Maydenburg, & Thei of Mai¦denburg are moued to rē∣der. requyre them to render them selues and shewe their fidelitie vnto them & to their Archebyshop. Thus if they wyll doe, they shalbe permitted to haue and retaine the Religiō and doctrine exhibited in times past at Auspurge, there shalbe nothing de∣minished
of their priuileges, lawes and lyberties, the fortifica∣tions also of the citie and goodes shal remayne safe, and no vio¦lence offered vnto any man. Moreouer they promyse to make intercession to the Emperour that he wyl abolysh the sentence of publication, verely vpon these conditions. That as other Princes and cities, so they also may humbly desire pardon, and deliuer him .xvi. pieces of ordenaunce, and an hondreth thou∣sand crownes, to the end they may inioye their goodes already confiscated. And that somme of mony they saye they will laye out and debource for them, that they restore vnto the Clergie their goodes: Concerning the hurte done on either syde, & tou∣chyng the habitation of the clergie, and ceremonies of the ca∣thedrall churche, they them selues will take order. And to the intent the Emperour may the easlier be perswaded, that a gar∣rison be receiued into their citie, tyll the Emperour haue con∣firmed the pacification, and the rest of the condicions shalbe ac¦complished. And that the soldiours shal do them no iniury, thei them selues wyll forsee. But in case the Emperour refuse these thinges, than wyll they haue out their souldiour immediatly, restoring vnto them their citie safe, and in euery point such as they founde it. But the Senate refused to make surrender or to receiue a power into the citie. In the moneth of December, the States of the Byshoprike of maydenburg, but thiefly the Clergie set forth a wrytinge in A writing of the Clergie against the citie. the vulgare tongue, against the Senate and people of Maydē∣burge, and saye howe they haue aunciently and by right apper¦teined to the iurisdiction of them and of the Archebishop, and that is to be proued by the letters of Otto the first Emperour. And many thinges saye they, haue they proudly and presump∣tuously done, chiefly against Burcarte and Gunther, Archeby∣shops, but being reduced to their dutie, they haue suffered con∣digne punishment, as by histories it may be declared. But in ye tyme that Ernest of the house of Saxon, and Albert of Bran∣denburge were Byshops, a composition was made for all con∣trouersies, but they kept not conuenauntes. And so ofte as the Byshops by the common assent of the other states decreed any thyng for the profit of the common wealth, they alwayes drew backwarde, and sought the meane, howe they myght rule the rest. And what tyme the Cardinall of Mentz had reciued Iohn Albert his cosyn to be his coadiutour: They would not only al¦lowe the same, but also toke from hym the title and honour due vnto hym, although they were oftentymes spoken to for ye same. And agayne whan he had succeded in the Byshopryke af∣ter
the death of Cardinal Albert, they would neither take hym for their Byshop nor geue hym their fidelitie, and herein perse∣uered so longe as he liued, albeit noble men ofte times intrea∣ted therin. And this did they for this intent, that they myght obteine the gouernment, whiche may easely appere vnto any man, that wyll consyder their doinges. And albeit that in boo∣kes set forth, to the intent to reyse a commotion, they go about to perswade the people, as though they had nothing offended, as though they were clerely faultles, as though they stoode in daūger for the truth sake only, and for Religiō, but the matter is far otherwyse. For their Religion hath had no let nordistur∣baunce, although thei possessed yt churches of our Iurisdiction. Their actes against the Clergie. And for so much as they sayd how they would aunswer it in a lawful coūsell, we suffered all thinges patiently. But they not content therwith, made a conspiracie, & entring into a league, whiche thing was not lawfull for them to doe, but by our con∣sent and the Archebyshoppes, would haue inforced vs to theyr Religion. Wherof it doth well appere that they sought not re∣ligion, but the goodes of the churche. And yt this was wrought that they might vnder some honest pretence couer and cloke their treason and rebellion. Full many seditious thinges haue thei wrought against the Emperour and states of the Empire, neither can all be recited, but we shall touche those thynges whiche properly apperteine vnto vs. And foure yeares past, breakyng their faith and conuenauntes wherby they are boūd to vs. Thei gaue vs the defiaunce, and entring into our houses toke our goodes and expulsed vs, some also they cast in prison, wherof some are dead and the rest doe remaine captiue at thys present. Than bete they down our houses euen with the groūd and brought our townes, landes, and gouernmētes into their subiection. And fortifiyng their citie strongly, that they might the more safely rebelle, they imposed to the commō people pay∣ment of mony monethly, and certen other charges. The chur∣ches and houses of Religion partly they rased and partly defa∣ced, and casting downe the belles out of ye steples, made gunnes of them, and toke vp the dead bodies not only of monkes and priestes, but also of Noble men, and cast them vpon their ram∣pares. Images, aultars, and grauestones, they haue cowched & layde in their walles. In the churches that were standing, thei haue put downe all Gods seruice. What ornamētes or precious Iwelles, what wrytinges or monumentes so euer they founde in churches, they spoiled, and beating the priestes and other mi¦nisters of the churche with their fistes and scourges, droue thē
out of the holy places, yea from the very aultars. They haue in sondry places exacted new tributes, cleane contrary to the cu∣stome of the countrey. Yea they haue broken down in their fu∣ry, the sepulchre of our founder great Otto the Emperour. And these be domestical euils. But not contented herewith they in∣uaded the byshoprike of Halberstate, & there spoyling the Col∣lege of Hamersleb, & plucking the priestes yt were saying masse, from the aultars, some they woūded, & some they stewe, and pol¦luting all thinges hallowed, trode the hoste consecrated vnder their feete. After disguising them selues in Monkes apparell, whan they had done many thinges in great oultrage & mocke∣rie: they returned home loden with spoyles & boties. And a cer∣ten wall or rampare of yt countrey, that was made with a very gret cost, & was right necessary in those parties, they cast down without any cause, burning & cutting vp the bridges that no mā might passe. Moreouer they haue sought to take away our liues, as they do also at this presēt, insomuch ye we can neither remaine in our own houses, nor with our frēdes, without gret daunger, and whome they suspected to geue vs lodgyng, they would breake into their houses by night, take their goodes, & cary away diuers of the nobilitie captiue, whom they also put vpon the racke. Yea they haue spoyled Noble matrones & vir∣gins, & striped them out of their apparel, & so euil intreated thē that thei haue brought them in daunger of their life, and haue not kept their handes also frō yonge babes & children. Briefly we suppose, that there is not the like example of crueltie sene amongest the Turkes. And if any man wold make an estimate aswel of those goodes that they haue gotten of ours, as also of the harmes done vs: he shal finde it at yt least to a mount aboue viii .C. M. crownes. To speake nothing in the meane season of the contumelious reproches & raylinges, of ye famous libels & picturs which they haue set forth in contēpt & mockery of thē∣perour & states imperial, & of the iniuries also, which we haue susteined fully now xxvii. yeares. For they haue cast stones at vs, & throwen vpon vs the filthe of the stretes, and as we haue gone through the citie, haue oftētimes made a clamorous out∣irie against vs, and driuen vs from place to place, many tymes also in the nyght they haue set our houses and gates a fyre, & with stones broken our glase wyndowes. Finally: no kynde of outrage hath bene of thē omitted. And foure yeres since, ye xxvi day of Iuly, whā at ye request of yt consuls we assembled in our college, they required of vs, first that we shuld professe the same religion yt they did. Secōdly, yt towardes the furniture of ye war
within eight dayes we should paye .xx. thousand crownes. Af¦ter this, entring into the churche, and the citezens reparinge thither, thruste out the Priestes by violence, and shut vp the churche dores, and demaunde of the inferiour sorte of priestes a great some of mony, and when they wer not able to pay it, wer driuen out of the citie into exile. After the selfe same sorte also haue they handled the rest of the clergie, entring vpon all their landes and goodes. In the whiche thing verely, they haue not only transgressed the lawes both of God and man, but also bro¦ken conuenauntes and their faith geuen. For we are their Me¦gistrates, and they may chiefly thanke vs both for their landes & goodes. And what time lately George Duke of Megelburge, had interteined those forces whiche had defended and also bese¦ged the citie of Brūswick, in nomber about thre thousand, and without our knowledge, marched through the coūtrie of May denburg and Halberstat. They through a wonderful presump∣tion issued out of the citie, of this intent and purpose, that af∣ter they had first discomfited the ennemy, they might bend the whole force and brunt of the war against vs, yea vtterly to di∣stroye vs. For they had two tunnes full of haltars, and had hi∣red certen hangmen with swordes, that some thei might hāge, and head other some. Howbeit, through the goodnes of God, it chaunced far otherwyse. For where they wer an eight thousād men, they were discomfited, and slayne aboue two thousand, & The slaugh∣ter of the ci∣tezens. amongst these were many innocēt people, whom they had part¦ly by force, partly by flattery allured vnto thē, & eight ensignes taken, & al their munition & furniture. And they goe about to ascribe the cause of this warre vnto vs, & say how the Duke of Megelburg moued warre through our impulsion: But that is false. For both oftētimes before, & also after the battel, we sent Ambassadours for peace, and wishe for non other thing at this tyme, than that they being reconciled to themperour, woulde restore vnto vs our olde tranquillitie and quietnes. But for so muche as they refuse all peaceable wayes, and deteyne by force and iniurie our castels, townes and villages, we are driuen to seke some meane, wherby we may recouer the same. Now such thynges as they inferre and alledge for their purgation, be all forged and fained, as it is commonly knowen. For we haue not disturbed or hindred their religiō. And whan lately the most no¦ble Princes Duke Maurice & the lectour of Brandēburg offred them reasonable cōditiōs, they proudly reiected thē, & making a salee out in the truce time, assaulted by night a certen aūciēt gentleman at home in his owne house, which had done thē no
displeasure, and being a slepe in his bed at their cōming, whan he had hardly escaped awaye half naked, rauening and distroy∣ing his goodes, they spoyled his wyfe and chyldren of all theyr apparell, and threatening them ofte with death, left thē starck naked, in so muche that one of the Nobilitie comming thither by chaunce, couered the woman with his owne garment. Cer∣tenly what oultrage they dyd that nyghte, can not with fewe wordes be expressed. They haue also made their aduaunt open∣ly, that we may loke for restitution in vayne. For they be so highly auaunced with our landes and goodes, that they haue accustomed them selues to a finer kynd of lyfe, neither can they be easely brought to render agayne other mens goodes. And where as the matter is thus, and seing they adds vnto the in∣iuries of the former yeares contempt also, and are vtterly bene vpon our distruction, we could not but recite these worthy ac∣tes of theirs, though somewhat briefly. Wherfore if meanes be founde now to reduce thē agayne to their dutie, no man ought to maruell therat. For who soeuer they be that loue this ciuile and common societie of men, can not chose but be of stomake a∣gainst them, muche lesse ought to succour and aide them. After the same sort had thei accused them a litle before sending their Ambassadours to Torge, where than Duke Maurice helde assē¦blies concerning the same warre. But not many dayes after, in the same moneth, the Senate maketh answer by opon wry∣tinge. Howe they suppose that all the states of the Byshoprike do not make this complaint of them, but that it procedeth alto¦gether The answer of yt citezens of the clergie, for it greueth them say they, that the Go∣spell is taught sincerely amongest vs, that their wickednes is disclosed, and their dignitie decayed. This is the chief cause of all hatred. These thinges haue pricked thē forwarde, to accuse vs falsely to the Emperour, that beyng by him once outlawed, we myght be so muche the more subiecte to iniury. Assuredly we haue offende the Emperour in nothing, and inioying our religion and libertie, there is nothing but he may haue at our handes. We be in dede bounde to the Archbyshop of this citie: But yet vpon certen conditions, that they shall not disturbe vs in our liberties, those conditions haue we not broken: But our aduersaries counselled the Archebyshop Iohn Albert, that he should demaunde certen newe thynges that were not accu∣stomed. And therfore refused we to geue him our fidelitie. Yet is there no great cause why they should alledge hym: For they were not faithful to him them selues, & it greued them, what tyme in former yeares they sawe the waye prepared for hym
to be Archebyshop. For they had rather haue had him excluded: But vnto them are not we subiect, nor bounde in any point. So longe as the conuenauntes of former time were obserued, we refused no kinde of dutie. But after that they swarued from the same, we resisted, & hereof grewe sondry displeasures. And verely in these latter yeares, whan new wayes were inuented to exacte mony in this prouince, we spake against it in opē assē¦blies, & declared how this was not vsed by byshops of former time, although it was al in uayn. For diuers of ye states & chief¦ly the clergie had a great part of that pray. This is yt froward∣nes that they obiect against vs. They went out of the citie but Why yt cler¦gle forsoke yt citie. of their owne accorded, and incensed with a certen pryde, whan they sawe the Duke of Saxon & the Lātgraue subdued. For than they supposed how the tyme was come, wherin they might accomplishe their mynde, obteine gouernment, & come to that their filthy kinde of life, certēly we did not expulse thē. And albeit that the preachers in their sermons, reproue their abhominable liuing, yet dwelt they safely amongest vs many yeares, and euen now lately certen of them did inhabite the ci∣tie. And if we had bene disposed to haue wrought any violēce against them, it was not harde to be done: But we attempted nothing. And whan the state of our thinges was such, that we were constraimed to feare the power of our ennemie, we called together the fellowes of the cathedral church. And for so much as the light of the Gospel is reuealed, and God also requireth the profession of the same, we requyred them dilligently, as we had doue many tymes before, that they them selues woulde choyse some experte Diuine, whiche myght teache Goddes worde in the Cathedrall churche. For the same were boeth of it selfe very Godly, and wold also helpe greatly to increase mu∣tuall loue and beneuolence betwene them and the citezens. And where as they refused, we our selues prouided the thyng. And because the ennemie was at hande and had already inua∣ded our limites, we requyred of them, that they would paye vs a certen somme of mony, that they should sende no letters out of the citie, that they should remayne with vs, and inioye their owne possessions. But they not long after departed out of the citie, and beyng after requyred of vs, to sende theyr Ambassa∣dours at a certen day to Salsie, with whome we might treate, they proudely reiected the talke. Wherfore whan they vttered their malice and spitefull hatred against vs, we were also con∣streyned to requite them with the lyke. For in case they had re∣mayned with vs, all this trouble myght haue bene auopded.
But they burned in malice against vs, and many times to our distruction forged new diuises, so must we of necessitie take ar∣mure for our own defence. For vnlesse we had taken their tow∣nes & villages, there had bene a place of refuge left for the enne my. And seing they be the reuenewes of the church of Mayden burg, & not theirs which persecute ye church, they may be right∣ly imployed to the defence of religion against false doctrine & idolatrie: Neither doeth the thing want examples of fourmer tyme. Themperour hath in dede outlawed vs, but by no desert of ours, as we haue heretofore oftener than once declared. And this fortune or state is common to vs with the Prophes, Apost¦les, All Godly folke are af∣flicted for pro¦sessinge the veritie. & finally with Christe him selfe, who for the profession of yt truthe were afflicted, as seditiouse, rebelles, and moste hurt full men of all others. We haue intreated the Emperour cōcerning our religion & liberties, but hitherto we labour in vayne, & to what ende belonge all their deuises, in our former wrytinges we haue sufficiently declared, verely the thing it self speaketh, that this is ment only, how wicked papistrie may be restored. This controuersie hath oftentimes bene brought to a cōmuni∣cation, and certen conuētions haue ben had for the same cause, but in the principall pointes we neuer were satisfied, for that thambassadours sayd, how their cōmission stretched not so far. Assuredly it greueth vs & that exceadingly, if any man shuld su∣steyne any dāmage for our cause: But yet such as are godlymē, we doubt not, but they will thinke as we doe, & will iudge all thinges to be suffered rather, than the confession of the truthe All thynges must be suf∣fered for the truthes sake shuld be forsakn. For seing Christ hath so lōg before prophecied of the incōmodities that insue vpō this profession, & hath also appointed euerlasting rewardes for them, that leaue their wy∣ues, chyldren and possessions for his sake, why do we not truste to these certen and large promesses? Certenly they that relent for feare of their owne daunger, and feare displeasures, those procure vnto them selues euerlastyng damnation, vnlesse they repente. That thing whiche our aduersaries impute vnto vs, may be rightly ascribed vnto them: For they lyue a fylthie, sha∣mefull, and a beastly lyfe, and which places as thei beare rule, there can the citezens very hardly desende from them the cha∣stitie of their wyues and daughters. We toke of the commons a litle monie, and not with suche an extremitie, as they fayne we dyd. Unto that whiche they speake of the custome, auns∣were myght be made, yf they had spoken more playnly. The Rampare wherof they make mention, whiche yet belongeth nothyng to them, we cut a sonder for a commune commoditie.
For through the meanes therof many tymes hath hurte bene done in our countrey, and whan thei had taken their botie, the spoylers were wont to escape that waye, and to retyre them sel¦ues out of daunger. Theycrie out that we haue intreated euill the Gentlemen that are our neighbours. But what so euer we haue done in that behalfe, we haue bene constreyned to doe it, whan we had a yeare and more suffered the iniuries of many. That whiche they saye concerning women and maydens, we vtterlye denie: such of the Nobilitie as were taken prysoners: we released with their seruaunts, without raunsome, and the matter was quieted emongest vs by cōposition. They enlarge exceadinglye, the accoumpte of the harmes done, and name it to be eight hondreth thousand crownes. What if we shuld shew againe into how much mysery thei haue brought vs? Pictures & suche other thinges haue bene set forth priuely in mo places then one, but al the blame is layd on vs. Where as for certentie we haue straightly commaunded, by setting vp letters openly, that no man should attempte to do any thyng presumptuously against the Emperour, or any other Prince. And certen also haue therfore bene punished. There haue bene other bookes al¦so set forth amongest vs, we denie not, wherin both Idolatrie is impugned, and many mens consciences erected. We confesse that we had an ouerthrowe, the good wyll of God being so, not vtterly to distroye vs, but to alure vs to the amendemēt of life. Certenly thei died honestly and Godly, for the glory of Gods ho¦ly name, and preseruation of the common wealth. And we God woun∣deth & hea∣leth. doubt not, but God when he seeth tyme, will mercifully loke vpon our affliction, and also punishe our aduersaries. Neither chaunced this thing by fortune, as they pretende. For they in∣tised hereunto George Duke of Megelburg, with large giftes and promesses. And yet in the meane tyme through a crafty po∣licie, they called the other states of the byshopryke to Stasfort, as it were to consulte, by what meanes they might driue those robbers, as they themselues than called them, out of their cosi∣trie. For it is to be proued by their own letters that they hired soldiours, yea they boaste and glory, that they care not greatly for common hurte and dammage. For beit that they susteyne some losse and hinderaunce, yet saye they howe the lande and grounde remaineth in their possessiō. What time therfore word was brought vs, that the towne Wanslebe was by them soden¦ly taken, spoyled and brent, a great nomber also of villages di∣stroyed, in so muche that there came rūning vnto vs out of the countrey husband men, women, and maidens, with plentie of
teares desiring our aids, we could not assuredly fayle thē. And although the thing had no good successe, yet doubt we not, but that we did God thanckfull seruice. And now where they saye to pike a thanke, that our intent was to oppresse the nobilitie and states of this Byshoprike, it is a starhe lie, and can not be proued. For we haue euerntore honoured the Nobilitie: But if we haue indammaged suche as haue done violēce toward our men, as they haue passed by to and fro, who is so vnreasonable a iudge that will impute that thing vnto vs, as a crime blame worthy? Touching that they reporte of the swordes founde after the battell, is a fained thing: As for the haltars & collars we denie not. For the vse of thē was right necessary for our wa¦gons and other cariage, as it is manifest. The condicions of peace, that were offered by Duke Maurice & the Marques of Brandenburg, we could not admit for causes moste weightie. For in case we had yelded, & receiued a power, it is easy to vn∣derstande, what should haue bene the state both of Religiō and the common wealth also. God of his infinite mercy hath ope∣ned vnto vs the knowledge of his Gospel: Whom we befeche to graunt vnto vs this so great a benefite perpetually, but those whiche promise vs assistaunce herein, howe it is credible that they can or also wyll perfourme the same, whan they them sel∣ues be of wauering myndes in Religion, and study to please men? that our aduersaries may recouer their goodes, and that dāmage done on both parties may be egally borne, we refuse not. But that they should retourne in the citie, & agayne set vp their idolatrie, that can we by no meanes suffer. Thei say how they were no impediment to vs in religion, but certenly they wanted no wil therunto. But we haue cause to geue God thā∣kes yt sent shrewed cowes short hornes. The bodies of dead men were not so intreated as thei report. But where as for our own defence we plucked down certē churches nere vnto the citie, so many bodies as were founde not wholy cōsumed, were cōueied to an other place, & buried deper. Again it was permitted vnto al men, that such of their kinred as they foūd there, they might transporte whether they would. That same of thēperour Otto the first, is moste false, & a shameful lie by them deuised. For we The prayse of great Otto. are not ignorant, what honour is due to that chief magistrate & especially to him of whom they speake, thēperour Otto, who did many worthy actes, & was a moste earnest defendour & pro∣tectour of yt libertie of Germany. That seruice, which they call holy & Godly, & which they complaine that we haue disturbed in their churches is nothing lesse than holy, but cōcerneth the
high reproche of God. They thēselues had lōg before caried out of the citie their vestimentes, chalices & other ornamētes. But their wrytinges & publique monumētes we kepe safely, & haue not abolished, as they falsly accuse vs. Moreouer their priestes wer not whipped, but they thēselues spoiled the churches & ca∣ried the pray els where. The college or monastery of Hamersle∣bie, which neuerthelesse belōgeth not to thē, therfore did we as∣saile at the last, for yt our ennemies had a place of refuge therin & there deuided the boties takē frō our felowes & vs. Wher they adde moreouer that our men did many thinges there insolētly & outrageously, that same was forged by the monkes. As cōcer∣ning the iniuries, which they say were done vnto thē in the ci∣tie, thus standeth the matter. About .xxv. yeres since, whā they on the eight day before Easter, whiche is called Palm sondaye, were in hand with their fond & trifling ceremonies, they were laughed at by ye cōmon people that thether resorted, but whose Folyshe cere¦monies. rashnes & boldnes proceded further, & such as brake glasse wyn∣dowes, they were suerly punished of vs & banished, for other in∣iuries we knowe none, neither haue they euer brought thē be∣fore vs. Wherfore we haue done nothing contrary to our pro∣messe, or cōposition, neither haue we geuē our aduersaries any cause of warre. And seing the matter is thus, we desire all mē, that they geue no credite to their sclaundrous reportes, but to lament our chaunce, which are cōstreined to defend the warre yt is attēpted against vs, to thintent we might mainteine ye pure doctrine of the Gospel, & the liberties receiued of our elders, for the which thinges also godly kinges & magistrates of fourmer times, & the Machabeis men of most stoute courage, haue refu∣sed no perill or daunger. We wishe for peace moste chiefly aboue al thinges: But that is denied vs hetherto. Wherfore being lōg & sore afflicted with the inuasions of our nere neighbours, we could not repulse frō vs vniust violēce. Wherby we haue also ye better confidence, that suche as we haue prouoked with no in∣iury, wil iudge this war to cōcerne thē nothing, & stande in the awe & feare of God, the reuenger of al vnrighteousnes. For the self same cause that hath stired vp this trouble against vs, wyl shortly after wrap vp thē also in great distresse & perils, so ma∣ny as couet to retein & maintein the pure doctrine. The letters 1551. wherwith the byshop of Rome had called the coūsell. Thempe∣rour the fifth day of Ianuary cōmaundeth to be red in the Se∣nate of states & Princes, exhorting thē, that they wold prepare thēselues. The same day king Ferdinādo, informeth the states, how in yt truce time, the Turks waxe busy in Hongary, & build a castel within his dominion, & went about to surprise his ca∣stel
of Zolnock, & fortifie theirs with a garrison, how also they haue made an inrode into Transsyluania: Wherof verely he hath geuen them none occasion, & doth al that he can, that the truce taken may be obserued, but in case the Turke shal refuse, he desired to haue aide geuen him. I told you in the xx. boke of Stephen byshop of Winchester, for what cause he was apprehē¦ded in Englād. And where he perseuered in his opinion, & wold neither allowe the statutes already made, nor suche as shuld be made hereafter cōcerning religion, during the kinges nonage, he was depriueth of his byshoprike this yeare in the moneth of Ianuary, & cōmitted again to warde. Andrew Osiāder, whom I sayd went into Prusse, set forth this time a new opiniō affir∣ming A newe doc∣trine of Osi∣ander. ye man is not iustified by faith, but by the rightuousnes of Christ dwelling in vs, & saith that Luther was also of his o∣pinion. But the rest of the diuines his fellowes did stoutly im∣pugne it, affirming that he said of Luther to be false, who not many monthes before his death, left a most ample & goodly te∣stimony in the preface of the first Tome of Melāchthons boke, wherin are treated the cōmon places of holy scripture: Where therfore he inueieth against Melanchthon, he maketh also Lu¦ther his aduersary, for that they were both of one opiniō. Mo∣reouer by a conference made, they proued manifestly that Lu∣ther taught cleane cōtrary to him in this matter: and say yt his doctrine is pestiferous, which saith yt the iustification of fayth cōsisteth not in the bloud & death of Christ, wherby we are rede¦med & iustified. The matter was handled with great cōtentiō. He him self verely pretended, as I said, as though Luther had ben of his opiniō. But in ye meane time he made his auaunt a∣mongst his adherentes, as it is written, yt Luther & Melāchthō had made & cōpiled a diuinitie after Aristotels doctrine, which sauereth more of the fleshe than of ye spirite. Albert the Duke of The Duke of Pruisse addicte to O¦siander. Prusland desired at yt first yt the matter might haue ben appea∣sed by mediatours. But perswaded by Osiander, after much de¦bating, he became of his opinion, & cōmaundeth his aduersa∣ries to depart out of his dominiō. Amongst whō was Ioachim Merlin, who must nedes be packing, although not only ye cite∣zens, but also womē & children besought yt Prince right hūbly, that they might not be depriued of such a pastour. This Osian¦der taught many yeres at Norinberg, & that much to his cōmē¦dation, & neuer made busines, but semed in al things to folowe Luthers doctrine so long as he liued. But whan after thempe∣rours decree of religion, he forsoke Norinberg, & went into the land of Pruisse, he reised vp this same questiō. Which many mē supposed yt he durst neuer do so long as Luther liued. He chiefly
prouoketh them of Wittēberg to confute these thinges if they can, & sayth how he wil defend his opiniō, whosoeuer impugne thesame, & taunteth Melanchthon bitterly. Whose opinion al learned men for the most part namely in Saxonie, reproued, by bokes set forth, & rebuked, that in a time moste troublesome he disturbed the congregation. And where he had hādled so vngod¦ly Melanchthon, a man of so great modestie & learning, with yt were al men offended exceadingly. In an other certen booke he Melanchthō best learned and modeste contendeth, that albeit mankinde had not ben lost through the sinne of Adam, yet shuld Christ haue bene borne neuerthelesse. The eight day of February is dissolued the coūsell of thempire. Therin made themperour a decre, & forsomuch, saith he, as this The decree of Auspurg. great dissention in religion, can by no meanes be better appea¦sed, than by a general, Godly, & fre counsell. Again, for that in yt former assemble the states haue submitted thē selues vnto the counsel, & therin perseuer, this shalbe cōfirmed & ratified. That thing also, which I my self than promised, I wil procure with all trauell & diligence, that eche thing may be orderly & rightly done. And sithe that this bull of the byshop of Rome, appertey∣neth vnto all christian Realmes & prouinces, I suppose verely, that all kinges & rulers, remembring their dutie, will obeye, & furder so Godly a busines to thuttermost of their power, what soeuer also shal become me to do therin, as the aduocate of the church, & defendour of counselles, yt same will I performe. And to al such as wil repare to the coūsel, whether they haue chaun¦ged their religion or not, I wil graunte saufe conduicte, yt they may there remayn & propoūde such thinges as they shal thinke to concerne ye quiet of their conscience, & after shal & may safely retourne home againe garded with a cōmon cōduct. Moreouer I will indeuour, yt the whole matter shalbe treated & determi∣ned Godly & christiāly, al affections set apart, according to the holy scripture & doctrine of yt fathers, yt as wel the ciuile as ec∣clesiasticall state may be reformed, all errours & false opinions cleane taken away. I intende moreouer to remain within the limites of thempire, or at the least very neare, to thintent to de¦fende the coūsel, so that it may come vnto thende wished for, & the fruict therof may redoūde vnto al men, & may be chiefly for the cōmoditie of Germany. Wherfore I require & exhort al prin¦ces & states, but chiefly thē of the clergie, & those that haue alte¦red their religion, & cleaue to ye confession of Auspurg, that ac∣cording to the byshops bul, they prepare thē selues, & come thi∣ther furnished, least after they complayne, yt they were through ouermuch haste supplanted, or els not admitted to the sufficiēt declaration of their cause. For as I said, I will assure them by
saufe conduict, & bring to passe, that they shalbe heard so much as shalbe requisite. But where as the states haue alledged son∣dry reasons, why the decrees of the former conuention of Aus∣purg concerning religion & reformation, be not kept, al this I reuoke to mine owne consideration & wil know of eche man se¦uerally what impediment there is. Therfore let euery man for see, yt the matter may come to rehersall. It was also decreed ye at the first day of April thambassadours of thelectours, & of syx other Princes, shuld mete at Norinberg, to consulte, howe that Mony for yt warre of Maydēburg. mony which was taken out of the cōmon treasorie for the war of Maydenburg, shuld be restored. Whatsoeuer they shall deter∣mine, is cōmaunded to be of like force, as if the same had ben en¦acted in the full assemble of thempire. And for so much as this war shuld concerne the welth of al Germany, it shalbe lawfull for euery Magistrate to taxe yt people for yt same cause. Againe, in case any citezen of thempire or straunger shall ayde them of Maydēburg, thā doeth thēperour also promise to be at charge. As concerning the iurisdiction & goodes of the churche, them∣perour saith he wil forese, yt being sued to, by thē whom it con∣cerneth, he wil minister iustice vnto thē, that euery man shal re¦couer & inioye his own. They decreed to ayde king Ferdinando against the Turke, although vnwillingly, with suche ayde as was promised him in the former conuention. Finally because therles of Mansfelde & Hedeck, mustring men the last wynter, had intended to aide thē of Maidenburg, as before is sayd, the Emperour chargeth & cōmaundeth, yt in case any souldiours as¦semble hereafter in any part of Germany, the Princes & states next thē shal immediatly ioyne their forces together to subdue thē, & to quēche yt flambe before it be of force or violēce. In this selfsame time Henry the Frenche king, receiueth into his faith & tuition, Octauins Farnesius, who was both mortal ennemy Octauian Farnese cli∣ente to the Frēch king. to Ferdinando Gonzage, themperours lieftenaūt in Lūbardy, for ye slaughter of his father, & also being so nere vnto Placēce, which thēperour held, fearing least he shuld not be able to kepe Parma by his owne force, craued foreine aide, & receiued into ye citie a garrison of Frenchmē. Which thēperour toke right dis∣pleasauntly, & especially the bishop of Rome, as shalbe declared hereafter. In these daies gaue thēperour sentence against the Lantgraue for the contie or lorship of Diece. For he was condē¦ned of contēpt, for that he answered not: But he said how it lay not in his power to answer, for so muche as he might not cōfer¦frely wt his coūsellours for the awayting & harkening of thē ye had him in their custody. For after that it came to light how be
would haue made an escape lately, as I shewed you before, no man might haue accesse to him, nor speake wt him without a witnesse. The .xxviii. daye of February, Bucer ended his life at The death of Bucer. Cambridge, & was buried very honorably & was celebrated wt thepitaphes of lerned mē, amongst whom also, wer two noble yong men of the house of Suffolke, brethren, whose mother the Duchesse, both at al times before, & whilest he was sick also she wed al fauour & beneuolence to Bucer, a woman of a most ear∣nest zeale towards religiō. In these daies the byshop of Stras∣burg, maketh a greuous cōplaint to ye senate of their preachers Complainte of the Bysh. of Strasb. by letters written, as though they shuld styre vp yt people, & put the priestes in hazarde of their lines. Wherfore he requireth yt these thinges may be reformed, or els will he do as his counsell shal serue him. The .x. day of March, king Ferdinādo & his sōne Maximilian, depart frō Auspurg. For vnto this time thei stode in termes with thēperour, & the Regēt of Flaūders. Thambas∣sadours also of Breme depart at the length without peace ma∣king. In this meane time at Maidēburg were diuerse cōflictes & skermishes, for ofttimes wold the townes men issue out. And whan the riuer of Elbe ouerflowed, in ye ships yt they had made they brought in vitayle both vp the streame & down. The same time were diuers wonders sene in Saxony, & amongest other thinges, thre sunnes, & as many mones, one while of a pale co∣lour, Wōders in Saxonye. an other while as red as bloud. They of Maydēburg desi∣red aide of the cities by the sea coaste, by Uolrate & Iohn, sōnes to the Erle of Manstelde, but it was in vain. Than do thenne∣mies build bulwarkes by the riuer of Elbe aboue & beneth the citie, & laying ships on either side wel māned, kepe the townes men frō sayling. Oftentimes they fought also whā they wold driue away the cattel, which the townes men daily turned out into the pasture about the citie. The xi. day of April ye byshop of The Pope accuseth Oc∣tauian Far∣nese Rome in a boke set forth, sore accuseth Octauius Farnese, and what time, saith he, he receiued of me Parma & ye high gouern∣ment, he promysed by his fidelitie, that he wold neither addict his seruice to none other Prince, nor receiue any forein power into Parma but through my licēce. And what time he appered to bend towardes an alteratiō, oftentimes I admenisted him of his duty frendly, by intermessages & by his brother Alexāder Cardinal: And because he answered yt time somwhat straūgly, sending my letters, I threatned him wt moste greuous punish∣ment, if he should doe otherwyse. Afterward being aduertised, that he kepte not conuenauntes, I was (as it well became me) ryght sore offended, that he shoulde worke me suche an iniurie, whome I had auaunced with so great honours and benefites.
Nowe therefore, although I might straightwaies determine, in a matter that is so euident, yet to thintent he may vnderstande oure great humanity, I wil and commaund him, that within xxx daies he appeare at Rome; and answer to his accusations, and make vs good assurance from henceforth. For this, if he neglect to do, I wil that he be euen now condemned of treason, periury and other most greuous crimes: and what landes or goodes so euer he hath, I cō∣maund it to be publicke and common, & require herein themperors fidelity, that he wil aid me in punishing the same; and commaund yt no man aid him with any thing. When May day was come, thac∣tion of the counsel was commenced: but because very few wer than The counsel at Trente is cold. commen thither, and the warre of Parma was at hand, the matter was adiourned to the first day of Septembre. Thambassadors of Princes which met at Norinberge, in the moneth of April, toke or∣dre, that there should be a new contribution of Mony, for the siege of Maidenburge. And albeit themperoure commaunded the same afterward by proclamation, yet was ther an exceading great diffi∣culty in the thing, and all men were vnwilling to paye, for that the siege was long, and there appeared no end. Wherfore Duke Mo∣ris also treated oftwith the Townes men of peace, and the fist day of Maye, what time they were come into the Campe by safe con∣duit, the matter was long and much debated, he him self being pre∣sent, A fewe monethes before Duke Maurice had taken to his ser∣uice Counte Hedecke, whome the Emperoure had outlawed, and Erle Hedeck frende to thē of Maidenb. made him gouernour of Lipsia. Who for the zeale vnto Religion, & hatred he bare to themperour, wished wel to them of Mayden∣burge, and was a counselloure of peace, that the same war beinge finished, Duke Moris might attempte greater thinges. For euen than entred into theyr heads the deuise of the war; that was moued afterwards against themperor, as shalbe declared in his place. Notwithstanding they coulde not than agre vpon a peace, for that ouer hard conditions were propounded, and that of set purpose, as many suppose, whilest duke Moris differred the time, and soughte oportunity for his enterprise, which than at the length was geuen, after that the French king had proclaimed war against the Empe∣ror, as shalbe said hereafter. In the meane season a rose a great re∣bellion in the Campe before Maidenburge, for want of paiment of certaine monethes wages. Neither came the Prince Octauius to Rome whan he was cited, but aided with the French kinges gar∣nisons, toke in hand to defend Parma. Wherfore the Emperour, the .xiii. day of May publishing his letters, for as much, saith he, as of our duety & good wil towardes yt bishop & church of Rome, I couet to perform such things as I am
den, and to forsee, least by this occasion greater commotions arise in Italy, and after in other places: again, whilest I consider vpon how iust causes the bishop is moued and how he hath omitted no∣thing, that Octauius might do his dutye, I haue committed thys charge to Fernando Gonzage, because I cānot my self be present, yt he shal aid the bishop in my name. Wherfore we wil & command al our louing subiects throughout Lumbardie, yt they be to him obe∣dient in this war none otherwise thā to our self, and yt they indeuor to anoy thenemy as muche as is possible for them to do. So ther∣fore Gonzage beginneth the war, and first spoyling the country, be The war of Parma be∣twixt them∣peroure and french king. segeth the city of Parma, and the bishop of Rome Mirandula. For therle of Mirandula was of the French parte, and except he were cooped in, might haue holpen greatly the Prince and city of Par∣ma. At the twenty day of Maye the Bishop of Rome wrote to the Swisses very louinglye, like as he had taken vnto him the name of Iuly the second, which loued them intierlye well, so had he also purposed in louinge them to immitate his example and fotesteps. Hitherto in dede he hath bene so occupied with sondrye, and that most waighty affaires of the publick weale, that he hath had no le∣sure to declare thaffection of his mind, yet hath he borne them still in perfect memory: and that the same apeareth chiefly in ii. thinges first, that for the custody of his body, he hath chosen in the Citye a garde of the same nation. Secondly, that he hath done also ye same at Boloigne Lagrasse, trusting both to their industry and fidelity also: and now, in as much as the counsell is called, and latelye the first day of May begon at Trent, occasion is geuen him to wryte vnto them: wher therfore their presence should be a great help and furtherance to so godly and nedeful a worke, he exhorteth them ve∣ry much, yt such prelates of the church as be within their iurisdicti∣on and liberties, be not wanting, but be there at the next session the first day of Septembre: the rest they shall vnderstande of S. Hie∣rome, Franch, Knight, his ambassadour, whose faith and diligence hath of them now many yeres ben wel tried: again, for because the matter in hand is greatly to his contētation, he wil send or it belōg one of his principal bishops, which may treat with them touchinge the counsel more at large. About thend of May, the Emperoures sonne departing from Auspurge, by Italy returneth into Spain, with him wente Maximilian his Cosin and Brother in lawe, to fetche awaye his wife, the mother of two Children. In the meane time, the kinge of Fraunce, to appease the Bishoppe and Senate The French kings excuse to the Pope. of Cardinals, declareth at Rome by his ambassadoure Mounsour de Thermes, that where he hath receiued into his tuition Octaui∣an the Prince of Parma, it deserueth no reprehension: For thys
thing proprely belongeth vnto kings, to succor thafflicted: Moreo∣uer, that he hath sought no priuate commodity in that matter, but whatsoeuer he hath done, to haue done it for the church of Romes sake, after thexāple of his progenitors, which haue ben more bene∣ficial to the same than any others, & many times also defēded it by force of armes. For seing that Parma is the patrimony of ye chur∣che, he was very careful to forsee, that it shuld not come into other mens handes, and for the same cause is at great cost & charge dai∣ly: wherfore he desireth him and that most earnestly, that he wold take it in that part, and leaue the opinion that he hath conceiued of him: for the same shalbe to the great cōmodity of the cōmon weale. But if he refuse this satisfaction, and chuse warre before peace, he him self seeth how greatly that wil be to the damage and daunger of all Italy and Europe, and that also there can be no certen trea∣ty had in Religion, that may continue: wherefore concerninge the moost pearillous commotions that shal arise hereof, that the coun∣sell already called, can not assemble, or if it do, of necessity muste be dispersed, and that in this troublesome time he can sende none of the bishops of his realme vnto Trent, of all these thinges ther can be no fault laid in him, who is willing not only to offer conditions of peace, but also to take, & this so protesteth so openly. Howe be it the bishop trusting to thaid and promesses of themperor, was no∣thing The sterse minde of Pope Iulye. the mileder for thys ambassade. The xvii. day of Iune, duke Moris graunteth againe safeconduite to them of Maidenburge, that they should send vnto him ambassadours concerning peacs. Who taking theyr iourney, being conducted by Marques Alberte, finde Duke Moris at Pirne a Towne of Meissen. For he was re∣tourned home, and semed to worke slackly. When they were come, in themperors name he propoundeth these conditions. That they should yelde them selues without any condition, and humblye de∣sire pardon. They shal make no leage against themperor, king Fer¦dinando, Austriche, or Burgundie: they shal obserue al the decrees of thempyre. They shall aunswere to the law, and recompence the cleargy for domage done, that they cast down theyr fortifications & Rampires, and admit into theyr City a garrison of a M. and CC. soldiours. They shall receiue themperor, Kinge Fardinando, and theyr deputies at all times, wyth what power someuer they brynge with them, that they deliuer twelue greate pieces of ordenaunce, paye an C: M. Crownes, and confirme all these conditions by an oth. These thinges, although they were not able to perfourme, yet did they not vtterly refuse, & through thintercession, of Counte He∣decke, by little & little some thing was remitted. Themperor before this sending his letters into Germany, especially to the states of ye
protestants religion, had sufficiently assured thē by safeconduit, ex∣horting thē to be at Trent the first day of Maye: but inasmuch as for the war of Parma, the day of the counsell was differred to the first of Septēbre, as I said before, he admonisheth them again yt they come in any wise, promising thē all equity & faithfulnes. But albeit ther were very many of the same profession, yet did they not confer together, which thing hath ben chiefly necessary, either for yt they dispaired touching the successe of the thing, or els for that they feared themperors displesure, or for yt they waxed faint hearted, as it were in the very entrance of the daunger. And amonges ye cities only they of Strausburge sent messagers to enquire what thinge both they yt were nere, and also far of, wer purposed to do herein. And certenly duke Moris gaue in cōmaundement to Philip Me∣lanchton, The confessi¦on of Duke Moris by Me¦lanchton. that he shuld pen tharticles of doctrine, which shuld after be exhibited openly: whan that boke was finished, the prince com∣maunded al the diuines & ministers of the church to mete at Lipsia the viii. of Iuly, wheras the same was red and approued by consēt of them al. The same ordre also toke Christopher, duke of Wirtem¦berge, who caused Brentius to compile a boke of the same argu∣ment. And albeit that the sence of either wryting was all one, yet wold Duke Moris haue his boke exhibited by it self, least if many together should propound the same thing in common, themperour might conceiue a suspition of some conspiracy made: Neuerthelesse sēding their bokes to and fro, both they of Wirtemberge approued the Saxons boke, & the Saxons the boke of Wirtemberge, and the diuines of Strausburge ether of them both, whan they had red the same: and so it was agreed, that when time shuld serue, ther shuld be sent to the counsel certen to prefer and defend these things. The Duke of Wirtemberge, after thexample of his father, made muche of Ihon Brentius for his excellent learning, vsing his aide in re∣storing of the godly doctrine, after also, he restored him to the Mi∣nistration The huma∣nity of the Duke of wir¦temberge, to ward Bren∣tius. of the Church, and made him president of Stutgarde. The .xxv. day of Iuly, the Marques Albert, in thabsence of Duke Moris, reiecteth such thinges by a trompetter, as they of Maiden¦burge had answered to the conditions of peace, propounded at Pir∣ne by duke Moris. The day before he had taken an ouerthrow: for they bickered with greater forces than euer they did before. About the viii. day of August ther had like to haue bene a greate sedition in the city. For letters wer brought to the soldioures, wherein this was conteined, how ther wer certen of the Senators, which wold betray the city to thenemy, and amonges them was Henry Alman. Wherfore the soldiors flocking together cal for him: whē he came, he saith it is to him an iniury, and refuseth no punishment, if it cā
be proued, affirminge this to be inuented by the ennemye, that the thing which they are not hable to do by power and force of armes, they might bring to passe by craft and policy: againe whan the hole Senate were become sureties for him, the matter was appeased, & a certain nombre of Citezens & Souldiors were chosen, whiche shuld marke what manner of letters from henceforth were sent to & fro. The eight day after, Duke Moris adressing his letters to ye Duke Moris letters to the Emperour. Emperoure, declareth how he verely can be content with the safe conduit, which he had geuen, neither doth he greatly find any lacke therin: how be it, he heareth say, that a decre was made in the coū∣sell of Constance, that inquisition shoulde be made againste Here∣tickes or suspected of Heresy, if haply being called to the Counsell, they repaired thither, and that sentence shoulde be pronounced a∣gainst them, although the Emperour had graunted them safecon∣duit, this decre to remaine in the common recordes. And like as they had decreed, so did they practise in deede, in burninge Ihon Husse, who came thither by the safeconduite of the Emperoure Sigismunde: and seinge it is so, he canne sende none of his to Trente, vnlesse the Prelates there will graunte also their safeconduit in the whole name of the counsel, as in times past was done in the counsel of Basil, which was next vnto the same: for the Bohemers being feared with the former example, would not come The burnt child the fyre dreades. thither at the same time, vnlesse they had first receiued the publike safeconduit of the whole counsell: his request is therefore, that he ether through his authority or fauour would obteine this at theyr handes: for except they might be in like case assured, as they wer in times past at Basill, it ought not to be preiudiciall to him, or to a∣ny other of the same profession, if they suffered no man of theyrs to trauel thither. But cōcerning the Bohemers, and Ihon Husse that was brent at Costantz, and of the warre that insued therof, I haue spoken in ye third boke. And because a decre was made at Costantz, that the next counsel after the same should be holden, the fift yeare after, an other after vii. yeares, and from that time foreward euery tenth yere, the fathers assemble again at Basill. And for so muche as the Bohemers were not as yet reconciled, the matter was trea∣ted betwene them by letters and intermessagers, & in the towne of Egre was made a draught of a safecōduit, which if yt fathers wold admit, the Bohemers said, how they woulde not refuse to come. After that those which were sent had declared theyr ambassade, the fathers approued the same fourme, and set to theyr feales, and sen∣ding vnto them withal most frendly letters, exhort them to prepare them selues, that, what time the safe conduit also of the Emperour Sigismund shall come vnto them, they may take their iourney.
This was in the fourth session, in the yeare of grace .M.CCCC.xxxii. But what maner assuraunce of the fathers that same was, shalbe shewed in the boke that followeth. Wherefore whan Duke Moris was warned hereof by his counsel, he maketh sute to them∣peror, and vrgeth the prescript of Basil, as the last, and moste con∣uenient for this time. For the protestantes case was in a maner al one with the Bohemers, and for much like causes was the counsel of Trēt called, as it was in times past at Basil, that is to wit, that heresies might be roted out, that peace and tranquillity mighte be restored to the common wealth, and that vices being taking away, the church might be refourmed. The xxvi. day of August, in yt mor∣ning after a sermon, the doctours and preachers of the Churche of Auspurge, to the nombre of ten, were sent for to the lodginge of the bishop of Arras, euery man by him self: when they were come thy∣ther, some after others, knowing nothing of the matter, they were commaunded to stand apart, and not to speake together: After they were called into a hall, where sate the bishop of Arras, with Hasie, Seldie, Maluēda, and certain others, in ordre one after an other. Interrogato¦ries for the Ministers of Auspurge. Seldie had the talke, and as he was commaunded, propoundeth questions. Whether that in the Lords supper, there is as much cō∣tained vnder one kind, as vnder both: Moreouer how many Sa∣craments they beleued to be? Finally, why they taught not after the forme prescribed by themperor thre yeares past, wheras they pro∣mised so to do: as wel as the Senate, and all other states do? They make aunswer euery man for him self seuerally, how Christ did in∣stitute the whole supper, whose prescript is to be followed: that in holy scripture are found only two Sacraments, Baptisme, and the Lordes supper: and that they receiued not that fourme of doctrine, for that it dissenteth from holy scripture. Here spake the Bishop of Arras in a great coler, thinke you than that themperor may not as The constan¦cy of the pre∣lates. wel in deuine matters, as in ciuill, make lawes and prescribe cer∣tain orders? what themperor may do, we now dispute not say they, but, as we haue saied, that fourme we neither receiued, nor certen∣ly can allow. Than waxed he also more angry, and being ful of fu∣rye, taunted them with sore rebukes. Whan they also spake of the Sacraments, Seldie a Ciuilian, as an interpretoure, did rebuke them, being thus sent from them, they are cōmaunded to tary with out, and being led by a keper, are bestowed euery man in his place, that they might not come together. After were sent for, certaine of the chiefest Senatours. whan they were commen, they were let in altogether, and commaūded that within iii. daies, these preachers shuld depart out of the city before the sonne setting: that hereafter they preach no more within the limites of thempire, nor so farre as
the Emperours dominion stretcheth: that they speake with none of their frendes nor kinsfolkes, nether tell any man the cause of their The prea∣chers exiled. departure, nor after to wryte to any man within the city, or signify what is done with them. These thinges were they constrained ful sore against their wils, with holding vp their fingers, as the cere∣mony is, to promise by an othe: after was the Senate commaun∣ded to shutte vp the Church dores, wherin Luthers Religion was taught, til the Emperor should contremaund them. After the same sort also, they dealt afterward with the scolemasters, and with the city of Meminge, and others in Sweueland, which were also sent for to come thither: for they were both forbidden to teach, and also to retourne home againe. And wheras one of them alledged that his wife was neare the time of deliuerance, and therfore besought them earnestly, that he might only be permitted to se her: the bishop of Arras turning towardes his company, he calleth her, saith he, his wife, which is an harlot. Thus therfore they beinge compelled to depart, caused great heauines in the City: but the citezens shew∣ed them what pleasure they could both by giftes, and other libera∣lity. The Duke of Saxon also prisoner, whan he hard therof, both comforted them by intermessagers, and also holpe them with mony at theyr departure. The cause, why the Emperor proceded on thys wise against them was thought to be, first, for that he was stirred vp hereunto of many: secondlye, for that after inquisition made, he found that the preachers were a let, that his decre of religion toke not place: Finally, for that he had heard report of the consent and a∣grement of the diuines of Saxon, Sweuelād, and Strausburge. And the readiest way was thought to be, if they were exiled, to the end the fathers at Trent might haue the lesse to do, and the victo∣ry more easily, in case they should hardly haue anye aduersaries to send against them. They therfore being thus driuen oute, and ba∣nished, fled partly to the Swisses, and partly to other places, when the brute of this thinge was blased abrode, it made manye men a fraid. For that which chaunced there, no man douted, but the same should also be done in other places: but behold, whilest all men are in the same feare, the french king maketh warre againste thempe∣ror, The French king war∣reth vpon themperour. and withall taketh certain ships of Flaunders, carieth them a∣way into Fraunce and spoyleth them, and in Piedemount & Tur∣rin surpriseth many Townes, and amonges other, Cherie, & San damians, by the conduit of Brissake. Touching the shippes inter∣cepted, the imperials in a writing setforth, report that whan them∣perour loked for nothing lesse than warre, and commaunded hys subiectes to sit quiet, the french Captaine Poline chaunced vppon them, and as though he caried the Quene of Scotlande, signified
vnto them that for honoure sake, after the olde accustomed facion, they shuld vaile their bonnets, strike saile, and hailse her with, sho∣ting of their ordinaunce: which thing whan they had done, beinge vnarmed, they were fradulently circumuented, and caried awaye. Many men had great maruel, that the king durst, in this so great good fortune and prosperity of the Emperor, renounce his frend∣ship: yea it is sayed to haue chaunced to the Emperour, contrary to his expectation For all be it he warred againste the Duke of Par∣ma, yet would he not seme therfore to be enemy to the French men with whome he had made peace seuen yeares before. How be it the king, for that he sawe howe through the side of Octauius, he him self shuld also be wounded, for yt he had alredy intelligence that ye Turkes wer sailing on the Sea. Again, for that he had intelligēce by intermessagers, how Duke Moris was affected, & for so muche as the Emperoure was thought in that imbecillitye of bodye, and disease that retourned ofte, to be of no longe life, he attempted the thing with a stout courage. And in manner about the same time, the Turkish Fleete, whan it had assailed Malta in vaine, surpriseth Tripolis a City in Af∣fricke. The blame hereof the Emperoure laying all together in the French King sendeth his ambassadors to the Princes & Cities of Cōtrarye ta∣les of ye King and the Em∣perour. Germany, affirming this to be done through his craft and Policy. But the King so sone as be knew therof, ercuseth the matter, and saith how the cause of the Turkish warre is, for that the Emperor restoreth not to them the city of Affricke, according to his promes, for that King Fardinando doth hold and fortify the Castel of Zol∣nocke standing at the frontiers of Hongary within the Turkishe dominion, for that he denieth to pay him his yearely tribute, and attempteth new enterprises in Transsyluania. After this he con∣futeth the Emperours narration, wherin is declared, how Tripo∣lis was lost through the treason of Aremount the French ambas∣sador, with a contrary narration, and confyrmeth the same by the letters of the great Turke. Whilest these things wer a bruing, the day of the consel came, the first of Septēbre, at the which day were ther present, besides the bishops of Italy & Spaine, tharch bishops of Mentz & Treuers, to the great ioy & gladnes, as it appered of al mē, & not long after came also tharchbishop of Colō. For themperor had earnestly moued thē both presētly in ye coūsel at Auspurge, & af¦ter also by letters & messagers, yt they shuld be ther, for they exceld al others in dignity, welth & power, & the most part of yt bishops in Ger¦many are cōprised vnder theyr dominiō: wherfor thincking to tary lōg, they sold altheyr horses, reseruing only a few, & made theirpro¦uisiō for houskepīg a lōg seasō, thither came also yt bishops of straus
Uienne, Costintz, Chur, and Numburge: others being let with af∣faires, age, or sicknes, whan they had obtained licence, sente theyr Proctours. In the Bishop of Romes name, Cardinal Crescēt was there president: and had ioyned in commission with him tharchbi∣shop The counsel renued at Trent. of Sipount and the bishop of Uerona. Themperor had sente thither Fraunces Toletane, Hugh, Earle Mounforte, and Willi∣am Pictaue, diuers were there also in the place of king Ferdinan∣do and Hongary. Making therfore an assembly in the head church which they call a session, the first day of Septembre, whan Masse was done, and other accustomed ceremonies finished, sodēly came in the French Kinges ambassadoure, the abbot of Bellosan, with letters which were indorsed to the conuention of Trent, which af∣ter The French kinges let∣ters to the counsel. he had deliuered to the bishops Legate, and he had red the su∣perscription, a question arose, why he shuld call it a conuention, ra∣ther than a counsell: and vnlesse he could shew a commission, those letters were neither to be red nor yet receiued, and where an excea∣ding great clamour was raised, especially by the Spanish bishops, and he affirmed that his commission was comprised in the letters, the bishops Legate ariseth, and calleth a side the fathers into the reuestry. The matter being decided, that the indorsinge mighte be taken in good part, they condescended to heare him. Therfore whē they had red his letters priuately, wherin the king did briefly sig∣nify his grief, and that he had iniury done him, and required them to credite his Ambassadour. They all sit downe againe, and than reading the letters openly, make this answere. Where the kinge, vnder the name of a conuention doth signify the counsell, it is takē of them in good part: neither will they therefore conceiue any sini∣strall suspicion of so great a king, who hath the title of the mooste Christen: but in case his mind and wil be otherwise, than take they those letters, as not wrytten to them. After he was commaunded to declare his message. Than he reciteth a long oration wrytten. And first, the king rehearseth what he treated by his ambassadour Paulus Thermes, with the bishop and Senate of cardinals: and how by all these meanes he hath nothing preuailed, notwithstan∣ding that he had opened alwaies vnto peace: and saith how bishop Iuly, who after thexample of his predecessoures ought to appease the controuersies of Princes, hath kindled an exceading great fire at such time as he ought least to haue done it, whan doubtlesse the state of the Christen common wealth was sore afflicted: and seing the matter is thus, & for so much as he dealeth so sharply & roughly with him, which is theldest sonne of the church, he protesteth, as he saith is likewise done at Rome, first, that for the most troublesome tumultes of warre, he may not send the bishops of his realme vnto
Trent: again, that he taketh not this for a publike or general coū∣sel, but rather for a certain priuate conuention, which is not insti∣tuted for the profit of the common wealthe, but for the vtilitye of a few: Finally, that nether he, nor any man within his realme can be bounden to the decrees therof: but declareth also furthermore that he wil vse suche remedies, if the case so require, as in a like matter his progenitors haue accustomed: he will be euer of a sounde and sincere mind towardes religion, and the Church of Rome, neither wil he cōmit any thing worthy of iust reprehension: but in as much as he is burthened with thiniuries and hatred of certain, without his desert, he can not otherwise do at this present. Therfore let thē take this protestation in good parte, and Communicate vnto him the doctrine or testimony of this action, to thend he may certify o∣ther Princes and people of Christendome, concerninge the whole matter. But wheras he saith, he wil vse the remedies of his proge∣nitoures, thus it standeth, like as in all other Regions, so also in Fraunce, if any Bishoppricke or Abbotship be vacant, such as are called Chanons or Monkes had fre election to chuse them: but the meane benefices, which were not electiue, as they terme it, the Bi∣shops and Patrones bestowed: Moreouer all maner of sutes and controuersies touching benefices or matters of the church wer de∣cided within euery prouince. But bishops of Rome, as Couetous∣nes Reseruatyōs and graceser pectatiue. increased, began to subuert those elections, and by reseruatiōs and graces expectatiue, as they name them, haue deriued all the gaine to Rome, and to them selues, & called also to Rome, all sutes, euen the fyrst instaunces, as they call them. And the beginning of this alteration chanced in Fraunce, in the time of King Lewes the ninth: but he resisted stoutly, and in the yeare of our Lord M .CC. lxvii. made a law, that thold custome shuld be reteined, nether that any tribute shuld for that cause be paid to the bishop of Rome. This law was verely of force many yeares, but at the lengthe the violence of the bishops preuailed against it, and so far as christen∣dome stretcheth, they published those foresaid graces and reserua∣tions, and were very chargeable to all men, vntill the Synode of Basill toke away this kinde of pillage, and restored the aunciente lawes of contributions and elections, and prohibited firste frutes to be paid. This decre of the counsel, the King of France, Charles the seuenth by thaduise of his Counsell did ratify, and in the yeare M .CCCC. xxxviii. confirmed by Proclamation. But Eugenius the fourth pronounced this counsell to be frustrate, and of none ef∣fect, as I said in the first boke, and the Bishops that succeded him reiected that decre, and said it was Scismaticall: and in dede Pi∣us the second, sendinge his Ambassadoure to Lewes the eleuenth,
sonne to Charles the seuenth, moued him earnestly to abolish that same confirmation: and the king asketh counsell of the Senate of Paris, the moost famouse of all Fraunce, which in a maner consi∣steth wholy of lawyers. They, repeting many thinges of great an∣tiquity, declare, what the bishops of former time, what the Coun∣sels, and finally what his progenitors, Clodowey, Charles yt great Phillip Deodate, Lewes the ninth, Philip le Beau, Lewes, Huti∣ne, Ihon the first, and laste what his father and grandfather haue herein determined: and except thauncient lawes be obserued, it wil come to passe, say they, that al thecclesiastical ordre shalbe brought to confusion, and that Fraunce shalbe lesse populous, whan so ma∣ny shal run to Rome, and shalbe so much impouerished, that chur∣ches, and many such other sumptuous buildings in France shalbe neglected and fall to ruine. And as touching the mony matter, vn∣les your fathers confirmation of the decree at Basill maye be of The sum of mony that is caried to Rome. force, there shalbe caried yerely out of Fraunce vnto Rome ten C .M. Crownes. For to let other thinges passe, in the time of Pius the second, now bishop, there haue bene vacant at the least twentye Bishopprickes, which haue paid euery one of them aswel for their first frutes, as for other charges, vi .M. There haue fallen abbot∣ships about lx, and euery one of them haue paied two thousand, of other benefices haue bene void aboue two hondreth, whiche haue paid v .C. crownes a piece. Moreouer, within your realme are an hondreth thousand parishes and aboue, out of the which an infinite quantity of gold hath bene gathered by that same deuise of the bi∣shop of Rome. Walke therfore in your fathers fotesteps, & swarue not from the decre of Basil. Certainly this was the counsell of the Senate: but the king being ouercommen with the Bishops, either authority or policy, would neades abolish the confirmation, & the The vniuer∣sity of Parts apealeth frō the Pope. chief worker of this matter was Cardinall Baluen, in great fauor with the king, whom the bishop of Rome had corrupted: how be it both the kinges procurer, and also the vniuersity of Paris, whome it much concerned, resisted with a stout courage, and appealed frō the bishop to the counsel. Afterward Lewes the twelfth had great emnity for the same cause with Iuly the secōd, and the matter was brought into the counsel of Laterane, and Fraunces the firste, that succeded Lewes, concluded at the length with Leo the tenth, vpon certaine conditions at Bononie, after he had taken Millan: verely that when a Bishoppricke or Abbotship were vacante, the Couent in dede should not haue thelection therof, but that the king shoulde within .vi. monethes nominate some man to the Bishop of Rome, whome he thought worthy of that office. This same therfore is the thing amongs others, which King Henry now, by his ambassador
signified vnto them of a remeady. For kings are on this wise wōt to bridle the bishops, when they are at dissention with them, and so to put in practise the confirmation of the decre of Basil, espectally at this time, when their thondrebolt is not so greatly feared as it was in time paste. And for so muche as the Realme of Fraunce is both most large and rich also, Rome can not without great hinde∣rance want the reuenues therof. And that which he signified here that he would do, the same did he not longe after, as you shal hear? The same remeadye also in times paste vsed the King of Fraunce Tharrogan∣cye of Poope Boniface a∣gainst ye king of Fraunce. Phillip le Beaw, against Boniface the eight. For wheras he com∣maunded him to war against the Sarazens, and refusing his ex∣cuse, forbad that he shuld take no mony of the churches within his owne Realme, which the King was driuen to do for the necessitye of his warres, and vnlesse he obeyed the same, did suspend him out of the Church: he assembleth all his Nobles and states at Paris, and reciting the wronges of Boniface, whan both all the Bishops, Princes, and Nobilitie being demaunded had confessed, that they held al their landes and reuenues through his liberality & benefit, he commaundeth, that from henceforth ther be no mony conueid to Rome, and causeth alwaies and passages to be watched diligētly. But wheras the Senate of Paris made thaccompt, how much the bishopprickes and abbotships vacant do pay, as before is said, this say they, is to be vnderstand of former time: for now is the paimēt dubled, and exceadeth the yearely reuenues, in so much, that many beneficed men, by reason of the great exaction, do leaue their buls in the handes of the Banckers. And within the realme of Fraunce be xii. Archbishopprickes, Aygnes, Uienne, Lions, Narbony, To∣louse, Burdieux, Auxi, Burges, Tours, Roan, Rains, and Sens: Twelue ar∣chbishopriks in Fraunce. and Bishopprickes aboute. lxxxxvi, by the vacations whereof, as they terme it, is caried to Rome a wonderful some of gold, and out of tharchbishopprickes verily about thre score thousand crownes, and thre hondreth, as thaccompte was made in the time of Lewes the twelfth. What time these letters were red, the fathers say, howe they shalbe answered at the next session in case ye king wil acknow∣ledge the counsel to be at Trent. But such thinges as are nowe in treaty, they do not admit, but in as much as they may do lawfully: and therfore can not graunte him any testimonye or instruction of this action. After whan the day of the next session, was appoynted the .xi. of Octobre, euery man returneth home, which was about ii. a clock at after none. And here semeth a mete place to declare what is the manner and ordre of the publicke session, whan the same day came, the fathers as they vse to speake, assemble in the house of the bishops Legate. And stil from ye cathedral church vnto his lodging
stand souldioures on either side the way, about foure hundred, and fifty horsmen, or mo. At ix. of the clocke commeth forth the Legate with his Crosier before him: and the cardinall of Trent goeth on his lefthand After follow those that are in commission with him, and tharchbishops that are Princes electors. Than the Ambassa∣dors of themperor, and kinge Ferdinando ioyned together, after∣warde the residue of the bishoppes euerye man in ordre. Whan the last of them are come to the church, the Souldiours by and by dis∣charge their pieces: and after repair to the market place, and there and about the Temple kepe warde till the counsell breake vp. All they for the moost part are taken vp in the country, that they maye be prest and ready at the same day: and the Towne it self also doth kepe many, whan they be come into the church, they heare Masse, that done, the decrees of the counsel are recited, and the day also as∣signed for the next session to come. Than also if any ambassadours haue ought to say, they are hard: But by reason of diuers, sondry, & many busy ceremonies that are vsed in all matters, thaction is de∣lated til it be far in the day: which at the lengthe beinge finished, the legate retourneth home with the same pompe. In sittinge, the Bi∣shops Legate hath the chief place, next him the Cardinal of Trent, than the Legates copartners, after tharchbishops electors: on the lefthand sate thambassadors of themperor and other Princes. On the middle fourmes sit Archbishops, Bishops, and other prelates, euery man in order as he came. The second day of Septembre, the Theames geuen to the deuines. the deuines had Themes geuen them to discusse and reason vpon, wherof euery man may speake his mind, to thintent, at the next sit∣ting they may be determined. And in pronouncing of sentences of this meane was prescribed, that they should cleue to the holy scrip∣ture, to the traditions of the Apostles, to the receiued and appro∣ued counsels, and authorities of the holye fathers, that they vse a breuitie, that they abstain from superfluous and vnprofitable que∣stions, that they eschue all frowardnes and contention. But as cō∣cerning the ordre, it was agreed, that those deuines shoulde speake The order of speaking. first which the bishop of Rome sent, secondly whome the Emperor sent, and so forth. Moreouer the bishops Legate permitteth them, that for the searching out of the truthe, and as they saye, to confute false opinions, they might read ouer all maner of bokes. And there were deuines a great nombre, Spaniards, Italians & Germanes whome both the bishop of Rome, and themperour, and also his si∣ster Mary, had sente, whome also tharchbishops of Collon & Tre∣uers, and the bishops of Spaine and of Italy had broughte wyth them. Unto whome was referred the knowledge of al matters, ne∣ther was it lawfull for others, than for suche as were of the same
profession, and that had taken the degre of doctorship, to speake a∣ny thing. Yet for the fauor of the Archbishops of Colon and Tre∣uers, was admitted Ihon Gropper a lawyer, and Ihon Delphe a batchelor of diuinity, but no doctor. And for so much as in certaine former sittinges of the yere a M .D. xlvi. and the yeare following, they had made a determination, of original sinne, iustification, and frewil, of the vii. Sacraments, of the new law, as they terme it, in general, and also of baptisme and confirmation particularely, they condescended, that al those standing in force of the decre, they shuld procede to the rest, and first in dede to the Sacrament of thanckes geuing. Wherfore certain Theames wer deliuered to the deuines, with these self same words, that they shuld search and try, whether they were heretical, and mete to be condēned by the holy Senode: which Theames they had collected oute of the bokes of Luther, Zwinglius, Bucer, and such others. And the deuines vse the mat∣ter after this sort. They assemble all daily in the house of the By∣shops The maner of making ye Articles of faith. Legate, by the space of many hours, & obseruing thordre be foresaid euery of them reasoneth of the said Theames without a∣ny interruption, yet so, as they submit al their sayings to the iudg∣ment of the church of Rome. For none of the protestāts wer ther. This place is open indifferently for all men: and the Bishops Le∣gate, and the residue of all the fathers are many times ther presēt: but the deuines only speake, and the wordes and sentences of eue∣ry man are registred by the Scribes. What time all men had done reasoning, which was than accustomed to be done in a Monethes space, the bishops resorte to the bishop of Romes Legate, and exa∣mine The maner of making ye decrees. the sentences of the deuines whiche the Scribes had noted: after, out of euery nōbre & natiō wer chosē certen, which perusing ouer al their opinions, might therof make a doctrine: what thinge should be determined and beleued in euery poynt: after this they cō∣demne the contrary doctrin and errours, as they call them, wyth a greuous sensure, yet not with many words: al these thinges are in fine related to the whole assemble. When they be throughly agreed they come vnto open sessions, as I said before, and the decrees be red openly: that done the bishops are demaunded, whether they al∣low the same. They answer all, that they please them well. And so the deuines declare what is theyr opinion of euery matter: but the bishops only, and with them a few other mitred men haue authori∣ty to determine: that thing which is thus decreed, they commaund to be sacred and holy, and call those decrees, Canons. These thin∣ges in dede are thus done outwardly, but those that are better ac∣quainted with Romish matters, wil affirme that all those articles of doctrine are written before at Rome, by the bishops commaun∣ment,
and sent to his Legate in time, that the deuines may in their reasoning folow that prescript and ordre. For the Bishop finedeth ther diuers of them, and many bishops also, and therfore it is com∣monly spoken by a fond prouerbe, that the holy ghost commeth ma∣ny times from Rome to Trēt inclosed in a male. For this cause ve¦rely that the bishop sendeth ofttimes letters in poste, signifying to The holy ghoste at the Popes com∣maundemēt. his Legates there what he woulde haue done. The fourth day of Septembre, Erle Hedeck commeth to Maidenburge: by him duke Moris did so mitigate the conditions before propounded, that they thought mete to proceade in the treatye. In the meane while was truse taken, which was after also prolonged for many daies, as I shall hereafter declare. The French king hauing his mind aliena∣ted The French kinges wry∣ting agaynst the Pope. from the bishop of Rome, publisheth a wryting, and speakinge many thinges of thiniury done vnto him, of the cause of the warre of Parma, and whye he receiued Octauius into his tuition, com∣maundeth vnder a great penalty, that no mony from henceforth be conueied to Rome: for considering that the sinewes of warre con∣sisteth in mony, what madnes were this, with his own mony & his subiectes to maintaine the force of his aduersarye, and strengthen his power? how it is the peculiare office of the bishops of Rome to appease: he controuersies of kings: this verely did Paule ye third, who being almost worn for age came to Nice in Ligurie to make a reconcilement betwene his father and themperor: but Iuly fol∣loweth cleane an other wates, and hauing lately called a counsell, very necessary in dede for the common weale, hathe stirred vp war against him, surely of a set purpose, that he mighte exclude all the french church, which is one of the principall: so that ther can not be holden a lawful counsel, wherin both therrors of the prelates and ministers of the church mighte be refourmed, and their faultes a∣mended. This proclamation of the king was openlye proclaimed at Paris, the vii. day of Septembre, whereas a few daies before, ther was an other most hainous proclamation setforth against the A cruell pro∣clamation a∣gainste the Lutheranes. Lutheranes, whiche partly confirmed such like decrees of former yeres, partly where they semed not to be diligently enough writtē, sharpned them, omitting nothing that concerneth great seueritye, and such as wil vtter any thing are promised great rewards, whi∣che thing in dede the king was thought to haue done for this intēt that he might bridell hereby such as in Fraunce desired to haue an alteration of Religyon, leaste by reason of thys dissention of hys with the bishop, they should take ouermuch libertye: And againe, least they whiche beare a reuerence to the Churche of Rome shuld conceiue any apinion of him, that his minde should be altered concerning Religion: Finally, that both the bishop him self
and the Senate of Cardinals might see, that they might be recei∣ued into his frendship whan they wold. Than out of themperours court came forth a wryting, wherin is recited the original cause of the warre of Parma, and how iuste an occasion of displeasure the bishop of Rome hath against Octauius, and the Earle of Miran∣dula, and of what an vnquiet mind the Frēch king is, which seketh all manner of occasions, and bendeth his whole force, that he maye impeche and defeat the most noble enterprises of themperor: how beit themperor being nothing moued withall these thinges, wil so much the more couragiously and stoutly procede. Octauius pretē∣ded, as though he had come of necessity into thobeisance and tuiti∣on of the French king, for thiniuries and laying in wayt of Fernā∣do Gonzage. But that is confuted by this wrytinge: For if there were any cause of feare, the occasion was geuen of him selfe, who hath ofttimes laid wait for the life of Gonzage After it is recited, how Placence came into the hands of themperor: For Peter Aloise the bishop of Romes bastard sonne, whan he had obteined Pirma and Placence, gouerned the common wealth cruelly and like an o∣ther The wicked lustes of the popes sonne Nero, and accomplished his wicked lust not only vpon womē, but on men also: wherfore he was slain at home, and murthered of his citezens, which could no longer abide so great crudelitye: after the townes men, for yt they saw a present daunger prepared against them, in case they shuld come again into the iurisoiction of the Bi∣shop and church of Rome, had this only refuge to saue them, if they gaue them selues to themperor, especially, consideringe also, howe they were once fre citezens of the Empire: so therefore they moued Gonzage, and desired him that they mighte be receiued into them∣perors tuition: For otherwise wold they prouide them aid and suc∣cour elsse wher: Therfore it is vntrue that he shuld faine him selfe to be a fraid: For themperor hath imploid many benefits vpon the Farnesians: He hath chosen Octauius to his sonne in law, & gaue to his father Aloise the city of Nouaria for euer, and honored hym with the dignity of a Marques: but great hath bene their vnthāk∣fulnes, both at other times, and chiefly whan through the pretence of frendship they aided him, in punishing certain rebels of Germa∣ny, their whole endeuor was to haue taken from him Genes and Lumbardy: For verely in the same tumult was slain ful wickedly amonges others, Ioannine Aurie, a man of an excellente vertue, whilest he both did themperor faithful seruice, and repulsed pearil from his country. After came forthe an answer to these thinges in A purgation of the french kyng. the French kinges name. Wherin is made mention, how thempe∣ror, to haue the frendship of the bishop of Rome Paule the thyrde, gaue vnto his sonne Peter Aloise, the title and degre of a Mar∣ques,
how he toke vnto him Octauius the sonne of Peter to be his sonne in law, how he preferred his other sonne Alexander to many ecclesiasticall promotions: how afterward he made a league with the bishop, wherin it was prouided that the decre of the Senate of Cardinals, that was made concerning the gouernment of Parma and Placence, themperor shuld confirme to the house of the Frene∣sians: but what time themperor made war in Germany, and pretē∣ded, The cause of dissention be twixt ye pope and emperor as though he moued not the same war for Religion, but to pu∣nish the rebellion of certain, this deuise was displeasaunt to the bi∣shop, for that he saw how by this meane, he went about his priuate affairs, and to procure to him self rule & gouernment: neither was he disceiued in his iudgement: For the war being almoste finished whan themperor had no great neade of the Frenesians seruice, he declared plainly, how he bare the bishop no great good will: For e∣uen than his lieftenants in Lumbardy fixed their eies and mindes to surprise Placence, and not long after were procured certain mur¦therers, whiche slue Peter Aloise in his chamber, and before the Townes men heard of the murther committed, souldioures were brought in, which in themperors name did take the Castel. And if themperor were not priuy to this act, it had yet ben reason, that af∣ter the death of bishop Paule, he shuld haue restored the City to the churche of Rome: but he hathe not onlye not restored the same, but hath also gone about to take Parma from his sonne in law, and e∣uen than was in hand with the same deuise, whan the Bishop yet liued, in so muche, that Paulus, beinge sore vexed in his minde to thinke vpon such vnkindnes, departed out of this life: Afterwarde wer murtherers takē at Parma, which spake it of theyr own mind, that Fernando Gonzage had waged them to slay Octauius: whan he therfore was brought into this distresse, whan he saw, how they, of whome he loked for healpe, and also his father in lawe, laye in wait to take from him bothe landes and life also, he requireth his aid and succor, which he could not deny him, so humbly cra∣uing the same.
✚ The, xxiij, Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charles the fyfte. ❧ The Argument of the xxiij. Booke. The fathers of Trent enter into matters, and graunt safeconduit to come to the Counsell, The French king accordeth not to the same: pea he disswageth the Swisses from goinge thither: a composition was made with them of Maidenburge vnder certaine conditions. The most part of the Cities in Germany send to the Counsell. The ambassadours of the Duke of Wirtemberge might not be there harde. Duke Maurice hauing for the last time sent ambas∣sadours to the Emperoure, for the deliueraunce of the Lantzgraue, and obtaining nothinge but delaies, secreatly is resolued to make warre. The Monke, Bishop of Uarady, by whose meanes king Ferdmando had taken Transiluania is slaiue. Themperor in his letters which he sendeth to appease the Archbishops, assureth him self of Duke Moris, who to make fayre weather sen∣deth his Ambassadors to the Counsel, with whome thothers ioyned, and make request for a safe∣conduit for theyr deuines, and aboue all, that those which are of the contrary parte be not iudges in the Counsell. But obteining nothing they departe, vpon the brute of the preparation to warre that theyr Prince would make. The fathers of the Counselare at discorde, and after that newes came of the takinge of Auspurge, they fled al, Crescencethe Popes Legate, fel into so terrible a feare, that he admitteth no consolation at his death. DUke Moris, for the pacification, assembleth the states of his dominion, and about thend of Septembre cōmaundeth them to repaire to Wittemberge. Thither also they of Mai∣denburge send ambassadours, as it was co∣uenaunted, which the tenth day after return home, at the conuoy of Marques Albert. I haue showed you before howe Duke Moris by his letters required that the deuines mi∣ght haue safeconduit from the whole counsel: to the Emperor, ther∣fore commaundeth his Ambassadoures to preferre the matter to the fathers, and bryng it to passe. Wherfore when the .xi. day of Octobre was commen, ther was A decree at Trent of the Lordes sup∣per. a sitting wherin was fyrst rehearsed the exposition of the doctrine of the corporall presence of Christ in the Sacrament of thanckes geuing, of the manner of the institution therof, of transubstantia∣tion, as they call it, of the worshipping and adoration of this Sa∣crament, of reseruing the hoste, and cariyng it about to the sicke, of the preparation that a man may receiue it worthely. After, al chri∣stians are forbiddē to beleue or teach any otherwise, than it is here
decreed: Than were the Cannons recited. Wherein all those thea∣mes were condempned, which I said before were collected oute of Luthers workes and others: Notwithstanding to gratify the Em∣perour, they leaue foure of them vndiscussed. Whether it be neces∣sary to saluation, and commaunded by Goddes lawe, that all men should receiue the Sacrament vnder both kinds. Whether he that receiueth but one, taketh les, than he that receiueth both: Whether the Church hath erred, in ordeining, that only Priestes shoulde re∣ceiue vnder bothe kindes, and not the residue. Whether the sacra∣mente oughte to be ministred vnto children also. Touchinge these theames, before the Synode shoulde determine any thinge, they saied how the Protestantes desired to be heard, and to haue safe∣conduit graunted them: where therfore they haue longed greatlye hitherto for theyr comming, and are in hope that they will returne to the auncient concord of the Church, they graunt them safelye to come, and safely to retourne: And differ the determination of these questions to the fiue and twenty day of Ianuary, that they may be fore that day repair thither, and declare what they haue to say: thē will they treat also, touching the sacrifice of the Masse, because the argument is like. These thinges did they read openly in such sort, as if theyr aduersaries had made request to be heard in these thin∣ges only, wheras they neuer thought of any suche matter. For be∣sides Duke Moris, no man once moued the Emperoure, and hys sute was framed after an other sort, as before is said, and the mat∣ters were much more waighty, that they would haue propounded. But for what intent the thing was thus pronounced, a man may make a coniecture, but nothinge can be affirmed. How be it, of two thinges the one muste neades be: For either the request of Duke Moris was coldlye and slenderlye preferred vnto them, or els haue they vsed the matter craftely and negligent∣lye, which thing is more like to be true, by the safeconduct that they sent. For where Duke Moris would haue had the selfe same assu∣raunce for his men, that the Bohemers had in time paste: They wrote the safeconduite with a few wordes, and very negligently, The safecon¦duit of the fa¦thers at Trent. setting to, neither signe nor seale publicke. How it was lawful for all the Germaines indifferentlye to re∣paire vnto the Counsel, and of matters to be treated there, either in the full assemble, or with certain commissioners, to propound, con∣fer and reason, what they shal thinke good, either in talke or wry∣ting, without contumelious wordes and reproches, and after, whē they wil, to depart, and return home? for this consideration ye coun∣sell graūteth thē safeconduit, as farforth as to ye same apertaineth.
Moreouer, it shalbe lawfull for them, that as wel for their sinnes past, as hereafter to be committed, although they be most heinous and sinell of Heresy, they may at their owne pleasure chuse iudges for them selues. The same eleuenth day of Octobre before mentio∣ned, they made certain lawes, vnder the title of reformation, whi∣che concerned theyr iurisdiction. After was an other session decre∣ed the xxv. of Nouembre, wherein shoulde be treated of penaunce and extreame vnction. Than also the electoure of Brandenburge, Ioachim, sending his ambassadour, Christopher Strasie, a doc∣tour of the ciuill law, offered his duety and obeisance. And certain∣ly thāmbassadour spake manye thinges at large of the great good The Mar∣ques of Brā∣denburge sta¦tereth the counsell. wil of his Prince: They answer again how they haue taken much pleasure to hear his whole Oration, especially that part. wher the Prince submitteth him self wholy to the counsell, and saith that he will obserue the decrees of the same: For their truste is, that the thing which he hath nowe presently spoken, that same will he per∣fourme in dede. After the deathe of Ihon Albert, whiche had the Archbishoppricke of Maidenburge, both wealthy and large, the gouernement was committed to Fridericke, sonne to thelectour of Brandenburge, whome the Colledge had desired for their archbi∣shop: but the matter was impeached, and could not be broughte to passe at Rome: And because thelectour Ioachim, was before of the Protestantes religion, as it was openly knowen, that same was a great let. Wherfore to auoid the suspicion, this ambassadoure was sent, who fawning vpon the Prelates, omitted no poynt of exquisit diligence. Ther was peace concluded at Wittenberge: And all beit the siege was not leuied immediatelye, yet were there frendly me∣tinges betwene them, the xii. day of Octobre. And ye self same time Duke Moris constraineth the Chats, a people in the countrye of Duke Moris seaseth vpon the dominiō of Chats. Hesse, which wer iii. yeres past by themperours sentence taken frō the Lantz graue being prisoner to be sworne vnto him, by the con∣sent of the Lātzgraues sonne, by reason of the league of inheritāce as he saith, which is betwene the house of Hesse and Saxon: so that for default of heirs males, the one house should succede thother. And no man doubted but this concerned the iniury of themperor. that had geuen the sentence, and some new commotion, and all mē marueled what would be thend therof: but in the Emperors court was in a manner no talcke of it, and made as they knew not ther∣of. At this time was the Duke of Somerset, vncle to the kinge of Englande, apprehended the seconde time, and with him the Lorde The duke of Somerset ap¦prehended. Paget the Lord Gray and certain others. Than had Ihon the Duke of Northumberlande the chiefe rule and gouernemente: The cause of his apprehension was, as
it is reported, that the Duke of Northumberland said, howe the o∣ther laid wait for his life: For this by a law newly made was dea∣the amonges them. About the eight day of Octobre, the Bishop of Rome created Cardinall, George Martinuse bishop of Wardin, of high authori∣ty in Hongary: the common people named him Monke, because he was of thordre of Paule, the first Hermit. How the French ambas∣sadour was commaunded to attend for an answer at the xi. daye of Octobre, so that the king would acknowledge the counsell, I haue tould you before: Certes he came not, but yet in the Counsels name was setforth a wryting to the king. First they recken vp how they loked for most ample things at his hands, and that for sondry causes, but at the comminge of this The counsel writeth to yt french king. messenger, and after they had red his letters, they conceiued an in∣ward sorow, for that they are fallen from their expectation: and yet forsomuch as they are neither touched with the gilt of conscience, nor haue geuen none any occasion of displeasure, they haue not yet laid aside thold hope they had of him: wherfore thopinion which he hath conceiued, as though this counsel were called for the priuate profit of a few, can least of all take place in so worthy a Sinode. For the causes of calling this Counsell were propounded not only Causes of calling the counsell. of this Bishop, but also of Paule the thirde, verelye, that heresies mighte be roted oute, the schole of Discipline amended, and peace be restored to the Church: is not this plaine inoughecan ther be a∣ny more godly or Christianlike thing be done? For now are here∣sies spredde, not only throughout Germany, but in manner in all Countries: which great calamity the counsell is in will to redresse: This is the very cause, and this is also the end of all theyr doyng, and all thinges are referred to this poynt: Let him therfore permit the Bishoppes of his realme to further so godly a busines: For he neaded not to feare, least they might not be suffred to speake frely that they thought: For lately was his ambassadoure bothe quietly and patiently heard, whan he told no ioyfull newes. Than seing a priuate man was heardwith such a lei tie, why should any man beleue that the same shuld be denied vnto publike parsons, & such as are placed in so high dignity? how be it though he send no man, yet shall the counsell neuertheles haue bothe his dignitye and authoritye, for that it was lawfullye summoned, and now for iust causes restored: And where he signified, that he would vse the remedies, that his progenitoures had done before: they sup∣posed he would neuer procede so farre, as to reuoke those thinges, which were taken away & abolished in times past to the great com¦modity of the kinges of Fraunce: and seing that god hath so highly
auaunced him, and indued him with so great benefites, they truste verely, that he wil do nothing, wherby he shuld seme vnthankeful, ether towards God, or to our mother holy church: let him only haue a respect to his progenitors, to that same title and surname of most christen king: Finally, to his father king Fraunces, who honoured the former Sinode by sending thither his bishoppes and ambassa∣dors. Men of most excellent learning: he oughte to walcke in these fotesteps which are both fresh and domestical, and follow this exā∣ple, and remit priuate displeasures for the common wealthes sake. Themperor and the Bishop had exhorted the Swisses, that they shuld be at the counsel: but it was in vaine: and the Bishop in dede treated with them by Hierome Francke, as before is saied, but the French king gaue charge vnto Morlet, that was his ambassador The French disswageth yt Swisses frō the counsell. there, that he shuld indeuor to perswade them all, that they send no man thither. Morlet, fineding some difficultye herein, sendeth for Uergerius, an expert man in such affaires, out of Rhoetia, and ax∣eth his counsel. He both furnished him of argumentes, and shortly after setforth a boke, of eschuing the counsell. Morlet beinge thus instructed, came vnto thassemble of Baden, and there alledgynge his reasons, perswaded not only them, which had longe sence for∣saken Papistry, but also all the residue of the Swisses, euen as he desired. Wherfore none of them came to Trent. Out of Rhetia cam thither, at the Bishop of Romes commaundement, Thomas Plāt bishop of Chur: but whan the Rhetians vnderstode, by the aduer∣tisement of Uergerius, what the bishop of Rome intended, & howe he would by him recouer his authority amonges them, he was cal∣led home againe. The Spaniardes, which wer in the land of Wirtemberge, were sent for about this time by themperor, and sent into Italy, to serue The land of Wirtēberge delyuered of Spaniardes. in the warre of Parma. By theyr departure was the whole coun∣try deliuered from a most greuous seruitude, wherwith it had ben oppressed by the space of fiue yeares: onlye the Castell of Asperge the Emperoure reserued to him self, placing in it a garrison of Al∣maines. In these daies also, Henry Hasie, by the Emperors com∣maundement, traueling throughout Sweaden, euery wher chaun¦geth the state of the common wealth, and ordeineth newe Sena∣tors: he dischargeth also the preachers and Scholemasters, vnles they wyll obey the decre of Religion, as was latelye done at Aus∣purge. It is mentioned before how Duke Moris, and the Duke of Wirtemberge had commaunded Articles of Doctrine to be wryt∣ten, which after shuld be exhibited: how also the Senate of Stras∣hurge had ioyned them selues vnto this theyr doing.
Wherfore the duke of Wirtemberge, sending two ambassadoures, Ihon Theodoricke Pleninger, and Ihon Hecline, commaunded Thambassa∣dour of Wir¦temberge to the counsell. them, both to exhibite openly this confession of doctrine, and to say also that the deuines shuld come, which shal treat al thinges more plentifully, and defend the same, so that they may haue safecōduit according to the decre of Basill. They, so sone as they came to Trent, which was almoste at the end of Octobre, go vnto the Earle Mounforte, and exhibite vnto him the commission of theyr ambassade, and shew him how in theyr princes name, they would propound certaine thinges in the coun∣sell, he in his talke tended to this end, that he thoughte good they should repair to the bishoppes Legate: but they seinge that if they should confer with him any thing, it wold apere that they shoulde attribute vnto him the chiefe right and authoritye of iudgemente, wherin they perceiued a preiudice and hinderance of their matter. Wherfore they come not at him, but wryting letters to theyr prince fary for an answer of his pleasure herein. In the meane season the deuines do reason after theyr manner, of the questions before pro¦pounded concerning penaunce and vnction. The third day of No∣uembre, Counte Hedeck being sent of Duke Moris, came to Mai∣denburge, and calling out the captains of the souldiors into a place The pacifica¦cion of May∣denburge. without the city, made a ful end, and wrytinges of the same matter were drawen and sealed. And the soldiors in dede were assured by safe conduit, that they might safely depart. This was the viii. daye of the same month, but so sone as they were discharged, they were priuelye reteined, and hired againe, by the duke of Megelburge, which was now by the pacification released: for Duke Moris pur∣posely woulde not do it in his owne name. And the conditions of peace were these. That they should humbly craue pardon of them∣peror: that they shuld do nothing against the house of Austrich and Burgundy: that they submit thē selues to the chambre: that they o∣bey the last decre of Auspurge: That they answer al mē to the law: That they cast down the fortification of the city, at themperoures pleasure: That they admit into theyr city, themperors garrison at all times, and set open theyr gates for him: That they pay L .M. crowns to themperors cofers: That for the charges of the warres they deliuer to themperor xii. great pieces of ordenaunce: that they set at liberty the duke of Megelburge & thother prisoners. Whan the soldiors of the garnison wer gon out of the citye, the same daye, which were to the nombre of ii. M fotemen, and an hondreth hors∣men, Duke Moris sent in v. enseignes of footemen, and the nexte day, the Senate going forth to mete him, he entreth the city wt hys whole army, and receiueth them al into thobeisance of themperor,
thempire, & of him self, which had bene chiefe captain of the same warre, after, leauing there a garrison, he leadeth away the reast. Than causeth he the preachers to be sente for, and by his counsel∣loures, Faccie, Carlebice, and Mortisie he complaineth of iniurye done him, by reason of the bokes and pictures setforth by them, as though he shuld haue forsaken the doctrin of the gospel, as though he should haue moued warre against the city, for the constant pro∣fessing of the true doctrine: wherfore he hath iust cause to be offen∣ded, if he would followe his affections, but all these thinges he re∣mitteth for the common wealthes sake, & requireth that they wold from henceforth exhort the people to amend their liues, and honor the Magistrates: he commaundeth also praiers to be openly made for the Emperoure, for him selfe and for all other Magistrates: he saith moreouer howe there is at this presente a counsell holden at Trent, wherin he will exhibit the confession of a godly doctrine, as well in his owne name, as also of other Princes and states, let thē pray therfore, that God would prosper and turn to good the whole action of the counsell, and that they raile not againste the same, as they haue accustomed to do. They, deliberating vppon the matter, make answer, that in dede they set not forth those pictures, how be it they iudge them worthy no reprehension: and that certaine with in his dominion haue by the space of iii. yeares swarued from the pure doctrine of the Gospell, it cannot be denied: for there be bokes and monuments extant: and that the city was besieged because of the Gospell, it is easy to proue, if a man consider only the fyrste au∣thors of the warre: In admonishinge the people they haue omitted nothing, the same wil they also do hereafter: for the counsel, which is assembled to quench the verity, wherin that Romish Antichriste obteineth the highest place, they can none otherwise pray, than that God may confound, breake, and dissipate their enterprises and de∣uises: for there is no good thinge to be loked for at theyr handes. Such conditious of peace were in dede spread abrode: but certaine it is, that they were well assured both for their liberty and religion. Duke Moris also had rather the City should be open for him, then for themperour, as thend declared afterward. After this sorte they of Maidenburge being deliuered, besides thexpectation of many, got them selues great praise and renowne amonges foraine nati∣ons, for so much as in manner they alone throughout al Germany, declared by theyr example, what thing constancy may do. Moreo∣uer The noble fame & constā¦cy of Maiden burge. thend of theyr misery, was thentry and beginning of the warre against them, by whose aid and counsel they were afflicted, as here after shalbe declared. Whilest Duke Moris was in the city, he de∣clared sufficiently, what his intent was, that is to wit, how he wold
hazard his life to deliuer his father inlawe: Neither did he dis∣semble the same the next daye after, being moued by a certen man. He had sent Ambassadours to the Emperour before, for ye deliueraunce of the Lantgraue. And had also ioyned with him herein the king of Denmarke, and many Princes of Germany as you shall heare hereafter. And vnlesse he could bringe it to passe, was fully determined to attempte the thing by force, and Duke Mau∣rice intēdeth to war vpon the Emper. was already at a compact with the French kyng touching the same, who had sent to him priuely Iohn Fraxinie, Byshop of Baion, a man well acquainted in Germany, and that vnder∣stode the tongue. But the Emperour appered to be nothing mo¦ued with all these thinges, and was wholy addicte to the war of Parma, and the treaty of the counsell of Trent. About this tyme also Maximilian the Emperours sonne inlawe cōming out of Spaine, arriued at Genes with his wyfe and children. The Frenche men sayling out of the porte of Marseilles, and bording certen of his shippes, toke and spoyled the same. The cause whereof was said to bee, for that those horsemen, which king Ferdinando had sent into Italy to receiue and conduicte his sonne comming out of Spayne, had ayded Ferdinando Gō¦zage in a certen warlike exploicte. But the Frenchemen before that also, vnder the pretence of amitie entring into the hauon of Barcelona, had takē away a Galley & six shippes of burthē, furnished with all thinges necessary for the vse & nauigatiō of Maximilian as certenly the imperialls recite in a certē inuec∣tiue, wherin they complaine of the iniuries of the Frenchmen & the peace broken. The Princes had intreated the Emperour in the conuentiō at Auspurg, that in case he might not be pre∣sent, at the least he wold not be far from the place of the coūsel. Which thing he graūted to do, & had said vnto thē how he wold remaine vpō the borders of thempire, as I shewed you before. Wherfore departing frō Auspurge in the beginning of Nouēb. he came to Inspruck, which is thre daies iourney from Trent. This he thought to haue done, both for bicause of the coūsell, & also for the warre of Parma, that being so nere al thing shuld be done with more diligence. Shortly after, about the .xxi. day of Nouēb. Iohn Sleidane, Ambassadour for the citie of Stras∣burg, Iohn Slef∣dan, Ambas∣sadour for Strasburge in the coun∣sell. came to Trent, yt he might further ye cōmon cause ioyntly wt Duke Maurices, & the duke of Wirtēberges Ambassadours. And vnto this citie had ioyned themselues, Esting, Rauēsburg Rutelinge, Bibrach and Lindawe, and gaue commission, that they should treate also in their names. But why, they of Fran∣kefort, and chiefly of Norinberge, sent not, it may be doubted:
Ulmes hadde before chaunged theyr Religion, after the pre∣script of the Emperour. From Auspurg and other places, were all the preachers bannished lately, as I sayde before: So that they could not well sende any. Howbeit though the same had not chaunced the Senate would haue done nothinge herein but by the Emperours consent. In the moneth of Nouember the Byshop of Rome, in one daye created .xiii. Cardinalles, all Italians. For they be wont The Pope createth. xiii Cardinals. to prouide such, as it were garrysons, to defende them selues. Whan the .xxv. day of Nouēber was come, and the fathers pla¦ced in their seates accordingly, the decrees were recited. That penaunce is a Sacrament instituted of Christe, and necessary, for suche as after Baptisme fall vnto synne agayne. That it is A decree of penaunce. also a seuerall Sacrament from Baptisme, and as it were an other table of saluation, after the shipwrake hath chaunced. That the same wordes of Christe, by the whiche he geueth to his Apostles the holy Ghost, ought to be vnderstande of the po∣wer to forgeue sinnes by this Sacrament. That the sinn shuld be forgeuen, thre thinges be required, contricion, confession, & satisfaction. And that contrition is in dede a true and profita¦ble sorrowe, which prepareth the man vnto grace. And confes∣sion, or the maner secretly to recite the synnes to the Prieste, to bee ordeyned by Goddes lawe, and necessary to saluation. That all sinnes whiche come to remembraunce, and circum∣staunces of the same are to be rehersed. That confession ought to be euery yeare once at the least, and that chiefly in the tyme of Lent. That absolution is not a bare ministery, wherby the remission of sinnes is denounced, but an act iudicial. That on∣ly priestes, though they be neuer so synfull, haue authoritie to geue absolution. Where as Byshoppes doe reserue vnto them selues, certen cases and offences, for the whiche other priestes can not assoyle, to be well done. Although the crime be remit∣ted, yet is not the punishement therfore released, and that sa∣tisfaction consisteth in worke, and not in fayth. That by such penaunce, as eyther God sendeth vpon vs, or the prieste inioy∣neth, or els of our owne fre wyll we chose vnto our selues, the synnes are clensed, concerning temporall punyshement. That satisfactions wherby synnes are redemed, be Goddes seruice. That the prieste hath power to bynde and lowse. And therfore may inioyne penaunce to hym that confesseth his synnes. And this muche concerning penaunce. They decree that extreme vnction is a Sacrament instituted of Christe, for that it ge∣ueth grace, remitteth synnes, and comforteth the sycke. The
vse of this Sacrament to be the same, wherof spake Saint Ia¦mes the Apostle. Those seniours also wherof he made mention not to be aunciēt in yeares, but priestes, and thei only to be the Ministers of this Sacrament. This doctrine they commaūde to be celebrated and obserued. Suche as teache or beleue other wyse, they deteste and accurse as pestilent and wicked. The next daye after the sessions, were brought the Duke of Wirtemberges letters to his Ambassadours, Whome he com∣maunded, that they should procede, and in the assession, at the xxv. daye of Nouember, they shoulde exhibite the confession of the doctrine wryttē. When therfore those letters were brought so lyttle tyme to late, and that it was a long season to the next sitting, and Earle Mounfort was also absente, they goe to the Cardinall of Trent, and saye they haue certen thynges whiche they should in their Prynces name propounde in the counsell: And howe the same should haue bene done in the laste session, but that the letters came so late that the occasion was paste. Wherfore they requyre, that he, whiche is a Germayne borne, would both for the loue of the countrie, and for their Prynces sake also, whome he knewe, further thē in this case, and bring to passe, that the fathers being called together, they myght de∣clare their message. He with moste ample wordes, promiseth great beneuolence. Howe he wyl preferre the matter to the by∣shops Legate: But sayeth howe it is agreed amonges the fa∣thers, that no man shal propounde any thyng openly, vnlesse it A discipline amongst the fathers. be first knowen, what maner a thyng that should be. And how the Frenche Ambassadour was cause of the same decree, whan lately in the opē sittyng there was reysed an vnsemely vprore, and a very clamorouse outcrie. Wherfore he inquireth what should be the effect of their requeste. Who for the desire they had to further the matter, shewe him the letters of their cōmission. Wherby vnderstanding that they should exhibite some boke of doctrine, he letteth thē so departe at that time, as he put them in hope, that within a fewe daies, the thing might take effect. The next daye he calleth for them againe, and saieth howe he hath conferred with the legate of the whole matter, & for the better credit also shewed him the letters of cōmission. But that he is sore offended, for that they shoulde thynke to exhibite a wryting, and thynketh thus, that those whiche ought of dutie reuerently to receiue and obeye the rule and order of doctrine, woulde prescribe theyr Elders, whiche thynge is both absurde and vncommely. Other aunswere coulde he get none at thys present, but yet woulde he bee in hande wyth hym agayne.
And biddeth them also to be of good comforte. Within a fewe The Amba∣ssadours of Wirtimb. deluded. dayes after, what tyme Maximilian of Austriche approched nere, the Cardinal going forth to mete him at Mantua, admo∣nisheth the Ambassadours of Wixtemberg, that, for so much as he must nedes departe, thei should repare to Toletane, the Em∣perours Ambassadour: Who both by vertue of his office and au¦thoritie, may profite them greatly, and will do it right gladly, euen for his sake, whiche hath cōmended the matter vnto him. They followyng his counsell, spake vnto him: Who promising them gently many thynges, so departeth. But whan thei came againe the second tyme, he began to make an excuse, by reason of the disputations that the Diuines should nowe haue, wher at the fathers must be present. Whiche finished, he would espie an occasion. It is to be thought that he receiued a muche like aunswere, as the Cardinall had done before: But least he shuld take awaye all hope of being heard hereafter, he alledged this cause, especially considering bothe howe the Emperour hath had procured the counsell, and that it was permitted by a pu∣blique decree of the Empire, that euery man myght frely pro∣pounde of what matters soeuer he wold. In the meane season the Ambassadour of Strasburge goeth to the Emperours Am∣bassadour, William Pictaue, in the absence of the Erle Mon∣forte. And for so muche as they were all of lyke condition and authoritie, he sheweth him the commission of his Ambassade, as the maner and custome is, and sayeth he is sent thither to ye intent he might conferre and consulte with the residue of the profession of Auspurge, howe this controuersie of religion and doctrine myght be appeased, and a publique quiet established. He taking a copie of his commission, whiche he sayde he would sende to the Emperour, and speakyng many thinges of the doc¦trine and dignitie of the counsell, like as he was in dede a lear∣ned man and an oratour, offered his seruice and diligēce. This was the laste of Nouember. And at the same tyme the Diuines had Theames deliuered them, touchynge the sacrifice of the Masse as they terme it, that they myght speake their myndes of the same, after the maner before mentioned. Howe Duke Maurice sent his Ambassadours to the Empe¦rour Thambassa¦dours of D. Mauris and the Marques of Brandēb. to the Emp. for the Lantgraue, is declared before. And with thē were ioyned the Ambassadours of the Prince Electour of Branden∣burge. Wherfore being admitted to his speache aboute the be∣gynnynge of December, whan they had in theyr Prynces name done theyr commendations. You knowe, saye they,
moste redoubted Emperour, in what distresse ar the moste No∣ble Princes electours, Duke Maurice & the Marques of Bran¦dēburg, Their Ora¦tion. for ye deteyning of the Lantgraue, wher into thei chaū¦ced beyond all expectation, whilest by their singuler industrie, they wolde procure vnto you, an easye and honorable victorye, demynysh the charges of the warre, and restore to the common countrye peace and quietnes. Which thing hath ben the cause also, that they haue ofte intreated you, sometime by their Am∣bassadours, and somtime in their own persons, that you wold haue cōsideratiō of them, and set him at lyberty. At the which time verely, they added this moreouer, that in case ye requyred a further assuraunce, besydes the suertyshipp: wherwith they both, and Wulfegange countie Palatyne, with all the people of Hesse are bounden to you, they wolde not refuse. Unto these their requestes you made aunswer to Christopher Carlebyce, & Iames Schillinge, whom they sent laste vnto you, that to de∣liuer hym before it should appeare, what the action of the Em∣periall assemblee should be, whiche was than at hande, you myght not: Againe that you promised nothing els, but that if he kept conuenaūtes, he should not be deteined in prison perpe∣tual. And where they being occupied with other affaires, could not them selues come to the assemblee, they moued you agayne by their counsellours and letters at Auspurg, but you writing againe the cause, why you were offended wyth him, and might not deliuer him, did pronounce them free from the bonde wher by they are bounde to the Lantgraues sonnes. Wherfore they determined to moue your highnes againe: And woulde haue come their selues, but you knowe, howe they were both letted by the war of Maydēburge, and the Marques also by sicknes: And therfore wold haue the thing done by vs. And first in dede, whan your pleasure was, that the Lantgraue should submitte him self vnto you without condition, they receiued intelligēce by the Byshop of Arras, what your mynde was, this verely, that he should admitte and obserue the conditions of you pro∣pounded, and deliuered vnto them. Nowe, if he should haue ben perswaded to render him selfe in this sorte, it was assuredly ne¦deful to declare vnto him, that he shold neither be deteined pri∣soner, nor farther burthened, than was in the pacification pre¦scribed. So therfore ye Prince did assure him. Which thing also your coūsellours vnderstode right well. And where he desired yt certē articles of yt same peacemaking might be further declared vnto him, & also requested yt he might not be staied in the same matter aboue .vi. daies, & ye thing signified to ye bishop of Arras
in other thinges also the Princes in a maner obteined what they would. And albeit that in this same treaty the case was not vnderstande of all men after one sorte, in so muche that he, whan he came, was contrary to their promyse, committed to warde. Yet did they neuer blame you, Cesar, for the same, ney∣ther stode they in termes with you therfore, for that they had had to do only with your counsellours, & not with you, sauing than, whan the Lantgraue was coming, and had signified vn¦to them that they should come vnto him to Numburg. For thā spake they with your selfe, and sayde how they had perswaded him to admitte the conditions propounded, and that he was cō¦ming not far of, and how they, if you wold permit them, wold go to mete him: And for so moch as he was come thither vpon ther fidelitie, they besought you that he might not otherwyse be burthened, then was in the pacification comprised. Which thing when your selfe had graunted then frankely: they went forth, & brought him to Hale. And in the last treatie, ther was no mention made, that he shoulde be detayned prisoner. Which The Lant∣graue kepte prisoner a∣gainste the leage made. thing thei suppose that your owne men can also testify, name∣ly the Bishop of Arras, with whom onely they had conference, and Seldus, whome he many times ded associate vnto him. For after the cōditions admitted, and his humble submission: the Princes beleued verely, that he shoulde haue bene released immediately, and that for many causes they thought so. Fyrst, bycause youre counselours made no mention of imprisōment, which is the chiefest point of the same peacemakyng, and dili∣gētly marked of ye Lantgraue doubtles aboue al other things: Agayne, for that in the pacification, are many things contay∣ned, that cannot be perfourmed of a captiue Prince, but onely of him that is at libertie. After when he had made his submi∣ssion: you pardoned his offence, & promysed to abolysh the pre∣scription, and to geue him letters of reconcilement: moreouer for that ye were content with their suertyship, wherby it was prouided, that in case he obserued not cōuenauntes, the people should present him to you captiue: and the suerties by force of armes, shoulde compell him to his dutye. Certeinely, all these things were to no purpose, and al together superfluous, if ther had supposed that he should haue suffred punishment with his owne body. But where as they neuer thought of any such mat¦ter, nor yet your own coūsellours had made any mention ther∣of, vpon this truste and cōfidence they sent for him, and if any thing shoulde chaunce vnto him besyde, they promysed & were bound to his sonnes, to abyde the lyke fortune that he shoulde.
This was their minde and opinion, which was also cōfirmed, what time after the submission, the Duke of Alba badde them and the Lantgraue to supper. Which bedding & hospitalitie, they, for the maner of Princes, and custume of Germany, could not so interprete the thing, that he shoulde goe to the Duke of Alba his house as vnto prison, & they shoulde accompany him, and bring him thyther. For if they had conceaued the leaste su∣sspection The Lant∣graue blod to supper, was kepte prisoner. in the world of that matter: who shoulde beleue that euer they wolde haue done it? For seing they be Princes of the Empyre, and that electours, borne of moste noble houses: they wolde neuer haue imployed their seruyce in that sorte, as to in tyse a noble Prince, being their nere friend and kynsman, into such distresse, and themselues as it were, bring him to prison. But they neither knew any thing therof, till it was after sup∣per: For then ded the Duke of Alba fyrste say vnto them, howe he muste remaine in the Castell, as in custodie. But howsoeuer it be, they ded it of a very good mynde, as we sayd at the begen∣ning: And for so moch as they be bounden to him of their fide∣litie, you may easely perceiue, that in case after so great & long suite, and suerties put in, he shoulde be longer detayned, howe greuous and harmefull the same wolde be to them, their chyl∣dren and kynsfolkes: You se also most mightye Emperour, cō∣sydering you are come of the Germaynes race, for asmoch as ye Lantgraues sonnes poursue theyr ryght, & vrge them to yelde them selues captyue, after the fourme of the obligation, what is mete for them to doe, to maintayne ther honour and estima∣tion, according to the auntient and accustumed manner of the Nobilitie of Germany, and how they can haue none excuse vn∣to other Princes, although eyther ye power to sue them, or dede of obligation, which they haue, should be taken a waye. And if peraduenture the Lantgraue, which neither by cōpositiō, nor geuyng his faith, but by the same occasion as we haue shewed you, is deteyned prisoner, for a certeyne wearynes, and impaci∣ence of long imprisōment, hath sought som meanes to obteine liberty, and that perchaūce his ministers haue attempted any thing against his kepers: the Princes doe besech you, that the same be not to them preiudicial: But for somoch as by reason of ther obligatiō, they ar in a great perplexitie, out of ye which you only, nexte after almighty God, may delyuer them. For so moch as it is not vnknowē vnto you, how they stroke vpō these rocks, for so moch as you haue certen inteligence of their good will, fidelitie and duty, what time in your aduersitie, they em∣ployed all their lands and goods, lyfe and bloude, for your com∣moditie,
followyng herein the fotesteppes of their auncesters, they moste hartely and earnestly require you, that you would, in releasing your captiue, succour them, and haue respect here∣in not so much to the Lantgraues doinges, as vnto thē, which honour you exceadingly. Especially, since that a fewe of their families, haue for your progenitours, and for the house of Au∣striche and Burgundy, spared neither coste nor perill. And in case you feare, least he being set at libertie, should not kepe con∣uenaunt, your highnes knoweth well enough, whan the mat∣ter shal come to that issue, what the nobilitie & people of Hesse haue promised you by an othe, & what the Princes haue done likewyse by suertishyp. But and if you require a further assu∣raunce, they haue both made you the offer diuerse tymes here∣tofore, and nowe do also, and haue geuē vs authoritie to treate of the same matter. Moreouer concerning the conditions, for suche as might streight wayes be accomplished, they suppose there can no lack be founde. And where as the castels were not so sodainly rased, if you knewe wel the cause, they doubted not, but for that matter you would holde the Lantgraues sonnes excused. Furthermore, if any lacke be founde, they wyll do their whole indeuour, that you may be cōtented and satisfied. Wherfore, if thei themselues haue at any time, or their fathers and grandfathers done any thing, that hath bene acceptable either to you, or to the Emperour Maximilian, and the rest of your progenitours, or if you thinke that they may doe or per∣fourme any thing in tyme to come that to you may be pleasāt and ioyfull, they desire you moste effectually, that you woulde suffer them nowe to receiue some fruicte of the same, and that you would cause that hope & promesse to appeare, whiche first you made them at Hale, after at Numburge, & last also at Aus∣purg to the intent verely they maye honor you from hēceforth, with so muche the more industrie & courage, and may reioyce, that their sidelitie and seruice, which thei haue done you, hath bene well imployed, and largely rewarded. For if it should be o∣therwyse, and should nowe obteyne nothing, you may coniec∣ture, moste puissaunt Emperour, what discommodities wyl in sue, what tyme they shalbe enforced to answer the matter and to declare their innocēcie, but they hope vndoubtedly, that you will graunt their requestes. Whiche verely they will accept for an high benefite, and not they only, but also the Lantgraue with his sonnes and all his frendes, shall euermore endeuoure that they may requite this your benefite. And for bycause the same thing doeth so muche concerne their estimatiō, they haue
also intreated other Princes, to make intercession with them, whose Ambassadours you se here. And this haue they done for this intent, that the thynge whiche they could not yet obteine of you by prayers, messēgers and letters, that same myght they bryng to passe through their commendation and fauour, and praye you to take it in that parte. What tyme they had thus spoken, they deliuer vnto hym the letters of Ferdinando kyng of Romaines, of Albert Duke of Bauier, of the brethrē Dukes of Luneburge, wrytten in the behalfe of the Lantgraue. And The names of ye Princes that intrea∣ted for the Lantgraue. the Princes that sent Ambassadours were these, Friderick the Electour of Palatine, Woulfgange Prince of Bipounte, Iohn Marques of Brandenburg, Henry and Iohn Albert Dukes of Magelburge, Ernestus Marques of Baden, and Christopher Duke of Wirtemberge. Their Ambassadours, streight way af∣ter the oration before rehersed, whan they had shewed their cō¦mission, Duke Maurice say they, and the Marques of Brandē∣burg, Electours, wher for the deteining of the Lantgraue they were in great perplexitie, and sayde they would make sute to The Oratiō of the Prices ābassadours to the Emp. your highnes for hym, moste mercifull Emperour, intreated our Princes, that they would sue with them, to the intent the treatie myght be of more commendation and importaunce. Whiche dutie verely they could not in so iust a cause denie thē, for the great frendshyp and alliaunce that is amongest them. Considering therfore that the matter is thus, as hath bene suf¦ficiently heard of either of their Ambassadours. And because, if he be longer deteyned, the same shulde be greatly to the oblo∣quie and defamation of them that haue promised him their fi∣delitie. The Princes whiche haue sent vs, do praye and beseche you to ponder all these thynges dilligently. For they suppose it to concerne them also, that their dignitie, honour and estima∣tion be preserued, neyther can any thinge chaunce vnto them more greuous, than if any blotte should redounde to their no∣ble fame. Whiche doubtles wyll come to passe, vnlesse the cap∣tiue be deliuered. Wherfore they moste instauntly require you, that these intercessions and praiers maye take place with you, and that he may be shortly deliuered, especially, since he hathe both acknowledged his faulte, and humblie also craued pardō, and bene nowe deteined captiue a long season, but chiefly, be∣cause the great necessitie of two Princes Electours so requy∣reth. Who at what tyme they handled the matter right faith∣fully, and would gratifie you, fell into this pecke of troubles. And albeit peraduenture that in the treatie some errour was committed, and some thinges not wel vnderstande, yet were it
conuenient and comly for your clemencie, to preferre equitie before extremitie, and not to regarde so muche the captiue, as the fatall necessitie of the Electours, and deale frankely with them, after the example of your progenitours. Who had euer a great respect and care to the dignitie of the Princes imperial. This verely should both redounde to your honour amongest al¦men, and also more excite them, to shewe vnto you all fidelitie and beneuolence, and make them preste and willing to doe all thinges for your sake. The king of Denmarke also sending his Ambassadours, maketh intercession in a maner to like effecte. The Emperour a fewe dayes after maketh aunswere. For as The Empe. aunswer to the Ambas∣sabours. muche as the matter is weightie, and requireth deliberation, and that in the meane season mention is made vnto hym of Duke Maurice, that for certen other weightie causes, he wyll shortly repare to him, in so muche that hauing wrytten his let¦ters to him, he loketh for him dayly, therfore will he, bycause the matter may beste be treated of whan he is present, differ it vntil than. And as for thē, they may retourne home vnto their Princes, and shewe them in his name, that he will remember their intercession, and so vse the matter, that they may vnder∣stand, how their cōmendation was of him not lightly estemed. Not long after, William the Lantgraues eldest sonne came to The Lant∣graues son cometh to D. Maurice Duke Maurice. And bycause he had put him in hope of the in∣tercession to be made, and certen moneths were now past, since ye Ambassadours toke their iourney, he inquireth what is done He saieth, for that the Ambassadours of Denmarke came late, and not till the Emperour went from Auspurg to Insprucke, the thing was delayde, and againe sheweth him what answer the Emperour made. And bycause he desireth to speake with him, & differreth the matter till than. Albeit he is lothe at this present to leaue his countrie, yet for that he tendreth the case greatly, he sayeth he is determined to go, hauing first receiued letters from him. Than sayeth the other, the answer is vncer∣ten & doubtful, neither can he see what good is to be loked for. In ye meane whyle his fathers estate is miserable, who pineth a way for sorrowe, and lothesomnes of the pryson. Whome he may by no meanes leaue destitute, bothe bycause of his duty, and also of his promesse. Therfore let hym indeuour and bryng to passe, that within a certen and that a shorte tyme, there be made a direct aunswere. If the same be not done, neyther he nor the Marques of Brandenburge, may take it displeasaunt∣ly, if they be sued, and cōmaūded to answer to their obligatiō. As cōcerning his iourney, he wold he shuld take further delibe|
For he knoweth not, whether it be wysdome for him so to do. These thinges were thus handeled for a countenaunce, before certen counsellours, whome Duke Maurice woulde not make priuie to this deuise of his. For since he firste began to treate with Counte Hedecke, which was at what tyme he allured to him me part of his force, as I told you in the fourmer booke, he would scarsly let any of his owne coūsell know any thyng of that matter, in so muche that none of them vnderstode, wher∣fore Fraxineus ye Frenche Ambassadour came, or what he made there. Whan he had therfore receiued this answer from them∣perour, by and by he fixed his minde to make warre, and taried only for the seasonable tyme of the yeare. And touching those forsayd theames they began to dispute the seuenth daye of De∣cember. And the sixt daye after, whiche was the shortest daye of wynter. Maximilian entring into Trent with his wyfe & chil∣dren, was receiued of the Byshop of Romes Legate, and of the Maximilian entreth into Trent. Byshops of Spayne, Italy, and diuers also of Germany, but not yet of the Electours. He brought with him out of Spayne an Olyphaunt of Inde, whiche the kyng of Portugall had ge∣uen him, a rare spectacle, and a beast not often sene in Germa∣ny. The next daye after, it fortuned yt Iohn Gropper, of whome I spake before, did dispute, and after that he waxed hote, he in∣ueed The railing of Groppes. sore against Melanchthon and Bucer, though he were dead, and rayled moste bitterly on thē both, being a Germain, where both the Spaniardes and Italians, were a great deale more temperate. Whiche thing was against the decree of them∣pire, and also against the lawe by them selues made, that vere∣ly the matter should be treated, all affections set aparte, and without rayling. Wherfore a few daies after, Iohn Sleidane, by occasion of talke spake of the same to the Emperours Am∣bassadour, Pictaue, and complaineth that they should be per∣mitted to haue suche libertie. He sayde, they did it cleane con∣trary to their willes, and also the mindes of the fathers, & that they haue bene moste earnestly admonished, that thei should ab¦stayne. And albeit that perchaūce they are prouoked to do this by the example of their aduersaries, whiche haue nowe these many yeares triumphed in this kynde, yet will they take suche order, that it shall no more be so. And that the Emperour wold also be loth that any occasion of offence shuld be geuē any mā. A Cardinal of Dalma∣tia slayne in his owne house. About the .xviii. daye of December, the Byshop of Wardin in Hongary, lately made Cardinall, was slaine at home in his owne house, for suspicion of a conspiracie with the Turkes. The authour of this murther was Iohn Baptiste Castalde, an
Italian, whome the Emperour had before sent into Hongary, to assiste king Ferdinando with his ayde and counsell. Sfortia Palauicine, was also present at the same. After the Byshop of Rome heard of the murther, he appointed certen to examine the matter, and also doeth excommunicate the parsons aboue named. Whan the wydowe of Iohn Uayuode sawe yt she coulde hardely defende Transsyluania, she made a conuenaunt with king Ferdinando, and permitted him to haue the gouernment, and deliuering him the armes and ornamētes of the Realme, retourned into the lande of Poole. By this meane therfore Fer¦dinando possesseth in a maner all Transsyluania, by the helpe of the byshop of Wardin. But because he appered afterwardes to attempt newe deuises, and to aspire to the gouernment, he lost his life. I shewed you in the fourmer boke of the preachers and ministers of the churche, that were expulsed frō Auspurg, wherfore the moste part of the church were distitute of priests, not without the great grudge of the people, who supposed that the senate had caused the Emperour thus to do. Where therfore it was to be feared least this heate would somtime breake out, at the length, whan they had sought long and much, they foūd one Caspar Huberine, whiche professed the fourme of doctrine prescribed by the Emperour. There be certen bokes of his wryt¦ten concerning Religion, whiche were alwayes very wel com∣mended, euen of Luther him selfe. But why nowe he had alte∣red his mynde, I can not affirme. Who after he came to Aus∣purge, began not to preache by and by, for that he feared the mutinie of people, but at Christmas after he began, to the wō∣der of many, which had red his bokes before. The soldiours, as well suche as beseged Maydenburg, as those that defended the same, wyntered in Thuringe and there aboutes, and did much harme, especially to men of the churche, and amongest others also to the Archebyshop of Mentz, whose limites reache vnto those places. Tharchebyshops of Mentz, Treuers, & Collon, be∣ing herewith offended, he for the damage receiued, & they, for yt they sawe also, that the same chaunce might redounde vnto them, determined to retourne home, sending bothe letters and messengers to the Emperour of the same matter. But the Em∣perour, who desired greatly to haue the counsel continued, an∣swering the third day of Ianuary, your letters, saith he, of the 1552. xxi. of Decēber, are come to my handes. And bycause I had com¦maunded The Empe. letters to the Byshops E∣leciours. Fraunces Toletane to treate with you of suche mat∣ters, as you wryte vnto me of: againe, for as much as ye byshop of Arras had declared vnto your Procurer here certen thinges
of the same sorte in my name, I had thought you had bene sa∣tisfied: But for so much as I heare say, how for an vnpleasaūt brute, reised, you intende to retourne home, I thought good to admonishe you by this wryting that you geue not credit to althinges that are reported. For although there hath ben now for a certen tyme a brute, as though it were to be feared, leaste there should be some commotiō in Hessia, yet am I credible in∣formed, that if there be any thing at all, it is but the deuise of a fewe, whiche the greater part also discommendeth, wherfore it is the rather to be thought, that they thē selues wilbe mind∣ful not only of their othe and fidelitie, wherby they be bounde to me, but also of their dutie, whiche they owe both to me and to the common wealth, neither trusting to thinges vncerten, will take so great daunger vpon them. Moreouer, I haue sent intermessagers vnto all the Princes, states, and cities therea∣boutes, and haue searched diligently, what the matter shoulde be, and what euery man goeth about. But I haue founde all men to be obsequious and to do their dutie. For surely I haue geuen none occasion of offence to any man. Of Duke Maurice in dede there went a reporte also not long since, whiche perad∣uenture had his original hereof that he had bene captaine be∣fore of the same bandes, whiche after the rendring of Mayden∣burg assembled together and did hurt in certen places: But he wryting to me his letters of late & sending his Ambassadours also, promiseth al his endeuour. And euen at this present, two of his Ambassadours shal go from hence to morrowe to the coū¦sell at Trent. Furthermore he hath signified, that he him selfe will repayre vnto me for certē weightie and necessary affaires, and I knowe by certen reportes, that he wyll either this daye or to morrowe at the furthest, take his iourney hytherwarde out of Maydenburg. Finally, he maketh me so large and am∣ple There is craft in daw¦byng. promesse of his loialtie and obeisaunce, that I ought to loke for nothing at his hande, but that is honorable, in case there be any fayth in this worlde yet remaining. And seing he is both in bloud and birthe a Germayne, I can not be brought to beleue that he should attempte or ima∣gine so craftie deuises, but as concerning those bandes that Wyly begy∣ed. were at Maydenburg, I haue heard many complaine, & certen states be carefull, least they will remoue their campe & worke some greater mischief. But after I vnderstode, that for lacke of paiment of their wages, they flocke together & worke this oul∣trage, sending Ambassadours & gouernours, I cōmaunded thei
see that in any wyse there were mony leuied to paie them. And not that only, but wryting my letters also to Duke Maurice, became suertie for the same money that is owyng, so that the soldiours may be discharged. And this I did, not bycause I was bounde, but for that I loue chiefly the peace and tranquil¦litie of Germany. Nowe therfore I loke in a maner euery mo∣ment, that the same be done, and suppose verely, that they shal slippe awaye without the dammage of any man, and all this mutinie and trouble be appeased, but in case whan the pay∣ment is made, the armie be not discharged: than is it easely per¦ceiued, that there is some other deuise in hande. Than shall we also take an other waye, whiche we haue in our head at this present. Nowe, as touching other reportes that are brought vnto me, whiche are many in dede, but yet doubtfull and ful of contrarietie, al these I suppose be imagined for the moste part of our ennemies, and according to their olde maner and light∣nes spred abrode, to disturbe the counsell & peace of Germany. But I truste in God that suche priuie conspiracies shall at the last come to lyght, and haue an ende according to their demeri∣tes. For since the rendring of Maydenburge, all thinges were quiet in Germany, and all Princes and states do so louingly & obediently demeane them selues towardes me, that certenly I can not see what cause of any new mutinie can or ought to be imagined or pretēded. I am not ignoraunt that men ought to be circumspecte, and especially at this time, & in these sturres of foreine nations, & that no suspicion of the least daūger is to be neglected. Againe I am neyther so cleane voyde of care nor diligence, that I wyll let passe with a deaf yeare, such thinges as are reported, for I haue in a maner in all places espialles, to inquire of euery matter. And herein do I spare neyther coste Kings haue long armes. nor trauell. Howe be it to make a full determinatiō of a thing, vpon euery light reporte, you your selfe of your wysdome con∣sider, how vndiscrete a thing it were. And that you shuld nowe leaue the counsell, vnlesse some extreme necessitie vrged you, it is in no wyse to be committed. For considering howe great a furtheraunce consisteth in your presence, it is to be feared, least through your departure, the counsel should not only be disper∣sed, but also Religion it selfe shoulde vtterly peryshe, wherin verely bothe the common saluation of men, and all your pri∣uate commoditie resteth. And consideryng the case standeth thus, I hartely desyre you, my Lordes of Mentz and of Tre∣uers, that altering your counsell you doe not as yet take your iourney. And you my lorde of Collon, which make not so great
haste, I exhort ernestly to perseuer styll. And generally I re∣quire you all, that you who occupie the chiefest places amōgest the states of the Empire, would helpe one an other with ayde and counsell, declaring amonges your selues a brotherly loue and beneuolence. In the meane tyme I wil kepe diligēt watch for the common wealth, and as muche as I am able by polycie and power, will seke to quenche in tyme, the flambe that shall haply arise, to the intent that (ciuile euils oppressed, and our force increased) forrein warre may more easely be defended, and that you hauing your countries quiet, and trāquilitie recoue∣red, may altogether applie the affaires of the christian commō wealth. Yet neuerthelesse I would aduise you, that suche of your counsellours and officers as you haue left at home, do pro¦uide for all thinges, that nothing chaunce vnloked for, & that they conferre their counselles with such of their frēdes & neigh¦bours, as are to be trusted. Wherin if I may also profite you a∣ny thing, I will do it gladly: So that if any tumulte be, which I can not thinke there wyll, you may be so muche the more ready what so euer chaunceth. And seing there is no great di∣staunce betwixt vs, you shall do me a pleasure, in case you shall wryte vnto me of suche thynges, as from hence forth you shall haue intelligence of. And I shall do the same, and whatsoeuer I shall thinke to concerne you and the common wealth, I wyl let you vnderstande, and as I haue oftentimes promysed you, so wyll I in dede perfourme all defence and tuitiō. A few daies before Erle Montfort was returned to Trent. Unto him ther∣fore go the Ambassadours of Wirtemberg, & declare howe they haue brought nothing to passe hitherto by the Cardinall, and Toletane. And for so much as he & his fellowes Ambassadours do present there the Emperours persone, they require yt theyr Princes demaundes might be heard. But where as than they receiued no very good aunswer, they being almoste in dispaire of the thynge, were pourposed to goe home. As the Prince had lately commaunded them, in case they were longe delayed. The Ambassadour also of Strasburge declared his commission to the Erle Monfort, as he had done before to Pictaue, and he al∣so toke a copie of the commission. And now the Diuines dispu∣tations ceased, and the fathers assembled dayly, that searching the opiniōs of all them, they might make decrees, as I shewed you before. And of the contrie of Germany, were chosen for the same thre bishops, Collō, Uienne, & Nūburg. This was Iulius Pssugius. And whilest they were occupied with those affaires, & prepared al things for ye next sitting, the .vii. day of Ianuary
come thither the Ambassadours of Duke Maurice, of whome the Emperour had written a litle before, Wuolfie Coler, and Leonard Badehorne a Ciuilian, by their coming, the Byshops of whome I spake were well chered vp, and chiefly the Empe∣rours Ambassadours, for that they thought there was nowe no more doubte in Duke Maurice, whiche followed peaceable wayes. The thyrde daye after they came, they declare their mes¦sage Thābassad. of Du. Mau∣rice come to the counsell. to the Emperours Ambassadours. First, they recite, howe the Diuines that should come were not sufficiently assured by the counsell, and for that cause their Prynce did sende no man. He is in dede right wel affected towardes the common wealth, and desyreth much that some waye of concorde might be foūd. And therfore was fully resolued to sende of his owne, suche as are good men, and louers of concorde, and doubteth not but that diuerse others wyll lykewyse do the same. But that the same may be done, these be his requestes. First that those that shall come, may haue saufeconduicte according to the fourme of the decree of Basill, as the Bohe∣mers were assured in tymes past. That they surcease from all action in the meane tyme tyll they come. That when they shal come, all fourmer actes may be retracted, and the daie appoin∣ted for the session, be adiourned. That there may be had a coun∣sell, wherin all nations and people may assemble. That the Byshop of Rome take not vpō hym the authoritie of president, but submitte hym selfe to the counsell, and release all Byshops of their othe, that all mens voyces in the counsell may be free, and their iudgementes not intangled. Whiche thynges also, whan they shall thinke good, they wyll declare more at large in the assemble of the fathers, and make requeste that some thing may be done in it so shortly as may be. For the Diuines haue already taken their iourney, and are come at the least for∣tie myles on the waye, and tary nowe tyll they be called. This was the tenth daye of Ianuary. They sayed howe they were both ryght glad of their comming, and that also they woulde preferre all these thynges vnto the fathers. They signified also the whole matter to the Emperour, who to gratifie Duke Maurice, did aduise and counsell the fathers, that they should D. Maurice feared of the Emperour. aunswere myldly and frendly to his requestes. Moreouer the Duke of Wirtemburge, where he had heard no certentie before after he knewe that Duke Maurice had sent thyther, commaū¦ded his Ambassadours to tary tyll the next sessions, and to ex∣hibite theyr wrytinge in the same. He sent them also an other wrytinge, howbeit very brief, of the same tenure in a maner,
as was the request of Duke Maurice, and wylled them to put vp that also with the confession of doctrine. The Ambassadour of Strasburge was commaunded to attende till either Duke Maurice men came, or that it were certenly knowē, they wold not come. Whan they were come therfore, he communicateth with them the cause of his Ambassade, and sheweth them how thinges stode, and vnderstandeth by them againe, what their commission was. The same do the Ambassadours of Wirtem∣berg, and the case was comen to them al. Which they notwith∣standing for that it was long or they came, followed and vrged chiefly, and therfore they intreated diligently the thre Archby∣shops Electours, and the Cardinall of Trent, a great-frende to Duke Maurice, and the Emperours Ambassadours, that for the common wealth sake, they would both be wylling them sel¦ues, and also perswade the rest of the fathers herein. For none of the Ambassadours would go to the legate Crescentius, or a∣ny of his fellowes legates, least thei should appere to attribute to them any thing. But bycause they were sent to followe the Emperours mynde, & satisfie the decre of the Empire, therfore they vsed his Ambassadours, which was their high & chief ma∣gistrate, for their intercessours. And at this present time came newes, ye within a few daies Duke Maurice wold come to the Emperour. Whiche made al men to be of better hope, & a great deale more willing. In this moneth was beheaded at Lōdon ye Duke of Somerset, vncle as I said before, to the king of Eng∣lande, & with him certē of his frendes, as Michel Stanope, sir The Duke of Somerset beheaded. Rafe Fane, & sir Myles Partrich knightes. And some reported that the same was done by the procurement of the Duke of Northumberland. They that were of the wittier sorte, began euen than to feare the good king, whome after his kinsfolkes were dispatched out of the waye, they sawe was more open to daunger & treason. For after the Duke of Somerset was dead, the Duke of Northumberland put to the king newe chamber∣laines, & amonges them his own sonnes & kinsmen. Whan the daye of the next session was now at hand, the Emperours Ora¦tours, sending for thambassadours of Duke Maurice, declare what thei haue done with the fathers in their cause. How thei haue obteined a saufeconduict such as they wyshed for. How al¦so thaction may be discontinued & differred, vntill they come & may be present at the same: For that al nations & people be not there assembled, that lieth not in the fathers to perfourme. The counsel was lawfully sōmoned. And although al mē come not, yet standeth it neuerthelesse in his ful strength & dignitie,
that suche decrees as are made should be reuoked, let them con∣sider them selues, howe vndecent a thing it were: For it belon∣geth to the reproche and infamie of so great an assemblie. Let Diuines come only: They shall both be in all matters hearde, and also intreated moste gently. And if any thyng offende thē, or be done without reason, if they see them selues ouermuche aggrauated, they haue free libertie to departe whan they wyl. They desyre them earnestly that they would geue some thynge to the tyme, and not to couet to haue all thynges graunted thē in this one moment. Whan they shall come to the action, than may dyuerse thinges by occasion be obteyned, whiche appeare nowe very harde. The fathers, they saye, be very desyrous of a reformation, and wyll not fayle to doe their dutie, and longe sore for the Diuines comming, vnto whome they wyll shewe all good wil & fidelitie, and haue thynges to propoūde of great importaunce, and desyre that they may begynne, to the intent that by this occasion, they may come forth also. That whiche they requyre moreouer touchyng the submission of the Byshop of Rome, they desyre them some thyng to qualifie. The fathers do see and perceyue, that there is som what in that high digni∣tie, that may be reprehended, and ought in dede to be redressed. But yet must they procede after some fine deuise. The Empe∣rours mynde and wyll is, that all thinges should be ritely and lawfully done. But they finde by daily experience, howe fayre, and dissemblingly they must treate with the Byshops legates. For verely they must vse a singular dexteritie, and deale with them by policie. Wherfore let them nowe contente them selues with suche thinges as are graūted, which are surely not with∣out their great trauell obteyned, and fynde the meanes, that the Diuines may make haste. And than will they neyther in publique nor priuate cause omitte any parte of their dutie. And whan they were come hytherto, they deliuer vnto them the saufeconduicte: Whiche they byd them reade, and after to sende it them againe. This was the .xxii. daye of Ianuary. And thus sending them awaye, in the selfe same momente, D. Maurice Ambassad. sent awaye. call for the Ambassadours of the Duke of Wirtemberge. And first make an excuse touching the fourmer tyme, by the moste weightie affaires of the fathers. But nowe if they haue any¦thyng to doe, they be ready to further thesame. They sayd, how they haue had a long tyme nowe thinges to propounde, and to be hearde with spede. Assone as they were dimissed, they sende for the Ambassadour of Strasburge, and speake to the same ef∣fecte. He declared briefly, wherfore he was sent, by reason of
Coletane, vnto whome he had not spoken before. For this pre∣sent he sayde he had nothing els to saye, and how he loked day∣ly for letters frō home. For immediatly after that Duke Mau∣rice Ambassadours were come, he was commaunded to wryte home what their cōmission was, and to attende what the Se∣nate would haue done further more. Howebeit he required thē in the meane tyme, that in those matters, whiche the Ambassa¦dours of Duke Maurice had preferred vnto them, they would so vse them selues, that they myght come forthwith, to open treatie. They saide againe, howe they had certen thinges to do with the Ambassadours of Duke Maurice and of the Duke of Wirtemberge. Whan any thing shalbe done, they will let hym vnderstāde, that he may signifie the same to his citezens. They verely do greatly wyshe for a concorde. And the Emperour also applieth his whole endeuour & study to the same. They desire very muche also, that thaction might beginne, and doubte not but God wyll assiste that moste honest enterprise. Whan this was done, the Ambassadours of Saxon, Wirtemberg & Stras∣burge, hauing cōference together, do way that fourme of saufe conduicte whiche they had receiued. And for so muche as they had wrytten out before euery chapter of the decree of Basill, ye all men might see, especially suche thynges as concerned any weightie matters, it was not hard for them by and by to dis∣cerne in what places this dissented from that. Whan they had The saufecō¦duict altered therfore perused it ouer, streight waye they perceiued, that the chiefest places, were partely altered and partly omitted. For in the saufeconduicte that in times past was geuen to the Bohe∣mers, are these thinges amongest others. That they shuld haue also authoritie to decide matters. That in al matters of cōtro∣uersie, the holy scripture, the order of the primatiue churche, & suche counselles & interpretours as were agreable to the scrip∣ture, should be in stede of the iudge. That they might vse their owne seruice at home. That nothing shuld be done in contēpt or reproche of their doctrine. Wherof, the first, the thirde & laste were cleane omitted. And the second and chiefest thing in dede was sore altered. Whiche thinges considered, they them selues deuise a new fourme, following the fotesteppes of the decree of Basil. But in the meane tyme Toletane, sent his seruaūt once or twyse for ye paper, fearing, as it appered, ouermuch diligēce: But they neuertheles procede, & at the last whā the thing was finished, Duke Maurice Ambassadours come againe vnto To∣letane, & comparing thone with thother, shewe him, what lack they find therin. Than began he to stomack the matter, & was
right sore offended. For why should they not be content with ye, whiche they with great labour & dilligence had obtained? For suche as should come, were assured sufficiently. For the chiefest point is wherby it is prouided that they may safely come & sa∣fely goe. All other thinges serue nothing to that purpose, but only concerne the maner of treatie in the coūsell: Which thing might a great deale better be determined what time the Diui∣nes be present, than now. They make aunswer, how they may not passe the bōdes of their cōmission, which is, that they may not receiue a saufeconduicte contrary to that of Basill. Two dayes after, the fathers assemble all in the house of the byshops legate, and with them themperours Ambassadours. Who call before them there thambassadours of the Duke of Wirtēberge, which the day before they had sayd they would doe. Whan they were brought in, they are cōmaunded to declare their message. Who after they had shewed their cōmission, & made a brief pre∣face, bring forth the confession of doctrine written, & deliuer it to the scribe of the counsel, as the maner is. And said also that Diuines should come from their Prince, whiche should treate of all things more aboundantly, howbeit vpō these cōditions. First, yt by cōsent of both parties, conueniēt iudges shuld be cho¦sen, which shuld heare the diuines reason, & iudge vprightly of matters yt be in cōtrouersie. For in asmuch as the Prince percei¦ueth, yt the doctrine of his diuines, doth for ye most part disagre with ye doctrine of ye bishop of Rome & of other bishops, whiche ar many wayes boūd to him, he thinketh it very vnreasonable & against al right, that they, which susteine ye parsone either of plaintife or defendāt, shuld chalenge to thē selues thauthoritie of iudgement. Secondly, that it was decreed in thassembles of thempire at Auspurg, that the counsel shuld be continued, & al¦thinges Godly & rightly done. And this was euermore so takē of their Prince, that such thinges as were decreed in the coun∣sel in fourmer yeares, ought not to haue the force of a law, but that all thinges should be repeted frō the beginning. For what right or reason were it, whan two men go to the lawe, that the thing whiche is decreed, whan the one hath iust cause to be ab∣sent, should be taken for ferme and stable? Moreouer, seing ma∣ny dcerees were made not only in the fourmer, but also in this same counsell, contrary to the holy Scriptures, and also many olde errours established, their Prince requireth that the same be of none authoritie, but ye al thinges may come to a dew exa∣minatiō. Those same articles cōprised in writīg they exhibited together wt the cōfessiō of doctrine. Whā this was done, answer
made them, that the fathers, whā they sawe time, should shew them their opinion, & thus were they dimissed. Thesame daye in the euening they sent like wise for thambassadours of Duke Maurice. They, whan they came, recite with a long oration ye demaundes of their Prince, in like sorte as they did of late to ye The franke speache of D. Maurice Ambassad. to the Fa∣thers. Emperours Ambassadours: sauing that the ende was more pi∣thie. Wher this was said moreouer, that ye same seruice & order that is vsed in the popish churches, was not the true religion, but a countrefeated thing, & as it were a shadowe of religion. Whan they had made an end of thoration, they were answered with the selfsame wordes, as before were the Ambassadours of Wirtemberg. Amongst other thinges this greued thē moste, yt their religion was described by so vile & contēptuouse a name. Which was afterward well knowen. Thambassadours had in∣tended to haue vttered their message openly in the publique as¦size: But to auoyde this, which they knew certenly they wolde do, they were heard priuatly. For either must thei nedes do this or els leaue al to ye cōmon treatie. They had brought with thē a confession of doctrine written by Philip Melanchthon, as I showed you before, but where as they had no cōmaundemēt of this thing, I know not for what cause, thei did not present the same. The next day, which was ye .xxv. of Ianuary, was thopen¦sassions, & the bishops legate was brought to the church with ye pompe before rehersed. Than was the nōber of soldiours much augmēted, & also a greater resort of people out of sōdry places, for that they supposed that the treatie of thesame day shuld be very notable. Whan the masse & all other ceremonies were ful∣ly finished, it was recited in the pulpit, how for the protestātes cause the whole matter should be differred till the .xix. daye of Marche, before the whiche day, they will be here in good time, to propound their matters. And this to be frendly graūted thē, for that the counsel trusteth, that they wil come not obūinatly to impugne the catholique faithe, but for a zeale to knowe the truth, & that they will in fine admitte & obeie the decrees of ye churche & schole of correction. How they haue more ouer a lar∣ger saufeconduicte, so that no lack can be founde. Furthermore that in the next sitting, the treatie shalbe of the Sacramēt of Matrimonie. The third daye after, whan nothing came forthe at al, the Ambassadours of Duke Maurice & their fellowes de∣maunded of Fraunces Toletane, with whom they chaunced to dine that day, a copie of thesame saufecōduict, which was spo∣ken of openly: Who made them a gentle answer, but whā other thre daies were past, thambassadour of Strasburg at ye request
of the residue goeth vnto Pictaue. He cōplaineth that this is the sixt daye, wherin they can heare nothing. And that before was a longer delay, for that the saufeconduicte was not suffi∣cient, & nowe is the time tracted again. And certenly the diui∣nes wil not come, before suche time as the magistrates be con∣tented with their saufeconduicte. He saide howe there was no faulte in him, & marueiled why Toletane thus differred them, who had the chiefest place amongest them. He would go talke with him, & doubted not but the matter should be dispatched ye same day. That thing whiche he should learne by him, he wolde she we him. And thus went to him. This was the last daye sa∣uing one of Ianuary. Within a fewe houres after, al thambas∣sadours were commaunded to come to the house of Toletane, who deliuered to euery of them a copie of the saufecōduicte, sig¦ned vnderneth by the scribes of the counsell. There was also ye Earle Monfort. Pictaue beginneth the talke, & first in dede he excuseth the delay made, and than speaking much of their own zeale, and the great good wyll of the Emperour, he admonished them, that the diuines might come with all possible diligence, whiche they trusted doubtles they would, hauing once receiued their saufeconduict. Than go they apart and reade it. And the The Ambas¦sadours of ye Protest. de∣luded. places whiche they had amended before the sessions, they finde nothing altered. Wherfore they come to them againe, and com∣playne therof, and she we what lacke they finde in euery point. Thambassadours of Saxon desire also to know, what answere the fathers haue made to their requestes. Thesame do they of Wirtemberge. Againe speaketh Pictaue, & touching the saufe conduicte, answereth. Where they desire, that their men might haue authoritie to decide, that same do they ouertimely. Whan the diuines be here present, & in ye worke it selfe, many thinges may fortune vpon occasions to be graunted, whiche are nowe refused. Where they would that holy scripture only shoulde be iudge of euery controuersie, there is no man against that. But whan there arriseth strife about thinterpretation of scriptur, vnto whom shuld credit be geuen soner than the coūsel? Scrip∣ture is a dome thīg & without life, as also other politike lawes How muche the papistes esteme the Scripture. be: But the mouth of the iudge must be applied therunto, that it may be wel perceiued. Which mout verely is the voice of the councell, & this maner hath bene alwayes obserued since the Apostles time, whansoeuer there arose any doubtful matters. Where they would vse their owne seruice at home, it is not in¦dede openly graūted thē, neither yet it is prohibited. Least any thing should be contemptuously done against their Religion &
doctrine, they nede not to feare for it should be straightly prohi¦bited. For both the Emperour wold haue it so, & the fathers al¦so hate all suche intēperauncie. And seing thassemblie is made for peace & vnitie, immodeste & opprobrius wordes shall not be vnpunished. Unto ther requests they make in a maner the lyke aunswere, as they did lately before the sitting. How al the trea¦tie was disterred for their cause vntill an other tyme: But that the decrees made should againe be repeted, they pray them not to disgrace so many notable men. They will promyse & become suerties, yt whan the diuines shal come they shal be heard in al¦thinges. Where they would haue the Bishop of Rome brought in subiection, & the other released, for asmuche as the same be∣longeth properly to hymselfe, ye fathers can determine nothing before the matter be declared to him. Concerning the requestes of thambassadours of Wirtemberge, for so muche as they be of the same sorte, the iudgement of the fathers is like also. Wher∣fore they intreate them, that they would not for so small mat∣ters, suffer the occasion so long wyshed for of accomplishyng a moste holy thyng, to be letted and dispointed, wherof doubtles all the nations of Europe shall receiue fruite, but that they would indeuoure and perswade their magistrates, that the di∣uines might come with spede. Thei can not at this time worke a greater benefite for the common wealth. Whan the Ambassa¦dours had againe replied, and vrged this thing chiefly, that it is against all reason, that suche as susteyne a parte of the suite, should iudge in a matter of controuersie, at the length they de∣parte thus, that they receiue the copie of the saufecōduite vpō no other cōdition, but to sende the same to their magistrates, whiche they would do immediatly with all expedition, neither wyl they faile to further the matter, so much as in them lieth, nother do they dispaire also of their cōming. Thambassadours of Duke Maurice sende their copie out of hand, & so did tham∣bassadour of Strasburge, they of Wirtemberge carie their co∣pie with them, going home the firste daye of February, by the Princes permission, who not long after sent others, as hereaf∣ter you shall heare. A litle before this tyme came the Diuines from Duke Maurice to Norinberge, and amongest them Ma∣lanchthon, The diuines come to No∣rinberge. being commaunded to remaine there tyll the Am∣bassadours sent them saufeconduict from Trente: But a fewe dayes after they were come thither, they are forbidden to goe any further, but to attende til they know what the Prince shal make wt the Emperour, vnto whome it was said he should go. Whan the decrees are confirmed in the counsell house, there
were theames wont to be deliuered to the diuines for the next disputation, as I shewed you before: But synce the last sitting this was cleane omitted, wherof were reported causes mo thā one. Yet was it sayde commonly, to be done for the Protestan∣tes sake. For in the beginning of February, whan the one of Duke Maurice Ambassadours and the Ambassadour of Stras¦burge, went forth of pleasure to see the hether part of Italy & Uenise, the other, whiche had sene Italy before, treated with the Emperours Ambassadours for so much as he supposed the diuines would come right shortly, whiche in his opinion were now at Auspurg, that ye whole intreatie might be differred vn∣till than, and that the fathers would patiently beare so smal a delay. Tharchebishop of Treuers had with him a black Freer, Ambrose Pelarge, who on a certen holy day, whiche was than the vii. of February, expounding yt place of the Gospel, which is of the cockel mixed with yt wheate, said amonges other things The bitter∣nes of freer Pelarge a∣gaing yt pro∣testauntes. that thyl cockel must be destroyed, after any sorte or maner, so yt the same might be done without the losse of the wheate, appli∣yng all his sermon to heretikes, whiche were signified by this worde, cockell. And it was reported to thambassadour of Duke Maurice, how he had rayled bitterly against heretikes, & had said this also, that there was no faith nor promesse to be kepte with them, if any were haply made. He therfore, after he had made more diligēt inquisitiō, goeth to the Cardinal of Trent, who was there with authoritie, and to the Emperours Ambassadours, and complaineth of that he had heard. The Freer being called for, confessed in dede that he spake of heretikes generally, and that they should be distroyed with fyre, sworde, hanging or any other meane, in case the same may be done without any great hynderaūce or publique commotion. But concerning that promesse is not to be kepte within them, he had spoken neuer a worde, and if he had so done, he should haue incurred the penaltie of losyng his lyfe, for breakyng the decre of the counsell. After this they call for the Ambassadour, and reciting the Freers purgation, bid hym loke for nothyng of the Fathers, but fidelitie and vpryght dea∣ling. If any thyng also be blabbed out lyghtly, whiche neuer thelesse is straytely prohibited, that they ought not to be mo∣ued therewith. Whether the Freer were belied or no, I knowe not certenly. For some of his auditours beinge demaunded, Duke Mau∣rice letters to his ambas¦sadours. sayde not the same thynge. In these daies were brought thither yt letters of Duke Mau¦rice, dated the last of Ianuary. In the which he signified to his
ambassadors, that such thinges as they had not obteined of the fa∣thers hitherto, they should vrge: he was all together in preparing him self to go shortly to the Emperor: Than will he amongs other thinges treat with him also of these matters presently: and that al¦so with his diuines should come. Moreouer the ambassadors and diuines of certain Princes and Cities: amonges the which he named the Duke of Pomeranes co∣sins, the copy of the which letters, thone of thambassadors, for that his felowe was not yet retourned from his iourney, sendeth to the Cardinall of Trent at Brixna, which was lately gon thither. For he, because he was both most seruiceable to the Emperor, and also loued Duke Moris by reason of muche familiarity, dearely well, and chiefly wished that the counsel might procede, toke very heaue∣ly this dissention growing, wherof ther was much talk. And that was the cause that thambassador sent these letters, wherwith he knew he should be comforted. And he verely after he had receiued those letters, where before he doubted, now at the length he began to take more comforte, and to hope well, and wrote againe to thambassador, that so sone as Duke Moris shall come to Insprucke, he will go thither immedi∣atly to him, or a great way further. For by reason of the amity and frendship that was betwene them, he thoughte he could perswade him to peaceable waies. And these letters were subscribed wyth Duke Moris own hand, and to them was also annexed letters of theyr commission, to exhibite, if nede required, for the same was be¦fore neglected. Not long after, tharchbishop of Treuers, to refresh him self, departeth from Trent homeward the xvi. day of Februa∣ry. For that they said, how themperor had geuen him leaue, that so sone as he might recouer his health, he should come thither again: yet left he the Frier Pelarge ther, that he might be present at al ac∣tions: Tharchbishops of Mentz and Collon brought him goinge a mile or two on his way. And he tourned on the lefthande, and toke not his iourny by Insprucke, wher themperor lay. Shortly after, many began to mutter how the counsell shoulde be proroged, and that Duke Moris, making league with the frēch A brute of war against themperor. king: prepared to warre vpon themperor. This rumour was not great at the first, but it increased daily, and secreatly was one sent from Trent to themperor: to vnderstād his pleasure. After also came one thither from themperor: but all thinges were kept very close. The seconde daye of Marche, whiche was than Ashewedens∣day, the Bishop of Romes Legate, settinge vp papers on the chur∣che Pardons. walles, whiche they call indulgences or pardones, graunteth
remission of sinnes to al men in generall, but specially to Bishops, Ambassadoures, and deuines, whiche either haue or will confesse their sinnes by a time prescribed, will go to certaine Churches in Trent on daies appoynted. And there saying fiue Pater nosters, & fiue Aue Maries, & other praiers, will pray to God for the con∣cord of Princes, for the consent and vnity of the church, and for the lucky successe of the counsell: and how this so great a benefit is ge∣uen by the high bishop Iuly the third, who is careful for the health of soules, yt men may as wel enioy the same at Trent, as at Rome. Wherfore many ran daily to the churches both Bishops & others, especially Spaniardes, obseruing the difference of daies. For they attributed to this religion one while les time, an other while more. In this great taciturnitye, as before is saide, the ambassadoure of Strasburge inquired of themperors ambassador Pictaue, of the state of thinges, who said, how the brute that went, that the counsel shoulde be proroged, was vntrue, and that themperor would haue them in any wise to proceade, and continue their action: where also ther hath nothing bene done of late, that is for theyr cause, whiche haue put the fathers in hope of the comming of the diuines. This was in the beginning of Marche, whan Duke Moris had aboute thend of February called backe the deuines from Norinberge, who after the brute was raised that he should come to themperor, whē he had passed a certain way of his iourny, retourneth home, and be¦ginneth to take munsters, as in the nexte boke shalbe recited. When these things wer knowen, and sondry messagers came daily one after another, and that the matter was now out of doubt, the Archbishops of Mentz and Colon, vnto whome came lately great plenty of vitaile out of the nether partes of Germany, prepared thē selues to horsbacke with great expedition, and the eleuenth day of March they depart in the dawning of the day, wheras ouer nighte the bishops of Romes Legate, accompanied with the residue of the Bishops of Italy and Spaine, came vnto them to bid them fare∣wel. The same day came thither new ambassadours from the duke New ambas¦sadors from Wirtēberge of Wirtemberge, Werner Munchinge, and Hierome Gerarde, a ciuilian. They go the next day to themperors ambassadoures, and shewing their commission in wryting, desyre to haue an answer of theyr Princes demaunds, exhibited to the fathers the .xxiiii. of Ia∣nuary: And say moreouer how the deuines wil be ther within these few dais, to declare more at large the confession of doctrine, yt was lately put vp the whole assembly Wherat they meruailed greatly, I know not for what cause, except it wer that one of thē had made all things ready to take his iourny, and was purposed to go home, which than of necessity must tary ther ful sore against his will. It
was answered them, how they must deuise and haue conference of the matter with the fathers, and loke what they shall hear of them they will let them vnderstand. In the meane tune duke Moris ambassadors were in great di∣stres and carefulnes. For they wer supposed both to haue handled the matter craftely, and to haue bene priuy to their princes doings and to haue plaid all together the dissemblers: where they againe affirmed, that neither they knew any thing that was don at home, nor yet receiued any letters from thence, and knew not which way to retourne home out of daunger. And for so muche as they sawe, that the longer they taried, the more daunger it were for them, the xiii. day of March they depart as priuely as they coulde, assone as the day apeared, and speding them hastly to Brirna, axe thaduise of the Cardinall of Trent, what is best to be done. At the last thone of thambassadors, which before he came to Trent, had made longe abode at Iuspruck, and in his princes name had with ye rest made intercession to themperor for the Lātzgraue, hauing first receiued except I be disceiued, a safe conduit came to Insprucke, & made his purgation to themperors counsel, & proueth that he was not made priuy to this war, in such sort as they did credit him. From thēce he goeth straight home: and thother taking his iourny through Car∣nia, returneth into Saxonie. When tharchbishops of Mentz and Collon approched nere vnto Inspruck, they were honorably recei∣ued of such as themperor sent to mete them. Amonges whom was the bishop of Arras. After they both talking long & much with the Emperor alone, spede thē on their iourny, for the matter required hast. The vi. day after that, thambassadors of Duke Moris were The diuines of Wyrtem∣berge. departed from Trent, came thither iiii. diuines from the Duke of Lirtemberge, wherof Brentius was one, and ii. of Strasburge. Wherfore thambassadors immediatly repair to Earle Monfort, & name the diuines vnto him that be cummen, and praye him so to deuise with his fellowes, that the fathers may answer to theyr de∣maundes, and that the action may begin. The next day, which was the .xix. of March, and appoynted for the open sessions, as before is said, the fathers assēble in the house of the Bishops Legate. There was thambassador of the Kinge of Portugall, which was lately come thither: who after he had shew∣ed his cōmission, was after a solemne manner, receiued and admit¦ted of the fathers: This done the cōmon session was adiourned to the first of May, and other thing was ther none done. And at these thinges were wrought priuatelye. The duke of Wirtemberge had The confes∣sion of the duke of Wir¦temberge. caused in yt meane time ye confession of doctrin, which his ambassa∣dors had exhibited, to be setforth in print, wherof first thambassa|
and after also the diuines had brought with them certain Copies, wherof though many had the sight: yet a great deale moe wanted. For the Bishoppes Legate reserued to him self that wryting that was openly exhibited the xxiiii. day of Ianuary, and would hard∣ly suffer any to read it. Which thing was than firste knowen, in so much that now, whan it was commen forth in Printe, diuers Bi∣shops both of Italy and Spain, and diuines sought for it diligēt∣ly, althoughe perauenture not all for one intente. But the Legate Crescentius, taking the same displeasauntly, blamed sore a certain learned Phisition of Trent, for that he hadde sowen abrode suche kinde of bokes. And also thearle Mōfort dissembling not the mat∣ter one whit, spake in such sort, as though they had transgressed the conditions of their safeconduit, and said that such as were openly assured from daunger, oughte also to eschue all occasion of offence. Two daies after that priuate treaty in the Legates house, Picta∣ue sheweth the ambassador of Strasburge, in the night, whē they reasoned together certaine houres before of the treatye to be com∣menced, that in case they would haue any thing propounded to the fathers by him and his fellowes, they wold not fail them herein, & also appoynteth them an hour. Wherfore the next day, which was the xxii. of March, thambassadors of the Duke of Wirtemberge, & of Strasburge resort to the house of Toletane, whan Pictaue had begon the talk, thambassadors of Wirtemberge said how they de∣sire the same now, that they did at their fyrst cōming, namelye that they might haue an answer to the demaunds, long since exhibited which thing done, they may the better procede vnto the rest: & wher after many words to and fro it appeared euidently, that if they did stick at this, the whole treaty shoulde be let thereby: The ambassa∣dors, as they wer commaunded, make this recitall. All be it they cā not obtaine such thinges as before they required, yet, to thintent it may appeare and be knowen, howe greatly desyrous theyr Prince is both of peace and concorde, againe that the treatye of the matter shoulde be no longer delaied. Moreouer to obey the Emperoure, and fulfill the decre of thempire, they are contente to admit the di∣uines to the disputation, and to presēt them in their princes name. Howbe it vppon this condicion, that they graunte no part of theyr right hereby, and that all such thinges may remain safe and whole vnto them and theyrs, as are agreable to the lawes and customes and to the decrees of thassemble at Auspurge. Whan they had pro∣nounced this forme of Protestation, they deliuer it vnto them by wryting, and after depart out of the place. Whan they were called in againe, the others commend their doing, and say how they per∣ceiue rightwell, that they be wholy bent to a concorde.
And seing it is so, the next consultation they say is, concerning the manner of the treaty, and desyre to know, what their opiniō is, tou¦ching the same. Thambassadors go a side, and after they had con∣sulted of the matter, declare vnto them, how they haue found two wais. That is to wit, that ether the deuines may be hard, touching all the decrees of doctrin made in this counsell, or els that the con∣fession of doctrin presented to the fathers, and now also setforth in Print, may be laid forth amonges them, and euery Chapter therof be decided in ordre: for theyr diuines are commen for this intent, yt they may more at large erpound and declare the doctrin comprised in that boke, and answer such as will impugne the same: This se∣meth vnto them the readiest way, and know no way better. Than also thambassador of Strasburge said, how the magistrates of his city had red the same wryting of the doctrine of Wirtemberge, and did approue and professe the same, & had sent diuines thither, whi∣che should ioyne them selues to his confession, and with the diuines of Wirtemberge should defend the same: This was he commaun∣ded to shew them, and confirme in the name of his city & fellowes, wherunto it was answeared. That where they wer so forward, and wrought so plainlye and sincerely, where also the state of Strasburge and other cities ther vnto annexed haue ioyned them selues to the same doctrine, they are right glad and geue them harty thankes, and withall expediti∣on wil signify the same to themperor, doubtinge not but he will be very desirous to hear it: but as touching the treaty of the deuines, and the manner of disputing by them deuised, they will shortly ad∣uertise them, what is thopinion of the fathers therin. A few dais after, wher they kept silence, and the bishop of Num∣burge departed thence, and the residue also of Germane Bishops, which wer but ii. that remaind, were said to prepare them selues to take their iourney. Thambassadors went to Monfort, to heare, if the fathers had answered any thing: he had nothing els to say: but but this only, how the fathers as yet had made none answere And whan mention was made of the Bishops departing, he said howe the Bishop of Numburge went no further but to themperoure: for ther should come certain commissioners thither out of Saxonie to treat a peace with Duke Moris: and for so much as he is of yt same country, and that one of the principall, beinge hereunto requested, he could not say them nay: for the residue he said, he knew nothing. For in so much as the Emperour desyred so greatly that the coun∣sell might procede, they them selues also applied hereunto all theyr wordes and dedes, least men should dispair in the thinge.
The nexte day, which was the xxvii. day of march, thambassador of Strasburge goeth to themperoures orator. Pictaue, and tolde him howe the state of his busines was suche that he muste return home: And therefore desired to knowe what he shoulde reporte at home of the deuines matter. By this occasion they entred againe into talke of the manner of the treaty that should be. And he affir∣med verely, that to procede after thordre by them lately prescribed, it might not be conueniently: For now they were in hand with the Masse, which thinge should be next discussed: which matter semed vnto him mete first to be discided, and after to come vnto all ye rest: How be it this, he saith, he speaketh of him selfe priuately, not that his fellowes haue so willed him. Thother inferreth againe: howe like as their deuines haue accustomed to debate thinges from the very beginning in ordre. Of the creation. Of the fall of man. Of o∣riginall sinne, as they terme it. Of iustification. Of faith. Of wor∣kes, and finally of the Sacraments: so ought they nowe also to be permitted to vse the same ordre: Moreouer the same daye wherein they deliuered them the safeconduite at the end of Ianuary, theyr promise was, that the deuines should be hard in all matters: wher in they ought to perseuer, and not to subuert and altare the nature of thinges: for vnlesse the former thinges be well determined, all disceptation of the last, that depend of the firste is to no purpose. And after they could not agre of this thinge betwene them selues, he answereth touching his iourney, that this may not be graunted him: for themperor hath commaunded them, that they suffer no mā to depart. After much talcke, where he alledgeth that he hathe no more to do, and whatsoeuer also remaineth, shoulde be done by the diuines, which had commission in wryting for the same: he biddeth him go to thearle Monfort, and shew him the letters of commissi∣on. After verye gently he biddeth him farewell, and wisheth him wel to retourne. Whan thearle Montfort had sene the commission, he said in dede that he would his businesse so required, yt he might longer remain: but for so much as the time must be serued, he will not be against it: and so letteth him frendly depart. The next daye whan he was ready to depart, themperors ambassadours send for Thambassa∣dor of Stras∣burge detey∣ned. him, Pictaue beginneth to speake. Wher yesterday they wer agre∣ed that he might depart, now they haue more diligently considered the thing, and conferred their heades together, they can not geue him leaue to depart: for nowe is the matter brought to yt passe, that the frute of the time spent is to be loked for, and thaction to be com∣menced: so that if the bishops Legate were not sickly, some thinge might be determined this self same day: therefore muste he still re∣main: for if he should now depart at this instaunt, the fathers wold
be offended, which know that he hath ben certain Monethes here present. Themperours commaundement also is suche, as no man at all may depart: and if his magistrate haue so commaunded him, he ought to exhibite the letters of the same, to thintent they mighte excuse it to themperor. Than said he, how it was not the commaū∣dement of the Senate, but that his owne matters so required: and alledging certain causes, vnlesse it wer for ye same, he said he wold not stirre one fote: for that both thauthority of the Senate, whych would haue him to remain ther longer, and also their honours that request him hereunto, and the cause it self moreouer, whiche he lo∣ueth, of reason ought to obtain this of him: Howbeit since that the deuines be commen, he may now much better be absent, especially seing this thing remaineth only, that they be admitted to thaction: Here be also thambassadors of Wirtemberge to assist the deuines, and the cause is common to both, as lately it was declared: and if it so be that the matter be earnestly and constantlye handled, it is possible, that the Senate will substitute an other in his place, whō he hath all ready aduertised of his departure hence. Ther replieth he againe, willing him at the least to abide so long, till thaction be commenced, which should be out of hand: and if perchance the Le∣gate Crescentius recouer not his health, they will yet so folow the cause that his felowes in commission shal execute the thing. Whan he could neither by excusing, nor intreating preuaile any thing, he fleeth to the last remeady, which vntill that time he had purposelye reserued, and said how both he and all others that wer protestants might lawfully by theyr safeconduit depart thence at any time. Than at the last saith Toletane, that is so in dede, neither can they let or be against it, but that he may depart: howbeit they could not but declare what themperor hath commaunded, and what also they them selues would haue done. Thus therfore he departing, com∣mendeth vnto them the cause and deuines also. Than were the fa∣thers at dissention amonges them selues, and not bent al one way. For the Spaniards, Neapolitans, and Siciliās, and whosoeuer wer of themperors part, but chiefly the Spaniardes, and thempe∣rors ambassadors, wer importune that thaction might be continu∣ed: but the bishop of Romes clients, for that they supposed that the Spaniards wēt about a reformation of the court of Rome, sought to find some let and delay: and for so much as the chiefest Bishops of Germany by reason of ciuill tumults, wer departed all ready. They loked also for the same occasion, and so much the rather, for that by daily letters and Messagers, it was reported how Duke Moris and his confederats were already in armure. The French kinge also by the Cardinall Tournon treated diligentlye with the
Bishop of Rome for peace: which if it toke effect, for as much as yt French king had war that time with themperor. No man doubted but that for his sake also the counsel should be dissolued. Wherfore themperors ambassadors which knew and feared all these things laboured this chiefly, that the thing which they most coueted, they might bring to passe by thambassadors of the Protestantes. Thys was little perceiued than, but afterward certenly knowen. About The blasphe my of a gray Frier. thend of March, a certaine graye Frier expounded the Epistle of Paule to the Romaines, before a great audience, and oftētimes by octasion he railed bitterlly against Luther and his felowes, & wa∣ded so far that he said such as had no knowledge of Christ, and yet liued honestly, haue obteined saluatiō: and that this also is the ve∣ry meaning of Saint Paule, in the second chapiter of the foresaid Epistle. Whan certain deuines of the Protestants had heard him speke this opēly, after deliberatiō takē, by cōmon assent they write The reque∣stes of the protestantes deuines. to themperors ambassadors, the last day of Marche, declaring for what intent they were sent, verely to expound and defend the con∣fession of the doctrine exhibited: they complain that ther is none ac∣tion commenced, and that the decrees of the counsel already made, haue in manner nothing els, but a bitter reproch and detestinge of that doctrin which they do professe: and that also this other daye a gray Frier spake not only many absurd things openly, and contra∣ry to the consent of the Church and exposition of thold doctors, but also poured out great aboundaunce of railing words against their doctrin and churches: and all be it that many will say that he dothe these things against the wil of ye fathers, yet se they wt what an as∣sent he teacheth and is hard: if this be thonly cause, why they wer sent for hither, that they might be verely a spectakle and laughing stock to others, and should be compelled to hear daily thiniuries & reproches of theyr doctrin, ther was doubtles no nede to haue ta∣ken this iourney in hand, and all these things might haue ben de∣clared by wryting: wherfore they earnestly require them according to their office and authority, they would bring to passe, that both the fathers would at the last declare what lack they find in the confes∣sion exhibited, and that they may againe also be openly hard in all matters. Those letters thambassadors receiue very gētly, and say they are glad also, that they haue an occasion ministred to vrge the matter, to thintent that if the Legate Crescentius do refuse, they may treat with his fellowes, and with the fathers. Than also the same Frier left reading, excusing the matter by sicknesse. The first day of Aprill Duke Moris and his league frends, laid siege to the Duke Moris taketh Aus∣purge by cō∣position. city of Auspurge, and toke it the third day after by composition, as in the boke that foloweth shalbe declared. The v. day of Aprill, the
Ambassadors of the Duke of Wirtemberge, beinge sent for to the house of Toletane, came, and brought with them as they were cō∣maunded two diuines, Brentius, and Ihon Marpache of Stras∣burge. Pictaue beginneth to declare, first of their owne good will, and zeale, after of the Legates sicknesse, and how, vnlesse he were present, neither his fellowes, nor yet the fathers wold do any thing and that the fault hath not bene in them, that they do not procede; and sheweth that they will also hereafter omit no manner of dili∣gence, and hereof maketh protestation. Thothers, whan they had consulted, say, that they know rightwell their good will and dili∣gence, howbeit they had loked for an other and a more certain an∣swer to their demaundes, which they might haue signified to their Magistrates: but now sith the matter is thus, they must take coū∣sel the best they can for them selues. Than said he againe, that the matter is not brought to that poynt, neither ought it so to be taken, as though ther wer no hope of any further action remaining: to ad∣uertise their Magistrates, and signify vnto them in what case all thing stand, it is wel done of them, and according to their duty: ne∣ther doubt they, but they, when they shal hear therof, wil both mar∣uel at this long delay and surceasing, and will take it also in euill part: Howbeit he requireth them to take paciently the tediousnesse of a few daies: In the meane time they will trauell, that they may haue a direct answer. Unto this, say they, they will gladly for their sakes acconsent. The next day with great expedition came messa∣gers and letters that Auspurge was taken, and howe the Princes marched straightway toward thalpes, to stop all the wais and pas∣sages. Wherefore they were commaunded to take armure in the county of Tiroll, and bandes of soldiors, hired, and commaunded all to repair to Insprucke. Now wer all the bishops of Germanye The fathers fle frō Trent departed thence: ther remained only the deputies of the bishops of Spier and Manster. Whan these newes were broughte, immedi∣atly the bishops of Italy flee, carying all their baggage down the riuer of Athesis. Wherfore thambassadors of Wirtemberge being herewith moued, what time of their own accord the councell nowe slipped away, come to themperors orators, and shew thē for what cause they purpose to go home with the diuines also. Who in dede at the first were sore against it, and say howe they may not assente therunto, except themperors pleasure be knowne: but when that might not preuaile, they require to haue the causes of their depar∣ting deliuered to them by writing, & signed with their own hands, to thintent they may make an excuse to themperor, and to the fa∣thers. Pictaue demaunded this also, if haply after theyr departure the fathers shall proceade in thaction, what than shall the diuines
say? wherunto thambassadors conferring with the diuines vppon the matter, say they wil make them answer, and the viii. day of A∣prill early in the morning, they deliuer vnto them a wrytinge. In the same they recite, what time the confession of their doctrine was The answer of the prote∣stantes am∣bassadors. exhibited: wherfore the diuines came. How they haue in vain solli∣cited hitherto, that they might receiue an answer to their Princes demaundes: How vnto that day ther appeared no hope of any ac∣tion that should be: Now also ther is war raised, so, that not only yt bishops of Germany, but also of Italy do depart, & that all states are now so intangled with troubles, that they can loke for nothing at this present: Moreouer the bishops of Germany being absente, perauenture it were not expediente that anye progresse shoulde be made: And if any time hereafter chance, wherin this busines may be treated wel and ordrely, they suppose, how their Prince will not be wanting: The diuines moreouer thinke thus, that ther be ma∣ny decrees made both in this, and also in the former counsel, which might be wel reproued, in case they be lawfully hard: And if the fa∣thers do now procede herein, it is to be thought, that their doings wil be like the reast. Neuerthelesse, in case ether the decrees alrea∣dy made, may be amended, or such may hereafter be decreed, as are consonant to the holy scripture, ther is no doubt, but the same will be receiued with most obedient harts: This thing vnto them dout∣les will be most sorowful, as in certain places of the confession ex∣hibited hath bene declared: which wryting verely, they iudge to be good and godly, and also whan time shal serue, will declare it more at large: They pray them therfore, to take in good part, their depar¦ture: and say in dede how they might by vertue of the safeconduite depart thence what time they list, and are not bounden to make any man priuy to it: but for so much as they haue manye times proued their gentlenes, they wold not omit this kind of duety. Thus ther∣fore taking their leaue, they departe aboute none time, and a fewe hours after they met with the Cardinall of Trent, whiche rode in great poste hastr from Brixna to Trent: And whan he heard that they were of Wirtemberge, inquiring for Brentius, he spake vnto him, and gaue them all most gentle wordes. Two daies after met them king Ferdinandoes daughters, which went by Insprucke to Brunecke, a towne in the Alpes, bordering on the limits of the Ue∣netians. Of the fathers I shewed you before, how they drue not all by one line. The Spanish bishops in dede semed of all others most Diuers min∣des in the counsel of Trent. diligente: diuers also of the Germanes pretended, as thoughe the thing required much reformation: but the mind of them yt thought best of al others, was this, that the schole of correction and maners of the church should be refourmed, that al superfluous excesse, am∣bition,
and dishonest examples of liuing shuld be taken away, that euery man be resident in his own church, and that eche man shuld haue one benefice, and no man be permitted to haue mo. Further∣more they purposed also to include within certain limites the pow∣er Refourmati¦on of the pa∣pistes. of the bishop of Rome, & not to attribute vnto his court so great authority ouer all realmes. These and such other like thinges they comprise by this word of reformation, and those thinges they ac∣knowledge to belong proprely vnto them: but touching religion & doctrin, they will be acknowne of none error, yea they decreed that The Church can not erre. counsels could not erre, and thought verely that their aduersaries would in fine reuolt and obey the counsel, as it apeareth manifest∣ly by an Epistle written to the French king, and by the form of the the safeconduit. And this thing also increased their hope and opi∣nion, for that they iudged few professors of that doctrine, least be∣ing so many of them dead & banished, as before is spoken of Swe∣uia. This was also common there amonges them, that whatsoeuer concerned religion should within a fewe monethes be determined. For of the chief articles ther remained two only, the Lordes supper and Matrimony: All other articles of doctrine were all ready dis∣cussed. The fathers that were at Basill did attribute the whole iudgement to holy scripture, and to other wrytinges agreable to ye The counsel of Basil pu∣rer thē Trēt same: but these men would be iudges them selues in expoundinge the scripture, neither woulde they admit that place of the decree of Basill, by thambassadors restored, but chaunginge the wordes of the decre, determined also to follow the traditions of thapostles in euerye doubtfull matter. And whansoeuer they were destitute of scripture, they bosted that it was so lefte by thapostles, and deliue∣red them as it were from hande to hande, as in the disputations of the deuines was oft times noted. Which caused also the ambassa∣dors, whan they receiued the safeconduit of themperors oratoures at thend of Ianuary, to protest, that by the traditions of thapostles they vnderstode those wrytinges, which were annexed to the newe Testament, or story of the foure Euangelistes. I shewed you be∣fore, how the first of Maye was appoynted the daye of session. But The last ses∣sion of yt coū¦sell. now the fathers that remained, being in dispair of the thing, assem¦ble together, and for the discord of kinges and princes, proroge the counsell for the space of two yeares or longer, in case the dissention be not appeased. This was the xxix. day of Aprill, and nowe was the bishop of Rome agreed with the French king. A few daies af∣ter themperors ambassadors depart thence also. But the Legate of The frenche Kinge hathe peace with ye Pope. Rome Crescētius, deteined by sicknesse, abode still: who being fea∣red by a vision in the night, as it is said, fel sicke, and began to dis∣pair also of his life, notwithstanding that both his frends, and also
the Phisitians did comforte him. Neither was he disceiued in his iudgement: For the disease increasing, he died at Uerona. And this was thend of the coūsel, which being right stoutly renued thought The ende of the Counsel at Trent. verely to restore the Romish doctrine, and shortly to establishe the same. Besides the Legates of Rome and the Cardinall of Trent, ther wer presēt lxii. bishops, wherof viii. wer Germanes, fiue and twenty Spaniardes, two of Sardinia, four of Sicilie, one of Hō∣gary, the bishop of Agria, all the reast were of Italy: and diuines there were xlii. and of them xix. Spaniards, of Germany & Flaun¦ders The death of the popes Le¦gate. xii. By what occasion the Legate Crescentius fel sicke. I had purposed not to haue spoken: for that there was some suspicion, it might be deuised of mallice: but in as much as his frendes & those of his own family, which went to comfort him whan he laye sicke, do thus report it, I thought mete to adde to the same. The xxv. day of March he had ben very much occupied in wryting letters to the bishop of Rome, and continued this trauel til night. At the whiche time arising, that he might refresh him self, behold, he saw a greate blacke dogge going, with glistring eies, and eares hanging down almost to the ground, and went straightway to him, and after slipt vnder the table. He being astonied and amased, whan at the lēgth he was cummen againe to him self, he calleth vpon his seruaunts, that were in the vtter chamber, commaunding them to bringe in a light, and to beate out this dogge: but whan he coulde no where be found, neither there, nor yet in the next chamber, he toke a great thought, and fel sicke, as I shewed you before. When he lay on his death bed also, he is reported to haue cried oute manye times to his ser∣uantes, that they should driue out the dogge that came vppon his bed.
The, xxiiij, Booke of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre of Charies the fyfte. The Argument of the xxiiij. Booke. DUke Moris publisheth his letters to all the states of thempire, not to hinder his enterpri∣ses: the same doth Marques Albert. The French kinge also publisheth his, and nammge him self Protector of Germany, taketh Metz in Lorayne, and marcheth vp to Strasbo∣rough, and from thence retireth to Hagenaw. Whither came vnto him sondry ambassadors, be∣seching him to stay his army. The king retireth his armye oute of Germany. Duke Moris and his company hauing won the straites of thalpes, putteth themperor to flighte, who a little before had enlarged the Duke of Saxon. After they publishe their letters at Auspurge, whereb yt they restore the ministers of the Churche that preached the Gospell. Whilest Duke Moris wente to Passaw for the treaty of peace, Marques Albert practiseth great cruelty againste them of Nu∣rinberge, and constraineth them to make theyr peace, vnto meaner Princes of the peace, sondrys thinges were declared aswell by letters as by ambassadoures: and they be pleased with certaine conditions. They of Seine do reuolt from themperor, who cometh to Strasborough; goinge to besiege Metz. HOw in the laste assemble of thempire, the gouernment of the warre of Mai∣denburge, was by common assente of the Emperoure and other states com∣mitted to Duke Moris, I haue before declared, during the which warre, con∣tinuinge the space of one yeare: he, ha∣uinge the armye at hys commaunde∣mente, began to seke meanes howe to deliuer the Lantzgraue his father in lawe, seinge he had so longe time sued to themperor for the same matter in vaine. Wherefore compelling the Chattes by an othe, to be true to him, and makinge peace with them of Maidenburge, and sendinge his ambassadoures to Ins∣prucke, as in the former boke is mentioned, he entreth into league with the Frenche kinge, and assuraunce made on either side by pledges geuen, they thoughte good by wrytinges setforthe to de∣clare the cause, of the warre, to thentent they might win therby the good wils of many. Moreouer the Marques Albert of Branden∣burge, going priuely into Fraunce to the king withdrewe him self wholy to the same businesse.
In the meane season the souldiours, aswell those that defended Maidenburge, as they that beseged the same, wintered at Mullu∣sie, and the places there aboutes, and did muche hurte to the Nor∣thusians and them of Herfurd. And whan themperor demaunded the cause therof of Duke Moris which had of the whole war bene generall, he was answered that this tumult was for want of pai∣ment of their wages. For this he prded the cause, wher in dede they serued him, and secreatly were bounden to him by an oth. And that he might the better perswade the self same time, he sente am∣bassadoures throughe Insprucke to Trent, whiche might obtaine a safeconduit for the diuines that should come, and propound cer∣taine other thinges in the counsel: Afterward he commaunded the diuines to follow, whiche goinge as farre as Norinberge, taried there loking for letters from the foresaid ambassadours, as before is mentioned: he sent also other ambassadors to the Emperoure. Christopher Carlebice, and Ulrich Mortise, which should tary for his comming in the borders of Bauier, whose aduise and counsell he might vse in the treaty. Furthermore he commanded a lodging to be prepared for him at Inspruck, and he him self toke his iour∣ney, and whan he had gone two or thre daies iourny on his waye, sending from thence to Insprucke moste gentle letters, and alled∣ging a certain cause for an excuse, returneth home again, and thus tracting the time, whan he had driuen it of from day to day. In the beginning of the spring time, hauing called backe his men in due season, he began to take musters of his soldiors, which in the win∣ter time he had gathered very secreatly, and addressing his letters vnto all ye states of thempire, saieth: Ther is nothing in this world to him so deare as concord: but he wisheth chiefly for an agrement in religion according to the doctrin of the Prophets and Apostles: wherof our aduersaries haue many times put vs in hope, both pri∣uately and also by publike decrees: but nothing is performed, and they do not only constre a misse those promises and decrees, but al¦so do abrogate the same and take them cleane awaye: This also haue they spoken vnto certen, that vnlesse they followe their proce∣dings, let them not trust greatly or leane to former promises: For at what time those promises wer made, the state of time was other wise: but now they must obey, or els, such as refuse muste be puni∣shed: and not contented with these wordes, they haue stirred vp al∣so forein kings against him and other princes of his state and pro∣fession, and haue inuented sondry causes to bring them in hatred, whilest they blame vs for religion or certen other things, wheras the thing it self declareth, that they care for no religion, but haue alwaies had an eie, how throughe thoccasion of dissention in Reli∣gion they might aspire to the gouernment.
For now is theyr craft sene of all men, whiche they vsed, that they mighte wholly rote oute and abolishe the true Religion, in former yeares setforth and expounded at Auspurge: For this is the mat∣ter wherfore they haue in all places exiled the preachers and mini∣sters of the Church, oute of the limites of thempire, and tarye nei∣ther for the decree of a lawfull Counsell, nor yet of the Bishoppes of Romes neither, and begin the thing by and by with execution. Wherfore, althoughe he with force of armes shoulde repulse  him and his, this seruitude of minde and conscience, there oughte no man to blame him: How be it for so much as this thing apper∣teineth to Gods glorye, who alone can both auaunce and defende his worde, he committeth the whole matter vnto him, and pryeth God, to graunt him constancy in the true knowledge of him vntill his liues end. An other thing wherof he intendeth to speake, is cō∣cerning the Lantzgraue, his father in law. For certainly v. yeares The seconde cause of war since, was he and Ioachim the Elector of Brandenburge put in hope in themperors name, that if the Lantzgraue mighte be per∣swaded to come to submission, and humbly to craue pardone of the Emperor, that themperor shoulde than require no more of him be∣sides that which was conteined in the pacification than conceiued, but would frendly let him depart: wheruppon they sent for him by theyr letters, geuing their faith vnto his sonnes, that if any thing chaunced to theyr father otherwise than well, they would abide the same fortune. So therefore came he vppon this faithe vnto Hale, and as∣ked the Emperor pardon. And afterwardes supped with the Duke of Alba, til it was far in the night, very pleasantly, and what time The Lantz∣graue detey∣ned prisoner against side∣lity. he would haue returned to his lodging, beyond al mens expectati∣on, he was deteined, and caried to prison, wherin he hath nowe re∣mained in a manner fiue whole yeres, not without exceding great misery: and although both his sonnes, his nobilitye and subiectes haue confirmed the pacification: Albeit that he him self, the Mar∣ques of Brandenburge and Wuolfgange, the Paulsgraue, became sureties for him, that vnles he perfourmed couenaunts, they wold deliuer him into his custody, albeit that according to the forme of couenaunts, the mony he was condemned in, is paid, his artilerye, and munition deliuered, his Castels and fortes rased, Henrye the Duke of Brunswicke and his sonne sette at libertye, the letters of confederacye exhibited, in so muche, that nothinge more can be re∣quired, yet coulde neither the suite of him and the Marques of Brandenburge, nor the lamentable teares of his wife, whiche pined to deathe for sorowe, nor the Prayers of the people or inter∣cession of other princes preuaile any thinge vnto this daye: For he
hathe ofttimes spoken to themperor, and because diuers men haue had a sinistrall opinion of him, he hath intreated him most earnest∣ly, to haue some respect to his honoure and estimation, and that he would graunt him this for the benefits which his elders had done vnto his Progenitors, and for his deserts also towardes him and king Fardinando, and that he woulde sette him at libertye: but all these things could moue him nothinge, yea he constrained the cap∣tife to answer to matters in the lawe out of prison, and to plead his cause, lying in fatters, which can be done by no lawe, especiallye in matters so waighty: to speake nothing in the meane time, how sus∣piciously, and howe rashly he handled the matter, after a straunge example, such as neuer was hard of in Germany, that verely vn∣der this pretence of the law, he might by little and little tourn both him and his children out of all theyr landes and possessions, and bring them in suche distres, that they shoulde be no more hable to maintaine theyr state and dignity: which thinge that it come not to passe, toucheth him very much, by reason of the alliaunce and hope of succession that he hath with the house of Hesse. This thing in dede might be thought a wonder, were it not that these craftes and pollicies are manifest in the sight of al men, whi∣che doubtles tende vnto this ende, that the same Monarchye, that hath ben now so many yeares in framinge, maye at the lengthe be established. The third, and chiefe poynt is that, which concerneth all men, The thirds cause. and our common natiue country of Germany, whose state doubt∣les is most miserable: For contrary to the lawes and couenauntes, forain souldiours are brought within the limits of thempire, whi∣che haue now many yeres ben here setled, and euery wher bothe in towne and Country consumeth other mens goods, and exercise al kind of filthy lust: Moreouer, many times ther be new wais inuen∣ted to get mony, and the auncient liberty diuers waies infringed, neither is any state, no not the Princes electours, in this case spa∣red: & thambassadors of foren kings, which be sory for these things and loue the wealthe of Germany, are prohibited to come at anye publike assembles, clean against the manner of thempire: Finally, The bōdage of Germany. this is altogether wroughte, that all men maye be broughte into a shamefull and straight bondage: for the which thing doubtles our posterity and ofspring may haue moste tuste cause to detest the co∣wardise and slouthfulnes of this time, wherin that moste precious iewell and goodly ornament, that is, the liberty of our coūtry shuld be lost: seing therefore that the case standeth thus, at the laste is he awaked, and William the Lantzgraue, the sonne of Phillip, whōe the iust sorow for his fathers miserye hathe raised, and makinge a
league with the french king, whom thenemy seketh also to depriue of that he hath, are determined for the deliuerāce of the Lātzgraue and the duke of Saxon, to maintaine their honor, and recouer the liberty of all men, to attempt the matter by force of armes: therfore doth he exhort, that no man disturbe this his enterprise, but that al men do further and professe the same, and put in good assuraunce: For if it be otherwise, and if any man by one meane or other and the aduersary, he wil take him for his ennemy. Iohn Albert, Duke of Megelburge subscribed also to the same letters, chiefly for the pre∣seruation of religion, forsomuch as duke Moris had said howe he warred for the same cause also. And the Marques Albert of Brā∣denburge Marques Al∣berts letters agaynste the Emperoure. publisheth a wryting in manner of the same effecte, and complaineth that the liberty of Germany is oppressed enē of them, which of duety ought to maintain and auaunce the same: he saithe ther is holden now a counsel, wherin be a few assembled for to sub∣uert the truthe: and that also there be many assemblies of the Em∣pire. Wherof the end is this, that by certaine corrupted with bribes and faire promises, mony maye be gotten by some subtile fetche to The heauye burthens of Germany. the vtter vndoing of Germany, and the same to be wrought chiefly by the cleargy, which in the consistory of the Empire surmounte in nombre, and now is the matter brought to yt passe, that the effect of al counsels dependeth almost of one mannes pleasure, which is nei∣ther gentleman nor Germaine borne, nor annexed to the Empire, to the great reproche assuredlye and hinderance of all Germaines: And if this ought to be the state of the weale publike, it were much better to call none assembles at all, but that mony shoulde be frelye and franckly geuen, whansoeuer it is cōmaunded and required: for so shuld ther be no losse of time, and besides great charges shoulde be spared. By suche like craft also is the seale of thempire commen into straungers hands, which foreiners at theyr pleasure abuse to the damage of Germany: yet is ther no man at al that dare bewail these things, vnlesse he wil enter into high displeasure: Nether yet are the Germanes matters and sutes dispatched, but are most lōg delaid in so much that many men complain much of the same: For the state of the things is such that the Germanes had nede to learn other lāguages, in case they should be there to do them selues anye good: of the same sort is this, wher against tholde custome of Ger∣many it is prohibited, that no man may serue anye foreine Prince in his warres, that the protestantes being reconciled ouer & aboue most greuous penalties, wer constramed to admit other more vn∣worthy conditions, and for that a great some of mony arose of the Protestants clients for seruing them in theyr warres.
The same burthen also was laid vpon other states and Princes, that had nothinge offended, and as thoughe that warre had bene made for the common wealth, they were commaūded to pay mony, to recompence the charges of the warres, for this intent verelye, yt ther should no sinewes nor force at all be lefte in all Germany: Of like sort is it, that ciuill controuersies of moste waighty matters, are committed, not to the publick iudgement of thempire, but vnto a few commissioners, that it may be in their power, either to esta∣blish or displace great princes: Againe that it is prohibited that no Prince maye set his owne Image in his coyne, that newe Sena∣tors are made in euery towne of the Empire, that this bondage is imposed in manner vppon all Germanes, that they be constrained to suffer forreine souldiors in their country, whiche bothe do verye much harme, and bring many men to beggery, and also practise al kinde of arrogancy and lechery that hath not ben hard of: For his own land was not spared, although he promised him better, for the fidelitye and seruice done to themperor: Howbeit at what time he was deteined by reason of the warre of Maidenburge, and about matters of the common wealth was absent, soldiors wer brought into his country. Notwithstanding that his officers desired much to the contrary: and thus certainly both he and other princes, whi∣che in the former war against the protestants, for his preseruation and dignity, put in great hazarde their liues and goodes, haue re∣ceiued a goodly recompence in that boke which Lewes Auila set∣forth The story of Lewes Aui∣la, of the pro¦testants war of matters done in the same war, a naughty and a lying fel∣low, whilest he speaketh of all Germany so coldly, so disdainfullye and straungely, as though it were some barbarous or vile nation, whose originall were skarcely knowen: And the vnworthinesse of the thing is so much the more, for that the same boke is printed and setforth by a certain especiall priueledge of themperor: Now vere∣ly be many thinges excused, by letters sent throughout Germany, but it is the self same song, that hath ben songen now many yeres, and all thinges tend hitherto, that they say, how accordinge to the state of times the decrees must be altred, and that men muste obey the present counsels, or els suffer punishment: And wheras certen Princes haue taken armure to repulse this ignominye and serui∣tude, he hathe also promised them all aide and fidelity, yea and his life also: And this he protesteth openlye, and desireth, that no man aid their aduersaries, but that all men woulde further this ende∣uoure of him and his fellowes, and defend the commen cause: For although very many perchaunce will followe the contrarye parte, yet let no man promise him self better things, if the aduersary may vanquishe: for than shall the state and condition of all Germaines
be common: but in case anye manne beare armure againste him and his felowes, him wil he persecute with sword and fire. There goeth a brute, he saieth, of him and his fellowes, as thoughe they wold bring into Germany forein nations, and euen the Turk him selfe, but this is a false and an absurd sclaunder: For what a mad∣nesse were it to procure so greate a daunger to them selues & theyr countrye? It is vaine also, that diuers report of him, as though he shoulde attempte this warre to enriche him selfe: he hathe serued nowe manye yeares the Emperoure, and kinge Ferdinando, and hereby hathe soughte no gaine, but rather praise and honor. Not without the great losse of his substaunce: he hath had also large of∣fers made, and not to be contemned, but all those refused, he hathe fixed his minde on this warre, wherin the liberty, and former dig∣nity may be restored to the common country. In the which warre, if it fortune, that the same ouermuch authority of the Clergy, and prohibited by holy Scripture, be infringed and weakned, no man ought to blame him therfore: For certainly the chiefe bishoppes of the Empire haue bene the occasion of al these euils: yet is it not his intent, that those Colleges which were founded chiefly for the no∣bility shoulde be distroyed, but that the vices beinge taken awaye, and those thinges amended, that can not be borne with, they maye remaine in their vocation and be auaunced also: wherunto he will be a furtherer to them, so that they will be contente, and not suffer them selues to be perswaded otherwise by his enemies. The king The frenche kingsletters of Fraunce also, in his letters setforth, saithe, he hathe this respecte chiefly, that Religion being established, he may profite the publike weale, and chiefly his frendes. And therfore immediately after the death of his father, he had restored Scotlande to their former dig∣nity, renued the league with Swisses, recouered Boloigne, and broughte againe the old inhabiters and Citezens dispersed hither and thither, into theyr landes and possessions, he hathe made peace also with the king of England, and entred with him into perfite a∣mity: and whilest he was occupied with these matters, the Empe∣roure by secreat deuises hath Imagined many thinges for his di∣struction, and oftner than once hath geuen occasion of warre, how beit both for the common wealthes sake, and priuatelye also to re∣lieue his people, he would attempt nothing, but winckinge at the iniuries, he gaue his minde whollye to the establishmente of his realme: but this his quietnesse, afterward, by his aduersaries was ascribed to a certaine timerousnesse and cowardlinesse: but in the meane season were broughte vnto him greuous complaints of the Princes and states of Germany, whiche saide that occasion was
sought partly for Religion, partlye for the Turkishe warre, and to punish rebellion, to bringe them in to bondage, and that by craftye counsels, dissention, and faction are mainetained, and Germanye impouerished, so, that it can no longer be doubted, but that he go∣eth about to make a monarchy for him selfe and the house of Au∣strich: of the which thing verelye he conceiued an inwarde sorowe, both for the common originall of either nation, and also for the old amity and frendship, which euer continued ferme and inuiolated, so long as it might by themperoures crafte and policye: For if that state should haue an alteration, and Germanye lose her liberty, he perceiueth well, what damage and daunger the same will be for him and all his realme: For Germany is not only the fortresse and strength of Fraunce, but also of the whole christian commō welth: Germanye ye fortresse of Christendoe. And therfore hath he desired oft with earnest prayer, and wishing, that either nation with their forces ioyned together, might so stay them selues, that they should nead to be afraid of no man: & where no hope of this thing appeared, and yet many craued his healpe, he coulde not see by what meanes he mighte succoure the Empyre, so rente and torne a sondre: but in this consultation so waighey, God, which is a righteous iudge, hath shewed a goodly way. For Octa∣uian Frenese, Duke of Placence and Parma, whome themperour and the Bishop of Rome, Iuly, laide in waite for, required aide of him, and declaringe al their iniuries, hathe perswaded him, to take vppon him, the defence of him and the countye of Mirandula. Af∣ter this came also those complaintes of the Princes and states of Germany, which required they might enter into league with him, for that they said, howe by that meanes onlye, the common wealth mighte be restored: but howe iuste and waighty causes they be, for the whiche the Princes attempte warre, he will not recite, for that the same may be vnderstande by theyr owne wrytinges: Notwith∣standing let euery man way with him selfe, whether this vnsatia∣ble couetousnesse of oure aduersaries dothe not geue a moste iuste occasion of griefe, whiche destroyinge the wealthe of the Empire, swepe all into theyr owne coffers and treasury. The Burgonians do nowe inuade them of Treuers, Gelderland, and Wirtemberge, Coūtryes op¦pressed bi the Emperoure. and make inuasion into their countries, and destroyeth the Lātz∣graues dominion diuers waies: of lyke sorte is it, that themperor excludeth his ambassadors from thassemblies of the Empire, that he prohibiteth, that no manne may serue in foreine warres, that he putteth to death noble capitains, and worthy seruiceable men, and amonges others, Uogelsperge, whose execution he him self beheld at Auspurge, to thintent he mighte satisfye his bloudye minde: Is
if not a mooste euill an example, that he shoulde prouoke and hyre men with greate rewards to slay such as serue him in the warres? Assuredlye it can not with fewe wordes be expressed, what craftes oure ennemies vse: For into the same iudgemente of the Chamber and consistorye of the Empire are admitted and placed such, as by their meanes they may bring to passe and obtaine what they liste: For doubtles the blame of all these euils is to be imputed to thys kinde of menne. Especiallye to the iudges of the Chamber: For the which causes verely he could not deny ye Germains, requiring his aid: Therfore hath he made league with them, and not only yt, but also is determined to imploy vpon this warre all his force and his royall parson. Neither yet doth he looke for anye priuate profite or gain therby, but minedeth this thinge only, that Germany beinge restored, and Ihon Fridericke the Duke of Saxon and the Lantz graue deliuered, whome he hathe detained prisoners in longe and vnworthy captiuity, he maye win praise and renowne immortall, as did in times past Flamminius, for deliuering Grece from bon∣dage: neither is there cause, that any man shoulde feare anye force or violence: For in as much as he attempteth this warre for liber∣ty he will wholly endeuoure that no man be hurt vndeseruedly: let them truste therefore to this promesse, whiche he confirmeth vnto them faithfully, and geue no creadit to aduersaries, which say his purpose is to afflicte and plage the Cleargy: For he not only inten∣deth no such matter, but also receiueth al them into his defence and tuition, so that they do not annoy him nor yet his league frendes. For after libertye recouered, he is put in good hope by many mens letters, that the concord of the churche, shall and may also be resto∣red, and that by lawfull meanes, whan all ambition and priuate lucre is farre remoued. And what so euer he may helpe hereunto, he will do it gladly: These are the things, wherof he thought good to admonish them, to thend they may vnderstand, what his will and purpose is: wherfore he requireth them, that in so iuste warre, which of necessity is attempted for the wealth of Germany, no mā would impeche or hinder him or his confederates: for otherwise, if any man be so cleane voide of all loue and duety, that he oweth to his country, that he intend to make resistaunce, him wil he destroy with sword and fire: and albeit he shal do so vnwillingly, yet, if a∣ny such shalbe, the same as a naughty and a corrupt membre, must be cut of from the reast of the body, least it do hurt by his infection, and in such sorte be restrained that it do no more harme: The rest they may know of his ambassador Ihon Fraxine, Bishop of Bay∣on, whom he hath sent vnto them with further of his pleasure vnto
whome he praieth them to geue creadit. This wrytinge beinge set forth in print, in the vulgare tonge, had ouer the head, a bonnet be¦twene two daggers, and wrytten by, that the same was the badge Tharmes of liberty. of liberty. And vnderneath that was the title of the kinge, who na∣med him selfe the reuenger of the libertye of Germany, and of the Princes captiue. This badge or cognoisaunce many say was foūd in old coynes, and vsed by them, that slue Iulius Cesar. Where he saieth, how themperor had assigned a reward for them, that coulde slay certaine of his captaines, thus standeth the case. Themperor by proclamation lately setforthe, had againe with wordes mooste waighty outlawed the Rinegraue, Recrode, Riseberge and Scher¦teline, which in dede serued all the French king, as I haue said be∣fore, and appointed foure thousande crownes in rewarde for him that could bring forth any of them, either quicke or dead. For they furthered the cause very muche, and whan this league was made, going into Germany, prested souldioures, and broughte them into Fraunce. And Scherteline in dede whan he had sued many yeres in vaine, and coulde by the intercession of no man be reconciled to themperor or King Fernando, being in a manner constrained fled to the French king. These letters of the kinge, and the Princes, dispearsed abrode in Germany, raised in some hope, but in manye, feare and careful∣nes. Duke Moris, which wrought all thinge by dissimulation the first of March, holdeth an assemble of the states of his dominion, and amonges other thinges he propoundeth, because he is sued of the Lantzgraues sonnes, to present him self, he may no longer seke delaies, or disceine their expectatiō. Therfore wil he go vnto them, to kepe his faith and promesse: let them therfore in the meane time obey his brother August, whome he hath made his deputye in his absence, and let them gather a force to defend the country, that no∣thing chaunce vnto them vnprouided. Thelector of Brandenburge was present at this treaty, for that he was sommoned to appeare: but when the Lantzgraues sonnes did permit him, that he shoulde at the next processe, appeare, and discharge his bond, he retourneth home. Duke Moris hauing put in ordre his thinges at home, and Duke Moris goeth to the field. appoynted certain counselloures to assiste his brother Auguste, he goeth with a few small company to those forces, which I saide be∣fore he had in the country of Turing, and marching forth abideth for the Lantzgraues sonne. Before he departed frō home the Burggraue of Meyssen, as they call him Henry, of the noble house of the Plauians Chauncelor of Boheme, in the name of king Ferdinando, treated with him dili∣gently
for a reconcilemēt. The Lātzgraues sōne, leading forth his armye, when he came to Erlebache the eightene daye of Marche, where also was the French ambassadour, Fraxine, they bothe re∣quest them of Franckfurt by letters amonges other thinges, that they receiue no garrison of the Emperours into their city. And all beit that they answered neither plainlye nor purposelye, yet, for so much as they must go forward, there was none other thing done. The sixt daye after, he ioyneth with Duke Moris: And when they were commen wyth their whole armye thre dayes after to Schwinfurt, Duke Moris declareth vnto him, how king Fardi∣nando woulde make intercession, and signified the same plainlye both by letters and ambassadoures, as thoughe he had authoritys of the Emperoure to treat, yea touching the deliuery of his father. He therfore making priuy to it the French ambassador, refuseth not, that the conditions and requestes of king Fardinando, should be heard, which thing determined, they march with great expediti∣on, by Roteburge, Dingelspelle, and Norling to Donauerde: At Roteburge, Marques Albert ioyneth him selfe to them with hys power bothe of horse men and fote men. Whiche waye so euerthey wente, they broughte the Citezens into theyr subiection, and dis∣placing those, whiche the Emperoure before had chosen, do ordain newe Magistrates: And exact of them also mony and munition. And because Auspurge was kept with no great garrison. And again because in the selfe same daies, a certain piece of the wall and Rampeare was fallen downe, they marched with excea∣ding greate iourneis, and the laste daye of Marche, reasted not so much as in the night season, and came thither the firste daye of A∣prill at midday, and making roades there, declared them selues to be ennemies: In the Citye were foure enseignes of fotemen, sente by them peroure: but where the Townes men the fourth day after rendred the city, they wer permitted to depart. Than they that sommoned the Cities of high Germany, and a∣monges them also Norinberge, and commaund them to be before them at Auspurge, at thend of Aprill, and also vrge them of Wuol∣mes, whiche were but nine miles from Auspurge, that they should aide them with all thinges, and come into theyr society. Aboute this time, the Prince of Salerne, by occasion of falling oute with the Uiceroy of Naples, reuolteth from the Emperoure, The Prince of Salerne reuolteth from them∣peror. and goeth into Fraunce: Whilest these thinges are done in Germany, the Frenche kinge, marching forth, with an huge army, surpriseth Tullie, & Uerdome townes of thempire, at the borders of Fraunce, after he inuadeth
Lorayne, and sendeth the yong Prince into Fraunce, aboute nine yeres of age, though the Lady Dowager his mother intreated ne∣uer The frenche subdueth Lo¦raine. so much to the contrary, & promiseth him his daughter in ma∣riage: Whilest the king him self was occupied with these affaires, his lieftenaunt the Constable, Annas Memoraunce, who led the Uantward, surpriseth Metz, a famous city of thempire, the tenthe day of Aprill, whan bothe the garrison within was small, and the French men made fair promisses, and saide howe the kinge made this warre to maintaine theyr liberty. For what time the Frenche king went out of his owne pale, which was aboute the eighte day of Marche, sendinge vnto them letters, and messagers, he desired only that they would prepare him vitaile, yt he might passe through theyr country with his armye, promisinge all benenolence. And he vsed for his minister the Cardinall Lenoncurt, bishop of the Citye, The Cardi∣nall betraied the Citye of Metz. who setforth his good will and zeale to the Senate. The conestable also wrote vnto them moste frendlye: but whan he came neare vnto the citye with his force, he desired to be let in, and obteined: the next day he was master of the gates, and of al the fortifications. Thither came also afterwardes the kinge him selfe at the xviii. day of Aprill, and there remaining four daies, after he had taken thothe of the Senate and people, he appoynted Moun∣sir Gōnorie to be theyr gouernoure, and commanded their armure to be deliuered, and caried into one place, and the Citye to be forti∣fied, likewise doth he in the Townes before named, and in Lo∣raine, and sending his messagers before to Strasburge, to Haga∣nawe, and other places neare, and to the bishoppe of Strasburge, required to be aided with Wheate and Uitaile. Whan Auspurge was taken, as I said, and thold Senate restored, which thempe∣roure had displaced, and the liberty of geuinge of voices, restored also to the people, the Princes contederated marched towarde Woulmes, that refused theyr league Whan they came thither the xii. day of Aprill, they ride aboute this Citye: And whan they were shot at with the greate pieces, they damaunde to be satisfied for the iniuries done them with the summe of three hondreth thousande Crownes, which denied, they becommed their enemies. But duke Moris goinge from thence, wente to Lintz, a towne of Austriche, that he mighte vnderstande by kinge Farnando the conditions of peace. For he, as I said, by the Emperoures consent, was a meane to intreat a peace. Afterwarde the Emperoure exhorted by his let∣ters the chiefest Princes of Germanye, that they woulde assaye to quenche this fire, and deuise some meanes of peace, the whiche he woulde not be againste.
And where as diuerse required his aide, for that thei were able to do nothing against so great a power, comforting their myn∣des, he answereth, that he hopeth wel that the treatie of peace commenced shall haue a lucky successe, if not: than will he ney∣ther faile them, nor the common weale. Whan Woulmes had bene beseged six daies, the Princes, the .xix. day of Aprill, remo∣ued to Stocach, a towne of Hegouia. There they receiued mo∣ny in the French kinges name for thre monethes (as is conue∣naunted) and Gamey Marchiane, the Frenche pledge was deli¦uered: For the other, Nantoliet died by the waye. The Princes The pledges of Fraunce & Germanye. pledges, whiche they gaue to the Frenche kyng, were Christo∣pher Duke of Megelburg, and Philip the Lantgraues sonne. The last of Aprill the Princes retourne to Thonaw, certen my∣les beneth Woulmes. In the meane seasō Marques Albert bur¦neth the townes and villages belonging to Woulmes, and ex∣torteth money, and taketh their castell of Helfesteyne, situated on a high hill, and placeth therin a garrison, and the towne of Gissing nere vnto it, whiche is thre myles frō Woulmes, with certen villages by the same, he condemneth to paye .xviii. thou¦sand crownes. Whā Duke Maurice was come to Lintz, he pro∣poundeth of deliuering the Lantgraue his father in lawe, of Conditions of peace, offe¦red by Duke Moris. appeasing the dissention of Religion and doctrine, of wel orde∣ring the common wealth, of peace to be made with the French kyng, their fellowe, and confederate, of the outlawes to be re∣ceiued agayne into fauour. Those were the Ryngrane, and others before named, and al¦so Erle Hedecke whiche in fourmer yeares gaue hym selfe into the tuition of Duke Maurice, as before is sayde. Howheit the Emperour had appointed no rewarde against his lyfe, least he should offende Duke Maurice, as it is to be thought. Unto these demaundes, Ferdinando, with whom were Maximilian his sonne, and his sonne in lawe Albert, Duke of Bauier, and also the Emperours Ambassadours, maketh aunswere. Howe the Emperour is content that the Lantgraue be set at lyber∣tie, yet so that the warre maye cease immediately. Touchinge Religion and the common wealth, he is well pleased, that the matter be determined in the next conuention of German. But the Emperour is very lothe that the Frenche kyng shoulde be herein comprised. Neuerthelesse Duke Maurice may knowe of him, in what sorte he wyl be accorded. The outlawes may also be taken to mercie, in case they wyl obeye the condition offered by the Emperour. Moreouer, Ferdinādo requested, that whan peace were once concluded, Duke Maurice would helpe him in
Hongary, and that the soldiours should not slippe away to the Frenche kyng. Wherunto whan Duke Maurice had aunswe∣red, and sayde that that he could determine nothing without the consent of his fellowes, they departed so, as at the .xxvi. day of May, they should mete againe at Passawe, whiche is a towne betwene Lintz and Regenspurge, where the Ryuers of Thonawe, and Oene mete. Thither should come also the Prin∣ces that were intercessours, and their deputies. On Maydaye the Lantgraues sonne, and Iohn Albert Duke of Megelburg, leade the armie of Gundelfinge, & there lye eight whole dayes together lokyng for Duke Maurice retourne out of Austrich. Whan he was come, the next daye was the armie munstred at Lawginge, a towne of Otto Henry the Pausgraues. For they The coūtrie of Oto Hen∣ry recouered had also recouered his prouince, possessed by the Emperour, and had expulsed the Byshop of Auspurge out of his coun∣trie. And verely Otto the Paulsgraue, ioyned hym selfe vnto their league. From thence they goe towarde the Alpes. And it chaunced at the same tyme that kyng Ferdinando had obtey∣ned of them a truce, whiche beginning the .xxvi. daye of May, should ende the eight daye of Iune. In the meane tyme Them∣perour leuied a power at the fote of the Alpes, whiche assem∣bled at the Towne of Rwe. In this hurly burly the Byshop of Auspurge Cardinall, which before was not very ryche and had nowe susteyned great losse, as I sayde, went to Rome, that he myght obteyne of the Byshop new promotions and benefices, wherwith he might fill vp those sinkes agayne. After this the iudges of the chamber imperial flie away from Spiers. For by The iudges of the cham∣ber slie. the Frenche king and the Princes in their forsaide wrytinges, signified plainly a displeasure, & ascribed to thē in a maner the blame of all their trouble. The Frenche king came with his ar¦mie by ye borders of Loraine to Saberne, the third day of May, foure myles from Strasburg, a town belonging to the bishop. He had before requested them of Strasburg to ayde his armie with thinges necessary. For the whiche cause Ambassadours were sent vnto him to Sarburg, seuen myles from Strasburg whiche should offer him a certen quantitie of wheate & wyne, those were Peter Sturmie, Fridericke Gotesseme, and Iohn Sleidane. But the Conestable accompted that as nothynge, whiche they offered. And albeit the Ambassadours departed from hym in suche sorte, as that they would aduertyse the Se∣nate, and after make reporte vnto hym, yet sente he the nexte daye two Gentlemen for a spedy aunswere, speakyng muche of the kynges great good wyll and zeale towardes Germany, and
also for what intent, the kyng had moued his warre, verely that he might restore the libertie of Germany oppressed. An o∣ther request was, that for so much as the soldiours had nede of many thinges, they might bie the same in their citie, and that artificers might be suffered to bryng forth their wares and sel them within the campe. Wherunto the Senate made this an∣swere; that in suche matters of weightie importaunce, there is nothing wont to be determined, but by the consent of the whole state. Whan the matter shalbe debated, they wyll sende agayne Ambassadours to declare, what their mynde is. Whan they were thus sent away, the next daye ye same Ambassadours were sent again into the campe, which was than at Saberne. Whan they were heard speake, and offered some what more, thā before, and had also declared causes, why the soldiours might not be permitted to come within the citie, the Conestable be∣gan to speake displeasauntly, and makyng a comparison, how The Cone∣stable chi∣deth wt them of Strash. partiall iudges they were, both of the kynges benefites, and al¦so of the Emperours iniuries, gaue very sharpe language. The conclusion of his talke was, that the nexte daye they shoulde heare the kyng hym selfe speake, whiche would affirme al that he had nowe sayde. On the morrowe were the Ambassadours sent for before the kyng, with whome was the Cardinal of Lo∣raine, the Duke of Uandome, and the Conestable. And there re¦porte vnto hym, what talke they haue had with the Conesta∣ble at two seuerall times, and offer as many rasers of Otes, as thei did before of wheate, and after also some what more wyne, beseching the king, that both for the olde amitie, that ye kinges of Fraunce haue had with the state of Strasburge, and also of his owne humanitie, he would take in good parte their offer. For they haue great force of soldiours within their citie, and a great nomber of people also be fled thither out of the countrie, so that the citie can not spare that corne, that they haue for theyr prouision. The kyng, after he had fyrst conferred with his counsell, began him selfe to declare, for what cause he came into Germany, to the selfe same effect, that the Conestable had the daye before. Saying that vitayle was moste necessary, and not to be denied any man, that would paye for the same, vnles he wer an ennemy. If ye Soldiours want that, they wyl fynd a waye, howe to come by the same. But what inconuenience wold come therof, euery man may easely perceiue. That thing whiche was offered, the kyng in dede refused not, but he would haue had it deliuered in bread. Thābassadours again in corne:
Where vpon when they coulde not agree, they departed with out the matter concluded. Whan the Ambassadours were re∣tourned, the Senate made a decree. For as muche as no parte of that wheate, whiche is in the citie, can be spared, that there should be as much bread made, as myght be in the places thera¦boutes. For the Ambassadours had alledged both to the Cone∣stable, and the kyng also, that the state of the citie and condiciō of time was suche, that from thence was nothing to be loked for. But in case any thyng myght be gathered in the countrie, belonging to the same, they should haue it right gladly. And this did ye Senate decre, least any extremitie shuld be wrought vpon the plowmen and people of the countrey. And so, that whiche could sodenly be gotten in townes and villages with out the citie, was caried to the Campe, but that same was ve∣ry litle. Whan the countrey of Loraine, and citie of Metz were taken, they of Strasburge immediatly toke vp to the nomber of fiue thousand souldiours, to defende their citie, agayne they pulled down very many aswel publique as priuate buildinges about the citie, and cut downe trees, and orcherdes and what so euer did let the prospecte, or that might be a succour to the ennemie, and where moste nede was began to fortifie their ci∣tie. This same was a great displeasure to the Frenchmen, and in the later communication the Conestable did not dissemble the same to the Ambassadours. For it is thought, howe they were in a certen hope, that like as by a certen face of frendship, they entred Metz, so also they should not haue bene shut out of Strasburg. But whan they knewe, that the citie was excea∣ding strong, and sawe moreouer all thinges prouided so dili∣gently for the defence of the same, chaunging their purpose, as it is to be thought, they tourned an other way, and remouinge their campe the seuenth day of May, marched towarde Haga∣nawe and Wisseburg. Hither came vnto ye king, Ambassadours from the Paulsgraue Electour, from the Archebyshoppes of The request of the Pryn∣ces to the kyng. Mentz and of Treuers, commissioners, and from the Dukes of Cleaue and Wirtemberge, whiche for the common wealthes sake, were lately assembled at Wourmes. Whose requeste was this, that the kyng would absteyne from spoyling the countrie and spare the poore people. And for so muche as he protesteth to make warre for the lybertie of Germany, that he woulde staye with his armie. For if he shuld goe further, the same wold be to the great losse and dammage of the Empyre. And they re∣quyre hym to geue his mynde to the wayes of peace, whereof they bothe haue alreadye made mention to the Emperoure,
and wyll doe also hereafter, and truste that all shall be well. Where he writeth of entring into league with him, they desire him to consider herein their honour and estimation. For by rea¦son of their othe and faith they owe to the Empire, they are not able to perfourme it. But yet will they do their endeuour, that a generall peace may be established. Furthermore they re∣quire him moste instauntly, that he would spare the dominiōs of Strasburg, whiche is a fre citie of the Empyre, and that by his mediation Marques Albert would intreate more gently the Byshop of Wirciburge. At the selfsame tyme, which was the .xi. day of May, letters were brought to ye king frō Duke Maurice, wherin was wryt∣ten D. Maurice letters to the kyng. what was done at Lintz. Duke Maurice required moreo∣uer, yt the kyng, whom he wold haue also comprised in the trea∣tie of peace, would declare, vpon what conditions he would ac∣corde with the Emperour. Whan these letters were receiued, the kyng, vnto whome this thing was thought to haue chaun¦ced vnloked for, two dayes after, remoueth his campe, and lea∣uing Germany, marcheth agayne towardes Loraine. But be∣fore his departure, he aunswereth the Ambassadours of the Princes before named. How he hath already obteined the same The kinges answer to ye Prynces. thyng, for the whiche he came with his army into Germany. For the captiue Princes shall be deliuered. And this was the cause of his warre: He therfore hath wonne honour enough. And if there chaunce any tyme hereafter, wherin Germany may requyre his ayde, he wyll spare neither paynes, coste, nor perill. And nowe leading backe his army, he intendeth to re∣tourne home, chiefly, for that his ennemies haue inuaded Fra∣unce. As concerning the complaintes of the poore people, he is hartely sory. Howbeit there can not be so good order taken in any Armie, but that licentiouse soldiours wyll alwayes do some harme. Notwithstanding he taketh moste dilligent hede, that bothe as little harme be done as is possible, and also that offences be moste straytely punyshed. Touchyng that whiche they wryte of the Emperour and of peace, he loketh certenly for at their handes. Through his paynes, force and dilligence, Germany is released from those miseries, wherewith it laye oppressed. Nowe must they well forsee, that they doe not disho∣nestly lose theyr libertie, by hym restored. For theyr request tou∣chynge them of Strasburge, he can not saye them naye, not withstanding, that what tyme he was there with his army, ye soldiours of that citie vsed great presumption and arrogancie towardes his men. Whan the king was entred into Germany,
the Emperours power of the low countreis, by the conduict of Martin van Rossem spoy¦leth Chāpa∣nye. Marten Rosseme, inuaded Champaignie in Fraunce, burning and destroying all before them, and toke the towne of Asteney, standing by the Ryuer of Mase, belonging to the Duke of Lo∣raine, but lately surprysed by ye Frenchemē. This was thought to be one cause, why the kyng retourned with his armie, ano∣ther, for that he misliked Duke Maurice doinges, and againe, for that his hope failed hym at Strasburge. Whan he had re∣moued from Wisseburge, Ambassadours came to the kyng, sent The suite of the Swisses to the Kyng. from all the Swisses. King Ferdinādo hath a Region ioyning to the Heluetians, called Sontgouia. And they of Enseme are the chiefest of all that countrey, who being afrayde of their partes, had intreated the Swisses, that for the aucthoritie and fauour that they had with the kyng, they would make interces¦sion for them. Wherfore at their request and charges takynge their iourney, they commended to the king also the cities nere vnto the same, Colmar, Seletstat, and Strasburg, saying how this countrie was linked vnto them in great amitie, both for the nerenes therof, and also chiefly for that they serue them in a maner of all their wheat, so muche as to them is nedefull, so that no displeasure can be done to them, whiche they shall not feele also. Unto whome the kyng maketh aunswer the .xx. daye of May besides Bipont. Howe he doth forgeue them of Ensem so that they wyll release suche of his soldious, as they haue pri¦soners. As touching the reste, for whome they spake, he neuer ment them euill. And albeit that the souldiours of Strasburg receiued his men somwhat roughly before the gates, and put them back that came thither to bie thinges, yet wil he not for∣sake their amitie therfore, euen for their sakes that intreate & be meanes for them. Nowe that he possesseth Lorayne, he shall be their nere neighbour, and wyll do nothing against the ma∣ner of neighbourhead. And loketh again for the same good wil and dutie of them also. There were before at Saberne, Ambas¦sadours sent to the king by ye Senate of Basill about thesame matter, vnto whome also was made a gentle aunswere. I she∣wed before of Duke Maurice, howe he departed from Lintz. Kyng Ferdinando also whan the conuention was done, went immediatly to the Emperour at Inspruck, to infourme him of all the matter. And Duke Maurice retourning to the campe, marcheth with his fellowes toward Thalpes as before is said. And whan he came almost there, by the perswasiō of the Frēch Ambassadour, he determined to set vpon the soldiours, whiche the Emperour had leuied in those partes. And where as ye. xvii
daye of Maye he was not far from Fiessa, which is a towne si∣tuated at the entring vp to the Alpes, by the ryuer of Leyche, he sendeth forth espialles, to vnderstande of the ennemie. They all in a maner bryng worde, howe they kepe the straytes and narrow passages of the moūtaines, and haue so fortified them∣selues, that they can be hurt by no meanes. Wherfore the Prin¦ces sende forth certen horsemen, chosen out of the whole nom∣ber, whiche riding almoste to their ennemies campe, intercept diuerse, and bring them away to the Princes. By whome they vnderstande many thynges, and the next daye marching fore∣warde Skirmyshes of ye Princes with ye in E∣perialles. with their fotemen, and hauing with them but two hō¦dreth horsemē only, they go to Fiessa. And what time thei were not farre of Rewe, they come vnto the straytes whiche were kept by the Emperours soldiours to the nomber of eight hon∣dreth, and with two field peces. Upō whom geuing the charge whan they were once entred into ye straytes, ouerthrowe their ennemies, who slipping away by flight, made them that incā∣ped at Rwe, to feare and tremble. The Princes pursuing with spede, geue charge vpon thē also, & finally put them to flight. Wherof a thousand wer taken, and slayne, and drowned, in the Ryuer of Leych: And lost also one enseigne. The next morning they go to the Castell of Erenberge, wherof we haue ofte made mention. And whan as fortune would, they had taken the for∣tresse, standing vnderneth the castel, and had wonne the straite wayes and passages, and had moreouer surprised diuerse peces of great ordenaūce furnished, they clyme vp the stepe & pitchell hill vnto the castell, and albeit they were layde at with many Erenberge take agayne weapons, yet toke they it by surrender. There were in the ca∣stell .xiii. enseignes of fotemen: Wherof .ix. were taken, and. iiii escaped, of the whiche thre were of Germaines, and one of I∣talians. And they that were taken, were about thre thousand, where they lost but fewe of their owne men. After that, was Rebelliō, in D. Moris cāp Duke Maurice in great daunger. For whan he woulde haue marched forewarde, the soldiours that were vnder Riseberge, would not, vnlesse they might haue an extraordinary paye for the wynning of the castell. But Duke Maurice sayd that was no reason, and commaunded with al, to apprehēde a seditious felowe that was more clamorouse than the rest. There all the rest make towardes him not only with their pykes, but also Duke Moris¦uye slayne. with their handgunnes, in so muche, that with moste spedy flighte, he could hardely saue his life. The .xxi. day of May two legions were sent by the Alpes to Inspruck, whiche was from thence two dayes iourney. Al the horsemen were left with one
legion of fotemen about Fiessa and Rwe, to defende and kepe the passage. The next daye Duke Maurice & his felowes Prin∣ces followyng after, ioyne with the army of fotemen, at Zir∣ley, whiche is not two great myles from Insprucke. But when the Emperour heard that Ereberge was wonne, he departed sodenly in the night awaye from Insprucke, with his brother The Empe. sleeth away by nyght. Ferdinādo, who was lately come thither to perswade a peace, as I sayd before, and through the Alpes, as they go to Trente, tourning on the left hande he came to Uillace a towne in Car¦nia, by the Riuer of Draue, whan he had a little before set at libertie Iohn Friderick, Duke of Saxon, which had bene fiue yeres prisoner, least his ennemies shuld ascribe this vnto their The Duke of Saxon set at libertie. glorie, whiche thing in dede the prisoner also hym selfe woulde not. Whā he was at libertie, he followed the Emperour neuer∣thelesse, whyther soeuer he went. In the selfe same tyme, quene Marie, the Emperours syster helde an assemblee at Achen in lowe ducheland, to make a league with the princes about her. And the Duke of Cleaue in dede, excuseth the matter by Am∣bassadours. But Adolphe, Archebishop of Collon comming thi¦ther entreth into league with the house of Burgsidy. Likewise doth the Byshop of Luke, George of Austriche. Whan Duke Maurice came to Insprucke, what thinge soeuer was founde The Empe. staffe spoiled there of the Emperours, and of the Spaiardes, and the Cardi∣nalles of Auspurge, it was spoyled. But to kyng Ferdinandos and the citezens goodes, there was no harme done. And for so muche as there remayned but thre daies only, vnto the truce, whiche for the treatie of peace, was taken, as before is mentio¦ned, Duke Maurice went from thence to Passawe. And the o∣ther Princes, Marching the same way they came ye .xxviii. day of May retourne to Fiessa, and afterwarde by menssengers as well, in their own, as in the name also of Duke Maurice, they publyshe letters at Auspurge, of this effect. In what sorte saye they, ye ennemies of truthe, haue alwayes done their indeuour, that all Godly Preachers oppressed, the Romishe idolle might be restored, and that the yought being brought vp in those er∣rours and false opiniōs might by litle and litle increase in the same, that thing is so manifest, that it nedeth no further demō¦stration. For euen at the same time, whan they did not sticke to proteste that they sought not Religion, they wrought with all their force that the pure doctrine might be cleane roted out. For they did not only caste the Godly preachers in pryson, but Crueltie a∣gainst godly preachers. in this citie also compelled them by an othe, & with great vn∣gentlenes, that they should departe out of the limites of the
Empire. And albeit that same othe was very wicked, and ther∣fore is grounded vpon no lawe nor reason, yet, least any sclaun¦der might aryse, we haue called home agayne those selfe same preachers and scholemaisters, whiche our aduersaries had exi∣led, thinking it our dutie so to doe. Wherfore all suche as after this sorte were bannished, as before is sayd, we do clerely relea∣se from that bonde of othe, wherunto through force & violence, contrary to the lawes thei were bounde, and restore them vnto libertie, in ioyning them, that not only in this citie, but also in other places, according to their vocation, they teache Gods worde syncerely, according to the confession here in tymes past exhibited, and rightly and godly bring vp yougth in learning, trusting vnto our defence and tuition. We cōmaunde also that no man moleste them with wordes or iniuries, as though they should do contrary to their faith geuen. For inasmuche as not through their deserte, but only for the profession of the truthe, they haue liued many monethes in exile, we doubte not but all good men wyll lamente their chaunce, and accompte them worthy of all good wyll and fauour. And for as much as those which in their absence haue prea∣ched in this citie, be men suspected and vnconstant, insomuch, that they may not conueniently be with these, that we haue called agayne, by reason of their contrarietie in teachinge, we require the Senate, to put them to silence, and so to demeane them selues, that this decree of ours may stande in ful strēgthe and authoritie. Whan the Princes had thus proclaimed the se∣uenth day of Iune, the fift day after, they restore the ministers The princes restore ye mi∣nisters of ye churche. of the churche to their places, and geue them agayne authori∣tie to preache, to the great reioysing & contentation of the peo∣ple. Before Duke Maurice retourned from Lintz, Marques Albert going a parte with his armie, doeth much harme with spoyling and burning to Wuolfgang, maister of the Almaigne order, as they call hym, and whan he had exacted mony of him, inuadeth the countrie of Norinberge, and the fift day of May taketh by composition, Lightnaw, a castell of theirs, standyng fiue myles from the citie, with the towne ioyning to the same. His armie was of two thousand horsemen, and .xix. enseignes of fotemen. The nexte daie sending his letters to them of No∣rinberge, The Marq. Albertes ar∣mie. albeit the Frenche king saieth he, and the Princes cō¦federated, haue declared by wrytinge sufficiently, and at large what they thought of the common wealth, and how thei were bent to recouer the libertie of Germany, and Religiō also, vpō hope and confidence that all good men with wylling myndes,
woulde not only imbrace this their enterpryse, but would al¦so with all their force and indeuour further thesame, whiche many haue done in dede: yet haue you neyther declared what your mynde and pourpose is, nor as I heare, haue sent no Am∣bassadours to the assemblee appointed at Auspurge, but pre∣pare all thinges for defence, plantyng your ordenaunce here & there on your walles and Bulwarkes, and hiring force of sol∣diours, make auaunt, that you wyll perseuer to the vttermoste extremitie, as I am credible informed, and it maketh me to be∣leue it the more, for that hetherto you haue sent no Ambassa∣dours to me for peace. Whiche some notwithstandinge haue done, bothe Princes and Cities further of. Where therfore the same wryting, of the kyng and Princes confederated, doth manifestly declare, that suche, as either shall resiste this enter∣pryse of theirs, or not further thesame, shall be taken as enne∣mies. And againe, for so muche as I am adioyned to the same warre, to the ende to bryng all those, in whose limites I come, to do their dutie, and to leaue behynde my backe no fortified place, out of the whiche any force or saleinge out is to be fea∣red, therfore haue I taken from you, whiche as yet haue not sa¦tisfied my expectation, the castell of Lightnaw, whiche was a great annoyaunce to my campe, preseruing the souldiours of the garrison, whome neuerthelesse I might haue otherwyse vsed. But bycause the chief thing yet remaineth, I require you both in the Frenche kinges name and my fellowes, that you wyll make a direct aunswer, what you are purposed to doe for the defence of the libertie of Germany, and for the stablishyng of Religion, and let me vnderstande it tomorrowe, that I may knowe, what thyng is to be loked for of you, and in what sorte I ought to accept you. Howbeit, what tyme Duke Maurice and his fellowes were at Schwinfurte, whiche was the .xxvi. daye of Marche, as before is sayde, they demaunded of them of Norinberge, faith, societie, munition, vitayle, & a great somme of monie. But after muche debating, all other conditions o∣mitted, what tyme they had paied them an hondreth thousand crownes, they promysed them peace as well for them selues as their fellowes, by letters deuised in moste ample wyse. Nowe therfore what tyme Marques Albert assayled them, they make complainte to them. And bycause Duke Maurice was not yet retourned from Lintz, the Lantgraues Sonne wrytynge to them agayne the thyrde daye of May, from Gun∣delfynge, byddeth them be of good comforte,
And the fift day after whan Duke Maurice was retourned, they wryte both, & promisse to kepe conuenauntes, saying that this acte of the Marques is cleane besides their expectation, neither do they like it, but will do all their indeuour, that they may recouer their own, & wyll also call back immediatly suche ayde as they haue lent him. Whan they of Norinberge had re∣ceiued the letters of Marques Albert, they wrote againe the same day, signifiyng what thing Duke Maurice and the prin¦ces had promised them by composition, and saie how that was the cause, that they sent no Ambassadours to him. Wherfore they earnestly pray and beseche hym that he wyll restore fully the castell taken, and gratifie his fellowes herein. Thre dayes after he wrote againe: For so muche as he doth not know, how they haue compounded with them, and yet it concerneth the Frenche king very muche, vnto whome he is no lesse addicted than to the others, he requireth to haue saufeconduicte for a credible man of his, whome he wyll sende into their citie, to se the instrument of their accorde. They followe his mynde, and let him se it. But he neuerthelesse, although Duke Maurice & his fellowes were meanes and diligently intreated him to the contrary, the .xi. daye of May, wryteth to them againe. And in the Frenche kinges name especially doeth charge them, that within a fewe houres they would aunswer him playnely, whe¦ther they wyll be obedient. And where he receiued not, suche aunswer as he would, the towne and castell of Lightnawe he spoyleth, burneth, ouerthroweth and maketh euen with the grounde. And whan he had exacted mony of the townes men, he caused them to sweare to be true subiectes to hym & to his cosin George Friderick, also Marques of Brandenburg, and be¦segeth the citie. Wherfore the the Lantgraues sonne calleth a∣gayne by and by two guidons of horsemen whiche he let hym haue against Woulfgange, the maister of the order, and com∣maundeth to come vnto him, wherwith he was sore offended. He attempted therfore cruell warre, and whan he had burned and spoyled an hondreth villages in their dominiō, and about Albertes cru¦eltie to them of Norm∣berg. thre score and ten maners and fermes of the citezens, and the churches also, he setteth on fyre moreouer an exceading great wood that they had, whiche serued not them only, but also o∣ther inhabiters therby of tymber and firewood, and burned therof aboue thre thousand acres. And he had before this pro∣claymed open warre to all others, there aboutes that wold not obeye, both of the nobilitie and others, but chiefly to ye Byshop of Bamberge, and of Wirtemburg, whome also in this case he
droue to moste vnreasonable conditions. And verely the bishop of Bamberge, to saue hymselfe and his prouince from present Bamberge redemeth pe∣ace dearelye. daunger, bought peace of him for wonderful losses. For he was fayne to geue him .xx. townes & signories within his iurisdic∣tion, & made hym wrytinges of the same, the .xix. daye of May, and also permitteth him to haue all his wardes and clientes. And the Byshop of Dirtemburge payde hym two hondreth & twenty thousand crownes, and also taketh vpon hym and pro∣myseth to paye his debtes, whiche amounted to the summe of thre hondreth and fiftie thousand crownes. The cities of Swe¦uia hauing compassion of this vnworthie and lamentable for∣tune of the Norinbergians, whiche were lately assembled at Auspurge (as before is sayd) to the nomber of .xxvi. by Ambassa¦dours chosen out of the whole nomber, make intercession, espe∣cially they of Auspurge. And whan they were come by saufecō∣duicte to Norinberge, alledging many reasons, they exhorte them to peace, and tell them of the takyng of the strayte passa∣ges in the Alpes, and of the castell of Erenberge, and declare that the state both of Hongarie and Italie is suche, that there can be no ayde nor succour loked for of any man. After they ex∣hibite the condicions propounded by Marques Albert. They geue them thankes for their good wyll and paynes taken, and declare both howe the Marques hath no cause to war against them, and also what was treated with Duke Maurice & his fe¦lowes. And because the conditions be suche, as partly they are not able to perfourme them, and partly can by no meanes be excused to the Emperour and kyng Ferdinando, they saye, they wyll abyde the extremitie, and commit the matter vnto God. For they knowe them selues so cleare, that they can be conten∣ted to be iudged herein not only by the Emperour, but by all other Princes also, yea by the next frendes & kinsfolkes of the Marques him selfe. Whan the intercessours had reported these thinges agayne to the Marques, and had duely placed their wordes with termes apte and conuenient, and he not only re∣lented nothing, but also threatened moste cruell thynges. The fourth daye of Iune, they aduertise them by their letters, that his mynde is set all on crueltie, and howe they could not bring him to any more reasonable conditions. And nowe the Mar∣ques shoteth of his ordenaunce into the citie, with much more violence, than before, and one night maketh the batterie, more ouer to put thē in the more terrour, he burneth one of the sub∣urbes. And about the same tyme came into the Campe to hym George Thanberge, and William Schacthe, sent as Ambassa∣dours
from Duke Maurice, & the Lantgraues sonne, to make peace. They, taking to them the Ambassadours of the cities, whiche being in dispayre of the matter, were els mynded to de∣parte, after a long & laborious treatie, at the length perswade both partes, and conclude a peace. For the Marques has his ar¦mie lately augmented, by Iob Dalbeck and Christopher Oldē∣burge, Norinberge hath peace with ye Mar. Erles, and Duke Maurice wryting his letters to the se∣nate, signified that he was moste greuously offended with this the Marques doinge, yet now could not remedie it. The condi∣cions of peace were these. They should paye two hondreth thou¦sand crownes, and deliuer him sixe great pieces of artyllarie, with all thinges furnished. They should beare their fauour to the Princes confederated, as they of Auspurg do. That he hym selfe should againe restore suche thinges as he had taken from them. Wherfore about the .xx. day of Iune, was leuied the siege of the moste famous and mightie citie in maner of all Germa∣ny, & best furnished of all thinges, but especially moste strongly fortified. The Marques full of lusty courage by reason of thys lucky successe, the .xx. daye of Iune, wryteth letters to them of Albert to thē of Wol∣mes. Woulmes out of his campe. Wherin was conteined, howe the Norinbergians, to their exceading great hinderaunce, by hym vanquished, had receiued conditions of peace, & would do what so he and his fellowes shall cōmaunde them. Nowe therfore is he determined to besege them also, but far otherwyse, & muche more streightly, than he did of late. And if fortune fauour his pourpose, he will spare no mankinde, that is past seuen yeares olde, except thei retourne in time, and immediatly sending Am¦bassadours, do fully satisfie him and his league frendes, and al¦so make their purgation of their rebellion lately committed. And what they wyll doe herein, he cōmaundeth them to sende playne worde, by the brynger of these letters. Unto the whiche letters they aunswer briefly, that whylest they be saufe, and so longe as they haue lyfe, they wyll doe no suche thynge as he demaundeth. The Frenche king passing out of Germany, with his army deuided in thre partes, came at the last to Walderfing, whiche is a litle towne of the dutchie of Lorayne by ye Riuer of Sare. There vniting his armie, the .xxv. day of May, marching forth and passing ouer the riuer of Mosel, what tyme he came into ye The Frēche king destroy¦eth Thempe¦rour coūtrie. lande of Lutcemburg, he distroied all before him with spoiling and burning, prouoked by the example of Rosseme, as they thē selues reporte, and recouereth the towne of Asteney, voyde of soldiours to defende it. For Marten Rosseme was retourned
home. Againe pitching his tentes, he taketh a little towne by surrender called Danuillers, after that also Iueye, one of ye chiefest fortes there. In the same town was Count Mansfield Ernestus, gouernour of the whole countrey, with the floure of the youth there with him. Al they were taken prisoners. After∣warde was the towne spoyled of the outragious soldiours a∣gainst the kinges will, as they reporte. Now let vs retourne to Duke Maurice. He, for to treate a peace, as I said, was gone to Passa we. There he repeting the treatie that was at Lintz, the Thassemble at Passawe. first of Iune, propoūdeth & declareth al thinges more at large. There were themperours Ambassadours, kyng Ferdinando, Al¦bert Duke of Bauier, the Byshops of Salisburge & Eistet, and of all the chief Princes of Germany, the Ambassadours also of Cleaue and of Wirtemberge, and many others besides. He com¦plaineth that the state of thempire whiche chiefly ought to be The cōplain te of Pryn∣ces Elect. free, is gouerned by straungers, that thauthoritie of the Prin∣ces Electours is deminished, & that many things be done with out their aduise & knowledge. That certē thinges also are pluc¦ked away, & alienated frō thempire. Howe meanes are deuised, that thautoritie of electing thēperour may be takē from thē, in cōmon assemblies the Electours voices are in a maner ne∣glected, that the priuate conuentions of the Electours, are for a certen feare omitted, and their liberties infringed, whylest the chamber imperiall receiueth those, that appeale from thē, contrary to the auncient custome. That the controuersies of the states Imperial are purposly maynteined, and be neuer ac∣corded, before either partie haue susteined losse and dammage. Howe in the Emperours courte a man can hardly be heard speake, neyther is his matter exactly knowen, chiefly for that they vnderstande not the tongue, and that there is muche losse not only of costes, but of tyme also: In open assemblies mat∣ters are handled nothyng frendly, and if any man propounde ought for the common wealth, it is taken in euyl parte. That Germany is sore impoueryshed and beggered with those ofte and dayly conuentions, and at home oftentymes are many thynges neglected, and neyther yet is the publique state any whyt amended, yea it is made worse and more intricate. By strayghte proclamations it is prohibited, that no man serue in foreyne warres. That suche as be reconciled, are bounde, that they shall not warre against the Emperours countrey, and so are plucked from the Empyre. In the Protestaūtes warre such as serued their Lordes, according to their dutie, were punished by the purse, such as in the same war remained in thēperours
frendshyp, were commaunded to paye also, and that their lan∣des and goodes should be put to sale, vnlesse they payed imme∣diatly, and their Ambassadours, bicause they did not by and by assent, were commaunded vnder paine of death, that they shuld not departe from the court. That foreine soldiours haue bene oftentimes brought into Germany, and the last warre beinge finished, were distributed hither and thither into Prouinces, whiche haue done many thinges dissolutely and vitiously, and haue gloried of the conquest of Germany, and haue sayde, how it should be annexed  the Emperours patrimonie, and that in the head cities should be buylded castelles and fortes. Howe muche ordenaunce and warlike munition, was, as it were in a mockerie, caried out of Germany into foreine nations. Howe diuerse men, for a certen ambition, haue caused the armes of ye Princes of Germany to be set vpon ye gunnes which they made for themselues, as though they had taken them from thē. How there be set forth bokes, & that with the Emperours priuilege, whiche sounde to the great reproche and infamie of Germany, as though it were cōquered and brought in bondage. That in common assemblees, vnder the name of the Emperours pro∣uinces, certen men were placed amonges the Princes and sta∣tes, and this to be wrought through secret deuises, that the nō¦ber being augmented, they may preuayle by the nomber of voi¦ces. Howe foure yeares past was ordeyned the iudgemēt of the chamber imperial, and lawes made by a very fewe, which wer after published, to the great hynderaunce of many, especially of them, that be of the Protestauntes Religion. For all those are vtterly excluded from that benche. Wherfore the thinge it selfe requyreth, that those lawes be better skanned in the next conuention. These and suche other lyke thynges he propoun∣deth, and for as muche as they chiefly concerne the Emperour, he requyreth that they be redressed out of hande, and that the Empyre be restored to the fourmer dignitie, and that others be not permitted to delude and contempne the same. The intercessours conferring together, iudged nothinge a∣misse in these requestes. Howebeit to the intent, that both the Emperours dignitie should be mainteined, and might so much more easely be perswaded, they thynke, that many thynges, whiche concerne the reformation of the state publique, may be ryght well differred tyll a generall conuention of the Empyre. There was present the French Ambassadour, Fraxineus: Who The oration of the Fren∣che Ambas. the thyrd daye of Iune made an oration before the Princes.
How betwene the Frenchemē and the Germaines, in old time, and before the name of Francons was knowen, there was so Thanitie of Frēchmē and Germai¦nes. great lykenes of life and maners, that ye Germains be thesame people, whiche the Romaines in times past called the brethren of the Frenchemen. But after that the Francons had planted them selues in Fraunce, both natiōs were so vnited, that there was one Empire, one Prince, and the same lawes for both. Af∣terwarde, whan an alteration chaunced, and that thempyre was deuolued to the Germains: The Dukes of Saxon & other Emperours, for that they had their originall of the kinges of Fraunce, had continual amitie with the Frenchmē, in so much that Philip king of Fraunce, caused ye auncient league, whiche could scant be read for the olde antiquitie therof, to be written out in goldē letters, and layd vp in an holyer place. And verely not without iust cause. For during that league of amitie, the cō¦mon wealth of either nation was in dede moste florishing. And certenly the force of Germany was thā so great, that it prescri∣bed lawes, not only to the Hongarians, Bohemers, Poloniās, and Deanes, but also to the Italians. And ye kinges of Fraūce, for the maintenaunce of religion, haue warred many times a∣gainst thennemies of Christendom. The Saracenes & Turkes, both in Asia. Affricke & Europe, and haue had moste noble vic∣tories. But after chaunced a time more vnfortunate, whan cer¦ten Emperours as newly entred, and not very Germaines, nor worthy of ye dignitie, haue forsaken that amitie with ye kinges of Fraunce, and haue induced great calamitie to the common wealth. But this sore plage, through Gods benefite, was hea∣led by the noble house of the Dukes of Lutcemburg, out of the whiche haue issued certen Emperours, men of great vertue, & linked moste assuredly to the kinges of Fraunce. For the father of themperour Charles the fourth, died in battell for the kyng of Fraunce. The like good will beare also the Princes of Au∣striche, amongest others Albert the firste, who neither for pro∣messe, nor threatening of the hyghe Byshops, could be brought to warre against Fraunce. These thynges he reciteth for this intent, that they may see, howe euell certen councellours and ministers of the moste puissaunt Emperour Charles the fyfte, prouyde for the common wealth, whylest they worke not thys thinge only, that they plucke a sonder the one from the other, these two moste excellent nations: but also through their craft and subtiltie haue brought this to passe longe synce, that the moste noble Prince, kyng Fraunces, was iudged an ennemie, his cause not harde. This do they to their owne priuate gaine,
but to the exceading great hinderasice of the cōmmon wealth. For how harde it were for them, during the amitie of the two nations to infringe the libertie of Germany, and to buylde vp that their kyngdome, it doeth hereof sufficiently appeare, for The libertie of Germany restored by ye power of Fraunce. that they being nowe affrayde of the force of Fraunce, be not so importune as they were, nor doe not so muche vrge that Spanyshe yoke and bondage. These be verely they whiche by intreatie and tributes, obteyning peace of the Turke, vnder the colour of Religion, and obedience, haue brought in dissen∣tions and factions into Germany, who ayded with the power of Germaynes, haue warred against Germany, whiche haue exacted money of all men, and made the State of the Empyre miserable, by placing here and there garrisons of Spanyardes by vnarmyng the armaries, and openyng the waye to confisca¦tion. For the matter is brought to that passe, that bothe the seale of the Empyre, and the iudgement of the chamber, and al¦so the ryght and libertie of assemblies depende only vpon the pleasure of the Byshop of Arras. For what example is this or what equitie is it, that suche as to get their liuing serue in fo∣reine warres should be therfore executed, outlawed, and with great rewardes set forth? be in daūger of murtheryng, to omit in the meane season so many murthers, lecherous actes, spoy∣lynges and robbinges of townes, and especially the handlyng of Religion, whiche hath not bene after one maner, but diuers according to the tyme. Certenly what so euer hath bene done these many yeares nowe, tendeth all to this ende: that, con∣trary to the lawes of the Empyre, kyng Ferdinando being her∣unto eyther compelled, or els by fayre promesses allured, the Prynces also by a certen feare and terrour subdued, the Prince of Spayne might be made Emperour. And shuld not noble cou¦rages The way o∣pened for ye Prynce of Spayne to be Emper. wyshe for death rather, than to beholde ye lyght of ye Sun in suche distresse and miseries? Assuredly there can no man be imagined so very a coward or so barbarouse, whō these thyngs would not moue. Wherfore no man ought to maruell, that in the ende ther should arrise some Princes, and amongest them Duke Maurice thelectour of Saxony, which thought it their parts euen with ye hazarde of their liues to recouer ye libertie of their natife coūtrie. And they, being of thē selues not able, nor of power sufficiēt to sustein such a charge alone, haue desired ye ayde of the king of Fraūce. And he doubtles setting a part ye dis¦pleasure of former yeares, hath not only made thē partakers of al his fortunes, but hath also imploied him selfe wholy to the same busines, making a league with them, wherein amongest
other thinges it is prouided, that thei may not cōpounde with the ennemie, but by the kinges consent. Howbeit, Duke Mau∣rice, although he be tied with that same bonde, yet, for ye weale of his countrie, and to followe the mynde of kyng Ferdinando requiring him hereunto, hath lately demaunded of the moste christian king, how he could be content to haue peace. Whiche thing chaunced vnto him in dede som what contrary to his ex∣pectation, for that, considering his benefite is so great, he sup∣posed that in matters touching him, he shuld not haue sent to him a far of, but to haue deuised with him presently. Neuerthe lesse because he setteth much more by publique, thā by his own priuate profites, he would deny nothing to a Prince of his con¦federacie. Wherfore if the woundes of the cōmon wealth may be healed, as they ought, & from henceforth assuraunce made, yt they breake not out again, if the captine Princes may be relea¦sed, vpon suche conditions as be in the league expressed. Moreo¦uer, in case the olde leagues of Fraunce with the Empire, and this new confederacie also made of late with the Princes, may so be confirmed, yt they may take place for euer, if these thines, I saye, may be brought to passe, he is so well affected towardes the common wealth, that not only he wyll assent gladly to the treatie of peace, but also wyl giue God hartie thākes, that his aduise and helpe hereunto hath not wanted. As touching his priuate matters, for so much as the Emperour deteineth many thinges by force, and hath made warre vpon no iust cause, the king thinketh it reason, that he ye hath first done wrong, should first seke also to make satisfactiō. He verely, althoug he neither distruste his force nor yet his cause, will so demeane him selfe, yt it may be well perceyued both how desirous of peace he is, and how willing also to gratifie Duke Maurice & them all. Here∣unto the Princes aunswere. Howe that recitall of antiquitie repeted of fourmer memory, cōcerning the coniūctiō of Fraūce The princes aunswer his oration. and Germany was to them right ioyfull, and no lesse pleasaūt to heare, that the kyng preferreth the common wealth aboue his priuate cōmodities, and is not against, but that the Prin∣ces confederate may conclude a peace with the Emperour. For that it should so be, it is for the profite, not only of one nation, but also of all Europe, whiche afflicted with ciuil discorde, ten deth to distruction. And suche conditions of peace, as the kyng requyreth, they doubte not but that they may be obteyned. For the Emperour both before this tyme, and also in this trouble thinketh well of the common wealth, and wyll not haue the libertie of Germany deminished. There is good hope moreouer
that he wyll shortly delyuer the captiue Princes. But that both the olde leagues should be renewed and the newe confir∣med, the king of his wysdome vnderstandeth, that in this same conuention so great a matter can not be finished. Neuertheles they wyshe vnfainedly, that the same amitie, which hath bene alwayes betwene bothe nations may remayne ferme and vn∣uiolable. That suche priuate suites as he hath with the Empe¦rour, myght be appeased, they both couet chiefly, and also wyll refuse no paynes and trauell therin. And where as the kyng af¦firmeth that the Emperour deteineth diuerse thinges that ar his and signifieth plainly, that he hath thinges to lay clayme to, they thinke it not against reason that he shewe, what thing that is. For they are mynded to preferre the controuersie to the Emperour, & be as meanes therin. And they desire very much, that the kyng would accept these thinges in good part. Nowe as concerning the alliaunce betwene the Germaynes & Frēche men, I haue spoken in the eight booke. And that whiche the Frenche Ambassadour speaketh here of the house of Lutcem∣burge, The house of Lucēburg thus it standeth. The Erle of Lutcemburge Henry, had a sonne named Henry, whiche was after made Emperour, the seuenth of that name, he had a sonne Called Iohn, whiche by mariage was made king of Boheme. Who aided Philip Ualose the Frenche kyng, against the kyng of Englande Edwarde the third, goyng hym selfe with hym to the fielde, and the bat∣tell The battell of Cressie. being foughten, where the Englishmen had the victory, he was slayne, and amonges others, lefte a sonne called Charles, whiche afterwarde was made Emperour, the fourthe of that name, father to Wenceslaus and Sigismunde, whiche were af∣ter both Emperours, and this Sigismunde also kyng of Hon∣gary and Boheme, the procurer of the counsell of Constance. Albert of Austriche of whome he speaketh, the sonne of Raffe the Emperour, whan he was Emperour he obserued perfit a∣mitie Albert of Au¦striche. with Philip le beau kyng of Fraunce, notwithstanding that the Byshop of Rome Boniface the eight, did wonderfully incense him vnto warre. Duke Maurice besydes the deliue∣raunce of his father in lawe, vrged two thynges chiefly. One, that of suche matters, as annoyed the libertie of Germany, & the whiche he hym selfe had recited by name, kyng Ferdinando Maximiliā his sonne, and the intercessours themselues, shuld nowe forthwith examine, and according to the lawes and cu∣stome of Germany, determine the same. Another was that pea¦ce myght be graunted to Religion, and that no man should he molested therfore tyl suche tyme as the whole cōtrouersie were
fully reconciled. This way did not thintercessours discōmend: but themperour by his Ambassadours declareth, what lacke he findeth therin, & thought it reason, that those which had bene faithfull to him, and therfore had chaunced into extreme mise∣rie, should be first recompēsed their losse. After much debating, what time diuerse pointes were mittigated, they agreed at ye length, that the third day of July, the Emperour shuld answer directly, & that the war should cease in the meane time. Wher∣fore thintercessours wryting their letters the .xvi. day of June exhorte themperour vnto peace. Whan yt castel of Ereberg was taken, and afterwarde Inspruck spoyled, I shewed you, howe the Princes, retorning through thalpes about thende of May came backe again to Fiessa. And marching frō thence, the .xix. day of June, pitched their tentes at Eistet, which is ye Byshops town, bordring vpon Bauier, and ther the whole army longed sore for Duke Maurice cōming, not without great thought & carfulnes. Who comming thither at the length, sheweth them in what case the matter stode: and the laste daye of Iune, he re∣tourneth from thence to Passaw by post horses, that he might be there at the daye appointed, and his fellowe Princes remo∣uing their campe, the next morning, the fourth day after came to Roteburg, whiche is a towne nere vnto Francony by the ri∣uer of Duber. But Marques Albert neuerthelesse pursued his enterprise, and hauing driuen the citie of Norinberge to make Marques Al¦bert warreth for himselfe. their peace, he compelled also the nobilitie and states in these parties, to be at cōmaundement. For albeit he mainteined the common cause at the first, as in the writing set forth he profes∣sed to do, yet was he not of the same league, and whā the siege of Ulmes was leuied, he went about his priuate affaires, whe∣ther it were for that he would wynne to hym selfe alone, what soeuer the chaunce of warre had geuen hym, or that he mysly∣ked Duke Maurice his doinge, or els moued by the Frenche kynge, was bent otherwyse. Notwithstanding those that he toke the faith of he commaunded to perfourme the same fide∣litie also to his felowes. Afterwarde inuading the prouince of the Archbishop of Mentz, by the Ryuer Meyne, doeth excea∣ding muche harme with burning and spoyling, and demaun∣deth of hym a wonderfull summe of money. And where diuers made intercession, neither yet could thei agree vpō the summe. The Archebyshop, fyrste synkynge hys great Artylarie in the Rhyne, the fyrste daye of Iuly fled awaye, to saue hym selfe. The selfe same tyme also, Marques Albert, whiche lefte nothynge vnattempted, wylleth the Archebyshop of Treuers
to deliuer vnto him the chiefest castell of his dominion, whiche is situated, where the Riuers of Rhine and Mosell mete, vpon an hyghe hyll, naturally strong, and very commodious. And he sayd, howe he required this of him in the Frēche kynges name. He, after he had conferred with his counsell, sent him worde yt he could not accomplyshe his request herein. For as muche as the Princes intercessours in the latter part of their aunswere that they made to the Frenche Ambassadour (as before is men∣tioned) sayd howe they thought it reason, that the kyng should declare what he required of the Emperour. The Ambassadour, by the kyng aduertised, whan he was with the armie besydes Eistet, the .xix. daye of Iune, wryteth to them agayne, how the kyng hath attempted this war, for none other cause doubles, The Frēche kinges aun∣swer to thin tercessours. but to profit the whole common wealth, and chiefly to restore the libertie of Germany sore opressed, what tyme certen Pryn∣ces had long and muche requested hym to the same. And assu∣redly sought no priuate gayne to him selfe therein, and that may the thing it selfe beare witnes. For he had taken nothyng at al in Germany, where it had not bene harde for him to haue done. He permitted the Princes also to warre frely as they list. And albeit that in the meane tyme that he hymselfe laye styll with his armie by the Riuer of Rhine, his ennemies had inua∣ded Fraunce, yet did he not once remoue tyll he was aduertised by Duke Maurice, that suche thinges myght be obteyned by peaceable meanes, for the whiche this warre was attempted. Whiche thing knowen, he was not a litle glad, whan he sawe the thinge procede, after their hartes desire. For his aduise and counsell was, first that the Princes should not neglect, so good∣ly an occasion as this was, neither disceiue them seluws, or by others be abused, as they were before. Moreouer, for so muche as he had shewed so notable a token of his good wyl and fideli∣tie, that the amitie of both nations might assuredly be establi∣shed, to thintent that he himself may afterwardes haue better leasure to se vnto other cōmodities of the cōmon wealth: And because Duke Maurice hath demaunded of him, in what sorte he would be accorded, this is his opinion, that he sayth howe ye Emperour moued warre against him without any iust cause. And the kinges of Fraunce be not wont to desire peace of their ennemy, especially of suche one, as neither in power nor other thing they be inferiours to. Now to propounde any thing (vn∣lesse there were certen hope to obteine yt same) he seeth no cause why. And as touching them selues he supposeth, that they wil require nothing of him, but that may stande with his honour
and dignitie. And he so loueth them againe, and so estemeth them, that in case he may se them treate the cōmō peace of the whole worlde, he would for their sakes geue ouer a great parte of his right. And is contented also, that they shall bothe heare and determine his requestes, so that the Emperour refuse not to doe likewyse, and wysheth greatly that for the same cause, there might some conuention be had as sone as might be. And if it may so be, than shall all men vnderstande, both how much he loueth the common wealth, and also howe farre from the truthe are those thinges, whiche are bruted of him by his ad∣uersaries, cōcerning the Turkishe league. But if these thinges can take no place, and that all consultations be referred only to his discretion, neither can obteine that league of amitie with the Germaines whiche by good deserte he loked for, the blame ought not to be imputed to him, if there chaūce further trouble to arise. These letters were red before the Princes the first day of Iuly. Whan Duke Maurice was come to Passawe at the day, on the morowe was brought the Emperours auns∣were to king Ferdinando. Than he whan the Princes were set sayd, howe the Emperour in dede had written his mynde, but did not assente to many thinges. And for so muche as it is so, it is not nedefull to declare expressely, what thing he hath auns∣wered to the rest. Neuerthelesse to thintent it may appere, how greatly he himselfe desireth peace, and howe well he wysheth vnto Germany, he wyll go with great expedition to the Empe¦rour, doubting not but that he shall perswade him. Wherfore he desireth ernestly, that Duke Maurice woulde be content to expect so long as he may goe and come, whiche shall not passe eight daies at the moste. Whiche thing when he refused imme∣diatly, the king was very importune: But that was in vayne, and Duke Maurice calling vnto him the Princes and Ambas∣sadours saith, how they them selues know right well, whiche haue bene present and priuie to all doinges for the space of a D. Maurice weary of de∣layes. moneth, that he hath lefte nothing vndone, that he might ey∣ther by study or trauel, worke to conclude a peace. And doubted not but yt they wolde assuredly witnesse wt him the same. Wher fore he requireth them, yt they would still beare him their good will, & helpe to further the cōmō cause of Germany, for he may graunte no further respite, for this long treatie is had in suspi¦tion of his fellowes already. Wherunto, whan they had made a gentle aunswer, cōmending his good will, they desire king Fer¦dinando, that he in themperours name would make a playne determination. For they suppose that what soeuer he did, the
Emperour would confirme and ratifie. Unto this Ferdinando answered, that his brother had geuen him no such authoritie. For than would he not take so muche paines to trauell to and fro: For he might in no wyse passe the bōdes by him prescribed. I shewed you before how the Princes that were intercessours, by their letters wrytten the .xvi. day of Iune, exhorted thempe∣rour to peace. Unto the whiche letters the last of Iune thempe The Empe. letters to the intercessours rour answereth from Uillace. How from the time he first recei¦ued the crowne imperiall, he hath euer desired peace, yea and now wisheth for nothing els. Wherfore there is no cause that they should cōmend the same so greatly to him, but vnto them, whiche be thauthours of these cōmotions. And that thei wold so do, he requireth thē by the faith, they owe vnto him. As tou∣ching his owne priuate affaires, he will for their sakes graunt very muche. And concerning the whole pacification, he hathe wrytten his minde to his brother king Ferdinando, of whome they shall heare al thinges. Unto the which letters they write Their auns∣wer to the Emperour. againe the fift day of Iuly, what time king Ferdinando retur∣ned to the Emperour. Howe thei at his request and desire came first vnto this treatie, and so muche the rather, for that he pro∣mised to doe any thing for the commō wealthes sake. And how they haue through their exceading great labour, carefulnes, & diligence, founde out the way of peace. Wherfore they beseche him eftsones, & that moste intierly that he would haue some re¦spect to the cōmon countrie. Many, and the chiefest states of thempire, keping their faith vnto him, haue already susteined great calamitie, and nowe the condicion of thinges is suche, & the occasion of deliberation to be had, so brief, that the other Princes & states, especially suche as are nere the fire, although they would neuer so faine perfourme vnto him al faith and lo∣ialtie, yet can they not so do, no they are constreined to consult by what meanes they may spedely esche we the present calami¦tie and distructiō. And in case he refuse peace, intēding to make warre, there wyll doubtles moste greuouse and perillous alte∣rations arrise therof in Germany, whiche afterwarde wyll re∣dounde to his prouinces also. Wherfore ther were nothing bet∣ter, than that he would content him selfe with the conditions of peace, whiche they wyth so great trauell haue procured, espe¦cially, since ye chiefest pointes were first approued at Lintz, the fourme and fotesteppes of the whiche treatie they haue follo∣wed herein. Againe for as muche as all suche thinges, whiche properly concerne his dignitie are pourposly referred to the cō∣uention of thempire, to the ende they may there more gently &
quietly be treated. The same day, wherin this was done, Duke Maurice departeth thence, and whan he was come to his fel∣lowes D. Maurice retourneth to his fello∣wes. the .xi. day of Iuly, which that tyme incamped at Mer∣getheme, he sheweth them, what is done, and saith howe kyng Ferdinando is ryden in poste to the Emperour, and supposeth that very shortly he will sende of his counsellours, whiche shal bring a full and determinate aunswer. And in this doubtfull state of thinges, least they should sit stil and do nothing, and by∣cause there was at Franckefurt a garrison of the Emperours of .xvii. enseignes of fotemen, and a thousand horsemen, at the leading of Conrade Hansteyne, so that they of Hessebye were in no small daunder, they condescended to goe thither. Wherfore whan they had done much harme to Woulfgange, Maister of Prusse, by burning and spoiling his countrie, where they were at the same time, marching forwarde through the lande of the Archebyshop of Mentz, the .xvii. day of Iuly they come to Frāc¦furt. But the Princes & intercessours and Ambassadours, sent immediatly after Duke Maurice and his fellowes into theyr campe Ambassadours, whiche might mollifie their myndes & perswade thē to peace. During the whiche siege, George Duke of Megelburge, adioyned vnto Duke Maurice, euen he which first of all men moued warre against them of Maydenburge, was slayne with a great piece. What tyme they began firste to George Du. of Megelbu. slayne. besiege Franckfurt, the Princes confederated desyre a great quātitie of batteryng pieces of the Paulsgraue Electour, who sayeth them nay ones or twyse: But whan he myght none o∣therwyse chose, and they threatened to come with their whole armie, he gaue them eight of the best he had, with all their fur∣niture. Kyng Ferdinando retourning to Passawe at the daye, which was the .xiii. day of Iuly, declareth to the intercessours what the Emperours mynde was in euery thyng. Uerely that the matters concerning the Empyre, whiche I sayde before Duke Maurice had propounded, shoulde not be Conditions of peace offe¦red by the Emperour. heard of certen commissioners seuerally, but of all men in ge∣nerall in the whole assemblee of the Empyre. Agayne that the cause of Religion should quietly remayne vnto the next con∣uention of the Empire. In the which conuention, that which shall seme good to be done therin from henceforth by the com∣mon aduise of the states, the same to be cōfirmed and ratified. Themperour also ye .xi. day of Iuly answereth thintercessours to their last letters, yt like as they haue by their letters so hath his brother king Ferdinādo treated wt him diligently to accept
And he in dede would gladly haue pleased both parts, but he is for diuers causes letted, whiche he declareth to his brother: for it lieth not in him to cōfirm & approue al things indifferētly: and wher by thoccasion of this cōmotion, diuers, without al desert are fallē into much calamity, yt is he as sory as one man liuing: yet hath not the same chanced through confidence in him, which put no mā in that hope, wherunto he shuld trust: For although he sēt vnto certen chief princes, yt they shuld remedy this euil growing, at the beginning of yt tumult, promising thē al his indeuor, yet was not this his mindē therfor, yt whatsoeuer shuld be propoūded, he wold alow ye same: for such things as cōcern the hole Empire, he thinketh resō they shuld be referd to the publik assēblies: at the which time verely if any mā shal bring forth any iust cōplaint of him, he wil not fail to do his du∣ty, which verely he hath not omitted hitherto: For sith as yet there hath no such request ben brought vnto him, which neuertheles ou∣ght to haue ben done, before war had ben attēpted, he could not cō∣iecture, what thing shuld be required of him, much les geue instruc¦tiōs to his ambassadors sēt to Passaw, what thei shuld answer to e∣uery poynt, which in dede for thoffice & dignity of his person, he in∣tēdeth to do him self presētly: wher therfor he aloweth not al things yt many perauenture go about to perswade him to, ther is no cause why any mā shuld reprehend this in him: but those yt be intercessors ought rather to perswade & exhort thē to resonable & moderat con∣diciōs: especially since they se, how he doth hardly at the leaste, & not before he is of necessity cōstraind, attempt war, which he intendeth not to folow now nether, if he may chuse, and in case they cā deuise some reasonable & conuenient way of peace: And seing the case stā∣deth thus, his trust is, yt they wil declare all fidelity to him rather, being their chief magistrate, than that they shuld geue ear to such, as contrary to theyr duty, haue made league with theyr ennemies, and raised vp cōmotions: he perceiueth, and is not ignoraunt what euils approche neare, whan both armies are brought forth to ioyn in battel, and is exceadingly moued with the losses of the common weale, & chiefly, of thinnocent people, & therfore minedeth peace, as he hath done alwaies, and wil refuse no condition reasonable: and it is not to be ascribed vnto him, that in the mean season, whilest he consulted of the condicions sēt vnto him at ii. seueral times, certen states susteind great losses: For ther was a truse al the time of the intercession: and wheras, during the same time, the Marques Al∣bert afflicted diuers, ye coulde not he do withall: For euen from the beginning was he euer against the treatye of peace? Moreouer in answering the same, he neuer made any delay: And if they had per∣seuered in the same way, which by thē was first propoūded, & after¦ward
altred, answer might haue bene much soner & more plainlye made, yea if they had not shronke from the treaty of Lintz, wherof they thē selues make mention, al things might haue ben concluded lōg since: wher therfor they se how he is minded towards ye commō¦welth, he earnestly requireth them, that together with his brother Fernādo, vnto whō he hath opened him self wholy, thei wold bring them to resonable cōditions, & therin haue respect to the welth and dignity of thempire: for certenly he wil vse the same lenity & peacea¦ble wais frō henceforth that he hath done hitherto, for yt he abhor∣reth very much al ciuil war: but in case peace can not vpon these cō∣dicions be established, he loketh for all fidelity of them, whyche are bounden to him. He answered than also by king Fardinando to the letters of the French ambassador, red vnto the Princes, as before is said. How he had peace with the French king, which he obserued diligently: And although he did many things arrogantly & proud∣ly, yet hath he dissembled the same for a common quietnes: but he, albeit he promised by his ambassador very largely, & pretended no such thing, made war against him both by Sea and land, before he had proclaimed the same: How be it he hathe offered this condition all ready, that if Duke Moris, electoure, should in his name bring any reasonable conditions of peace, and to former actes agreable, he wold not refuse them: but ther is no certen or determinate thing propounded, and this his drift, that wher he hath laid the blame of breaking the peace in him, he saith how the way of concorde muste be set open by him also. Moreouer he seketh to purge him self of the turkish confedera∣cy, as though he had wrong done him: but al this is wholy forged: for if ye case shal so require, there may be brought to light & shewed the cōmentaries of Aremont, the frēch ambassador, wrytten at Cō∣stantinople Thambassa¦dors commē∣taries inter∣cepted. for a memorial, and sent to the king by one Coste a cē∣turion, ther are forth comming also, and to be sene the letters of the Turkes lieuetenant in Hongary, sent at this time to the Princes confederated & others but intercepted, wherby it appeareth euidēt¦ly, yt he was the causer of the hurt, that the Turkishe nauye did the last yere, and motioned also that the like might haue ben done this same yere, and that he is right sory, that ther is no more harm don. To be brief, that is his intente and purpose, and the Emperours of Turkes also, vtterly to vndoe him and his brother Ferdinando, to thintent they may afterward bring the whole common wealth, but chiefly Germany into extreme danger & distres: but how wel these thinges do agre with his fair promesses, and what care he taketh for the wealth of Germany, any man may easilye perceiue: For the thinge it selfe declareth what his minde is: For that the chiefest
states of thempire wer this yere sore vexed & afflicted, and vtterly distroid, that many others wer in most pearil & danger, yt through the help of the Germains, that linketh thē selues with him, certain places of thempire wer brought into his tirannical power, and are nowe by him also fortified, the whole blame is to be ascribed vnto him: seing therfore that the case standeth thus, he cannot see what credit may be geuen to his ambassadors letters vtterly forged, and fained: and in dede after his opiniō it had ben much better to haue reiected the same, than to haue receiued any such kinde of answer: and if they consider al thing diligently, he douteth not but they shal perceiue, what he by his ambassador intendeth & goeth about: and forsomuch as that same wryting maketh not for this presēt treaty, he thinketh it nothing nedeful to answer any more to the same. A∣bout the xiiii. of Iuly, king Ferdinando, sente Henrye of the noble house of the Plauians, Burgraue of Meissen, & chancelor of Bo∣heme, vnto the camp before Frankfurt. Who cōming to duke Mo∣ris the xxiiii. of Iuly, after the matters wer a while debated, at the Duke Moris admitteth peace. last parswadeth him to peace. Wherfore the last day of Iuly, cōtra∣ry to many mens expectation, they concluded of the whole matter, as hereafter ye shal heare, amonges other reasons which he had to perswade, this was one also. Let him consider with him self, vnles he receiue the conditions, what danger he standeth in, bothe of the Emperor, which hath now a puissant army, and also by the Duke of Saxon Ihon Fridericke, whome themperor hauinge inlarged will incontinently send home: Let the Lantzgraues sonne also cō∣sider into what pearill he shall bring both his father being prison∣ner, and also his whole prouince. The gunnes of the Paulsgraue elector, which he was constrained to lend them, as before is saide, whan the peace was made, wer receiued into the towne, least they should come into the hands of Marques Albert. In the monthe of Iuly the French king hauing taken certen townes of the Duchie of Lucemburge, as before is said, brought his armye into Artois, The French king dischar¦geth his ar∣my. but without any notable exploict done, to the end he might relieue his army from trauel and infection, dischargeth his power, & him self returneth home, hauing fortified such places, as he had taken with garrisons & fortifications. Ouer al the which things he made gouernor the Duke of Guise, a Prince of great authority through out Fraunce. And he commaunded the Duches of Loraine widow to depart the country, which was neare to themperor by his sister. She, the xii. of Iuly came to Strasburge, and ther remained cer∣ten dais with her husbands sister, which was also cōmaunded by yt french king to depart. To Strasburge came also, driuē frō his coū¦try, ye forenamed Wuolfgange, master of thorder of Knighthode in
Germany, which in the consistory of thempire hath the next place to tharchbishops. Marques Albert who ioyned him self by the way to his felowes Marques Al¦bert y scour∣ge of priests. going to Franckfort, leauing them at the siege, goeth to the Rhine, and subdueth Wuormes, and Spiers, exacting of them both mo∣ny and also munition. Which way someuer he went, the priests ei∣ther wer fled away before, or els chaunged their apparell, and dis∣sembled theyr profession and order. And what time the army came neare vnto Frankonie, the bishops ther abouts, & thother prelates of the same ordre, sought to saue them selues by flight: and tharch∣bishop of Mentz, who for fear of the Marques was gon longe be∣fore, the xxv. day of Iuly came fleing to Strasburge, and lodgyng ther one night, passed ouer the Rhine. The bishop of Spiers a very aged man, fled to Saberne, wher he died not long after. The Bi∣shop of Wuormes, through the mediatiō of the Paulsgraue, retur∣ned home, after he had paid xii. thousand Crownes. Whan he had taken these cities before said. Marques Albert the xxviii. of Iuly, sending his letters to the Senate of Strausburge, requireth that he and his fellowes may His requests to Strasbo. haue accesse into theyr city at al times, and ther to place a garrison whan neade shalbe, and they to shew them fidelity, as well in hys own, as also in the French kings name: For all this war, saith he, is moued to reuenge al Germany: nether shal it be honest or profi∣table for them to resist this enterprise: For to the intent they maye bring this to passe, therfore hath he and his fellowes ioyned toge∣ther The answer of Strausbo. again now al theyr power. To which the Senate two dais af∣ter wryteth again. These many yeres now they haue wished for no thing more than that the true Religion of Christ, and also thanciēt siberty might florish throughout al Germany, and to this end haue they bent not only all their doinges and counsels, but also haue al∣wais imploid hitherto their mony & goods, and are now of ye same mind also, nether wil they at any time fail either the wealth or dig∣nity of the cōmon country, for so much as they are able at all times to performe: They know moreouer that thys is theyr bounden du∣ty, for the same oth and fidelity, by the which they are bounden to yt Emperor: And seing it is so, there nedeth no further declaration of theyr wil: The king of Fraunce also, what time he was in Alsatia, had demaunded no such thing of them: Again, that wryting, wher∣of he maketh mention, setforthe by the Princes confederated, was not sent nor shewed vnto them: Wherfore they desire him to accept this satisfaction, and work no violence to them nor to their coūtry. In this self same instant Marques Albert being aduertised, that duke Moris intended to make peace, leuing at Spiers a garrison
returneth with his army to Franckfurt, & renueth the siege, which Duke Moris hauing made peace, had forsaken, pitching his tents on thother side of the town, on this side the riuer of Meyne vppon the higher ground somwhat, from whence he might very commodi¦ously beat the town with his ordinaunce. And this pacification he toke most displeasantly, and spake euil words of duke Moris, and would not be comprised therein. The conditions of peace be these. That the Princes confederated shal leaue theyr armure before the xii. day of August, and so discharge their army, that they may serue king Farnando, if he so will, and neither annoye themperoure nor Germany At the same day also the Lantzgraue, being set at liber∣ty, Conditions of peace. shalbe deliuered at his castel of Rinfelse, which he hath vpō the Rhine, putting in first surety, to obserue couenaunts geuen by the Emperor at Hale in Saxony: They also whiche at the same time became sureties for him, Duke Moris thelector of Brandenburge and Wuolfgange Duke of Sainebricke, renuing their obligation entre again into bondes: The suit that the Lantzgraue hath with the Earle of Nassow for the Lordship of Chats, shall be examined by the Princes Electors, and of suche also as bothe the plaintife, and also the defendaunt shal assign to the same matter: of the whi∣che afterward themperor shall chuse out sixe, which shall determin the case, yet so, that the matter be discussed within two yeres space. Within sixe monethes, the Emperoure shall holde an assemble of the Empire, to consult chiefly, howe and by what meaue the dissen∣tion of Religion may best be appeased: In the meane time all men shall obserue peace, and no man shall be molested for religion: and what so euer shall be decreed, concerning the manner of appeasing Religion, by the common assent of the states, and by the authority of the Emperor, that is to wit, that the controuersy may be quieted by godly and rightfull waies, the same to be firme and stable: Un∣to the iudiciall place or Chamber of the Empire shall be admitted also those, whyche are of the Protestantes Religion: All other thinges, which proprely concerne the dignity and libertye of Ger∣many, ought to be intreated of in the conuention of thempire: Otto Henry the Paulsgraue is also permitted frely to enioye his lande and dominion: during this warre so many as by geuing their faith to the Princes confederated, haue boūden them selues vnto them, shall be free from all bondes, and theyr owne men, as before: they that haue sustained any domage in this warly tumulte, shall com∣mence none action therfore, against those that haue done it: yet shal it be the part of themperor and states, in the nexte assemble to de∣uise some meane, whereby they maye receiue some recompence for the losses they haue receiued.
As concerning the French king, for so much as matters of them∣pire concern him nothing, it shalbe lawful for him to declare vnto duke Moris, such priuate actions as he hath against themperor yt they maye after be related to themperor: The outlawes are recei∣ued to mercy, so as they attempt nothing hereafter against thempe¦ror, and thother states, so that they also, which serue in the French kinges warres, retourne againe into Germanye within three moneths, cleane forsaking him and his seruice: he that shal breake this peace, shall be iudged an ennemye. Unto all these thinges, the princes that wer ther present, of the chiefest dignity, and the depu∣ties of others subscribed. For this pacificatiō was deuided at Pas¦saw, whiche was signed also by themperor. Whan this peace was concluded, Fraxineus, the Frenche kinges ambassador retourneth home. And certenly the king toke this composition greuously: but hearing, that the Lantzgraue should be in great daunger, excepte this compact were made, he assented, and sent againe the pledges safe into Germany. The third day of August, Duke Moris, and ye Lantzgraues sonne, departinge from Frankfurt, go two seuerall waies: This man into Hesse, and thother leadeth his army to Do∣nauerde, and sendeth them downe the riuer of Thonawe into Hon∣gary, against the Turke inuading, but that legion which was vn∣der the leding of Riseberge, passing ouer the riuer of Moene, went to Marques Albert, not withoute the greate care of the Prynces, which feared, least themperor woulde take an occasion hereby, not to dimisse the Lantzgraue. Marques Albert liyng before Frank∣furt, where he might haue bene comprised in the peace, and would Marques Al¦bert refuseth the peace. not. The ix. day of August he departeth thēce, and trāsporting his army ouer the rhine, ineampeth besides Mentz, and broughte the citezens into his subiection. About thend of Iuly, themperor retur¦ning from Uillace to Insprucke, and the eight day after departing thence, and marchinge throughe Bauier, with Almaignes, Bohe∣mers, Italians, and Spaniardes, which at the beginning of Iu∣ly arriued at Genes, at the conduit of the Duke of Alba, the xx. day of August came to Auspurge. Tharchbishop of Mentz, whā he had wandred certain daies in Swenia, so sone as he vnderstode of the Emperors comming, he taketh his iourney thither. At this present time they of Senes, through the procurement and aid of the french king, cast out a garrison of Spaniards, and pull downe a castell, that was begon ther to be builded by themperors commaundemēt and recouer theyr former libertye. In the meane season Marques Albert imposeth a great some of mony to thecclesiasticall persons, especially of Mentz and Spiers: whan the same could not be leui∣ed, by reason that many wer fled, he spoyleth the churches of either
city, and began to take the lead of the cathedrall church at Spier, but at the request of the Senate he surceased: And at Mentz he burneth the bishops castell, standinge by the Rhine, his owne lod∣ging, and fiue churches. Moreouer all the shippes, yea those, that were laden with wine and wheat: And calling away those souldi∣ours of his, that he had ther placed in garrison, marcheth towards the borders of Treuers. The xiii. day of August, Herman, archbi∣shop of Collon, a pure aged man, ended his life in his natiue coū¦try, The deathe of Herman Archebishop of Colon. His wish. and had such end, as he desired. For he had many times wished that either he might setforth the doctrin of the gospel, & put in good order the churches of his prouince, or liue a priuate life: and being sometime by his frendes admonished, how much enuye he shoulde procure vnto him self by this alteration of religion, he was wonte to make them answer, how there could chaunce nothing vnto him, vnloked for, and that his minde was established againste all that might fortune, he came of the noble house of the Earles of Weden. The Lantzgraue being set at liberty, as couenaunte was, and ta∣king his iourney homeward, whan he was commen to Utrecht, a Towne standing by the mase, by the commaundemente of Quene Mary regent of Flaunders which was there presente, he was at∣tached againe, and committed to the custodye of the same Spani∣ardes, which had kept him these v. yeres. And the cause hereof was for that Riseberge, who had serued the Lantzgraues sonne, went with all his force vnto Marques Albert, as before is said. Wherin the Quene said, how the peace was brokē, and therfore might not she let him depart, before she knewe themperors pleasure therein. Duke Moris, as I said, comminge to the water of Thonawe, the xxii. day of August sendeth his army before, the footemen, downe the riuer, and the horsmen by lande: he him selfe for his priuate af∣faires rideth home in poste, mineding shortly to return to them a∣gaine. Whan Marques Albert came to the frontiers of Treuers, George Holie, a captain of themperors, had brought ten enseigns of fotemen, to defend the citye: but kepte oute by the Townes men, which refused to haue any garrison, he bringeth again his men to Lucemburge. And the Marques the xxvii. of August sommoneth the towne to be rendred vnto him: The next day being receiued, he Marques Al¦bert entreth Treuers. bestoweth his soldiors in the city, and places there aboutes. The bishop in the meane season was in the castel, which I said was si∣tuated where the Rhine and Moselle mete: neither was there any prelate of the same ordre there. Themperor remaininge certaine daies at Auspurge, displaceth the Senate, whiche the princes had lately ordeined, and abrogateth all the tribes, & restoreth the same state of the common weale, and the Senate by him established, &
of the ministers of the churche he remoueth thre, and the reaste he permitteth to teach and minister according to the fourm and order of the confession of Auspurge, which thinge declared in the pulpit, made many mēright glad. This was the xxv. day of yt mōth of Au¦gust. Wheras in the yeare before, they were in a manner the same day exiled, as I haue in the xxii. boke declared. After that, depar∣ting thence the first day of Septembre, and leauing behind him a garrison of vi. enseignes of fotemen, two daies after he came to Wuolmes: but his army wente an other waye, till they came to the borders of Wirtemberge which was done for their sakes of Wuol∣mes, least theyr country, which had shewed to themperor so greate fidelity, should sustain a new domage: The same day that thempe∣ror departed from Auspurge, he sente awaye Ihon Fridericke the The duke of Saxon goth home to hys owne house. Duke of Saxon, with most gentle wordes, & promised very large∣ly of his beneuolence towardes him, who on the next day toke hys iourney homeward. The Lātzgraue also being released the fourth of Septembre, retourneth home the sixt day after. The same time came forth the fourth Tome of Luthers worckes. To the whiche Melanchthon making a preface, reioyseth much at the Dukes re∣turne, and highly commendeth his constancy, which he vsed in the time of his most aduersity. In the meane time that Marques Al∣bert was at Treuers, all the churches were shut vp, who remai∣ning there viii daies, whan he had burned certen Abbaies, and a castel of the bishops not far from the towne, he leaueth in the city a garrison of xii. enseignes. Afterward marching towards Sircke, which is a towne of the Duchie of Loraine, in the midway betwixt Metz and Treuers the xiii. day of Septēbre, he passeth ther with his army ouer the riuer of Moselle, and inuadeth the land of Lu∣cemburge, and from thence retourneth again into Loraine, and e∣uery wher doth very much harme, attending to se what manner of condition the french king would offer him. How he had sore afflic∣ted the bishops in Franctonie, it is before recited: but whan them∣peror approched neare, being sued to of the Bishops, he dothe dis∣charge those compactes, and chargeth them, that they stand not to them, but seke to recouer theyr owne, the same doth he permit also to them of Norinberge, and after exhorteth them, that for the de∣fence of theyr country, they would make a league: the same thinge wryteth he to them of Sweuia to the inhabiters of the Rhine and others, aswell princes as cities. Wherfore these foresaide Bishops with the state of Norinberge do fortify them selues afterwarde by a league, and what time Marques Albert, at the Emperors com∣ming, went into Loraine, the bishop of Bamberge, aboute the end of August, and in Septembre, recouered the townes of Forcheme
and diuers others. Themperor passing out of the land of Wirtem∣berge, held the way toward Spiers: but whan he came to Bret, Themperor goeth wyth his army to∣ward Lorain which is a town of the Prince Palatines, altering his purpose, he tourned on the lefthand, & marched towards Strasburge. At his coming, vi miles frō the city came vnto him ambassadors, Iames Sturmie, Friderick Gottesseme, and Lewes Grempre, to intreat Ambassa∣dors of Stras¦burge to the Emperor. him that he would spare their country, and lead his army another way, neither that he him self would enter into the city wt any great power, or alter any thing in their cōmon wealth. Who, after he had right gently receiued them, saith, how he knoweth rightwell, how worthely and valiauntly that city hath lately shewed it selfe, and what a benefit they haue done to him & the whole Empire: which thing he wil beare in perpetuall memory, and in very dede wil de∣clare, as occasion serueth, how much he is bounden to them for the same. Afterward he excuseth diligently his sodain cōming, by rea∣son of the ships brēt by Marques Albert, for the newes that came how the Frenchmen inuade Alsatia, and also for the time of yt yere which requireth expedition, that they may come to thenemy so sone as is possible: wherfore he wil lead his army a long by the Citye, wherinto he him self wil enter with his owne family only, and ta∣king a dinner, wil not tary ther one night. Whan therfore the .xv. day of September, he was cummen into a certaine village, a mile without the City, his whole army destowed here and there in the country abouts, he remaind ther v. dais: In the which time all his Themperor entreth into Strasburge. cariage was conueied down the Rhine, wherin was no small dif∣ficulty, and assone as it was day, commaūding his army to march forth, he him self, with no great company, about none came into the City, which he had neuer sene before, and was both louingly & ho∣norably receiued of the Senate. It was his chance to passe by the headchurch: whan he came thither, he alighted, and being led in by the priestes, making ther small abode, went straight to dinner. The Senate than presenteth him with a gift, after the custome of the city, praying him to accept it in good part, he answereth, that it is to him right acceptable, and that whiche he had spoken certaine dais past cōcerning his good wil towards them, for theyr stout go∣uerning of theyr state in a most doubtfull and pearillous time, he repeteth again, and for that the townes men haue hurt done them without the city, by the soldiors in their Orchardes and heritages, he saith he is right sory: but for somuch as it is vnpossible to saue al vpright, amonges so great a multitude, he praieth them to take it patiently, chiefly for that this warre is made for thempire. After∣ward, toward the Euening, entring into the way of Hagenaw, he tourned into the next village, and ther reasted al night. What time
he was at Strasburge, going to Metz, he commaunded thambas∣sadors of forain Princes, which followed his court, to go to Spi∣er and there remain. That time was sir Richard Morisine, knight Sir Richard Morisine am¦bassadour of England Marques An¦tonius Am∣bassadour of Uenise. The spoil of the soldiors. ambassador of Edward the vi. King of England, who amongs mē learned hath a worthy name: and for the state of Uenise, Marcke Anthony Amulie, who also was him self very well learned, and a great fauorer of learning. In those few dais that themperor staid at the city, no man would beleue what hurt the souldiours did in ye country, and it was an heauy sight to se the pore husband mē, their wiues and children come running into the citye, spoyled of all that euer they had. The matter was complained vppon to the Duke of Alua, by the Senate: And all be it he saide he was very sory for it, and would se, that the like shuld not be done from henceforthe, yet did it preuail nothing, and which way so euer they wēt, after their manner they spoyled all thinges. The Duke of Alua was liefte∣nant generall of the whole armye, and all manner of complaintes were brought vnto him, neither might any man be suffred to speke with themperor, which was thought to haue any such thing to sai. In the meane season the Frenchmen, by the conduit of the duke of Guise, fortify chiefly Metz and Nancey, and also conuey thither al the wheat and forage of the country. Ther serued themperor, Thō the Marques of Brandenburge, Alphonse Duke of Holst, brother to the king of Denmarke, Philiberte sonne to the duke of Sauoy. The outlawes, refusinge the condition of peace, remained still in Fraunce. The Duchesse of Lorayne, expulsed oute of the country, The deathe of Caspar Hedio & An∣drew Osian∣der. spake with themperor her vncle at Strasburge, and after went in to Brabant. The xvii. daye of the monthe of October died Caspar Hedio, the chief minister of the church of Strasburge. The same day also died Andrew Osiander, at Coningsperge, which is a town in Pruse by the sea coast. Themperor remoueth from Hagenaw to Landaw, and ther making abode xvi. dais of very faire weather, not without the great wonder of many, at the length he taketh the way to Metz, and the xxii. day of Octobre besiegeth the City. Ue∣ry many citezens and Senators, by the permission of the Frenche Themperor besegeth Metz. men went their waies some into Loraine, & some to Strasburge. Than was the Marques Albert in the borders of Lorayne, at the Towne of Pontamosse, with l. ensesgnes of fotemen, and no smal power of horsmen, but wher the French king and he could not agre vpon wages, aswell for the time past, as also for the time to come, through the mediation of certaine, he was reconciled to themperor Marques Al∣bert reconci∣led to them∣peror. who both pardoned him for all his offence, and prohibiteth that no action should be commēced against him, for his enterprises in this warre, and ratifieth the compacts made with the bishops of Bam∣berge
and Wirciburge, and releaseth him of the warfare into Hon¦gary, and for his sake pardoneth the Earle of Oetinge, the father and the sonne, of whose misfortune before is mentioned: likewise Albert the Earle of Mansfeld and his sonnes. This thing known Duke d'Anmalle, brother to the duke of Guise, who was sent into Lorayne with a great power of horsmen, by the king, least yt Mar∣ques of whom they stode in doubt of, should worke any mischiefe, was purposed to set vppon him. For nowe had the French men se∣creatly plucked from him one legion of fote men, at the conduit of Riseberge: for he was reuolted to the Frēch king: Afterward, they attempted the reast of his army also, and their purpose was, that, for want of mony, being made naked and destitute of his men, thei mighte put him to flighte with shame. Duke d'Anmalle had of his counsell Ihon Fraxine, Bishop of Baion: And whan he exhorted him to do likewise, he gaue the charge with his whole force. The fotemen for want of a paye refused to fighte: wherefore his whole trust was in his horsmen, whome the Marques speaking frendly to, and exhorting them to be valeaunte, set vpon them, and fortune Albert ouer∣throweth the French men fauored his bold enterprise: For breaking throughe their maigne battell, he ouerthroweth them, and putteth them to flighte, all be it they were far mo in nombre, slayinge many, euen of the nobilitye: Fraxine the bishop escaped away by flight: duke d'Anmalle, recei∣uing thre woundes, is taken. This was the fourth day of Nouem∣bre, Duke de An¦malle taken prisoner. whan Marques Albert had obteined this victorye, he came to Metz with duke d'Anmalle prisoner, and pitcheth his tents by the riuer of Moselle, and what time he healed his prisoner of his woū∣des, he sent him into Germany, to be kept, his lieuetenāt was now as also in the protestants war, George of the noble house of Lich∣teberges. After he adnertiseth the bishop of Bamberge of the com∣pactes confirmed by themperor, and admonisheth him that he kepe his promesse, and restore vnto him his townes: he commaundeth his captains also, that vnles he so do, they recouer them by force of armes. In this self same time, themperors army of the low coun∣tries, inuadeth Fraunce, and taketh Hesdine, the strongest castell in those parties, which after a certaine time the French king reco∣uereth again, and sending his letters into Germany, taunteth the Emperor bitterly, and exhorteth them to kepe amitye with him, as mindful of a benefit receiued, and of theyr liberty by him restored. About this time the iudges of the chamber imperiall, of whose fle∣inge I haue spoken before, retourne to Spiers. The Emperoure who had yet remained at Dedehoue, whiche is a towne by the Ri∣uer of Moselle foure miles beneath Metz, the twenty day of No∣uembre came into the campe.
Than chiefly was the city maruelouslye beaten with shot, the vio∣lence wherof was so great, that the noise and Thondering thereof The greate battery of Metz. was hard, not only to Strasburge, but also iiii Dutche miles be∣yond the Rhine. And Strasburge is from Metz xviii. great dutch miles. Duke Moris, whom I said went with his army into Hon∣gary for the king Fardinando, about this time retourneth home. That time Uolrate, the sonne of Albert, Earle of Mansfeld made The duke of Brunswicke driuen out of his country. warre against Henry the Duke of Brunswicke, and had in a ma∣ner driuen him out of his whole Countrye, Duke Henry therefore commeth to the Emperor at Metz, complaining of his misfortune, and desireth aid, but that was out of time. Counte Mansfelde had serued vnder the Marques Albert, whilest he was yet of the frēch party. Whilest themperor besiegeth Metz, Wuolfgange, maister of the Almaigne order, taketh the Towne of Eluange. There is a very ritch promotion ecclesiasticall, whiche he had sued for manye moneths. The fellowes or prebends of that Colledge haue autho∣rity to chuse the Prouost, as they commonly call him. Whan therfore they had chosen one of a noble house, he, which was sory that it passed by him, vpon the soden surpriseth the place. This known, the Duke of Wirtemberge, whome the fellowes of that Colledge had besought to defend their righte, leuieth his men immediatly, and setting forth in the cold winter season, recouereth that easely, and besides winneth an other Town or two from him, till he were recompenced for the charges he was at with his soldi∣ors. The French men that wer besieged make many sales oute, es∣pecially into Mar. Alberts Camp, & amongs others, Lichteberge his lieftenaunt was sore wounded. The winter was very sharpe with frost and snow: And althoughe themperor had an exceadinge great army, yet did he abstaine from the assault, and attempted the thing by mines: but that was in vain, whan both the time of ye yere was a let therunto, & thenemy also knew it by espial. Ther defēded the City most chosen captaine, commen of noble houses: but ye chief The duke of Guise defen∣ded Metz. gouernor was the duke of Guise. What time the lieuetenauntes of the Marques Albert, hired souldiours by his commaundemente, the bishop of Bamberge complaininge therof to thimperiall cham∣ber, the xxix. day of Decembre obtaineth letters, wherby the Alber∣tines wer cōmaunded to lay away their armor. They of Wuolmes recouering their castell of Helsesteine, by expulsinge the garrison, which Marques Albert had there lefte, rased it downe to the harde ground. Themperor enforced by thextremity of the cold winter, a∣bout thend of Decembre, being in dispaire of the thinge, leuied the siege, and remouing from thēce to Dedehouie, and so returning in∣to Flanders, cōmaundeth certen legions to remain in the countrye
of Treuers, amonges the whiche was also Marques Albert. By cold and sicknesse, themperor lest the third part of his army. The French men the xxii. day of Ianuary go a procession about all the Churches in Metz, geuing God thankes for theyr good for∣tune. 1553. The next day are searched out al Lutherian bokes in the ci∣tezens houses, and by the hangman are brente openlye: After this, the Duke of Guisse, leauing ther his deputie, returneth into Frāce In this same moneth the captain of Marques Albert wone ma∣ny things again from the Bishop of Bamberge: and after the siege of Metz was leuied, whan Marques Albert had wintred a while in Treuers, til themperor, had paied him his wages in the moneth of February returning into Germany the Bishop of Bamberge, the .xvii. day of the same moneth, obteyneth newe letters of the chā¦ber, wherof in one was commaunded agayne, thesame as, was be∣fore: in thother are inioyned the nobilite of Franckeconie, they of Norinberge, the Paulsgraue electour, and Iohn Friderick Duke of Saxon, as his next neighboures to helpe him. About thende of the moneth of February, the French king which was puft vp with pride, that Metz was so defended, setteth forth a wryting in printe The french kinges wry∣ting against themperor. vnto all the states of the Empire, verye stinginge and hatefull to the Emperoure. For he goeth aboute to bringe him in hatred and contempt also: How he verely is nowe no more to be feared, whose power is all readye in fringed, and the craft of many yeares detec∣ted, whiche is also so sicke and diseased, that they can hardlye kepe life in him: he doubtles wil be alwais of one mind towards thē, that is to wit, frendly and liberall. And all be it that diuers of thē, whiche haue receiued of him greate benefites haue not shewed thē selues verye thanckefull, yet wyll not he therefore renounce the Frendship of the reast. After that Marques Albert was aduerti∣sed of the commaundement of the chamber Imperiall, he wryteth manye letters to the Bishop of Arras, to the Duke of Alua, and to the Emperoure him selfe, signifyinge what the Bishops go aboute, and howe they breake couenauntes, and for so muche as he hathe ratified those compactes that were made him, he requyreth that ther maye be a penaltye appoynted, vnlesse they obey the same. Af∣terwarde sendinge a messager to the chamber at Spier, declareth how the Bishoppes haue not only broken couenauntes, but them∣perors commaundemente also: wherefore he requireth them, that they woulde suffer none action to be commenced againste him, and that they woulde abolishe the letters, whiche his aduersaries had obtained. Wherunto they make answer, how it is theyr partes and duety to minister the law vnto all men: which they coulde not denie the bishoppes also requiring the same.
But he again after a longe confutation, requireth the same that he did before. For els in case he sustain any losse, he shal haue good cause to require amendes and recompence at their hands. Themperor the xiii. of March wryteth an answer to the letters The Empe∣rours letters of aunswere to Marques Albert. of Marques Albert. How he ratified that compacte he can not de∣ny: How he paied him also and his men theyr wages most liberal∣lye, to his owne greate hinderaunce, where he gaue to the residue nothinge: And he woulde haue bene righte glad, if the Bishoppes woulde haue stirred no more in the matter, and for the same cause he sent an ambassadoure to them, to perswade them: but since they haue refused, and haue appealed both to him, and also to the Prin∣ces electors, and to the Chamber imperiall, he seeth well inoughe how this can not be denied them: Especially, consideringe howe di∣uers states haue conceiued a suspition of him, and spreade diuers brutes: For in case he should now accomplishe his request, and cō∣maunde them to kepe couenauntes, it woulde be saide that he did wronge, and it shoulde increase suspicion: For his office is, to mi∣nister iustice indifferently vnto all men, and prohibite wronge and violence: Therefore the only way is this, that the matter maye be frendly taken vp, and he doubteth not, but he him self, if he ponder the matter diligently, wil take this same way: and to the intent the matter may the more easely and purposelye be broughte to passe, he will appoynt his owne kinsmen, the Dukes of Bauier and of Wir¦temberge, that they shall be meanes in the matter. The bishops verely in diuers and sondry letters haue complai∣ned to him greuously: Neuerthelesse he trusteth that they will not refuse the treaty: for the controuersy that is betwene the Duke of Brunswicke and his nobility, he hath committed the hearinge of ye matter to Ihon Marques of Brādenburge: And hath appoynted also the dukes of Bauier and Wirtemberge, to end the matter be∣twene therles of Deting, the father and the sonnes. In manner a∣bout this time, both tharmy of counte Mansfeld shrank away, and thambassadors of Ihon Friderick & duke Moris met together, to accord thē two: For he in his letters & coyne, that he stamped, vsed stil the name of elector and ii. swords a crosse, which is tharmes of Tharmes of Electorshyp Electorship, & by themperors permissiō fortified again his castel of Goth, which thing duke Moris toke greuously, & cōplaineth ther∣of to his states: the opiniō of al thē was to deuise meanes of peace: wherfore, as I said, ambassadors wer sēt, but yet in vain. In this The Cardi∣nall Lenon∣courtes am∣bition. time also Robert the bishop of Metz, Cardinal Lenōcurt, most ad∣dict to the french king came to Metz, & chalengeth to him selfe, the hole iurisdictiō, & saith it belōgeth to him, which is a prince of them∣and
ordeineth a newe Senate, and placeth in that nombre diuers of the Cleargy, and fortifieth Marsey a little Towne standinge at the Frontiers of Germany, with fortificatiōs & garrison of french men. His letters wer before intercepted, wherein he desired of the king, that he would permit him to haue the iurisdiction, whiche the Bishoppes, his predecessors haue had: For his intent is, to ordain a new Senate, and to receiue none into the same: but that shall be wholly addicted to him: or els will it come to passe, that such as be of the Emperors part shall remaine there, and the others shall de∣part thence, which doubtlesse woulde be to his great hinderaunce: For vnlesse all suspected personnes be cleane remoued, let him not loke to kepe the City in quiet possession. And he desireth to declare his hart and good wlil towardes him: For euen for the same cause chiefly, came he into these parties, and receiued this bishoppricke, that he might do him some notable seruice. Than was Marques Albert at Hedelberge with the Pauls∣graue elector, and had sente those foresaid letters to the iudges of the chamber. That time came also to Hedelberge, by themperors commaundement, the Dukes of Bauier and Wirtemberge, for a pacification: thither came also the Duke of Cleaue. The matter be¦ing longe debated, whan the Bishoppes had offred him a wonder∣full summe of mony, especially Bamberge, that he might haue his Townes in quiet, and the intercessors also approued this conditi∣on: The Marques which would haue his couenauntes obserued, which themperor had also confirmed, wheras in the same time, his captaines leuied horsmen for him in Saxony, and was now assu∣red of certen other mennes aid, he departeth and nothing done, the intercessors being sore offended, and bendeth him selfe to war, and publishing a wrying the xxvii. of March, repeteth the whole mat∣ter in order, complaining mooste greuouslye of his aduersaries for breaking theyr promesse, and confuteth that reason, whereby the Bishoppes alledge, that they maye alienate nothing of the church goodes, and sheweth how he is driuen of necessitye to defende hys righte by force of armes. The bishop of Wirciburge was ther him self, Bamberge had sente deputies. The grudge and controuersy was betwene the Duke of Wir∣temberge, and the maister of the Almaigne order, through the me∣diation of princes was here appeased, where this man to recouer his townes again, paid xxx. thousand Crownes. At the second day of Aprill, whyche than was Easter daye, Duke Moris came al∣so vnto the Princes at Hedelberge, vsing greate expedition. Thre dais after, he returneth home againe in poste. These prynces that were intercessoures, make a league, that they maye defende them
selues from iniurie, and therin be cōprised also the Archbishops of Mentz and Treuers. Whan Marques Albert refusing the condi∣cions, wente from Hedelberge to gather his armye, the Bishoppes of Bamberge and Wirciburge procure other letters from the chā∣ber, in the which both the Archbishoppe of Mentz, the Paulsgraue Duke Moris, the Maister of Pruisse, the Duke of Saxon, the Duke of Wirtemberge, the Lantzgraue, the Norinbergians, and all theyr neyghboures, are commaunded to assist them: This was the second day of May. Duke Moris, who suspected Marques Albert, and supposed that he was also pricked at by the same, for his owne assuraunce, maketh a league with the Duke of Brunswicke, and promiseth aid to the Bishoppes and Norinbergians. In the meane season Mar¦ques The spoy∣linges & bur¦ninges of Marques Al∣bert. Albert, hauinge leuied his power, marcheth forewarde, and in the Countries of the Bishoppes and state of Norinberge, he de∣stroyeth all with burninge and spoylinge, and taketh the Citye of Bamberge, the head Towne of all that Countrye, and threatneth warre to the Nobilitye of Frankonie, vnlesse they will obey, and surpriseth Schuinfurt, a Towne imperiall, and fortifieth it with a garrison. The Norinbergians, because they hold certain townes and Castels by the benefite of the Realme of Boheme, had intrea∣ted king Farnando that they might leuy certaine horsmen in hys dominions to defend those places: The king was content, and per∣mitted them to gather fiue hondreth: but the Marques, as they were comminge intercepteth them, and taketh also certaine of the foresaide Townes and Castels. Againe on the other side, Henrye Duke of Brunswicke, which had drawen vnto him a greate parte of Counte Mansfeldes army, by Phillip his sonne moueth warre againste his neighboures, inuadinge the borders and Countries of the Bishoppes of Munster and Minden, and of his Cosin also Duke Erike of Brunswicke, and of the state of Breme, and extor∣teth of them a maruelous great some of Monye. Aboute this tune the controuersy that the Duke of Cleaue had with the Archbishop of Collon, for a certaine iurisdiction, by the mediation of the Pauls¦graue and the Bishoppe of Treuers, whiche met at Bacheracke, was throughly appeased. A little while after, at the beginning of the monthe of Iune, the Paulsgraue, tharchbishop of Mentz, thambassadors of the dukes of Bauier and Wirtemberge, by themperors cōmaundement mete at Franckfurt, aboute the warre of Franckonie. The Emperoure had ambassadors ther Coūte Conigsten, therle of Solmen, & Hēry Hasie: king Ferdinando had theralso diuers. And wher the bishops brged the Emperours abrogation, & the Marques his cōfirmatiō,
thelectors admonish his ambassadors, to signify this vnto him, to thintent he may aduertise them, whether he wil haue to take place. Themperor the xvii. day of Iune maketh answer. Wheras in the last yeare past he had hard of the composition of Marques Albert and the bishops, at the sute and request of certen, he abolished the same, cōmaunding the bishops not to kepe it, for that it was a mat¦ter of an euil president, to compell any man to suche subiection, for doing of his duety to him and to thempire: But afterwarde, whan Marques Albert would none otherwise accord with him, excepte those former compositions were ratified, (he) to eschue a further in conuenience, which was than like to insue vpon all Germany, ser∣ued the time present. And, for so much as he had an armye readye, and Counte Mansfeld also, in his name was gatheringe a newe power in Saxonie, and he him self being troubled with the french warres, could not suppresse him, neither was ther in al Germany, that was hable one day to abide his force, he made peace with him, in hope verely that he shuld quiet him afterward: Especially, if the Princes that be his kinsmen should trauell in the thing: and certē∣ly, if God had sente him good successe before Metz, he had deuised meanes, wherby he shuld haue ben satisfied: For he did him muche good seruice in the same warre, in so much that he was desirous to gratify him: but after that the siege toke no place, he assaid howe to make a concord by them at Hedelberge: and wher the Marques re¦fused the conditions ther propounded, and again hath moued war, it was to him very displeasaunte, and therfore did he assigne thys other conuention at Franckfurt: And now it is reported vnto him, that he attempteth warre, not only againste the Bishoppes, but a∣gainst certen others also: which thing both greueth him exceading¦lye, and is done also contrarye to the compactes: For he, what time he was receiued into fauoure, promised faithfull seruice hereafter bothe to him and to thempire: And yet if he would now at the least obey, he coulde be contente to forget all thinges past: but where he him selfe also is had in suspicion of diuers, it is wrongfullye done: wherfore let them indeuoure wyth all theyr force to make a pacifi∣cation, and require no further declaration of him in this matter: The same shall be to him mooste acceptable, and in matters con∣cerninge the Empyre, he will do nothinge from henceforth, but by theyr aduise and Counsell. At the lengthe they departed frō Frāck∣furte, wythoute the matter ended. Aboute the same time also, by themperors commaundemente, the Duke of Bauier and of Wir∣temberge with others assemble at Lawginge, that they might pa∣cifye The father & the sōnes cō∣tend for inhe¦ritaunce. the Earles of Detinge, the father and his Sonnes. For euer since the Protestantes warre, vnto the siege of Metz, Lewes the
father and his eldest sonne of the same name, haue wandred vp & down at most vncertenty, for that they warred against themperor: but all his landes and possessions, by themperors permission had his sonnes Fridericke and Wuolfgange, whiche were of a contra∣rye Religion. Whan they came to the treaty, the father, accu∣seth them of moste ingratitude: and all be it the Prynces laboured the matter diligently, yet coulde there be nothing determined. The, xxv, Booke of Sledaines Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre, of Charles the fyfte. The Argument of the xxv. Booke. THe warre beginning in Piedmount, Duke Moris and the Marques Albert being at de∣siaunce, loyne in battell. wherin Duke Moris was slaine, but the Marques lost the field. Augustus his brother succedeth Duke Moris. Iohn Fridericke maketh reclaime to hys landes. At this time are nine martirs executed at Lions. The good king Edward of Englād being dead, his sister Mary is proclaimed Quene, and the Popish bishops restored to their dig∣nity. Marques Albert hauing lost the field against Henry Duke of Brunswicke, surpriseth the towne of Holse: After he is banished. A disputation in England about the Sacramente of thaul∣tare. The Lady Iane, which was proclaimed Quene is beheaded, & greate execution is done in England. The blessed death of the Duke of Saxon and his wife. Alberte again exiled, worketh greate crueltye. Marye Quene of Englande maried to kinge Phillip. Cardinall Poole geueth full absolution to England. An assemble at Auspurge. Many excellente parsonages are condemned in Englande, being wholy reconquested to the Pope. TO the intent some remeady might be founde for these troubles and tumults in Germany, the Emperour in the month of May calleth an assembly of thempire, the xiii. day of Au∣gust: And whan he had besieged the Citye of Terwen, in the dominion of Fraunce, from the end of Aprill. The xx. day of Iune he ta∣keth Terwen ra¦sed. it by an assaulte, spoyleth, burneth, and raseth it down to the ground. The Constable sonne was taken in the same. The king of Englande sendinge an honorable ambassade, by the space of certaine monthes intreated a peace. The same did the bishop of Rome, but that was in vain.
In the month of May, Ihon, Duke of Northumberlād, which af∣ter the death of the Lord Protector, the Kinges Uncle, had ye chief The Lady Iane of Suf∣folke maried to Buylford Dudley. gouernment (as before is saide) marieth one of his Sonnes to the Lady Iane of Suffolke, daughter to the Lady Fraunces, whiche was Nece to Kinge Henrye the eighte, by his Sister the Frenche Quene. That time was Kinge Edwarde greuouslye sicke. Than was it warre also in Piedmont, and in the hither partes of Italy. Kinge Ed∣ward sore sicke. War in Ita∣lye. For the Emperour purposed to recouer Senes, sendinge thither a power from Naples vnder the conduit of the Uiceroy, Peter To∣letane: but wheras he died, and the Turkish Nauy, to the whiche the Prince of Salerne, going out of Fraunce, had ioyned him self, was sailing on the Seas of Grece and Italy, the soldiors retour∣ned home, to repulse the neare and domesticall daunger. Marques Albert kepinge warre in Franconie, Duke Moris and his fellowes send their army thither. The Marques therfore leauing a garrison at Schuinfurt and other places, whan he had euerye where exacted Monye, hasted with greate expedition into Saxony, leading away with him many pledges oute of the domi∣nions of Norinberge and Bamberge captiues. Whan he was cō∣men to Arustet, there were the ambassadors of Ihon Fridericke, Duke of Saxon, to intreat him that he would not hurte his coun∣try: he promised right gently, and kept it. After, marching into the limites of Erfurde, he spoyleth there manye villages. Duke Mo∣ris amased at his soden comming, which had sente his armye into Franckonie, as I saide, commaundeth all his Nobility, after also thother states to put on armure, and hyreth as many as he coulde, The Mar. maketh war in Saxonye. but the Marques passing through his countrye, with oute doinge anye hurte, whan he came to Halberstat, he taketh the gates, and imposeth to the Cleargye there a greate summe of Monye, after that, he burneth and destroyeth the Countrye of Henrye the Duke of Brunswicke, beinge aided by Duke Ericke, and the Nobilitye of Brunswicke. The Duke of Brunswickes armye, whiche I saide before, was gone into Franckonie, by the conduit of Phillip his Sonne, whan they had attempted Schuinfurte in vaine, and saw ther was pea∣rill at home, retourne into Saxonie: likewise do the Souldioures of Duke Moris, whereof the Earle Hedecke had the leading, and ioyn wt Duke Moris about Northuse. And for so much as ye Mar∣ques tourned downe into the prouince of Minden, Duke Moris thinckinge that he woulde haue gone throughe Hesse, and againe made inuasion into Franconie, from Northuse marcheth to Em∣becke, that he mighte preuente him. Than in the ende ioyninge all his forces together, he incampeth in the countrye of Hildesseme, at
Osterode, and the first day of Iuly, not only he, but also the Chaū∣celour of Boheme, Henrye Plauie, in kinge Fardinandoes name King Fer∣nādo procla∣meth warre agaynste Al∣bert. Proclaime warre againste him, and sending abrode theyr letters. (Themperor) say they, in these former yeares, hath by common as∣sent and consent of the princes and states, established peace throu∣ghe out the Empire, and gaue commaundement, that what action some euer any man had, he should try it at the law, and worcke no force nor violence: And certainly the state of Germany, which hath bene nowe certaine yeares nowe sore afflicted with Ciuill warres doth much require peace and quietnesse. Wherfore, what time there arose warre lately within the limits of the Empire, kinge Ferdinando, with the healpe of others, inde∣uoured and toke paines, that the warre was appeased. And here in at the lengthe had the Princes consentes, that were chiefe Cap∣tains of the warre, and finally, through the Emperoures permis∣sion concluded peace. Wherin it was prouided amongs other thin∣ges, (not only) that nothing be done to the contrary, but that suche also as be in dāger shuld be aided and assisted, but that same peace did not Marques Albert refuse only, but also did wryte openly to certen renowmed princes, that the same tēded to the great reproche and dommage of Germany, and was more worthye to be called a treason, than a peace making. By which wordes you declare suffi∣ciently, what minde you beare to your natiue country. Again, whā you had with spoyling and burning distroied the countrye that li∣eth by the Rhine, wheras you had no good successe in Fraunce, and themperor had an army prepared, throughe intercession you were reconciled to him, vpon respect only, that he would confirme youre composition with the Bishops of Bamberge and Wirciburge. But you straightwaies abusinge this confirmation of themperor, who permitted you to shew no violence, haue by youre ministers manye times put in feare, either prelate, with most terrible threatninges, saying how you would inforce them, by tharmies of the Earles of Mansfeld and Oldenburge, to obserue their couenauntes, as it is by your own mens letters to be proued. And that also you mighte bring this to passe, the soldiors, which you discharged after ye siege of Metz was leuied, you commaunded to retourne to you againe, at the beginning of Aprill. And all be it that they put their matter to the arbitrement of themperor, king Ferdinando, and the Prin∣ces, or cls referred the controuersy to the iudges of the chamber, & lawes of thempire, and namely at Hedelberge offered suche condi∣tions, that not only the princes intercessors, but also themperor by his letters approued the same: yet you refusinge all these offers, haue inuaded their prouinces, and surprising certain places, haue
not spared to spoile gentle women, and so practising spoilinge and exactions of mony, haue fired many Castels, Townes, Uillages, The spoylin¦ges of Al. and other buildinges, burning cruelly not only them, but the men in them in some places, aswell of theyrs, as of the state of Norin∣berge, which both by the publicke law of the Empire, and a league also lately made did assist them. After this haue you taken oute of sondrye places, Townes men and Citezens, of greate yeares: and for age vnweldie, as pledges for the mony imposed, where it is not to be had, and haue caried them aboute with you into the lower partes of Saxony, cruelly and tirannically which way soeuer you went. Moreouer, against all righte, you haue proclaimed warre a∣gauist the Nobility of Franckonie, and taken Sthuinfurt a town imperiall, and fortified it with a garrison, by the whyche thynges doubtlesse you haue raised vp a wonderfull trouble and terrour in all places. Furthermore, you haue not spared the king Fardinan∣do: And all be it you are bounden to him by wardship, and league of inheritaunce, yet throughe a certaine desperate rashnesse, you haue not only made Rhoades into the borders of Boheme, but al∣so haue sore afflicted the possessions of his kingdom, graunted out in times paste by composition to them of Norinberge, and diuers honest men also of the same iurisdiction, you haue partlye slaine, and partly brought into extreame pouerty and misery, and the same guidons of horsmen, which the king licenced the Norinbergians, to leuy for the defence of theyr Country, and not to wrong any man you haue set vppon, and taken, and spoyling them of horse and ar∣mure, you haue compelled them to retourne home again. Further∣more, you kepe certaine Traitoures, and such as the Kinge hathe outlawed for rebellion, and speake wordes, as it is reported, full of threatninges against the Kinge and the Bohemers. Yet hathe the king geuen you none occasion so to do, but hath euer auanced your commodities, by what meanes he coulde: And all be it you entred his Country one yeare past, full like an ennemy, yet are you not ig∣noraunt, how frendly than he wrote vnto you, that both you shuld amend this fault: and also beware from henceforth. Now, for my part, saith Duke Moris, all be it that in all my life The com∣plaint of D. Moris vpon Marques Al. I neuer gaue you any occasion of displeasure, but haue rather be∣stowed vpon you many benefits, yet, the last yeare, whan after the peace concluded, departing from Franckfurt, for the common wel∣thes sake, and king Ferdinandos, I led my army into hongary a∣gainst the Turke, you remember by what meanes you soughte to allure my men from me, and what opprobrious wordes you gaue me, both to your soldioures and others, what time, speaking of the pacification of passawe, you called it the betraying of Germanye.
meaning it by me, and my frend Henrye Plauie. Moreouer I am not ignoraunt, what thing was attempted the laste winter, whan I was in Hongary, to the destruction of me and my country, by the army of the Earle Mansfeld, which was than in the duchy of Brū¦swicke. And whan you wer reconciled to themperor, what manner of wordes, and not only how stinginge and bitinge, but also howe threatning and contumelious ye spake againste me and my pro∣uince at the siege of Metz, they know, which were-than in Campe with you. And whan you retourned home, after the siege was leui∣ed, being demaunded of me by letters, of the same matter, and of your mind towards me, you answered proudlye, yt whatsoeuer you haue spoken of me or of others, you both remembre it, and will not deny the same: And to thother you made such answer, as I can ge∣ther no certaintainty therof. After, wryting to me of the same mat∣ter from Hedelberge, you alledged certain thinges of great parso∣nages for this intent as I suppose, that you might cause me to sus∣pect and distrust them: but wheras I gaue no great regard to such matters, I aduised and counselled you, bothe by letters and inter∣messagers, that you should obserue the peace, and also desyred to know, what I my self should loke for at your hand. But you, wry∣ting letters to thelector of Brandenburge: All be it you spake of me somwhat temperatly, yet, wher you come to the pacification of Passaw, you signified plainly enough, howe you were affected to∣wards me, and not long after declared it also in dede. For in certen of your last letters, you required me, that I woulde call backe my army, which was in the tentes of the confederates in Franckonie, for this intent verely, that vnlesse I so did, you mighte haue an oc∣casion to war against me. Againe, shortly after you led your army through my country and my brothers Augustus, wher you had ge∣uen vs no knowledge ther of before, cleane contrary to thaunciente custome of Germany. You make your boast, that you did no hurte as you went, but my men report to me far otherwise. And all be it, that it were so, yet do I not so much ascribe this to your will, as to necessity. For it is knowen how fast you marched, and how weary the Souldiours wer: And you knew rightwel, that in case you had attempted any force or shewed violence, it had not ben harde for me to haue resisted you and your army, being so faint and weried with traueling, and to haue called home those that were in Franckonie: but doubtlesse your purpose was, to haue set on me at your return, and that haue your Souldiors not let to saye. Moreouer, passyng through the country of Thuring, you spoiled certen villages of the city of Erfurd, which is vnder our tuition. Which you denye not in your owne letters wrytten to me from Brunswicke. Your soldiors
also haue slaine diuers in my brothers Country, and neare vnto Bichlinge, they toke two gentlemen, and whan they had appealed vnto me, bette them with whippes and cast them in prison. Yet for all this could not I be broughte, to attempte warre: but required the same by letters, that I did before, and exhorting you to peace, wherof there was than a treaty at Franckfurt, inquyred what minde you were of towardes me and my fellowes. But how bitterly & angerly you answered, it appereth by your own letters. For neither woulde you vtter your minde, and yet accused the trea¦ty of Franckfurt as suspected. Whereof I could gether none other∣wise, but that you were determined to continue the warre of Fran∣konie, yea and as occasion serued, to spare neither me nor my fel∣lowes. Which you also denounced to them of Erfurde, and imme∣diatly after declared also to others. For besides many others displeasures, that you did the Bishop∣pricke of Halberstat, which themperor, as you knowe, hathe com∣mitted to my protection, you imposed a great some of Monye, and spoyled theyr colledges in the country neuerthelesse. The same did you also in the Archbishoppricke of Maidenburge, which is like∣wise comprised vnder my tuition, and haue exacted Monye of the Northusians and Mullusians. And Henrye the Duke of Brun∣swicke, with whome I haue made a league, righte honest in dede, Duke Mor. league with the Duke of Brūswicke. and not repugnant to the treatye of Passawe, you haue persecuted with sword and fire, so sone as I had aduertised you by letters, of the league, and the reast of my fellowes. These thinges doubtles, be not correspondent to certain of your former letters. Now therfore, although that king Ferdinando (I) and our fel∣lowes do greatly desire peace: especiallye of Germany, & euer sence the pacification of Passaw, to indeuor that al thinges may be qui∣et: Especially in these parties: which thing also very manye of the nobility of Brunswicke, which serue now in your camp can testify: yet, for so much as you haue remoued the war into these parties, & declare manifestly, whan you inuade our fellowes, what your intēt is. Moreouer, for so muche as there is a brute, yt you are hyring of greater forces, though it be in an others mās name, which you are not hable to find, except you permit them to robbe and spoyle, and worke what mischief they list, in so much that not only Frankonie, but other prouinces also, stand in great danger of you, which your selfe can not dissemble, whilest you saye, you will brynge to passe, that no man els shall be in better case than you are: For these cau∣ses I say, and for so muche as you leaue no place vnto Concorde, king Fernando (I) and our fellowes, seing we are next the dāger,
are constrained to put on armure, to repulse from vs violence and iniury, to the end we may deliuer our natiue countrye, and recouer the Publike quietnesse. For this do the lawes of the Empire, not only permit, but inioyne vs also, and the high court of the chambre imperiall commaundeth vs, to aid and assist our neighbors of Frā konye. And althoughe at this time that you leuye men in, you pre∣tend to do it in themperors name, yet knowe we assuredly, that the same is forged and famed. For he hath declared what his mind is, not only to you, but to vs and other also, and shortly you shal know more, what he thincketh. But, since this our enterprise is attemp∣ted for the common wealthes sake, and therfore neaded no declara¦tion of our mind, yet to thintent, you shall not be ignorant, we both do protest, that we will do hereafter, as the thinge it selfe shall re∣quire, that this your dissolute, and more than Tirannicall cruelty, may be suppressed. And this verelye in oure owne name, and oure fellowes, we do you to vnderstand, and hear testify, that the blame of all the calamity, that shall chaunce in this warre, is wholy to be imputed vnto you, which will come to no reasonable condition: ne∣ther doubt we this also, but the euerliuing God will assiste rather those, that seke the safegard of their countrye, than him, that goeth about destruction, and warreth on his natiue country. What time these letters were deliuered, in the campe of Marques Albert, the Ambassadoures of the electoure of Brandenburge, were sente to perswade a peace. Whan he had red the letters, he cōsulteth of the matter with his captaines, & demaundeth of them, whether they will take his part: Who affirming, he calleth for the yong gētleman that brought the letters, and tourning his talke to him. Thy Prince, saith he, hathe thrise broken his faith before this, and hath done wickedly, & thys is the fourth fact of the same sort: let him come hardly, I wil proue what he can do: This tell him in my name. The Mar. annswere to duke Moris. With these wordes he geueth him certaine crownes in rewarde, and sendeth him a waye. There the ambassadoures that were in∣tercessors, shall we do nothing than say theyrnothing, saith he, you may retourne home. Whan therfore he perceiued the waight of the warre, he sendeth Duke Ericke of Brunswick to the Emperor the third day of Iuly, and signifieth vnto him, how through the policy Marques Albert sen∣deth to the Emperor of certen, ther wer many aduersaries raised againste him, whiche indeuor, that the couenaunts be not only not kepte, but also that he might be expulsed out of al his lands and possessions, by reason of a new conspiracy, and that is he able to proue: that certen Princes electors, and the chiefest of all Germanye, haue conspired to chuse
a newe Emperour. And the cause why the Bishoppes be so sore against him, is long of the iudges of the Chamber. He prayeth hym therfore that he would not be offended, if he shall attempt ought against them. His aduersaries also, to bryng hym in ha∣tred, and to allure mo vnto them, haue reysed this brute of him, as though he hath conspyred with him to oppresse the li∣bertie of Germany. This doubtlesse haue certen Prynces obiec¦ted vnto hym, and letters are caste abroade in Germany, as sent from the Byshop of Arras, howe he verely for this intent, hyreth an armie, that he myght accomplyshe his wyll. For the Duke of Alba shall brynge his sonne, the Prynce of Spayne into Germany to the next conuention of the Empyre, that he may be denounced the successour of the Empyre. With this is kyng Ferdinando so fully perswaded, that entryng into league with his ennemies, he hath proclaimed warre againste hym. He hath verely excused this vnto many ryght dilligently: but the suspicion increaseth dayly. Therfore is he subiecte vnto great perilles and daungers, in a maner for this cause only, that he wyll not forsake his frendshyp. Wherfore he humbly besecheth hym, that he wyll bothe ratifie those compositions of the Byshoppes, and also defende hym and his. This if he wyll doe, he wyll brynge vnto hym (whan the matter shall be agreed vpon) .ix. thousande horsemen, and an hondreth enseig∣nes of footemen. In the meane tyme the Norinbergians, and the Byshops; in the absence of Marques Albert, inuade his dominion, he, The bishops in his absen∣ce inuade his counitie. publishyng letters, blamed sore them of Norinberge, as those that had broken their fayth and conuenauntes, and entrynge into league with the faulse Byshoppes, imbraced agayne the Popishe doctrine. Wherunto they afterwarde, setting forth a boke make aunswere, and recite the whole matter in order, e∣uer synce the yeare before, howe cruel warre he hath kept, how they made compacte with hym, howe after by the Empe∣rours permission and consente, they made a league with the Byshoppes aboute them, howe he hathe refused mooste reaso∣nable conditions, offered by the same Byshoppes, and againe moued warre agaynste them: and howe, at what tyme, bothe for the league made, and also for the commaundement of the Chamber, they ayded theyr fellowes, he inuaded a∣gayne theyr Countrie lately. Amongest others of hys wyc∣ked Actes, they recite this as a rare example of suche crueltie as hath not bene hearde of, that, hauyng taken two townes of
their dominion, Altorfe and Lanse, he shut in not the townes The great crueltie of Mar. Albert men only, but also the people he could fynde in the countrie, and eattell, and after set them on fyre in sondry places, but chi∣efly about the gates, pourposing doubtlesse to burne them all vp. In the which fire they say chyldrē and women with chylde, and many sicke persones, which were not able to breake down the walles and escape, were there miserably brent. Touchinge that he saieth of altering their Religiō, they declare to be false for the league is made only, to repulse violence from them and theirs. And that he careth for no Religion, it is well knowen to many, and they also haue many thinges to saye in this be∣halfe: But for the noble familie he commeth of, and for certen Princes, his kinsmen, they wyll temper them selues. The fift daye of Iuly Sigismunde kynge of Pole, marieth the Lady Katherine, daughter of kyng Ferdinando, which had bene wyfe to the Duke of Mantua, where as ten yeares synce, he had maried his syster, as is mentioned in the .xv. boke. Edwarde the syxte, kyng of Englande, a Prynce of vndoub∣ted and excellent hope, the syxt daye of Iuly, as it was knowen The death of good kyng Edward. abroade, departed out of this lyfe, of a consumyng disease, be∣yng of .xvi. yeares of age, to the exceadynge great grief of all good and Godly men. For after his death ensued a maruelous alteration of thynges in Englande, as shalbe declared hereaf∣ter. It was bruted abroade, that he was poysoned. Certenly, there was not in Europe a kyng of so great expectation these many yeares. From his very chyldhode he was excellently well brought vp and instructed in vertue and learnyng, and had The vertues of Edward the sixt. not only the Latin tongue, but the Greke and Frenche also, and loued the doctrine of the Gospell exceadyngly, and gaue vnto all learned men enterteinement and succour, to Ger∣maines, Italians, Frenchemen, Scottes, Spanyardes, and Polonians. What tyme both armies were not farre a sonder in Saxo∣nie, A battell fought be∣twixt Duke Maurice and Mar. Albert. and the Marques was come ouer the water of Weser, the nynth daye of Iuly at after none, they ioyned in battell with all theyr forces. After a longe fyght, Duke Maurice whiche ex∣celled in horsemen, had the victory, but he hym selfe beyng stri∣ken with a dagge through his bowels, died within two dayes after. The Marques came to Hanobrie in safitie. There were slayne aboute foure thousande, in a maner al horsemen. There were taken exceadyng many. Henry the Duke of Brunswycke, loste in that conflicte two sonnes, Charles and Philippe.
The nexte daye came fiue hondreth horsemen out of Boheme, sent by kynge Ferdinando to Duke Maurice. The Lantgraue had also sent to Duke Maurice seuen hondreth horsemen. At the same tyme therfore, there were together in one campe the Lantgraue and the Duke of Brunswick, with the Byshoppes, by a maruelous chaunge and contrarietie in thinges, where Duke Ericke of Brunswicke, that had maried Duke Maurice syster, ayded Marques Alberte. Many menne thought that tyme, that lyke as kinge Ferdinando gaue ayde against Mar∣ques Albert, so did the Emperour incourage and strengthen the Marques against Duke Maurice. Howebeit the Empe∣rours letters (whiche hereafter I shall recite) importe no suche kynde of thynges. The Frenche kyng was sayde than to haue treated of newe deuises with Duke Maurice, & was ryght sory for his death. Duke Maurice being caried into his Tente, the same nyght wryteth letters to the Byshop of Wirtemburge, his fellowe in that warre, wherein he declareth the whole matter, and saieth howe the victory is his, but that he is sore wounded: And sup∣poseth that Albert is fliyng. He admonysheth hym therfore, that he commaunde the wayes to be layde for hym in certen places, that he may be intercepted, and not suffered to passe. What so euer his owne state or ende shal be, he is of a good con∣science. For he toke in hande this warre, that he myght sup∣presse that disturber, and recouer the quietnes of Germany. He was buried at Fridberge a Towne of Meissen, the fourtenth daye after the battell by Henry his father, and his yong sonne Albert. He was .xxxii. yeares olde and vpwarde: His presence was thought to be a great cause of the victory, or els it was supposed that the Marques should haue wonne the fielde. For D. Maurice wan yt fielde and lost his lyfe. many of his horsemen were fled. There were taken of the en∣nemies and brought vnto hym out of the battell .liiii. enseig∣nes, and .xiiii. guidons. For the whiche Duke Maurice in dede spent his owne lyfe, but yet he ouerthrewe the force and po∣wer of the Marques. For after that battell he was neuer able to gather any mayne power. Whan the corps went through Lipsia, Ioachim Camerarie, made the oration funerall, and speakyng muche in his commendation, he rekened vp the won∣ders The wōders before his death. that went before his death. Droppes of bloude styckynge vpon the leaues of trees, the moste importune barkynge of Dogges, and werieng one an other. The neyinge of Horses hearde, and the clatterynge and clankynge of Harnesse, and certen other thynges full of terrour.
Againe, his owne Tente ouerthrowen with a whirlewynde, & the residue standing still and not touched, and certen wordes of his owne, as forespeaking and prognosticating his death to co∣me. And certenly as touching those red droppes, they were com¦monly sene in diuerse places, and euen at Strasburge aboute the beginning of Iune, what tyme they fell vpō bowes, grasse, tyled houses and stones. That tyme did there flie a wonderfull number of butterflies, and some there were, that sayde, howe these bloudy droppes came of them. Againe others iudged that it did pourtēde and signifie some thing. Betwene Duke Mau∣rice and Marqes Albert, being both of one age, there had bene Great frend¦ship betwixt D. Maurice and Marqu. Albert. alwayes very great frendship, so that there could be no derer frendes. For thei both had serued the Emperour in thre warres together, in the Frenche, the Protestauntes, and the warre of Maydenburge, after, this fourth and laste warre they attemp∣ted against the Emperour. But displeasures arysing, as before is sayd, their amitie had at length this doulefull and sorouful ende. What tyme Duke Maurice died, his brother Augustus was in Denmarke, with his wyfe, with the kyng his father in lawe. Wherfore the Nobilitie and States doe retaine parte of the armie, for to defende his countrie, about .xii. enseignes of fotemen, and fiue guidons of horsemē: The residue are dischar∣ged, and for the moste part retourned home with the funerall. But the .xviii. daye of Iuly, Marques Albert wryteth letters to the nobilitie and people of Duke Maurice. Where as of late The Marq. letters to yt states of D. Maurice. he went through their coūtrie into Saxon, he passed without harme doing, for that he had no hostilitie in his mynde. But Duke Maurice hath not only hurt men of his dominion, but also to the intent to gratifie certen wicked & periured bishops, had renounced yt auncient league, that is betwene his familie and ye house of Saxon, in a maner for no cause, & after a straūge example had made warre against him. Whiche thing being so in dede, and for so muche as they thē selues haue furthered his enterprise, cleane against the Emperours cōmaundement, ther¦fore must he see for hym selfe, howe he may recompence himself for the domage receiued, and therfore renounceth their league and amitie. The Emperours armie, after Turwen was ouer∣throwen, marching from thence into Artois, in the moneth of Iuly toke the Castell of Hesdine by assaute. There was slayne Oratius Farnese, the Frenche kynges sonne in lawe. There were manye of the Nobilitie taken, amonges whome was the The death of Orace Far∣nese. hyghe Mareshall of Fraunce, Marchian, that dwelleth in the foreste of Arden.
The newes of the battell in Saxonie was brought to the Em∣puy within a very fewe dayes. Who after the .xxii. daye of Iuly, aunswereth Duke Ericke of Brunswicke, whome Mar∣ques Albert had sent, as before is sayde. Howe he is not a little sory, that the displeasure is growen so farre, for he had muche rather that all this controuersie had bene appeased, and vnles it be so, he feareth least it wyll come euyll to passe, not only to the Empyre, but also to Marques Albert, especially, since that so many of the chiefest States doe set in fote herein, and haue made a league. Therfore his aduise and request is, that with al spede they laye downe theyr weapons, and deuise some meanes of concorde. If the Marques be so content, he wyll deuise, that the contrary parte shall surcesse also, and distrusteth not, but that he shall perswade them. And he earnestly desyreth, that he refuse not so to doe: For otherwyse, the case standyng as it doth nowe, he can not vse his seruice, least he should increase the su∣spicion that is reysed already. Whiche doubtlesse vnto hym, that hath nothyng derer, than the peace and tranquillitie of the Empyre, should be very greuous and displeasaunt. About the begynning of the moneth of Auguste, Augustus Augustus brother and hesre to Du. Maurice. Duke Maurice brother, commyng home out of Denmarke, a fewe dayes after, consultyng with his Counsel, taketh an othe of all the people, and amongest others, of the Wyttembergians to be true to hym and to his heyres males, and if none remain, to retourne to the fidelitie of Iohn Fridericke and his chyl∣dren, in case he obey the Emperour, and obserue the compactes of fourmer yeares, if not, that than they be obedient to the Lantgraue. This done, he is saluted Prynce Electour, and calleth an assemblee of his States, to appere before hym, the xx. daye of Auguste. The .xvii. daye of that moneth, was a marueilous great earthquake in the towne of Mesen. Whan all were assembled at Lipsia, at the daye, very many. Duke Au¦guste bryngeth in question: fyrste, whether he should ioyne hym selfe to the newe league of kyng Ferdinando, the Prynces and Byshopes, and to prosecute his brothers warre against Mar∣ques Albert. Secondarely, if he should forsake the league, how he ought to auenge his brothers death. Finally, by what mea∣nes he may compounde with Iohn Fridericke. For he, in his absence, sendyng letters to the nobles, required that the digni∣tie of Electourshyp, and his possessions that were taken awaye myght be wholy restored to hym. The effect of the consultatiō and counsell was, that he should obserue peace with both, and that the Electour of Brandenburg should treate a pacificatiō.
And hereof an order was made, although king Ferdinando by Henry Plauie, Chauncelour of Boheme, had treated earnestly with Duke Auguste concerning the league. In this conuen∣tion, the Duke of Saxon sending againe an other Ambassade, Iohn Frede¦rick demaū∣deth his lan∣des and dig¦nities. demaundeth his owne, and that with sharpe wordes, the same did the States of his dominion, but that was in vaine. And Auguste sayed, howe he was not bounde so to doe, and that he would sticke to those compactes and conuenauntes which the Emperour had made whan he was takē, but yet would he not refuse all treatie. During that same assemblie, Henry Duke of Brunswicke desyred ayde of Duke Auguste against Marques Albert, whiche hyred new bandes of soldiours. After the death of Duke Maurice, the Duke of Saxon sent thone of his sōnes, Iohn William, into Brabant to the Emperour, that he might be restored. And in a maner about the same time, the nobilitie and states of his dominion, sent thyther Ambessadours also in the absence of Duke Auguste, that the Emperour, wold accept their Prince as by them commended. The Duke of Saxon had sent Ambassadours also, to kyng Ferdinando, and to the kynge of Denmarke, about the same matter. In the meane season the Bishop of Wirtemburg besegeth Schninfurt, which was kept with a garrison of Marques Albert, as before is sayd. And the Byshop of Bamberge, and the Norinbergians, whan they had a whyle beseged Collebach, leading away the power, ioyne thē selues to Counte Plauie, whiche layed batterie to the towne Hosie, belonging to the Marques. In these monethes were .ix. burnt at Lions, whan diuers of them had bene in pryson a yeare and more. Articles were pro∣pounded Nyne burnt at Lions. to them al, of the presence of Christes body in the Lor∣des supper, of Purgatory, of the Masse, of priuate or auricular Confession, of Ceremonies, of praiyng to the virgin Mary, and other that be dead, of the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome, of Free wyll, of Iustification of workes, of the authoritie of the churche and of Byshoppes, of Monasticall vowes, of choice of meates, of vnction and confirmatiō, and of Images. And they aunswered to euery point constantly, and after one sorte, seue∣rally, alledging the testimonies of Scripture. Whylest they were in pryson, with their letters they comforted not only one an other, but also their frendes and other churches, and wrote euery thing as it was done. What tyme Lewys Marsake, one of the prysoners being a mā of warre, alledging many things Lewys Mar¦sake. out of the holy Scriptures, the inquisitours that were presēt demaunded of him, whether it were his part to read the bokes
of Scripture, and asked him how he knewe these thinges to be the Gospell? The kinges liftenaunt also sayd there were onely but two Euangelistes, Matthew and Iohn: For the other two The blasphe my or yt lief∣tenaunt. and Paule also, had as it were sowed together certen fragmen∣tes, and patches. And if it were not that the Doctours of the churche did attribute to Paule that authoritie, he wold set no more by his Epistles, than by Esopes fables. And whan Mar∣sake inferred agayne, that there were Godly testimonies of the vocation and office of S. Paule, especially in the .i. chap. of the Epistle to the Galathians. That maketh nothing for the mat∣ter saith he, for he beareth witnes of him self. Unto those that suffer with hym, the hangeman put an haltar about their nec∣kes, as the maner is. But Marsake, whome the iudges cōmaū∣ded to be led without a bande about his necke, sayed vnto thē, is their cause better than mine? Why wil you not geue me such a chaine also? Why will you not dubbe me knight of this noble and excellent order? alluding to ye accustomed maner of kinges, who at what tyme they wyll honour and auaunce their fren∣des, they make them knightes of their owne order, and geue them a chayne of Golde, as a token of honour. Fiue of them stu¦died at Losanna, Frenchemen in dede borne, but founde at the Fiue studēts of Losanna. charges and liberalitie of the Lords of Bernes. Whan therfore they had heard that they were taken, and vnderstode their daū∣ger, they made diligent sute to ye king, desiring him, thei might be geuen to them: But it was in vayne, where the kyng alled∣ged that he might not doe it by the lawes. The Cardinall of Tournon, was thought to haue bene the occasion hereof. I spake a litle before of the death of the moste noble Prince, Edwarde the sixte, kyng of England. He was in a consumptiō, and in the moneth of Ianuary he fell sicke. And where as his sicknes increased, being carefull for his Realme and Religion, he conferreth with his counsell of the matter, and inquireth of them, vnto whome chiefly he should committe the gouernmēt. For albeit that king Henry his father whā he died, had appoin¦ted next in succession vnto him. Mary and Elizabeth, as before is sayd, yet for so muche as he him selfe was of lawefull yeres, he accoumpted it to lie in his power to make his heire, espe∣cially, seing that moste men doubted of the lawful birth of his syster, and Mary was also of the Byshop of Romes Religion, which if she should haue the gouernment, he sawe howe there was great daunger, least both this present Religion should be subuerted, and the Realme also be gouerned by a straunger. Wherfore after deliberatiō had, it was agreed to chose the lady
Iane of Suffolke, daughter to the Lady Fraūces, nece to kinge Henry the eight. Whan the rest of the Counsell, and the Maior The lady Iane. of London, and the Lordes of the Realme had this allowed. The Archebyshop of Cantorbury, primate of Englande, was sent for to the court, that he myght subscribe, whiche he refu∣seth to doe, vnlesse he maye first heare the kyng speake. Wher∣fore being admitted to his speache, whan he had reasoned the matter with him familiarly as he laye, he assēted, being of him earnestly required hereunto. Whan the kyng was departed, whiche was the syxt daye of Iuly, as before is sayd, the fourth daye after, the Lady Iane is proclaimed Quene, and a procla∣mation openly set forth howe kyng Edwarde by the consent of his Nobles, for moste weighty causes, had disherited the Lady Mary, and the Lady Elizabeth his systers, and lefte the succes∣sion of the Realme to the Lady Iane. The Nobilitie and com∣mons toke this moste displeasauntly, not so muche for the loue of the Lady Mary, as for the hatred of the Duke of Northum∣berlande, where no man in a maner doubted, but that he was the authour of this counsell, to the intent, that by this meane, he myght as it were conuey the kingdome into his own house. Whylest these thinges were a workyng, the Lady Mary fleeth into Norfolke, and from thence to the castell of Framingham in Suffolke, and wryting abroade for ayde, taketh vpon her as Quene. That knowen, the Duke of Northumberlande assem∣bleth a power, and setting forth of Londō, marcheth towardes her, by the consent of the reste, to apprehende her. But in the meane season the counsellours that remayned in the citie, per∣ceiuing the hartes of the people, & that the forces of Norfolke and Suffolke, resorted to Quene Mary, chaunging their myn∣des and pourpose, proclaimed Quene Mary, and kepe the lady The Lady Mary procla¦med Quene Iane in pryson. After these newes came into the Campe, al mē for the moste parte, bycause they serued against their wylles, & hated the Duke, do reuolte. And whan letters and commission came from Frammingham, thei take the Duke at Cambridge, and the .xxv. daye of Iuly bryng him agayne into the citie. It is vncredible, with what rebukes & railinges ye people receiued hym, whylest some cal him traytour, some parracide, & others the murtherer of the moste innocent kyng. For in as much as he was thought to haue brought his sonnes wyfe to the Roial crowne, there arose a suspicion, that he had imagined these thynges longe before, and layde in wayte for the kynges lyfe. After were apprehended his sonnes and his brother, and certē other Nobles, and the kynges scholemaister, Sir Iohn Cheke,
knight, a mā of great vertu and learning. Yet was he dischar∣ged afterwardes, but put in a maner from all his lsuing. After came Quene Mary to London, & entring into the holde, which they call the Towre, deliuereth out of prison the Duke of Nor∣folke, who had bene almoste seuen yeares in captiuitie, & Gar∣diner Byshop of Winchester, and Tunstall Bishop of Duresme, and certen other Byshops of the popyshe Religion, whiche had bene put from their Byshoprikes, and restoreth them to their fourmer places. And certenly yt byshop of Winchester, although in bookes set forth, he had defended the doing of king Henry, what tyme he diuorsed him selfe from the Lady Katherine the mother of Quene Mary, as in the .ix. booke is mentioned, yet nowe he obteined the place of the chauncelour, whiche is there Winchester made Chaū¦celour. the highest degree of dignitie. For where the lady Katherine al¦ledged the Byshop of Romes licence, Iuly the second, who had confirmed that matrimony, and the kyng againe sayde it was naught, and therfore sent the Byshop of Winchester, before he was Byshop, to Rome, that Clement might pronoūce thesame frustrate. Who comming thither in the moneth of February in the .xxix. yeare, was an importune suter. The Bishop of Rome, who as the prouerbe is, helde the woulfe by both eares, where as both he coueted to gratifie the kyng, and also feared them∣perours displeasure, aunswereth that he wyll wryte to them∣perour, that the true licence vnder seale might be shewed. He assenteth in dede, but he requireth to haue two monethes only appointed for the same matter: Whan that tyme shalbe runne out, Gardener requireth ye the licence might be compted vnlaw¦full. But that thought the Byshop of Rome both straunge and also vnreasonable, and seketh with gentle wordes to satisfie the kyng. But the Ambassadour tolde hym playnly, that vnles he might obteyne the kynges request, it would be to the great hinderaunce of the See of Rome. Agayne the Emperour, and kyng Ferdinando, the .xxvii. daye of Aprill, by Ambassadours declare their grief, and expostulate with byshop Clement, that he fauoured the kyng onermuche, and would haue the matter iudged in Englande, and also appointed their procurers with large and ample commission, whiche should treate and followe the cause, in their names, at Rome. Wherfore the Byshop com∣maunding at the last Campegius to retourne home, reuoketh the suite to him selfe, so much the rather, for that he vnderstode by the Cardinall of Yorke of the kynges new loue, as I said in The Duke of Northum¦berland con∣demned. the .ix. booke. The .xxii. daye of August, the Duke of Northumberland, cō∣demned
of treasō, was beheaded, and whan he was brought to the Scaffolde, made an oration, and amonges other thinges, he exhorteth the people, to perseuer in the same religion, whi∣che they had receiued of their forefathers, as it wer from hand to hande: For he iudgeth this to be the only cause of all the ca∣lamitie, that hath come into Englande, of longe tyme nowe, His incōstan¦cie at hys death. but chiefly since the death of King Henry, that they are sepera∣ted from the reste of the body of christianitie. Of many yeares nowe, he had bene of a contrary opinion (as he pretended at the leaste) and had vtterly forsaken the Popish doctrine. And the cause why he nowe spake thus (as they saye) was for that he was put in hope to be pardoned. And albeit that the reste of his talke being finished, he sayd he spake as he thought, yet be ther some that affirme he was sory for so saiyng, what time he loking round about him, perceiued no succour, & sawe that he was begiled. And other that suffered at the same time, one sir Thomas Palmer, knight, professed the doctrine of the Gospell Thomas Palmer. with moste constancie. And the Duke was condēned (as I said) of rebellion & treason. And albeit there were great suspiciōs, ye he had geuen the king poison, yet was he nothing at al exami∣ned for that matter: Nor in the sentēce pronoūced against hym any mētion made therof. Of Peter Martyr the Florentine, we haue spoken before, whiche going into England six yeres past, by the kinges sending for, was reader of the diuinitie lecture at Oxforde. Whome many made muche of for his excellent lear¦ning and vertue, but he wanted not also euil willers. Wherfor when the king was dead, he was commaunded not to styre one fote thence without the pleasure of the Quene firste knowen, nor cary away any thyng that he had, vnder a great penaltie, in case he should doe otherwyse. He was content to obeye, but whan he sawe he was longe delayed, he wryteth to the counse∣lours of the Realme concerning his state, and if he had ought offended, he requireth that his accuser might be brought forth, and the matter examined: Wherupon through their permis∣sion, he came to London. There he fyndeth the Archebyshop of Cantorbury his Patrone and frend, of whome the Popysh pre∣achers The cōstan∣cie of the ar∣chebyshop of Cantorbury had reysed a brute, as though he should be vnconstant & wauering, as though by his commaundement the Masse were restored at Cantorbury, & as though he had promysed the selfe same thing to the Quene. And bragged with al of a disputatiō that should be. After he knewe of this, immediatly he set forth a writynge to pourge him selfe, and sayth, how a terten priest, vnknowyng to hym, had sayde Masse at Cantorbury.
he denieth the other thing also, yea, he protesteth, if the Quene wyll geue him leaue, to proue, that the actes of kyng Edwarde concernyng the Lordes supper and other articles of doctrine, be consonaunt to the holy Scriptures, and that the Romyshe Masse is cleane repugnant from the institution of Christe, for the declaration wherof, he desyreth no great nomber, but euen a very fewe, and amonges them, Peter Martyr, to ayde and as∣siste hym. And for so muche as the contrary parte, adourned their Religion by the commendatiō of antiquitie, saiyng that it hath continued aboue a thousand and fiue hondreth yeares, he affirmeth that thei be not able to proue the same, but he wil proue, that the doctrine, whiche in kyng Edwardes daies, was set forth, and is as yet obserued in England, is the very natiue and auncient Religion instituted and left vs of Christ and his Apostles. Whan he had publyshed this wryting at London a∣bout the fift daye of September, Peter Martyr the same tyme came thither from Oxforde (as I sayd) & aduertysed by hym of the whole matter, commendeth his doing, and sheweth him ye he wyll refuse neyther paynes nor peryll herein. But beholde, whylest they are in this expectation, the Archebyshop of Can∣torbury was committed to pryson, and also the Archebishop of The bishops caried to pri∣son. Yorke, and Rydley Byshop of London, H. Byshop of Worcester and certen other Byshops, for the profession of the Gospell, and for sermons made against Quene Mary, by the counselles com¦maundemēt, before she atcheued the crowne. Moreouer Hughe Latimer is than also apprehended, whome kyng Edward deli∣uered out of the tower, layd in there by his father for doctrine. In the meane tyme Peter Martyr, albeit he perceiued his daū¦ger, yet for that he had nothing offended against the lawes of the Realme, trusting to his innocencie, thought not good to de¦parte, before he had obteyned leaue. Wherfore whan he had brought that to passe, and receiued his passeporte signed with the Quenes hande, he came to And werpe, from thence to Col∣lon, and after to Strasburge, from whence he went firste into Englande, and a litle before hym Bernardine Ochine, both in health. It was once written and signified into Germany, that the Emperour should haue geuen coūcell to his auntes daugh∣ter Quene Mary, that she should gouerne with mercy, and not alter Religion, nor marie without the Realme. For what daū∣ger were in that, in case she should chaunge the Religion, he knewe best of all men. Whether this were so in dede I can not affirme: The ende it selfe declareth it to be farre otherwyse. For euen for the doctrine of the Gospel, straungers being cōmaun∣ded
to departe, and the natiue countrie men there caste in pry∣son, the Romyshe Religion was wholye restored, as shalbe de∣clared The popishe Religion re¦stored in En¦glande. hereafter. The first daye of October after Quene Mary was crowned. And not longe after began the Parliament at London. But the conuention of the Empyre, which the Empe∣rour called against the .xiii. day of Auguste, as I shewed in the beginning of this boke, was proroged to the first of October, & than to the moneth of Ianuary. After that same battel, wher∣in Duke Maurice was slayne, Henry the Duke of Brunswick, and the Marques Albert, euery of them for them selfe, make them selues strong, and gather their power about them. The Warres re∣uiued be∣twixt the D. of Brunsw. & Marques Albert. Byshoppes and States of Norinberge fed Duke Henry wyth monie. But all men for the moste parte marueled at Marques Albert, from whence he had al that store. Wherfore it was spo∣ken commonly, that Quene Mary the Emperours sistes sup∣ported him with mony: But the Emperours folkes denie that vtterly, and maruell, that there are any so fonde so to thinke. But what tyme the mony was brought to the Duke of Brun∣swicke somewhat to late, he was in very great daunger. For whan the Marques had intelligence therof, he practised with the soldiours to forsake hym, who abode this delaye moste im∣patiently: But very luckely, in the selfe same momente, whan that heate and mutine began to ryse the .x. day of September, was brought a remedy, and all the tempeste appeased, & Duke Henry for his better assuraunce, fel at a cōposition with Duke Ericke his cosin, whiche was his ennemy before. The kyng of Denmarke had long since sent his Ambassadour into Saxon, to further the matters of Duke Augustus his sonne in lawe. They at the length through the helpe of the Electour of Bran∣denburges Ambassadours, reconcile hym to Marques Albert. The conditiōs were these, that Duke Augustus should neither Albert recō∣ciled to Au∣gustus. prosecute his brothers warre, nor ayde the ennemies of Mar∣ques Albert. The same shall the Marques doe, and if he shall chaunce to leade his armie nere vnto the limites of Duke Au∣gustus, he shall go forth without harme doing. That Duke Au¦guste shall beware, that what tyme he dischargeth his armie, thei go not to the Marques ennemies. Finally that the league of inheritaunce, whiche is betwene the house of Saxon and of Brandenburge, be renewed so shortly as may be. The next day whiche was the .xii. of September, Marques Albert leadeth his armie out of Brunswicke. And where as he chaunced vpon his ennemies, not far without the citie, he geueth the charge. But vanquished with the nōber, especially, where he had none
and the Duke of Brunswick had .xx. enseignes of footemen, he was discomfited and put to flight, albeit he left to the ennemy a bluddy victory: After the battel he retourneth to Brunswick. In the meane season thei were in great distresse, whome Coūte Plauie and his companions had besieged at Hoffie. For where the towne was both very sore battered with shot, and the Mar¦ques was vanquished in battell, and no rescowe came, beinge dryuen through penurie and want of all thynges, they render vp the towne. And Counte Plauie sweareth the townes men to be true to hym and his chyldren, and leaueth there in garri∣son one enseigne of fotemen, and the great ordenaunce. We haue spoken before of the Turkishe flete: Unto whome The Tur∣kishe Naute taketh the I¦land of Cor∣sica. ioyned them selues certen Frenche captaines, setting forthe of Marseilles, and in maner in these dayes take the Iland of Cor¦sica, belonging to the state of Genes, a fewe townes excepted. Howe the Emperour toke the castell of Hesdine by force, is be∣fore said. And ye same he raseth, as he had done Terwen before: The French king in the meane season leuieth his armie about Amiens, and attendeth, tyll the Swysses, whiche he had sent for were come. Whan Hesdine was now ouerthrowen, the Em∣perour at the ende of Auguste was in mynde to attempte Dor∣lans, but whan the Constable heard therof by espiall, he lea∣deth forth a great number of horsemen, and some part of foote∣men, so spedely, that he set vpon them or euer thei were aware, and putteth them to flight, slaying and takyng many of them. And what tyme the Swisses were come about the beginninge of September, a ten thousande footemen, the kyng went vp the water of Some, on the banke wherof standeth Amias, and commeth to Corbie. From thence sending out certen guidons of horsemen, he runneth about the Towne of Bappam, as though he would besiege it. But the seuenth daye of Septem∣ber sendyng an Herault of Armes to Cambraye, he requireth to be certified, what hartes the Townes men beare towardes hym, that is a very large towne, belongyng to the Byshop, and aunciently to the Empire, and in the same warre whiche the The Frēche king attem∣teth Cābray Emperour made with the Frenche king, it was a neuter town indifferent to both, but at this tyme it was more of the Empe∣rous parte. The king therfore sendeth them worde, that he wil do nothing against cōuenauntes, so that they wyl do the same, and let their citie be set open for him, who is protectour of thē∣pire, & be ready to serue him in all thinges, as wel as they be to themperour. But when yt gouernour of yt town had signified ye
matter to the Emperour he made aunswer, that for so muche as the Frenchmē had with spoyling and burning distroyed al the coūtrie, yt he should take them for his ennemies. But before this message came againe from the Emperour, the kynge ma∣king roades out, began to assaie the citie certē daies. But wher nothing preuailed, about the middes of September, he rayseth his campe, and pitcheth his tentes two myles from the Empe∣rours campe, whiche was than at Ualencene, a towne of He∣nault, nere vnto the riuer of Scalde. Thā he approcheth nerer. and certenly the thing was like to haue come to a batell, but yt end was this, that the king, for that he had approched so nere yt Emperours fortifications, after he had loste very many of his men, retourned with his army the .xviii. day of September. At his departing he distroyed all far and nere with fire. The mat∣ter was after wrytten priuatly vnto frendes, & the Frenchemē in dede saie, howe the Emperour would not fight, but this the imperials deny. The king retourning home, dischargeth the Swisses. In this same moneth are discharged the garrison of sixe enseignes of fotemen, whiche had by the Emperours com∣maundement bene all that yeare at Auspurge, as I sayd in the fourmer boke. About this tyme also met at Hailbrune, ye Pauls graue, the Archebyshop of Mentz, the Duke of Bauier, and the Duke of Wirtemberge. From the Archebyshop of Treuers, and the Duke of Cleaue came Ambassadours. There was present in the name of king Ferdinando, the Byshop of Passawe. This Pestilence & firing at Pa¦ris. sommer the rage of yt plague made a great slaughter at Paris, and in the meane time diuers were burnt there also for Luthe∣ranisme. The king had a darling, whose husband in tyme past had bene gouernour of Normandy. The same woman being a wydowe had two sonnes in lawe at the same time prisoners: Duke de Anmalle, and the Mareschall Marchian as before I sayed. And for the raunsome of Duke de Anmalle, Marques Albert demaundeth a hondreth thousande crownes, but that was aboue his habilitie. Wherfore the brute went, that she, which might do with the king what she list, to yt ende she might make the monie, without her owne hinderaunce, had obteined that the kynge should geue her their landes and goodes, that were condemned for heresie. For the custome of Fraunce is, that the kynge taketh not only the lyfe of suche as be condem∣ned, but their goodes also. What tyme therfore this praye was obtayned many they saye, were brought in daunger. I wyll not certenly affirme this, but it commeth to passe many tymes in Fraunce and in other places, that the bloude of innocent
persones is not only a pleasure, but also a gaigne to many. The bloud of innocētes gaynfull to many. Marques Albert, after his ouerthrowe in battell, retour∣neth to Brunswicke, as a little before I haue sayed, but where he vnderstode by espiall, that the Duke would besege the citie, making no longe aboade, he gathered vp what horsemen he could, and commaundeth them to abide his comming in Tu∣ringia, and sending to his kinsfolkes and allies for ayde. Whan he was holpen of them, he hasteth into Turinge, and the fifth daye of October, vsing great expedition, beyond al mens expec¦tation, came to Weymer, where he was ryght gently receiued of Iohn Fridericke, and there remayning two nightes, that he myght refreshe his souldiours after their trauaile, that laye scattered a broade in the coūtrie, he marcheth towardes Franc¦kony. That tyme the Erle Plauie and his fellowes beseged a towne of his named Birnt. But hearing of his comming, they leuied their siege, and gote them to Bamberge. But he being accompanied with no great bande of horsemen, goeth forthe the .xi. day of October to espie what is done at Hosie, the town lately loste. The soldiours of the garrison chaunced than to be some what vn warely without the gates, for their pleasure, be∣ing altogether carelesse. Wherfore, fynding this occasion, and exhorting his men to be valiaunt, ryding vpon the spurre, set∣teth vpō them quickely, and putting them to flight, followeth after, and entring in at the gates with them: whan the towns men reioysing at his sight and presence, came running to him, he slewe the moste parte of them. He founde there great pieces of Artillerie, and certen others, whiche they call field pieces, but without any cariage or furniture. For the enemies had ca¦ried awaye all that were furnished to make the batterie at Birnte. Leauing ther an enseigne of fotemē, he goeth to Blas∣seburg, his chief castell. After he came awaye from Brunswick Duke Henry beseged the citie, and battered it sore with shot. Brunswick beseged. But the Byshoppes, and they of Norinberge, whiche suppor∣ted all that armie, sendyng hym worde, that he should repayre to them. Duke Henry demaundeth of the citezens about foure thousande crownes. Whan they refused this, and the Souldi∣ours vnlesse they were payde their wages, woulde beare none enseignes, they being afrayde of their owne daunger, promyse to geue hym so muche. Than at the lengthe leuieng the siege, whan he had appoynted his Soldiours a daye, whan they shoulde be payed, he taketh his iourney through Turinge. That knowen, the Duke of Saxon, Iohn Friderick, for that he was not as yet made at one with him, goeth him selfe & his
thre sonnes to Gothe, leauing his wife at Weymer, for that she was not very wel in health. Duke Henry being now furnished The Duke of Brunsw∣letters to the D. of Saxon to take his iourney, sending vnto him letters, albeit sayeth he, I haue had iust cause, and good occasion also, in these certen yeares past, to reuenge the iniuries of fourmer time done vnto me, yet, for so muche as you were in the Emperours custody, I haue attempted nothing against either your subiectes or chil∣dren, but haue permitted the thing to lawe & iudgement. But you not contented with fourmer iniuries, haue holpen now of late also with your ayde and counsel, Albert of Brandenburg, the disturber of Germany, and my vttermoste ennemy, whiche I knowe for certentie, although you wrought it secretly. Wher¦fore, in case my army now shal doe any hurte to your countrie, there is no cause to cōplaine therof: For yt beginning is of your selfe. Duke Henry was determined to haue playd the vtter en∣nemy, with Albert & Uolrate Erles of Mansfeld, for the last ye∣res war. Howbeit through thintercessiō of Duke August, whō they sought vpon, the matter was appeased. Iohn Fridericke, receiuing the Duke of Brunswickes letters, began to treate wt him by ambassadours, & to mitigate his minde, so that he shuld come to Weymer with two guidons of horsemen, & fiue enseig∣nes of fotemen, & the residue of his armie, be placed in ye coūtrie therabout. Hither came to him from the Prince, Minquice his chaūcelour, & declaring his cōmissiō, perswaded him throughly The Du. of Brunswick is reconciled to the Duke of Saxon. to quietnes. And where before he required a great sōme of mo∣nie, the same now doth he partly remit, & remaining there two daies without doing any hurt, departeth frendly. At the .xviii. day of October, began a disputation at Londō, by the Quenes cōmaundement, of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar, as they terme it. The matter was reasoned six daies, A disputatiō in England not without opprobrious wordes, where one of the Romsh dic∣trine, Doctor Westō, that was proloqutour, demeaned himselfe disorderly what was decreed of the same, and what was thend of that parliament, I wyll declare here after. About the end of October, Michael Serueto, a Spaniarde, was executed at Geneua. He had many yeares since set forth diuerse bookes, a∣mongest Serueto a Spanyarde burnt at Ge¦neua. other thinges of the trinitie, vtterly repugnaunt to yt cōmon consent of the church. And whan at the length he came this yeare to Geneua, ye Senate being certified of him, cōmaū¦deth him to be aprehended, and after appointeth Caluine who before had wrytten against him, & other ministers of yt churche, to haue conference with him. Wherfore there was a great and a bitter disputation amongst them, where as he would many
tymes tell Caluine he lied, very immodestly. But the Senate, least any thing should be done in so weightie a matter rashely, asketh counsell touching the same opinions of the Doctours of Bernes, Zurick, Basill, and Schafusians. They all make aunswer, that the same thinges redounde to Gods high contu∣melie. And where he wold not only not forsake his opiniō, but also with opprobrious wordes & cursed speakinges defende the same, he was condēned to die. Whan he came to yt place of execu¦tion, & William Farell did exhorte hym, he would not call vpon Christe, the eternall sonne of God. And where he she wed no to∣ken of repentaūce, yet did he not defend his cause vnto the peo∣ple. Many men ascribed the blame of his death to Caluine: But he, setting forth a booke, reciteth his opinion, and all the matter as it was, & declareth that heretikes may be punished with death. The laste sauing one of October, Iames Sturmie a man moste iuste and wittie, and the very beaultie of the No∣bilitie of Germany, both for his excellent gyftes of mynde, and notable lerning, departeth out of this life at Strasburg, whā he had layne sicke of a quartaine, by the space of two moneths. He was past thre score and thre yeares olde. In these dayes Reynold Poole, an Englisheman borne, a Cardinal, comming from Rome, goeth through Germany to the Emperour. And Reynold Poole Car∣dinall. whan he was come to the frontiers of the Paulsgraues coun∣trie, receiuing newes from the Emperour, who sent vnto hym Mendoza, he retourneth to Dilling, whiche is a towne of the Byshops of Auspurge by the water of Thonawe, and there at∣tendeth, till he shal heare more from the Emperour. The Duke of Brunswicke, departing from Weymer, the seuenth daye of Nouember came to his fellowes Campe, whiche was than at Lichtefelse a Towne belongyng to Bamberge. In the whiche Towne were placed the Soldiours of Marques Albert, a .ix. enseignes of fotemen, the selfe same that had bene a little be∣fore at Birnthe. And the Counte Plauie and his Fellowes had beseged it. And what tyme the great pieces of Artillerie came from Norinberge, wherwith the Towne myght be battered, they makyng surrendrie, the tenth of Nouember yelde them selues in their ennemies hādes. Who taking certen of the Cap∣taines, let goe the reste without armure, or enseignes. That done, they go to Colembach, a Towne of Marques Albertes, and batter it very sore. And the townesmen perceiuing that they were not able to defende it from the ennemie carie out all their goodes and houshold stuffe into the castel of Blasse burge,
and after, setting the houses on fire, flie thether them selues al¦so. Thus in fine the ennemy entreth the towne, and kylling di∣uerse that were founde there, quencheth the fire, and spoyleth the reste that was lefte. Afterwardes whan Coūte Plauie had taken by surrendrie the castell of Lichteberge and the townes of Biruth and Hofie, and rased the walles, he besegeth the ca∣stell of Blasseburge, the chiefest forte that the Marques had, & kept with a great garrison. This tyme, the Frenche men, go∣ing priuely out of Piedmount, vpon the soden, take Uercelles, Uercelles surprised. a towne of Turin, whiche the Spanyardes kept. But where they thought them selues hardly able to defend the same being so nere Millan, and Gonzago, the Emperours lieftenaunt ap∣proched also with a power, they spoyled the towne, and retour∣ned home in due season, laden with boties. Not long after it was signified and written both from Uenise and other places, of Solyman Emperour of Turkes, who had hanged his eldest sonne, Mustapha, for suspicion of treason. They reporte, that The Turck hanged his sonne Musta¦pha. the murther was committed, through the procurement of his seconde wyfe, whiche coueted to haue her sonne auaunced, and to succede his father. I haue, spoken before of the Archebyshop of Cantorbury: He, and Quene Iane, with thre sonnes of the Duke of Northumberlande, being brought to the barre, in the The Archby¦shop of Can¦torbury and others con∣demned. moneth of Nouember, were cōdemned to suffer for treason: but according to the custome of the Realme, thei were caried again to pryson, and through the intercessiō of certen, were reserued. Sebastian Scherteline, of whome ofte mention is made, for whose death the Emperour had appointed a great rewarde, as in the last boke is declared, was at this tyme reconciled to the Emperour and king Ferdinando, and recouered all his goodes. At the suite of the byshoppes and their consortes, the iudges of the chamber imperiall, with a solemne ceremonie, the fyrste of December do outlawe Marques Albert of Brandenburg, as a disturber of the publique quiet, and of the Empire, dispatching Marques Al¦bert outla∣wed. abroade their letters hither and thether, and the same set vp o∣penly, and permitted his lyfe and goodes to be spoiled of al mē. Duke Henry of Brunswicke, leauing Counte Plauie at ye siege of Blasseburg, the sixt day of December goeth with his power to Schuinfurte, whiche towne in dede being situated on the banke of the Riuer of Moene, the Marques kept with a strong garrison. The Duke had an ayde of Soldiours that came from Norinberge and Forcheme. But Marques Albert suspectinge the matter firste, what vitaile so euer was in places therea∣boutes, he brought it into the Towne, after he burnte all the
buildinges about it, to the intent he might take away the oc∣casion of besieging from the ennemie that tyme of the yeare. Wherfore Duke Henry, without any exploicte done, hauinge lost also many of his men, what tyme the Marques saleed out, and fought, retourneth home with no great company, passing through the countrie of Iohn Fridericke, without harme do∣ing. Whan Marques Albert vnderstode that he was outlawed by the chāber, he sueth to the Emperour, that he would reuerse the iudgement: But he sayeth howe he may not let the execu∣tion of the lawe. So than he refuseth the iudgement as corrup¦ted with bribes and rewardes, and maketh a protestation, in a wryting set forth of the same. But the iudges do commaūd the next prouinces of the Empire to se the thinge executed. This tyme was holden in Englande a parliament of al the The Godly lawes of good Ed∣ward repea∣led. States of the Realme. And for so muche as in kyng Edwardes tyme, there were actes made, of the Lordes supper, of ceremo∣nies, of the ministration of the Sacramentes, of the mariage of priestes, of the election of Byshoppes, of ordeining the mini∣sters of the churche, of the fourme of praying, and of such other like thinges. In this parliamēt it was enacted, that those sta∣tutes should take no place, but that all men should followe the same Religion, whiche was obserued at the death of kyng Hē∣ry. Moreouer, that no man should moleste or disquiet suche priestes and ministrs of the churche, as shalbe ordeined hereaf∣ter. Furthermore the diuorcement of Quene Katherine, the Quenes mother is pronoūced to haue bene onlawfull. Finally there was debated amonges the Nobles concerning the Que∣nes Quene Ma∣ry: affiaūced to the Empe¦rours sonne mariage, and a greed that she should be espoused to the Em∣perours sonne, king Philippe. Of whome there went a report before, that he should marie his Cosin, daughter to Emanuell king of Portugale, and to his aunte Elenore. Whan this was agreed vpon, the Emperour sendeth for Cardinall Poole. The cause why the Emperour would haue hym to staie in Germa∣ny was this (as many supposed) least he being of the bloud ro∣iall, and well beloued in his countrie, should haue bene some let to the mariage. In stede of those Byshoppes, whiche I sayd before were thrust in prison, were created others at this tyme. For the full confirmation of the Matrimony, the Emperour sent a moste honorable Ambassade into Englāde, which might affiaunce Quene Mary to kyng Philippe being absent. The 1554. chief Ambassadour was Counte de Egmonde. They arriuinge at London about the beginning of Ianuary, after they had treated of the matter a fewe dayes, bryng it to passe. The com∣mons
of the Realme toke this matter moste greuously, and di∣uerse also of the Nobilitie, and laiyng their heades together, Commotion in Kent. do rebelle. The chiefe authour and rynge leader hereof was syr Thomas Wiat. Who reysing a rebellion in Kente, made gre∣uous and bitter orations, against the Quene and her counsell, how through the mariage of a straunger, they wyll procure to the Realme of Englande a perpetuall and moste miserable bō∣dage, and seke also that the true Religion being extinguished, they may agayne establishe papistrie. And Kente is a countie by the sea coaste, nexte vnto Fraunce, by reason of the citie of Cantorbury right famouse. The brute of this commotion was brought to London the .xxv. daye of Ianuary, and not long af∣ter was heard also of Henry the Duke of Suffolke, who reysed vp men in Lecester shyre. Wherfore the Quene assembleth what power she coulde, ouer whome she maketh generall, Tho∣mas the Duke of Norfolke, lately deliuered out of prison. Who about the ende of the same moneth meting with his enemies at Rochester bridge, being forsaken of his soldiours, was faine The Duke of Norfolke forsaken of his men. to saue himselfe by flight, and with much payne came to Lon∣don. Wherfore amongest these tumultes, the Emperours Am∣bassadours to mitigate the rebellion & for their own daunger together, the first day of February take shipping & depart. And the same daie came the Quene into the citie of London, & ma∣king in her oration a greuous complaint against Wiat, decla∣reth what his intent is, and what loue she beareth vnto them, The quenes oration to yt commons in yelde hall. and sayeth howe she hath determined nothing of her mariage, without the consent of her counsell. For she hath liued a good part of her tyme a mayden, and doteth not so of mariage, but that she would remayne in the same kynde of lyfe styll, in case her Nobles and commons iudged mete that it shoulde so bee. For that the Realme should be in daunger bycause of her ma∣riage, and that all should be ful of slaughter, it should be to her moste greuous. Wherfore let them perseuer in doinge theyr du∣tie, and assiste her in reuenging the treason of wicked persons. For this is their dutie to doe, whiche haue commaunded her, as the lawefull heyre of her father, by common assente to bee Quene. Whan she had on thys wyse pacified them, she appoin∣ted certen to defende the citie, and assigneth the Erle of Pen∣broke to haue the charge abroade. Nowe was Wiat proclai∣med before by an Heraulte of Armes, Rebell and Traytour to the Realme, and to bryng hym in greater hatred there were read his requestes sent vnto the Quene, wherof the fyrste (as they saye) was, that he would haue the Quene in his custody, &
that it should be lawfull for him to determine concerning her mariage, and either to reteine or displace her counsellours at his pleasure. The third daye after was proclaimed a pardon to all the cōmon people, so that they would forsake the captaines and authours of rebellion, and to him that would bring Wiat prysoner, was appointed a great rewarde. The Duke of Suf∣folke was also accompted in the nūber of traitours. And wher¦as the same daye the conspiratours came nere vnto the citie, the Quene cutteth in two London bridge ouer the Ryuer of Temse, least any should go out to them. The next day thei come into Southwarke, supposing that the citezēs would haue ioy∣ned with them: But they were holden in with a garrison. In the meane season the Duke of Suffolke is taken in an other parte of the Realme, by the Erle of Huntington, whome the The Duke of Suffolke. Quene sent after him with horsemen. Whan the confederates had spent two daies at the citie, and traueled on that syde in vayne, taking an other way they passe ouer the Temse at King stone ten miles aboue London, and so marche towardes the ci∣tie. There at the laste was Wiat and his felowes intercepted, of that power, whiche the Quene had sent out with the Erle Wiat taken and commit¦ted to Prisō. of Penbroke, and committed to pryson. The next daye, whiche was the seuenth daye of the same moneth, proclamation was made, vnder payne of death, that who so euer had receiued any of these rebelles into his house, should brynge them forthe and present them immediatly. A fewe dayes after the Duke of Suf¦folke is brought prysoner to London. And the .xii. daye of Fe∣bruary, the Duke of Northumberlandes sonne, Guilford Dud∣ley, and the lady Iane his wyfe, the Duke of Suffolkes daugh∣ter The Lady Iane & her husband be∣headed. (which after kyng Edwarde I sayde was admitted Quene) were both beheaded, for that, contrary to the lawfull succession they had aspired to the crowne. And the Lady Ianes mishappe in a maner all men lamented, that so vertuouse a Lady, so wel brought vp, and so learned, should chaunce into so great a cala¦mitie, for none other cause verely, thā that she had not refused the kingdome offered. She made an oration to the people, very Godly and modeste, and calling to God for mercy, through Ie∣sus Christe, toke a clothe of one of her gentilwomen, and coue∣red her own face and bound it about her eies, and than offered to the hangeman her necke to be striken of. The self same daye was Corteney, Erle of Deuonshire, whome the Quene a fewe monethes before had deliuered from long captiuitie, agayn ta∣ken vpon suspicion of a conspiracie made. After this in Londō and Westminster, where the Quene than was, many were ca∣ried
to execution, and that of the Nobilitie not a fewe. Some of them also escaping, and amongest them a worthie Knight syr Peter Carrew, fled into Fraunce. The Duke of Suffolke al∣so The Duke of Suffolke beheaded. the .xxi. daye of February was beheaded, whan he had bene condemned foure dayes before. Whylest these thynges are done in Englande, Sibille of Cleaue, the wyfe of Iohn Fridericke, Duke of Saxon, the foresaed .xxi. daye of February departeth Sibille Du∣ches of Saxō departeth. at Weymer, and the .xi. daye after her the Prynce hym selfe, whan he had layen a whyle sicke. They died bothe in the true knowledge of God: And suerly he, whan his wyues tombe was a making in the churche, had commaunded a certen place to be reserued for hym by the syde therof, for that he should shortely followe after. Neyther was he disceaued in his opinion. For the thyrd daye of Marche, about ten of the clocke before noone, whan he had heard a Sermon liyng in his bed, callyng vppon Gods mercy, and commending his spirite vnto God, he flitted The Godly end of Iohn Friderick. out of this myserable life into the heauenly countrie. And nowe was the composition made betwene hym and Duke Augustus. For where the kyng of Denmarke, sendynge Ambassadours, as I sayd before, made great intercession, after much and diuerse, and almost an half yeares disceptation, now at this tyme was the matter appeased, vpon these condicions. Iohn Fridericke departeth from the Electourshyp, from Meis∣sen, and from the Townes of mettell mines. Duke Augustus disceasing without Heires males, all these thinges retourne to the Duke of Saxon & his heires males. In the meane tyme the Duke of Saxon may vse the name and the armes of Elec∣tourship, as well in sealing of letters as in coyninge of mo∣nie. Duke Augustus also graunteth to hym and to his sonnes certen townes and gouernementes, and for the debtes that were behynde of certen fourmer yeares whiche Duke Maurice had not payed to his sonnes, he payeth downe to the summe of an hondreth thousand crownes. He redemeth also the Castell An end ma∣de betwixt him and Au¦gustus. and towne of Conigsperge, standing in Franconie, and layed to morgage to the Bishop of Wirtemburge for .xl. thousande crownes, and restoreth it to the Duke of Saxon & his sonnes. Finally the league of inheritaunce of the house of Saxon, in these fourmer yeares infringed, is renewed, and established a∣gayne. The same composition Iohn Fridericke, lying on his deth bed, not long before he ended his lyfe, confirmed with his wryting and seale, and commaūded that his sonnes should doe likewyse. Wherfore with a noble courage vanquishyng all euilles and miseries, wherinto he chaunced, he died not in
prison, nor in the custody of foreine soldiours, wherūto he was appointed, but through the notable benefit of God set at li∣bertie, and retourning home to his wyfe, his children, and his owne religion, ended his lyfe moste peaceably, leauing to his sonnes and subiectes peace and quietnes. His wyfe also the Duchesse, hauing her owne wyshe; left this earthly mansion. The Godli∣nes of his wyfe. For often tymes she had saied, that she coulde be content to dye with all her harte, so that she might first se her husband safe & at libertie. And the same many times did she pray to the liuing God for, with many teares and sighinges. The same daye that she ended her lyfe, had Duke August a sonne borne named Alex∣ander. In these same dayes the rest of the straungers that were in Englande, yea and many of the same natiō, forsakyng their countrie for the alteration of Religion, and the Quenes procla¦matiōs, conueye them selues into Germany, wherof some tary at Wesell, some at Franckefurte, and many also at Strasburg. Iohn Alascus, a Polonian, a noble man borne, brother to Hie∣rome, a man of excellent learning, went thence before wynter Iohn Alasco with diuerse others into Dēmarke: But where as he was ther not very frendly receiued, by reason of his contrary opinion, touching the Lordes supper, and for thesame cause was denied to dwell in the lower partes of Saxony, he came at the length to Emden, a towne in east Friseland, and there remayned. The fourth day of Marche, the Quene of England set forth ecclesi∣asticall lawes, wherin she cōmaundeth bishops & their officers that they receiue no man. that is suspected of heresie, into holy Ecclesiasti∣cal lawes in Englande. orders, that they rote by cleane all heresies, that they abolyshe al naughtie and pestiferous bokes, that they prescribe an order to Scholemaisters, and preachers, that they take awaye from maried priestes their wyues and benefices, and inioyne them punishement condigne for their misdoing, yet so, that suche as by the cōsent of their wiues, wil proteste to make a diuorsemēt they do handle more gently, and suche as amende to be also re∣stored. Moreouer that all prayers at common supplications be sayde in the latin tongue, after the olde custome, that all holy daies be obserued, and the Ceremonies of fourmer tyme be re∣stored that bigge children before christened be confirmed of the Byshops, and that they be taught in Scholes howe to helpe a priest to saye Masse and serue him at the aultar. What tyme the kyng of Englande, Henry the eight banished the Byshop of Rome, as I sayd in the .ix. boke, he made this lawe amongest o∣thers, that no man should be admitted to any office or ecclesia∣stical dignitie, except he would first proteste by a solemne othe,
both him and his successours also to be supreme head of the En¦glishe churche, ouer the whiche the Byshop of Rome hathe no authoritie, neither to be any other thinge than Byshop of the citie of Rome, with whome they wyll haue nothinge to doe. Whiche othe the Quene whan she published these thinges, did nowe release also, and chargeth the Byshoppes, that from hen∣ceforth it be required of no man, secretly after a sorte restoryng the supremacie of the bishop of Rome. Where she speaketh of cō¦mon prayer, thus it is. By the kyng her fathers commaunde∣ment procession was sayde in the vulgare tongue: Wherin God was prayed to amonges other thinges, that he would deliuer them from the sedition, conspiracie and Tyranny of the By∣shop of Rome. This fourme therfore set forth in print, ye Quene nowe commaundeth to be abolished. Not long after the Lady Elizabeth the Quenes sister, a Lady very well learned, was cō∣mitted The Lady Elizabeth cō¦mitted to yt Tower. to the Tower, for that she was thought priuie to the fourmer conspiracie. At the ende of Marche, the ennemies of Marques Albert retourne to the siege of Schninfurt. In the moneth of Aprill came into Germany, out of England, men of great learning, sir Richarde Morisine, Knight, of whose Am∣bassade I haue spoken in the fourmer boke, sir Anthony Coke, and sir Iohn Cheke, Knightes, both the kinges scholemaisters and they went after into Italy. Thither came also Iohn Po∣met, Byshop of Winchester, whiche by reason of this alteratiō of Religion was displaced, as likewyse were diuerse others. About this time, where as the forces of the Duke of Flo∣rence, and the Byshop of Rome besieged Senes: Peter Strosse, who in the Frenche kinges name defended the citie, vnderstan∣ding The siege of Senes. certen thinges by espiall, set vpon them sodenly, and slew of them a great nomber. They notwithstanding, restoring their strength continued the siege. Wherfore the Frenche kyng hy∣reth about thre thousand Swisses to ayde those that were be∣sieged. The Duke of Florence had fiaunced his daughter to As∣canio the Byshop of Romes nephewe, and meanes were deui∣sed, to auaunce hym by this mariage. In these daies; the gouernour of Millan Ferdinando Gon∣zago, being sent for, came to the Emperour in Brabant: Thi∣ther came also Babtista Castaldus, whome the Emperour, as I sayde, in fourmer yeares sent Ambassadour into Hongarie. About the middes of Aprill, Sir Thomas Wiat was executed at London: Before he suffered, excusinge the Lady Elizabeth The death of Wiat. and the Erle of Deuonshyre diligently, he affirmed that they were not priuie to this conspiracie.
Than also the Archbishop of Cantorburye, the Bishop of London and Hugh Latimer were caried first to Windsore, and after to Ox∣ford, and after they had disputed with the diuines of that vniuersi∣ty, and also of Cambridge, perseueringe in theyr opinion, they are committed to prisone. At the same time againe the Quene helde a Parliament. Wherin she propounded two thinges chieflye, concer∣ning her owne mariage, and restoring the supremacy to the bishop A Parlamēt in England. of Rome: wherof she obteined the first vpon certain conditions, but this other, the Nobility being chiefly againste it she coulde not per∣swade. Cardinal Poole, after he had bene a certen time with them∣peror, wente to the French kinge, and was a counsellor of peace to them both: but he preuailed nothing. At thend of Aprill, Marques Albert receiuing lx. thousand crownes, sendeth away Duke D'an∣malle his prisoner, wher a little before he had lost Holansperge, an other fortresse of his dominion. Not long after, themperor sending his letters from Bruissels, where he was in the winter before out∣lawed by the chamber, he outlaweth him again, and complaininge that he should worke so much mischief vnpunished, commaundeth with wordes most waighty, that all Princes and states, but chiefly those that are nexte him, do put the Proclamation of outlawrye in execution. They had met twise before this at Roteburge to treate a peace: but wheras nothinge was concluded, themperoure decreed this againste him, and for the same the states assembled after, at Wuormes, al such as belonge to the prouince of the Rhine. Of the cōmon assemble of thempire yt shuld be holden at Auspurge, I haue spoken oftner then once: & because themperor, being impeched both with sicknes and also with warres, could not be ther, king Fernan∣do at his request, taketh this charge vppon him, and the Princes being of him desired to come, excused them selues by reason of the troublesome state of Germany. Themperor had all ready sent thi∣ther Thassemble of Auspurge certen of his counsell, and had also chosen out the Cardinall of Auspurge for the same purpose: but what time for the cause aboue named, no man came, the matter was differred til a time more con∣ueniēt. Marques Albert had written certen thinges spitefully and bitterly against the Norinbergians, as though in the former war they had priuely aided the French king and his fellowes, and had paid mony, as though they shuld haue had a great suspitiō of them∣peror, both they & also the bishops theyr fellowes, had spoken con∣tumelious words, that they shuld fauor the french king more then themperor, yt they them selues had attēpted this war against him, yt they do what they are able, yt the bishops shuld not kepe couenants as though they shuld seke to destroy al the nobility, as though they shoulde haue broken theyr promise expressed and signed in wry∣ting,
as though they should haue made a wicked and a cruel warre against the people of his dominion, as thoughe they had corrupted the iudgemente of the Chamber with bribes. He called them also traitors to theyr country, dispersing abrode libels therof, throughe out Germany. This knowen, the Norinbergians, whan after the taking of Holansperge, they had found certaine thinges of the lyke A wrytinge of the city of Norinberge against Mar¦ques Albert. sort, the .xviii. day of May make answer at large, and addressinge theyr wryting vnto all the states, both confute al thinges in ordre, and verify the most thinges of him, and recite, vpon what conditiō they gaue Monye to Duke Moris and his fellowes, and declare who is the author of the warre. For euen at the same time say they that the Princes intercessoures met at Hedelberge, he by his vaūt∣currers leuied as muche power as he possible mighte in Saxonye, and that is to be proued aswell by others as also by those letters, which one of his curriers, William Grumpache wrote vnto him the xxix. of March. Than if king Ferdinando, duke Moris, and the dukes of Brū∣swicke, had not imploid all theyr force, yea their liues and blud for theyr country, he would doubtlesse haue made an horrible destruc∣tion and waste through oute all Germany. He had driuen the By∣shops of Franckonie to conditions most vnreasonable: but that cō∣position the Emperor made after frustrate, and gaue them leaue to recouer againe theyr owne. Wherfore the Bishoppe of Bamberge wan againe certaine of his Townes and gouernments, longe be∣fore that he was receiued againe into the Emperors fauor, and e∣uen than, at what time by reason of his high treason, not onlye his landes and possessions, but his life also might haue bene taken frō him lawfully. Afterward by the Emperors commaundemente we made this league for the defence of oure prouinces. Than was e reconciled to the Emperor, and obteined of him the confirmation the compactes made, but yet vppon condition that he should be true to him and to the Empire: but he, all be it the Emperor permitted him no violence, in the time of the siege of Metz wrote home to hys captains, that they should feare the bishops, and vnlesse they wold restore that they had taken to worke force and violence. So they, in the monthe of Ianuary followinge, makinge an in∣uasion recouered manye thinges by force of armes. Wherefore the Bishop of Bamberge, admonished his fellowes to aide him accor∣ding to theyr league: we neuerthelesse, least we should do any thing rashly by sondrye letters and intermessagers, exhorted Marques Albert to peace: but he answeringe contemptuouslye and opprobri∣ously, said amongs other thinges, that the mo ennemies he had, the more honor and praise should he win.
This was in the beginning of March, and not long after began yt treatye at Hedelberge. And whan he ther refused moste ample and large conditions, his kinffolkes and allies, intercessors, exhorting him vnto peace, he went home and leuied an army, we being solli∣cited and moued againe by the Bishoppes, did than at the last pro∣fesse our selues his enemies. This was the last yere, the first of A∣prill. And wheras he him self hath moued a most cruell warre, af∣ter a very straunge example, and such as hath not bene heard of in Germany, he goeth about to charge vs with that crime. But assu∣redly it is vntrue, neither was ther euer any such like thinge com∣plained of vnto vs. But his soldiours haue omitted no kind of cru∣elty, and chauncing on a time to find plowmen in the field, hanged them vp both the fathers and the sonnes, in a manner before oure faces: and haue not only inforced women a liue, but haue also dig∣ged them vp whan they haue bene dead. The last yere in ye moneth of May, a certaine gentelman of Franconie, Nicholas Eglofsten, was inforced to yelde vp his castell of Conrute: but he did not on∣ly The cruell actes of Mar¦ques Albert. burne it, but also fineding ther about a fortye country men, and with them the minister of the church, commaunded them to be hā∣ged vp all in an Orchard adioyning to the Castel, and caried away with him his wife and his mother Prisoners. He wente aboute in dede to excuse this matter by letters to the Nobility of Franconie, but nothing to the purpose. How he also intreated his prisonners, both our men and the pledges of Bamberge whiche he haled with him into Saxonie can declare, and all other such as he hath detei∣ned in prisone. For bothe he demaunded of them an vnreasonable summe of mony, and mooste greuously tormented them vppon the racke, and also sterued them for honger and cold, so that many di∣ed, and the residue hauing their limmes starke deade, by reason of the cold, wer faine to haue them cut of and taken away. And wher∣as certain of them, had nothing, either to paye their raunsome or to liue by, he forbad they shoulde haue any meate geuen them. And if the souldioures of the warde, being vanquished with their lamen∣tations and pitiful cry, had not somtime cast them a piece of bread, that was so drye and moulded with longe kepinge, that no Cattell nor brute beastes, vnlesse it were for extreme honger, woulde haue touched, they had died all for want of meate. And all be it yt som of them made a piece of mony by theyr fren∣des, yet hardly could they therfore get a little straw & water. Wher¦fore certaine were staruen for honger and thurste, not onlye in the terrible darknesse, but also in the stench of the prison, in the mids of thordure, Uermen, & venemous beastes. And whan they had thus perished, ye coarses wer not than drawn out, nor remoued frō thēce
but lefte with them that were aliue there, and increased the Prison with stench. But howe gently we haue intreated his Prisonners, both captaines and certen centurions, and euen suche as deserued worst of vs, and haue rendred them selues without condition, that may be knowen by their owne testimony. And howe vnwilling he is to haue peace, that may well appeare by the two last treaties of Roteburge, (as you know) moste noble Princes, which either wer there your selues, or sente thither your ambassadoures. For althoughe we susteined by him wonderfull losse and cala∣mity, and all be it he was already outlawed, yet in the former con∣uention we made this offer That if he wold leaue his warre, and demeane him selfe well from henceforth, and woulde trye the mat∣ter by the law, we would also lay a part oure weapons, and put the matter to tharbitrement of the Princes that were intercessours, or to the iudgement of themperor and states of the Empire: the same offer made the Bishoppes, by the aduise and consente of the ambas∣sadours of King Ferdinando: The counselloures also of the Prin∣ces intercessoures, for the loue of peace added this moreouer, that if the states of Franconie, that be in confederacy, would promise to restore him his prouince, as it was than, they shoulde cease warre on both sides, and kepe peace from henceforth, and that the Publi∣cation, in that behalf should be frustrate, and the whole controuer∣sy committed to a frendly and lawfull treaty. But he in a contempt and mockery called the intercessors his e∣nemies procurers, and saide he woulde not suffer him selfe to be broughte into suche distresse, neither did he couet to haue this out∣lawry as yet reuearsed, and would also put in hazard the reaste of that he had, and spake many such other like things, both rashly, op∣probriously and with threatninges, to the highest, meane, and low∣est degrees, as it is to be proued by those letters, that are in Printe at Holansperge. After, at the nexte assemble, althoughe we offered more largely, yet was he nothing the rather inclined to peace, yea, he went about craftes & policies, neither commendable, nor prince∣like. For at the request of the intercessors, committinge the whole matter to the Emperor and certen Princes, he promised not to at∣tempt longer warre, and that same compromise, themperor sending letters from Bruissels the fourth of Aprill, did ratifye, and willed the states of Frankonie, that they should leaue warre also, and cō∣mit the cause to his care and fidelity. And this did Marques Albert for this intent ful craftely, as it appeareth by such thinges as folowed, yt both he might staye them∣peror that he shuld not cōmaūd certen prouinces of thempire to put the outlawry in execution, & that he him self also might haue space
to leuy an army, which he was gatheringe that time in all places, to haue oppressed vs vppon a soden: but through Gods benefit the matter was detected, by his own letters at the same time intercep∣ted, which he sent hither and thither to his chief Captains and Cē∣turions, wherin was this: that he hath admitted the treaty of Rote¦burge, for this purpose only, that in the meane season, he may pre∣pare him self, and set vpon his enemies: and nowe if thintercessors shal haply require them to forsake their enseignes, let them not o∣bey, but kepe together, and in no wise scatter abrode: and for an ex∣cuse let them alledge this cause, that they haue many months wa∣ges owing them, and therfore may not depart before they be paid, but say, how they will remaine in those parties without any hurte doing, til they haue receiued theyr mony. Hitherto appertaine also those letters of his, wherin he commaundeth his chieftaines, wyth out delay to set vpon al men, whosoeuer they be, whan this treason therfore was brought to light, and wheras our men demaunded of of his ambassadors, sent to Roteburge, whether he would stand to the compromise, and could haue no certain answer: by the aduise of king Ferdinandoes ambassadors, we wer constraind to commit the matter vnto God first and to themperor and thempire, as oure let∣ters sent to themperor the same time declare. And seing the matter is thus, and for so much, as euery man may easily perceiue, by such thinges as we haue truelye rehearsed, that we are hitherto driuen by so manye railinges, reproches and displeasures, to repulse his fury and violence, that we haue obeied the commaundement of the high and chief Magistrate, therefore we beseche all men, that loue vertue and honesty, and hate violence and iniurye, to consider dili∣gently, that vnlesse the sentence geuen shoulde be put in execution, and this his boldnesse be repressed, how great daunger hangeth o∣uer not vs only, but them also. Wherfore let no man aid or assist him, or geue him any succoring place or refuge, but as it becommeth noble Princes, & such as loue their country, we wish they would not only not impeche thexecuti∣on of the commaundement, but that they them selues also would se the thinge executed to the vttermooste of theyr power, and woorke so herein, that all others may be made afraide by his example. And that also they geue no creadite to hys famous libels and slaunders sette forthe agaynste vs, and if he shall againe attempt anye thinge againste vs that they further hym not wyth theyr aide or Counsell, we requyre them moste earnestlye. Marques Albert receiuing mony of duke D'anmalle, as before is said, hasteth into Saxony, and there hiringe soldiors in the monthe of Maye, goeth
to Schuinfurt priuely, and the tenth daye of Iune, with viii. hun∣dreth horsmen, and vii. enseigns of fotemen, in the dawning of the Marques Al. goeth to Su∣infort. day, he entreth the towne, on that side that was not besieged. And for because they wer in great penury of al things, the third day af∣ter whan he had spoyled the Towne, in the night he leadeth out al the soldiors, aswel horsmen as fotemen to the nombre of xviii. en∣seignes with the artillery, leauing no ward at al to kepe the gates and taketh his iourny to Kitzing, a town standing beneath on the riuer of Moene. Whan it was now light day, and thenemies per∣ceiued the gates vnfurnished, at the sound of the Trōpet, they pre∣pare them selues euery man to follow and pursue after him: but di∣uers, and that chiefly the soldiors of the Duke of Brunswick, wer commaunded of him to enter the towne, who spoile and destroy all that was left. Wherfore the chief captains and gouernours of the field, least through the delay and taryinge of the reaste, Marques Albert should haue time to escape, set the towne on fire in diuers & sondry places: so they being driuen to depart, repair vnto tharmy. And albeit the Marques was gon certain hours before them, yet for that he was so letted and hindred with thordenaunce, yt he could make no speade, he was staide of the forewarde, and with them he bickereth: but the reast of tharmy approching, whan he saw him self to weake for so great a multitude, exhortinge his men to make the best shift they can, euery mā for him self (he) accompanied with His flight. a few horsmen, goeth spedely out of sight, and by swimming ouer ye riuer to Kitzing, escapeth, losing all his munition and cariage. The viii. day after was the Castell of Blasseburgh, his chiefest Fortresse rendred vp, and came into the handes of king Ferdinan∣do, when the Chauncelour of Boheme, Counte Plauie, which bese∣ged the same continually was dead a little before. Thus therefore Marques Albert was expulsed and driuen out of all his domini∣on. Whilest these thinges were done in Franconie, Henry Duke of Brunswicke, in the lower partes of Darony, compelleth diuers, aswell Princes as Cities, and many of the Nobility to pay mony, and be vnder his subiectiō, as the Duke of Megelburge, the dukes of Luneburge, the Princes Anhaldes, and Earles of Mansfelde: An other part also of his and the bishops power, hauing discomfi∣ted the Marques, & taken Schuinfurt, punished right sore Rote∣burge, a Towne imperiall, and Counte Henneberge amonges o∣thers, and were thus bent, that except they might recouer the char¦ges of the warre, which they said appartained to all men, they pre∣tended to worke much violence: but through mediation the matter was appeased, and the war ceased. In manner about this time, Charles duke of Sauoy, depriued
of a great part of his dominion, as I tolde you in the tenth booke, departeth oute of this life, leauinge his sonne Philibert his heyre, The death of Charles D. of Sauoy. who had serued themperor in his warres now many yeares. King Fernando setting forth of late a Proclamation, had commaunded his subiectes, that nothing should be altered in the Sacramente of thanckes geuing, and that after thold custom, such as receiued the Lordes supper, should be contented with thone kind as they terme it: but the Nobles, Gentlemen, and Cities, wheras they had diuers times before sued to him herein, now again they require him most humblye by theyr letters, and alledginge manye teasons, that they might he permitted to receiue the whole Supper of the Lorde, ac∣cording to the commaundement and institution of Christe, and cu∣stome of the primatiue Churche. Unto these letters of theyrs, the xxiii. of Iune, the king ausweringe from Uienne, I had full little The letters of king Far∣dinando to his subiectes of the Lords Supper. thought (saith he) that you would haue called in question that pro∣clamation of mine, and haue found cauillations therin. For I mēt only that my subiectes should perseuer in thauncient and true Re∣ligion, and obedience of the Catholicke church, without the which, no man can obtain saluation, and that they should receiue this sa∣crament, the chiefest of all others, after the law and custome of the church, and neither through the corrupt opinions of certain, or for curiosity and pride also, should swarue from that duty, which they both owe to the church and also to the Magistrate. This is verely the mind and effect of the same proclamation: nether is it any new thing that I commaunded, but an old ordinaunce, which hath ben brought as it wer by hād vnto my progenitors, Emperors, kings, and Dukes of Austrich, and to me also, whan I began to gouerne the common wealth, was deduced, and vnto this time, by me dili∣gently, as becommeth a Christen Prince, obserued, and at sondrye times to my people also inioyned that they shoulde remayne in the same. Wherfore I supposed that you would not haue attempted a¦ny thyng against this my proclamacion, which in all other thinges do contende, that there should be no alteraciō, and that your lawes and liberties myght remaine vnto you whole. For certenly that you do, is a new deuise, and lately of you conceaued by a certayne opi∣nion, and now also reasoned at large, as though it were lawful for you to iudge of my commaundementes, whiche am your chiefe and supreme magistrate, or as though the same ought of ryght to be per¦mitted you, which certen yeres now diuers of you, of your own ac∣cord, contrary to the lawes of the church and my will, haue taken vpon you priuately to vsurpe. But because the question is harde & ful of difficulty, as you also affirme, I will doubtles thincke more therupon, and whan time is, make such answer, that it may be well
perceiued, that I do not tender a little the saluation of my people: but in the meane time I loke for al obediēce of you, and trust that you wil do nothing against my proclamation. Unto this the states The states make aswer to yt Kinges letters. afterward answer again by wryting: And the same (say they) that we haue oft times spoken before of our sauiour Christes commaū∣dement, most puissant king, we now repete again. For he did insti∣tute his supper with plain and manifest words, that after the same sort, that he him self prescribeth, it might be receiued of al men: ne∣ther is it lawfull for any man mortall to alter hys institution. It may be proued also that this was the manner of thauncient Churche, and the same that is vsed now a daies, to haue crept in by little and little. For euen the counsel of Constance graunteth that ye same was so instituted of Christ. Wher therfore thys cōcerneth our saluation, certainly neither curiosity nor pride hath moued vs here vnto. Wherby we truste the rather, that you will refer your consul∣tation to the commaundement of Christ and his Apostles, and con∣sent of the primatiue Church, and will not that our consciēce shuld be burthened, which thing that it might please you to do, we besech you for the honor of God, and the glorye of his name, and for oure own saluation. We do acknowledge you, and that moste gladlye to be our high Magistrate geuen vs of God, and there is nothing in this world, but that you both may & ought to loke for at our hāds, if it lie in vs to do. But in this one matter we desire you to be fa∣uorable to vs. In the byshop of Wirciburges dominion ther is an Abbay of Mōkes, called Newstat. The Abbot therof, Ihon Frise, Thabbot of Newstat ac∣cused of He∣risye. after he came in suspition of Lutheranisme, the fift day of May he is cited, to come the vi. day to Wirciburge, and to answer vnto cer∣tain interrogatories. And the questions were these. Whether it be lawful to sweare: whether anye man be bounden by his othe, whe∣ther it be lawful to make a vow of Chastity, pouerty and obediēce, Interrogato¦ries mini∣stred to him. whether such manner of vowes do binde, whether becometh better the ministers of the church, mariage or singlenesse, whether ther be one true and Apostolical church, whether the same, as the spouse of Christ, be continually gouerned by the holy ghost, whether she can alwaies discern true and holsom thyngs, whether the same by rea∣son of her head, Christes vicar, be called rightly ye church of Rome, whether all the bokes of both Testaments, that be in the Cannon, be lawful and true, whether the holy scripture ought to be expoun∣ded, after the mind of the holy fathers, the doctors of the Church & counsels, and not after thopinion of Luther and others of the lyke sort, whether that besides the Scriptures, ther is nede also of other traditions as be those of the Apostles and such other like, whether the same faith, aucthority and obedience oughte to be geuen to the
same traditiōs, as to the holy scripture, whether we ought to obay ye ciuill magistrate in politick matters, & in holy things, thecclesi∣asticall ordinary, whether ther be vii. sacraments of the Churche. whether children oughte to be Christened, whether they oughte to Christen in the Latin tounge, with Salt, Oile, Water, Charactes and exorcismes, whether that by baptisme be cleane putte awaye Originall sinne, in such sort, that concupiscence, which remaineth loseth the name of the same sinne, whether the breade be chaunged and consecrated into the body, and the wine into the blud of Christ by the vertue of the wordes which the Priest pronounceth, & whe∣ther it do so remaine, althoughe it be not by and by receiued, whe∣ther the Sacrament being after this sort consecrated is to be wor∣shipped, whan either it is borne aboute for the honor of Christe, or caried vnto sickfolkes, or also be reserued in the pix, whether Christ is to be worshipped vnder the forme of bread and wine, whether Christ be wholly vnderneath either kinde, whether the confession of sinnes do prepare a man to the worthy receiuing of the Sacra∣ment, whether Masse be a true and continuall sacrifice, whether yt the Cannon of the masse is to be reteined, whether the Sacramēt of confirming is to be vsed, whether ther be iii. parts of penaunce, contrition, confession, and satisfaction, whether the priest may for∣geue his sinnes, which hath not before confessed the same, whether Priestes onlye haue authoritye of the keyes, whether the soules of good men do loue vs, whether they pray to God for vs, whether we ought to pray vnto Sainctes, whether sainets Holy daies oughte to be obserued, whether the relikes of Sainctes oughte to be wor∣shipped, whether the soules of the godly not yet repurged, be relie∣ued with Masses, Praiers, Fastinges and Almose dedes, whether there be a place of Purgatory, whether the time of Lent and other times of fasting appoynted by the Churche oughte to be obserued, whether on daies by the Church forboden, we ought to abstain frō eating of flesh, whether the people ought to be stirred vp vnto reli∣gion by Ceremonies, what Ceremonies be godly, and whiche not, Unto these dothe he make answer, the xxvii daye of May at large: And althoughe he confirmed his sayinges with the Testimonies not only of scripture, but of the doctors also, yet was he condemned the xxv. of Iune, and depriued of all his function. About thend of Iune, the french king marching with an army out of Chāpaigne, The frenchē Kinge mua∣deth thempe¦rours coun∣tries. Mariburge taken. taketh the way to the riuer of Mase, and inuading the Emperors country ioyning to Tournay, surpriseth amonge many other thin∣ges. The Townes of Bouine and Dinaunt, spoyleth them, and ra∣seth the castels there, and taking Mariburg, fortifieth it with mu∣nition and garrison. Themperor going out of Bruissels with hys
army commeth to Namures, which is a town by the riuer of Sa∣bie v. miles beneath Dinant. The French king appeared to haue desired the battell: but whan the time was tracted, he tourneth in∣to Henault, and taketh Biuse a town and castel of Quene Maries the Lady Regent of Flaunders, wher she had a house of pleasure, all the which he spoileth and burneth, and destroyeth all the coun∣try, farre and neare with spoyling and burning. After he commeth to the siege of Rentie, a towne in the borders of Artois: but at the Emperors comming, whose army was now wholly assembled, the siege was leuied, after light conflictes had, and skirmishing on ei∣ther side. This was in the moneth of August, wheras in a manner the same time, the kinges armye in Italy, at the conduite of Peter Strosse, set vpon by themperors power, wherof was gouernor the Marques of Marignan, receiued a great ouerthrow. Uery many of the Swisses were slain, which as I said before wer sent thither by the king. In the meane time the Emperors sonne Phillip, the xix. day of Kinge Phil∣lip arriueth in England. Iuly, arriueth in England with a Nauy oute of Spaine, and the fourth day after in the euening, commeth to Winchester, where the Quene taried for him, and going to the Cathedrall Churche, wyth all the Nobility before him, was receiued of the bishop of Winche∣ster and certaine others. Emonges other Princes there was with him the Duke of Alua. The next day he goeth to the Quene, & tal∣king with her long and much, verye familiarely, the seconde daye, which was kept holy to S. Iames the Patrone of Spain, the ma∣riage was solempnised: And ther was themperors ambassadoure, who affirmed openly, howe themperor had geuen to his sonne for his mariage, the kingdom of Naples. Afterwardes departing frō thence, at the last he entred into London the head city with greate pompe and solempnitie. In the moneth of August certen states of thempire mete again at Wourmes, for that themperor called vpon thexecution against Marques Albert. Who being expulsed out of his country, went first into Loraine, and after into Fraunce, wher the king denied him not intertainmente. And because it was to be feared least he should attempt something, least he shoulde make a roade into Alsatia or the parties neare vnto it: they that are of the prouince of Rhine, about thend of Septembre, sent certen guidōs of horsmen into the borders of Loraine to kepe the passages. But they at the last without any exploict done, returne home, not with∣out the domage of them wher they lay. In the moneth of Octobre they assemble again at Frankfurt, both for this, and for other cau∣ses. Unto the which conuention wer broughte the letters of Mar∣ques Albert, wherin he complaineth of his enemies last war, and
speaking much of yt bishop of Arras, he taunteth spitefully amōges others, the bishops of Treues and Strasburge and also the Lantz The frenche kinges let∣ters. graue, and calleth those bloudy horsmen, that laye in waite for hys life. There were letters also red in the name of the Frenche kinge, wrytten in the Dutch tonge the first day of Octobre. And speaking of thold amitie of Fraunce and Germany, our eunemies, are who∣ly addict, saith he, to infringe the same: And certen yeres past, they wrought the matter so far, that my father was declared an enemy: but I neuerthelesse, when about two yeres since the state of them∣pire was miserable and cleane out of order, forgetting the offences past, declared plainly, what good will I bare you, following here in the fotesteps of my progenitors, which soughte euer to auaunce your honor and dignity. For it can not be proued that euer they of∣fered you wronge: but our aduersaries haue many waies, gone a∣boute to plucke from you all your liberties and goodes also, what time they haue deuised sondry policies not only to exact mony, but haue also kindled factions betwene noble houses; as you knowe rightwell: And albeit the case standeth thus, yet through their pro∣curement, I heare say, howe certaine states, which are in dede my neighbors, of whom verely I loked for no such thing, haue moued warre against me, wher they haue proclaimed the same before. Which doubtles is to me great maruel; and so much the more in dede, for that there is no quarrell betwixt vs. For in that, which is commonly spoken of Marques Albert, as though I shoulde aide him against you, I receiue wrong. For inasmuch as I shewe him fauor. I do it both for the same old frendship, whiche I saide hathe bene alwaies betwene vs and also for that this hath bene euer the custome and entertainment of the kinges of Fraunce, that Pryn∣ces in aduersity, especiallye Germaines, shoulde haue with them a safe refuge and succoring place It were much more pleasaunte to me surely, to se him in honor at home, and all thinges safe and wel, than to se him thus discomfited, expulsed and destitute of all succor: I would haue wished also, that he had not chaunced into this cala∣mity, or at the least wise might now be reconciled vpon reasonable conditions. And for so much as through the fault of mine aduersa∣ry he is brought into this distresse, which he hathe pronounced the same thing frustrate, and after hath ratified it? why shuld I be had in suspition, for hauinge compassion of his misfortune? but that I shuld geue him aid against thempire, it neuer came in my thought: neither will I do it here after, and that you maye be assured of, so that you again do nothing against the lawes of amity. And wheras youu ought to loke for nothing els of me but that is peaceable and frendlye, I require of you againe, that you be not circumuented
through their craftes, which neither loue me nor you, so that either you should make warre your selues with me, or aid them with men and monye. For this is theyr endeuor, that they maye make theyr priuate affaires common. But rather obserue amity, and take the condition that is offered you. And what you intende herein, I re∣quire you to aduertise me plainly by the bearer hereof: Moreouer, that according to thauncient custome and pacification of Passaw, my ambassadors, which shal come to the next assemble of thempire may haue safeconduit. Unto this was made answer, how the horsmen that were sente to the frontiers of Loraine, concerned none iniury towardes him, but was done for this intent, that in case Marques Albert should make anye sodaine inuasion, his enterprise mighte be disapoynted: touching his Ambassadoures and the safeconduit, for so muche as they haue no commission hereof, they will aduertise theyr princes, and distrust not but they will do herein, that shall be reasonable. About thend of Octobre, themperor geueth ouer to his sōne Phil∣lip Thempeor geueth to his sonne Phyl∣lip the duke∣dom of Mil∣lan. the Dukedome of Millan, sendinge messagers to inuest him herein with accustomed Ceremonies. The French kinge leuiynge his siege from Rentie, as before is said, and not long after dischar∣ging the Swisses, he placed the reast of his soldiors in garrisons. And themperor not far from Hesdine, which in the yeare before he toke and ouerthrew (as is said) espying a place conuenient, began a new fortification of a Towne, and to thintent he might bringe it to passe, he maintaineth an army, whiche in the monthe of Nouem∣bre, destroyeth all Picardy with spoyling and burning as farre as Amias. Wherefore the whole force and violence of the warre ligh∣ted vppon the pore and miserable people on either side. Afterwarde themperor discharging the reast of his armye, interteined still a le∣gion or two for him self. The same time the French king sēt a new power into Italy, and amonges others certaine Almaignes, to re∣lieue them of Senes, whome the Emperors force and the dukes of Florence besieged hotely. At the .xii. day of Nouembre was holden a Parliament in Eng∣land. For the which Cardinall Poole comming oute of Brabant, wheras certen ambassadors were commen out of England, to cō∣duit Cardinall Poole arri∣ueth in Eng¦land. him, and amonges them the Lord Paget, the xxiii. of Nouem∣bre he came to London, being right honorably receiued, in all pla∣ces, whersoeuer he came, and was immediatly restored to his blud and house of inheritance with common assent and consēt, from the which king Henry the eight had displaced him. The v. day after he came into the Parliament house, and in the presence of king Phil∣lip and the Quene, whā he had shewed the cause of his ambassade,
he exhorteth them to return to the cōmunion of the church, & restore to the most holy father the bishop of Rome his due authority, who wil graunt vnto thē all clemency & gentlenes: he admonisheth thē also, to geue God thankes, which hath geuen them such a king & a Quene: Finally, wher they haue restored him to his house & inhe∣ritance, he taketh it for a very great benefit, and saith he is so mu∣ch the more boūden, to restore them again to the heauēly court and coūtry, which he wisheth most of al other things. Whē he had spokē to this effect, he goth a part. Ther the bishop of Winchester being Chancelor, repeting his oration, and with many words exhorting thē to vnity and concord, saith they are boūden to geue God great thankes, who of his vnspeakable mercy hath raised them vp a pro¦phet of their owne sede, whiche is, that most honorable Cardinall, which is wholy inclined vnto their saluation. The next day, when the Nobility and commons had approued thoration & requests of cardinal Poole, there was drawne a fourme of a petition, wherin they beseche the King and the Quene, that they would make inter∣cession to him. The some of that supplication was this. How it re∣pented them sore of the scisme, for that they haue denied their obe∣dience to the Apostolicall seat, and that they haue consented to the decrees made against the same: but from henceforth they wil be at the commaundemente of him and the Quene, and will do all that euer they can, that all such lawes and statutes may be abrogated the same Parlament: Wherfore they mooste humbly beseche theyr highnesse, that they wold be meanes, and bring to passe, that being absolued from the sinnes and censures, whith they haue commit∣ted againste the lawes of the Church, they may be receiued again England re∣turneth to her vomit. as penitent children into the bosome of Christes church, that from henceforth they may serue God in the obedience of the sea and Bi∣shoppes of Rome, to the glorye of his name, and increase of theyr owne saluation. An other day, whan the King and the Quene and Cardinall Poole were present: the Chaunceloure standeth vp and pronounceth openly, what the states had determined concerninge the request of the Bishoppe of Romes Legate: Afterwarde dothe he exhibite the supplication aforesaide comprised in wrytinge and subscribed, to the Kinge and the Quene, beseching them to receiue it. They when they had opened it, deliuer it againe to the Chaun∣celoure to reade. Than he demaundeth of all the companye, whether they be contente herewith? whiche whan they hadde affirmed, the Kinge and the Quene arrise, and deliuer it to the Cardinal. Whan he had red it, he exhibiteth vnto them the letters of his commission. And than were the same red, that all men mighte perceiue, that he had
authority geuen him by the Bishop of Rome to assoile them. After he maketh an oration, and declareth howe acceptable a thing vnto God is repentaunce, and how much thaungels in heauen reioyse for a penitent sinner, and alledging for the purpose manye exam∣ples, geueth God thanckes, which hath put in them a minde desi∣rous of amendement This done, he arriseth: likewise do the King and the Quene, and knele down vpon theyr knees. There he than calling vppon the high power and mercy of God, besecheth him to loke mercifully vppon the people, and pardone their offences: And affirming him self to be sent therfore from the highe Bishop, Chri∣stes vicar, to geue them absolution, lifting vp and stretching forth The Cardi∣nal geueth yt Lordes abso¦lution. his hand, as their manner is, blesseth the whole multitude, and as¦soileth them. After this, they go to the chappell: Here was geuinge thanckes vnto God, playing of the Organes, sounding of trōpets, and all tokens shewed of mirth and gladnesse, as at such times is accustomed. They that knew Cardinal Poole before, by his talke and manner of liuing, marueled much at this his doing, and loked for other manner of stuffe at his hand. The xviii. day of Decembre themperor addressing his letters frō Bruissels, vnto all the states of thempire. Upon how waighty and vrgēt causes (saith he) Mar∣ques The Empe∣rors letters against Mar¦ques Albert. Albert the last yere was outlawed by the iudges of ye chābre, & condemned of treason, you haue had certen knowledge by the let¦ters, which than was set vp openly, and those also which came frō vs afterward. And for so muche as he perseuereth obstinatelye in his troublesome and seditious purposes, and vndoubtedly goeth a¦bout more mischief, to thintent he may vexe and plage again oure natiue country of Germany: Again, forasmuch as he hath hys re∣course into sondry places ther, which he taketh for starting holes, & refuge as I am credily informed, I thought it necessary for the cōmon countries sake, to renue ye former decrees. Especially since I beleue there is none of you, but both he loueth his countrye, and wold prouide for ye safegard of him self, his lands & subiects, & also wold haue thenterprises of him, and his adherents impeched & let∣ted. Wherfore I charge & commaūd vnder the same penalties be∣fore expressed, yt no man aid him or his felowes with any thing, ne¦ther with help nor counsel, relief, mony, vitails, nor artillery: And also yt nether he nor his fellowes be permitted to make any power or leuy soldiors in any of theyr dominiōs, & if he attempt any such thing, yt euerye man let him by alwaies possible, and kepe in theyr people and subiectes, that they run not oute to him, and such as be offēders, and will not obey this commaundemente to punishe ex∣tremely. These letters were set vp in all places in Print. At the .xxix. of Decembre, king Ferdinando, for because of the coū∣sel,
wherof I haue spoken before, yt it shuld be holden at Auspurge, came thither: and fineding no man there, two daies after, sendinge Thimperial counsell of Auspurge. both letters and messagers, he exhorteth the princes, yt for so much as they should treat of most waightye affaires of the Empire, they would repare thither with spede: he him self although to his great losse and hindraunce, leauing his own country, is commen thither: yt he might consult with them of the common weale, and deuise suche meanes as be profitable & necessary for thafflicted state of Germa∣ny: wherfore let them come thē selues, & not do the thinge by theyr deputies: for so the waightines of the cause requireth: and thempe∣ror his brother hath geuē him ful authority to treat, neither wil he tary them any longer, than he neades must. Aboute the middes of Ianuary breaketh vp the Parliament at London. Amonges ma∣ny other thinges, the restoring of Cardinall Poole, was enacted. Thactes also of kings of former time concerning the punishing of 1555. heretickes, and authority of bishops, were renued: but chieflye the supremacy of the bishop of Rome was wholye restored, and all the lawes and statutes that had ben made against the sea of Rome by the space of xx. yeares, were condempned and abolished. Uery ma∣ny supposed, that at the same Parliament king Phillip shuld haue ben crowned: but herein was nothing done. In the beginninge of February, fiue were condemned at London to suffer, because they would not returne to the Romish Religion, men of excellent lear∣ning, Ihon Hoper, Bishop of Glocester, Ihon Bradford, Laurēce Fiue cōdēnd at London for the Gos∣pell. Saunders, Rolland Tailler, Doctoure of the ciuil law, and Ihon Rogers: And he was burned at London, where he had taught, but the reast were caried euery man home, to Glocester, Manchester, Couentry, and Hadley, and ended their liues with the like punish∣ment, all right constantly. A little after, also the Bishoppe of Saint Dauid was condem∣ned, and sent home to suffer. It was wrytten than out of Englād, that ambassadoures woulde go to Rome in the name of the whole Realme, which shuld both geue the bishop thankes for hys greate clemēcy, which he hathe shewed towardes them, and promise him also from henceforth al obedience and fidelitye. The v. daye of Fe∣bruary, king Ferdinando, though verye fewe Princes were there, beginneth the treaty at Auspurge. How they them selues knowe, for howe waightye and neadefull causes the Emperoure had ap∣poynted this conuention, first at Wuolmes, after in this Citye, to begin at the middes of Nouember: And he in dede at the request & aduise of his brother wished yt the matter might haue ben cōmen¦ced at the same time: Howe be it in puttinge his thinges in ordre at home, that in his absence all thinges mighte be well gouerned, and
the neare ennemye be resisted, in case he made anye enterprise, he was impeched and letted. Notwithstandinge at the xxix. of Nouember he came hither at the laste, to consulte for the common wealth Which thinge also the Emperoure desireth chiefly, that is to wit, that what so euer cōcer∣neth Goddes glorye, and the tranquillitye of the Empire, the same might by the common consente of them all be here determined: For how much hath bene alwais themperors dilligence, studye, paine; and care, for the zeale he hath to the common country, that both the publicke quiet, and offences being taken away, Religion might be established, that is so wel tried and knowen: both by all others, and also by the decrees that were made in the two laste assembles, that it nedeth no further declaration. What so euer also he promised at the same time to do, he perfourmed in dede: but how pernitious cō∣motions as well ciuill as foreine haue beyond al expectation chaū∣ced sence, by the which all those so holsome decrees were not onlye letted and disturbed, but also taken away, to the greate damage of the common weale, that is so manifest to all men, that it nedeth no further rehersall: but herein was not the Emperour to be blamed, who gaue none occasion of offence vnto any man, and hath alwais dealt vprightlye and constantlye, and whatsoeuer the sclaunder of his aduersaries be, hath chiefly had respecte to the common profit: neither doubteth he but they also beleue ye same, and hold him clear∣ged in this behalf. Wher therfore to remeadye these euils, thempe∣ror hath called this counsell, he was certenly purposed to haue ben present him self at the whole treatye, but deteined by sicknesse and other affaires, he could not: yet neuerthelesse he would not, that the thing should be longer delaied, to thintent verely that bothe this e∣uill increasing might be restrained, and he mighte do his duetye to his country, which he loueth aboue all other thinges. Wherfore he hath made him his Uicegerent, and geuen him ful authoritye, that together with them he maye deuise meanes bothe honourable and also profitable for the common weale, and for the same purpose hathe sente certen men, and ioyned them with him in commission to treat of the same: and the chief and principal matter shalbe concerning Religion: For this so long a dissention hath ben the head and welspringe of all these tumultes and miseries: & that these many yeares now, so manye thousandes haue loste not oulye their liues, but also their souls and eternal saluation, is altogether long of this: and that same is so manifestly known, that it neadeth no further declaration: For doubtles it is a lamentable and an hea¦uy sight, that those which are al of one baptime, name, Empire, and lāguage, shuld be thus torn a sōdre, in the professiō of ye same faith,
which so many hundreth yeares they haue receiued of their elders, as it were deliuered from hand to hand: but the case is much more greuous, for that there ariseth daily not one sect or two, but diuers, whilest euery man wil maintain his own opinion. Whiche thinge doubtlesse is bothe to the reproche of God, and breaketh the bonde of charity, and disturbeth mennes mindes, in such sort that the vul∣gare people knoweth not what in the world to beleue, but the grea∣test mischief of all is, that in these so greate erroures, very many by little and little growe vp in, and that there be found diuers, as wel of the chiefest Nobility, as of others, which setting cocke on houpe; beleue nothinge at all, neither regard they what, reason, what, ho∣nesty, or what thing consciēce doth prescribe: and this is done both to the great hinderaunce and daunger of innocent youthe: And cer∣tainly it were chiefly to be lamented, if Germanye, which hath had so manye yeares the chief praise of Religion and vertue, shuld now be so abased, and so far degenerate, that it mighte not be compared with the heathen people of old time, neither oughte to be preferred at this daye before the Turkes also and, Barbarians, nor in thys poynte to be thoughte one whit better: and because there hath bene no redresse made hitherto of this great enormity, althoughe many conuentions haue bene had therefore, for that fewe men cared for it, for because those, whome it best became to remeadye it, partlye wincked therat, partly seruing the time, had a respect more to their priuate commoditye, for this cause the euer liuinge God hathe of longe time nowe plaged all Germany, and certaine states priuate∣ly with diuers calamities, in so muche, that the same region, which in times past, for nombre of people, excelled in strengthe and vale∣auntnesse, and was hable easily to repulse all foraine violence, the same being rent and torne with dissentions, warres, and commoti∣ons, as well ciuill as foreines. is now in greate daunger, and ten∣deth to vtter destruction, excepte God do wonderfullye preserue it: Therfore is it neadfull that euery magistrate indeuor for his part, herein to do his duetie, and haue an especiall regarde to the cause of Religion, wherein bothe Gods honoure, and the honestye of life also is conteined. Moreouer, ther hath benmo waies than one deuised to appease religion: but that an vniuersall, free, and godlye counsell mighte be had, semed alwaies from the beginning, not only to the Emperor, but also vnto them all to be the best waye. For because that in as much as it is a matter of our faith, it apperteineth not to one only people, but also vnto al other nations of christendome, which must doubtlesse be called to the same, yt what vices soeuer be in any place they may be reformed and taken away. Therfore did the Emperor
both for his own duetie, and at theyr request also, labor this waye to the vttermost of his power, and at the length brought it to passe, that such a counsell was oftner than once called, and sometimes al¦so commenced: but what impediment ther was at euerye time, and why no frute of the same returned to the common wealth, that doth he leaue to his place, doubting not, but many of them, whiche were either at the Counsels them selues, or hadde their deputies there, know the matter well inough: And now, if they be so contente, that the same ordre of the counsell maye be repared to, and take place: which thing verely is aboue all others to be wished for of almigh∣ty God, he will not only assent thervnto most willingly, but also ap∣ply the thing with all study, faith and dilligence: And than in dede is this thing only to be consulted of, how those causes that wer be∣fore a let and impediment might be auoided and taken awaye: but if for the tumultes of warre, and tempest of the common wealthe, they shall thincke mete it be differred vntil an other time more qui∣et, he is content, that other godly and tollerable waies be debated, that in the meane season the people and all states may liue peacea∣bly, and be kept vnder an honest discipline, to the glorye of God al∣waies, and with a safe conscience: In former yeares in dede there was ofttimes mention made of a counsell prouinciall, as thoughe the same were most fit and conueniente for oure purpose, but for so much as bothe the name, manner, and fourme thereof in ouretime hath not in his opinion bene much knowen and accustomed, he can determine nothing therof at this present. The third way & meanes hath bene diuers times assaied by talcke and conference of learned men: And all be it the same hath commen to small profit, yet is this well perceiued, that many and that the chiefest poyntes might here by haue bene reconciled, in case the matter had bene handled wyth a godlye zeale, and no respecte had to priuate commoditye of either side, which thinge neuerthelesse he woulde that no manne shoulde thincke spoken to his iniurye: of this waye therfore we muste take further deliberation also: And all be it that themperors deuise and purpose touchinge the same matter, who all together mente good faith, was otherwise taken in former yeares, and had small thanke of either partie, yet doth he againe, if they shall thincke good so, not mislike the same: if the parties also will treat sincerely, if all affecti∣ons laid a part, and obstinacy set a side, they will haue before theyr eies Goddes glorye onlye and the common saluation of all men, he will shew herein all faith and dilligence: he can perceiue none other way at this present, that is conuenient: but in case they haue anye other thing that is more mete for this purpose, it shall be lawful to declare the same. An other part of this consultation is concerninge
peace, and whan certen yeres past there were lawes made hereof, themperor and he had supposed, that they had well prouided for the common quiet: but thend now declareth, that it was not sufficient∣ly foresene, for that they might not condempne nor outlawe the re∣bels, and seditious parsons, vnlesse they were first cited to appere, and after all due order of iudgement conuicted, where they in the meane season, hauing time and space, did afflicte diuers without a∣ny desert: it was also prouided in former actes, that if any man suf∣fred iniury or were by force inuaded, his next neighbors should as∣sist him: but it is not vnknowen to them, what impedimentes haue chaunced: Therfore must they consult and way with him diligent∣ly, how these two poyntes of the law maye be amended, that bothe vnquiet and troublesome persons may be made a feard, and suche as are faithfull to thempire may know assuredly that they shal not want aid against force and violence: which thing may now be done so much more commodiously for that the foundation hereof is laid of late at Woormes and at Frankfurt: Wherfore they shal do wel, if they follow the consultation there begon, and bring it to an end: He exorteth them moreouer to consult of establishing the iudgemēt imperiall, of publicke contribution of Coyne: and of other politicke thinges, and hitherto to applye all their deuises, by what meanes these domesticall euils, dissentions, tumultes, seditions and force may be taken awaye and cleane roted oute: and herein to consider chiefly the state of thempire, and to se in how greate daunger Ger∣many standeth not only by reason of the cruell Turke, but for other ennemies also, which nothing lesse, than the Turke, seke ye destruc∣tion of thempire: let them ponder therfore, what commodities they receiue of these discordes and domesticall euils, which they vndou∣tedly haue craftelye raised and supported, that in this dissention of the states, they might accomplish theyr gready lust, and by a soden inuasion might bring al men into their subiection and bondage: for other nations, which haue bene so vanquished by them and supplā∣ted, ought to be a warninge for them, to take hede to thē selues, and to take such counsel, wherby, both the present tempest and ruine of the country may be blowen ouer, and the Empire consiste and per∣seuer in full strengthe and authoritye, and all foraine violence, as in times paste, so nowe also maye be manfullye and valeauntly re∣pulsed: And what so euer the Emperoure and he are able to do here in bothe with theyr aide and counsell, they will do it right gladlye, and that in suche sorte, as all men maye vnderstande, what intier loue they beare to the common Countrye: And let them perswade them selues of this to be moste assured What time this Oration of kinge Fardinando was published throughoute Germanye, it was
wrytten at the self time out of sondry places, that he had exiled out of Boheme, about two hundreth ministers of the churche: It was The mini∣sters exiled out of Bo∣heme. signified also bi letters, how cardinal Morone shuld com frō Rome to the counsell of thempire, which would assay to do the like in Ger¦many, that Cardinall Poole had already brought to passe in Eng∣land: For it is thought assuredly, that for the recoueringe of Eng∣land, the bishop of Rome and all his clients conceiued a wonderful hope in their mindes. For in as much as the thing had so lucky suc∣cesse, therfore thought they now, or els neuer, yt God was on theyr side, and that they maintained a most iuste cause, neither that theyr church could be conuict of any error, thus they now chiefly beleued. or at the least so pretended: And whan they send ambassadours in∣to Germany, they do it for this intent, not to acknowledge any faut of theyrs, but that they may helpe and succor, as they saye, mennes infirmity. About the end of February, Ihon Albert, Duke of Me∣gelburge, who I said was in league with Duke Moris, and whō Henry the duke of Brunswicke afflicted sore the yere before, what time he kept war in Saxonie, marieth the daughter of Albert duke Pruisse. Whan I had proceded thus farre, I was aduertised oute of England, that of those fiue, of whome I spake a little be∣fore, Bradford, althoughe he were condempned, was reserued in prison, and that the mindes of manye, through the constancy of the reaste that suffe∣red, wer wonderfully astonied and amased.
The, xxvi, Booke of Sledaines Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion, and the common Weale, during the reigne of the Em∣pyre, of Charles the fyfte. The Argument of the xxvj. Booke ENgland brought againe in subiection to the Bishop of Rome, a wrytinge is sete for the with Indulgences. The Duke of Saxon by his ambassadoures maketh his purgation to Ferdinando, and excuseth him selfe that he can not be at thassem∣ble. The ministers of the Churche expulsed oute of Boheme are comforted by the wrytinges of godly learned men. Townes taken by the French men. The Prin∣ces of Germany mete, and enter also into league. Pope Iuly being dead: immedi∣diatly after that Mercellus was chosen in his stead he dieth. And Paul the fourth of that name founder of the sectes of the Iesuites, succedeth, whilest they of Sene do yelde them to the Em∣peroure. Cardinall Poole solliciteth themperor and the French kinge vnto peace in vaine. The Quene of England being therin a meane, and persecuting cruelly the true Christians. At which time a rose tumultes at Geneua and Lucerues. The Senate of Paris indeuoureth to mitigate and call in the Proclamation setforth by the French king against the true Christians. Thinges done at Rome by the Bishop, and by the Normens against the Spaniardos. Uulpian taken by the French men, dissention amonges the Ministers of the Churche concerning the Lordes sup∣per. Whilest the compact was made for the Lordship of Chattes, themperor going into Spain, committeth the gouernment to his sonne. Thinges doue in thassemble of thempire concerninge Religion: And extraordinary wryting of the Papistes in the same, thanswer also of Ferdinando and of the Protestantes to them bothe: and what decrec insued vpon the same. The Parlament and state of England. They of Austriche by their ambassadoures requiringe that they mighte be permitted to haue the true Religion, are denied it by the diuers answers of Fardinando, and sue in baine. In manner at the same time the Bauarians sollicite theyr Duke about the like matter in vaine. At the lengthe was truce taken betwixte the Emperoure and the Frenche kinge. The Duke of Prusse imbrasing the confession of Auspurge, therror of Dsiander is quenched. About this time appeared a blasinge starre. The matter of Marques Albert is heard. Tharchbishop of Cantorbury openly and constantly professyng the true Religion, is burnt. The Pope seketh pri∣uelye to infringe and disseuer the confession of Auspurge. The Cardinall of Auspurge accused of treason purgeth him self: declaring plainly of what nature and faction he is of. A suspiti∣on of a conspiracye in Englande brodeth trouble, and increaseth crueltye againste the faithfull: that xiij. were burnte together at a stake. Fardinando alledgeth the reuoltinge of Transtiuania and diuers Townes from him: And also the Turke now ready to inuade as causes and lettes, why he can not come to thassem∣ble, which hitherto he had so oft dif∣ferred. Themperor now at length taketh shipping into Spaine, leauing his soone gouernor of the lowe coun∣tries. Sleidan departeth out of thys life.
HOw England submitted it self againe to the Bishop of Rome, it hathe bene shewed in the Ioy at Rome for England reduced to yt Romishe Church. former boke. When these newes with a won∣derfull expedition were broughte to Rome, greate ioye a rose in the Citye, and Te Deum was song in euery Church. After on Christ∣masse euen. The Bishoppe sendeth forth this wryting. Since I lately heard (saith he) that England, which of many yeares nowe, was separated and plucked from the body of the Church, is through the vnmeasurable mercye of God broughte againe to the Communion of the same Church, and to the obedience of the sea of Rome, by the singuler dilligence, fidelitye, trauell and industrye of kinge Phillip and Mary his wife, and Cardinall Poole, I toke greate pleasure in my minde: And also, as reason was, gaue thankes vnto God as hartely as I could, and omitted nothing, but that the frute and pro¦fit of this my gladnesse might redound to the whole City. But, like as that father, of whom the Gospel mentioneth, hauing recouered his sonne lost, not only reioyseth exceadingly, and is priuately glad in his minde, but also inuiteth others to feasting and making good cheare together with him: Euen so I verely, to thintent, that al the world may vnderstand, how great is my ioy and gladnes, will that common thanckes and praiers be made. Therfore, by the power yt Indulgēces graunted by the Pope for the conuer∣sion of Eng¦lande. I haue, I permit euery man in generall, that he maye chuse him a priest, whom he list, vnto whom he may confesse his sinnes rightly: And geue to the same priest authority, yt he may forgeue al manner of sinnes, be they neuer so greuous, euen those whiche are reserued to my power alone, and are wonte to be excepted by name: that he may remit not only the trespasse, but the paine also for sinnes due: that he may impose such satisfaction as behoueth, and may release all vowes, except chastity and Religion: so yet, that they be recom∣pensed by an other worke: yea trusting vpon Gods mercye, and the intercession of sainctes, Peter and Paule, I graunt full remission of all sinnes, which is wont only to be geuen but euery fifty yeare, to all those, that with an humble hart do conuert to God, and who∣ly confessing their sinnes, whan they shall vnderstande this indul∣gence to be setforth by vs, will twise or thrise a weke fast and geue Almose and vse other godly exercises, and after receiue the Sacra∣ment, with thanckes geuing and praiers vnto God, that he with ye light of his countenance, would illumine those that walke in dark∣nesse, that he would geue peace, and moue the heartes of kinges to concord. And this so great a benefite I graunt to them also, which are hindred either by reason of age or sicknesse, so that they can not
performe the thinges before said. And to the intent that these oure wrytinges may be euery where knowne, I charge and commaund all Patriarches, Archbishops, and suche other like, that so sone as they shall haue receiued a copy of the same by and by they cause it to be published euery man through out his Prouince, and since the gift is fre, that they set it forth without any gain. In the last boke I shewed you how Blassenburge the head ca∣stell of Marques Albert, wherin the hope of the whole country cō∣sisted, by surrendry was taken: And at this time, least being reco∣uered it mighte geue an occasion of further displeasure, his aduer∣saries do subuert and rase it to the ground, not without the greate displeasure of the house of Brandenburge, and the Marques kin∣red. Ferdinando king of Romaines, both before he came frō home, and than also, when he was commen to Auspurge to the assemble, by messagers and letters exhorted the Princes to make haste, and come thither in parson, as in the last boke hath ben said. And chiefly he had sollicited the Prince elector of Saxony, to come to Auspurge: who had both excused him selfe before, that he could not come, namely for the state of Saxony not very quiet, and now sending ambassadours thither, excuseth the matter againe, & by occasion falling into the mention of the Turk, sheweth in what pearill Germany standeth, which in times past being mightye and feared of others, is now almost destitute and void of strength, ha∣uing receiued so many displeasures and plagues. And that this e∣uill is so much the worse, that there is amonge the states so greate an alienation of mindes, and distrust amonges them selues: And how the Emperour him self, to remeadye this disease, had omitted no kind of diligence: but yet yt al labour hitherto hath ben taken in vain: For the minds of men to be so bitterly exasperated, & alwais so set open to displeasure, that vnneth any hope of reconcilement is to be had: how a few yeares past, his brother Moris had ordained that certain Ceremonies, and things indifferēt should be kept still in Churches of his dominion, but that the same commaundement was of so little force, that it was also taunted with the libels, and bitter raylings of many. In so much that it was not in his power to confirm it, vnles he would bring him self in daunger. And therfore are many afraid for attempted any thingin this behalf: Now on thother side, they that be on the contrary part, and impugn the doctrin professed at Auspurge, how little they thincke to establish any godly and lawfull reformation, it is known wel i∣nough by the doings of former time, when the matter was attemp¦ted ether by talk and conference, or els by counsels.
Consideringe therefore that after so much labour taken, and counsels holden, the waye of concorde can not be found, God per∣anenture so willinge and reuenginge oure sinnes, he besecheth him earnestlye, that the same Booke, that conteineth the some of the Christen doctrin, and was in times past exhibited at Auspurge he would not take for an euill or wicked boke. But know it for a certenty to be a pure and a godlye wrytinge, which can shewe vnto vs the sonne of God authoure of saluation, whiche in Doctrine dothe plainly agree with thauncient churche, and with those foure chiefe Counsels: whiche teacheth and fetteth forthe true Christen worckes, and exhorteth the people to shew o∣bedience to the Magistrate. Wherefore in case a sure peace in that assemble maye be esta∣blished, there is no doubte but that the Emperoure and he maye haue greate aide in Germanye againste the Turke, where as elsse they that are of the Protestauntes Religion, and manye of theim in dede borne and broughte vp therein, will perseuer constantlye in the same Religion. For vnlesse such a peace may be had, that may comprise bothe Religion and also the Churche goodes, and if the matter, as ma∣nye times it hathe bene, shoulde be differred to an other assemble, and delaied from daye to daye, and the people be lefte in this dout∣full state of thinges, to be vncertaine howe pacientlye all menne woulde take it. For though he and other Princes should be quiet and do their duety, and shewe all obedience, yet that it maye be, that menne of the meaner and baser sort may raise some tumulte, and maye pre∣tende this vncertaintye of state, and feare of pearill for Religion: Especiallye in those places, whiche geue oportunitye to attempte suche thinges: Since therefore the case of the Empire is suche, he earnestlye requireth him to prouide for the common tranquillity, for so muche as he hathe full authoritye of the Emperoure to de∣termine. But of late yeares this condition was propounded of his brother Moris at Passawe, that in case the controuersy of Re∣ligion mighte not be reconciled, that yet neuerthelesse an assured peace might be had, til the thing might be throughli appeased: and although the Emperor would not than admit the same condition, for that he saide it apperteined to all thestates of the Empire, yet in as muche as at the same time he reproued it not, and with ex∣presse woordes added to the Composition, that he woulde see that in the Counsell the matter shoulde bee handeled indiffe∣rentlye, neyther that there shoulde be anye crafte vsed in the
voices concerning Religiō, he trusteth for the same cause, that he will moue in this behalfe not only those whiche were that tyme at Passawe, but other states also so sone as the counsel be ginneth, and perswade them to peace. When thambassadours had spoken to this effect the fourth daye of February, the nexte daye after king Ferdinando propoundeth to the states in suche sorte as I shewed you in ye last boke. The ministers of ye churche driuen out of the lande of Boheme, the learned men that were in Meissen and in Wittemberge, and amongest others Melāch¦thon, Melancthon comforteth ye ministers of Boheme. comfort them with an epistle, and shew the craft of the cō¦trary part, who affirmed that they kept a necessary order in the churche, & that those whiche either had not receiued orders at the Byshops hande, or had wynes, could not minister the Sa∣cramentes. For this cause of expulsion they fayned, that they should not seme to haue a desire to oppresse ye true doctrine: but these men shewe how it is a starke tyrāny, that maried priestes should be put from the holy ministery. For Sathā was the au∣thour of prohiting matrimony, as it is euidēt by ye scriptures: And that we ought not to seke to be ordeined of the byshops, yt are the open ennemies of the Gospell, and defende idols, but of that fellowship, which hath pure doctrine, & therfore hath the keyes of the kingdome of heauen. For it were to absurde & daū∣gerouse, if Shepeheardes should be ordeined of wolues. The churche to haue had alwayes right to chouse mete ministers, and that so was the decree of the counsell of Nice. And they that were so chosen and tried, to haue bene confirmed of them, that gouerned Godly congregations: The same maner to bee nowe also obserued, and therfore that it is a sclaunder, to saye that they disturbe or breake order. Since therfore the matter is so, and that for the true professing of the Gospell they be ex∣pulsed, they ought to take this calamitie so muche more mode∣ratly: For God wyll not fayle them in his tyme: And that they be ready with theyr next churches to shewe them all loue and hospitalitie. Where the Frenche men at the Ides of Decēber of the yeare before, had by the conduit of Brissake, taken Eporedia a towne The towne of Cassalle taken by the Frenchmen in the Alpes by the water of Durie. This yeare, the third daye of Marche they intercept the town of Casale nere vnto ye Poo, wherin was a garrison of Spaniardes and Almaynes, vpon the sodayne, and with in a fewe dayes after the Castell also: Af¦terwarde bringe many other thinges into their subiection. And amongest others thei rase and make euen with the groūd, Ualence and Saluadore.
The sixt day of Marche August Duke of Saxony, Ioachim Marques of Brandēburg, Princes Electours: The sonnes also An assemble of the Prin∣ces of Saxo∣nie at Num¦burge. of Duke Iohn Fridericke, the Lantgraue & certen other Prin∣ces of thesame countrie, assemble at Numburg vpon the Riuer of Sale, & there renew the league of inheritaūce, whiche is be∣twixt the houses of Saxon, Brandēburg & Hessia, as I shewed in the .xxiiii. boke, & also determine, that they would sticke con∣stantly to ye cōfession of Auspurg: And least there should any su∣spicion arise of any new or secret coūsell, the fift day after that they came thether, they signifie the cause of their assemble to ye Emperour in wryting. In the former yeare, what time a com∣pact was made betwene Augustus & Iohn Fridericke Duke of Saxonie, this was also agreed vpon y• the old & familiar leage The letters of the Prin∣ces of Saxo∣ny to themp. should be renewed: To witte that league whiche was made an hondreth yeres since & more, & after established by a lawe: And therfore yt they haue now met for the same cause, & as that lea∣gue was profitable to their elders & all the people, so likewyse thei trusted, yt it shuld com thē luckely to passe: since thei sought for nothing els but peace & trāquillitie, & did it to ye displeasure of no man: Moreouer, yt after the maner of their aūcesters, they haue excepted his highnes & his brother king of Romains: and as they intende priuatly to kepe mutual amitie amongest thē selues, so wil they also openly doe that their dutie requireth, & which may become obedient Princes of thempire: And yt in Re¦ligion they wil not procede any further than is limited in the confession of Auspurg, but for as much as in the same are cōtei¦ned the chief articles of ye Christian doctrine, & no wicked sedici¦ous opinion can be found therin, thei wil through Gods grace perseuer in thesame doctrine: neither wil they fayle also the cō¦mon welth of Germany, so far forth as thei are able with their trauel, counsel & treasures. And for as much as at this time be¦ing not moste quiet, for the auoiding of a further discōmoditie they abide at home, they haue sent Ambassadours to thassēblee of thempire, who haue in cōmaundemēt to refer al their coun∣sels & doings vnto peace, so yt neither for religiō nor any ciuile cause any force or violēce should be feared. For ye peace once esta¦blished it shal be an occasion yt other cōtrouersies may be ye bet∣ter appeased: That the state doubtles of ye cōmon welth now is such, yt it is great nede to ioine together all their forces & min∣des that a wyder entrie be not set open to ye Turkes to inuade vs: How they know wel enough howe greatly he desireth that so sone as may be, a sufficiēt army might be prepared, to repres thennemies violence. Wherfore now in case such a peace might
be established, ther is no doubt but the states of thempire wold gladly imploy their substaunce vpon the same war, which vere¦ly hitherto by reason of sondry tumultes & ciuile discordeshath bene omitted. That they wil be alwaies ready, & haue cōmaun¦ded their ambassadours to offer these thinges in their name, at the counsel, thesame day they write to king Ferdinādo, in a ma¦ner to ye same effect, as before I said, ye Duke August did by his Ambassadours. For both they vrge y• same cōpact of Passawe, & shew how desirous they are of peace. Thei cōmend the doctrine cōfessed at Ausperge, and exhort him to confirme the peace, and also pray him, that he wold geue no credit to such, as haply se∣ke to disturbe the quiet of Germany. At the Ides of March the The Archby¦shop of Mētz dieth. Archbishop of Mentz departed out of this life, whom we saied to haue bene at the counsel of Trent, & after was put to flight by Marques Albert: Whom Daniel Brēdel succedeth. The. viii day after yt byshop of Mentz, which was ye .xxiii. day of March, The death of Pope Iu∣ly the third. dieth Pope Iuly the third. Who for bicause he had so easely be∣yond al expectatiō recouered England, was thought to haue cō¦ceaued also a wōderful hope of Germany: And had therfor sent thither Cardinal Morone, who the next day after that he was dead, came to the coūsell of thempire at Auspurg: But with in eight daies after hearing newes therof, ye last day of March he departeth thence againe, and with Truckesse Cardinal of Aus∣purg, spedeth him to the Electiō at Rome. The Cardinals that wer at Rome, not tarieng for the rest made hast, & the .ix. day of April proclaime Pope, Marcellus, the secōd of that name. The Marcellus ye second chosē same that was sent Ambassadour with Cardinal Farnese to ye Emperour, of Paul the third, as I shewed you in the .xiii. boke The Cardinal of Auspurg a fewe daies before, that he went to Rome, by his letters sent to the Senate of Princes & Ambassa¦dours, sheweth that he desireth in dede peace by al meanes: but in any wise to cōsent, that the dignitie of the Sea Apostolique or the olde religion should be defaced, he will neuer permitte. In the meane time they of Sene, who nowe by the space of eight moneths (to wit) euen from the time that Peter Strosse They of Sene rendre them selues to Themp. receiued the ouerthrowe, as is shewed in the last boke, were be∣sieged with ye power of themperour & of Cosmus Duke of Flo∣rence, driuen for want of all thinges, where no ayde appered, ye xxi. daye of Aprill yelde thēselues to thēperour, & are ruled by a garrison of soldiours, lieftenaunt of themperours armie was the Marques of Marignane, twyse famous by the policie of war. Thre yeres since what time by thayde of the French king, the Spanyardes beinge discomfited, they Rased the Castell,
they of Sene, sending Ambassadours, gaue the kinge as harty thankes as they could deuise, and from that time forewarde cō¦mended to his tuition them selues and all that they had. Marcellus the second, newly created Pope, the, xxii. daye of Marcellus ye second dieth his creation, in the night yt goeth before the first of May, chaū∣ged his life for death. Alitle before wercome to the citie fordu∣ties sake and to salute him, Hercules Duke of Farrare & Guy Ubalde Duke of Urbine. For they had preuēted others, who ne∣uerthelesse should haue come. The Cardinals assembled in the Conclaue, the .xxiii. day of May, proclame Cardinal Theatine Pope. Thesame was Iohn Peter of Naples, Deane of the Col∣lege, a gentleman borne of the noble house of Carastes, a man of aunciēt yeares & notably learned. Chaunging his name, he called him self Paul the fourth. Paul the third had chosen him into the nomber of Cardinals. And he is the self same that be∣gan Paule the fourth. a certen new secte of those whiche are called Iesuites, and haue nestled not in Italy only but also in certen places of Ger∣many. Not lōg after he created his nephew his brothers sonne The secte of Iesuites. Cardinal, the same was a man of warre, and that a chief cap∣tayne seruing for the moste part the Frenche Kyng. I shewed before in the last boke how Poole thenglish Cardi¦nal went to themperour, & French king, to sollicite & moue thē The trauell of Cardinall Poole to ma¦ke peace be∣twene them perour and Frēch king. to peace, and handled the cause both by wordes & writinges, & amongest other thinges which he vsed to perswade them. Whi∣lest you saith he, kepe ciuile war, the Turke doeth very much to inlarge his dominion. And hauing wonne by Sea & land two strong holdes, Belgrade & the Rhodes hath made him a way o∣pen to Offen, & hath the possession of Tonowa: And if God had not stired vp the king of Persia to be his aduersary, it is to bee thought that he might haue already subdued to him self al the prouinces of Christendom. By this selfsame occasion haue euil Christiās also increased in sondry places, with so much a depra¦uation & corruptiō of al discipline aswel ecclesiastical as ciuile that now your power is not great inough to suppresse thē. For this declare welenough so many rebellions which are stired vp euery where, & the duties of religion neglected, & heresies & scis¦mes which in the meane time spring vp & are increased. After in an other place, ye ought to consider (saith he) that you ar the Princes of the Christen Beligion. And albeit that God hathe permitted Sathan, thauthour of all euil, which is altogether in this yt he might sift the churche, & wynnowe it like wheate, to styre vp war amongst you, which are two of ye chiefest & moste noble mēbers of ye church, yet hath he not suffred his wickednes
further than to prophane and ciuile matters. For in Religion he hath kept you sounde, of one and the same opinion, and an∣nexed to the body of the churche: For els coulde there hardly be made againe any concorde betwixt you. And where as so many other Princes haue reuolted from the churche, and that then∣nemy of mankinde hath attempted so many thinges, yet hath God moste benignely loked vpon you, and hath made his enter prises frustrate. Wherby, as by a moste certen token of his good¦nes and clemencie towardes you, he sheweth that he wil at the length vse your ministerie, & wil ioyne you both together with his vicar in earth, to the intent verely that such hurtful dissen∣tions may be taken a way, and that as well in the state ciuile as sacred peace may be restored to al mē. Many such like thīges brought Poole, threatening them also with the wrath and vē∣geaunce of God, vnlesse they leaue, and releaue the miserie of ye afflicted people. And although he preuailed than nothing, yet whilest the matter went forwarde in Englande, he holdeth on: And the matter at lēgth was brought to this point, that both the Emperour and the Frenche king refused not to sende Am∣bassadours to the treatie of peace. But the Quene of Englande, who was a meane in this matter, appointeth a fit and mete place in the myddes of the A place of y• treaty of pea¦ce, chosen by the Quene of England. playne betwyxt Caleis, Arde and Grauelyn, Townes of the Englyshe, Frenche and Flemishe dominion, set as it were a treangle, and intrenchynge the same rounde aboute wyth Ditches, buylded there foure Pauilions, Sommer houses in deede, but yet fyne and fitte for the pourpose. In this place therfore, the .xxiii. daye of Maye this yeare the Ambassadours mete, from the Emperour, amongest others came the Byshop of Arras: From the Frenche kyng the Cardinal of Loraine and the Conestable. Out of England came as peacemakers Cardi∣nall Poole, the Bishop of Wynchester Chauncelour, the Erle of Arondell, and the Lorde Paget. This brute blowē abroade far and nere, styred vp diuerse expectations and iudgementes of men, amongest the chiefly vnto whome the controuersies were not vnknowen. For there came in question the Dukedome of Millan, Burgundy, Sauoye, Piedmont, Corsica, Nauerne, Lo¦raine, the lande of Luke, the cities of Tully, Uirodone and Metz. The matter being long & much debated, where amongst other thinges at the last the Englishe intercessours sayde how certen of these controuersies ought to be referred to the hea∣ring of the generall counsell, they departed and nothyng fini∣shed. Kyng Ferdinando and the states of the Empire sendinge
their letters to the Emperour ye fourth Ides of Iune, had prai∣ed him that in the treatie of peace he would haue consideratiō of those thinges whiche the kyng of Fraunce had taken from the Empire. Where therfore nothing was done, the Emperour The Empe. letters to the states of the Empire. wryting againe to the states the .xv. day after, your duty, saith he, is to me ryght acceptable, that you are so moued with the calamities of those thinges whiche both mine and also the pu∣blique ennemy of the Empire hath afflicted. Doubtles I was very careful that suche thinges might be restored to their four∣mer estate: And before your epistle was deliuered me, I had in∣ioyned mine Ambassadours & chief counsellours, sent to treate of peace, that amongest other thinges they should handle this same moste diligently, nother should they herein relent any thyng. And although all wayes and meanes of concorde being set open of vs, I had thought, that he, because of a cōmon quiet would not haue dealte obstinatly, yet are they at this time bro¦ken of without any good done: Neuerthelesse for the better stay of Christendome, I refuse not peace, vpon such reasonable con∣ditions as hitherto haue bene propounded. And when occasiō shall serue, I wyll wholy indeuour that those thinges may be restored to the Empire, and may be in a better state hereafter. The Emperour had a little before sent the Duke of Alba into Lumbardie, that he might there make warre, where as Ferdi∣nando The Duke of Alba sent to Millan. Gonzaga had discharged him selfe of that office, and re∣tourning home out of Flaunders liued a priuate life. Of many monethes before there had bene a report, and that in dede most certen, but chifly at this tyme, that ye Quene of Englande was with childe, and nere her time: But the expectation was vain. Then also they began to burne againe in Englande, and the same Bradforde whome in the ende of the .xxv. booke I sayde Bradforde burnt in En¦glande. was a fewe monethes before condemned, and caried againe to pryson, was than at last burnt amongest others. At the ende of the moneth of May, Iohn Fridericke the el∣dest sonne of Duke Iohn Fridericke, toke to wyfe Agnes the Iohn Fride∣rick thelect. sonne ma∣rieth. Lantgraues daughter, whiche had bene wyfe to Duke Mau∣rice. Thither came many Princes, whiche vpon this occasion also consulted againe of their own matters at Numburge. In maner at this same tyme the Lady Iane the Emperours mo∣ther departed out of this lyfe: Kyng Ferdinando kept her fune∣rall at Auspurge. The Empe. mother dieth A certen tumult in the night was raysed than at Geneua, by certen of the Senatours, who thought to bring the gouern∣ment A tumult rai¦sed at Gene∣ua. of the citie to them, and to their faction. And chiefly they
hated Caluine: And those, which for persecutiō were come thi∣ther out of Fraunce, they sought to expulse: And where there was running vp and downe in the night season, in sondry pla∣ces, as a token or watche worde, they cried that the Frenchemē were vp in harnesse, & the citie was betrayed: But where they kept them selues in their houses, the matter at length was ap¦peased, and after were certen executed: Many saued thē selues by flight. The cause why they would haue expulsed the French men that were straungers, amongest others was this, that ma¦ny of them were of late chosen in to the nomber of the citezens wherby they sawe their owne force weakened, the nomber of the other part being increased. The Turkes nauie, as in certen former yeares, so nowe also sayled on the Tuscane sea, threatening Hetruria. Wherfore or euer they went any further, or ioyned with the Frenche nauie, the Marques of Maarignane lieftenaunt of the Emperours armie, inuaded the porte of Hercules, kept by the Frenchemen, and by force of his souldiours wynneth the castell, putting the Porte Hereu¦les taken by Imperials. Plūbine be∣sieged of Turkes. garrison to ye sworde. This was at the Ides of Iune. The Tur∣kes afterwarde besiege the Towne of Plumbine: And when af¦ter an ouerthrowe the matter would not succede, thei attempt Ilua, an Ilande of the Dukes of Florence, but in vayne also. Than were certen politicke lawes set foorth at Metz, in the whiche citie the Frenche kyng had a garrison & a gouernour, & also a iudge to execute iustice. There was wrytten amongest other thinges, if any brother or sister or vncle or tutour, or gar∣dien be bawed to any mayde or woman, that he should haue a rynge of Iron put about his necke, and where he shall openly vse suche practise, being subiect to the iniuries and rebukes of all men, let him be beaten with roddes, and bannished. But if the father or mother shall do the lyke, they shal lose their head. Many men marueled that these thinges were so set forth, for that such vnaccustomed vices, and not euery where vsed, semed not so muche to be forboden, as shewed. But howe corrupt ma∣ners be in our tyme, hereof it may be easely gathered. Of that same controuersie, which hath nowe many yeares Controuer∣sie for the do¦minion of ye Chattes. vene betwixt the Lantgraue and William Erle of Nassow, for the Lorship of Chattes, we haue spoken heretofore oftener thā once. Wherfore to the intent at the last an ende might be made least that any further inconuenience might arrise therof, cer∣ten Princes intreate the matter, and as indifferent arbitrers appointe a daye at Wormes the first of Iuly. These were the Paulsgraue Prince Electour, Christopher Duke of Wirtēberg,
William Duke of Cleaue, the Lātgraue sent thither William his eldest sonne. The conditions there propounded, and a certē tyme debated, at the last are permitted to a further deliberatiō and a certen tyme appointed for the same matter. In ye meane season the Frenchemen, to the intent they might haue victu∣alles in a readines, plucke downe many villages in the coun∣trie of Mountfarrate, least if the ennemie should possesse them, Casale should be brought in distresse. There is in those partes a towne Uulpiane, of great force and estimatiō: The same was Uulpian vi∣tayled. kept by Spaniardes. And where at the newe comming of the Duke of Alba, a great power was gathered, the towne was vi∣tayled. At the same tyme also the Frenchemen vitayled Mary∣burge, taken the yeare before in Flaunders, and kept from the Emperour. The Frenche kyng being moued by his counsell, set Maryburg vnailed. forth a proclamation, wherby he commaunded all his officers, that suche as the ecclesiastical iudges, and Inquisitours of the fayth should condēne, they should for the greatnes of the fault, The Frēche kinges pro∣clamation a∣gainst the cō¦demned of yt inquisitours without any delaye, or respecte had of appealyng, put them to death. The Cardinall of Lorayne deliuered this proclamation to the Senate of Paris, that after the old custome being of thē allowed and set forth, it might be registred in the common re∣cordes, but they somewhat astonied at the newnes of ye thing, for that the helpe of appealing was takē away, require a time for to take deliberatiō, and after sending to the king their Am∣bassadours, she we what is their opinion, as shalbe declared in his place. There is a towne in Rhaetia, next Italy, called Lucarne, whiche belongeth to the common citie of the Heluetians. The citezens of the same towne required of the Swisses that they The Lucer∣nates requi∣re of yt Swis¦ses the doc∣trine of the Gospell. would permitte them to haue the doctrine of the Gospell. But they, for as muche as they were in Religion diuerse, varied in sentence, where some thought mete to graunte them their re∣queste, and others that it ought not to be permitted. And there was lyke some ciuile tumulte to arise therof: But in the ende their voices preuailed, wherby it was decreed, that they should remayne in the Religion of their elders, and that it should be lawfull for thē that would not, to go dwel els where. So there were founde very many, whiche leauing their houses, went to Zurick, whiche citie in dede receiued them and dealt liberally with them. About this time the English Ambassadours which were sent to the Pope in the name of the whole Realme, as I shewed about the ende of the laste booke, retourne from Rome homewarde. The Pope allowed well enough al other thinges,
that they had retourned to repentaunce, and craued pardon: But that the churche goodes should not be restored, he saide it was in no wyse to be suffered. Amōgest the Ambassadours was the Byshop of Ely. The king of Denmarke had a nauie at that time, which sai¦ling The Nauie of the kinge of Dēmarke towardes the North, made men to talke diuersly. For some said it was done by the Emperours counsell, who mynded to put the kinges sonne or his brother in to the possession of Scot¦lande: Others sayde it was prepared for the vse of the Frenche kyng, others for this cause only, that if the Emperour or king Philip his sonne (whose power was waxed great by reason of Englande) should straye any further: they might be restrayned. And therfore were the cities of the Sea coaste thought also to haue borne the charges of the same nauie. After lōg and great expectation all this rumour vanished away, and all this prepa¦ration was found to be made against Pirates. Than was ye state of Rome troublesome. For yt Pope hauing Sanstorian & Camillus Cardinalles led into pry∣son. cōceiued a suspicion of certen nobles, prouided him garrisons, and placing soldiours here and there in the Citie, committed Ssortia Cardinall of Sanflorian; and Camillus of the house of Columnois, to prison. And for as muche as they were of the Emperours part, many men thought he went about a greater matter: And that suspicion was increased, what tyme he requi¦red of the Duke of Florēce the Emperours client, a wonderous great summe of mony, whiche both Clement the seuenth lent Alexander Medices, and lately Iuly the third lent him, at the siege of Sene. The captiue Cardinalles at the length putting in suerties are inlarged. The Spanishe flete that tyme came towardes Flaunders, laden with all kynde of Marchaundise: And when it came vpō The Spani∣she flete in∣tercepted by the French. the coastes of Normandie, the Frenchemen, whiche knewe it long before, set vpon them with a great force. And the fight & conflicte was terrible, the shippes being sunke and burnte on either parte, and very many loste, wherof some with weapon, others with fire, many swallowed vp of the billowes did pe∣rishe. The Frenche men caried away certen shippes that they King Philip came out of England to his father at Brusselles. toke into Depe hauon, from whence they came. This was in the monthe of August, whereas about the end of the same mo∣neth, kyng Philip sayling out of Englande into Flaunders, came to the Emperour his father at Brusselles, accompanied with the Nobles of Englande. Truckesins Cardinall of Aus∣purge, An vniuersi∣tie erected at Dillinge. had a fewe yeares past, founded an Uniuersitie at Dil∣linge, a towne situated vpon the Riuer of Danubius, by the
wyll and permission of Pope Iuly the thirde, who had graun∣ted for the same a publique bull, with exceading great fredoms & priuileges, as a wryting set forth in print declareth. Hither therfore amonges other came he whome themperour of many yeares had vsed for his ghostly father or confessour as they ter∣me him. Peter Asot, a Spaniarde, a blacke freer. He this yeare began with a contrary wryting to impugne the booke contey∣ning A boke of Pe¦ter Asot a∣gainst the cō¦fession of the Duke of wir¦temberge. the sōme of the christen doctrine, the which boke Christo∣pher Duke of Wirtemberge sent by his Ambassadours to the fathers of the counsell of Trent, as before is sayde, whiche also he was not afrayde to dedicate to the same Duke. But Iohn Brentius about this time aunswereth it at large, and confu∣teth his sophisticall reasons. Whiche boke of Brentius Uerge∣rius afterwarde translated into Italian, to the ende that men of his owne nation might vnderstande, both what thing came in to controuersie, and whether parte handled the scriptures more purely and sincerely. About the Ides of September, George Counte of Mount∣pelicarte, George Er∣le of Mount pelicarte ma¦rieth yt Lant¦graues dau∣ghter. vncle to the Duke of Wirtemberge maried the Lady Barbara the Lantgraues daughter. After the arriuall of the Duke of Alba in Lumbardie, the king of Fraunce also sendeth thither new ayde, and many warlike captaines, which ioyned them selues to Monsour Brissake as companions of his perils and fortune. There is a towne wherof we haue spoken before, called Uulpian, which fortified with a garrison of Spaniards was a great annoyaunce to Frenche matters, seing that from thence roades were made as farre as Taurin and further. To the intent therfore that this only let might be taken away, & that they might haue victualle, the Frenchemen towarde the ende of August besiege it with al their force, and batter it with Uulpian ta∣ken and ra∣sed by the Frenchmen muche harme done and receiued. At the length the .xxii. day of September they take it by surrendry, and rase the walles both of the towne and Castell, and make it in shape of a Uillage. And a fewe dayes after, they take also the Towne and Castell Mountcalue is taken by yt Frenchmen of Mountcalue betwixt Aste and Casale. The dissention that hath bene nowe these .xxx. yeares betwixt learned men aboute the Lordes supper, and of the presence of Christes body, began at this time to be renewed, and bokes were set forth by the mi∣nisters of the churches of Breme and Hamborough, namely a∣gainste The contro¦uersie about the Lordes supper is re∣newed by yt bremers. Caluine & Iohn Alascus. Caluine afterward aunswe∣reth sharpely, and defendeth the cause. Thesame doeth Bullin∣ger and Iohn Alascus also. For setting forthe a booke to the Kyng of Poole, he complayneth and bewayleth that there
is no examination had or made by talke or cōference of the sen∣tences, but that the opinion is only condemned by preiudice, verely after the maner of the Papistes, whiche also procede not by argumentes and scripture, but only by wyll and violence. About the end of September, Augustus Duke of Saxony, had August prin¦ce Electour, had a sonne borne. a sonne borne, called Magnus, his Godfathers at the fōtstone were amongest others Henry Duke of Brunswicke, and Iohn Fridericke the Lantgraues sonne in lawe. I haue spoken before of the Archebyshop of Cantorbury, & of Ridley Byshop of London, and Hughe Latimer, howe they being caried to Oxforde, and reasoning with the diuines there were of them condemned, being therfore kept in prison vnto this tyme, nowe at the last in the moneth of October, Ridley and olde father Latimer were burnt. The Archebyshop was al¦so Ridley & La¦timer burnt in England. brought forth with them, and at the place of execution did openly call vpon God for mercy with them, but he was lead a∣gaine to pryson. In this same moneth the Cardinalles of Lo∣rayne and Tournon went to Rome. Then also the Senate of Paris, whiche they cal the Parliament, aunswering the king, Thanswere of the Parlia¦ment of Pa∣ris to yt kin∣ges procla∣matiō of Lu¦therians. to that whiche the Cardinall of Loraine requested them to, as before is mentioned. By that proclamation of yours (say they) whiche came forth foure yeares since, moste mighty kyng, you reserued to your selfe and to your iudges the examination and punishment of Luthers heresie: Neither in it was any thinge exceptep, vnlesse it were what time it required any declaration of heresie, or that sentence were to be pronounced of suche as had taken orders: But this proclamation of yours that is now set forth, doth plainly establish the contrary. For it submitteth the people of your Realme to the ecclesiasticall iudgement, and to the Inquisitours, and by this meane it diminished your dig¦nitie, wherby you excelle all men, and geueth to your subiectes a iust cause of grief, when they being of you clerely destitute, ar made subiect to foreine power. But herein a great deale more inconuenience shalbe, when all their goodes, lyfe, health & dig∣nitie shall be at their pleasure, the helpe of appealing being ta¦ken away. For verely appellation is the refuge and sanctuary of innocencie: And you are the protectour and defendour, both of the appellation and also of innocentes, yea besides you no Note howe byshops seke authoritie of kinges to cō¦demne inno∣centes. man hath any right ouer the people. But and if the lawe and iudgement be nowe committed to the Inquisitours and By∣shops officers, appellation taken away, this were to set open a wyndowe and to make a waye that euen innocentes might be condemned, and lose both body and goodes. For they being in∣dewed
with so great power, to witte, the kinges ful authoritie will forget their dutie, and will kepe no measure, what tyme they shall see euery degree to them subiecte, and not only com∣mon persones, but also Noble men & Princes to stande in their hande. Howbeit yet this meane waye may you take, that your iudges shuld heare the cause and geue sentence. And if there be any obscure opinion, that the same be determined by the cler∣gie. Let thē also that be with in orders be iudged of their owne men. Concerning appellations, let a wrytyng be obteined of the Pope, wherby this may be permitted to your iudges. And when the matter shall come to this issue, that iudgement must be made of suche as haue appealed, let there be present certen of your chosen counsellers of the ecclesiasticall order, or if suche wante, other tried and fit men. In the inquisition let this be obserued, that the Popes Inquisitour doe substitute and place vnder him in prouinces, men of vpright fame and good men, & that the Byshop doe beare the whole charges, and not the de∣fendaunt, yet so, that the matter being determined, the costes be required of whome it behoueth. These thinges tende to this ende verely, that suche maner of controuersies may be restrey∣ned within certen boundes and limites. Notwithstanding, for as muche as it appeareth by the punishement of Heretickes, al though it be necessary, that this hath hitherto bene thereby brought to passe, that their facte should be detested rather, than that they should be amended: Moreouer, for bicause it is much better, to remedy the disease in time, than to geue it space whi∣lest it may increase and after to lay to a medicine, it shalbe law full for you (moste mercifull kyng) herein to followe the maner and steppes of the olde & primatiue churche: For the same was not established either by fyre or sworde, but the diligence of the Bishops did euer resiste Heretickes, whylest they both preached to them oftentymes Gods worde, and shone before them in ex∣ample of good lyfe. Since it was therfore in tymes past by this meane firste confirmed, it may nowe by the same also be retey∣ned and kept, so that you would only execute that, whiche li∣eth rather in your power to do. This verely, that Byshoppes & Pastours of shepe, should them selues gouerne their churches presently. Let also the inferiour ministers do the same. Againe that from henceforth suche be made Byshops as are able them selues to teache the people, and not to substitute deputies in their steade. This is the rote, that must be tilled: vpon this foū∣dation must we builde, for so may we hope well that heresies wyll by litle and litle vanishe away: But in case this waye be
neglected, it is to be feared, least thei wil increase more & more, what proclamatiōs so euer be finally made, or what remedies so euer be vsed. This was the .xvi. daye of October, when they signified these thinges to the king by Ambassadours & letters. Then also the Princes that were vmperes, for the controuersie of the gouernemēt of Chattes, mete againe as was appointed: The meting of Princes a¦bout yt āt∣grauet mat∣ter. First at Bacherach, afterwarde for the sickenes of the Pauls∣graue, at Wormes. The matter in dede was ended, and a certen somme of money agreed vpon, whiche the Lantgraue shoulde paye to the Erle, and abyde styll in possession: But where the Erle (vnlesse the mony were payd at a certen time) would haue this compact to be vaine, and his action to remayne to hym whole. And the Lantgraue whiche had sent his sonne thither, as before, reiected this condition, they departed the matter not finished. In this same moneth the Emperour calleth before him at The Emre. Charles ge∣ueth the go∣uernemēt to his Sonns Philip. Brusselles the rulers of all states, and speaking of his sicknes, sheweth them amongest other thinges that he would goe into Spayne, and geueth ouer his gouernement, his right and all his power to Philip his sonne, and exhorteth them to their du∣tie. These newes were spred abroade ouer al Europe far & nere, and a nauie was prepared, and the day appointed for his iour∣ney at the Ides of Nouember: But by litle and litle this brute waxed colde, and because wynter was at hande, they sayde his nauigation was differred to the next sommer. Nowe must we come to the counsell of the Empire, of what matters they should treate, kyng Ferdinando the fifte daye of February had propounded, as is sayde in the ende of the laste booke: But where many came very slowly, they began not be∣fore the nonas of Marche. Than at the laste the Ambassadours of the Princes Electours doe consulte, of what matter they should first treate: And although there were many against it, yet doe all consente at the laste to treate fyrste of Religion. The same also was thought mete in the Senate of the other Prynces and Cities. After muche debatynge they agreed to geue peace to Religion: But this thynge came chiefly in con∣trouersie, Whether peace should be geuen to Religion or no? that the Protestauntes woulde haue it lawefull for all men indifferently to followe theyr doctrine. But their ad∣uersaries with muche contention did resiste them, and sayde that the same was not to be permitted either to the cities that had receiued the decree of Auspurge made seuen yeare before concerning Religion, or yet to the whole state of the clergie.
And yf any Byshoppe or Abbot woulde chaunge hys Reli∣gion, they woulde haue hym remoued, and an other to be sub∣stitute in his place. Therfore the contention was sharpe, and the Protestauntes alledged this cause for their purpose, that the promesses of God as well of the olde as of the newe Testa∣ment, whiche conteine our saluation, doe apperteine general∣ly vnto all men. And therfore not to be lawfull for them to in∣clude the same within any certen limites, or brynge them to any restreinte, least that they should shutte bothe them selues and others out of the kyngdome of heauen. That there is nei∣ther Turke nor Iewe of any zeale at all, that would not bee glad to bringe all men to his owne Religion. Howe muche more than ought we to doe the same, whome God hath so ear∣nestly and straightly charged? Wherfore they are able to proue, that all men in this case oughte to haue libertie graunted them, bothe by the holy Scriptures, and also by the decrees of the fathers and counselles, howe those whiche take vpon them the title of olde and Catholique Religion, not without the great dishonour of God, handle Religion and abuse the chur∣che goodes. Neuerthelesse to establishe a peace, they do per∣mitte that they may kepe styll their lawes, Rites and ceremo∣nies, and inioye all their goodes, landes, and possessions, cu∣stomes, rightes, and priuileges, tyll suche tyme as the dissen∣tion in Religion be accorded. Wherfore they can not allowe that they shoulde prescribe that condition to the Byshoppes: For so should it come to passe, that they them selues shoulde be bounde to impugne the approuers and felowes of their owne Religion. And to theyr great dishonour they shoulde condemne their owne cause. For this were (saye they) to graunte, our Religion and doctryne not to be worthy of the Churche goodes, and that the same goodes haue bene hetherto applied amisse to our Chur∣ches and Ministeries. We should also confesse theyr wicked doc∣trine and ministerie to be grounded vpon Goddes worde, and that the Churche goodes are consecrated to this fylthie lyfe of theyrs, Lawes and Ceremonies. But howe greate an assence woulde this thynge ingender, yf we shoulde maynteyne the cause and lyuynges of them, whyche doe perfourme no profitable nor necessary dutie to the Churche? And shoulde betraye them who for the same Religion oughte of vs to bee moste set by? The aduersaryes
amonges other thinges saide this, if the Clergie should be per∣mitted to alter their Religion, it would come to passe, that By∣shoprikes, and suche other like colleges should be made propha∣ne, and by litle and litle being plucked away from the churche should come into the handes of Princes, and be made their in∣heritaunce. But they affirme that this was neuer their intēt: But to haue had a respect to this only, that being called again to their olde foundation, they might be imployed to the true vses, and that the same goodes might be annexed to the same churches for euer. And to take awaye all doubtes, they promise to put in good assuraunce, that in what Byshoprikes or Colle∣ges soeuer Religion shall be altered, no part of their goodes to be alienated, and that after the death or resignation of the by∣shop, free election and administration should be permitted to the College. But where after muche reasoning they could not agree, they exhibite on both partes to kyng Ferdinando their reasons comprised in wrytinge, and requeste hym that he wold fynde some waye. This was after the Ides of Iune. For they proceded very slowly. The cause wherof many thought to be, that the conclusion of peace betwene the Emperour and the Frenche kyng was loked for: For that the same was thought to make not a litle for either parte. But the Papistes made as it were an extraordinary wry∣ting, A wrytinge of the Papi∣stes to reque¦stes of yt Pro¦testauntes. vehement and byting, to the intent they myght the more set forth their matter. And firste saye they, the protestauntes haue propounded fiue conditions. First that the catholiques should allowe that doctrine, which many yeares past, & in this our time also, by & by so sone as it sprāg vp, of the ordinary ma∣gistrate hath bene alwayes condēned. Secondly that the sacri∣leges which they by the space of these .xxx. whole yeres haue cō∣mitted, should be ratified & allowed, & that neither by law, nor by other godly & lawful meanes the church may recouer yt same goodes. But they wold also haue peace to be made with them, where notwithstāding it is forboden to haue any cōpany with them. Moreouer that thei might place in ye colleges & churches of archbishops & of other prelates wicked ministers, to set forth dotestable & condēned doctrine, to abolish the true seruice & cere¦monies of ye church, & to bring in new & wicked in their place, & that they may norish those false preachers of ye churche goodes, directly against tholde lawes & custome of the churche. Further more that it should be lawefull for all persones as well ecclesi∣astical as ciuile which as yet followe the catholique religiō, to reuolt frō their true religion, & to come and followe their lore.
Finally when any of the Princes or Byshops do reuolt to their syde, that it shall not concerne the same persone only, but must apperteine to the people also that are subiecte to his gouerne∣ment, and to the goodes, and the whole ecclesiasticall iurisdic∣tion. Nowe although these thinges do striue with the lawes of God and man, albeit thei be contrary to the othe both of them∣perour and of the king and of al the Prelates, in so muche that the catholiques may not conueniently receiue them, vnlesse they would breake both their fayeth and promesse, yet for as much as they sticke obstinatly to their pourpose, and threaten force also, the catholiques at the length are contented, so farre forth as they ought to do by the pacification of Passawe, and haue declared the same sufficiently in the Senate of the Em∣pire, shewyng how they can not graunt that libertie of chaun∣ging religion indifferently to all men. For so should it come to passe that the Empire shoulde be broughte to desolation, and that hyghe top of dignitie taken away from Germany: For it is the dutie of Archebyshops and other Prelates, that not only The office of Archebysh. they do not permitte any Religion condemned, but also that they should admonishe and put in feare Byshoppes and suche others yea the vnlearned that are ready to reuolte, and suche as continue in their errour, to present to the Catholique and Romishe churche. For this maner hath euer since the tyme of the Apostels bene obserued, as it is to be proued by sondry testi∣monies of counselles, but chiefly by that of Calcedonie. Ney∣ther ought any man to thinke, that suche as do reuolte, should be left to their owne conscience. For in thinges that concerne our fayth, euery man ought not to be permitted to haue his cō∣science free. But when any departeth from the commō consent of the churche, he ought to be punished and restreyned. And in case he obeie not, he must be excommunicated, after the exam∣ple of those counselles, whiche are accompted the chief, whiche condemned Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius Eutyches. And in dede the counsell of Calcedonie deposed Dioscorides the mayn∣teyner of Eutyches from his Byshoprike. For where it is sayde that euery man ought to haue his iudgement and conscience free: And that neyther Christe nor his Apostles did euer com∣pelle any to beleue, yea when many went awaye from Christe, there was none holden against his wyll, this same verely is grounded vpon no foundation: And is confuted by Saint Au∣gustine at large in the two hondreth and fourth Epistle. For if it should be free for Byshoppes, forsaking the catholique Re∣ligion, to reuolte to an other, they wyll not relinquishe theyr
Byshoprike, for they wyll saye that they can nōt doe it with a saufe conscience, but they wyll desyre ayde of the Protestaūtes, that they wyll assiste them in mainteining their state, and ke∣ping of the people in their Religion. If this be done, there is no doubt, but these wyl take in hande to defende them, and wil saye they doe it of dutie, to the end that they may haue the go∣uernment, and also the possession of the goods. But wher these men saye they are bounde to admitte fellowes of their Religiō and to exclude no man out of the kyngdome of heauen: It doth not excuse them, for there is one only fayth whiche all that are christians ought to professe and obserue. This faith in tymes past both Emperours and kynges, and all Princes and Rulers of the Empire, and the people also confirmed by an othe. Uere∣ly this catholique faith is the selfe same, which we of Germa∣ny from the beginning vnto this time haue followed, those ex∣cepted that haue reuolted from the same. Wherfore there is no∣thing to be made newe, but all thynges ought to be referred to this fayth, and the mynde is to be subdued, that it may obeye the catholique churche. He that doeth otherwise, and taketh to him selfe any priuate Religion, he vnlesse he obeye admonishe∣mentes ought of his Byshop to be excommunicated, and to be remoued from all function: His goodes also ought by the ciuile Magistrate to be published, neither is he to be suffered within the limites of the Empire. For that same libertie or licencious∣nes of Religion the fathers haue alwayes reiected as a certen confusion of the faith, & made this lawe, that what thinges so euer were once determined of coūsels in matters of faith, shuld no more be reasoned, nor called in doubt, so that it is lawful for none to ordeine or propounde any thing to the cōtrary. For hi∣stories teache vs, what time Ualentinian themperour, admit∣ted all kinde of sectes, what trouble arose of the same. Again if this shuld be receiued, yt whosoeuer dissenteth frō ye catholique faith, shuld be excused by his conscience. Than should the Ana∣baptistes & Zwinglians, a Schuuenchfeldians, & suche other like also be excused, & in this peace cōprised. They saye how the promesses of God, wherby he promiseth vs euerlasting life, ap∣perteine to all men in generall, neither ought they of thē to be restreined. As though those promesses apperteined to thē only whiche be of their profession. But the thing is far otherwyse: For what tyme they shall swarue from the communion of the churche, they are excluded from the kingdom of heauē, euen by their own iudgement: And where there is no saluation out of the churche, howe should the kyngdome of heauen belonge
to them, whiche reiecte the Sacramentes of the churche, and contemne the ordeining of priestes, vnto whome Christe hathe geuen power to binde and lose? And if there be no priestes con∣secrated amonges them, howe obteyne they remission of their synnes? And except their sinnes be forgeuen, how shall they be made partakers of the heauenly kingdome? Therfore those pro¦mises apperteine not to them only: But rather they are to be thought to be of that nomber, whome Christe sayeth he know∣eth not. They bragge that they are able to proue, howe the Ca∣tholiques by sondry abuse both religion & the churche goodes. But let vs see what thing is herein to be blamed. After the ho∣ly Scripture and the lawes of the fathers and counselles the churche goodes ought to be distributed to Byshops and mini∣sters of the churche, to be imployed vpon the poore, vpon repa∣rations, and if the thing require so vpon the raunsomyng of them that are kept prysoners of the Turkes and Barbarians. Uerely this custome hath continued a thousand and thre hon∣dreth yeares since, that the same goodes shoulde bee imployed to Godly ministers and vses: Of the whiche sorte be, to saye Masse, to shewe Gods worde, to repare and builde churches, to fynde pore men, also Monkes, Freers and Nunnes. But what do they? putting out certen Byshops they make newe, as they were prophane and ciuile officers, vnto whome they geue as small a portion as they can possible: They ioyne to them other ministers, whiche bring ye sely people into errour, whilest both they contemne the sound doctrine, and minister to the people the Sacrament, whole, and the bread in dede not consecrated, to witte a creature in place of the creatour, and vnder the co∣lour of true worshipping, committe Idolatrie. They saye that from henceforth they wyll imploye the churche goodes aboute none other matters, but to the vse of scholes, nor wyll conuert no part therof to them selues (well let it be so) but by this vse the catholique religion should be polluted, and vtterly oppres∣sed. And this vse shall be a great deale worse than if the same goodes were bestowed about prophane matters. For these cau∣ses therfore, it is not lawefull for the Catholiques, to allowe this condition, as it is wrytten. This wryting (as I sayed) was extraordinary and priuatly made. The Protestaūtes being aduertised hereof, write against The answer of the Prote¦stauntes to yt wryting of the Papistes it, and first shewe what is the true doctrine, the same verely, whiche is conteined in the wrytinges of the Prophetes & Apo∣stles. Secondly, they declare how muche the doctrine of the Pa¦pistes differeth from the same, whiche haue so many wayes pol¦luted
the Lordes supper, whiche haue brought in so filthie er∣rours of purgatory, of praying to the dead, whiche take awaye and denie the remission of sinnes, whilest they saye we must al∣wayes doubte of the grace of God, whiche so muche dishonour matrimonie, instituted of God, which with detestable and hor∣rible crimes are defiled in this their senglenes of lyfe, euē with the same vices that Saint Paule rehearseth. Of these thinges it may clerely appeare who haue forsaken the true Religion. And seing it is so, suche ecclesiasticall persones, as either haue nowe already or els hereafter shall imbrace the pure doctrine can not be of them neglected. As touching the churche goodes, all thinges be maruelously defiled also. Truthe it is that a be∣nefice is geuen for dutie, but it is to be considered diligently of what sorte is the office of a priest or byshop. And that a conside∣ration of scholes must also be had. For euen from the tyme of ye Prophetes this maner hath euer remayned. And nowe the pre∣lates of churches seke chiefly, that suche thinges as are due to ministrs of the churche, to teachers, schollers and scholes to al∣mouse houses and hospitalles, they imploye to their own vses, that they may liue in al voluptuousnes. The same do thei with Abbeies & Colledges. Doeth not the Byshop represent a great Prince, who taking first the possessiō of his byshoprike, entreth the citie with two thousand horsemen? And these thinges in dede they do, where there is none of them all that can doe his dutie: What mynde or conscience is there? Can these obiecte sa∣crilege and extortion to others? Their doctrine is in dede con∣demned of Freers: But through their wickednes, yt perswade them not to reade their wrytings. And that the Pope and that the rabble do condemne and despise it, to be no maruell: For af∣ter the same maner was Christe and his doctrine intreated of Anna, Caiphas, and all the sorte of Phariseis and Byshoppes. They make oft mention of counselles and of the churche: But it lieth not in the power of the counselles and churche to pro∣pounde or commaunde any newe doctrine, besides the same whiche is left vs by the Prophetes, of Christ and his Apostles. That they speake of the consecrating of ministers to be fonde and worthy to be laughed at: For that folishe and histrionicall annointing maketh nothing for ye purpose. Finally their wry∣ting to be full of rayling & opprobrious wordes, but this they committe to God, and would only, aunswer the thynge in fewe wordes. A wryitng of king Fer¦dinando to the Princes. When this was the state of thinges, king Ferdinādo, whom both partes had requested, that he would shewe some waye, as
before is sayde, about the beginning of Auguste sendeth Am∣bassadours to the Electours & certen other Princes, with this message, howe to obeye the Emperour his brother and to fur∣ther the common wealth, he came to Auspurge the third Kalē∣des of Ianuary, not without the losse and hinderaunce of his owne affaires. Againe when he was come thither, how he was driuen to tary long, because fewe or none were come, before he could propounde any thing. For the matter was differred tyll the nonas of February. Than firste he declared the causes of sommoning the sayde assemblee: But in consultations to haue had wonderfull delayes, and not before the tenth Kalendes of Iuly was there any aunswere made hym, and that but of one only point of the deliberation, that is to witte of the peace in Religion, and that selfe same aunswere, not of one mynde, but diuerse and contrary. He verely fearyng this longe before, had admonished them diligently, that they woulde haue bene pre∣sent at the counsell them selues: If they followed his aduise herein, the matter in his opinion might haue bene brought to an ende wyshed for: Upon the other parte, whiche concerneth the publique peace, they doe nowe consulte, but because it is to be thought, that it can not be dispatched in a short tyme. A∣gaine, for bicause the state of his countries requyred his pre∣sence, for as muche as the Turkes semed to attempte new mat∣ters, and threaten sore, notwithstanding that he treateth with them for peace. Moreouer for as muche as nothing can be done or determined to any pourpose vnlesse they be present them selues, therfore he thinketh good, that the counsell be differred tyll an other tyme, and that nowe a decree be made after this maner. For as muche as through the absence of the Prynces nothynge can be determined, they are agreed that all treatie be differed tyll the nexte assemblee, the begynnynge whereof to be made at Regensburge aboute the Kalendes of Marche, of the yeare followyng. There the Princes them selues to bee present, that they may together with the Emperour, or with hym determine and ordeine those thynges wherof they haue nowe consulted, and hereafter shall doe. In the meane season the pacification of Passawe to remayne in full strength. And for as muche as it conteyneth this, fyrst, that in the counsell of the Empyre should be treated, whether that by a generall or by a prouinciall counsell of Germany, or els by the con∣ferrence of learned men the cause of Religion ought to be ap∣peased. Secondly that the thynge be done by the common coū∣sel of al states, not without the ordinary power of themperour
Therfore he, whiche loueth peace and concorde, hath determi∣ned at the next assemblee to exhibitie a certen booke compiled for the reconciling of suche matters as are in controuersie: but in it to be none intrapping, and to be made only for this ende, that the discorde shuld growe no further, and that the offences might be mitigated. Moreouer, to thintent that they them sel∣ues may the better determine, whether by the meane declared in the boke, the dissention may be taken vp, or whether that an other way must be sought for. Therfore he requireth them to take this proroging in good part, and that to the next counsell they would come them selues, after his example who for the cō¦mon welthe sake hath bene nowe so longe tyme out of his pro∣uinces. And that he hath chosen the place at Regenspurge, for bicause for the iminēt daūger of the Turke, he may not depart far out of his owne countrie. Let them aduertise him therfore what they wil do herein, to the ende he may be certen, that the matter shall not be forslowed, that with vaine expectation the better part of the time do not passe away, as it hath heretofore oftener than ones. These requestes hearde, the most part of the Princes thought it not good, that he should departe before the peace confirmed. For al Germany to be in great expectation of this matter. And since they agree nowe better in voyces, than euer they did before this time, they beseche him that he woulde make an ende before his departure: To the intent verely that in the next assemblee they might with so muche more expedi∣cion, take order and determine of Turkishe matters, which yet remained. As touching the boke which he wold exhibite, many of them sayde howe the like would come of that, as chaunced to the other boke whiche seuen yeares paste was wrytten also of Religion and set forth. For yet it is freshe in memory with what rayling wordes it was taunted: For where it was set forth, and priuileged by the Emperour to haue made a cōcorde, there arose occasions therof of many offences and dissentions. When Ferdinando had heard these of his Ambassadours a∣bout the eight Kalendes of September, the daye before the ka∣lendes of the same moneth, he declareth what his opinion is of the wrytinges of both partes to him exhibited, and amongest other matters that chief poinct that concerneth byshops, that in case they chaunge their Religion, they should forgo their of∣fice The bishops whiche cha∣unge their re¦ligion shuld lose their pro¦motions. and goodes also, by his wyll, and with many wordes mo∣ueth the Protestauntes that they would assente to the same. For this cōdition (sayth he) taketh from you nothing, but doth this only, that when a byshop forsaketh his order, and depar∣teth
from the olde Religion, his benefices and promotiōs may neuerthelesse remaine in the same state, wherin they were insti¦tuted, whiche thinge is both agreable to the ciuile lawe, and also to the lawes of the Empire, and to the pacification of Pas¦sawe: Whiche sayeth by playne wordes, that those whiche fol∣lowe the olde Religion, as well of the state ecclesiasticall as ci∣uile, not to be molested in their Religion, Ceremonies, goodes, possessions, rightes, priuileges: but that they should inioye all these thinges quietly without the interruption of any man. I can not se therfore how this condition can be denied them, whiche apperteineth to the ende that we spake of (that is) that they may inioye their thinges quietly. Whiche in dede can not be, if they should release this condition: For so should it come to passe, that suche as happely forsake and relinquishe the holy or∣der and auncient Religion, would kepe styll neuerthelesse their office, goodes, and possessions, neyther should it be lawefull for their colleges in the meane time to trie the lawe with them in this case. And this inconuenience wil come also, that betwene the Byshop and them there wyll be no great good wyll. For where it is reason, that according to the lawes of the founda∣tion mete persones should gouerne and rule holy offices, and if they do against those lawes, or relinquishe their state, that thā their Collegers should remoue them, and forsee, that the same reuolting hurt but him alone. Certenly their demaunde ought not to be refused. Wherfore I exhorte you agayne and agayne, that you contende no further herein. For amonges other thin∣ges you ought to consider, how they do not prescribe vnto you, what meane and waye is to be kept in gouerning of suche of∣fices, Colleges, and benefices, as to your selues you haue vsur∣ped, nor yet what is to be done with the ministers of churches of your dominions, whiche breake the lawes set forth by you, and neglecte their dutie. For lyke as it should be greuously and euyll taken of you, in case they would haue suche ministers as forsake and impugne your Religion, of you to be reteyned: So should it be muche more greuouse vnto thē, if both the gouern∣ment, and possession of landes and goodes should be left vnto them, whiche should both forsake and impugne their Religiō. For what other thing myght hereof be loked for, but debate, strife and contention? The foundation therfore of the thinge that is nowe in hande, to witte peace it selfe, by this meane should be vtterly taken away. The eight daye after, they auns∣were. Howe it is not their intent, to prescribe the clergie here∣in, muche lesse that the holy gouernmentes should be brought
to desolation, or that their nature altered they should be made ciuile or prophane. For we'ar not ignoraūt (say they) that some part of the Empire consisteth in these matters and possessions, whiche we couet not to deminishe or decaye, but by al meanes to mainteyne them. It would haue pleased vs right well, that this question had neuer bene moued, but to haue stande in the decrees of fourmer yeares, made at Norinberge, Regenspurg & Spiers, whiche include in the peace al the parteners of the cō∣fession of Auspurge: And at the first in dede the Ambassadours of the thre Archebyshops Electours, did wittely consider this also. But after when this doubte began to be moued of others, they went vnto their syde. They that first moued this question had peraduenture some cause so to doe, but what hath insued therof, nowe appereth. For if this let had not chaunced by the way, al ye matter (in our opiniō) had now ben brought to a good ende. But why we should not admitte that cōdicion, there wer Godly and weighty causes. For euery man doeth easely percei∣ue, howe muche it should be to the contempte and hinderaunce of our Religion, if we should permitte, that suche as imbrace the same, should be displaced and depriued of all their honour & dignitie, and accompted in the nomber of heretikes. What the first foundations of Colleges were, and what vices haue crept in since, we wyl here passe ouer in silence: But we suppose that many of the same statutes be not against our Religion. Again, to assente that none of the ecclesiasticall state should be of that Religion, whiche as the true & Christen Religion we professe, were doubtles no smal offence. For by the same facte we should cōdemne it as wicked and vnworthy the state of pristes, whiche ought chiefly to set forth Religion. And seing it is thus moste mightie kyng, we beseche you to waye these thinges in your mynde, and for the authoritie that you haue of the Emperour, you would suffer that part to be omitted. But he maketh aun∣swere that nothynge more can be graunted them: And sayeth moreouer that those thinges are nowe permitted them, which of so many yeares could neuer be obteined. Therfore let them haue consideration hereof, for els shall they be fayne to departe without any thing finished: Whiche if it so come to passe, and any incōuenience arise therof, there is no cause why the blame shuld be layde either in ye Emperour or in him, who so quietly & patiently hath handled the matter, and hitherto hath remay∣ned: Whiche nowe he can defer no longer. Therfore he geueth them ten dayes, that in the meane time they may wryte these thinges home to their Princes, and make him a direct answer.
When the daye came, these men, for that they had omitted no diligence, that al others were prouided for concerning religiō, and for that they might not prescribe any measure herein to ye king or Emperour, doe assent, especially since the king also re∣leased certen thinges, as hereafter shalbe shewed. Therfore the seuenth Kalendes of October the decree made was red openly, as the maner is, to this effect. For the doctrine a decrewher by religiō is frely permit to all men. of Protestauntes, faith and Religion, the Emperour, king Fer∣dinando, and the residue of Princes and states shall hurte no man of the whole Empire in any wyse, neither shall they com∣pell any man to forsake his Religion, ceremonies and lawes, whiche in their dominion the Protestauntes haue already or∣deined, or hereafter shall ordeyne, by commaundemētes or any other meane, nor yet contemne the same: But permitte them this Religion free, and also their goodes, faculties, customes, possession and rightes, so that peaceably they may inioy them. That the controuersie also of Religion be appeased by none o∣ther but by godly, frendly, and quiet meanes. In like case shall they that be of the confession of Auspurg demeane them selues towardes the Emperour, king Ferdinando and the rest of Prin¦ces and states addicte to the olde Religion, as well sacred as ci∣uile, towardes the whole state ecclesiastical, and colleges of the same, whether so euer they shal finally remoue to dwel, so that their ministerie be well ordered, as beneath shall be sayde. To all these shal they permitte their Religion, lawes, and ceremo∣nies, possessions, customes and all other rightes frely, neither by any meane hinder, but that they may quietly inioye them, and what so euer displeasure or strife shall arise, be determined on either syde after the custome & lawes of the Empire. That suche as be of neyther Religiō, be not comprysed in this peace. If any Archebyshop, Byshop, Prelate or other ecclesiastical per¦sone shall reuolte from the olde Religion, he shall immediatly An ecclesia∣stical person that chaun∣geth his Re¦ligion shalbe depriued. departe from his Byshoprike, office, benefice, and also from all the prosites, that he receiueth therof: And it shall be lawfull and free for the College or those to whome the same thing shal by ryght or custome apperteyne to chose or substitute an other in his place, whiche is of the olde Religion; to the intent that the ryghtes of the foundation, election, presentation, confir∣mation, and such other like may remayne to them whole with the quiet possession of the goodes: Yet so, that nothinge hereby be taken away from the foresayde reconcilement of Religion, that shalbe. And bicause diuerse states of the Empire, and their progenitours, haue taken to them certen ecclesiasticall gouer∣nementes,
abbeies and suche other like goodes of the church & haue disposed the same to the ministers of the church, vpō scho∣les, For churchs goodes al cō¦trouersies ar taken away. & other good vses, they shal not be troubled for the same nor sewed in the law therfore, but such goodes, to wit, those which do not belōg to the states of thempire, or to others that be sub∣iecte to thempire, & the possession wherof the clergie had not at the time of the pacification of Passawe, nor after also, shall re∣mayne as they be, & are cōprised in this peace: Neyther shall it be lawfull for the iudges of the chamber imperiall to graunte out any proces, or decree any thing against them for vsurpinge the same goodes. That the ecclesiastical iurisdiction be not ex∣ercised, nor take place, against the Protestaūtes Religiō, faith, The ecclesia¦sticall lawes shall not be exercised a∣gainst ye pro∣testauntes. rightes, lawes, and ecclesiasticall ministerie: But remayne in suspence, and stayed, and moleste them in nothing, tyll the con∣trouersie be throughly ended and taken away: But in al other matters, that concerne not Religion, ceremonies, lawes, and ministerie, let it be of force, and be exercised after the olde cu∣stome and lawe: Againe that the goodes, customes, rightes, re∣maine whole to all the state ecclesiasticall, yet so, that they in whose iurisdictiō such goodes be, lose no part of their politicke law which they had before this cōtention in religion. Moreo∣uer, yt of these selfsame goodes, the necessary ministeries, of the churche, parishes, scholes, almouses, hospitalles for the poore & sicke people, as they were founded in times past, ye so they be now also established & mainteined, without any respect had, of what religiō they be, to whose vse the almouse or sustenaūce is imployed. And if there fortune any strife or contention to arise by reason of this sustenaūce, or yt measure therof, yt bi the cōsent of ye partes arbitrers be chosen, who viewing ye thing, within ye space of half a yeare shall determine & make an estimate, howe much ought to be decided & bestowed vpon suche vses & ministe¦ries. In the meane season, til the matter be decided, that, yt thet whose part it is to geue suche ayde, be not molested in their pos¦session, but loke what they were wont to geue & bestowe in ty∣mes past, let thē geue now also, till the matter be determined. In October and Nouember was a Parliament holden in Englande: many supposed that they would haue there treated A parliamēt in England of the coronation of king Philip, but nothing was propoūided. The Quene motioned for the restoring of abbey landes, for as muche as the Pope vrged the same. But many Noble men and gentlemen doe possesse thē: Wherfore nothing could be brought to passe. The Quene her selfe in dede, whiche with al she coulde do, restored to the clergie the first fruictes & tēthes of benefices
during the tyme of this Parliamēt certen biting libelles were Libelles stro¦wed about in London. sowen abroade in London, wherin were some thinges to whet the people against the Spaniardes, & some other yt might haue withdrawen the Quenes minde frō king Philip. When inqui∣sition was made nothing could be tried out. Before the end of the parliament the Byshop of Winchester Chauncelour died of The byshop of Winche∣ster dieth. the dropsie: In whose place was substituted Doctour Heth Ar∣chebishop of Yorke, which had bene in tymes past with the Ar∣chebyshop of Cantorbury in Germany, and thought rightly of the pure doctrine. About ye nones of Nouēber the wife of Iohn The wife of Iohn Fride∣rick dieth. Friderick, the Lantgraues daughter died, of whose mariage is spokē before. Fraūces Uenerie Duke of Uenise, for that he had not handled him selfe well in the vytayling of the citie, and set Frances Ue¦nery displa∣ced. more by his priuate profit thā by the publique, was displaced. What time themperour had geuen ouer all his gouernmēt in the coūtries. Philip his, sonne sendeth his Ambassadours to the chief Princes & cities of Germany, & signified to thē yt same Ambassad. to the Prin∣ces of Ger∣many. and offereth thē his good wil & amitie. At the same time also ye Ambassadours of king Ferdinādo sollicited the Princes of Ger∣many, that for as much as a moste present daūger hanged euer by the Turke, who required al Transyluania to be geuē him, a coūtrie of nature most strōg, fertile, & ful of horsemē, they wold at the day appointed be present them selues in the coūsel of the Empire, & to consulte for the common wealth. He helde also a An assemble in Austriche coūsel of his subiectes for the same cause, in yt whiche assemblee they of Austriche required that religiō might be permitted thē fre? But the king differred them to the coūsel of thempire that should be next at Regenspurg, & also toke order that they shuld be before him at Uienne at the Ides of Ianuary the next yere. The Marques Marignane diyng at Millan, the Cardinall of Trent is sent into Lumbardy by the Emperour or king Philip his sonne, to haue the gouernment there: And the Duke of Al∣ba is made viceroy of Naples. On Christmas day the Pope, af∣ter his maner, createth newe Cardinalles, & amongest others Iohn Gropper, Counsellour to the Archebyshop of Collon, of whome often mention is made in the fourmer bokes. Than al∣so Iohn Grop∣per Cardin. Reinold Poole, when of a Cardinall deacon he was made a priest (as they call it) began to singe Masse. For this is not law full for Deacons by the Popes lawe. In the beginning of the moneth of Ianuary throughout Saxonie, Meissen and Boheme were horrible tempestes, thon∣dering, and lightening, and thonderboltes, whiche dyd muche harme euery where, but especially in churches. In the same
moneth, at Uirodure, whiche is a towne in Swicerlande two mile from Zuricke, in the night about suppertyme, fyre bur∣sting out of one of the towres of the church cracked so, that all men came running to quēch it: When they came thither, ther was no flame, twyse this happened one tyme after an other, to witte the fourth daye of the same moneth, and the .xiiii. daye. Certen men of the townes of Heluetia, being moued by the Pope, go afterwardes to Rome, not without the great suspi∣cion of many. Kyng Philippe beginning his newe gouernmēt whiche he had receiued of his father, with great pompe and so∣lemnitie, the .xviii. day of Ianuary entreth into Andwerpe the chief towne of that coūtrey. In the meane tyme there is great King Philip entreth into Andwerpe. persecution and burning in Englande. About the Ides of Ianuary thābassadours of the prouinces of Austriche, assemble at Uienne, as was appointed. There the king with an oratiō graue & long, declareth in how great daū∣ger they stode all of the Turke now iminent, and therfore doth admonish them, that so sone as may be, they would helpe hym with men & mony, that his great & outragiouse crueltie might be repressed. Then they that are of yt lower partes of Austriche, saye how thei were cōmaunded of theirs, that thei shuld treate Thambassa¦dours of Au¦strtche requi¦re of kynge Ferdinando that the true Religiō may be permitted them. first of Religion. Therfore they recite what they haue done in the selfsame cause, by ye space now of .xiiii. yeares, how oft they haue intreated & put vp supplicatiōs, & what maner of procla∣mations he hath set forth contrary to their expectatiō: Again, for as muche as hitherto (say they) al coūselles against ye Turke are taken in vaine, & not only as yet he could not be repressed, but also his violence hath so farre proceded, that hauing taken in Hongary and Slauonie many townes, Castels & Fortes, he hangeth now ouer yt neckes of vs, it is doubtles to be thought that this is the manifest vengeaunce of God, whiche plageth vs for sinne, and afflicteth vs for that we amende not our life, and so in dede afflicteth vs, that vnlesse his worde be receiued, & the amendement of life followe, the losse not only of lyfe and goodes, but also of eternall saluation is like to insue. For al∣though the whole worlde toke armure against that ennemie, yet, so long as it shall remayne in that state of lyfe, there is no hope of victory, but rather of destruction, and slaughter, as it is euident to haue chaunced some tyme to moste florishynge kyngdomes. We treated of the same matter also in the laste as∣semblee, and prayed you that we myght not be compelled to do any thyng against our conscience: But you referred the matter to the counsell of Regenspurg. How be it you may cōsider (most
mightie king) howe greuouse it is to them, whiche thyrste for the health of their soules, to be differred to a tyme vncertē. For in the meane time the mynde is in angwishe, and in this an∣gwyshe and perplexitie many thousandes of mē ende their life. Doubtles the worde of God, whiche through our Sauiour Ie∣sus Christe is opened to vs, should be the only rule, whiche the church ought to followe: And in case any thing cōtrary to gods worde haue crept in, although it be grounded of great antiqui¦tie, it must be reiected: For God wilbe honored & worshipped, as he him selfe prescribeth & cōmaundeth, not as men wene and fayne. But with how horrible & greuous plages he reuengeth the neglecting of his cōmaundemēt, & the obseruation of mēs traditions, both the Empires of fourmer time do shewe, & also the freshe and domesticall calamities of people next vs declare. Therfore after moste diligēt searche, there appereth to vs none other remedy than that those manifest errours and depraua∣tions, brought long since into the churche, being caste away, the pure doctrine may be receiued and frely preached, to gether with suche administration of the Sacramentes as Christ him selfe did institute, for to departe & tourne away from the worde of God so manifest and so plaine, we may not, as we haue ofte shewed you at other tymes. For firste we must seke for the king∣dome of God. Whiche being done, God assisteth vs with his spi∣rite, and gouerneth our counselles and doinges. To the ende therfore that he would deliuer vs from al these daungers, that he would be the counseller of the warre and enseigne bearer, that he may assiste vs in battel & discomfite thennemies force, in moste humble and earnest wyse we beseche your highnes, euen for the death of Christe, for our saluation, and for the last iudgement that we shall abyde, for as muche as this thing ap∣perteineth to the perpetuall felicitie of you and your children, and al your Realme, that we, which are spotted with no secte, may by your leaue and permission remaine in the pure and sin¦cere Religion vntyll a free generall counsell, and that we may inioye the same benefite of peace, whiche in the laste assemblee of the Empyre you haue made with the fellowes of the confes∣sion of Auspurge. For seyng we be all Baptized in Christe, we beseche you, that our State and condicion be not worse than theirs, nother that you woulde denye vs the thynge, whiche you haue graunted to diuerse other of your Prouinces, but that you woulde call in those Proclamations of yours, sette forth concerning Religion, and woulde delyuer vs from thys carefulnes, wherwith we are bounde. Moreouer, we beseche
you, that you woulde set forth by proclamation, that the mini∣sters of the church, that teache after the wrytinges of the Pro∣phetes & Apostels, & after the same maner, as before is said, doe minister the Sacramentes, be not molested, nor yet suche scho∣maisters: Neither that they be imprisoned nor banished, before they shall pleade their cause before a lawful iudge. If you thus do, as we trust you wil in this extreame daunger, there is no doubt, but God will rewarde the same moste aboundantly, & al¦so the states of the Empire will sende you more ayde than they haue done hitherto. And we likewise will not be behinde with our dutie, but with moste willing mindes, will bestowe & geue what so euer shall apperteine to the cōmon defence & preserua∣tion of our coūtrie, and wil throughly satisfie your demaūdes, so muche as shall lie in our power and habilitie to do. At the selfsame time the Ambassadours of themperour and Truce takē betwene the Emperour & the kynge of Fraunce. the Frenche king had met: And where the controuersie coulde not be finished by a peace, the fift day of the moneth of Februa∣ry, they take truce for fiue yeares by Sea and lande, as well in Flaunders and those partes as also for Italy and all other pla∣ces. Euery one kepeth the possession of those thinges whiche he hath gotten in the tyme of the war: Themperour excepteth the exiles of Naples & Scicilie. He compriseth the Pope in the first place, as doth also the Frenche king, & afterward euery mā his frendes & allies, as the maner is. The same truce not long af∣ter the king caused to be proclamed both throughout Fraunce and at Metz also, but the Emperour somwhat later in his coū¦tries. A brute went that the Pope toke it in snuffe that this truce was made, and went about afterwarde to perswade the Frenche king to breake the same. Others thought cōtrariwise, that it was made chiefly through his aduise, yt he might make warre against the Lutherians. Touching prisoners nothinge could be concluded in this truce, amongest whome the chiefest were the Duke of Arescot, a Bourgunnion, and Monmoraūce the Conestables eldest sonne, takē thre yeres before at Terwin. When they of Austriche (as I sayde before) had on this wise The answer of king Fer∣dinando to yt Ambassa. of the house of Austriche the day before the Kalendes of February put vp their supplica∣tion to king Ferdinando in wryting, the king the eight day af∣ter aunswereth, and speaking first of his good wyll towardes the common wealth, and of the common calamitie and miserie of times, and of Gods wrath, whilest I consider (saieth he) and way mine owne state and place diligently, whilest I thinke howe I haue euer from my yought hitherto followed the pre∣ceptes of the christen and catholique churche, after the maner
of my progenitours, of whome I haue receiued this Religion He meaneth the Emper. Sigismonde that burnte Iohn Husse. and discipline as it were deliuered by hand, I do surely finde, yt I may not assent to you in that whiche you require. Not that I would not gladly gratifie my people, but for that I see it is not lawful, that I should be preiudiciall to the Christe church, & shoulde alter the lawes of the same, and the holsome decrees, at my pleasure, where I must rather heare it as Christ cōmaū∣deth. How beit for as much as I know by long experiēce, what occasion of great euils this bitter contention about Religion bringeth, I haue doubtles with my brother yt Emperour bene now these many yeares wholy occupied, that they might come to a composition. And therfore hath the matter bene attēpted in many counsels of the Empyre, & certein conferences of lear∣ned men, and through our mediation hath bene begon once or twyse the counsell of Trent: But where as the treatie came to no good effect, that can not doubtles be imputed to vs, neither is it vnknowen, by what diuises and craftes the matter was than hindered, Now where you require that the pure doctrine, and the benefite of the peace newly made for Religion may be graūted you: Like as heretofore I haue kept backe no man frō the true Religion, so will I not also do it hereafter. Again you are as well comprised in the same peace, as are the people of o∣ther Princes. For this is the meaning of the same decree, that the people shall followe the Religion of their Prince. And it is permitted to temporall Princes to chose whether Religiō they will, for that the people ought to be content with the choise of the Prince, but yet so for al that, that such as shal not like that Religion whiche the Prince hath chosen, may haue fre libertie to sell that they haue and go dwell in an other place, without any hinderaunce or blemishe to their estimation, whiche seing it is so, your dutie is to perseuer in the olde and catholique Re∣ligion, which I professe. That the Gospel should not be purely taught after the exposition of the Apostels Martyrs & fathers whiche the churche hath receiued, I was neuer against. The Lordes supper although it were instituted whole, yet was it in the olde churche also distributed vnder one kynde, as it may be declared at large. Therfore it was not altered first in ye time of the counsell of Constaūce, but that custome had lasted many ages before: Wherfore you may easely thinke, how it is not law¦ful for me, by my priuate authoritie to chaunge or abolish that lawe receiued and approued by generall counselles, especially at this tyme, when both now lately peace is geuen to Religiō, and in the next assemblee we must treate further for a reconci∣lement:
In the which treatie doubtles, I wil seke to the vtter∣moste of my power, that dissention may be vtterly takē away: But if that can not be done, thā wil I take such away as may profit both your wealth and your soules health also. And to ye intent you may vnderstand my good wil & clemencie towardes you, I wil in dede staye & restreine that part of my proclamatiō that cōcerneth the Lordes supper, but yet vnder this conditiō, that all sectes forsaken, you do alter nothing of the lawes & ce∣remonies of the churche, but tary for the decree of the assemble of the Empire next cōming. The ministers of the churche and scholem aisters, so that they followe this order, also shal not be molested, as also before this time, I suffered no man against right to be iniuried. Seing therfore I beare you this good wil my truste is that you will desire nothing furthermore, and for as muche as the publique necessitie vrgeth, it shall become you to consult for the common wealth, and to geue that behoueth. Wherunto they make aunswer the .xii. daye of February: And The Ambas¦sadours ans¦wer to Fer∣dinando. where in the cause of all other moste weightie, whiche contei∣neth perpetuall felicitie, and especially apperteineth to the sal¦uation of him and his children, they can obteyne nothing, thei she we how they are moste hartely sory. And where as (say they) moste mightie kyng, you say, that this wonted distributing of the Lordes supper, was in oulde tyme receiued in the churche, that same may be aboundantly cōfuted by holy scripture, and also their errour detected, that haue perswaded your highnes herein. But where you say the meaning of the late decree made at Auspurg to be, that the people should applie them selues to the Religion of their Prince. Uerely for as much as a fewe yea¦res paste, and longe before this decree, we haue with common consent exhibited to your highnes supplications concerninge Religion, it were lawfull for vs also, in case we would dwel in the same aunswer, to sell our goods, and flitte with our wyues and children to some other place: But what discōmoditie were herein, agayne, how heuie and sorowfull newes this would be to the people, who seeth not? When verely they shal heare, that they, whiche after the custome of their elders, haue bene euer more ready to spende their bloud and lyfe for the preseruation and dignitie of the house of Austriche: must nowe forsake their moste swete natiue countrie, so many yeares inhabited and in∣riched by their fore fathers? Therfore we admit not, nor ratifie the same aunswer, in this behalf, but as we haue done oft here∣tofore, for the honour of God we beseche you, that you woulde permitte vs to haue that incōparable treasure of Gods worde,
and suffer vs to haue no let in this matter. For if the condition of the cause were suche, that the whole blame should be to you ascribed, doubtles we could be cōtent, lyke as in other thinges, so in this case also, to obey you willingly. But since that euery man must render an accompt of his owne dedes, since there is no difference of persones with God, and for bycause the ende of this lyfe is euery moment at hande, neither is there any thing more vncerten than life, we can not but with earnest suite and labour requyre this thinge of you. Wherfore, we beseche you that we may haue sufficient warrauntise herein. Hereunto the kyng the fourth daye after, I suppose (sayeth The answer of king Fer∣dinando. he) there was no iust cause, wherfore you should not be satisfied with the fourmer answer. I permit that as the Apostels haue set it forth, as the martirs and fathers approued of the churche haue taught and expounded the scripture, it be nowe taught also, I pray you, what more require you herein? For since God hath promysed to his churche the holy ghoste, saluation is not to be sought els where. You saye you are defiled with no secte, of the whiche sorte be many now adayes, as anabaptistes, Sa∣cramentaries, Zwinglians, Schnemfeldians and such other lyke. This in dede is very well: But if the doctrine be set at li∣bertie, and be not included within certen limites, as before is sayde, howe long suppose you that it wil continue pure? When euery man for hym selfe wyll bragge of Goddes woorde, and saye it is subiect to no creature, but to God alone, nor will ad∣mitte the iudgement of no man, as we see it happen in many places, where all is ful of trouble, whylest euery mā doeth stifly mainteine his owne opinion, the authoritie of the churche vt∣terly contemned. And for as much as in your fourmer wryting you recite the laste decree of the Empire somewhat otherwyse than apperteineth, therfore haue I declared how it is to be ta∣ken, not that I would haue you to go dwell els where. Againe to take frō you all carefulnes, I haue suppressed ye parte of the proclamation touching the Lordes supper, promysing hereaf∣ter all diligence, that a reconcilement may be had. For what causes I can not reuolte from the lawes and ceremonies of the churche, I haue shewed. For both Christ sayeth that the church must be heard, and also the thing it selfe teacheth the fourmer age, whiche renewyng nothing, abode in the Religion of their forefathers, to haue bene muche more quiet and fortunate in all thinges, than this is nowe, where all thinges are tourmoy¦led with sectes and dissentions, and many men rauished & toste hither and thither with euery wynde of doctrine. Wherby I
would the rather haue thought that you would not haue ans∣wered in this sorte. And nowe, albeit that this aunswere of yours may be throughly confuted, yet, for as much as we must treate of contributions and subsidies, and therof shortly deter∣mine, vnlesse you be determined to suffer extreme miserie, I wyll not be ouer longe, trusting also that you wyl doe, both as the matter it selfe, and also as the consideration of your dutie requyreth. They agayne solicite the same thing, and saye howe they can not leaue it: And in case they can obteyne nothinge, they saye it wyll be the cause, that the same consultation of ge¦uing him ayde, wyl surely be hindered and letted. For that they haue no commission to promyse any thing herein, vnlesse they haue first good assuraunce for Religion and Ministers of the churche, and for Scholemaisters, that they may be authorised to teache frely. In the moneth of February, Henry Duke of Brunswick, ta¦keth to wyfe the sister of Sigismunde king of Poole. About Duke Hēry of Brūswick marieth a wyfe. The byshop of Treuers dieth. Fredericke Counte Pa∣latine dieth. this tyme dieth Iohn Isemburg, Byshop of Treuers, and hath Iohn Ley his successour. The .xxvi. daye also of the same mo∣neth departeth at Alzeme Fredericke the Pausgraue, Prince Electour, a man of great yeares: Whome Otto Henrick his bro¦thers sonne succedeth, who had lōg since receiued the doctrine of the Gospell, and was in daunger therfore to haue lost al his possessions. Taking an othe of his people, he commaundeth by and by, that no man within his dominion should say Masse, or vse any other ceremonies. Of the trouble that Osiander styred vp in Prusse, who had brought in a newe doctrine of iustificatiō, is spoken in the xxii boke. But where as the moste part of learned men reprehended that opinion, Albert Duke of Prusse by open wryting profes∣seth The Duke of Pruse pro¦fesseth the cō¦fession of Auspurge. that he wyll followe the doctrine of the confession of Aus∣purg: He commaundeth therfore the ministers of the churche, that they teache according to the same, and promyseth to saue them harmeles, in case they obeye. And to the ende the matter might be throughly appeased, Iohn Albert Duke of Megel∣burge, sonne in lawe to the Duke of Pruse, a Prince excellent∣ly learned, going thither, and hauing learned men about hym, brought Iohn Funccius, who was chief of the secte of Osian∣der, to that poinct, that both he acknowledged his errour, and affirmed that he would confesse it openly, and would hereafter teache after the confession of Auspurg. Where as others would do the same, they were agreed with the other diuines, and the state of the churche was appeased.
The fourth daye of Marche began to shine a blasing starre, and is sene by the space of twelue dayes. In this moneth the A Camete sene. Ambassadours of Princes and cities mete at Regēspurge, and treate the cause of Marques Albert of Brandenburge. For his aduersaries in the counsell of the last yeare had againe requi∣red the ayde of Princes against him, but through the mediatiō of his frendes, and that the matter should be heard by interces∣sours. Where he therfore in the moneth of February of this yere came out of Fraūce into Germany, his matter was heard the causes of thempire differred till the moneth of Aprill. The Archebishop of Cantorbury already condēned, & after Tharcheby∣shop of Can∣torbu. burnt for Religion the death of Ryddley & Latimer retourned to prison, as before is said, ye .xxi. of this moneth is burnt at Oxforde. Certen daies before, being put in some hope of life, through the perswasion of certen, he had reuoked diuerse articles of doctrine, neither shewed he constancie. And when he sawe he must die, he made an oration to the people, and speaking many thinges of the a∣mendement of life & of maners, to the ende he might haue his audience attētiue, at the lēgth sheweth how greuously he had offended God by denying of the truthe, & reciting the chief arti¦cles of doctrine, declareth briefly, what he thought, and confir∣meth Papistrie to be the kingdome of Antichriste. He had no so ner said so, but he was had thence, not without moste bitter & railyng wordes to the place of execution. And when he came thither, stretching forth his right hand, this hād (saith he) hath wickedly offended, in subscribing to ye wicked opinions, which the ennemies of the truthe had propounded to me: Wherfore it shall first suffer punishment. Thus being tied to ye stake, so sone as the fire began to burne, he stretched forth his hande into if, as far as he coulde reache, that it might first fele the torment. And so was burnt the primate of Englande, a man of greatest learning & authoritie. From the time that the Popishe marke was taken from him, they call it degrading, whiche is wont to be done with many cerimonies, they put vpon him a most vile garmēt, & so brought him forth amonges the people, to be lau∣ghed at: But many hauing cōpassion of his vnworthy chaūce, could not kepe thē frō sheding of teares, although thei doubted nothing, but that he should flitte out of this miserable lyfe in to the heauenly countrie, and life euerlasting. His promotions got Cardinall Poole, made Archebyshop, when he had Massed before. The Baua∣rians sollici∣te their Prin¦ce forreligiō. And like as they of Austriche, so also the Bauariās sollicited Albert their Duke cōcerning religiō, in maner at ye same time.
The Duke seing that kyng Ferdinando his father in lawe had permitted some thing to his subiectes, he also, when he exacted mony. graunted some thing for a time, that they might receiue the Lordes supper whole, and on daies prohibited, when neces∣sitie requireth, to eate flesh. Howbeit he prosesseth with many wordes that he wyll not departe from the Religion of his aun∣cesters, nor alter any thing in ceremonies & such other thinges for the same not to be lawfull for him to doe, without the con∣sent of his supreme Magistrate both spirituall and temporall: And where he permitteth these two, to be for a tyme only, tyll some thing be established by publique authoritie, or a reconci∣lement made. For he wyll that his proclamations of fourmer tyme concerning Religion be exactely and stryghtly kept, these two thinges only excepted: He wyll procure also, as muche as in him lieth, that the Metropolitane and Byshops shall con∣firme this graunte, and that they shall not for this cause seke to moleste any man. This proclamation was written the daye before the Kalendes of Aprill. The Metropolitan of whome he speaketh, is the Archebyshop of Salisburg. At this time certen noble men of Transiluania do reuolte from kinge Ferdinand. Ferdinando also prorogeth the counsel of the Empire to a time vncerten, and leuieth an army, whiche he sendeth downe the ri¦uer of Danubius into Hōgary. There is a town of Alsatia cal∣led Obereyne, thre leages from Strasburg. A certen citezen of that towne, being a labourer about vines, for penury & want, when his wyfe was absent, the tenth daye of Aprill sleeth his A father kil∣leth his thre children. thre children, a daughter of seuē yeares, a sonne of foure yeares olde, and a sucking babe in the cradell, not fully halfe a yeare olde. That tyme there was a brute, and reporte went of the se∣cret conspiracie of the Pope & his adherentes against the Pro∣testauntes. It increased this opinion, for that there was no doubte, but that the Pope toke moste displeasauntly, the decre The Pope toke displea¦sauntly that peace was geuen to re∣ligion. of the last yeare made at Auspurge, wherby peace and libertie was graunted to Religiō: It is thought also that he sollicited the Emperour to make it frustrate: For he sawe how many re∣uolted daily from his kingdome, and vnderstande what they of Austriche and what the Bauarians went about. Moreouer, the Archebyshops of Mentz, Treuers and Collon by occasion of the bathes met that tyme together: Whiche was thought to be done not without cause. King Ferdinando breaking vp his assemblees in Austriche, goeth into Boheme, and calling the countries there about to Kyng Ferd, goeth in to Boheme. Prage, against this iminent daunger, demaundeth mony and
hath it graunted: Than sending letters to them whiche had bene now certen monethes at Regenspurg, he excuseth his ab∣sence, and bicause he must retourne to Uienna, he appointeth the assemblee of the Empire the first of Iune. After the depar∣ture of king Ferdinando, the Lantgraue came in to Meissen, & was a certen tyme with Auguste Duke of Saxony. The tenth The Duke of Arescot brake out of pryson. day of May, the Duke of Arescot, being prisoner in castel Uin∣cent, not far from Paris, escaped and came home safe. The Cardinall of Auspurge who had taried a whole yeare at Rome, when he being lately retourned frō thence had heard how sinistrally and many euill men spake and thought of him, as though he should practise with the Pope priuie and perni∣ciouse counselles for Germany, he pourgeth him by an open wryting, set forth in the vulgar tongue, about thende of May. And where as the last yeare (sayth he) after the death of Iulius the third, I went to Rome, as my dutie was to do, and was pre¦sent The Cardi∣nall of Aus∣purg pour∣geth himself by wryting. at the Election of him that now ruleth: I had pourposed doubtles to haue retourned home into Germany with expedi∣tion, but I was deteined of the Pope, who went about than a reformation of the churche: And chosing certen excellent men of all nations for the same purpose, chose me also, although vn¦mete for so weightie a matter, bycause I was a Germane, to be of that nomber. But where the charge of my Byshoprike re∣quired my presence, askyng leaue of the Byshop, the day before the Ides of Aprill, I retourned home. Neuerthelesse, although I haue so vsed my self both alwayes before, and after also that I came to this kynde of lyfe that I now am in, whiche I wold should be spoken without boasting, that no shamefull matter can be truly obiected to me, although I haue bene oft the coū∣sellour and authour of peace, not without my great losse and hinderaunce, although the welth and dignitie of my countrie hath bene to me alwayes dere, yet so sone as I came againe in to Germany, I heard of great mē and worthy credit that were my frendes, how in myne absence certen wrytynges were caste abroade, whiche sounded to my dishonour, as though I should not only at Rome with ye Pope, but also euery where through out Italy, with secret diuises practise this, that Germany, & namely the league fellowes of the confession of Auspurg, shuld againe be vexed with a moste greuous warre. And in the same wrytinges they alledged this to be the cause of this enterprise sinisire suspi¦cious spred of the Card. of Auspurg. and fecret working, that the Pope did greatly mislike the decre made the last yeare at Auspurg cōcerning religion, in so much that he perswaded the Emperour that he woulde abolishe the
same, that he had dispensed with him for his faith & promesse herein, that he had promysed him all the ayde and power that he could make to subdue Germany, so that themperour againe would not fayle hym in recouering the ecclesiasticall iurisdic∣tion in Germany, that therfore he had made truce betwixt the Emperour and the Frenche kynge, that bothe their Armies might be conuerted to this vse. Thei added moreouer that this was written in the same libelle, that no foreyne Soldiours should be leuied, but only of Germaynes, that the thing might the better be hidde. Moreouer that the kyng of England wold hire eight thousande horsemen, and be gouernour of the whole warre, and that mounsters shoulde be take in sondry places: Briefly, that the whole matter shoulde be handled so circum∣spectly, that all these powers should set forwarde together at one tyme, and should inuade the Protestauntes vppon the so∣den, than when many shall be from home at the counsel at Re∣genspurge, Furthermore, that both the Pope and the kyng of Englande, sending Ambassadours to certen Prynces in Ger∣many, doe promyse them largely, and that the Pope in dede pre¦pareth a greate army of horsemen and fotemen, to sende for ayde. Furthermore, that I should sclaunder Otto Henrick the Paulsgraue, Christopher Duke of Wirtemberge, and Albert Marques of Brandenburge, as Heretickes, and seditiouse and worthie to be driuen out of their countrie. And should hyghly commende the Lantgraue in the Senate of Cardinalles, for that he had forsaken his Religion, and that Titell man one of the Ministers of his churche had reuoked his doctrine at Rome both by worde and wryting. Now for as muche as this sclaunder toucheth not only the The pourga¦tion of yt Car¦dinall of Au¦spurg against the suspici∣ous of certen Pope and the Emperour, but hurteth also my name and esti∣mation. And bycause it is the part of an honest man to defende both his owne and also the honour and innocencie of his Ma∣gistrate, I must nedes aunswere to the same. And to begynne with all, it was surely very greuous and paynefull for me to heare that any were yet remayning and to be founde, whiche contrary to the auncient vertue of Germany, faythe and con∣stancie, doe geue their myndes to suche sclaundering, and here to applie them selues, that through moste wicked libelles and lewde talke, they myght styre vp the Prynces of the Empyre a∣gainst their hyghe Magistrate, and set the Prynces together by the eares in a wycked warre. How cruel, troublesome, and full of perill was the sclaunder
diuised .xxviii. yeares past, I suppose full many doe remember: A sclaunder deuised a∣gainst certi Princes. When kyng Ferdinando, the Byshoppes of Mentz, Salisburg, Bamberge and Wirseburge, the Prynce Electour of Branden∣burge, Lewys and William brethren Dukes of Bauier, and George Duke of Saxony, were sayd to haue conspired against Iohn Duke and Electour of Saxony, and the Lantgraue, where the matter was brought to that poinct, that al thinges tended to a moste cruell ciuile warre. Doubtles Princes ought to set before their eyes, and to remember the same tyme. For bothe the wyckednes of that deuiser was detected, where as euery Prynce for his parte denied the thing by open wryting, and the sclaunderer afterwarde, loste his head, as he deserued. Whiche I truste shall nowe come to passe also, that euen God beyng reuenger, the authours of so wycked a deuise may be disclosed: For my parte I praye God to sende them a better mynde, and to confounde theyr counselles, that they redounde not to the distruction of the Countrie. For seinge that thys is a lyke sclaunder, as that furmer was, it may be easely per∣ceiued, that the authours haue forged it of the selfe same myn∣de, that the other dyd: or after the imitation of hym to haue attempted this, to the intente, verely that they myght nowe bringe to passe, that thynge whiche he than coulde not finishe. But for as muche as the intente of this Sclaunderer is, that he myght perswade that the Pope and the Emperoure, woulde by force of armes, breake that decree made for peace in Religion, and that the kyng of Englande and the Byshoppes of Germany would also ayde them herein: I proteste that it is wyckedly forged and inuented, for this intent verely, that mens myndes beyng exasperated, and displeasures increased, all places myght swymme full of ciuyle bloud. And although I doe not doubte but that the Emperoure and other Princes, to the iniurie of whom this seditiouse and famouse libelle apperteineth, wyll them selues defende theyr cause, yet for duty sake, I can not omitte but that I must also pourge the highe Magistrate. Unfaynedly all the tyme that I remained at Rome, in my presence or to my knowledge, ther was not one worde spoken at Rome of that same peace of Re∣ligion. It is falsely therfore ascribed to the Pope, as though he should applie all hys Counsell to force and violence, as though he went about to perswade hereunto the Emperoure and other kynges: It is falsely (I saye) imputed to him, neither can it be proued. And seing that is so, it is like wyse false that
is wrytten of the Emperour. For since there was no cōference nor treatie betwene them for this matter, howe coulde they The Pope had no confe¦rence with yt Emperour against reli∣gion or the libertie of Germany. determine vpon warre, or make a compacte betwene them, for the recoueryng of the ecclesiasticall iurisdiction, or subduinge of Germany? This defamer sayth, that truce was made betwyxt the Em¦perour and Frenche kyng, to the intent that the soldiours be∣ing of either discharged, might be led to this warre. What the cause of the truce was, the copie of the same declareth. Againe, those soldiours were not reteined of any Prynce, but so many, as kyng Ferdinando commaunded to be taken vp, and sent thē into Hongary against the Turke, those also excepted, whome they of Auspurge and of Norinberge, and the Byshoppes of Bamberge and Wirtemberge hired, least haply they should be oppressed vpon the soden. This part therfore of their deuyse fal¦leth touchyng the Pope, the Emperour, and of the other By∣shoppes. Nowe as concerning my selfe, I haue verely hitherto follo∣wed the olde trewe and catholique Religion, and as it becom∣meth The Cardi∣nall of Ans∣purg addicts to the olde Religion. a Germayne borne, I treade in the footesteppes of my el∣ders, and perseuer in the same communion of the churche, that I was brought vp in, as also in the last counsel imperiall I de∣clared both by my letters and counsellours. In this mynde I pourpose through Gods grace to perseuer: Neither am I myn∣ded to doe any thynge, that may striue with honestie or consi∣deration of my dutie: And yet neuerthelesse I couet to be at peace with all men. But where it is sayde, that I haue had se∣cret conference with the Pope, with the Emperour, with the kyng of Englande, and with other States of the Empire, and and with certen priuate men, about the framyng of this war. Agayne, that same of the Paulsgraue, the Duke of Wirtem∣berge, and the Marques of Brandenburge, to be moste false, neyther that it can be proued of any man: Yea they that bringe vp suche tales of me, whether it be done by woorde or wrytinge, I saye they be sclaunderers, and ennemies of the common countrie. And touching Counte Palatine thus stan∣deth the matter. The maner and dignitie of my vocation requyreth, that I should maynteyne the ryght of my Byshop∣rike, and kepe the people committed to my charge in the olde and Catholique Religion. And beynge aduertysed that Otto Henry Prince Electour went aboute, to make certen Townes of my Byshopryke, of his Religion, and had placed Preachers in them, I toke this doubtles in euyll parte, and had cause,
why I should defende me by the lawes. Therfore my counsel∣lours in my absence, howbeit, yet by my commaundement, brought the matter in to the chāber imperiall, where the mat∣ter dependeth as yet so: Otherwyse not so much as in worde I neuer hurte his name nor estimation, muche lesse haue I at∣tempted any thyng against his countrie: But if I coulde doe any thyng, that might tourne to the commoditie of hym selfe, his countrie or people, I would omitte nothing, and I suppose that the people of his coūtrie can beare witnes of this thing, for they knowe what I haue done for them in tymes paste in their great aduersitie. Moreouer I haue euermore loued the house of Palatine, being readye to gratifie them by what so∣euer meanes I myght: And the same wil is neuer a whit chaū∣ged. In semblable wyse am I affected towardes Christopher Duke of Wirtemberge, a good man, wyse, skylfull, a louer of peacei And haue euer synce the tyme we were fyrst acquaynted, The good will of the Cardinall of Anspurg to∣wardes the duke of Wir¦temberg. borne hym great good will, and haue studied also to perfourme the same in dede. But that eyther he or the Paulsgraue should be dryuen out of theyr countrie, the same not only came neuer into my mynde, but also in case I had knowen any suche mat∣ter as myght haue tended to the losse of their estimation or goodes, I would both haue bene ryght hartely sory for the sa∣me, and woulde haue letted it also to the vttermoste of my po∣wer that no suche thinge should haue chaunced. And hitherto in dede I haue so demeaned my selfe alwayes, that I suppose they haue founde nothyng, so shal I also vse my selfe from hen∣ceforth, that I shall geue them a more occasion so to thynke, vpon this hope verely, that for as muche as I haue geuen no cause to be offended, they wyll beare me the lyke good wyll. And howe muche I lamented the chaunce of Marques Albert, he is not ignoraunt hym selfe, for what haue not I assayed, what haue I not proued, that this discorde myght bee taken awaye, and quietnes be restored to the Empire? Doubtles my trauell in that thyng hath bene so muche, and my industrie so great, that although I regarded herein the common wealth, yet came I in suspition with many, that I tendered his com∣modities ouermuche, and sought to hynder others. But howe vpryghtly I handled the matter, my letters wrytten to hym can shewe. Seyng therfore I am of this mynde towardes thē, neyther is there any duty wantyng in me, I truste, that for the vertue that is in them and true Nobilitie they wyll sooner geue credit not so muche to my saying as doyng, whiche mani∣festly appereth and sheweth it selfe, than to these sediciouse
persones, which as certen bellouse seke to reyse vp flame. With what intier loue also and good will being absent Imbraced al Germaines for the remembraunce of the moste swete countrie The loue of yt Cardinall of Auspurge towardes yt Germaines. that can both the Ambassadours of many Princes, and many also of the Nobilitie declare, whiche were than at Rome, when I was of Mentz, Treuers, Collon, Saxons, of Brandenburg, Maydenburge, Bauarians, of Brunswicke, Passawe, Osen∣burg, Minden, and of Basill. For all these at once repared to me as a certen hauen, and were faythfully holpen of me in their affayres, and certen also through my labour and commen¦dation haue ascheued offices and great promotions. Now that same of the Lantgraue, and of one Titelman what a fonde di∣uise is it. For neyther had I euer any talke with the Lantgra∣ue, and his sonnes of that matter, neyther can I remember that I spake one worde of it either at Rome or in Italy: Much lesse can I tell what the Ministers of his dominion do teache or reuoke: This in dede am I able to saye, that to my know∣ledge, there was no suche recantation made at Rome. Ther∣fore I doubte not but the Lantgraue, when the matter shall so requyre, wyll easely confute this same, and the other also of my commendation. Considering therfore that the artificers of so perniciouse libelles haue shamefully forged all thynges, to the ende that the same fyre whiche many yeares since they had layde together, myght nowe at the length burne and brea∣ke out all at ones, it is nedefull that Princes and Magistrates take dilligent hede of them, and when at the laste they shall be detected, that they set suche an example, as may make all o∣thers afrayde. Finally, in case there be any that haue concea∣ued any euyll opinion of me by reason of these sclaunders, I earnestly praye them to laye it awaye, and thynke assuredly, that synce I am bothe a Germayne borne, and come of a noble house, I wyll doe nothinge vnworthy the vertue and Nobili∣tie of my auncesters. When he had published this wrytinge the fifte Kalendes of Iune (as before is sayde) he wrote also priuatly to diuerse Prin¦ces to the same effecte, and after went againe into Italy, what tyme Bona, the mother of Sigismunde kyng of Poole, retour∣ned home, goyng to Naples. In the meane season commotiōs were in England, & many Commotiōs in England for suspicion of a conspira¦cie. Gentle men for suspicion of conspiracie (as it was sayde) were cast in prison: Wherof, some were executed, other some fled into Fraunce, and amonges them Sir Androwe Dudley, brother to
the Duke of Northumberland. There were two also taken out of my Lady Elizabeth her house. At the Ides of May Sir Pe∣ter Sir Peter Carrowe & Syr Iohn Cheke takē prisoners. Carrowe, who for an insurrectiō had fled certen monethes before, reconciled to king Philip, and Sir Iohn Cheke whiche was king Edwardes scholemaister, retourning out of Germa∣ny into Brabant, to fetche his wyfe, as they were going from Brusselles to Andwarpe, by the cōmaundement of king Philip being apprehendetd are caried to London. Aboute the ende of Iune not far from London there were .xiii. burnt together at Xiii. burnt at Stretford at the bewe. The Marq. of Baben re¦ceiueth the Gospell. one stake for Religion. In the meane tyme Charles Marques of Baden receiueth the doctrine of the Gospel, and of his neigh¦bours borroweth ministers to refourme & order his churches. Before this also had the Senate of Spire taken a preacher or two of the Gospell. Maximilian the eldest sonne of king Ferdi∣nando with his wife the Emperours daughter departing frō Uienne, the. xvii, day of Iuly came to Brusselles, where he had bene long and much desirous to take that iourney. Peter Mar¦tyr, a Florentine of whome we haue spoken before, what tyme the dissention about the Lordes supper was kindled againe, & he in certen bokes was touched by name, wēt from Strasburg to Zurick, that he might handle that matter frely both in tea¦ching and writing. That time Conrade Pellicane died at Zu∣rick: Peter Mar∣tyr goeth to Zurick. And therfore the Senate being requested by the ministers of the churche, wryting their letters to the Senate of Stras∣burg, praye earnestly that he might be sent them. So he depar∣teth at the third Ides of Iuly not without the sighing & grief of many, whiche loued him for his incomparable learning, his moste exacte iudgement, his great gentlenes and modestie and his other vertues. At the same time the Archebyshop of Pise Cardinall, borne in Sicilie, passing by Basil, went to themperour at Brusselles Cardinalles sent from yt Pope to the Emper. and the Frenche kyng. being sent frō the Pope, where a litle before Cardinal Caraffa the Popes cosin, was come to the kyng of Fraunce. A reporte had bene, and that written that there was moste heinous dis∣pleasure betwixt the Pope & themperour, & that ye matter ten∣ded vtterly to war. For amonges other thinges the Pope had taken from the house of Columnois al their possessions in Ita¦ly: Whiche thing in dede semed to apperteine to the iniury of ye Emperour. Again it was said how he would not inueste kyng Philip his sonne, in the possession of Sicilie and Naples, pro∣pounding ouer hard condicions, for those kingdomes paye tri∣bute to the Byshop of Rome, and depende vpon his benefite. At the Ides of Iuly, Albert Duke of Bauier, in the name of
king Ferdinando beginneth the counsel at Regensburg, decla∣reth Counsell be∣gon at Re∣genspurg. that he is occupied with holding assemblees in Austriche and Boheme, so that he could not come hither hym selfe at the time appointed, and sheweth why he can not be present yet nei¦ther. For by meanes of Peter Petrouice ye kynges cliente, who had desired ayde of the Turke, all the coūtrie of Transyluania, when no necessitie vrged them, & when they had no iust cause, reuolted from the king to the sonne of Iohn Uayuode: After that Fraunces Beuecke and George his sonne, making a rebel¦lion in Hongary haue by the helpe & the aide of the Walachiās taken certen townes and castels. Againe that the Turke hath lately sent a gouernour to Offen. And that an other also what time they treated of the truce, beseged the towne and castell of Buda in Latin. Zegeste the .xi. day of Iune, and began to batter it sore. More∣ouer to be signified by the letters and messages of many, that the gouernour of Bosnia leuieth an exceading great army to inuade Slauonia: And also that the president of Grene, gathe¦reth no small power at the citie of Sophie, intending to mar∣che forward, and that the Emperour of Turkes him selfe wyll in haruest next, come in to Hongary and wynter there, or if he defer it to the next spring, that he wil come than with a strong army, to wyn Uienne by sege. For these causes therfore ye kyng can not at this time leaue his countries, but is wholy busied & occupied in making preparation to resiste. And for as much as it is not for the profit of the cōmon wealth to differ the coū∣sel any lōger, therfore hath he appointed him to begin the trea¦ty and to procede, till he may come him selfe. And in dede thre yeares since the king sent a noble Ambassade to the Turke for peace or truce, and they are yet deteined at Cōstantinople. And albeit that truce was taken betwene thē, till thambassadours were retourned home, yet the Turkes in the meane season, ha∣uing broken their faith, haue takē many townes & castels, vpō the frontiers. And seing now also Zegest of them is beseged, it appereth not, what peace in very dede is to be loked for at their handes, that can be firme & tollerable: Whiche thing seing it is so, & for as muche as great daunger hangeth ouer not only the remnaunt of Hongary & Austriche, but also ouer all Germany to be first nede, to consulte imediatly of sending ayde, and of cō∣tribution mony, which should be kept in certen places, and for this warre, when nede is, to be defrayed by the publique trea∣surers. And that other kynges and Princes also are sollicited by the kyng for ayde, neither wyl he him selfe spare any coste or perill either of him selfe or his sonnes also, but since his coun∣tries
being sore inpouerished with the warres of so many yea∣res, are not able to resiste so great an ennemy, it is requisite to contribute thereunto, and that spedely. Moreouer, for as much as in the last assemblee it was decreed also, that in this assem∣blee wayes should be sought to appease Religion, the kyng er∣nestly exhorteth that they would searche diligently, whether a reconcilement myght be made, and whiche waye. They muste also treate of mony, and of establyshyng peace in the Empire. And the consultation of the Turkishe warre not to be set be∣hinde, but to be chiefly of them considered, to the ende the pre∣sent and iminent calamitie may be repulsed. About the .xv. day of September, the Emperour hauing a The Empe. goeth in to Spain with both his si∣sters. fayre wynde, and his nauie in a readines, taketh shipping to sayle into spayne, and taketh with him both his sisters Quene Mary and Elenor companions of his iourney. But before he departed, he set kyng Philip his sonne in possession of all the lowe countries. And to his brother kyng Ferdinando he com∣mitted the common wealth of Germany, sending letters to the Electours of the Empyre, wherby he requireth them that they would acknowledge the same for Emperour of Romaines, & obey him accordingly. The last day of October, Iohn Sleidane authour of this worke, a man for Iohn Sley∣dane dieth. the singular giftes of the mynde, and excellent learnynge all prayse worthy, departeth out of this life at Strasburg, and is there honora∣bly buried. FINIS.
✚ An Apologie of Iohn Sleidane. FOr as muche as I heare that diuerse men speake nothing frendly of my History, and haue small thanke requited me for my ex∣ceading great paines, I am constreined to set forth this wryting for defence. Nowe for what causes I was moued to write this story, how I proceded in yt same, howe I wrote for the displeasure or fauour of no man, and couched thinges in order, I declared in the preface of the worke: And added moreouer, that I was very desirous of the truthe and therin so affected, that if I knewe any thing to be wrytten vntruely, I would scrape it out, and admonishe the Reader of myne owne accorde, to geue no credit to it. Doubtles I would haue thought that all men here with would haue bene satisfied, especially, since the very reading should proue it true that I said: But in as muche as it is reported to me far otherwyse, whiche to me was very loth∣some and greuous, I am driuen of necessitie to adde some thin∣ges to my preface. And first in dede euer since the beginning of the worlde it hath bene accustomed, that matters as wel eccle∣siasticall as ciuile should be cōmitted to wryting: Which thing in dede bookes do testifie, and the same custome hath alwayes florished chiefly amonges noble & free nations, especially Gre∣kes and Romaines. The chief precept & ornament of this kinde of wryting is, that it be right and trewe, and therfore Tully calleth an history the witnes of tymes, and light of veritie, the lyfe of memory, and maistres of lyfe. By the whiche wordes ve∣rely, he doth both commende it exceadingly, and also sheweth, of what sort it ought to be, and nowe, for as muche as in this our tyme hath chaunced so great an alteration of Religion, as since the tyme of the Apostles the like hath not bene, & no smal sturre of ciuile policie hath insued also vpon the same as is cō∣monly wont to do, I verely, although not the metest man of al, at requeste of certen good men, toke vpon me this kynd of wry∣tinge, to the setting forth of Gods glory, and with great fideli∣tie and diligence haue brought it to this our tyme. And that I haue herein geuen nothing to affectiōs, and haue vsed my selfe so moderatly in this argument, as peraduēture none other be∣fore me hath done, that same I trustel indifferent iudges wil confesse. For although I do gladly prufesse this doctrine of the
Gospel through the benefite of God restored, and reioyce excea∣dingly to be of that nomber and fellowship, yet do I absteyne from al bitternes of wordes, and declare simply the whole mat¦ter as it was done. God also I take to witnes, that myne in∣tent hath not ben, falsly to hurte any man: For what a shame∣les impudencie were it, of those thinges wherof the memorie yet is freshe, to set forth any thyng contrary to a truthe? Again they that know me throughly, haue perceiued, I truste no such vanitie in me: Notwithstanding in case I haue erred in any pointe, I will both acknowledge it willingly, being admoni∣shed, and also as I saide in the preface, I wil proteste it openly, that the Reader be not abused. And as concerning my paynes I suppose verely, that in searching out of the truthe, no mans dilligence could haue bene no more than myne hath bene, and like as many are able this to testifie, so I doubte not but the thing also it selfe shall declare. And in describing matters of Religion, I might not omitte polytique causes. For as I sayde before, they came in maner alwayes together, and especially in our tyme they could not be separated. And that they come together, this is a sure reason and grounded vppon the scrip∣ture. To witte that so sone as amonges any people Religion is chaunged, by and by arrise offences, dissentions, debates, vp∣rores, factions and warres. For euen for this cause Christ saith that the sonne is plucked from his father, and the daughter frō her mother: Also that his doctrine bryngeth not peace, but the sworde, and sayeth it shall styre vp fyre also amonges the nere of bloud. And this hath bene euer the state of thinges since the worlde was made, neither can it be denied, and the thing it self speaketh. For so sone as in our time gods benefite geuen to mā, and the Gospell began to be preached, against the Popes par∣dons and traditions of men, by & by the worlde began to reise tumultes, and chiefly they of the clergie. Upon this very oc∣casion the matter was brought into the common assemblee of the Empire. And where certen Princes and cities receiued also this doctrine, the fire went further abroade, & the matter was handled by diuerse meanes, tyll at the laste it ended in warre. And in all this same description a man may see, what care and diligence the Emperour toke, that the dissentiō might be takē vp: It is to be sene also, what the Protestan̄tes and states haue aunswered, and what maner of conditions they haue oftenti∣mes offered. But when the matter fel out into warre, the hand¦ling of it was variable and diuerse. And the Emperour in dede that I may bryng of many examples, one sending his letters
to diuerse Princes and cities, after also setting forth a publike wryting, declared the cause of his enterprise. This wrytinge, wherin the foundation of themperours cause consisteth, with the aunswere of the contrary part, might not be omitted. For than I praye you what maner of story were it to be thought, whiche raccompteth but the doinges of the one part only? And yet howe I haue demeaned my selfe herein, howe I haue mo∣derated and tempered my style, it may be sene by conferring the dutche with the Latin, wherunto I referre my selfe also. The warre being now driuen of tyll wynter, the Emperour had the vpper hande, where the ennemies were gone euery man home. These victories and triumphes of his also, firste in highe Ger∣many, and after in Saxonie, I recite faithfully all, and this order is kept euery where: For neither I take awaye, nor attri∣bute to any man more, than the thing it selfe requireth & per∣mitteth, whiche thing fewe men haue perfourmed, as it is eui∣dent. For many in the narrations put also their iudgement as well touching the persones, as the thinges. And to speake no∣thing of olde wryters, it is knowen, howe Platine hath descri∣bed the Popes liues. And a litle before our dayes, a worthye knyght, Sir Philip Commines, set forth a notable historie of his tyme, and amonges other thinges he sheweth howe after ye death of Charles Duke of Burgundy, who was slayne in bat∣tell a little from Naunce, Lewys the .xii. king of Fraunce, toke away from the daughter & heire of Duke Charles, either Bur∣gundy and also the countrie of Artois. And albeit that Com∣mynes was bounde to Fraunce by his othe, although he were one of the kinges counsell, yet he saieth that this was not wel¦done of him. About the .xxiiii. yeares past, the Senate of Ueni∣se appointed Peter Bembus to describe the warres which they had made with the Emperour Maximilian, with Lewys the Frenche kyng, and with Pope Iuly the seconde, & with others. Which he did comprising the matter in .xii. bokes: And amon∣gest other matters he reporteth, howe Lewys the .xii. kynge of Fraunce denounced warre to the Uenetians: He sayeth howe the Herault of armes, after that he came before the Duke and the whole Senate, spake these wordes. To thee, Lawredane Duke of Uenise, and to all other citezens of the same, Lewys kyng of Fraunce commaunded me to denounce warre, as to mē vnfaithfull, possessing townes of the Byshoppes of Rome and of other kynges gotten by force and by wronge, and sekyng to catche and bryng al thinges of al men disceiptfully vnder your gouernement: He him selfe cometh to you armed to recouer the
same. These wordes, would some man saye for as much as they be heinouse against the Uenetians. Bembus shoulde haue o∣mitted. But he would not so, but wrote them out of the cōmon recordes into his boke, and added to the aunswer made to the Herault, no lesse byting: And the workes was printed at Ueni∣se with the priuilege of the Senate. Paulus Iouius, besides o∣ther wrytinges, wherin he compriseth the forces of certen no∣ble mē, hath not lōg since set forth also two Tomes of thinges done in his tyme: But howe frankely he wryteth, those that haue red them can testifie. Not withstanding that in certen places he doth the Germanes wrong: And yet the same worke came forth authorised by sondry priuileges. Who so wyll, may seke the ninth leafe of the seconde Tome, also in the life of Leo the .x. leafe .xciii. and .xciiii. And in the lyfe of Alphonse Duke of Farrare, leafe .xlii. All the bokes of good authours be full of examples. And Comines is for this cause chiefly commended, that he wrote so indifferently: But he kepeth this maner, as I sayde also before, that not only he discribeth the thinges, but also addeth his iudgement, and pronounceth what euery man hath done be it right or wrong. And albeit that I do not so, yet is it vsed of many. But that whatsoeuer is done on either part should be recited, that same is not only reasonable, but being frequented in all times is nedefull also. For otherwyse can not the History be compiled. Where so euer be factions, where war and sedition is, there doubtles are al thinges full of complain∣tes accusations, and defensions with other cōtrary wrytings. Now he that reciteth all these thinges, in suche order as they were done, doeth iniurie to neither part, but followeth ye lawe of the story. For in those brawlinges and complaintes euery thing is not by & by true that one obiecteth to an other. When there is grudge, hatred, and malice amonges them, it is knowē and tried, howe the matter is vsed on either syde. If the euill wordes, that Popes and Byshops and suche other lyke, haue powred out against the Protestauntes .xxxvi. yeares past, were true, what thinge could be imagined more wicked than they? Paule the thirde, being Pope, sent his nephewe by his sonne Cardinall Farnese, Ambassadour to the Emperour to Brussels the yeare of our Lorde .M.ccccc.xl. He there gaue counsell a∣gainst the Protestauntes, whiche not long after was set forth in printe, and is of me recited in the .xiii. boke of my History. Af¦ter many contumeliouse wordes, amonges other he sayth, that the protestauntes do resiste Christ no lesse, but rather more thā the Turkes do: For these sleye the bodies only, but they leade
The soules also into euerlasting pardition. I pray you what more heynouse or horrible thing can be spoken, And in case these thinges shuld not haue bene recited, then might the Protestauntes haue hed iust cause of complaint against me: but the matter is farre otherwise: For neither be thinges true, because he said so. And if I should haue omitted this, I might iustly haue commen into suspition, as though I handled not the matter vpright∣ly, and would gratify more the one part. And that it is thus, as I haue plainly declared, I doubt not, but reasonable men will iudge, that I haue done nothing contrary to the law of an history, and so much the rather for that the moste thinges are taken out of common recordes, which had ben setforth in Print before. Therfore they do nothinge frendly, no they do me plaine wronge, which thus do sclaunder my worcke, and so much the more wronge, if they vnderstand thorder of compiling an history, but if they knowe it not, I would they should learne, of such thinges as we haue nowe declared, and of others that wryte stories. But when I speake of Historiographers, I meane not those of our time, which study only, to extoll, and highly commend what part they list, and ouerwhelme thother with contumelious and railynge wordes. They that are of such sort, be not worthy to be so called. Ihon Cocles .vi. yeares past, setforthe Commentaries, in a man∣ner of the same argument that mine are: but all thynges are heaped vp with such horrible, forged, and abhominable sclaunders and lyes as haue not bene hard. Cardinall Poole in the boke lately setforthe, calleth the Doctrine renewed in Germany Turkishe seede. Of suche lyke wordes are al theyr bokes full. But what like thing is found in all my woorke? I haue verely wrytten the wonderfull benefite of God, geuen eo thys our time, orderly and as truely, as I could possible, and for the same purpose, I gathered .xvi. yeares since, what soeuer belonged herun∣to, neither haue I wrytten rashlye, but with a sure iudgemente pro∣ceaded. And what labour and paines this worke hath cost me, nexte the liuing God, I know. For his glory haue I chiefly regarded, and lea∣uing the practise of the law, I haue applied in a maner all my study herevnto: and verely I must confesse, that throughe Gods motion I haue ben after a sort drawen vnto this labour And nowe where di∣uers requite me so vnworthye thanckes for my so greate trauell and paines. I wil cōmit to him, whose cause chiefly I toke it in hād: for I know vndoubtedly yt I haue offred vp vnto him a most acceptable sacrifice
with the same verely good conscience I comfort and sustain my self, especially seing that my labor is commended of learned men, whiche bothe geue me thanckes, and confesse also that they haue receiued much frute therby. Wherefore I desire all louers of the veritye, that they wold geue no credit to the sclander of a few certen mē: but wold gentelly accept my labors, faith, and dilligence, nether conceiue any sinistre opinion of me. Furthermore I protest that I do acknow∣ledge the Emperour and king of Romaines, for the high Magistrate, whome God hath ordained, and to whom in al things, that be not against God, we ought to obey, as Christ and thapostles teach. FINIS.
¶ A Table containing all the Principall matters in this Boke. A A Counsel promised. 92 An Apology deliuered, but not re∣ceiued. eodem A beastly cruelty. 104 A blasing starre. 109 A consecrating of Cardinals. 113 Andrew Gritie duke of Uenise. 117 A boke of Romish Marchauntes. 118 A straunge chaunge. eodem Alteration in England for Reli. 125 A Prophet inspired. 129 A new king of Anabaptistes. 131 A boke of the misteries of the scrip. 133 A blinde asse. 134 A counsel called. 147 An oration against the french king. eo. A reformation of Collon. 141 A sword hallowed. 142 A wryting of Auspurge. 143 Athanasius, Arius, and Liberius. 148 A propre saying of Ciprian. 153 A priestes sonne, not enioy his Fathers benefice. 155 Auarice and concupiscence, let coū. 156 Annas Momorancy made Constable of Fraunce. 157 A gentleman of Tolowse burnt. 158 Andrew de Aury saluteth the king. 159 A colledge erected at strasborough. 160 A league of the Papistes againste the protestauntes. 173 Ambassadors sent to Henry brother to George duke of Saron. 176 A Friers wede maketh the deuell a. 177 An assembly at Smalcald. 169 A wryting exhibited by the deuines. eo. A confutation of the .vi. articles. 171 An oration of a yong Cardinal. 172 A priuy hatred of the french king. eod. An exceading hot sommer. 174 A disputation betwixt Eckius and Me∣lanchthon. 176 A great assemble at Regenspurge. eo. A mean to get mony by pardons. 177 A most costly stole or Paile. eodem A wollen halter to strāgle the pope. 178 A boke presented to the collotors. 179 A great tempest destroid his ships. 184 An assemble at Spires. 186 A soden fear in the french court. 88 An army against the Turke. eodem Any pleasaunt life is not to be. eodem A consolation of the prisoners. eodem A counsel called at Trent. 198 An assembly at Norinberge. 163 Ambassadors to the duke of Saxon, & the Lantzgraue. 194 A rebellion at Rochelle. 197 A supplication of the protestaunts. 194 A boke called Antididagma. 201 An assemble at Spire. 202 A league of themperor, and the king of England against the french king. 203 A boke of Caluine against Sorbo. 204 A boke of the relikes of saints. eodem A false report of themperors death. eo. A great assemble of Spiere. 206 A straunge tale of the duke of Brū. 209 An image buried in ye stede of Eue. 209 A decre for religion. 212 A peace concluded betwixte themperor and Fraunce. 314 An ambassade said to the king. 216 A Commention of deuines at Mil. 217 An assembly at Wormes. 218 A lamentable departing. 219 A soldsoure geueth the Merundo. 220 A cruell fact of Miners. eodem A terrible example of cruelty. eodem A captain defendeth the women. eodē A sharp answer of the king. eodem A frere obseruant stirreth themperour to warre. 221 A skirmish betwixt the Duke. 225 A conflict betwixt the Duke. eodem A league of them of Strasborow, Zu∣ricke and Bernes. 85 A confutation of the Protestantes. 88 A confession of the Zwinglians. 88 A story of the king of Fraunce. 101 A controuersy of the bishoppe of Bant∣berge with the Marques of Bran∣denburge. 103 A bishops office. 111 An assemble at Regenspurge. 73 An assembly at Spires. 79
A treatise of peace betwixt Fraunce & England. 227 A brute of warre againste the Prote∣stauntes. 228 Ambassadors to themperor for tharch∣bishop of Collon. 230 A decre of the Sinode, read. 231 Alphonse Diaze commeth into Germa¦ny. 234. Alphonse returneth to Nuburge to kill his brother. eodem A communicatiō of the Lantzgraue, & others. 237 A diuision amonges thelectors. 241 A statute of Trent. 243 A decre of originall sinne. eodem An aunswer of them of Strasborough to themperor. eodem An heape of euils, of ciuel war. 244 A league betwixt the Pope and them∣peror. 246 A preatence of mouinge war. 247 Albert of Brunswicke hurt. 265 Alteration in Sauoy. 266 A warlike pollicy of themperor. 267 An other pollicy of themperor. eodem Aucthoritye can not beare equallitye. 271 A decre of the counsel at Trent of iusti∣fication. 276 A Dolphe substituted to Hermon arch∣bishop of Collon. 277 Alteration of Religion. 278 Alteration in the Courte of Fraunce. 282 A pergidu of the sonne. 285 An assembly of the Empyre at vrmes. 286 An assemble at Auspurge. 291 An holy boxe sent downe from heauen you may be sure. eodem A conspiraty against the Popes sonne. 294 A reformation of Religion in Englād. 297 Albert receiued into the tuition of the king of Pole. 3021 A disordained ordre of knightes. 303 A composition of peace. 305 A counsel called at Trent twise 309 An euil compiled booke ofte corrected. 314 Ambrosa Blaurer the chiefest minister of the church. 324 At Strausburge the Consull of th∣ri, eodem Augustus married a wife. 327 A commotion at Burdeaur. eodem A wonderful conuersion of Uergelius. 328 A meting of deuines in Saxony. 330 A Diaphora. 333 An open disputation at Oxford. 335 A communication at Lipsia. 336 A rebellion in England. eodem A boke in Italian againste the Poope. 339 An assembly of Cardinals for to chuse a new Pope. 340 A straunge sight neuer hard of. 342 A trouble in the Church of Strasburg. eodem A iest of the Cardinall of Auspurge. 343 A peace concluded betwene Fraunce and England. 344 A confession of faith, made by the mini∣sters of Auspurge. 345 A Regester of the deuines of Louaine. 346 A proclamation for printers. 347 Andwarpe astomed at the Emperors Proclamation. 347 A woman in pearil for a lyght worde. 348 An ambassade against them of Maiden∣burge. 350 A cruel decre against the Maidenburgi∣ans. 351 A wryting of the cleargye againste the city of Maidenburge. 354 All godly folke afflicted for the verity. 357 A new doctrine of Osiander. 359 A cruel Proclamation against the Lu∣therans. 368 A purgation of the french king. eodem A decre of Trent of the Lordes supper. 369 A decre of penaunce. 273 A Cardinall of Dalmatia slaine in hys owne house. 378 A brute of warre againste themperor. 385 Albertes crueltye to them of Norem∣berge. 402
Assembly at Auspurge. 386 A poynt of the law. 72 A Monke forsaketh his religion. 76 Alteration in Denmarke. 45 Archbishop of Mentz answer. 22 Aristotle. 20 Albert Arch bishop of Mentz. 3 Authors of scismes. 47 An assembly called at Auspurge. 65 A bloudy preacher bloweth a trom. 56 A most cruell maner of burning. 54 Albert to them of Wolmes. 403 Albert of Austrich, of whome. 466 Ambassadors of Strasburge to them∣peror. 413 Albert ouerthroweth the frēch mē. 414 A battel fought betwixt duke Maurice & Marques Albert. 421 Augustus brother and heyre to Duke Maurice. 423 Albert reconciled to Augustus. 426 A disputation in England. 428 An end betwixte Iohn Fredericke and Augustus. 431 A parliament in England. 433 A wryting of the city of Norinberge a∣gainst Marques Albert. eodem A place of treaty, of peace chosē, by the Quene of England. 451 A tumult raised at Geneua eodem A vniuersity erected at Dilling. 453 A boke of Peter Asot againste the con∣fessiō of the duke of Wittem. eodem August Prince elector had a son. 454 A wryting of the Papistes to requestes of the protestaunt. 456 A wryting of the king Fardinando to the Princes. 458 A decre wherby Religion is frely per∣mitted to all men. 460 An ecclesyastical parson that changeth his Religion shalbe depriued. eodem A parlament in England. 461 An assemble in Austrich. eodem A Comet sene. 465 A father killeth his iii. children. 466 A slaunder deuised against certain. 467 Aucthority of the deuines of Paris. 32 Agrement betwixt Luther and Zwin∣glius. 83 A Concord. 107 B BIshops of Rome bound as other is to Goddes commaundement. 3 Boke burners. 27 Bloudye preacher bloweth a trompet. 56 Bokes presented to themperor. 85 Bōdage no let to christian liberty. 63 Bucer laboreth for concord. 96 Busy marchauntes. 118 Brauling Friers. 119 Barbarossa almost taken. 121 By what meanes men be disceiued. 134 By what means the deuel is van. eodē Baptisme condemned. 135 Bishops stir vp princes. 150 Barbarossa taketh castel Newstat 178 Bucer preacheth at Bonina. 201 Barbarossa returneth. 213 Bolloigne rendred. 214 Bruly burnt at Tourney, 216 Bucer declareth how tharticle of iusti∣fication wās accorded in. 229 Bucer is sent for to Auspurge. 310 Bucer is in daunger. 313 Bren. wife & his children banyshed. 316 Bucer and Fragus come into Eng. 331 Baūberge redemeth peace dearly. 402 Brunswicke besieged. 428 Bradford burned in England. 451 Bish. of Merspurge answer to Lu. 22 Best thiuges pleaseth fewest men. 34 Beginning of fyrst frutes & tenthes. 42 Bible is to be preferred before al. 43 Bishop of Constaunce maketh a boke in defence of Images. 48 Boke of restitution. 131 Bi. Munster demaūded his charges. 136 Bold answer of the king. 137 Barnes aid to Geneua. eodem Bolde and profitable Counsell of the Lantzgraue. 359 Bhoemers serued against the Duke of Saxon vnwillingly. 169 Bohemers refuse war in Saxony. 277 Bishop of Strausburge, syngeth hys fyrst Masse. 331 Bondage of the Germanians. 392 Bishop of Winchester dieth. 461 Bauarians followeth the Prynce for Religion. 465
C CHarge of the Bishoppe of Maiden∣burge. 1. Ciuilians vse of Citing. 2 Cardinall Caietane wryteth to ye duke of Saxon. 8 Charles is declared Emperour 14 Conditions propounded by Luther. 18 Confession of sinnes. eodem Counsel of Lateran and Pisa. eo. Capnio a deuine. 19 Catarinus wryteth against Luther. 27 Commotions in Spaine. 34 Cornelis Scepper a good wryter. 42 Cardinall Campeius wryteth to the duke of Saxony. 45 Campeius Oration to the Prynces at Norenberge. eodem Campeius raileth against Matrimony. 49 Christianity taketh not away bondage 61 Carolostadius wryteth against Lu. 65 Carolostadius maketh his purgatiō. 65 Counsel at Spires. 69 Contention about the Masse. 79 Certaine Princes resiste the decree of Spires. 81 Ciuil war amongst the Swicers. 82 Cardinall Campeius Oration. 88 Certaine chosen to accorde Relygyon. 90 Conditions of peace. 104 Conditions of peace betwene thempe∣ror and the Protestauntes. 105 Conditions of creating a kinge of Ro∣maines. eodem Cristine kinge of Denmarke is taken. 108 Christ was called Seditious. 112 Conditions of peace. 116 Conditions betwixte Fardinando and Duke Ulrich. eodem Crafty marchauntes. 118 Couetous marchauntes. 119 Cruelty vnsemely in Churchmen. 122 Condition of peace. 128 Ciuill war in the city. 129 Cnipperdoling was the chief of that fac¦tion. 129 Cnipper doling prophecieth. 130 Croked necked cattel. 134 Comotion in Lincolne shire. 141 Captaine Aske executed for Treason. eodem Cardinal Pole the Popes ambassador to the French king. 142 Cardinals Poles boke against e Kinge Henry the eight. eodem Cold reasons for the Popes supremacy 143 Carninall Poole was vnthanckefull. eodem. Cardinall Pole incenseth the Empe∣roure against the king of England. eodem Cardinals Poles Hipocrisy and false∣hode. eodem Cristierne king of Denmark, receiueth the Gospel. 158 Complaintes of Pillage. 178 Contention betwixte the electoure of Saxon and Duke Moris. 188 Conterme in displeasure with the pope and cardinals. 194 Cardinals sent to make peace 197 County William taken Prisoner. 213 Cabrier yelded. 220 Cardinall Farnesius, his comming to Wormes. 221 Counte William deliuered. 226 Claudius Cenarcleus a yong gētlemā of Sauoy. 235 Condityons imposed to the Duke of Wirtemberge. 275 Conditions offred to the Lantzgraue. 281 Caspar Phlugus captain of the Bohe∣mers army eodem Conditions wherby the duke redemed his life. 285 Ciuil war betwixt England and Scot∣land. 310 Countries vnited by mariage. 311 Ciuil war in Affrica. 330 Contention for thempire betwene the Emperor and Fardinando. 353 Complaint of the bishop of Strausbo∣roughe. 360 Contrary tales of the king and them∣peror. 364 Causes of callinge the counsel. 371
Countries oppressed by the Emperor. 394 Conditions of peace offered by Duke Moris. 397 Cruelty against godly preachers. 40 Conditions of peace offred by thempe∣ror. 48 Conditions of peace. 411 Commotion in Kent. 430 Cardinall Pole arriueth in England. 438 Controuersy for the dominiō of Chatz. 452 Cinistre suspition spread of the Cardi∣nal of Auspurge. 456 Commotions in England for suspition of a spiratie. 469 Cardinals sent from the pope to them∣peror and Freuch king. eodem Counsel begon at Regenspurg. 470 Cause why Luther was not punished. 41. Complaintes of them of Zurick. 51 Cause of them hatred. eodem Constancy of them of Zurick. 52 Confession of the Protestauntes. 88 Conspiraty of the Papistes against the Protestauntes. 93 Complaint of the Pope to the kinge of Pole. 97 Common wealth hath neade of manye remeadies. 102 Contentiō betwene Erasmus and Lu∣ther. 114 Clement the seuenth dieth. 117 Counsel of Constaunce. 149 Counsel of Myllen broken of. 152 Craft of Popes. eodem Cardinall Montaine striken with a fu∣ry. 300 Cruel actes of Marques Albert. 434 D DUke Fredericke his wisdome. 2 Disputation at Lipsia. 18 Dissention betwixte Leo and hys Cardinals. 38 Decrees of Pius and Iulius. 23 Dyssentyon at Basill for Relygyon. 80 Daunger of the Turke. 85 Duke Ulrich expulsed out of his coun∣trey. 113 Disputation with the king of Anabap∣tistes. 136 Duke George of Saxon dieth. 176 Doctor barnes burnte in Smithfielde. 174 Dure the chiefest Towne in those par∣tes is taken. 196 Depensius driuen to recant. 20 Duke of Moris maketh lawes for the ministers of the church. 202 Duke Moris foundeth three Scholes. eodem. Duke Moris is beneficiall to the vni∣uersity of Lipsia. eodem Dissention in Scotland. 205 Duke Moris serued themperor at Lan∣derssy. 206 Duke Moris intreateth a peace. 405 Duke Henry and his Sonne yeld them selues. eodem Diaze goeth to Maluenda. Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue prepareth to warre. Duke Frederick chosen Emperor. Donauerde taken. Donauerde rendred. 265 Duke Maurice consulteth agaynste the Potestauntes. 266 Duke Maurice letters to the Electour. 269 Duke Maurice blamed of all men. 270 Duke Maurice Excuses. eodem Duke Maurice nothing couetous. eod. Duke Maurice followeth Doeg. 275 Duke Ericke discomfited. 287 Duke Maurice and the elector of Brā∣denburge intreat for the Lantgraue eodem Duke Maurice letters to the Lant∣graue. eodem Duke Maurice intreateth liberallye to the deuines of Wittemberge. 291 Duke of Placence depryued Hierom. 294 Daughter of Nauarre married to the duke of Uandome. 321 Duke Henry besiegeth the city of Brū¦swicke. 348 Dracutus an archpirate 348 Duke Maurice general of the war. 351
Duke Maurice besiegeth Maidenburg. 352 Duke Maurice letters to the Empe∣roure. 363 Duke Morice seaseth vpon the domini∣on of Chatz. 370 Duke Morice entendeth to warre vpon themperor. 373 Discipline amongst the fathers. 374 Duke Maurice feared of themperours. 380 Duke Maurice ambassadoure sente a∣way. 381 Duke Maurice letters to hys ambassa∣dours. 384 Duke Maurice taketh Auspurge by cō∣position. 388 Diuers minds in the counsel of Trent. 389 Duke Moris goeth to the field. 395 Duke Moris letters to the king. 399 Duke Moris nie slaine. 40 Duke Moris weary of delaies. 47 Duke Moris reburneth his fellowes. 48 Duke Moris admitteth peace. 410 Duke de Anmalle taken Prysonner. 44 Duke Morleague wyth the Duke of Brunswicke. 420 Duke Maurice wan the field, and loste his life. 422 Duke Henry of Brunswicke marrieth a wife. 465 Duke Frederickes answer. 26 Deuines of Paris condempn Luthers bokes. 32 Duke of Saxon, and the Lantzgraue prepare them to warre. 78 Duke of Saxon Marshall of the Em∣pyre. 90 Duke of Saxon letters to the Pryn∣ces. 98 Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue wryte to the French king. 166 Death of the french king. 282 Daughter of Scotland affiansed to the king of England. 308 Death of Sigismund king of pole. 305 Duke of Swaybrige molested for Re∣ligion. 332 Death of Pope Paule the thyrd. 336 Disputation at Baden. 71 Decre for religion. 70 Decre of the duke of Loraine. 50 Disputation at Zuricke. 44 Decre of the Swices. 45 Daniel expounded, how? 89 Deluge at Rome, and in Seland. 94 Dombe sprite walking. 114 Dukes Confession of the duke of Wit∣temberge. 386 E ECkius boke against Luther. 2 Erasmus iudgemente of Luther. 16 Eneas Siluius. 23 Erkius to Luther. 28 Erasmus boke of fre wll. 50 Eckius the Popes champion. 52 England hath title to Fraunce. 74 Erasmus boke against Gospellers. 83 Erasmus wryteth to Campeius. 90 English Bibles Printed at Parys. 160 Ebleb a noble Gentleman dyeth for sorow. 29 Execution done in the frenche kynges syght. 335 Erle Hedecke frende to them of May∣denburge. 361 Erenberge taken away. 40 Ecclesiasticall lawes in England. 432 England is tourned to her vomyt. 439 Emperour sendeth for Luther. 28 Emperour wryteth to Luther. eodem Emperours letters to the Princes of Germany. 65 Ende of the Papistes dectrine. 67 Emperoure marrieth a wife. 71 Exhortation of the Lantzgrane. 57 Excuse of some to the Protestauntes. 94. Emperor of necessity graunteth peace to Germany. 108 Emperoure goeth into Italy. 109 Erroures of the Anabaptist. 133 Erroures of the Mūsterians in fayth. 135 English ambassadors winter at Wit∣tenberge, 139 Emperoure inuadeth the frenche pro∣uince. 140
Erasmus death. eodem Emperour, French king, and the pope mete at Nice. 59 Emperors and French kings ambassa∣dor to the Uenerians. 168 Emperors priuate wryting for the pro¦testauntes. 183 Emperors letters to them of Collon. 203 Emperors answer to the pope. 195 Emperors letters to the states of Bo∣heme. 283 Emperors sōne commeth into Flaun∣ders, and he is receiued at Millan. 330 F FRaunce and Germany were vnited. 12 Frederick the Paulsgraue sent into Spain. 14 Flatterers must be eschued. 18 Fraunce is offred to the spoiles. 19 Feare for the host. 47 Feare in Muncers camp. 57 Faith ought not to wauer. 65 Faber driuen out of Paris. 66 Fardinando forsaking king Lewes. 77 Fardinandoes title to Hongary. eo. Fraunces Sfortia reforced to the duke∣dom of Millan. 83 Florence rendred. 90 Florence loseth her liberty. eodem. Fardinando proclaimed Kinge of Ro∣maines. 98 Frances Sfortia marrieth the Empe∣rors Niece. 117 Folish pity marreth the city. 122 Fredericke forsaketh the bishoppricke. 128 From the horse to the asse. 130 Franckfurt receiued into the league. 139 False doctrine is not to be born wyth. 151 Fardinando his army destroyed 154 Fardinandoes request. 173 Fiers in Saxony. 174 Fardinando besieged Buda. 184 Fardinādo defeateth the request of his nobles. 186 Frances Lander cōmitted to Pryson, his weaknes and recantation. 200 Few Spaniardes loue the Gospel. 233 Friers be disturbers of peace. 236 Friers are vile in life and learnynge. 237 Feare in themperors campe. 259 Force ought not to be vsed in Religy∣on. 260 Fraunce denied to aid Protestauntes. 264 Fardinando Sebastian deputye, pro∣claimeth war to Saxony. 269 Fardinando to the Bohemera. 283 Fardinando ambassadour to the Bohe¦mers. 284 Fardinādo goth wc his army to Proge. 291 Freight with others caried to prisone. 325 Frances Spiera dispaired. 327 Fraunces Spiera his recantation, his death in despair with comfort. 328 Forces bent against Maidenburge. 350 Folish ceremonies. 358 Fiue of them studentes of Lossaunce, french men borne. 424 Fiue condempned at London for the Gospel. 440 For Churche goodes all coutrouersyes are taken away. 461 Fraunce venery displeased. eodem Fredericke Counte Palatines death. 465 French king taken prisoner. 43 Faith of Abraham obtained greate be∣nefites of God. 56 French league against themperor. 71 Frenche kinges letters to the Prynces of Germany. 73 French kinges inuentions against the Emperour. 79 French kinges oration. 120 French kinges letters. eodem French warreth againste the Duke of Sauoy. 38 Frenche kinge kissed the Popes ryght fote. 159 French king geueth counsel to ye Duke of Wittemberge. 166 French kinges answer to themperors letters. 199
French king cōpared to the Turk. 207 French king hated of all men for the Turkes societe. 211 Frowardnesse of the Duke of Brun∣swicke. 225 French king is receiued into Paris. 235 French dischargeth his army. 410 French kinges Proclamation against condemned of thinquisition. 452 G GRece and Bohemes happines. 3. Gerson of Paris. 8 Gesmer captain of the boures. 54 Gods power appeareth in fewest men. 56 Gods wrath is slow, but yet sore. 58 George Duke of Saxon hateth the gos∣pel. 67 Godlines is not to be sought for in the Court. 68 Great ghostly fathers. 89 God bridleth the power of Sathan. 134 Great execution done at Gaunt. 171 Granuellans oration at Wormes. 174 George of Austryche apprehended at Lions. 184 God offreth hys worde before he Pla∣geth. 185 Gropper commended Bucer. 187 Gwelphians. eodem Gibellines whiche were names of the Emperiall. eodem Geneua. 192 Grashopper in Germany and Italy. 193 Gropper forsaketh the gospel. 202 Greate Princes sue for the Popes fa∣uour. 305 Griniam the French ambassador. 309 Granuellan his answer to the Lantz∣graue. 409 General counsel promised. 72 Great slaughter. 105 Great alteration in England. 113 Great assemble at Regenspurge. 176 Gonzage gouerne of Millane. 501 God is not the author of wrong. 263 Gropper had the spoile of Frede. 277 Godly preachers flie. 315 Ganimede nourished by the pope. 348 God woundeth and healeth. 357 Germany the fortresse of Christendom 394 George duke of Megelburge slain. 408 Great frendship betwixt duke Maurice and Marques Albert. 422 George Earle of Mount Pelicart, ma∣rieth the Lantzgraue daughter. 453 Gospell is slaundred wyth rebellyon. 63 Godly constancye of the Duke of Sax∣ons children. 322 H HEbrue bookes of thre sortes. 20 How the scripture muste be hand∣led. 22 Honoures chaunge manners. 23 Henrye King of Englande wryteth a∣gainst Luther. 34 How the yoke of Papistes is to be sha∣ken of. 48 Henry Zutphan put to death. 50 How the magistrate should deale wyth the Papistes. 58 How wicked dominion is to be shaken of. 58 Hunting, hauking, and fishinge prohi∣ted. 60 How ministers should be ordained. 62 Hipocrisy of bishops. 75 How scripture should be expounded. 82 Hugh Capet Earle of Paris. 101 How a free counsell is to be vnderstād. 111 Hirman Stapred. 128 Heldus the Emperoures ambassador. 143 Heldus Oration at Smalcald. eodem Harlots honored at Rome. 157 Hatred betwixt counsellers 170 His arme discomfited. 184 Howe the Turkes atcheued the Em∣pyre. 187 His death. 194 His weakenes before the king. 202
Holy men haue had leagues wyth men of contrary Religion. 211 Hermon leueth his Bishopprick. 277 How miserable is it for the Quene for to marry with a straunger. 311 He that doth against his conscience pro¦cureth him self hel fire. 316 Hallowing of churches. 333 Hallowing of Belles. 334 Hallowing of altares. 334 Hedeck and Mansfield discomfyted by Duke Morice. 352 How much the papistes esteme Scrip∣ture. 383 Heldius answer. 147 I IHon Tecel a Dominican Frier, set vp conclusyons at Frankfurt. 1. Indulgences to be vsed after the Ca∣non law. 2. Iames Hogestrate wrote againste Lu∣ther. 3. Ihon Wickliffe an English man. 32 Ihon Husse a Boheme. eodem Ihon Husse appealeth frō the pope. eo. Ihon Husse, and Ierom of Prage bur∣ned. eodem. Iniquity procedeth frō the priestes. 40 It is not lawful for vs to kil any mā 43 Images burnt at Zurick. 48 Ihon Fredericke of Saxon, marrieth Sthel of Cleaue. 74 Ihon Uaivodes letters to the states of thempyre. 76 Ihon Uayuodes ambassadors takē. 77 Images put downe. 80 Images burnt on Ashwedensday. eod. Inas king of Brittain. 114 Idle Nunnes marchant women. 120 Ihon Leidan an Anabaptiste. 128 Ihon Mathew the high Prophet. 130 Iesting punished. eodem Ihon Leidan inuadeth the kingdō. eo. Ihon Leidans pompe. 131 Ihon Husse at Constance. 199 Ihon Caluin and Peter Bruly super∣intendantz of the Colledge of Stras borough. 168 Ihon Isleby, chief of the Antimo. 172 Inuectiues vnmete for princes. 174 Ioy in France at themperors losse. 185 Ihon Miners president of the Counsel at Agnes. 219 Iustus Ionas asked whether we shall know eche other in the life to come. 232 Ihon Diaze a Spaniard. 233 Ihon Isseby a Reuolt. 310 It is daunger to vse forain aides. 311 Ihon Marques of Brādēburge refuseth thinterim. 315 Isseby rewarded of themperor. 320 Inquisitions of Uergetius. 320 Iuly the third consecrated bishop. 343 Interrogatories for the Ministers of Auspurge. 383 Ihon Sleidan ambassador for Straus∣burg to thempire. 373 Ihon Frederick demaundeth lāds and dignities 423 Ihon a Laisco a Polonian. 432 Interrogatories Ministred to the Ab∣bot of Newstat. 436 Ioy at Rome for Englande reduced to the Romish church. 443 Indulgences graunted by the Pope for the conuersyon of England. eodem Ihon Fredericke the electours Sonne marieth. 451 Ihon Gropper made Cardinall. 461 Ihon Sleidane dieth. 470 Iudges of the chamber trouble the pro¦testauntes. 123 Ihon Laydon parradocsises. 131 Iudges of the chambre. 144 Ignorannce of the people is gaine full to the priestes. 150 Iudges of the chambre shal kepe theyr place. 212 Ignoraunce of the people for lacke of teachinges. 237 Interim permitteth Priestes to keepe theyr wines stil. 313 K KInges of Naples paye Tribute to Rome. 11. King Henry the eighte calleth hys mariage in question. 113 Kingdoms destroid for Idolatry. 185 Kinges of Fraunce moste addict to the
Pope. 200 King Hēry banished the Pope, but not Popery. 278 King Ferdinando moueth the Bohe∣mers to warre. 279 King of Fraunces fautour of ear. 282 King Fardinandoes letters to the Bo∣hemers. 286 King Fardinando requyreth mouye of the states. 314 King Phillip inuested in Flaun. 337 Kinges haue long armes. 279 King Edward sore sicke. 408 King Fardinando proclaimeth warre against Albert. 408 King Phillip arriueth in Eng. 437 Kinge Phillippe came to his father to Brurels. 453 King Phillip entreth into And. 462 King Fardmando goeth into Boheme 466 King of Denmarke slieth. 41 King of England wryteth to the prin∣ces of Sarony. 44 Kinges sonnes are pledges. 69 King of Hongary slain. 71 King Henry hated againste the Pope. 114 Kinges supper and murder. 132 King of England, patrone of the Pro∣testauntes league. 139 King Edward the .vi. borne. 154 King of Englande refuseth the Coun∣sell. eodem King of Englande hated of the Pope. eodem. King of England maried the .vi. wife. 187 Kinges purgation. 191 King of Denmarke warreth vppon the imperials. 266 King of England warneth the Prote∣staunts of the daunger. 227 King of Denmarke aided not the Pro∣testauntes. 275 King is apparelled like a deacon. 292 L LUthers letters to the Bishoppe of Mentz. 1. Luthers questiōs at Wittenberge. 1 Luthers exception. eodem Luthers letters to Pope Leo. 2 Luthers answer to Siluester Prierias. eodem. Luthers second aunswere to Siluester Prierias. 3 Luthers forsaking of Rome. eodem. Luther cited to Rome. 4. Luther is called to Auspurgē. 5. Luthers conference with Cardinal Ca∣ietane. eodem Luther appealeth. 6 Luther appealeth from the Pope to the Counsel. 9 Luthers letters to the Pope. 17 Luthers boke to the duke of Saxon. 18 Luthers boke condemned at Louain 19. Laurence valla. eodem Luthers letters to themperor. 21 Luthers letters to the archbishoppe of Mentz. eodem Luthers letters to the bishop of Merse∣burge. 22 Luther cursed of the pope. 23 Luther impugneth the Popes censure. 24 Luthers boke of the captiuity of Babi∣lon. eodem Luthers bokes are burnt. 26 Luther burneth the Canon law. 27 Luther cometh to Wormes. eodem Luther pledeth his cause before them∣peror and the hole Empire. 1. Luthers answer to the princes. 39 Luther sent away from Wormes. 31 Luther is outlawed by themperor. 33 Luther wrote sūdry bokes in his exile. eodem. Luther is conueied out of daunger. eo. Luther returneth to Wittenberge. 35 Luther foreseeth the tempest comming eodem Luther wryteth to the Bohemer. 36 Luther wryteth against the bishops. eo Luther a Frier. 38 Luther compared with Mahomet. 40 Luther expoundeth the Popes laying. eodem. Luther interpreteth the decrees of the Princes. 43 Luther wrote to the Senate of Prage. eodem.
Luther wrote of eschuing the doc. 44 Luther compared to Mahomet. 50 Luther disswageth al men from sedi. 58 Luther did more with the worde, then could haue bene done by forc. eodem Luthers answer to the boures. 60 Luthers office. 63 Luther bloweth the trōpet against. 64 Luther to vehement. 65 Luther married a Nonne. eodem Luther and Zwinglius mete at. 66 Luthers letters of submission to the. 67 Luthers letters to George duke of. eo. Leonard Cesar apprehended for the. 74 Lawes of disputation. 75 Lantrech besiegeth Naples. eodem Luther and Zwinglius dispute at. 83 Luther wrote a boke to the bishops. 96 Luther comforteth Melancthon. eodem Luthers opinion of mens traditiōs. eo. Letter of the duke and Lantzgraue. 103 Luthers counsel. 112 Luthers purgation. eodem Luther comforteth thexiles. eodem Luthers opinion touching the spri. 116 Luthers wryting of Munster. 134 Legions of soldiors in Fraunce. 137 Luthers constancy. 138 Like lips, like lettes. 151 Longolnis oration against the Lu. 167 Lascus committed to prison. 175 Luthers boke against the Duke of. 176 Luther is cursed of the Pope. 175 Langeus letters to Alphonse. 184 Luthers oration for the field. 189 Lawes against deflowrers of vir. 202 Laundersey besieged. 205 Luthers boke of the Lordes supper. 215 Luthers answer to them of Louain. 218 Luthers boke against the Pope. 222 Luthers Themes of iii. gouern. eodem Luthers picture against the pope. eodē Luther a Prophet. eodem Luther chosen arbitror. 231 Luther wareth sicke. 232 Luthers last prayer. eodem Luthers birth. eodem Luther sent to Rome. eodem Luther eloquent in the dutch. eodem Lightning caused destruction. 255 Liberty is exiled out of the counsel. 256 Letters for the Lantzgraue to. 295 Letters of Strasborough to them. 326 Luther brought in contempte, the Po∣pish Ceremonies. 334 Lewes Marsile one of the prisoners 423 Libels strowed about in London. 461 Lady Clinor commeth into France. 86 Lantzgraue departeth from Ausp 89 Lantzgraue goeth to the frēch king. 113 Lantzgraue boroweth Monye of the French king. eodem Lady Mary proclaimed bastard. 114 Lantzgraue taketh his leaue of them∣peroure. 240 M MAximilians letter to Poope Leo, concerning Luther. 3 Maximilians death. 10 Many sectes in the popish kingdom. 36 Maner of chusing themperor. 10 Matrimony lawful for all men. 47 Muncer a great Anabaptist. 55 Muncer wil haue a token of God. eodē Muncer maketh gunnes. eodem Muncer teacheth that all thinges shuld be common. eodem Muncer raileth on the princes. 56 Muncer disceyueth the people by the rainbow. eodem Muncer is taken, his cruel answer, and he is reproued of the Lantzgraue. 57 Muncer repenteth at the hour of death eodem Mishaps of the french king. 82 Matters receiued in religion. 89 Monestical vowes. 124 Munster a city of Westphalia. 137 Maidens do prophecy. 130 Mariage counted whoredome. 135 Many filthy actes of Monkes. 156 Meanes to restore the ecclesiastical. 181 Melancthon and pristor come to. 201 Miners president of Aygwes. 219 Miners leuieth a power againste Ual∣dois. 219 Maluenda treateth of iustification. 229 Marquin excuseth Diaze. 234 Mariages in broil of warre. 254 Maurice loueth his townes. 276 Marques Albert sent to aid. 277 Mendoza ambassade from the Frenche King to Strasburge. 279
Marques Albert taken prisoner. 280 Mihel Sidonie a great Masmōger. 294 Muskel borowe field. 296 Muleasses king of Tones. 313 Maximilian marieth his cosen. 315 Musculus departeth to Bernes. 316 Maximilian warred against the Swis∣sers. 322 Maried Priestes plucked from theyre wyues. 329 Melanthō defēdeth the Adiaphorist. 333 Monseur Ueruine beheaded. 336 Maximilian cometh out of Spayne. 353 Melanthon best learned. 359 Mony gathered for the warre of May∣den burge. 760 Maximilian entreth into Trent. 378 Marques Albertes letters agaynst thē∣peroure. 393 Marten van Rossem spoileth Champa∣nie. 399 Marques Albert warreth for hym selfe. 406 Marques Albert the scourge of Pristes. 410 Marques Albertes request to Strase∣burge. 410 Marques Albert refuseth peace. 101 Marques Albert entreth Treuers. 412 Marques Antonius Ambassadoure of Uenisse. 413 Marques Alberte reconciled to Them∣peroure. 413 Marques Albert sendeth to the Empe∣roure. 420 Marques Albert outlawed. 429 Marques Albert goeth to Sewinforte and flyeth. 436 Maryburge taken. 473 Melanthon conforteth the mynisters of Boheme. 449 Marcellus the Second chosē Pope. 450 Marcellus the Second dyeth. 450 Maurenburge vitaled. 452 Mount Calue is taken by the French∣men. 453 Masse abolished at Zuricke. 54 Madnes of the Munsterians 57 Magestrates is as necessarye as the Sonne to the worlde. vi Marques letters to the state of Duke Maurice. 42 Ministers exiled out of Boheme. 442 N NEw pardons. 9 No man may be kepte frō the gos∣pell. 6 Newes of the Turkes Coming. 200 Newes of the Turkes approche. 1 Nauius hath the place of Heldus. 174 Nuburge rendered to the Emperoure. 264 Notes of the Interim by the Bishop of Rome. 314 No man oughte to be compelled to hys fayth. 319 New ambassadours from Wittenberg 375 Norinberge hath peace with the Mar∣ques. 402 Nyne bournte at Lyons. 423 Note how Bisshoppes seke authoritie of kinges to condemne. 454 Nombers of great gonnes taken front protestauntes. 29 Notes of the Interim by the bysshops of Rome. 313 O O Eham condemned in Paris. 19 Of the original of the Turkes. 190 Of ecclesiasticall benefites. 281 Out of the conclaue came most fylthys Letters. 343 Ortauious Farnesius cliēt to the frēch kinge. 360 Oration of tharchbishop of Treuers. 12 Opinion of the Cyties touchynge the king of Romaines. 102 Othe of the Electors. 406 Oration of the Popes ambassadour to the Duke of Saxon. 109 Oration of Themperours Ambassa∣dour. 109 Oratiō of the french ambassadours. 123 Ofspring of fraunce and germany. 123 Originall of the Annabaptistes. 127 Oration of the Popes Legates. 231 Oration of Themperours Ambassa∣dours. 240 Occatiō of taking thēperours losse. 267
Oration of the kinge of Poles ambas∣sadour. 301 Originall of this order of knight. 303 Oratiō of the Princes ambassadors to thēperour & thēperours aunswer. 377 Oration of the Frēch ambassador. 404 P PRinces of necessitie must reforme Rome. 3 Popes vnder the Councell. 7 Pope Iohn is deposid. 8 Pope Prius wishe. 18 Picus Myrandula. 19 Pope Leo his bull. 23 Priestes maried wyues. 44 Popes subiect to themperour. 25 Pope Clement sendeth Campeius to duke Frederike. 45 Phifer compagnion to muncer. 55 Phyfers entreprise. 56 Preachers ought to be circumspect. 59 Prayers for the dead ar superfluous. 75 Paccius beheadid. 78 Prayers mixed with threateninges 92 Poore Luther maketh many men. 95 Persecutiō against the Lutherians. 115 Paule was craftier then Clement. 117 Persecution in France. 118 Pope Iohn a woman. 119 Proude Marchantes. 115 Popes condempned for heresy. 121 Paphūtius perswadeth ye priestes. 124 Peter wirtē began to preach again. 129 Perome besieged. 141 Popes haue emperors insubiectiō. 149 Pope paule euell reported. 154 Presidentes of the Councell. 158 Preaching forbidden. 173 Perswasions to warre against the Turke. 187 Perpiguian besieged. 192 Peace is disceptfull. 196 Psalmes translated by Marot. 201 Philip created king of Spaine. 202 Pillugius bishop of Numburg amōges the presidentes. 230 Preaching frees. 231 Peace betwixt Fraūce & England. 246 Peter strosse disceaued ye protest. 265 Penstellens in Emperors campe. 267 Persecution in Fraunce. 270 Paulus Fagius a man learned and ∣loquent. 273 Part of the counsell of Trent flit to Bonomie. 283 Peter Alois ye popes sonne slaine. 294 Peter martyr goeth into England. 297 Prusse belongeth to Pole. 303 Prusse belongeth to themperour. 305 Paule geuen to astrology and coniu∣ration. 340 Paules ioye in bayne 342 Proclamatiōs against lutheranes. 345 Pope Iuly somoneth a counsell. 351 Pardons graunted by the Popes le∣gat. 385 Pestilence and fiering at Paris. 427 Paule the fourth made Pope. 450 Port hercules taken by thimperialles 452 Plinabine besieged of Turkes. 452 Peter martir goeth to Zurick. 469 Papistes in Swicerland made league with king Ferdnando. 80 Protestantes assemble at Norunberg. 86 Protestantes accused of Sedition. 93 Practise of Prelates. 117 Practise of the French men. 144 Popes ambassadour dispised. 147 Popes errours and autority. 148 Paule the thirdes crafte. 149 Preachers of the gospell brought god∣ly workes to light. 150 Popes accused of Idolatry. 151 Pope would bie Millian. 201 Princes letters to the Pope. 208 Popes letters to themperour. 215 Pope most desirous of warre. 221 Pope cite the Archbishop of Collon. 223 Popes letters to the Swisses. 247 Protestauntes Ambassadours to the Swissers. 247 Protestauntes accused of treason. 253 Protestaūtes letters to Iohn marques of Brandenburg. 251 Protestauntes aunswer to the table of out lawery. 260 Purgations of the Cardinall of Au∣spurge against suspicions. 467 Pope had no cōsideration with them∣perour against religiō or the liberty of Germany. 468
Q QUene Anne loueth ye gospell. 113 Questions moued to a dombe spi∣rite. 115 Quene Marie affiaunced to the empe∣rours sonne. 430 Questions of zuinglius. 39 Quene of Hungary made regent of flaunders. 101 Quene of Anabaptistes behedid. 133 Quene Katherine dieth. 137 Quene Anne dieth lamentably. 140 Quene of Scottes dieth. 153 Quene Maries oration to the comons in yelde Hall. 430 R ROme the seat of Antichrist. 3 Reweline a diuine. 19 Reweline dieth. 37 Reliques of the holy gost. 45 Rome is the treasure house of the hole world. 72 Rome is Sacked. 74 Religion reformed. 76 Religiou reformid at Geneua. 76 Rochester and more beheadid. 121 Rochester made cardinal in ye towre. 121 Rotman a Preacher at Munster. 127 Rotman became an Anabaptist. 128 Rotman desperate. 136 Reasons why the protest. refuse the counsell. 149 Rebellion in Gelderlande. 154 Rebellion of Gaunt. 168 Rebellion at Genes against the house of Aurice. 276 Robert of a Brince wrote against the interim. 322 Rewardes for promoters. 346 Reseruations & graces expectatiue. 365 Reformation of the papiste. 390 Rebellion in duke Moris campe. 40 Renold Poole Cardinall. 429 Ridley & Latimer burnt in englād. 454 Rage of Antichrist. 125 Requestes of the princes to ye king. 398 S SIlens of the bishop of Mentz. 1 Siluester prierias his dialogue. 2 Siluester prierias themes. 2 Scripture and the old writers only are to be allowed. 2 Siluester prierias his second aunswer to Luther. 2 Shiftes of the Popes. 19 Sute betwixt the bushoppe and Swis∣sers vanquished. 11 Senate of Strasburg. 48 Supper of oure Lorde vnder bothe kindes. 18 Sundry plages in Germany. 83 Scripture is the touch stone of all doc∣trine. 91 Spirites in the popish kingdome. 115 Selling of benetices. 119 St. Geneua the goddes of Paris. 120 Sedition in Munster. 131 Symony raigneth in the Church. 157 Symony must be taken awaye. 181 Syr Henry Kneuet. 185 Strife about the Bisshoprick of Num∣burge. 186 Sebastian Scertiline a mā of war. 228 Spedius a blabbe. 240 Sherteline retyreth. 252 Siluer mines comon to the Dukes of Saxon. 266 Scertiline departeth from the prot. 267 Sedition at Naples for the Spanish in quisition. 291 So I will and do commaunde. 303 Sinne against the holy gost. 315 Strasborough rue the Interim. 326 Strasburgh writeth letter to thempe∣rour. 331 Skirmishes of ye princes with the em∣periall. 400 Syr Richard Morisme Ambassadour of Englande. 403 Serueto a Spanyarde burnt at Gene∣ua. 428 Sibylle Duchesse of Saxon depar. 431 Sanslorian and Carmillus lead to pri∣son. 453 Syr Peter Carrow sir Iohn Chick ta∣ken prisoners. 469 Swisses made a legue with the french Kinge. 32 Solempne buriyng in Fraunce. 114 Sfortia Duke of Millane dieth. 121 Supper of the Lord vnder both kindes. 124 Spoyling and burninges of Marques Albert. 416
T THomas of Aquine Albertus mag∣nus Scolar. 3 Thomas of Aquine a Saint. eod. Thomas of Aquine giueth auctoritie to the Pope. eodem Thomas of Aquine died. eodem Treaty of warre against ye turke. eod. The popes letters to ye Duke of saxō. 4 The popes letters to Gabriell Uene. 5 The vniuersitie of Wittenberge wry∣teth for Luther to the Pope. 5 The well spring of pardons. 7 The Dukes letters to the Card. 8 The vniuersitie of Wittēberg writeth for luther to the duke of Saxon. 9 The pope sendeth a golden Rose to the Duke of Saxon. 10 Themperour Rafe. 13 The Duke of Saxon refuseth thēp. 14 The birth of themperour. 14 The court of Rome is vncurable. 17 The part of a true friende. 18 The story of Rewcline. 20 The Sacramentes. 24 The maner of the Coronation. 24 Thēperour calleth a counsell imper. 25 The lawe of pope Clement. 25 The court of Rome an Fraunce. 26 The Duke of Saxon incensed against Luther. 26 The Bull of Cursing. 28 The Constancy of Luther. 28 The pope and the coūsell maie erre. 30 Treuers & other princes threten lut. 30 The offence of faith and maners. 31 The Counsell of Constance. 32 Three Popes deposid. 32 Thyrtene townes of Swissers in the league 33 The liberty of the Swisses. eodem The Masse to be abolished. eodem Themperour hath war with fraūce. 34 The death of pope Leo the tenth. eod. The Turke taketh Belgrade. eodem The Lady Mary assured to themper. 35 The Sectes of Bohemers. 36 The Pope writeth to the Princes of Germany. 37 The Watre of Treuers. 38 The Popes letters to Strasburg. eod. The stocke of Adrian. eodem The disputation of Zurick. 39 The request of Adrian to dispatch Lu∣ther. 39 The sinne of Rome spread ouer all the world. 40 The meane to let Counselles. 40 The answere of the Princes. 41 The maner of a free Counsell. 41 Two Friers burnt at Brussels. 43 The Ceremonies of disgreding. eod. The death and workes of Hutten. 44 The aunswer of Duke George. eodem The eating of flesh. eodem The Princes aunswer to Cāpeius. 46 The decree of wormes repeted. eodem The Pope is well monyed. eodem The Swisses are assendid with them of Zurick. eodem The Marchaundise of the Clergie. 47 The aunswer of them of Zurick. 47 The decree of Norinberge. 48 Thomas Moouer a Graye frier. 48 The lamentation of Luther. 49 The Golden Rose sent to the kynge of England. 50 Themperour blameth the princes. eod. Themperour defendour of the Romish Churche. eodem The duke of Burbōne besiegeth Mar∣selles. eodem The beginning of ye Rusticall war. eod. The papistes fight for their belly. 51 To serue foreyne Princes is vyle. eod. The crafte of Papistes. eodem The pouerty and bōdage of the Swis∣sers. 52 The Riches & liberty of thesame. 52 The Comotion of ye vulgare people. 53 Their Demaundes. 53 The Duke of Wittenberg attempted Warre. eodem The slaughter of the Boores. eodem The great cruelty of the Boores. eod. The warre of ye Boores in Loraine. 54 The slaughter of the Boores. 54 The cruelty of tharchbishop of treu. 54 The death of Frederick duke of. 56 The Princes make a power. 56 The slaughter of the Muncerians. 57 The vnreasonable laughter of mūc. 57 The dewty of a good Magistrate. 58 Thautors of rebellion are without ex∣cuse. 58
The best way to ouerthrow the popes auctoritie. 58 The practice of the Deuell. 59 The popish kingdome not long. eod. The demaundes of the preachers. eod. The Boores vse godly titles. 60 The state of a Magistrate wherin. 61 The Christian Lawe. eodem The Christian profession is hard. eod. The nature of veritie. 62 The craft of the deuill to oppresse. eod. The aunswer to ye Boores dema. eod. Tythes must be payde. eodem The false title of the Boores. 63 The rayser of tumultes. 63 The part of a wise man. 64 The dutie of a Magistrate. eodem The ende of tiranny. eodem Their can be nothing worse then. 65 The popes letters to them of Paris. 66 The kinges letters for Faber. eodem The story of Pruse. eodem The chief point of luthers doctrine. 67 Thomas woolsey cardinall a butchers Sonne. 68 The peace taken at Madrice. 68 Themperours letters. 69 The Turke inuadeth Hongary. 69 The beginning of the prot. league. 70 The popes benefites to themperour. 71 Themperours aunswer. 71 The kingdome of Naples. 72 The pope and thempar two great. 72 The Pope is a waryour. 72 Themperour confuteth the French. 73 The princes letters to themperour. 73 The beginning of ye Anabaptistes. 74 The French army inuadeth Italy. 74 The power of Bernes. 75 The duke of Burbon condemned at. 75 The prebendes of Constance dep. 76 The victory of the Gospell. eodem The English & French ambassad. eod. The French king offreth themp. eodē Themperours answer to ye French. 78 The Papistes forbidden to Preach. 79 The ambassadours of thimperiall chā∣ber to Strasborow. 79 The Bishoppes letters. 79 The masse put down at strasborow. 80 They of Basill take armure. 80 The Masse put downe. 80 The assembly of Spires. 80 The ambassadors of Strasborow. 81 The decree of Spires. 81 The decree of wormes. 82 Thoriginall of protestantes. 82 The peace of Cambray. 82 The Turke besiegeth Uienna. 83 The sweating Sicknes. 83 Two Clerkes burnt at Collon. 83 The protest. ambassadors to thēp. 84 Themp. aunswer to ye protestantes. 84 Thambassadours appeale. 85 The honesty of a Bishoppe. 85 The Chābre writeth to Smalcald. 86 Thēperors Coronation at Bonony 86 The diuines of the protestantes. 86 The princes yt wold not haue masse. 87 The Duke of Saxons office. eodem The turkes victory in Hōgary. eodem The turkes cruelty. eodem Thābassadour of Austrich his comp. 88 Thinges refused in religion. 89 That the Masse is a sacrifice. 89 The warre of florens. 90 The pope in league with thēp. eodem The Turkes power. eodem The protestantes were laboured. eodē The Bohemers borne withall. 91 Thēp. oration to the protestantes. 91 The Protestātes answer to themp. 91 Themperour to the Protestantes. 93 The protestantes spite no man. 93 The drone bees desire to be restored. 93 The answer to ye cōfutation of zwin. 94 The decree of Auspurge. 95 The Church oppressed with tirāny. 96 The papistes are accused of aerag. 96 The Lantzgraue made a league with Strasborow Zurick and Basill. 96 The league of ye protest. at smalcald. 97 The pope is a Sayler. 97 The prot. letters against Ferdinādo. 67 The causes of creating king of rom. 98 The protestantes letters to the king of England and Fraunce. 99 The protestantes appellation. 99 The bishoppes of Denmark resist. 100 The lawes permit the inferrour magi∣strate in some causes to resist the. 100 Tharchbishop of Treuers departeth. 101 The aunswere of the French kinge to the protestantes. 101 The amytie of Fraūce & Germany. 101 The aūswer of the king of Englād. 102
The duke of Saxons doubt of the. 102 The Palsgraue & tharchbishop of. 102 The Appellation of the Marques. 103 Therles of Nassow & Nauenar come to ye Duke of Saxon to intreate. 103 The intercessors and protestantes. 103 They of Zurick discomfited. 104 The death of Swinglius. 104 The death of Decolampadius. 105 The assembly of Regenspurge. 105 The dukes of Bauier misliked the. 106 The annswer of the duke to ye int. 107 The crafte of the Papistes. 107 The number of Protestantes. 108 The assembly at Regenspurg. eodem The Turke inuadeth Austrich. eodem The death of the duke of Saxon. eodem The slaughter of the turkes. 109 The pope serueth the time. eodem The Popes policie. eodem The duke of Saxons answer eodem The protestantes answer to ye pope. 110 The coūsell are swarued from their. 110 Themperours part is to defend rel. 111 The Pope is plaintife defendant &. 111 The Popes snares. eodem The Pope slieth to the Coūsell. eodem The craft of duke George to find of. 112 The inconstancy of pope Clement. 113 The vniuersitie of paris Sentens. 113 The death of Cardinall Wolsey. 114 The tragedy of the graye friers. 114 The game players carried to paris. 115 The condemnation of false Friers. 115 The victory of the Lantgraue. 116 The liberality of the French king. 117 The Lantgraues letters to thēp. eodē Themperours aunswer. eodem The punishment of the Godly. 118 The cruelty of Iohn Morine. 118 The pryce of a Masse is somtime. 118 The Pope the old Marchant. 119 Thieuish Marchauntes. 119 The maner of executiō in Fraunce. 120 The Lutherians are abhorred. 120 The Lantgraue is recōciled to Fer. 121 Thēperours voyage into Barbaria. 121 The duke of Saxon answer to ver. 121 The protest. answer to Uergerius. 122 The Popes craft is espied. 122 Themperour may order Coūselles. 122 Themperous letters to ye Iudges. 123 The answer of ye protest. to ye frēch. 123 The dutie of Princes. 124 The kinges opiniō of matters in. eod. The comō places of Melanthon. eod. The masse mainteneth purgatory. eod. The kinges of Fraūce & Nauar ex. 125 The prot. would make no league. 125 The oration of Bishop Foxe ambassa∣dour for the king of England. 125 The state of ye church troubelsome. 125 The protest. league is renewed. 126 The Erle of Nassowe hath mitted. 126 The Gospell receiued at Auspurge. 126 The papistes cōfesse their ignorāce. 128 The papiste for sake their Citie. eodem Thei of Mūster oppresse ye papiste. eod. They Anab. banished the Citie. eod. The constauncie of Fabricius. 129 The prophecie inspired with fury. 130 The diuition of Germany into pro∣uente. eodem The falsed of Iohn Berdan. eodem The euyll Iudges. eodem The madnes of Knipperdolan. 131 The Appose of munster. 132 The preachers of munster. eodem The preachers raked. eodem The preachers obstinacy. eodem The king taketh hede to him self. eod. The diuition of the world. 133 The presente age cōpared to Esaie. 133 The craft of an ignoraunt deuill. 134 The assemble at wormes. 135 The citie warre requered to render. 135 Two escaping betrayed the Citie. 135 The king is taken. 136 The king & his fellowes taried ab. 136 The cruell death of the King. 137 The popes coūsel to inuade Sauoy. 137 The house of Uicecountes in Lōb. 137 The Frēch kinges title to Millain. 138 Themperours oratiō against ye French King. 138 The duke of Florence maried the Em∣perours basterd. 138 The kinges letters to the protest. 139 The king of England requered a con∣ference of learned men. 139 The protestant sent to themprour. 140 Themperours letters to the prot. 140 The death of Frances Dolphin. 141 The Pope wil refourme the court. 141 The king of Scottes maried the Frēch Kinges doughter. 141
The duke of slorener slaine by his. 142 The Swicers sewe to the king for. 142 The protest. ambassadour to thēpe. 143 The dukes of Saksones answer. 144 The place of the Counsell. 148 The protest. decree mariyng of mi. 149 The authoritie of Iudgment in y•. 150 The crafte of the Pope. 151 The of spring of Cayne. 152 The protest. letter vnto the Frēch. 152 Terwine besieged in vaine. 153 The pope intendid to make Eras. 154 The pope hath a duble office. 155 The Couls maketh not the Mōcke. 157 The cardinal of Cappira can abide. 158 The Coloquie of Erasmus. eodem The duke of Pruse is outlawed. eod. The metyng of the emperor & the. 159 The bishop of lige made his graue. 159 Thomas Becket archbishop of cāt. 160 The Markes of Brandenburg of ye. 161 The lady Elizabeth sister to the lantz∣graue is referred into the league. 162 The secte of the Antinomions. 162 The citie of Mynden outlawed. 163 The duke of Brūswick desirous of. 163 The Lantgraue intercepteth the. 163 The death of Iohn duke of cleane. 164 The duke of Saxson wold not giue to Ferdinando the title of the king. 165 The Cannons comenly called of y•. 167 The sixe Articles. eodem The lady Anne of Cleaue. eodem Thēperour passeth through fraūce. 168 The emperour entreth into Paris. 168 Themperors & French kings amb. 168 The secrete of the senate vttered to. 169 The treators executed. eodem Themp. arriueth in Flaunders. eodem The prot. write to ye French king. eod. The Lord Cromwell. eodem The answer of the prot. to Crōwel. 170 Themp. letters to the protestantes. 171 The protest. answer to themperour. 171 The protest. comparid to Turkes. 172 The duke of Cleaue ioyned with. eod. The pope warreth vpō ye perusians. eo. The lord Cromwell beheadid. eodem The king marieth Katherine Haw. eo. The duke of Brunswick accused. eod. The assembly of Hagenaw. 173 The decree of Hagenaw. 173 The death of Iohn vaynode king of. 173 Three prote. burnt & three papistes. 174 The death of Budey. 174 The euill that cometh of discēsion. 174 The Turke receyueth the infant of. 175 The papistes seke delays. 175 The admiral of Fraunce condēned. 176 Themperour goddes Clyent. 177 The blasphemie Friere Tecell. 177 The maner of making this Palle. 178 These fires were set on by the duke. eo. The treatie of Regenspurge. eodem The chosen by themp. eodem The rashnes of Eckius. eodem The contentes of the boke. 179 The protestauntes letters to the Frēch king for such as were persecuted. 179 The Duke of Cleaue goeth priuely. 179 The duke of Cleaue marieth the. 179 The Admirall restored. 179 The Cōstable put out of the Court. 179 The colloquie of lerned mē at Reg. 180 The worse part ouer cometh by ye. 180 The Popes legate. 181 The diligence of the prot. in teach. 181 The diuines of the prot. answers. 181 The princes electours answer. 181 The answer of the popish princes. 182 The bishops are inioyned to ref. eod. The presumptuousnes of Eckius. eod. The protestantes confute his lett. 183 Themperours cōplaint of ye duke. 183 The princes make intercession for. 183 The oration of the French ambass. 183 The French ambassadors intercep. 183 The emperours iorney into Barb. 184 The plague in Germany by the. 185 The nobilitie of Austrich put vp a. 185 The plages that God sent to Aust. 185 The Turke is the scourge of God. 185 The chiefe article of doctrine is in. 186 The nobles reiterate theyr sute. eodem The oration of the French ambass. 187 The policie of the Romaines in est. 187 The concord of England. 187 The opinion of the popes Ambassa. 188 The Pope suspecteth Germany. 188 The pope cōpared with ye Turke. 189 Two mighty tyrannes. eodem The turke shal not be of such force. eo. The last acte of the Turke. eodem The praier of Luther. 161 The Markes of piscare accuseth the. 191 The Frēch king proclaymeth war. 192
The Duke of Languile & Martin van Rossen inuade Brabant. 192 The māner to serche out the Luth. 192 The articles of the Sorbonistes. 193 Two Friers preach ye gospell at Metz. 193 The duke of Saxon & lantgraue moue war against the Duke of Brunswike who flieth. 193 The Chaūcelor of Fraunce put in. 194 The Palsgraue the Gospell. 195 The enterprice of fregose & Rincō. 195 The French king is accused of ambis∣sion. 196 The presidentes of the coūsell at Tret. 196 The Scottes taken at Solymosse. eod. The king of scottes dieth. eod. The Duke of Saxon and Lantzgraue refuse the iudgment of ye chāber. 197 The duke of Cleaue recouereth Dure. 197 The kinges oration to them of Ro∣chell. eodem The Clemency of king Fraunce. eod. The assembly of Nurremberge. eodē The treatye of Norunberge. 198 The Turkes increase by the losse of Christians. 198 The decree of Norunberge. 199 The duke of cleaue refuseth truce. eod. The death of ye bishop of Auspurge. eo. The duke of Sauoye frend to thep. 200 The death and prayse of William Bellay. 200 The prayse of Clement Marot. 201 The Archbishop of Collon calleth a cō∣uocation. eodem The Bishops boke of reformatiō. eod. The protestaūtes ambassadour to thē∣peror. 203 Themperors viage against the duke of Cleaue. eodem They of Hyldesseme are accused to the Emperour. eodem The Popes to ye clergie of Collon. eod. The French king fortifieth landersey. 204 The Turkes nauie arriueth in the. eo. The Castell of Nice besieged. eodem Two cities full of Relicques. eodem The duke of Cleaue craueth pardō. 205 The duke condicions to him imp. eod. The doughter of Nauarris sent to. 205 The preachers of ye gospell thrust. eod. The siege is leued at Nice. eodem The yonge Quene of Scottes affiaun∣ced to king Edward. eodem The duke of Cleaue renounceth y•. 206 The departure of the French men. 206 Three Eclipses of the moone. eod. The causes of the Turkes prospe. 207 The protestātes oratiō to the emp. eo. The duke of Brunswick accuseth. eod. The French ambassador to ye asse. eod. The French heraut euill receyued. 208 The ambassadors retorne by night. eo. The Popes aunswer. eodem The meane to heale the comon. eodē The Princes letters to the swisses. 209 The protestantes accuseth duke of. eod. The tenure of his letters. eodem The duke of Brunswicke contemneth his owne religion. eodem The French victory at Carignaue. 210 The duke of sanoye accuseth the. eod. The swisses aunswer the Princes. eod. The English Nauie inuadeth scot. eod. The oration of the French ambas. 211 The duke of Saxon is set through. 211 The states of thempire decree a. 212 Themperours genelnes to ye lantz. 212 The Duchye of Brunsewicke com. 212 Thamperours Iorny into fraunce. 212 The king besieged Bollognie. 213 The death of the Prince Orenge. 213 The feare & slight of the Parisians. 213 The conditions of the peace. 214 The towne of Pery was burnt. 214 Three most mighty enimies of Fraūce that is themperour, the Germaynes and the kyng of England. 214 The enemies of the Romish church. 215 The pope cannot abide no super. eod. Thēperour is ye popes eldest sonne. eo. The creation of Cardinalles. eodem The Clergie of Collon to the arch. 216 The clergie appeale o the pope &. 216 The articles of Lonaine. 217 The protestauntes make aunswer. 218 The counsell trent vnlawfull. eodem The deuise of the popish princes. eodē Their be in the Frēch prouince a peo∣ple called valdois. 219 The Cardinall of fournon. 219 The Meridolns flie into ye woodes. 219
The Swisses intreate for the valdois. 220 The confession of the valdois doctrine. 221 The death of Lewis duke of bauier. eo. Thēperours ambassadour to the king of Poole. eodem The kinges answer to thēperour. eod. The wilde Beast. 222 The ignorance of Grimian. eodem The death of Fraunces Duke of Lo∣raine. eodem The birth of Charles sonne to kynge Philip. 223 The Duke of Brunsewicke getteth mony of the French king. 223 Themperours taketh truce with the Turke. eodem The clergie and vniuersitie of Collon agaynst theyr Archebishop. eodem Themperour citeth the Archbish. eod. The decree of Auspurg. 224 The warre of Fraunce & Englād. eod. The protestantes sende Ambassadours into Fraunce and England. eod. The death of the duke of Orelaūce. eo. The armie of ye duke of brunswick. eo. The lantz. goeth against him. eodem The vanitie of the Duke of Bruns∣wicke. 225 The death of ye Cardinal of Mentz. 226 The Lantzgraues letters to thēp. eod. Themperour to the Lantzgraues. eod. The Palsegraue ordeneth ministers in his Churches. 227 The protestantes accused of conspi. 228 The lātzgraues letters to Nauius. 229 The colloquie of the learned menne at Regenspurg. 229 The colloquie dissolued. 230 The popes Legates in the counsell of Trent. eodem The beginning of the Counsell. 231 The warning of Esoras & Nehem. 231 The seconde session of the Synode. 231 The quiet departure of Luther. 232 The inuincible constaunce of Luth. 232 The victory & conquest of the word. 233 The traytorous minde of Alphōse. 234 The murtherer killeth Daze. 235 Thēperours letter for a paracide. eod. Themperour visiteth the Lantzgraues doughter. eodem The Lantzgraue cometh to themp. eo. The Lantzgraue spake vnto thēp. 236 The boke of reformatiō at Collon. 236 The archbushoppe of Collon is accoū∣ted vnlearned. 237 The diuines are stubburne and ob. 238 Themperour ought to coūsell the pope to his dutie. 239 The ende of the Scripture. eodem The best thinges please fewest. eod. The minde of the Paulsgraue. eodem The Lantzgraue is arbittor betwixt the duke of Saxon & duke moris. eod. Themperour thāketh lantzgraue. eod. The thirde sessiō in the Sinode at. 240 The popes letters to the Bushoppe of Sedune & Chur & certaine Abb. eod. The Archbushoppe of Collon excomu∣nicated by the pope. eodem Thēperour cometh to Reuspurg. 241 The murther of Diaze vnpunished. 241 The brute of warre against ye prot. eo. The falshode of Marques Albert and Iohn Brandenburge. eodem The Lantzgraue is circumspect. eod. Themperours letters to the Cities of the protestauntes. 242 Themperours Crafte. eodem The oration of the Frenche Amb. 243 The French kinges request. 243 The pope tiraunt. 244 The clergie abused ye church goods. eo. The good will of the protestaūts. eod. Themperour had secrete talke with duke Moris. 245 Themperours ambassadour to ye. eod. The cities of wirtēberg put on ar. eod. The oratiō of Balthazar to ye sold. eod. The protestauntes letters to the Ue∣netians. 246 The Churche goodes in Spaine to be imployde. 246 The cardinal Scotlande slaine. 246 The teares of the Crocodile. 247 The pope attempteth the matter. 247 The Paulsgraue axeth the cause of. 247 The Paulsgraue seketh to recōsile the protestaunte to themperours. 248 The duke of Saxō letters to thēp. eod. Themperour periured. eodem The authors of this warre. eodem Themperours letters to the Archebus∣shoppe of Cellon. 248
Themperours policie. 249 The Cardinal of Auspurg the fire brād of this warre. 249 The Iudges of the Chamber bee Pa∣pistes. 250 The league betwixte the three houses, Saxon Brandenburg and Hesse. 250 Thintent of the Papistes. 251 The Popes bull agaynste the Prote∣stauntes. 251 The diligence of the Protestantes in le∣uyng theyr armye. 251 The Lantzgraue sente his sonne to Strausburge. 251 The fyrste enterprise to the Prote∣stauntes. 251 The Castell of Erenburge. 251 Themperoures power. 252 The Duke of Saxon & Lantzgraue are out lawed by Themperoure. 252 The popes letters to the Swysses. 257 The pope bringeth themperour into hatred. 254 The nūber of the fathers at trent. 254 The king of Swetia receiueth the. 254 Thēperours letters to dukemoris. 254 The protestauntes letters to the Duke of Bauer. 255 The Swysses aūswer to the Prote. 255 The death of Diazius vnpunished. 256 The Protestantes proclaime warre a∣gainst Themperour. 256 The craftines of themperour. 256 The Articles of the vniuersitie of Lo∣uayne. 257 Themperour woulde not receiue the protestantes. 257 The table of prescription. 257 The popes armie cometh to thēpe. 257 The Captains of the said armie. 257 The captains of thēperours armie. 257 The princes of ye protestaūtes cāpe. 257 The lātzgraue rideth forth to espie. 258 The Spaniardes inuade the protestāts Captayne. 258 The Erle of Bure leadeth an Army to Themperoure. 259 The cause of the protestāts miseri. 259 The Swisses aunswer to thēpe. eodē Themperour to the Swisses is a gospeller. eodem The protestāts one against an other. eo The protestāts sēd to ye bohemers. 260 The pope hireth mē to poisō other. eo. The emperours craft toward ye pro. 261 The emperorsdecrees made for fear. eo The dissimulation of themperour. eo The Duke of Brunswick a bitter ene∣mye to the Protestantes. 262 The Frēch ambassador dissuadeth the Emperour for his warre. eodem Thēperour will conquer Germany. eo The rable of the papistes. 263 Themperour pretended this warre long before. eodem The decres of wormes was the trom∣pet of this warre. 264 The custom of thempire in assēbles. eo The protestauntes remoue there. eo. The protestauntes write to the Swif∣sers gospellers. 265 Their aunswer to the protest. eodem Themperours and the protestauntes Campes nere together. eodem The Duke of Alba taūteth ye lantz. 266 The vnreasonable request of Duke. eo Thēperour winneth the riuer of. 267 The lantzgraue aunswereth the states of duke Moris. 268 The crueltie wrought by the per. eodē The protestauntes benefites to Duke Moris. eodem The protestaūtes letters to ye cities. eo The horse men of hongary are comon∣ly called Hussares. 269 The duke of Saxōs request to his. eod. The electours countrie inuade. 27 The Bohemers slip a waye. eodem Tharchebishop of Collon appealeth from the Pope. 271 The vnlucky successe of the protestaū∣tes warre. eodem The perill of protestauntes. 272 The duke of Saxon exacteth many pa∣pistes. eodem The Emperours letters to the duke of Wirtemberg. eodem The dukes letters of submission to themperour. 273 The Paulsgraue asketh pardon of themperour. eodem They of Frankforth render therle of Bure. eodem The Electours letrers to the states of Duke maurice. 274 The Calamissi of Saxoni. 274
The king of Denmarke aided not. 275 The cities of protestants send am. 276 Themperor wil hear no mention. eod. The duke of Saxon besiegeth Lip. eod. The death of Henry the eight. 277 The Duke of Somerset. 278 They of Auspurge make theyr. eodem Thelector of Brandenburge in. eodem Thomas Cranmar primate of. eodem Thelector of Saxons letters to. eodem The death of Nauius. 279 Themperor leuieth a new armyeodem The league of Bohemers. eodem The winning of Roclice. eodem The duke of Wirsemberge cra. 208 The seuenth session at Trent. eodem They of Strasburge compound. 281 The duke of Saxon sendeth an. 282 The Bohemers letters to the. eodem The notable library of king Fran. eo. The kinges knowledge. eodem The death of two kings was hap. eo. The ouerthrow of themperors. eodem Two executed at Frankfurt. eodem The Lantzgraues purgation. eodem Themperors Iourny against the. 284 Themperors celerity in ouerta. eodem Themperor fighteth a battel with. eo. The duke taken sighting. eodem The condempned to lose his head. 285 The burial or king Fraunces. 286 The Lantzgraues sonne in law. 287 The schole which was fallen in. eodem The treatise of Urmes. 288 The Lantzgraue commeth to. eodem The Lantzgraue kneleth to. eodem Themperors answer. eodem The Lantzgraue is driuen into. eodem The Lantzgraue captiue. 289 The nombre of great gunnes takē. 29 The Bohemers subdued by fre. eodem The Cardinals of France sent. eodem The Coronation of the French. 291 The twelues Peres of Fraunce. eodem Themperor exacteth in Germany. 292 They of Maidenburge outlawed. eod. Themperor moueth the Swisses. eod. The churches new halowed. eodem This was an armed assembly. 293 The Pope a Negromancier. eodem The hatred of the Citezens to 294 The monstrous lustes of hin. eodem The counsel of Trent. eodem The Protestantes intised or sea. 299 Themperor answer to the states. 290 The conditions wherby the Lantz. eo. Thanswer of duke Maurice. eodem Themperor requyreth the wry. eodem Thoration of the Cardinall of. eodem Thoration of the bishop of Renes. 297 The French king contendeth. eodem The Popes letters to his Legate. eod. The Pope to Mendoza thempe. 298 The popes letters to the bishops. eod. The pope is ignorant of al things. eod. The pope is a watchman. eodem The constancy of the Romish. eodem Themperors ambassador sent to. eodē The Popes Legate to themperors. eo. Themperors ambassador to the. eodem The malapertnes of the legate. 299 The letters of protestation. eodem Themperors carefulnes for the. 300 Thauthors of remouing the coun. 300 The beginning of thordre of. 301 The victory of king Cosriure. eodem The war of Emperors and kinges of Pole against this ordre of Knights. 302 Thoration of the Marques. 303 The duke of Muscouia. eodem The prince of Lituanis, made. eodem The people rebel. 304 The conditions of peace betwixte the king of Pole and the knightes. eodem The commotion in Boheme for ye doc∣trine of Ihon Husse. 305 The Popes answer to Mendoza. eodem The war finished by the Popes ar. eodē Themperors praise, set ye pope afire. eo. The fathers must be prouided for. 307 The Pope may be weake & neg. eodem The authors of thinterim. 308 The connsel of England wryte. eodem The gouernor of Scotland. eodem The Britains expulsed by the. 309 The pictes by the Scottes, eodem Two waies to finish warre. eodem The ceremony wherby duke Mau. 310 The Marques of Brandenburge. 312 The contentes of thinterim. eodem Two sacrifices of Christ after these. eo. Thelectors vary in opinion. 313. The craft of the archbishop of Mentz in approuing of thinterim. 314 The Constancy of the duke of. 315 The labor and pearil of Bren. eodem
The playnes and godlines of Bren∣tius. 315 The fearefulnesse of the Duke of wit∣temberge. eodem The constacie of the duke of Saxo. eod. The Dukes godly minde. 316 The cruelty shewed is Duke of Saxon prisoner. eodem The stmate minde of winchester. 317 The Ecclesiasticall reformation of the Emperour. eodem The Trēblable misteris of the Masse. 317 The Excomunication. eodem The meanes made that Strausburge shoulde receiue therin. eodem Theyr Aunswer. eodem The Emperour will not discharge his Souldiours. 319 The promes of a lawfull Counsell re∣pented. 320 The decree of the Uenetians. eodem The wisdom of the Uenetians in mat∣ters of religion. eodem The story of Lewes Auila of the Ger∣mains warre. 322 The Duke of Saxon beloued of all menne. eodem Thei of Counstaūce writte to thempe∣rour. eodem Thēperour maketh newe Senatours. 323 Thēperours abrogates faternities. 323 The Spaniardes go to Coustaūce. eod. The Constaunce assaulted. eodem Themperour delited in the Frenche tonge. eodem The letter of Strausburge to the em∣perour. 324 The Constancie of the ministers. 325 The Duke of Saxon and the Lātgraue led awaye prisoners. 325 The reformation of the Chamb. 326 They of Constaunce geue them selues to the house of Austrich. 326 The slaughter yt was at Burdour. 327 The abhominable filthines of an arch∣bushoppe. 329 The inheritor of Scotland led into Fraunce. 330 They of Madenburge are made a praye for their godlines. 331 Trouble in Englande. eodem The Admirall of england beheaded. 331 Thomas Crammer a furtherer of lear∣ning and Codlines. 331 The duke of Swaybrig plaine trouth. 332 The Interim confuted by them of Bu∣beck and others. 333 The force of Hohwater. eodem The popes legates to themperour. 334 The Pope graunted licence to eate fleshe. 335 The Archbishop of Metz to the coun∣sellors of the Lantgraue. eodem The Godly aūswer of ye preachers. eod. The king commaundeth to go on pre∣session. eodem The French king stealeth fortes. 337 The Senate of Strausburge do com∣pound with their Bishop. eodem The perill of feare of them of Mayden∣burge. eodem The Purgation of them of Mayden∣burge. eodem The cause why them of Maydenburge cannot gette their pardon. eodem The sayng of goodnes the. 338 They betray the trouth that hold it in Silence. eodem The mōstruous lechery of the pope. 339 The Popes rauening. eodem The Pope sister a whore made her bro∣ther a Cardinall. eodem The mayseres of ceremonis. 340 The custody of the conclaue. eodem The orders of the Cardinall. eodem The maner to chuse the pope. 341 The factions of the Cardinall. eodem The cause why pole was not pope. eod. The yeare of Iubiley. eodem The protectour of England. 343 The Frenche kinges proclamation a∣gainst Lutheranes. eodem The opening of the Golden gate. eod. Themperiours letters to the states of thempyre. 344 The cleargye of Strausburge renueth their ministers. 345 The talcke of faith is forbidden. 346 The death of the cardinall of Loraine. 347 The Archbushop of Collon entreth the City with Pompe. 347 The Protestation of the Duke Moris
against the Counsell. 348 The knauery of Spanierdes. eodem The death of Granuellan. eodem The taking of the Ciue of Africa. eod. The ouerthrow of the Maiden Burgi∣ans. 349 The princes letters to them of Mayden burge. 349 The Proclamation for religion muti∣gated. 349 The answer of ye Maydenburgians. 350 The death of viriche Duke of Wiriēb. 351 The causes that the decree is not obser∣ued. eodem They repare to trent before condem∣ned. 352 Themperours Proclamation agaynst them of Maydenburge. eodem The Lantgraues Sonnes sue for theyr father. eodem The Lantzgraues purpose of sliyng be∣wrayed. eodem The issuyng out & victory of the May∣denburgians. 353 The duke of Megelb. takē prisoner. 353 They of Maydenburge are moued to render. eodem The Actes agaynst the Clergy. 354 The slaughter of the Citizens. 355 The answer of the Citizens. 356 The prayse of great Otto. 358 The duke of Pruisse addicte to Oū. 359 The decree of Auspurge. 359 The death of Bucer. 360 The pope accuseth Octauian far. 360 The counsell at Trent is solde. 361 The warre of Parma betwixt thempe∣rour and the French king. eodem The Frenche Kinges excuse to the Pope. eodem The fierse minde of the Pope. 362 The confession of duke Moris by Me∣lanthon. eodem. The humanity of the Duke of Wit∣temberge towarde Brentius. eodem The burnt child the fire dreades. 363 The Constancy of the Prelates. 363 The Preachers exiled. 364 The French king warieth vpon them∣perour. 364 The Counsell renued at Trent. 365 The French kinges letters to the. 365 The Some of Mony that is caried to Rome. 366 The vniuersitie of paris appeleth from the Pope. eodem The arrogantie of Pope Boniface a∣gainst the king of Fraunce. eodem Twelue archbishoprikes in fraūce. eod. Theames geuen to the diumes. 367 The order of speaking. eodem The maner of making the Articles of the faith. eodem The maner of making the decrees. eod. The holy gost at the popes cōmaunde∣ment. 368 The Frenche kinges writing against the Pope. eodem The wiked lustes of the Pope. eodem The cause of dissentiō betwixt the pope and themperour. 369 The safe counded of the fathers at. 370 The Marques of Brandenburge moc∣keth the Counsell. eodem The duke of somerset apprehēded. eod. The Counsell writeth to the Frenche king. 371 The Frēch king disswadeth ye Swisses from the Counsell. eodem The land of Wittenburge deliuered of Spanyerdes. eodem The ambassadour of Wittenburge to the Counsell. 372 The pacification of Maydenburge. eod. The noble same and constancy of May∣denburge. eodem The Pope created xiii. Cardinalles. 373 The amba. of wittēberg deliuered. 374 The amb. of Duke Maurihe Mar∣ques of Brandenb. to themper. 374 Their oration. 375 The Lantzgraue kept prisoner against the league. 375 The Lantzgraue biddē to Supper and kept prisoner. 376 The names of the Princes that intreat for the Lantzgraue. 377 The Lantzgraues Sonne cometh to Duke Morice. 377 The rayling of Cropper. 378 Themperours letters to the Bushoppe electors. 378 Their is craft in daubing. 379 The ambassador of duke Maurice come to the Counsell. 380
The Duke of Somerset beheaded. 381 The saufeconduct altered. 382 The fraukespeache of Duke Maurice Ambassadour to the fathers. 383 Thambassador of the prot. deluded. idē The diuines come to Norinberge. 384 The bitternesse of Frere Pelarge a∣gainst the Protestantes. eodem The diuines of Wittenburge. 386 Thābassodours of Strasburg det. 387 The blasphemio of a gray Frere. 388 The requestes of the Protestauntes di∣uines. eodem. The Fathers flie from Trent. 389 The answere of the Protestantes Am∣bassadour. eodem The churche cannot erre. 390 The Counsell of Basell purer then Trent. eodem The last session of the Counsell. eodem The French Kynge hath peace with the Pope. eodem Thende of the counsell of Trent. eodē The death of the Popes Legate eodem The seconde cause of warre. 392 The Lantzgraue deteined prisoner a∣gainst fidelitie. eodem The thirde cause. eodem The heauie burthens of Germany. 393 The storie of Lewes Auila, of the Pro∣testauntes warre. eodem The Frenche kynges letters. 394 The armes of libertie. 395 The prince of Salerne reuolteth from the Emperour. 396 The Frēche king subdneth Lorain eod The cardinall betraied the cites. eodē. The pledges of Fraūce & German. 397 The coūtry of Oto Hēry recouered. dē The Iudges of the chamb. flie. eodem The Conestable chideth with theim of Strasburge. 398 The kinges answer to the princes. 399 The sute of the Suises to the king eodē Thēperour flieth awaie by night. 400 The duke of Saxon set at libertie. eodē The Emperours stuffe spoiled. eodem The Princes restore the ministers of the churche. eodem The Marques Albertus armie. 401 The Frenche kyng destroieth the Em∣perours countrie. 403 The assemble at passaue. eodem The cōplaint of the princes elector. 403 The affinitie of Frenchmen and. 404 The libertie of Germanie restored by the power of Fraunce. 405 The waie opened for the Prince of Spaine to be Emperour. eodem The princes aunswere his oraciō. eodē The house of Lucenburg. 406 The battaile of Cressie. eodem The Frenche kynges aunswere to the intercessours. 407 Themp. letters to thintercessours. 408 Their aunswere to themperour. eodē The Ambassadours commentaries in∣tercepted. 409 The aunswere of Strausburge 410 The death of Bernard Archebishop of Colon. 412 The duke of Saxon goeth home to his owne house. eodem The Emperour goeth with his armie toward Loraine. 413 Thēperorentreth into Strasburg eod. The spoyle of the souldiours. eodem The death of Caspar Hedio and An∣drewe Osiander. eodem The Emperour besiegeth Metz. eodem The batterie of Metz. 414 The Duke of Brunswik driuen out of his countrie. eodem The duke of Guise defended Metz. eod. The Frenche kinges writyng against the Emperour. 415 The Emperours letters of aunswere to Marques Albert. eodem The armes of Electourship. eodem The Cardinall Lenoncourtes ambi∣cion. eodem The father and the sonnes contend for inheritaunce. 417 Terwen raced. eodem The Ladie Iane of Suffolke, maried Guilford Dudley. 418 The Marques maketh war i Sar. eodē. The spoilyng of Albert. 419 The complainte of Duke Moris, vpon Marques Albert. eodem The marques answer to duke Mo. 420 The Bishop in his absence inuade his countrie. 421 The great crueltie of marques Al. eode The death of good kyng Edward. eodē The vertues of Edward the sixt eodem
The wonders before Duke Maurice death. 422 The death of Orace Fernese. eodem The blasphemie of the lieutenan̄t. 424 The ladle Iane. eodem The lady Mary proclaimed quene eodē The Duke of Northumberlande con∣dempned. 425 Thomas Palmer knighte professeth ye doctrine of the Gospell. eodem The constancie of the Archebishopp of Cantorburse. eodem The bishops caried to prison 426 The Popishe religion restored in En∣glande. eodem The Turkishe naute taketh the Iland of Corsica. 427 The Frēche king attēpteth Cam. codē The bloode of Innocentes gainfull to many. 428 The Duke of Brunswickes letters to the Duke of Saxon. eodem The Duke of Brunswicke is reconci∣led to the duke of Saxon. eodem The Turke hanged his sonne Musta∣pha. 429 The Archebishop of Cantorburie and others condempned. eodem The Godlie lawes of good kynge Ed∣ward repealed. 430 The duke of Norffolke forsaken of his menne. eodem The duke of Suffolke. 431 The Ladie Iane and her husbande be∣headed. eodem The duke of Suffolke beheaded eodem The godly ende of Ihō Frederick. codē The godlines of his wife 432 The Lady Elizabeth committed to the Towre. eodem The slege of Senes. eodem The death of Wiat eodem Thassemble of Auspurge. 433 The death of Char. duke of Sanot 436 The letters of king Ferdinando to his subiectes, of the lordes Supper. eodē The states make aunswere to the kin∣ges letters. eodem The Abbot of Newstat accused of He∣reste. eodem The Frenche kyng inuadeth the Em∣perours countries. 437 The Frenche kynges letters. 438 The Emperour giueth to his soonne, the dukedome of Millane. eodem The Cardinall giueth the Lordes ab∣solution. 439 The Emperours letters against Mar∣ques Albert. eodem Themperiall counsel of Auspurg. 440 The ministers exiled out of Boheme. 442 The Towne of Cassell taken by the Frenchmen. 449 The letters of the princes of Saxon to the Emperour. eodem The archbishop of Metz dieth. 450 The death of Pope Iuly the third. eodē The of Senes render theim selues to themperour. eodem The secte of Iesuites. eodem The trauaile of Cardinall Poole, to make peace betwene the Emperour and Frenche kyng. eodem The Emperours letters to the States of the Empire. 451 The duke of Alba sent to Millane eodē The Emperours mother dieth. eodem The Frenche kinges Proclamacion a∣gain condēned of thinquisitors. 452 The Lucernates require of the Swis∣ses, the doctrine of the Gospell. eodē The Naute of the Kyng of Denmarke 453 The Spanish Flete intercepted by the Frenche kyng. eodem The controuersie about the lordes sup∣per is renued by the Bremers. eodē The aunswere of the Parliamente of Paris, by the kynges Proclamacion of Lutherians. 454 The meting of princes about the Lātz∣graues matter. 455 Themperour Charles giueth the go∣uernement to his sonne Philip. eodē The office of the Archbishops. 456 The aunswere of the Protestantes, to the writyng of the Papistes. 457 The bishops which chaunge their reli∣gion, should lse their promociō. 459 Thecclestastical lawes shal not be exer∣cised against the Protestantes. 461 The wife of Ihō Frederick dieth. eodē The ambassadours of Austrich require of Ferdinando, that true Religion male be permitted vnto them. 462
Truce taken betwene the Emperoure and the kyng of Fraunce. 463 The aunswere of Ferdinando to the Ambassadours of the house of Au∣strich. eodem The Emperours Sigismonde burned Husse. eodem The Ambassadours aunswere to Fer∣dinando. 464 The aunswere of Ferdinando, eodem The bishop of Treuers dieth. 465 The Duke of Pruse professeth the con∣fession of Auspurge. eodem The Archebishop of Cantorburie bur∣ned for Religion. eodem The Pope was displeased, that peace was graunted to Religion. 466 The Duke of Arestat. brake out of pri∣son. eodem The Cardinalle of Auspurge purgeth hymself by writyng. eodem The Cardinall of Auspurge addicte to the olde religion. 468 The good will of the Cardinall of Au∣spurg toward the Duke of Witten∣berge. eodem The loue of the Cardinall of Auspurg toward the Germaines. 469 Twelue burnt at Stratford bow. eodē The marques of Barden receiueth the Gospell. eodem Themperour goeth into Spaine with bothe his sisters. 470 VV. WHy the Bisshoppe of Rome is extolde. 3 Whiche are properlie called Sacramentes. 24 Who is aucthour of single life. 35 What nedeth gold in the churche. 47 What is true confession. eodem What thyng Rebellion is. 58 Wee are all blinde in our owne cause. 61 Who be the aucthours of dissencion. 81 Uergecius the Popes ambassadour. 86 Upon what condicions the duke of Sa∣xon will come to the assembly. 103 Warres in Swiserlande. 104 Whereof sprang the dissencion in Re∣ligion. 110 Wile Marchauntes. 120 Uergecius message to the Duke of Sa∣xon. 121 Uergecius spake with Luther. 122 Who wrote against the Anabaptistes. 131 Uergecius sent to the Emperour. 138 Who ought to be at the Counsell. 150 Why Innocentes be in perill. 151 Whereof cometh contempt of the cler∣gie. 155 Who ought to be made bishop. eodem Unlawfull to giue benefices by legacis eodem Why Cardinalles wer first made. 156 Uergecius his oracion. 176 Why the Protestantes desire a Coun∣sell. 177 What moued Luther to write against Papistes. eodem Willyam Farell. 192 Warre betwixte England and Scot∣lande. 196 William Countie forsaketh the Frēch kyng. 206 Whether we shal knowe eche other in the life to come. 232 What Counsell the Protestauntes de∣sired. 237 What profite hath the Emperour out of Germanie. 239 Ulmes reconciled to the emperour 273 Unreasonable tormente, is a perillous matter. 283 Wittenberg rendered. 286 Wittenberge a Towne of Electorship 287 Uogelsburge apprehended. 312 Uogelsburge cōstancy at his death 312 Workes of superogacion. 313 Whilest the Masse is set vp in Germa∣nie, it is put doune in England 317 Uiolence is not to be vsed in Religion but reason and truthe. 318 Who were outlawed by the Empe∣rour. 320 Who impugned the Interim. 322 Uergecius vanquished with the truth. 328 Uergecius repaireth to Mantua, and is put out of the Counsell. 329 Uergecius Preacheth the Gospell in Rhetia. eodem
What thynges offende many. 353 Why the Clergie forsake the citee. 356 Wonders in Saxonie. 360 Wilie begiled. 379 Warre in Italie. 48 Winchester made Chaunceler. 425 Warres renued betwixte the Duke of Brunswick & marques Albert. 426 Uercelles surprised. 429 Wiat taken and committed to pri. 431 Uulpian victualed. 452 Uulpian taken & raced by the Frenche kyng. 453 Whether peace should be giuen to the religion or no. 455 Unconstancie of Clement. 53 Uictorie of themperialles. eodem Winnyng of Munster 136 Warres of Geneua against the Duke of Sauoy. 137 Uenecians league with the Empe∣rour. 138 Uenecians Ambassadour to the Turk. 169 FINIS. ✚ Imprinted at Lon∣don by Ihon Daie, for Ni∣cholas Englande. M .D. LX. The. 26. daie of September. Cum priuilegio ad impri∣mendum solum.
