21037 99855149 20622
❧A merie newe Ballad intituled the pinnyng of the Basket: And is to bee songe to the tune of the doune right Squire. IT was my hap of late to heare, a pretie ieste: The which by me as may appeare is here expreste. With tantara, tantara, tantara, for this belonges thereto: With bitter broyles, and bickeryng , and strife with muche . Marke then for now this marvell strange, I will declare: A Ioigner sent his man to change, money for ware. Tantara, tara, tantara, vnto the toune he gose: And hasted to the Chandlers shop, his money to dispose. But see the chaunce the Chandler drie, was gone to drinke: Or els poore soule to plaie thereby, at sice and sincke: Tantara, tara, tantara, whereat his wife did chafe: And out she went then in a rage, to seeke her good man Rafe. She ranged forthe and could not reste, vpon the molde: When she hym founde, the bedlam beaste, beganne to scolde: Tantara, tara, tantara, quoth she vnthriftie knaue▪ If thou be at the good Ale tappe, thou hast that thou wouldest haue. This quiet man acquainted was, with her rough talke: And paciently orth with her passe Tantara, tara, tantara, at home she founde hym place: Till he had serued his customer, and then beganne the fraie. For hauyng doen, hold here quoth he, the Basket Dame: Goe gossip giue it hym and see, you pinne the same. Tantara, tara, tantara, now doeth the sporte beginne▪ Knowe thou quoth she sir knaue that I, the Basket will not pinne. Her housebande sore insenste did sweare, by stockes and stones: She should or els he would prepare, to baste her bones. Tantara, tara, tantara, quoth he Ile tame your tongue, And make you pinne the Basket to, doubt not ere it be long. Then with a bastian that stoode by, whiche he did smell▪ At her he freely did let flie, and bumbde her well Tantara, tara, tantara, vnguentum Baaline: Did make this houswife ickly , the Basket passyng . This pastyme pleased well the Page, that all this while▪ Sat on his horse, and sawe this rage, and bitter broyle▪ Tantara, tara, tantara. the good wife doeth retire, swears she will no more deny, her housebandes iust desire. The Basket pinne, the Page departes, when : He spurres his tt, the Iade startes, he was so fraied: Tantara, tara, tantara▪ in haste he homewarde rides, Yet when he comes, for tariyng long, his Maister chafes and chides. His Mrs too as one halfe madde, beganne to raue▪ Becse too long he taried had, hym knaue: Tantara, tara, tantara, he spake his Mistres faire: And tolde her she should knowe the cause, of his long tariyng there. Then boldly he began his tale, and tolde them all: Betwixt these two, how Deaudly Ale, had bred a braull: Tantara, tara, tantara, quoth he the Chandlers wife, Would not intreated be to pinne, the Basket for his life. Till he to beate her did beginne, with bounsyng bloose: Then quickly she in poste to pinne, the Basket goose: Tantara, tara, tantara, the Ioigner ioyes at , But sure his wife to heare this tale, was quite bereft of . , grace, Was chaunged, with beganne to frame: a nnyng face: Tantara, tara, tantara, quoth she for all his bloose, The knaue the Basket should haue pinne, hym self spight of his nose. Here then her housebande did beginne, quoth he if I: Should bid you wife the Basket pinne, would you deny: Tantara, tara, tantara, to hym she plainly tolde, That she the Basket would not pinne, thereof he might be bolde. Then thei hereof for to conferre, doe haste to bedde▪ And here you see a seconde iarre, the Basket bredde: Tantara, tara, tantara, the thirde doeth now beginne, The sillie Page to get some meate, in haste doeth hye hym in. No whit amazed vnto the maide, straight oeth goe: The queane of hym no more afraide, beganne to crowe: Tantara, tara, tantara, hym knaue and sot, And vsed hym that in the ende, a broken head he got. Hence forht take heade of makyng strife, thou knaue quoth she and his wife, where  should be: Tantara, tara, tantara, with greef her wordes he heares: But yet it grieued hym more to feele, the blood about his eares. Yet vp he stept full stoutly then, and bomde me Ione, That she lent, he so paide againe, he made her grone. Tantara, tara, tantara, and getts his Supper too: And made her sitte and eate with hym, although with muche a doe. His maister on the morowe nexte, of this was glad: His mistres was herewith so vexte, it made her mad. Tantara, tara, tantara, this happe brynges ioye and care: For now the Ioigners wife to pinne, the Basket must prepare. Her housebande by his mans good happe, doeth hope to winne: And makes her now spite of her cappe, the Basket pinne: Tantara, tara, tantara, againe he doeth replie: Will you the Basket pinne or no, she stoutly doeth denie. Then with a bedstaffe he to baste, her doeth beginne: Yet would she not for all his baste, the Basket pinne: Tantara, tara, tantara, this combate beyng doen Dame doeth runne. And to this ioylly Iustice wife, discoueryng all: Betwixt her spouse and her what sstrife, late befall. Tantara, tara, tantara, whom she would faine haue bounde, Unto the peace if by the happe, there might suche meanes be founde. Of this her frende the francke cousent, she sone had wone: To doe for her incontinent▪ what might be doen. Tantara, tara, tantara, this Iustice wife now gose: Her gossipps sute in haste vnto, her housebande to disclose. Her housebande hearyng by this tale, how all thynges stood: In mynde he at this ieste so stale, did laugh a good. Tantara, tara, tantara, a little more adoe: This Iustice would haue taught his wife, to pinne the Basket too. Now all good wiues beware by this, your es to blot, The Basket pinne with quietnesse: denie it not. Tantara, tara, tantara, be counsailed by your frende: And of this Baskettes pinnyng now▪ enough and so an ende. Finis. {quod} T. Rider. ¶ Imprinted at London for Henrie Kirkham, and are to be sold at his shop, at the little North doore of Paules, at the signe of the blacke Boye.
