21709 99847467 12503
TWO SERMONS PREACHED at PAVLES-Crosse LONDON. The one November 21. the other Aprill 15. 1627. BY ROBERT SAVNDERSON, Bachelour in Divinitie, and sometimes Fellow of LINCOLNE-Colledge in Oxford. LONDON. Printed by B.A. and T.F. for ROBERT DAVVLMAN, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the signe of the Brazen Serpent in Pauls Church-yard. 1628.
TO THE WORSHIPFVL my very kind Neighbour and Patron, THOMAS HARINGTON of Boothby-Paynell, in the County of LINCOLNE Esquire. SIR; although I neither haue, nor ought to haue any other prime inten∣tion in the Publishing of these two Sermons, then I had in the Preaching of them, and then euery Minister that fore-casteth to make his last account with comfort ought to haue in the whole course and exer∣cise
of his Ministerie, viz. the building vp of the people of God in Faith and Godlinesse: yet I can∣not but desire withall, that as they passeth abroad in the world, they may stand vp euery where as a publique testimonie of my priuate obligations to you. Whereof (omitting those dai∣ly kinde offices of Friendship and Neighbourhood, which you are euer ready to doe me and mine vpon all occasions; as also your zeale vnto Iustice and the Common-good, aboundantly manifested in mana∣ging the affaires of your Countrey with singular skill, Industry, and Faithfulnes:) I neede produce no other argument then this; that li∣uing so long vnder my Charge, as I doe also vnder your Patronage, you neuer yet gaue me the least cause to
thinke my selfe, either despised in the Worke, or defrauded in the Wages, of my Ministery. Which, as it is a gracious euidence of a pious and sincere heart in you; so it is a Circumstance, wherein I am happie beyond the condition of most of my Brethren in the same Cal∣ling. God make me truly Thankfull to him for his good Prouidence ouer me therein, and for all other his Mercies towards me: and both continue and increase your Com∣forts amid all the Afflictions of this present euill World; and in the end make you partaker of the Ioyes of the world to come: Yours in the Lord, Robert Saunderson. Boothby-Paynell, Linc: 1. Iuly. 1628.
Errata. IN Page 5. and in Note line 6. for Psal. read Verse. In page 14. from line 6. for Psal. read Verse fiue times in that page.
A SERMON PREACHED AT Pauls-Crosse London, November, 21. 1624. 1. TIM. 4.4. For euery Creature of God is good: and nothing to bee refused, if it be receiued with Thankesgiuing. OF that great and Vniuer∣sall Apostacie,§. 1. The Cohe∣rence. which should bee in the Church through the tyrannie and fraud of Anti∣christ; there are else∣where in the Scriptures more full, scarce any where more plaine pre∣dictions, then in this passage of Saint PAVL, whereof my Text is a part. The Qualitie of the Doctrines foretold Vers. 1. Con∣trary
to the Faith, Erronious, Diuelish; [Vers. 1. Now the Spirit speaketh expressely, that in the later times some shall depart from the Faith, giuing heed to seducing Spi∣rits, and doctrines of Deuils.] The Qualitie of the Doctors foretold, Vers. 2. Lyars, Hypocriticall, vncon∣scionable; [Vers. 2. Speaking lyes in Hypocrisie, hauing their Consciences seared with a hot jron.] But least these ge∣neralities should seeme not sufficiently distinctiue; each side charging other, (as commonly it happeneth where differences are about Religion) with Aposta∣cy, and Errour, and Falshood, and Hipocrisie: the A∣postle thought it needfull to point out those Anti∣christian Doctors more distinctly, by specifying some particulars of their diuelish Doctrines. For which purpose he giueth instance in Vers. 3. two of their Doctrines: whereof he maketh choyse, not as being simply the worst of all the rest, (though bad enough) but as being more easily discernable then most of the rest, viz. a Prohibition of Marriage, and an Injunction of absti∣nence from certaine Meates. Which particulars, being so agreeable to the present Tenets of the Ro∣mish Synagogue, doe giue euen of themselues alone, a strong suspition, that there is the seate of Anti∣christ. But joyned vnto the other Prophecies of 2. Thes. 2.3. &c. St. Paul, and Apoc. 13.11. &c. St. Iohn, in other places, make it so vnquestionable: that they who will needes bee so vnreasonably charitable, as to thinke the Pope is not Antichrist, may at the least wonder, (as Moulins ac∣complishment in the Preface. one saith well) by what strange chance it fell out, that these Apostles should draw the picture of Antichrist in euery point and limbe, so just like the Pope, and yet neuer thinke of him. §. 2. Scope.The words of the Text, are the ground of a Con∣futation; indeed properly and directly of the latter of these two Errours onely, concerning Abstinence from certaine meates: but yet so, as it strongly o∣uerthroweth
the other too, concerning Marriage; and in trueth generally, all other superstitious Pre∣cepts, or Prohibitions, of like Nature. Marriage being the holy Ordinance of God, as Meates are the good Creatures of God: and neither Marriage, nor Meates, nor any other Creature or Ordinance, being to be refused as vpon tye of Conscience; pro∣uided euer, they be receiued with such thankefulnesse, and such other requisite conditions, as become Christi∣an men. For euery Creature of God is good; and nothing to bee refused, if it be receiued with thankesgiuing. Which words giue vs occasion to consider of Three points,§. 3. And diuisi∣on of the Text. which according to the number and order of the seuerall clauses in this verse, are these. First, the Qualitie of Gods Creatures, as they come from him, and are giuen to vs: [Euery Creature of God is  good.] Secondly, the vse of Gods Creatures, consi∣sting  in their lawfulnesse vnto vs, and our libertie vn∣to them, [And nothing to bee refused.] Thirdly, a  condition necessary on our parts, least the Creatures, otherwise good and lawfull, should become vnto vs euill and hurtfull; and that is Thankefulnes: [If it bee receiued with Thankesgiuing.] The two first set out the bountie of God towards vs; who hath made a world of Creatures, and all good, and hath not en∣uyed vs the vse of any of them: and the third, con∣taineth our dutie vnto God in regard thereof; viz. to returne vnto him, for the free vse of all his good Creatures, the tribute of our Thankes. Of these three Points it is my purpose, by Gods grace, and with your patience, to speake in such manner, as shall be most for our edification; in such measure, as the vsuall houres will allow; and in such Order, as the Text giueth them: and first of the First, from the first clause thereof; Euery Creature of God is good.
By Creature vnderstand,§. 4. Obseru. 1. The Goodnes of the Cre∣ature de∣clared. not onely such as are ap∣pointed for nourishment: but euen all kind of crea∣ted Beings; the Gen. 1.1. Heauen and the Earth, and Exod. 10.11. all things therein contained Col. 1.16. visible and invisible, with all their seuerall Properties and Accidents. Of all and each of these the Apostles assertion is true; Eue∣ry Creature of God is good. Hee concludeth all kinds of meates to bee good; because, they are the Crea∣tures of God: which argument were not good, if euery Creature were not good. And by Goodnesse vnderstand, not only that goodnes ad intra, where∣by euery thing is simply and metaphysically good, in regard of the Nature, perfection, and beeing there∣of: but that goodnesse ad extra too, whereby eue∣ry thing is in the kind and in some measure endowed with an abilitie to doe some good without and be∣yond it selfe. You may call them an V. Scalig exer. 107. sect. 27. Absolute, and a Relatiue Goodnes. And euery Creature hath both of these. There being in the meanest and ba∣sest of Gods Creatures, not onely an Absolute Good∣nes, whereby it is perfect in its proper kind, Quà Ens, as it hath a beeing and existence: but also a Relatiue Goodnes too; and that two-fold. One, re∣specting God the Creator: whose glory more or lesse it serueth to shew forth, Quà Creatura, as it is the Worke of his hands. Another, respecting its . Plat. in Protag. & in Menone. fellow-Creatures: to some of whom it is some way or other seruiceable, Quà Pars Mundi, as it is a Part of the Whole; but especially seruiceable vnto Man, for whose seruice (next vnder the Glory of God) the whole was Created. The summe is. Euery Crea∣ture which God hath made is good. Good, absolutely & in it selfe; as a Thing: Good, in that it setteth forth the Glory of him that made it, as a Creature: Good, as a part of the World, for the seruice it doth to Man, and other Creatures.
Hereof wee neede neither further,§. 5. With the proofe. nor other testi∣mony, then Gods owne approbation registred in the story of the Creation Gen. 1. Where wee may see Gods allowance stamped, both vpon the seuerall Creatures of each seuerall day, that they were Gen. 1.4.12.18.21.25. good: and also vpon the whole frame of the Crea∣tures, when the worke was finished; that behold they were Ibid. Psal. 31 exceeding good. Et nusquam in toto corpore menda fuit. In this goodly systeme and fa∣bricke of Nature, that which is beyond all, is, the harmony and conjuncture of the Parts, exceeding in goodnesse, beauty, and perfection: yet so, as no one part is superfluous or vnprofitable; or, if consi∣dered singly and by it selfe, destitute of its proper goodnesse and vsefulnesse. As in the Naturall Body of a Man; not the least member, or string, or sinew, but hath his proper office and comlin in the Bo∣dy: and as in the artificiall Body of a Clocke or o∣ther Engine of motion, not the least wheele, or pinne, or notch, but hath his proper worke and vse in the Engine. God hath giuen to euery thing hee hath made, that Wisd. 11.20. number, weight, and measure of perfe∣ction and goodnesse, which he saw fittest for it vn∣to those ends for which hee made it. Euery Crea∣ture of God is good.§. 6. And ground thereof. A truth so euident; that euen those among the Heathen Philosophers, who eyther denyed or doub∣ted of the Worlds Creation, did yet, by making . Arist. 1. Ethic. 6. Ens and Bonum termes convertible, acknow∣ledge the goodnes of euery Creature. It were a shame then for vs, who Heb. 11.3. through Faith vnderstand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, if our assent vnto this truth should not bee by so much firmer then theirs, by how much our euidence for it is stronger then theirs. They perceiued the thing; wee, the ground also: they saw, it was so; we, why
it is so. Euen because it is the worke of God. A God full of goodnes; a God who is nothing but goodnesse; a God Pars naturae corum est esse bnos. (De Di∣is) Seneca. essentially and infinitely good, yea very Goodnesse it selfe. And as is the Workeman, such is his workemanship. Not for degree, (that is here impossible;) but for the truth of the Qualitie: not alike good with him, but like to him in being good. In euery Creature there are certaine trackes and foot-steps, as of Gods Essence, whereby it hath its Being; so of his Goodnes too, whereby it also is good. The See August. passim in Script. our. Mnichae∣s. Manichees saw the strength of this Inference: Who, though they were so injurious vnto the Creatures, as to repute some of them E∣uill; yet durst not be so absurd, as to charge the true God to be the cause of those, they so reputed. Com∣mon reason taught them: that from the good God could not proceed any euill thing; no more then Darkenesse could from the light of the Sunne, or Cold from the heate of the Fire. And therefore so to defend their Errour, as to avoid this absurdity; they were forced to maintaine another absurditie (indeed a greater, though it seemed to them the lesse of the two,) viz. to say, there were two Gods, a Good God, the Author of all good things; and an Euill God, the Author of all euill things. If then we acknowledge, that there is but 1. Cor. 8.6. one God, and that one God good; (and wee doe all so acknowledge;) vnles we will be more absurd then those most absurd Heretiques, wee must withall acknowledge all the Creatures of that one and good God to be also good. He is so the causer of all that is good; (for Iam. 1.17. euery good guift and euery perfect giuing descendeth from about from the Father of lights:) as that hee is the causer onely of what is good (for with him is no variable∣nes neither shadow of turning, saith Saint Iames.) As the Sunne who is Pater Luminum, the fountaine
and father of Lights, (whereunto Saint Iames in that passage doth apparantly allude) giueth light to the Moone, and Starres, and all the lights of heauen, and causeth light wheresoeuer hee shineth, but no where causeth darkenesse: so God the Father and fountaine of all goodnesse, so communicateth goodnesse to euery thing hee produceth, as that he Errat, si quis putet illos (De∣os) nocere velle q non pissunt. Senec. Epist. 95. Nec dant malū, nec habent Ibid. cannot produce any thing at all, but that which is good. Euery Creature of God then is good. Which being so; certainely then, first (to raise some Inferences from the premisses for our farther instruction and vse) certainely I say; Sinne,§. 7. Inferences thence: the First. and Death, and such things as are euill and not good, are not of Gods ma∣king, they are none of his Creatures: for all his Crea∣tures are good. Iam. 1.13. Let no man therefore say when hee is tempted and ouercome of sinne, I am tempted of God: neither let any man say when he hath done euill, it was Gods doing. God indeed preserueth the Man, actu∣ateth the Power, and ordereth the Action to the glo∣ry of his Mercy or Iustice: but he hath no hand at all in the sinfull defect and obliquity of a wicked action. There is a naturall (or rather transcendentall) Good∣nes, Bonitas Entis as they call it, in euery Action, e∣ven in that whereto the greatest sinne adhereth: and that Mali author non est, qui om∣nium qua sunt author est: quia in quantū sunt, in tantum bona sunt. Au∣gust. 83. Quest. 21. Goodnes is from God, as that Action is his Crea∣ture. But the Euill that cleaueth vnto it, is wholly from the default of the Person that committeth it; and not at all from God. And as for the Euils of Paine also; nei∣ther are they of Gods making. Wisd. 13.16. Deus mortem non fe∣cit, saith the Author of the Booke of Wisedome, God made not death, neither doth he take pleasure in the de∣struction of the liuing: but wicked men by their words and workes haue brought it vpon themselues: Osc. 13.9. Perditio tua ex te Israel, Os. 13. O Israel, thy destruction is from thy selfe: that is; both thy sinne, whereby thou destroy∣est thy selfe, and thy Misery whereby thou art destroy∣ed,
is onely and wholly from thy selfe. Certainly God is not the cause of any Euill, either of sinne or Punishment. Conceite it thus: not the Cause of it (formally, and) so farre forth as it is Euill. For otherwise, we must know, that (materially considered) all Euils of Punishment are from God: for, Amos 3.6. shall there be euill in the City, and the Lord hath not done it? Amos 3.6. In Euils of sinne, there is no other, but onely that Naturall or Transcendentall goodnesse (whereof wee spake) in the Action: which goodnes though it be from God, yet because the A∣ction is Morally bad, God is not said to doe it: But in Euils of Punishment, there is, ouer and besides that Naturall Goodnesse whereby they exist, a kind of Mo∣rall Goodnes, (as wee may call it, after a sort, impro∣perly, and by way of reduction,) as they are Instru∣ments of the Iustice of God: and whatsoeuer may bee referred to Iustice, may so farre forth be called good: and for that very goodnes, God may be said in some sort to bee the Author of these euils of Punishment, though not also of those other euils of sinne. In both, we must distinguish the Good from the Euill: and as∣cribe all the Good whatsoeuer it be, (Transcendentall, Naturall, Morall, or if there any other,) to God a∣lone; but by no meanes any of the Euill. Wee are vn∣thankefull if we impute any Good, but to him: and wee are vniust, if wee impute to him any thing but good. Secondly,§. 8. The second. from the goodnes of the least Creature, guesse we at the See Wisd. 13.1. &c. excellent goodnes of the great Cre∣ator. A Gell. 1. Noct Attis. 1. Ex pede Herculem. God hath Imprinted as be∣fore I said, some steps and footings of his goodnes in the Creatures: from which we must take the best scant∣ling, we are capable of, of those admirable and inex∣pressible and vnconceiuable perfections that are in him. There is no beholding of the body of this Sunne, who dwelleth in such a 1. Tim. 6.16. glorious light as none can attaine vnto;
that glory would dazle with blindnesse the sharpest and most Eagly eye that should dare to fix it selfe vpon it, with any stedfastnes: enough it is for vs, from those Tantae hae formaum va∣rieta, in rebus conditis, quid nisi quidam sunt radij Dei∣tatis, demon∣strantes quidem quid vere sit a quo sunt; non tamen quid fit, prorsus desti∣enes. Bern. Ser. 31. in Cant. rayes and glimmering beames which he hath scarte∣red vpon the Creatures, to gather how infinitely he ex∣ceedeth them in brightnes and glory. Bern. ibid. De ipso vides, sed non ipsum: We see his, but not him. His Creatures, they are our best, indeed our only instructers. For though his reuealed word teach vs, what we should neuer haue learned from the Creatures without it: yet, fitted to our capacity, it teacheth no otherwise then by resem∣blances taken from the Creatures. Rom. 1.19, 20. , as St. Paul calleth it Rom. 1. the whole Latitude of that, which may be knowne of God, is manifest in the Crea∣tures: and the invisible things of God not to be vnderstood but by the things that are made. S. Baesill therfore cal∣leth the world Basil. , the very schoole where the knowledge of God is to be learned: and there is a double way of teaching, a twofold method of tray∣ning vs vp into that knowledge in that schoole; that is to say, quin. 1. qu 11.12. Per. Vi negationis, and per viam Eminentiae. First, . Damasc. 1. de fid. Orthod. 4. Viâ negationis: looke whatsoeuer thou findest in the Creature, which fauoureth of defect or imperfe∣ction; and know God is not such. Are they limited; subiect to change, composition, decay, &c? Remoue these from God: and learne that he is infinie, simple, vnchangeable, eternall. Then Viâ Eminentiae: looke whatsoeuer perfection there is in the Creature in any de∣gree; and know that the same, but (infinitely and in∣comparably) more eminently, is in God. Is there Wisedome, or Knowledge, or Power, or Beautie, or Great∣nesse, or Goodnesse, in any kinde or in any measure, in a∣ny of the Creatures? Affirme the same, but without measure of God: and learne that he is infinitely wiser, and skilfuller, and stronger, and fairer, and greater, and better. In euery good thing so differently excellent a∣boue
and beyond the Creatures; as that, though yet they be good, yet compared with him they deserue not the name of good Mark. 10.18 There is none good but one, that is God. Mark. 10. None good, as hee: simply, and ab∣solutely, and essentially, and of himselfe such. The Creatures that they are good, they haue it from him; and their goodnes dependeth vpon him: and they are good but in part, and in some measure, and in their owne kinds. Whensoeuer therefore we finde any good from, or obserue any goodnes in any of the Creatures: let vs not bury our meditations there, but raise them vp by those stayres (as it were) of the Creatures, to contem∣plate the great goodnes of him their Creatour. We are vnhappie truants; if in this so richly furnished schoole of Gods good Creatures; we haue not learned from them at the least so much knowledge of him and his goodnes, as to admire, and loue, and depend vpon it and him. Looke vpon the Workemanship, and accordingly judge of the Workeman: Euery Creature of God is good: surely then the Creator must needs excell in goodnesse. §. 9. The third.Thirdly; there is in men, amongst other cursed fruites of selfe-loue, an aptnes to measure things, Non ex sui naturae, sed ex suo commodo, vel incommodo. August. 12. de Ciuit. 4. not by the leuell of exact Truth, but by the modell of their owne ap∣prehensions. Who is there, that cannot fault anothers worke? The Plin. 35 Nat. hist. 10. Cobler could espy something amisse in Apelles his master-piece; because the picture was not drawne just according to his fancy. If a thousand of vs heare a Sermon, scarce one of that thousand, but he must shew some of that litle wit he hath in disliking somthing or other: There the Preacher was too elaborate, here too loose; that point he might haue enlarged, contracted this; he might haue beene plainer there, shewed more lear∣ning here; that obseruation was obuious, that exposi∣tion enforced, that proofe impertinent, that illustration common, that exhortation needlesse, that reproofe vnsea∣sonable: one misliketh his Text, another his Method,
a third his stile, a fourth his voyce, a fifth his memry; euery one something. A fault more pardonable if our Censures stayed at the workes of men, like our selues; and Lucian in Hermotimo. Momus-like we did not quarrell the workes of God also, and charge many of his good Creatures, either with manifest ill, or at least wise with vnprofitablenes. See Sirac. 39.16, 17. &c. Why was this made? or why thus? what good doth this, or what vse of that? It had perhaps beene better, if this or that had neuer bin; or if they had beene otherwise. Thus we sometimes say or thinke. To Ne tanti arti∣ficis opus in ali∣quo reprehen∣dere vanitate humanae teme∣ritatis audea∣mus. August. 12 de Ciuil. 4. rectifie this corruption, remember this first clause of my Text, E∣uery Creature of God is good. Perhaps thou seest not, what good there is in some of the Creatures: like e∣nough so: but yet consider, there may bee much good, which thou seest not. Say, it giueth thee no nourishment: Possibly it may doe thee . Damasc. 2 de fid Orthod. 12. seruice in some other kinde. Say, it neuer yet did that: yet it may doe hereafter. La∣ter times Quam multae animalia hoc primun. cogno∣vimus seculo? & quidem multa venientis aeui populus, ig∣nota nobis, Sci. Senec. 7. Nat. qu. 31. haue found out much good vse of many Creatures, whereof former ages were ignorant: and why may not after times find good in those things, which doe vs none? Say, it neuer did, nor euer shall do seruice to man, (although who can tell that?) yet who knoweth but it hath done, or may doe seruice to some o∣ther Creature, that doth seruice to man? Say, nor that neither: yet this good thou mayst reape euen from such Creatures, as seeme to affoord none; to take Vtitur qui∣busdam assu∣mendis & res∣puendis, ad va∣ltudinem; qui∣busdam toleā∣dis, ad patiEn∣tam; quibus∣dam ordināis, ad tusticiam; quibusdam con∣sideranilis, ad a∣lquod vecitatis documentum. August. 83 quest. 25. know∣ledge of thine owne ignorance, and to humble thy selfe thereby, who art so farre from comprehending the es∣sence, that thou canst not comprehend the very workes of God. The most vnprofitable Creatures profit vs, at least this way: Bern. Serm. 5. in Cant. Visu, sinon vsu, as Bernard spea∣keth; if not to vse them, yet to see in them, as in a glasse Gods wisedome, and our owne ignorance. And so they doe vs good; if not Ibid. cedendo in cibum, if not exhiben∣do ministerium, in feeding and seruing vs; yet exercendo
ingenium, as the same Bernard speaketh; in exercising our wits and giuing vs a sight of our ignorance. §. 10. A Doubt remoued.But yet those Creatures, which are apparantly hurt∣full to vs; as Serpents, and Wild-beasts, and sundry poy∣sonous plants; but aboue all, the Diuels, and cursed. An∣gels: May we not say, they are ill, and justly both blame and hate them? Euen these also are good, as they are the Creatures of God, and the workmanship of his hands. It is onely through sinne, that they are Euill: eyther to vs, as the rest, or in themselues, as the Diuels. These (now wicked) Angels were glorious Creatures at the first: by their owne voluntary transgression it is, that they are now the worst, and the basest. And as for all the other Creatures of God, made to doe vs service; they were at the first, and still are good in themselues: if there cleaueth to them any euill, whereby they become hurt∣full to vs, that is by accedent; and wee haue to thanke none but our selues for that. For who, or what could haue harmed vs, if we had beene followers of that which was good? It was Rom. 8.10. not of their owne accord, but through our sinfulnesse, that the Creatures became sub∣iect vnto vanity, and capable eyther to doe or to suffer ill. They had beene still harmelesse, if we had bin still fault∣lesse: it was our . Chrysost. in Gen. Hem. 25. sinne, that at once forfeited both our innocency, and theirs. If then we see, any ill in them, or finde any ill by them; let vs not lay the blame, our wreake our hatred vpon them: let vs rather bestow our blame and hatred where it is most due, the blame vpon our selues, the hatred vpon our sinnes. If Balaam had done iustly, he should haue spared the Numb. 22.27, &c. Asse, and haue corrected himselfe: but the false Prophet doth the fault, and the poore beast must beare both blame and strokes. When we suffer, we curse, or at the easiest blame the Creatures: this weather, that floud, such a storme, hath blasted our fruites, sanded our grounds, shipwrackt our wares, and vndone vs: when alas these haue neyther
heart nor strength against vs, but what our selues put into them by our sinnes. Euery sence of euill thereof in or from the Creatures, should worke in vs a sence of our disobedience vnto God, should encrease in vs a detestati∣on of the sinnes we haue committed against God, should teach vs by condemning our selues, to acquite the good Creatures of God: which as they are good in themselues, so should they haue beene euer and onely good vnto vs, if wee had beene true to our selues, and continued good and faithfull seruants vnto God. They are all good: doe not thou accuse any of them, and say they are euill; doe not thou abuse any of them, and make them euill. Hitherto of the first Point, the Goodnesse of the Crea∣tures;§. 11. Obseru. 11. Our Liberty to the Creatures. Euery Creature of God is good. Followeth the second, which is their vse: consisting in their lawfulnesse vnto vs, and our liberty vnto them; euery Creature of God is good, and nothing to bee refused. [Nothing.] That is, most agreeable to the argument of the former verse, nothing fit for food: but more generally, (and so I rather thinke the Apostle intendeth it) no Creature of God, whereof we may haue vse or service in any kinde whatsoeuer. Nothing, which may yeeld vs any com∣fortable content for the support of this life, in point of health, ease, profit, delight, or otherwise (with due so∣briety, and other requisite conditions;) nothing is to bee refused. By which Refusall the Apostle meaneth not a bare forbearance of the things; (for that we both may, and in many cases ought so to reuse some of the Crea∣tures shall anone appeare:) but the thing he forbiddeth is, the forbearance of the Creature, as vpon immediate tye of Conscience; viz. eyther out of a superstitious opi∣nion of the vnlawfulnesse of any creature, for some sup∣posed naturall or legall vncleannesse in it, or out of a like superstitious opinion of some extraordinary perfection, or operatiue and effectuall holinesse in such refusall. The
Point is this. All the Creatures of God are lawfull for vs to vse: so as it is against Christian liberty, eyther to charge the vse of them with sinne, or to place holinesse in the abstaining from them. §. 12. Without ey∣ther sinne in the vse.Our Apostle often teacheth this Point. In Rom. 14. at Psal. 20. Rom. 14.20 [All things are pure:] and at Psa. 14, there he deliuereth it as a certaine truth, and vpon knowledge, Ibid. 14. [I know and am perswaded by the Lord Iesus, that there is nothing vncleane of it selfe:] and therefore he impu∣teth it as an errour and weakenes in judgement to them that refused some kind of meates out of a superstitious opinion, or but timorous feare of their vnlawfulnes, at Psal. 2. Ibid 2. [One beleeueth hee may eate all things: ano∣ther, who is weake, eateth hearbes:] And in 1. Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 10.25 [Whatsoeuer is sold in the shambles that eate, asking no question for Conscience sake:] and anon Psal. 27, Ibid 27. [if an vnbelieuer bid you to a feast and you be disposed to goe; Whatsoeuer is set before you, eate, asking no question for con∣science sake.] And to the end we might know the liber∣tie he there giueth to extend to all other Creatures as well as meates, he pronounceth of them all vniuersally at Psal. 23, Ibid. 23. [. All things are lawfull for me]. And so he doth in Tit. 1.15. vniuersally too; Tit. 1.15. [Omnia munda mundis, To the pure all things are pure.] From all which Testimonies wee may conclude, there is no vnlawfulnesse or impurity in any of the Creatures, but that wee may with security of conscience, freely vse them without sinne. If wee vse them doubtingly a∣gainst Conscience, or indiscreetly against Charity, or otherwise inordinately against Sobrietie; they become indeed in such cases sinfull vnto vs: But that is through our default, not theirs; who sinfully abuse that, which wee might lawfully vse. And that abuse of ours, neither Rom. 14.14. defileth the things themselues; nor ought to 1. Cor. 10.29, 30. preiudice the liberty of another, that may vse them well.
And as there is no sinne in the vse:§. 13. Or merit, in the forbea∣rance. so neither is there any religion or perfection to be placed in the refusall of a∣ny of Gods Creatures. Rather on the contrary, to ab∣staine from any of them, out of a conceit of any such per∣fection or holinesse, is it selfe a sinfull superstition. Our Apostle ranketh it with Idolatrous Col. 2.16, &c. Angel-worship, and condemneth it as a Will-worship, Colos. 2. from s. 16. to the end of the Chapter. The subiecting of our selues to those and such like ordinances, Touch not, tast not, handle not; though it may haue a shew of wisedome in will-worship, and in a voluntary humility and neglecting of the body, yet it is derogatory to that liberty wherein Christ hath set vs free, and a reuiuing of those rudiments of the world, from which we are dead with Christ. Eue∣ry Creature of God is good; and nothing to be refused, out of a superstitious either feare of vnlawfulnesse or o∣pinion of holines. Now the Ground of this our Right or Liberty vnto the Creatures is double: the one,§. 14. Our right by Creation. Gods ordinance at the first Creation; the other Christs purchase in the worke of Redemption. At the Creation, God made all thinges for mans vse, as hee did man for his owne seruice; and as he reserued to himselfe his absolute Soueraignty ouer Man; so he gaue vnto man a kind of limited Gen. 1.26. Soue∣raignty ouer the Creatures, in Gen. 1. Psal. 8.6. — quod nos in hoc pulcher rimo do∣micitio vulue∣runt (Dij) se∣cundas fortiri, quod terenis prafecerunt. Sen. 2. de benef. 29. He hath put all things in subiection vnder our feete, saith Dauid, Psal. 8. Which dominion ouer the Creatures was one speciall branch of that glorious Gen. 1 27. Image of God in vs, after which wee were created: and therefore was not, nor could be absolutely Bonis naturae maa aduentitia dam non succe∣dunt, se. lacce∣dunt: tupant▪ vtique ea, non exterminant▪ ō∣turbant, non deturbant Bern. in Cant. Ser. 82. lost by sinne; but onely decayed and defaced, and empaired, as the other branches of that Image were. So that, albeit man by sinne lost a great part of his Soueraignty, (Chrysst in Gen▪ hom. 9. , as speaketh St. Chrisostome,) especially so farre as concer∣neth the execution of it; many of the Creatures being
now rebellious & noysome vnto Man and vnanswering his commands and expectations: yet the Right still remai∣neth euen in corrupt nature; & there are still to be found some tracings and Characters, as in Man of superioritie, so in them of subiection. But those . Damasc. 4. de fid. Orthod. 4. dimme, and con∣fused, and scarce legible: as in old Marbles, and Coines, and out-worne Inscriptions, we haue much a doe to find out what some of the letters were. §. 15. And Re∣demption.But if by sinne we had lost all that first title we had to the Creature, wholly and vtterly: yet God hath been pleased graciously to deale with vs, we are fully as well as before. God the Father hath graunted vs, and God the Sonne hath acquired vs, and God the Holy Ghost hath sealed vs a new Patent. By it, whatsoeuer Defect is, or can be supposed to be, in our old Evidence, is supplyed, and by vertue of it, we may make fresh challenge and re∣nue our claime vnto the Creatures. The blessed Sonne of God Col. 1.20. hauing made peace through the blood of his Crosse, hath reconciled vs to his Father; and therein also re∣conciled the Creatures both to vs and him: reconciling by him (saith our Apostle Col. 1.20.) , all things (not men onely) vnto himselfe. For God hauing giuen vs his Sonne Heb. 1.2. the heyre of all things; hath he not Rom. 8.32. with him giuen vs all things else? hath he not permitted vs the free vse of his Creatures in as ample Right as e∣uer? Ioh. 8.36. If the Sonne haue made vs free we are free indeede. And as verily as Christ is Gods, so verily (if we be Christs) all things are ours. This Apostle setteth downe the whole series and forme of this spirituall Hie∣rarchy, (if I may so speake,) this subiection and sub∣ordination of the Creatures to Man, of Man to Christ, of Christ to God, 1. Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 3.21, 23. All are yours, and yee are Christs, and Christ is Gods. §. 16. This liberty impeached by IudaismeStrengthened with this double title, what should hin∣der vs from possession? Why may we not freely vse that libertie, which was once giuen vs by God, and againe
restored vs by Iesus Christ? Why should we not Gal. 5 1. stand fast in, and contend earnestly for the maintenance of that libertie, wherewith Christ hath set vs free: by re∣jecting all fancies, opinions, and Doctrines, that any way trench vpon this our Christian prerogatiue; or seeke ey∣ther to shorten, or to corrupt, our freedome vnto, and power ouer the Creatures? First, If any shall oppose the legall Prohibitions of the Old Testament; whereby some Creatures were Leuit 11, forbidden the Iewes, pronoun∣ced by God himselfe vncleane, and decreed vnlawfull: it should not trouble vs. For, what euer the principall reasons were, for which those prohibitions were then made vnto them (as there bee diuers reasons giuen thereof by Diuines both ancient and moderne;) cer∣taine it is, they now concerne not vs. The Church, du∣ring her nonage and pupillage, (though she were Gal. 4.1, 2. heyre of all, and had right to all; yet) was to bee held vnder Tutors and Gouernors, & to be trayned vp vnder the law of Ceremonies as Gal. 3.24, 25. vnder a Schoolemaster, during the appointed time. But Gal. 4.4. when the fulnesse of the time ap∣pointed was come, her warship expired, and liuery sued out (as it were;) by the comming and suffering of Christ in the flesh: the Church was then to enter vp∣on her full royalties, and no more to be burdened with those . Gal. 4.9. beggerly rudiments of legall obseruances. The Col. 2.14. handwriting of Ordinances was then blotted out; and the muddy Epes. 2.14. partition wall broken downe; and the legall impuritie of the Creatures scowred off; by the . Damasc. 4 de fid. Orthod. 4 blood of Christ. They haue little to doe then, but withall much to answere; who, by seeking to bring in Iudaisme againe into the Christian Church, eyther in whole or in part, doe thereby as much as lyeth in them, (though perhaps vnawares to themselues, yet in deed and in truth) Gal. 5.2.4.11. euacuate the Crosse of Christ. In that Act. 10 1 15. large sheete of the Creatures, which reacheth from heauen to the earth, whatsoeuer we finde, wee may freely kill, and
eate, and vse euery other way to our comforts without scruple. God hauing cleansed all; wee are not to call or esteeme any thing common or vncleane: God hauing  Created all good, we are to refuse nothing. If any shall oppose secondly, the seeming morality of some of these prohibitions; as being giuen Gen. 9.4. before the Law of Cere∣monies, pressed from Leuit. 17.11.14. Morall reasons, and confirmed by Act. 15.20.29. Apostolicall Constitution since; vpon which ground some would impose vpon the Christian Church  this, as a perpetuall yoke, to abstaine from blood: Or thirdly, the prophanation which some Creatures haue contracted by being vsed in the exercise of Idolatrous worship, whereby they become Anathema, and are to be held as execrable things; as Iosh. 7.1. Achans wedge was, and the 4 Kin. 18.4. Brazen Serpent which Hezechiah stamped to powder; vpon which ground also some others haue inferred an vtter vnlawfulnesse to vse any thing in the Church, which was abused in Popery, by calling them ragges and reliques of Idolatry: neyther this, nor that ought to trouble vs. For although neither my ayme, (which lyeth another way,) nor the time, will permit me now to giue a just and full and satisfying answere to the seuerall instances, and their grounds: yet the very words and waight of my Text, doe giue vs a cleere re∣solution in the generall, and sufficient to rest our Con∣sciences, and our judgements and practice vpon; that, notwithstanding all pretensions of reason to the con∣trary, yet these things, for so much as they are still good, ought not to be refused. For the Apostle hath here layd a sure foundation, and impregnable: in that hee groundeth the vse vpon the Power; and from the Good∣nesse of the Creature inferreth the lawfulnesse of it. [E∣uery Creature of God is good: and nothing to bee refused.] Hee concludeth; it is therefore not to be refused, be∣cause it is good. So that looke whatsoeuer Goodnesse there is in any Creature; that is, whatsoeuer naturall
Power it hath, which either immediately and of it selfe is, or may by the improuement of humaine art and in∣dustry be taught to be, of any vse vnto man, for neces∣sity, nourishment, seruice, lawfull delight or other∣wise: the Creature, wherein such goodnes or power is to be found, may not be refused as vpon tye of Consci∣ence; but that power and goodnesse it hath, may lawfully be employed to those vses, for which it is meete in re∣gard thereof: Euer prouided, we be carefull to obserue all those requisite conditions, which must guide our consciences, and regulate our practise, in the vse of all lawfull and indifferent things. They that teach other∣wise, lay burdens vpon their owne consciences which they neede not, and vpon the consciences of their brethren which they should not; and are iniurious to that liberty which the blessed Sonne of God hath purchasd for his Church, and which the blessed spirit of God hath as∣serted in my Text. Iniurious in the second place,§. 17. and Pope∣rie; in the points to this branch of our Christian liberty, is the Church of Rome: whom Saint Paul in this passage hath branded with an indeleble note of infamy; in as much as those very doctrines, wherein he giueth intance as in doctrines of Deuils, are the re∣ceiued Tenets and Conclusions of that Church. Not to insist on other preiudices done to Christian liberty, by the intollerable vsurpations of 2. Thes. 2.3. the man of sin, who ex∣erciseth a spirituall Tyranny ouer mens Consciences, as opposite to Euangelicall liberty, as Antichrist is to Christ: let vs but a little see, how she hath fulfilled Saint Pauls prediction in teaching lying and Diuelish doctrines and that with scared consiences and in Hypocrisie, in the two specialities mentioned in the next former verse, viz. forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstaine from Meates. Marriage,§. 18. of Mariage, the holy Ordinance of God, instituted in the Gen. 2.18. place and estate of innocency, honoured by Ioh. 2.2. Christs
pesence at Canae in Galilee; the seieples of the Church, and the 1. Cr. 7.2. sole allowed remedie against incontinencie and burning lusts; by the Apostle commended as Heb. 13.4. honou∣rable in all men, and commanded in case of 1. Cor. 7 9▪ vstion to all men: is yet by this Reu 17.1.3. purple strumpet forbidden, and that sub mortal, to Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Sub∣deacons, Monkes, Fryers, Nunnes: in a word, to the whole Clergie (as they extend that title) both Secular and Regular. Wherein besides the Diuelishnes of the Doctrine, in contrarying the Ordinance of God, and in denying men subiect to sinfull lusts the lawfull remedie, and so casting them vpon a necessity of sinning, see if they doe not teach this lye with scared consciences. For with what Conscience can they make the same thing a Sacrament in the Lay; and Bellarm. de Monach Cap. 34 Sacriledge in the Clergy? With what Conscience permit stewes; and forbid Mar∣riage? With what conscience alledge Scriptures for the single life of Priests; and yet confesse it to bee an Aquin. 2.2. qu. 88.2. Bellar. de Cler. c. 18. De∣can. 1. man Con∣trou. 13. . 11. ordinance onely of Ecclesiasticall and not of Diuine right? With what conscience confesse fornication to be against the Law of God, and Priests marriage onely a∣gainst the Law of holy Church; and yet make marriage in a Priest a Coster. Enchi∣rid. cap. 20 prop. 9. farre fouler sinne then ornication, or incest? with what conscience exact a vow of continen∣cie from Clearks, by those Canons, which Ca. Is. qu. dist. 34 c. 12. qu. 1. ca. Dilectissimis defend their open incontinency? With what conscience for∣bid lawfull marriages to some; and yet by dispensation allow vnlawfull marriages to others. And is not the like also done in the other particular, concerning Meates?§. 16. and Meates. The lawes of that Church forbid∣ding some Benedictines and Carthusians orders of men, some kind of meates per∣petually, and all men some meates vpon certaine dayes: and that not for Ciuill respects; but with opinion of satisfaction, yea merit, yea and supererogation too. In which also, besides the Diuelishnes of the Doctrine, in corrupting the profitable and religious exercis of
fasting, and turning it into a superstitious obseruation of Dayes and Meates: judge if they doe not teach this lye also, as the former, with seared Consciences. For with what conscience can they allow an ordinary Con∣fessour to absolue for Murder, Adultery, Periury, and such petty crimes; but reserue the great sinne of Eating flesh vpon a Friday or Ember day to the censure of a Penitentiary, as being a matter beyond the power of an ordinary Priest to grant absolution for? With what Conscience make the tafting of the coursest flesh a breach of the Lent fast; and surfetting vpon the delicatest fi∣shes and confections, none? With what conscience pre∣tend they forbid such and such meates, for the taming of the flesh; when they allow those that are farre more nutritiue of the flesh, and incentiue of fleshly lusts? With what conscience inione such abstinence for a penance, and then presently release it againe for a peny? Indeed the Glosse vpon the Dist. 82. ca. Presbyter. Canon, that doth so, hath a right worthy and a right wholesome note: Note, saith the Gloss. ibid. Glosse, that he who giueth a peny to redeeme his fast, though he giue money for a spirituall thing, yet he doth not commit Symonie, because the contract is made with God. If these men had not seared vp their consciences: would they not thinke you feele some checke at the broaching of such ridiculous and inconsistent stuffe, as floweth from these two heads of Diuelish Doctrines; of forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstaine from Meates? I deny not, but the bands of that strumpet,§. 20. The extent of this Li∣berty, in eight Positi∣ons. the Do∣ctor▪  hat Church, haue their colourable pretences whe with to blanch ouer these errours: else the lyes would be palpable; and they should not otherwise fill vp the measure of their Apostacy, according to my Apostles prophecie, in teaching these lyes in Hypocrisie. But the colours, though neuer so artificially tempered, and neuer so handsomely layd on; are yet so thin: that
a steddy eye, not blered with preiudice, may discerne the Lye through them, for all the Hypocrisie. As might ea∣sily be shewen; if my entended course led me that way, and did not rather direct me to matter of more profi∣table and vniuersall. Hauing therefore done with them it were good for vs in the third place, (that we might know our owne freehold with better certainty, and keepe our selues within our due bounds;) to inquire a little what is the just extent of our Christian liberty vnto the Creatures, and what restraints it may admit. A point very needfull to bee knowne for the resolution of many doubts in conscience, and for the asking of many questions and dispues in the Church: which are of ve∣ry noysome consequence, for want of right information herein, I haue other matter also to entreate of: and therefore since I may not allow this enquiry so large a discourse, as it well deserueth: I shall desire you to take into your Christian consideration, these Positions fol∣lowing. The First. Our Christian liberty extendeth to all the Creatures of God.§. 21. I. It extend∣eth to all the Creatures. This ariseth clearely from what hath beene already deliuered: and the testimonies of Scripture for it are expresse. Rom. 14.20 All things are Pure; 1. Cor. 10.23 All things are lawfull; 1. Cor. 3.22. All are yours; elsewhere: and here, Nothing to be refused. The second Position. Our Christian libertie equally respecteth the vsing▪ and the not vsing of any o Gods Creatures.§. 22. II. It equally respecteth the vse and the forbea∣rance. There is no Creature; but a Christian man by vertue of his libertie, as hee may vse it vpon just oc∣casion, so hee may also vpon just cause refuse it. 1. Cor. 6.1▪ All things are lawfull for mee, saith St. Paul, but I will not be brought vnder the power of any thing. Where he establi∣sheth this libertie in both the parts of it: libertie to vse the Creatures, or else they had not all beene lawfull for him; and yet libertie not to vse them, or else he had bin vnder the power of some of them. Whence it followeth,
that all the Creatures of God stand in the nature of things Indifferent: that is, such as may indifferently bee eyther vsed or not vsed, according as the rules of godly discretion, circumstances duely considered, shall direct. The Third Position. Our Christian liberty for the vsing or not vsing of the creature, may without preju∣dice admit of some restraint in the outward practise of it.§. 23. III. It may admit of some restra∣ints in the outward ex¦ercise of it: Ab illicitis semper, quandoque & a licitis; I thinke it is St. Gregories: A Christian must neuer doe vnlawfull; nor yet alwaies, lawfull things. St. Paul had liberty to eate flesh, and hee vsed that liberty, and ate flesh: yet hee knew there might bee some cases, wherein to abridge himselfe of the vse of that liberty so farre, as 1. Cor. 8.13. not to eate flesh whilst the world standeth. But what those Restraints are, and how farre they may bee admitted without prejudice done to that liberty, that wee may the better vnderstand: let vs goe on to The Fourth Position. Sobriety may and ought to re∣straine vs in the outward practise of our Christian li∣berty.§. 24. IIII. as first, Sobrietie; For our Dyet, all Fish, and flesh, and folwe, and fruites, and spices, are lawfull for vs, as well as Bread and herbes: but may we therefore with chritlesse pro∣digality and exquisite royall fare delisiously and sump∣tuously euery day, vnder pretence of Christian liberty? Likewise for our Apparell; all stuffes and colours, the richest silkes, and furres, and dyes are as lawfull for vs, as cloath, and leather, and sheepes-russet: Christan liber∣ty extendeth as well to one as another. But doe wee thinke that liberty will excuse our pride, and vanity, and excesse, if we ruffle it out in silkes and scarlets, or otherwise in stuffe, colour, or fashion vnsuteably to our yeares, sexe, calling, estate or condition? In all other things of like nature; in our buildings, in our furniture, in our retinues, in our dispores, in our recreations, in our society, in our Mariages, in other things: wee ought as
well to consider, what in Christian sobriety is meete for vs to doe; as what in Christian liberty may bee done. Scarce is there any one thing, wherein the Diuell putteth surres vpon vs more frequently, yea & more dangerously too, (because vnsuspected:) then in this very thing, in making vs take the vttermost of our freedome in the vse of indifferent things. It therefore concerneth vs so much the more, to keepe a sober watch ouer our selues and soules, in the vse of Gods good Creatures: lest o∣therwise, vnder the fayre title and habite of Christian liberty, we yeeld our selues ouer to a carnall licencious∣nesse. The Fift Position. A Sobriety: so Charity also may,§. 25. V. Secondly, Charity: in our selues, and ought to restraine vs in the outward exercise of our Christian liberty. Charity, I say, both to our selues, and others. First, to our selues: for regular charity begin∣neth there. If we are to Math. 5.29.30. cut off our right hand, and to plucke out our right eye, and to cast them both from vs, when they offend vs: much more then ought we to deny our selues the vse of such outward lawfull things, as by experience we haue found, or haue otherwise cause to suspect to be hurtfull eyther for our bodies, or soules. So a man may, and should refraine from meates, which may endanger his bodily health: But how much more then from euery thing, that may endanger the health of his soule? If thou findest thy selfe enflamed with lust, by dancing; if enraged with choler, by game: if temp∣ted to couetousnes, pride, vncleannes, superstition, cruelty, any sinne, by occasion of any of the Creatures: it is better for thee, to make a couenant with thine eyes, and eares, and hands, and sences, (so farre as thy condi∣tion and Calling will warrant thee,) not to haue any thing to doe with such things: then by satisfying them therewith, cast both thy selfe and them into Hell. Bet∣ter, by our voluntary abstinence, to depart with some of our liberty vnto the Creatures: then by our volun∣tary
transgession forfeit all and become the Diuels cap∣tiues. But Charity, though it begin at home,§. 26. and others. yet it will a∣broad: and not resting at our selues, reacheth to our bre∣thren also: of whom we are to haue a due regard in our vse of the creatures. An argument, wherein St. Paul often enlargeth himselfe: as in Rom. 14. and 1. Cor. 8. the whole Chapters throughout, and in a great part of 1. Cor. 10. The resolution euery where is, that 1. Cor. 14.26. all things be done to edification: that things lawfull become 1. Cor. 10.23. inexpedient, when they offend rather, then edifie: that though Rom. 14.20. all things indeed are pure, yet it is euill for that man which vseth them with offence: that albeit flesh and wine and other things be lawfull, yet Ibid. vers. 21. it is good neyther to eate flesh, nor to drinke wine, nor to doe any thing, where∣by a mans brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weake. Hitherto appertaineth that great and difficult common-place of scandall, so much debated and dispu∣ted of by Diuines. The Questions and Cases are mani∣fold; not now to bee rehearsed, much lesse resolued, in particular: But the Position is plaine in the generall, that in case of Scandall, for our weake brothers sake, we may, and sometimes ought, to abridge our selues of some part of our lawfull Libertie. Besides these two, Sobrietie and Charity; there is yet one restraint more, which ariseth from the duty wee owe to our Superiours, and from the bond of Ciuill o∣bedience:§. 27. VI. Thirdly, Duty, in O∣bedience to Gouernours; Oeconomi∣call, which if it had beene by all men as freely ad∣mitted, as there is just cause it should, how happy had it beene for the peace of this Church? Concerning it, let this be our Sixth Position. The determination of Superiours may and ought to restraine vs in the outward exercise of our Christian liberty. We must 1. Pet. 2.13.15.16. submit our selues to euery ordinance of man, saith Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 2.13. and it is necessary we should doe so: for so is the will of God, vers. 15. Neither is it against Christian
liberty if wee doe so; for we are still as free as before: rather if we doe not so, we abuse our liberty for a cloake of maliciousnesse, as it followeth there, vers. 16. And St. Paul telleth vs we Rom. 13.5. must need be subiect not onely for feare, because the Magistrate Ibid. vers. 4. carrieth not the Sword in vaine, but also for conscience sake, because Ibid. vers. 1. the powers that are ordained of God. This duty, so fully pressed and so vniformely by these two grand Apostles, is most apparant in priuate societies. In a family, the master or Pater familias, who is a kind of petty Monarch there, hath authority to prescribe to his children and seruants in the vse of those indifferent things; whereto yet they, as Christians, haue as much libertie as hee. The seruant, though he be 1. Cor. 7.22. the Lords free-man, yet is limited in his dyet, lodging, livery, and many other things by his ma∣ster: and hee is to submit himselfe to his masters ap∣pointment in these things, though perhaps in his pri∣vate affection he had rather his master had appointed otherwise, and perhaps withall in his priuate judgement doth verily thinke it fitter his Master should appoint otherwise. If any man vnder colour of Christian liberty shall 1. Tim. 6.3.5 teach otherwise, and exempt seruants from the obedience of their Masters in such things: St. Paul in a holy indignation inueigheth against such a man, not without some bitternesse, in the last Chapter of this E∣pistle, as one that is proud, and knoweth nothing as hee should doe, but doateth about questions and strife of words, &c. vers. 3.5. §. 28. Civill,Now looke what power the Master hath ouer his seruants for the ordering of his family; no doubt the same at the least, if not much more, hath the supreame Magistrate ouer his subiects, for the peaceable order∣ing of the Common-wealth: the Magistrate being Pa∣ter Patria, as the Master is Pater familias. Whosoe∣ver then shall interpret the determinations of Ma∣gistrates in the vse of the Creatures to be contrary to
the liberty of a Christian: or vnder that colour shall ex∣empt inferiours from their obedience to such determi∣nations, he must blame St. Paul; nay, he must blame the Holy Ghost, and not vs, if he heare from vs that he is proud, and knoweth nothing, and dateth about vn∣profitable questions. Surely, but that experience shew∣eth vs it hath beene so, and the Scriptures haue fore∣tould vs that 1. Cor. 11.19. it should be so: that there should bee differences, and sidings, and part-takings in the Church: a man would wonder how it should ever sinke into the hearts and heads of sober vnderstanding men, to deny eyther the power in Superiours to ordaine, or the necessity in Inferiours to obey Lawes and constitutions, so restraining vs in the vse of the Creatures. Neyther let any man cherish his ignorance herein: by conceipting, as if there were some difference to be made betweene Ciuill and Ecclesiasticall things,§. 29. and Eccle∣siasticall. and Lawes and Persons in this behalfe. The truth is, our liberty is equall in both: the power of Superiours for restraint equall in both, and the necessity of obedience in Inferiours equall in both. No man hath yet beene able to shew, nor I thinke euer shal be, a reall and substantiall difference indeed betweene them, to make an inequa∣lity. But that still, as ciuill Magistrates haue some∣times, for just politique respects, prohibited some trades, and manufactures, and commodities, and enioy∣ned othersome, and done well in both: so Church-gouernours may vpon good considerations, say it bee but for order and vniformities sake, prescribe the times, places, vestments, gestures, and other Ce∣remoniall circumstances to bee vsed in Ecclesisticall Of∣fices and assemblies. As the Apostles in the first Coun∣cell holden at Ierusalem in Act. 15. layd vpon the Churches of the Gentiles for a time, a Act. 15.28, 29. restraint from the eating of Blood, and things sacrificed to Idols, and strangled.
Thus we see our Christian liberty vnto the Creatures may without preiudice admit of some restraints in the outward exercise of it:§. 30. VII. With the compari∣son of these 3. restraints. and namely from the three re∣spects, of Christian Sobrietie, of Christian Charity, and of Christian Duty and Obedience. But now in the com∣paring of these together; when there seemeth to be a repugnancy betweene one and another of them, there may be some difficulty: and the greatest difficultie, and which hath bred most trouble, is in comparing the cases of Scandall and Disobedience together, when their seemeth to be a repugnancy betweene Charity and Du∣tie. As for example. Suppose in a thing which simply and in it selfe wee may lawfully according to the Liber∣ty wee haue in Christ, either vse or forbeare; Charity seemeth to lay restraint vpon vs one way, our weake brother expecting we should forbeare, and Duty a quite contrary way. Authoritie requiring the vse: in such a case what are we to doe? It is against Charity to of∣fend a brother; and it is against Duty, to disobey a su∣periour. And yet something must be done: eyther we must vse, or not vse; forbeare, or not forbeare. For the vntying of this knot, (which, if we will but lay things rightly together, hath not in it so much hardnesse as it seemeth to haue;) let this be our seuenth Position. In the vse of the Creatures, and all indifferent things, we ought to beare a greater regard to our publique Gouer∣nours, then to our Priuate Brethren; and bee more carefull to obey them, then to satisfy these, if the same course will not in some mediocritie satisfie both. Alas, that our Brethren who are contrary minded, would but with the spirit of Sobrietie admit common Reason to be vmpire in this case: Alas, that they would but consi∣der, what a world of Contradictions would follow vpon the contrary Opinion, and what a world of Confusions vpon the contrary practise. Say what can be said, in the behalfe of a Brother: all the same, and more may bee
faid for a Gouernour. For a Gouernour is a Brother too, and something more: and Duty is Charity too, and something more. If then I may not offend my Brother, then certainly not my Gouernour: because he is my Bro∣ther too, being a man, and a Christian, as well as the o∣ther is. And the same Charity, that bindeth me to sa∣tisfie another Brother, equally bindeth mee to satisfie this. So that, if we goe no farther, but euen to the com∣mon bond of Charity, and relation of Brotherhood: that maketh them equall at the least: and therefore no reason, why I should satisfie one that is but a Priuate Brother: rather then the publique Magistrate, who (that publique respect set aside) is my Brother also. When the scales hang thus euen: shall not the accession of Si tantopera cauenda sunt scandala parvu∣lorum, quanto amplius praela∣torum? Ber∣nard. de Prae∣cept. & di∣spens. Magistracie to common Brotherhood in him, and of Duty to common Charity in mee, be enough to cast it cleare for the Magistrate? Shall a seruant in a fami∣ly, rather then offend his fellow-seruant, disobey his Master? And is not a double scandall against Charity and Duty both, (for Duty implyeth Charity,) grea∣ter then a single scandall against Charity alone? If pri∣uate men will bee offended at our Obedience to publique Gouernours: we can but be sorry for it: Wee Prudenter ad∣uertat qui hoc cogitat, scanda∣lum scandalo non bene emendari. Qualis, emenda∣tiò erit, si vt a∣lijs scandalum tollao, alios scan∣dalizas? Ber∣nard. de praec. & disp. may not redeeme their offence by our disobedience. Hee that taketh offence, where none is giuen, sustaineth a double person; and must answere for it, both as the gi∣uer and the taker. If offence be taken at vs, there is no woe to vs for it, if it doe not come by vs: Math. 8.7. Woe to the man by whom the offence commeth: and it doth not come by vs, if wee doe but what is our duty to doe. The Rule is certaine and equitable; The respect of private scandall ceaseth, where lawfull authority determineth our liberty: and that restraint which proceedeth from speciall Duty, is of superiour rea∣son to that which proceedeth but from Common Cha∣rity.
§. 31. VIII. The inward free∣dome of the ConscienceThree Moderatours then of our Christian liberty to the Creatures we are to allow off; Sobrietie, Cha∣rity, and Duty▪ vnto euery of which a just regard ought to be had. Neither neede we feare, if we suffer Sobrie∣tie on one side, and Charity on another, and Duty on a third, thus to abridge vs in the vse of our Christian liberty; that by little and little it may be at length so pared away among them, that there may bee little or nothing left of it. To remoue this suspition; let this be our Eighth and last Position. No respect whatsoeuer can, or ought to diminish the inward freedome of the conscience to any of the Creatures. And this inward freedome is it, wherein especially consisteth our Chri∣stian liberty to the Creature. This freedome we are all bound to maintaine to the vtmost of our powers; and not to suffer our selues to be made 1. Cor. 7.23. the seruants of men, (otherwife then in Gal. 5.13. seruing one anothr by loue:) but to Gal. 5.1. stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ hath set vs free. Now this Liberty consisteth in a certaine resolu∣tion of judgement, and a certaine perswasion of onsci∣ence arising thence, that all the creatures of God are in themselues lawfull, and free for vs either to vse, or refuse, as wee shall see it expedient for vs: and that neither the vse not the orbearance of them, doth of it selfe either comtend or discommend vs vnto God; or a∣ny way either please him as a part of his worship, or of∣fend him as transgression of his Law. Rom. 14.17. The Kingdome of God is not meate and drinke, saith Saint Paul: 1. Cr. 8.8. nei∣ther of wee , are wohe better; neither the worse if wee doe not eate; nor on the contrary. Now here is the wickednesse, and the vsurpation of the High Priest of foure; that he challengeth to himselfe a spirituall power ouer the consciences of men, which is the greatest tyran∣ny that euer was, or can be exercised in the world: lay∣ing impuriy vpon the things he forbiddeth; and an∣noing operatiue holinesse, and power both satisfactory,
and meritorious, to the things hee inioyneth. Which v∣surpation, whosoeuer hateth not in him with a perfect ha∣tred: is justly vnworthy of, and shamefully vnthankefull for, that liberty and freedome, which the blessed Sonne of God, hath purchased for his Church. But this inward freedome once established in our hearts, and our consciences, fully perswaded therof: let vs thence∣forth make no scruple to admit of such just restraints in the outward exercise of it,§. 32. may stand with some restraints in the outward exercise. as Christian Sobrietie, Charitie, and Dutie shall require. For wee must know, that the Li∣berty of a Christian is not in eating, and wearing, and doing, what and when and where and how he list; but in being assu∣red that it is all one before God, (in the things themselues barely considered,) whether hee eate or not eate, weare or not weare, doe or not doe, this or that, and that therefore, as he may vpon iust cause eate, and weare, and doe; so he may vpon just cause also refuse to eate, or weare, or doe, this thing or that. Indeed otherwise, if wee well consider it, it were but the empty name of liberty, without the thing: for how is it liberty, if a man be determinately bound the one way, and tyed ad alteram partem contradictionis precisely: and not left indifferent and equall to either? If then the re∣gards of Sobrietie, Charity, or Duty, doe not require a for∣bearance, thou knowest euery Creature of God is good, and nothing to bee refused: thou hast thy Liberty therefore, and mayest according to that liberty freely vse that Creature. But if any of those former respects require thou shouldest forbeare; thou knowest that the Creature still is good, and as not to be refused, so not to be imposed: thou hast thy li∣berty therefore here, as before, and oughtest according to that liberty, freely to abstaine from that Creature.§. 33. Obseru. III. The Crea∣ture to be re∣ceiued with Thankesgi∣uing; Both in vsing, and refusing, the Conscience is still free: and as well the vse as the refusall, and as well the refusall as the vse, doe equally and alike belong to the true libertie of a Christian. We haue seene now, what liberty God hath allowed vs: and therein we may see also his great goodnesse and bounty towards vs, in making such a world of Creatures, and all of
them good, [Euery Creature of God is good;] & not enuying vs the free vse of any of those good Creatures, [Nothing to be refused,]. But where is our Duty, answerable to this Bounty? Where is our thankefulnes, proportionable to such receipts? Let vs not reioice too much in the Creatures good∣nes, nor glory too much in our freedome thereunto: vnlesse there be in vs, withall, a due care and conscience to per∣forme the Conditio, which God requireth in lieu thereof; neither can their goodnes doe vs good; nor our freedome exempt vs from evill. And that condition is, the Dutie of thankesgiuing: expressed in the last clause of the verse, [If it be receiued with thankesgiuing.] Forget this prouis: and we vndoe all againe, that we haue hitherto done, and de∣stroy all that we haue already established concerning both the goodnes of the Creature, and our liberty in the vse there∣of: for without thankesgiuing, neither can we partake their Goodnes, nor vse our owne liberty, with comfort. Of this therefore in the next place: wherein the waight of the Du∣ty considered, together with our backwardnes thereunto, if I shall spend the remainder of my time, and meditations: I hope my labour by the blessing of God and your prayers shall not be vnprofitable, and my purpose therein shall find, if not allowance in your judgements, at least in your Chari∣ty Excuse. To speake of which Duty of thankesgiuing in the full extent, and by way of common place; were to en∣ter into a spacious field, indeed a very sea of matter with∣out bottome. For mine owne case therefore and yours, I shall confine my selfe to that branch of it, which is most im∣mediatly pertinent to my text; viz. that tribute of Thankes, which we owe vnto God for the free vse of his good Crea∣tures: forbearing to meddle with the other branches there∣of, otherwise then as they fall within the reach of this, by way either of Proportion or Inference. §. 34. and what is meant there∣by.And first we are to know, that by Thankesgiuing in my Text is not meant onely that subsequent act, whereby wee render vnto God praise and thankes for the Creature, af∣ter wee haue receiued it, and enioyed the benefit of it:
which yet is most properly Thankesgiuing: but we are to extend the word farther, euen to those precedent acts of Prayer and Benediction, whereby we beseech God to giue his blessing to the Creature, and to sanctifie the vse of it to vs. For what in this verse is called Thankesgiuing, is in the next verse comprehended vnder the name of Vers 5. hic. Prayer. And we shall accordingly find in the Scriptures elsewhere, the words , and , the one wherof signifieth properly Blessing, the other Thankesgiuing, vsed oftentimes promis∣cuously the one for the other. The blessing which our bles∣sed Sauiour Iesus Christ, vsed at the consecration of the Sacramentall bread, Luk. 22.17.19. St. Luke and 1. Cor. 11.24 St. Paul expresse by the word : Math. 26.27. St. Mathew and Mark. 14.22.23. St. Marke, by . And the Prayer of blessing, vsed before the eating of common Bread, is by Math. 15.36. Mark, 8.6. Ioh. 6.11. Act. 27.35. euery one of the foure Euange∣lists in some places described by the word : and by Math. 14.19. Mark. 6.41. Luk. 9.16. three of them in other some places, by . And the name See Casaub. exercit. 16. in Baron. sect. 33.  is somtimes found in the writings of the An∣cients, for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; the more vsuall name whereof is , or the holy Eucharist. And we in our ordinary manner of speech, call as well the Bles∣sing before meate, as the Thankesgiuing after, by the com∣mon name of Grace, or saying of Grace. Both these then together, Grace before meate, and Grace after meate; a sa∣crifice of Prayer before we vse any of the good Creatures of God, and a sacrifice of Praise after we haue vsed them; the Blessing wherewith we blesse the Creature in the name of God, and the Blessing wherewith we blesse the Name of God for the Creature: both these I say together, is the just extent of that Thankesgiuing, whereof my Text speaketh, and we are now to entreat. Concerning Meates and Drinkes,§. 35. For meates and drinkes, vnto which our Apo∣stle hath speciall reference in this whole passage: this du∣ty of Thankesgiuing, hath bin euer held so congruous to the partaking thereof, that long and ancient custome hath e∣stablished it in the common practise of Christians; not on∣ly with inward thankfulnesse of heart to recount and ac∣knowledge
Gods goodnes to them therein, but also out∣wardly to expresse the same in a vocall solemne forme of Blessing or Thankesgiuing, that which we call Grace, or say∣ing of Grace. Which very phrases, whether or no they haue ground, (as to me it seemeth they haue,) from those words of our Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. (1. Cor. 10.30 For if I by grace bee a parta∣ker, why am I euill spoken of, for that, for which I giue thankes:) I say, howsoeuer it be with the phrase; sure we are the thing it selfe hath sufficient ground from the exam∣ples of Christ, and of his holy Apostles. From whom, the custome of giuing Thankes at meales, seemeth to haue bin deriued, throughout all succeeding ages, euen to vs. Of Christ himselfe we reade often, and in euery of the Euange∣lists, that hee blessed and gaue thankes in the name of him∣selfe and the people, before meate; in 14. and 15. of Math. 14.19. & 15 36. Ma∣thew, in 6. and 8. of Mark. 6 41. & 8.6. Marke, in 9. of Luk. 9.16. Luke, and in 6. of Ioh. 6.8. Iohn. And in Math. 26. that after meate also, when Supper was ended, he and his Disciples . Math. 26.30. sang an hymne, before they departed the roome. And St. Luke relateth of St. Paul, Act. 27. when hee and his company in the Ship, who were wel toward 300. persons, were to refresh them∣selues with food after a long fast, that he tooke Bread, and first Act. 27.35. gaue thankes to God in the presence of them all, and then after brake it, and began to eate: yea St. Paul himselfe so speaketh of it, Rom. 14. as of the knowne practise of the Church among Christians of all sorts, Weake, and Strong. He that was strong in the faith, and knew the liberty he had in Christ to eate indifferently of all kinds of meates, flesh as well as hearbes; did eate of all indifferently, and gaue God thankes for all. The weake Christian too, who made scruple of some kinds of flesh or other meates, and conten∣ted himselfe with hearbes and such like things, yet gaue God thankes for his hearbes, and for whatsoeuer else hee durst eate. Rom. 14.6. Hee that eateth, eateth to the Lord (saith hee there, at verse 6.) for he giueth God thankes: and hee that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giueth God thankes too. Notwithstanding they differed in their judgements
and opinions, and consequently in their practise, concer∣ning the lawfull or vnlawfull vse of some meates: yet they consented most sweetly, and agreed both in their judge∣ment and practise, in the performance of this religious ser∣uice of Thankesgiuing. So then giuing of Thankes for our meates and drinkes before and after meales, in an outward and audible forme,§. 36. and other Creatures, the Thankes∣giuing of the mouth expe∣dient; is an ancient, a commendable, an Apostolicall, a Christian practise: ordinarily requisite as an outward testimony of the inward thankfulnesse of the heart; and therefore not to bee omitted ordinarily, neither but in some few cases. There being the like necessitie of this dutie, in regard of inward thankefulnes, as there is of vocall Prayer, in regard of inward Deuotion; and of outward Confession, in regard of inward Beliefe: and looke what exceptions those other outward duties may admit; the very same, mutandis muta∣tis, and in their proportion, are to be admitted here. But not nely Meates and Drinkes; but euery other good Crea∣ture also of God, whereof we may haue vse, ought to be re∣ceiued with a due measure of thankfulnesse. And if in these things also, so often as in good discretion it may seeme expedient for the aduancing of Gods glory, the benefiting of his Church, or the quickning of our owne Deuotion; wee shall make some outward and sensible expression of the thankfulnes of our hearts for them: wee shall therein doe an acceptable seruice vnto God, and comfortable to our owne soules. For, for this cause God instituted of old a∣mong his owne people, diuers solemne feasts and sacrifi∣ces, together with the Sanctifying of the first fruits, and of the first-borne, and diuers other ordinances of that nature: as on the other side to be fit remembrancers vnto them of their duty of thankfulnes; so to bee as well good testimo∣nies and fit expressions of their performance of that duty. But if not alwayes, the outward manifestation thereof:§. 37. but of the Heart neces∣sary. yet God euer expecteth at least the true and inward thank∣fulnesse of the heart, for the vse of his good Creatures. Col. 3.17. Whatsoeuer you doe in word or deed, doe all in the name of
the Lord Iesus, giuing thankes vnto God and the Father by him, Col. 3. Phil. 4.6. Bee carefull for nothing: but in euery thing by prayer and supplication with thankesgiuing, let your re∣quest be made knowne vnto God, Phil. 4. Psal 103.1.2 Blesse the Lord, O my soule, (saith Dauid in Psalm. 103.) and all that is with∣in mee, praise his holy name; Praise the Lord, O my soule, and forget not all his benefites. Forget not all his benefits: as much as to say, by an ordinary Hebraisme, forget not any of all his benefites. He summoneth all that is in him, to blesse God for all he hath from him: he thought it was necessary for him, not to receiue any of the good Crea∣tures of God, without Thankesgiuing. Which necessity of Thankesgiuing will yet more appeare; if we consider it, either as an act of Iustice, or as an act of Religion: as it is indeed and truly both. It is first, an Act of Iustice.§. 38. as an Act, 1. of Iustice; The very law of Nature, which containeth the first seedes and principles of Iustice, bindeth euery man that receiueth a benefit, to a thankefull acknowledgement of it first, and then withall. (ability and opportunity supposed,) to some kind of retribution. The best Philosophers therefore make Gratitude a Cic. 2. de in∣uent 13 & 36. branch of the Law of Nature; and so account of it, as of a thing, then which there is Quid tam cō∣tr ffictū, quā nō reddere quod acceperis? Am∣bros. 1. offic. 21Nullum ofi∣cium referenda gratia magi necessarium est. Cic. 1. de Of∣fic. not any office of vertue more necessary: as nor any thing on the contrary more detestable, then Ingra∣titude. You cannot lay a Erunt homici∣da, tyranny, fu∣res, adulters, raptores, sacri∣legi, proditores: infra ista omnia ingratus est. Senec. 1. de be∣nef. 10. fouler imputation vpon a man, nor by any accusations in the world render him more odi∣ous to the opinions of all men; then by charging him with vnthankfulnesse. Ingratum dicas, omnia dixeris: doe but say, he is an vnthankfull wretch; you neede say no more, you can say no worse, by any mortall Creature. Verily, euery benefit carrieth with it the force of an obligation; and we all confesse it: if we receiue but some small kindnes from a∣nother we can readily and complementally protest our selues much bound to him for it. Indeede when we say so, we often speake it but of coarse, and thinke it not: but yet whē we do so, we speak more truth then we are aware of▪ for, if it be in truth a kindnes in him, we are in truth & equity
bound to him thereby. The common saying is not without ground, Qui benificium accepit, libertatem vendidit. Some men therefore refuse kindnesses and courtesies at other mens hands; because forsooth they will not be beholden to them. Which though it be a peruerse and vniust course, and indeede a high degree of vnthankefulnesse, (for there is vn∣thankefulnesse, as well in Non solum is gratus debet es∣se, qui accepit be∣neficium; verum etiam is, cui po∣testas accipendi fuit. Cic. de Prouinc. Con∣sular. Tam te∣neor dono, quam si demittar onu∣stus. Horat. 1. Epist. 7. not accepting a kind offer, as in not requiting a good turne;) and therefore also a high degree of folly, (for it is not a foolish thing for a man, out of the bare feare of vnthankfulnes one way, to become wil∣fully vnthankefull another?) though I say, it be a fond and peruerse course in them: yet it argueth withall in them a strong apprehension of the equity of that principle of Na∣ture and Iustice, which bindeth men that receiue benefits ad , to a necessity of requitall and retribution. Truth it is; to God our heauenly Father first, and then to our earthly Sirac. 7.28. Parents, none of vs can reddere paria: none is able to make a full requitall to either of them; especially not to God. But that freeth vs not from the the debt of thankful∣nes, as not to our Parents, so neither to God: it rather bindeth vs the faster therevnto. The same Law of Nature, which teacheth vs to requite a good turne to the vttermost, where there is wherewithall to do it, and withall a fare op∣portunity offered; teacheth vs also where there wanteth ei∣ther ability or opportunity, to endeauour by the best con∣uenient meanes we can to testifie at least the thnkefulnesse of our hearts, and our vnfained desires of requitall. Which In beneficio re∣dendo, plus ani∣mus, quam cen∣sus operatur: mags{que} praepou∣derat benevolen∣tia, quam possi∣bilitas, referendi muneris, Am∣bros. 1. offic. 32 desire and endeauour, if euery ingenuous man, and our earthly Parents, doe accept off, where they find it, as of the deede it selfe: can we doubt of Vt decent vires tamen est laen∣danda volun as: hac ego contentos auguror esse Deo. Ouid. de Ponto. Gods acceptation of our vnfained desires herein, though infinitely and without all proportion short of a just requitall and retribution? Dauid knew right well, that when a man hath done all he can, he is but Luk. 17.10. an vnprofitable seruant, and Iob. 22.2. cannot be profitable vnto God, as hee that is wise may bee profitable to himselfe and his neighbours; and that Psal. 16.2.3. Nulla ex nobis vtilitas Deospe∣randa est, Sene. 4. de ben. c. 3. Nec ille collato eget, nec nos ti quicquam con∣ferre poffumus▪ Ibid. cap. 9. his goodnes, though it might be pleasurable to the Saints that are on the earth, yet it could
not extend vnto the Lord; all this he knew; and yet know∣ing withall that God accepteth the will for the deede, and the desire for the performance; he doubted not to raise vp his language to that key, in Psal. 116. Psal. 116.12, 13. Quid retribuam? What requitall shall I make? What shall I render vnto the Lord, for all his benefits towards mee? I will take the cup of saluation, and call vpon the name of the Lord. This thanke∣full heart he knew God valued as a sacrifice: nay, .Xenoph. 1. . pre∣ferred before Sacrifices. For hauing reiected them at Psal. 8. Psal. 50.8.14 [I will not reproue thee for thy sacrifices, &c.] he ex∣acteth this at Psal. 14. of Psal. 50. [Offer vnto God thankes∣giuing, &c.] God respecteth not so much the calues out of our stalls, or the fruits from of our grounds: as these Osec. 14.2. Vi∣tulos labiorum, these Calues of our lips, as the Prophet; and these Heb. 13.15. Fructus labiorum, these fruits of our lips, as the A∣postle calleth them. [Let vs offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruite of our lips giuing thankes to his name, Heb. 13.] More then this, in his Mercy hee will not desire: lesse then this, in all reason wee cannot giue. Thankfulnes is an Act of Iustice: wee are vniust, if wee receiue his good Creatures, and not returne him thankes for them. It is not onely an Act of Iustice: it is an act of Religion too;§ 39.2. Of Religi∣on: a double sanctificati∣on of the Creature; and a branch of that seruice whereby we do God wor∣ship and honour. Psal. 50.23. Who so offereth praise, he honoureth me, Psal. 50. verse last. Now looke what honour we giue vn∣to God; it all redoundeth to our selues at the last with plen∣tifull advantage; 1. Sam. 2.30. [Them that honour me I will honour. 1. Sam. 2.] Here then is the fruite of this religious Act of Thankesgiuing; that it sanctifieth vnto vs the vse of the good Creatures of God which is the very reason Saint Paul giueth of this present speech in the next verse. Euery Creature of God is good, saith he here, and nothing to be refu∣sed, if it be receiued with Thankesgiuing: for, saith he there, Vers. 5. hic. it is sanctified by the word of God, and Prayer. Vnderstand not by the Word of God there, his written word, or the Scriptures; as some yet giue the sense, not without violence
to the words, though the thing they say be true: but, more both naturally to the construction of the words, and perti∣nently to the drift and scope of our Apostle therein, vnder∣derstand rather the word of his eternall councell and decree, and of his power and prouidence, whereby he ordereth and commandeth his Creatures in their seuerall kinds, to afford vs such seruice and comforts, as he hath thought Good. Which sanctifying of the Creatures by the word of Gods de∣cree and prouidence, implyeth two things, the one, re∣specting the Creatures, that they doe their kindly office to vs; the other respecting vs, that we reape holy comfort from them. For the plainer vnderstanding of both which; in∣stance shalbe giuen in the Creatures appointed for our nou∣rishment: and what shall be said of them, we may conceipt of, and apply vnto, euery other Creature in the proper kind thereof. First then,§. 40. The first way. the Creatures appointed for foode are sancti∣fied by the word of God; when together with the Creature, he giueth his blessing, to goe along with it: by his power∣full word, commanding it, and by that command enabling it, to feede vs. Which is the true meaning of that speech in Deutr. 8. alledged by our Sauiour against the Tempter, Deut. 8.3. Math. 4.4. Man liueth not by bread onely but by euery word that pro∣ceedeth out of the mouth of God. Alas, what is Bread to nou∣rish vs without his word? vnles he say the word, and cōmand the bread to do it, there is no more sap or strength in Bread, then in stones. That power and nutritiue vertue which the Bread hath, it hath from his deeree; because the word is already gone out of his mouth, that Psal. 104.15. bread should strengthen mans heart. As in the first Creation, when the Creatures were produced in acta primo, had their beings giuen them, and naturall powers and faculties bestowed on them; all that was done by the word of Gods power∣full decree, [Psal. 33.9. He spake the word, and they were made; he commanded and they were Created;] So in all their opera∣tions in actu secundo, when they doe at any time exercise those naturall faculties, and doe those offices for which they
were created; all this is still done, by the same powerfull word and decree of God, [Heb. 1.3. He vpholdeth all things by the word of his power,] As we reade of Bread; so wee often reade in the Scriptures of Leuit. 26.26. Psal 105 16. Eek. 16▪ the staffe of Bread: God some∣times threatneth he will breake the staffe of Bread. What is that? Bread indeede is the staffe of our strength; it is the very stay and prop of our liues: if God breake this staffe, and deny vs Bread, we are gone. But that is not all Bread is our staffe: but what is the staffe of Bread? Verily, the Word of God, blessing our Bread, and commanding it to feede vs, is the staffe of this staffe: sustaining that vertue in the Bread, whereby it sustaineth vs. If God breake this staffe of Bread, if he withdraw his blessing from the Bread, if by his countermaund he inhibit or restraine the vertue of the bread; we are as farre to seeke with Bread, as without it. If sanctified with Gods word of blessing; a little pulse Dan. 1.12.15. and water, hard and homely fare shall feede Daniel as fresh and fat and faire, as the Kings dainties shall his com∣panions: a 3. King. 19.6.8. ake and a cruse of water, shall suffice Eliah nourishment enough to walke in the strength thereof 40. dayes and nights: a few Ioh. 6.9.12. barley loaues and small fishes shall multiply to the satisfying of many thousands, eate while they will. But if Gods word and blessing be wanting; Gen. 41.20.21. the leane Kine may eate vp the fat, and be as thin, and hollow, and ill liking as before: and we may, as the Prophet Hag∣gay speaketh, Agg. 1.6. eate too much and not haue enough, drinke our fills and not be filled. §. 41. The second way.This first degree of the Creatures sanctification by the word of God, is a common and ordinary blessing vpon the Creatures; whereof, as of the Math 5.45. light and dew of heauen, the wicked partake as well as the Godly, and the thanklesse as the thankfull. But there is a second degree also▪ beyond this; which is proper and peculiar to the Godly. And that is, when God not onely by the word of his Power bestow∣eth a blessing vpon the Creature: but also causeth the Eccho of that word to sound in our hearts by the voice of his Ho∣ly spirit) and giueth vs a sensible tast of his goodnes to vs
therein: filling our hearts not onely Acts 14.17. with that joy and gladnes, which ariseth from the experience of the effect, viz. the refreshing of our naturall strength, but also joy and glad∣nes with more spirituall and sublime then that, arising from the contemplation of the prime cause, viz. the fauour of God towards vs in the face of his Sonne; that which Dae∣uid calleth the Psal. 4.6. light of his countenance. For as it is the kind welcome at a friends table, that maketh the cheare good, rather then the quaintnes of variety of the dishes, Ouid Meta∣morph. 8. (Super omnia vultus Accessere boni;) so as that Prou. 15.17. a dinner of greene herbes with loue and kindnes, is better entertainment then a stalled Oxe with bad lookes: so the light of Gods fa∣uorable countenance, shining vpon vs through these things, is it, which Psal. 4.6.7. putteth more true gladnes into our hearts; then doth the corne, & the wine, and the oyle themselues, or any o∣ther outward thing that we doe or can partake. Now this sanctified and holy and comfortable vse of the Creatures, ariseth also from the word of Gods decree; euen as the for∣mer decree did: but not from the same decree. That for∣mer issued from the decree of Common prouidence; and so belonged vnto all, as that prouidence is common to all. But this later degree proceedeth from that speciall word of Gods decree, whereby for the merits of Christ Ie∣sus, 1. Cor. 15.45 the second Adam, he remoueth from the Creature that Gen. 3.17. curse, wherein it was wrapped through the sinne of the first Adam, And in this the wicked haue no portion; as being out of Christ: so as they cannot partake of Gods Creatures; with any solid or sound comfort; and so the Creatures remaine, (in this degree) vnsanctified vnto them. For this reason, the Scriptures stile the Heb. 12.23. Faithfull Primogenitos, the first borne; as to whom belongeth Deut. 21.17. a double portion: and Rom. 4.13. Haeredes mundi, heires of the world; as if none but they had any good right thereunto. And St. Paul deriueth our Title to the Creatures from God, but by Christ; 1. Cor. 3.22.23. [All things are yours, and you are Christs, and Christ is Gods:] as if these things were none of theirs, who are none of Christs. And in the verse before my Text, he
saith of meates, that Vers. 3. hic. God hath created them to be recei∣ued with thankesgiuing of them which beleeue, and know the truth: as if those that wanted faith and sauing knowledge, did but vsurpe the bread they eate. And indeede it is cer∣taine, the wicked, haue not right to the Creatures of God, in such ample sort, as the Godly haue. A kinde of Right they haue, and we may not deny it them; giuen them by Gods vnchangeable ordinance at the Creation: which be∣ing a branch of that part of Gods image in man, which was of naturall and not of supernaturall grace, might be, and was fouly defaced with sinne; but was not, neither could be wholly lost, as hath bin See before §. 14. already in part declared. A Right then they haue: but such a right, as reaching barely to the vse, cannot affoord vnto the vser true comfort, or sound peace of conscience, in such vse, of the Creatures. For, though nothing be in, and of it selfe vncleane: for Euery Creature of God is good: yet to them that are vncleane, ex accidenti euery Creature is vncleane and polluted, because it is thus sanctified vnto them by the word of God. And the very true cause of all this, is the impurity of their hearts, by reason of vnbeliefe. The holy Ghost expresly assigneth this cause, Tit 1.15. To the pure all things are pure: but to them that are defiled and vnbelieuing is nothing pure: but euen their mind and conscience is defiled. As a Sinterum est nisi vas, quod∣tunque infundis accessit. Horat. 1. Epist. 2.nasty vessell sowreth all that is put into it: so a conscience not Fide purifi∣tans corda. Acts 15.9. purified by faith, casteth pollution vpon the best of Gods Creatures. §. 42. and how this belongeth to the present point.But what is all this to the Text, may some say: or what to the point? What is all this to the Duty of Thanksgiuing? Much euery manner of way: or else blame St. Paul of im∣pertinency: whose discourse should be incohaerent and vn∣jointed, if what I haue now last said were beside the Text. For since the sanctification of the Creature to our vse, depen∣deth vpon the powerfull and good word of God, blessing it vnto vs: that Duty must needes be necessary to a sanctified vse of the Creature, without which we can haue no faire assurance vnto our Consciences; that that word of blessing is proceeded out of the mouth of God. And such is this duty
of Thankesgiuing: appointed by God, as the ordinary meanes, and proper instrument, to procure that word of bles∣sing from him. When we haue performed this sincerely and faithfully; our hearts may then, with a most cheerefull, but yet humble confidence, say Amen, So be it: in full as∣surance that God will joyne his Fiat to ours: crowne our Amen with his: and to our So be it of Faith & Hope, adde his of Power and Command: blessing his Creatures vnto vs, when we blesse him for them; and sanctifying their vse to our comfort, when we magnifie his goodnes for the re∣ceipt. You see therefore how, as vnseperable & vndiuided companions, the Apostle joyneth these two together: the one, as the cause: the other, as the meanes of the Creatures sanctification: [It is sanctified by the word of God, & Prayer.] By the Word of Gods powerfull decree: as the sole efficient, and sufficient cause: and by the Prayer of Thankesgiuing (for such Prayer he meaneth, as either hath Thankesgiuing joy∣ned with it, or else is a part of Thankesgiuing, or Thankesgi∣ving a part of it?) by Prayer I say and Thankesgiuing, as the proper meanes to obtaine it. This is the blessed effect of Thankesgiuing, as it is an Act of Religion. And thus you haue heard two grand Reasons, concluding the necessity of Thankesgiuing vnto God, in the receiuing and vsing of his good Creatures. The one, considering it as an Act of Iustice: because it is the onely acceptable discharge of that obliga∣gation of debt, wherein we stand bound vnto God for the free vse of so many good Creatures. The Other, conside∣ring it is an Act of Religion: because it is the most proper and conuenient meanes to procure from the mouth of God a word of Blessing, to sanctifie the Creatures to the vses of our liues, and to the comfort of our Consiences. This Thankesgiuing being an Act both of Iustice and Religion: whensoeuer we either receiue or vse any good Creature of God; without this we are vniust in the Receipt, and in the Vse prophane. It is now high time, we should from the premises inferre something for our farther vse and Edifi∣cation.
And the first Inference may be, shall I say for Triall; or may I not rather say, for Conuiction?§. 43. The first In∣ference; for Conuiction of our vn∣thankefulnes to God since wee shall learne thereby, not so much to examine our Thankefulnes, how true it is; as to discouer our Vnthankfulnes, how foule it is. And how should that discouery cast vs downe to a deepe condemnation of our selues for so much both Vniustice and Prophanenesse; when we shall finde our selues guilty of, so many failings in the performance of such a necessary Duty both of Iustice, and Religion? But we cannot abide to heare on this care: We vnthankfull to God? farre be that from vs: we scarce euer speake of any thing we haue, or haue done, or suffred; but we send this clause after it. I thank God for it. And how are we vnthankfull, seeing wee doe thus? It is a true saying, which one saith; Thanking of God, is a thing all men doe, and yet none doe, as they should. It is often in vdo, but seldome in imo: it swimmeth often vpon the tip of our tongues, but seldome sinketh into the bottom of our hearts. I thanke God for it, is, as many vse it, rather a Vsu quodem, magis quā sen∣su vel affectu, personare in ore multorum gra∣tiarum actionem aduertere est. Bern. in Cant. serm. 13. By-word then a Thanksgiuing: so farre from being an ac∣ceptable seruice to God, and a magnifying of his name; that is rather it selfe a grieuous sinne, and a taking of his holy name in vaine. But if we will consider duly and aright, not so much how neere we draw vnto God with our lips, as how farre our hearts are from him when we say so: wee shall see what small reason we haue, vpon such a slender lip-labour to thinke our selues discharged either of the bond of thankefulnesse, or from the sinne of vnthankfulnes. Quid verba audiam, facta cum vidiam! Though we say, I thanke God, a thousand and a thousand times ouer, yet if in our deedes we bewray foule vnthankefulnesse vnto him: it is but Protestatio contraria facto: and we doe thereby but make our selues the greater and the deeper lyers. §. 44. in sundry de∣grees: for want of dueEuery sinne is spacious, and diffused, and spreadeth into a number of branches: this of Ingratitude not least. Yet we will doe our best to reduce all that multitude to some few principall branches. There are required vnto true Thankfulnesse three things; Recognition, Estimation, Re∣tribution.
He that hath receiued a benefit from another, he ought first, faithfully to acknowledge it, secondly, to va∣lue it worthily; thirdly, to endeauour really to requite it. And who so faileth in any of these, is (so farre as he faileth) vnthankefull more or lesse. And doe not some of vs faile in all, and doe not all of vs faile in some of these? For our more assured, whether Examination, or Conuiction; let vs a little consider how we haue and doe behaue our selues in each of the three respects; In euery of which, wee will in∣stance but in two kinds; and so we shall haue sixe degrees of Ingratitude: still holding our selues as close as we can to the present point, concerning our Thankefulnesse or vn∣thankfulnesse, as it respecteth the vse we haue of, and the benefit we haue from, the good Creatures of God. And first, we faile in our Recognition,§ 45. I. Recogniti∣on: the first; and in the due ac∣knowledgement of Gods blessings. And therein first, and let that be the first degree of our vnthankfulnesse, in letting so many blessings of his  by vs, without any regard, or so much as notice taken of them: Whereas knowledge must euer goe before acknowledgement, and Apprehension before Confession. There is a twofold Confession to bee made vnto God: the Confessio ge∣mina est: aut Peccati, aut Laudis. August exp. 2. in Psa. 29 . Chrysost. in Psal. 9. one, of our sinnes; the other, of his goodnesse. That belongeth to Repentan; this to Thankefulnes. Both of them consist in an Acknowledgement: and in both, the acknowledgement is most faithfull, when it is most punctu∣all: and in both, we come to make default, for want of taking such particular information, as wee ought, and might. In our Repentance, we content our selues common∣ly with a generall Confession of our sinnes; or at the most, possibly sometimes make acknowledgement of some one or a few grosser falls, which gall our consciences or which the world cryeth shame of: and if we do that, we thinke we haue made an excellent Confession. So in our Thanks∣giuing, ordinarily wee content our selues with a generall acknowledgement of Gods goodnesse and mercies to vs; or sometimes possibly recount some one or a few notable and Beneficia qua∣dam magnitudo non patitur ex∣cidere: sed nu∣mero pluria, & temporibus di∣versa effluunt. Senec. 3. de be∣nef. 5. Eminent fauours, such as most affect vs, or whereof the
world taketh notice: and this is all we doe. But we doe indeed in both these, deale vnfaithfully with God, and with our owne soules. If wee desire to shew our selues truely penitent we should take knowledge (so farre as pos∣sibly we could) of all our sinnes, small and great (at least the seuerall species and kinds of them, for the indiuiduals are infinite:) and bring them all before God in the Con∣fession of Repentance. And if we desired to shew our selues truely thankefull; we should take notice (so farre as pos∣sibly we could, and in the species at least,) of all Gods bles∣sings, small and great; and bring them all before him in the Confession of Praise. We should euen Ioh. 6.12. Colligere frag∣menta gather vp the very broken meats, and let nothing be left, those Colligere frag∣menta, ut peccāt, i. e nec mnma beneficia oblinis∣ci. Bernard. in Cant. serm. 51. small petty blessings, as we account them: and as we thinke scarce worth the obseruation. Did we so: how many baskets full might be taken vp, which we day∣ly suffer to fall to the ground, and bee lost? Like Swine vnder the Oakes, we grouze vp the ake-cornes, and snouke about for more, and eate them too, and when we haue done lie wrouting & thrusting our noses in the earth for more: but neuer lift vp so much as halfe an eye, to the tree that shed them. Euery crumme we put in our mouthes, euery drop wherewith we coole our tongues, the very ayre we continually breath in and out through our throats and nos∣thrils, a thousand other such things whereof the very com∣monnes taketh away the obseruation, wee receiue from his fulnesse: and many of these are renewed euery morning, and some of these are renewed euery minute: and yet how sel∣dome doe we so much as take notice of many of these things? How justly might that complaint which God ma∣keth against the vnthankefull Israelites, be taken vp against vs? Esay 1.3. The Oxe knoweth his owner, and the Asse his Masters crib: but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider. The second degree of our Vnthankefulnesse to God,§. 46. and second Degree. and that also for want of faithfull Acknowledgement, is: in as∣cribing the good things he hath giuen vs to our owne de∣serts, or indeauours, or to any other thing or Creature, ei∣ther
in part or in whole, but onely to him. Such things in∣deed we haue, and we know it too (perhaps but too well) but we be stirred our selues for them, we beate our braines for them, wee got them out of the fire, and swet for them; we may thanke our good friends, or we may thanke our good selues for them. Thus doe wee Hb. 1.16. sacrifice vnto our owne nets, and burne incense to our drag, as if by them our portion were fat, and our meate plentious. And as Luk. 13.1. Pilate mingled the bloud of the Galileans with their owne sacri∣fices: so into these spirituall Psal. 50.14. sacrifices of Thanksgiuing, which we offer vnto God, wee infuse a quantity of our owne swinke and sweate, of our owne wit and fore-cast, of our owne power and friends, still some one thing or other of our owne; and so rob God, if not of all, yet of so much of his honour. This kinde of vnthankefulnesse God both fore-saw and forbad in his owne people, Deut. 8. warning them to take heed, verse 17. lest when they abounded in all plenty and prosperity, Deut. 8.14.17. they should forget the Lord, and say in their hearts, my power and the might of my hand hath gotten me this wealth. The very saying or thinking of this was a forgetting of God. Ibid. 18. But (saith Moses there) thou shalt remember the Lord thy God; for it is he that giueth thee power to get wealth, &c. The whole Chapter is none other but a warne-word against vnthankfulnesse. All Est superbia, & delictū max∣imum, vti da∣tis tanquam in∣natis; & in ac∣ceptit beneficiis gloriam vsurpa∣re benificii, Ber∣nard. de dilig. Deo. glorying in our selues, all vaine boasting of the gifts of God, or bea∣ring our selues high vpon any of his blessings, is a kind of smothering of the receipt; and argueth in vs a kind of loath∣nesse to make a free acknowledgement of the giuers boun∣ty; and so is tainted with a spice of vnthankfulnesse in this degree, 1. Cor. 4.7. If thou didst receiue it; why doest thou glory, as if thou hadst not receiued it? saith my Apostle elsewhere. Hee that glorieth in that, for which hee euen giueth thankes; doth by that glorying, as much as hee dareth, reuerse his thankes. The Pharisee, who Luk. 18.11. thanked God hee was not like other men; did euen then, and by those very thankes, but bewray his owne wretched vnthankeulnesse.
Besides a faithfull Recognition, in free acknowledging the benefit receiued; there is required vnto thankfulnesse a just Estimation of the benefit,§. 47. II. Estimati∣on: the Third; in valuing it, as it deserueth: Wherein we make default, if either we value it not at all, or vndervalue it. The third Degree then o our Ingrati∣tude vnto God, is the Forgetfulnesse of his benefits. When we so easily Apperet illū non sape de red∣dendo cogis asse, cui obrepsit obli∣uio, Senec. 3. de ben 1- peruens∣unt c, quo, vt ego existime, pes∣simus quisque & ingratissimus peruenit; vt ob∣liuiscantur. Ibi. 5. forget them, it is a signe we set nought by them. Euery man readily remembreth those things, hee maketh any reckoning of: insomuch that, although old age be naturally forgetfull, yet Nec vero quē∣quam seū au∣diui ebutum, quo loco the sau∣rum obruisses: Omnia, quae cur∣rant mimine∣runt: vadincnia centituta, qui sibi, quibus ipsi debeat. Cic de senect. Tully saith, he neuer knew a∣ny man so old as to forget where he had hid his gould, or to whom he had lent his monyes. In Deut. 8. Moses war∣neth the people, (as you heard) to Deut. 8, 14. beware, lest being full they should forget the Lord that had fed them: and Dauid stirreth vp his soule in Psal. 103. to Psal. 103.2. blesse the Lord, and not to forget any of his benefits. We all condemne Pharaohs Butler of vnthankfulnesse to Ioseph, (and so we may well doe; for he afterwards Gen, 41.9. condemned himselfe for it:) in that hauing receiued comfort from Ioseph, when they were fellow prisoners, he yet Gen. 40.23. forgat him when he was in place where, and had power and opportunity to requite him. How inexcusable are wee, that so condemne him? seeing wherein we judge him, we condemne our selues as much, and much more: for we doe the same things, and much worse. Hee forgat Ioseph, who was but a man like himselfe: we forget God. He had receiued but one good turne: we many. It is like he had none about him to put him in mind of Ioseph; for as for Ioseph himselfe we know he lay by it, and could haue no accesse: we haue God him∣selfe dayly rubbing vp our memories, both by his word and Ministers, and also by new and fresh benefits. He, as soone as a faire occasion presented it selfe, confest his fault, and remembred Ioseph; thereby shewing his former forgetful∣nesse to haue proceeded rather from negligence then Wilful∣nes: we after so many fresh remembrances and blessed op∣portunities, still continue in a kind of wilfull and confirmed resolution, still to forget. Well may we forget these priuate
and smaller blessings; when we begin to grow but too for∣getfull of those great and publique Deliuerances God hath wrought for vs. Two great deliuerances in the memory of many of vs, hath God in his singular mercy wrought for vs of this Land; such as I thinke, take both together, no Christian age or Land can paralell: One formerly, from a forreine Inuasion abroad; anoher since that, from an hellish Conspiracy at home: both such, as wee would all haue thought, when they were done, should neuer haue bin for∣gotten. And yet, as if this were Terra Oblinionis, the land where all things are forgotten; how doth the memory of them fade away, and they by little and little grow into forgetfulnesse! Wee had almost loued, to see Eighty-eight almost quite forgotten, and buried in a perpetuall Amne∣stie; (God be blessed who hath graciously preuented, what we feared herein:) God grant that we, nor ours, euer liue to see Nouembers fifth forgotten, or the solemnity of that day silenced. A fourth Degree of vnthankfulnesse is,§. 48. and Fourth degree. in vnderualuing Gods blessings, and lessening the worth of them. A fault whereof the murmuring Israelites were often guilty: who although they were brought into a Exod. 3.8. good Land, flowing with milke and honey, and abounding in all good things both for necessity and delight; yet as it is in Psal. 106.24. Psal. 106. They thought scorne of that pleasant Land: and were euer and a∣non and vpon euery light occasion repining aginst God and against Moses; alwayes receiuing good things from God, and yet alwayes discontent at something or other. And where is there a man among vs that can was his hands in innocency, & discharge himselfe altogether from the guilt of vnthankfulnesse in this kind? Where is there a man so constantly and equally content with his portion; that hee hath not sometimes or other either grudged at the leannesse of his owne, or enuyed at the fatnesse of anothers Lot? Wee deale with our God herein, as Hiram did with Salomon. Salomon gaue him twenty Cities in the land of Galilee: but because the Countrey was low and deepe (and
so in all likelihood the more fertile for that,) 3. King. 29.11.13. they pleased him not; and e said to Salomon, What Cities are these thou hast giuen me? and hee called them Cabul; that is to say, dirty. So are wee witty to cauill and to quarrell at Gods guifts; if they be not in euery respect such, as wee in our vaine hopes, or fancies, haue ideated vnto our selues. This is dirty; that barren: this too solitary; that too populous: this ill-woodded; that ill-watered: a third ill-ayred, a fourth ill-neighboured. This . Iude 16. grudging and repining at our por∣tions, and faulting of Gods guifts, so frequent among vs, argueth but too much the vnthankfulnes of our hearts. §. 49. III. Retri∣bution: the Fifth;The last thing required vnto Thankefulnesse, (after a faithfull Acknowledgement of the receipt, and a just Valua∣tion of the thing receiued:) is Retribution and Requitall. And that must be reall, if it be possible: but at the least, it must be votall, in the Desire and Endeauour. And herein also (as in both the former,) there may be a double faile: if, hauing receiued a benefit, we requite it either not at all, or ill. Not to haue any care at all of Requitall, is the fifth degree of Vnthankfulnes. To a Requitall (as you See before, §. 38. heard) Iustice bindeth vs: either to the party himselfe that did vs the good turne, if it may be, and bee either expedient or needfull; or at the least, to his Dauid retained such a grate∣full memory of Ionathans true friendship and constant af∣fection to him; that after he was dead and gone, he heark∣ned after some of his good friends, that he might requite Ionathans loue by some kindnesse to them, 2. Sam. 9.1. [Is there yet any left of the house of Saul, that I may shew him kindnesse for Ionathans sake?] And surely hee were a very vnthankfull wretch, that hauing bin beholden to the Father, as much as his life and liuely-hood is worth, would suffer the Son of so well deseruing a father to perish, for want of his helpe; and would not straine himselfe a little euen beyond his power (if need were) to succour him. Indeed to God, as we heard, we can render nothing that is worthy the name of Requitall: wee must not so much as thinke of that. But yet somewhat we must doe, to expresse the true and vnfai∣ned
thankfulnesse of our hearts: which, though it bee no∣thing lesse, yet it pleaseth him for Christs sake to interpret as a Requitall. And that to Him; and His: To Him, by seeking his glory, to His, by the fruites of our Christian Charity. We aduenture our states and liues, to maintaine the honour and safety of our Kings in their just warres; from whom perhaps we neuer receiued particuler fauour or benefit, other then the common benefit and protection of subiects. And are we not then foulely ingratefull to God, to whose goodnesse we owe all that wee haue or are; if for the aduancement of his glory and the maintenance of his truth, we make dainty to spend the best and most precious things we haue, yea though it be the dearest hart-bloud in our bodies? But how much more vngratefull, if we thinke much, for his sake to forgoe liberty, lands, liuings, houses, goods, offices, honours, or any of these smaller and inferi∣our things? Can there be greater vnthankfulnesse, then to grudge him a small, who hath giuen vs all? In these yet peaceable times of our Church and state (God be than∣ked) we are not much put to it: but who knoweth how soone a heauy day of tryall may come, (we all know it can∣not come sooner, or heauier, then our sinnes haue deser∣ued;) wherein woe, woe to our vnthankfulnesse, if wee doe not freely and cheerefully render vnto God of those things he hath giuen vs, whatsoeuer he shall require of vs. But yet euen in those peaceable times there want not op∣portunities, whereon to exercise our thankefulnesse; and to manifest our desires of requitall: though not to him, yet to his. To his seruants and children in their afflictions; to his poore distressed members in their manifold necessities. These opportunities we neuer did, we neuer shall want, according to our Sauiours prediction, or rather promise, Math. .6.11. Pauperes semper habbitis, The poore you shall alwaies haue with you, as my deputy-receiuers; but mee (in per∣son) ye shall not haue alwaies. And what we doe, or not doe, to Math. 25.40 45. these, whom he thus constituted his deputies, he taketh it as done, or not done vnto himselfe. If when
God hath giuen vs prosperity, we suffer these to be distres∣sed, and comfort them not, or victuals, to perish, and feede them not; or cloathing, to sterue, and couer them not; or power, to be oppressed, and rescue them not; or ability in any kind, to want it, and releiue them not: Let vs make what shewes we will, let vs make what profession we will of our thankefulnesse to God, what we deny to these, we deny to him; and as we deale with these, if his case were theirs (as hee is pleased to make their case his) wee would so deale with him. And what is to bee vnthankfull, if this bee not? And yet behold vnthankefulnesse, more and greater then this: vnthankfulnes in the sixth, and last, and highest, and worst degree.§. 50. and Sixth degree. We requite him euill for good. In that o∣ther we were vniust; not to requite him all: but iniurious also in this, to requite him with ill. It sticketh vpon King Iosh as a brand of infamy for euer, that he slew 2. Chron. 24.22, 23. Zacha∣ry the sonne of Iehoiada the high Priest, who had bin true and faithfull to him both in the getting of the Kingdome, and in the administration of it: recorded to all posterity, 2. Chron. 24. Thus Ioash the King remembred not the kindnesse which Iehoiada the father had done him, but slew his sonne: and when he dyed, he said: The Lord looke vpon it, and require it. And it was not long, before the Lord did indeed looke vpon it, and require it: the very next verse beginneth to lay downe the vengeance that God brought vpon him for it. And yet compared with ours, Ioash his ingratitude was nothing. Iehoiada was bound as a subiect to assist the right heyre: God is not bound to vs; he is a debter to none. Ioash had right to the Crowne before Iehoiada set it on his head: we haue no right at all to the Creature, but by Gods guift. Ioash though he dealt not well with the sonne, yet he e∣uer more esteemed the father so long as he liued, and was aduised by him in the affaires of his kingdome: we rebell euen against God himselfe, and cast all his counsels behind our backs. Ioash slew the sonne; but he was a mortall man and his subiect, and he had giuen him (at least as he appre∣hended
it) some affront and prouocation: we by our sinnes and disobedience crucifie the sonne of God, Symb. Nicen. the Lord and giuer of life, by whom and in whom and from whom we enioy all good blessings, and of whom we are not able to say that euer hee dealt vnkindly with vs, or gaue vs the least prouocation. But as Israel (whom God calleth Deut. 32.15. Ie∣shurun compareth to an heyfer fed in large and fruitful pa∣stures,) going alwayes at full bit, grew fat & wanton, and kicked with the heele: so we, the more plentifully God hath heaped his blessings vpon vs, the more wantonly haue wee followed the swinge of our owne hearts, and the more con∣temptuously spurned at his holy Commandements. It was a grieuous bill of complaint, which the Prophet in the name of God preferred against Israel in Osee, 2. that his Osee. 2.8. corne and wine, & oyle, and the siluer and gold which he had giuen them they employed in the seruice of Baal an abominable Idoll. If when God giueth vs wit, wealth, power, autho∣ritie, health, strength, liberty, euery other good thing; in stead of vsing these things to his glory, and the comfortable reliefe of his seruants, we abuse them, some or all, to the seruice of those Idols which we haue erected to our selues in our hearts; to the maintainance of our pride and pompe, making Lucifer our God; of our pelfe and profits, making Mammon our God; of our swinish pleasures and sensua∣ality, making our Phil. 3.9. belly our God; are we not as deepe in the bill as those Israelites were? as vniust, as they? as pro∣phane, as they? as vnthankefull euery way, as they? Flater wee not our selues: Obedience to Gods commandements, and a sober & charitable vse of his Creatures, is the best and surest euidence of our thankefulnesse to God, and the fai∣rest requitall we can make for them. I we withdraw our obedience, and fall into open rebellion against God; if wee abuse them, in making them either the occasions or instru∣ments of sinne to the dshonour of God, and damage of his seruants: we repay him ill and vnworthily for the good we haue receiued, and are guilty of vnthankefulnesse in this foulest and highest degree.
Now we haue seene what we are: let vs say the worst we can by vnthankefull ones; call them wretches, caytffes, chures, any thing; loade them with infamies, disgraces, contumelies; charge them with iniustice, prophanenesse, Atheisme; condemne them, and with them the vice it selfe, Vnthankefulnesse to the pit of Hell; doe all this, and more, and spare not; and as Dauid did at Nathans parable, when we heare any case or example of ingratitude in any of the former degrees, whether really done, or but in a parable pro¦nounce sentence vpon the guilty, 1. Sam. 12.5. The man that hath done this thing shall surely die. But withall let vs remember, when we haue so done, that our hearts instantly prompt vs what Nathan told Dauid, Ibid. 7. Thou art the man. Wee, we are the men, We are these vnthankfull ones: Vnthankefull to God, first in passing by so many of his blessings without taking any consideration of them; Vnthankefull secondly, in ascribing his blessings wholly or partly to our selues, or any other but him; Vnthankefull thirdly, in valuing his blessings so light∣ly as to forget them; Vnthankefull fourthly, in diminishing the worth of his blessings, and repining at our portion ther∣in; Vnthankefull fifthly, in not rendring to him & his accor∣ding to the good he hath done for vs; but sixthly and most of all vnthankefull in requiting him euill for good, and ha∣tred for his good will. Dealing thus with him, let vs not now maruaile, if he begin to deale something strangely, and otherwise then he was wont with vs. If he deny vs his Creatures, when we want them, if he take them from vs when we haue them; if he withhold his blessing frō them that it shall not attend them; if wee find small comfort in them, when we vse them; if they be vnanswering our expectati∣ons, when we haue bin at some paines and cost with them: if as the Prophet speaketh, Agg. 1.6. we sowe much and bring in lit∣tle, we eate and haue not enough, we drinke and are not filled, wee cloath vs and are not warme, and the wages wee earne we put into a bag with holes: if any of these things befall vs; let vs cease to wonder thereat: our selues are the cau∣sers of all our woe. It is our great Vnthankefulnesse that bla∣steth
all our endeauours; that leaueneth with sowrenesse whatsoeuer is sweete, and turneth into poyson whatsoeuer is wholesome in the good Creatures of God. It is the Vers. 5. hic. word of God, and Prayer that sanctifieth them to our vse; and they are then good, when they are receiued with Thankes∣giuing: so long as we continue Vnthankefull; we are vaine if we looke for any sanctification in them, if we expect any good from them. I haue now done with my first Inference, for Tryall, or rather Conuiction: I adde a second of Exhortation.§. 42. The second Inference, of Exhortatiō; with sundry Motiues to Thankeful∣nesse. The Duty it selfe being so necessarie as we haue heard; Neces∣sary, as an Act of Iustice for the receipt of the Creature: and necessary, as an act of Religion for the sanctifying of the Creature: how should our hearts be enflamed with a holy desire, and all our powers quickened vp to a faithfull endeauour, conscionably to performe this so necessary a du∣ty? One would thinke that very necessity, together with the consciousnesse of our former vnthankefulnesse, should in all reason be enough to worke in vs that both desire and en∣deauour. In all reason, it should so: but wee are vnreaso∣nable; and much a doe there is to perswade vs to any thing that is good, euen when we are perswaded. Wherefore to enforce the exhortation more effectually, I must haue leaue to presse the performance of this duty vpon your Consci∣ences, with some farther Inducements, and important Con∣siderations. Consider first, the Excellency of the Duty.§. 53. viz. 1. The excellency of the Dutie. There are but three heads, whereto we referre all that is called good: Iucundum, Vtile, Honestum, Pleasure, Profit, and Honesty. There is nothing desireable or louely, but in one or other of these three respects. Each of these singly we account good but that excellently good, wherein they all concurre. We loue things that will giue vs delight; sometimes when their is neither profit, nor credit in them: we loue things that will bring vs profit; though possibly neither delightful greatly, nor seemely: and we loue things that wee thinke will doe vs honesty, often times without regard either of
pleasure or profit. How should we then be affected to this duty of giuing thankes, and singing praises vnto our God; wherein all these doe joyntly concurre, and that also in an excellent measure. Dauid hath wrapped them all together in one verse, in the beginning of Psal. 147. Psal. 147.1. Praise yee the Lord, for it is good; yea it is a pleasant thing, and praise is comely. It is good, it will bring you profit; it is pleasant, it will affoord you delight; and it is comely, it will do you honestie: and what can heart wish more? Againe, many good vertues and graces of God in vs, shall expire together with vs: which though they be eternall in their fruit and reward, yet are not so as to their proper actes; which after this life shall cease, because their shall be neither neede nor vse of them then. 1. Cor. 13.8. Whether there be Prophesies, they shall faile; or whether there be tongues, they shall cease: or whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. There shall bee no vse of taming the flesh by Fasting, or of supplying the want either of others by Almes, or of our selues by Prayer, Nay euen Faith and Hope themselues shall haue an end: for wee shall not then need to belieue, when we shall see: nor to expect, when we shall enioy. But giuing of thankes, and praise, and honour, and glory vnto God, shall remaine in the kingdome of heauen and of glory. It is now the conti∣nuall blessed Reuel. 4.8.11 & 7.11, 12. exercise of the glorious Angels and Saints in heauen: and it shall be ours, when we shall be translated thither. O that we would learne often to practice heere, what we hope shall be our eternall exercise there! O that we would accustome our selues, being Epes. 5.18.20 filled in the spirit to speake to our selues in Psalmes and himnes and spirituall songes, singing and making melody in our hearts to the Lord: giuing thankes alwayes for all thinges vnto God and the Fa∣ther, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ: as speaketh our Apostle, Ephes. 5. Consider secondly, the multitude and varietie and conti∣nuance of Gods blessings:§. 54.2. The conti∣nuance of Gods bles∣sings. and let that prouoke thy thank∣fulnes. If thou hadst receiued but one or a few benefits: yet thankes were due euen for those few, or for that one,
more then thou art able to returne. But what canst thou alledge, or how excuse thy vnthankefulnesse: when his mercies are renewed euery morning, nay euery Omni momen∣to me tibi obli∣gas, dum omni momento mihi tua magna be∣neficia praestas. August, Solil. cap. 18. Tot nu∣mera, quae sine intermission di∣ebus de noctibus (Dij) fundunt. Senec. 4. de be∣nef. 3. moment, when he is euer Psal. 145.16. opening his hand, and powring out his blessings, and Psal. 68.29. loading and euen ouerwhelming thee with his benefits: as if he did vye with thee, and would haue thee see, how easily he can overcome thy evill with his goodnesse, and infinitely out-strip thine infinite ingratitude with his more infinite munificence! His Angels are a∣bout thee, though thou knowest it not: from a thou∣sand vnknowne dangers hee deliuereth thee, which thou suspectedst not: hee still continueth his goodnesse vnto thee, and repriueth thy destruction, though thou deser∣uedst it not. What should I say more, thy very life and being thou owest to him Act. 17.28. in whom wee all liue and moue, and haue our beeing: thence resolue with holy Dauid, to sing vnto the Lord, Psal: 104.33 as long as thou liuest; and to sing praise vnto thy God, whilest thou hast thy beeing. Many and continuall receipts, should prouoke many and conti∣nuall thankes. Consider thirdly, thy future necessities.§. 55.3. Our fu∣ture Neces∣sities. If thou wert sure of that thou hast, that thou and it should continue toge∣ther for euer, and neuer part; and that thou couldest make prety shift to liue vpon the olde stocke hereafter, and neuer stand need to him for more: there might bee so much lesse neede to take care for giuing thankes for what is past. But it is not so with any of vs: of what wee haue, we are but tenants at courtesie, and we stand continually vpon our good behauiour, whether wee shall hold of him any longer, or no: and much of our fu∣ture hapinesse standeth vpon our present thankefulnesse. And with what face can wee craue to haue more, (and yet more wee must haue, or we cannot subsist,) if we bee not thankfull for what wee haue? Bern. Serm. 77 Peremptoria res est ingratitudo, saith Saint Barnard, it cutteth it of all kindnesse. August. So∣liloq. e. 18. Ventus vreus & exiccans: like that Exod. 14.21. strong East-winde which in a night dryed vp the Red sea; it
holdeth of the streames of Gods bounty from flowing,Gratiarum ces∣sat decursus, v∣bi recursus non futri Bern. serm. 0. and dryeth vp those channels whereby his mercies were wont to be conueyed vnto vs. Certainly this is one espe∣ciall cause, why God so often sayeth vs Nay, and sendeth vs away empty when we aske; euen because we are so little thankefull to him for former receipts. The Ecel 1.7. sua reddentur ori∣gine fluentae gva∣tiae, vt vberius luant. Bern. serm. 89. Ri∣vers returne all their waters to the Sea, from whence they had them: and they gaine this by the returne, that the sea feedeth them againe, and so by a continuall fresh supply preserueth them in perpetuall being and motion. If they should Alloquin, nisi ad fontem rede∣ant, exictantur. Bern. ibid. withhold that tribute, the Sea would not long suffice them nourishment. So wee by giuing, receiue; and by true paying the old debt, get credit to runne vpon a new score, and provoke future blessings, by our thank∣fulnesse for former: as the Earth by sending vp vapours backe to Heauen from the dew shee hath receiued thence, filleth the bottles of heauen with new moysture, to bee powred downe vpon her againe in due season in kindly and plentifull showers. By our Prayers and Thankesgiuings wee erect a Ladder, like that which Gen. 28.12: Ia∣cob saw, whereon the Angels ascended and descended; wee preserue a mutuall entercourse betwixt heauen and earth; and wee maintaine a kinde of continuall trading as it were betwixt God and vs. The Commodities are brought vs in, they are Gods blessings: for these wee traffique by our Prayers and Thankesgiuings. Let vs therefore deale squarely, as wise and honest marchants should doe. Let vs keepe touch, and pay: it is as much as our credit is worth. Let vs not thinke to haue Com∣modities still brought vs in, and wee send none out, Horat. 1. E∣pist. 1. Omnia te adversum spectantia this dealing cannot hold long. Rather let vs thinke, that the quicker and speedier and more returnes we make, our gaines will be the grea∣ter: and that , Chrys. in Gen▪ Hom. 26 . Ibid. Hom. 25. the oftner wee pray and praise God for his blessings, the more we secure vnto our selues both the continuance and the increase of them.
Consider fourthly thy misery,§. 56.4. Our mise∣ry in wan∣ting. if thou shouldest want those things, which God hath giuen thee. . Tum deni{que} homines nostra intelligi∣mus bona, Quū, quae in potestate habuimus, ca¦misimus. Plau. in Captiu. 1.2. Carendo magis quàm fruendo. Fooles will not know that true worth of things but by wanting, which wisermen had rather learne by ha∣uing them. Yet this is the common folly of vs all: Wee will not prise Gods blessings as we should, till he for our vnthankfulnesse take them from vs, and teach vs to value them better before we haue them againe. We repine at Gods great blessings; we grudge at his gentle corrections; judging these to heauy, those too light: We thinke our ve∣ry peace a burden, and complaine of plenty as some would doe of scarcity; and vnderualue the blessed liberty we haue of treading in his Courts, and partaking his holy Ordi∣nances; and all this, because by his great goodness wee haue so long injoyed them: and this is our guise in euery other thing proportionably. Did we but feele a while the miseries of our neighbour Countries, who want the bles∣sings which we thus slight; or could wee but fore-thinke what our misery should be, if we (as they) had our throates euer before the sword, or were wasted with extreame fa∣mines and pestilences, or liued eyther in thicke darkenesse, without the Gospell, or vnder cruell persecution for it. Did we thus; though our hearts were as hard and cold as stones, it could not be but those thoughts would soften them, and enflame them to magnifie and blesse the holy name of God for our long and present peace, for that measure of plenty what euer it be which we yet haue, and for the still conti∣nued liberty of his glorious Gospell and sincere worship a∣mong vs. God grant, that from our wretched vnthanke∣fulnesse, he take not just occation, by taking these great blessings from vs to teach vs at once both how to vse them better and how to value thm better. Consider fifthly, the Importunity with God,§. 57.5. Our im∣portunity in asking. when thou wantest anything; and according to that, proportion thy thankes, when thou hast it. I remember what Bernard writeth of the Popes seruants and Courtiers in his time: Ben lib 4 le Consid. ad Eugē. Importuni vt accipiant, inquieti donec acceprint, vbi
acce∣ceperint ingrati, When Suiters come to the Popes Court with their businesses, the Courtiers and Officers lye in the wind for them, greedily offering their seruice, and neuer quiet with them till they haue got something: but by that they haue got the money, they haue forgot the man, and hauing first serued their owne turne, they then leaue the businesse to goe which way it will. Not much vnlike is our dealing with God. When we Multos vide∣mus vsque be∣die satis impor∣tune petentes, quod sibi de esse cognoueint; sed pausos ad∣modum nous∣mus qui digas super acceptis beneficijs grati∣as agere vide∣antur. Bernard. serm. de diuer∣sis. 27. would haue some∣thing, some outward blessing conferred, or some outward ca∣lamity removed, (for these thanklesse deuotions seldome looke farther, then after these outward things;) we are as S. Chrysostome speaketh Chrysost. in Psal. 137. , very eager and earnest with God, wee must haue no Nay, we wrastle with him and that stoutly, as if we would out wrestle Gen. 32.25, 26. Iacob for a Blessing, and we will not let him goe till we haue obtained it. But , saith Chrysostome there, when our turne is serued, and we haue what we would haue; by and by, all our deuotion is at an end, we neuer thinke of thankes. All the tenne Lepers begged hard of Christ for a cleansing: the Text saith, Luk. 17.13.17. They lift vp their voyces; they were all lowd enough, whilest they were suitors. Sed vbi nouem? there returned not to giue God thankes for their cleansing, of the whole tenne any more then barely one single man. It is our case just. When we want any of the good Creatures of God for our necessities, wee Psal. 81.10. open our mouthes wide, till hee Psal. 145.16. open his hand, and fill them with plentiousnesse: but after, as if the filling of our mouthes were the stopping of our throats, so are wee speechlesse and heartlesse. Shame we to bee so clamorous, when we craue from him; and so dumbe, when we should giue him thankes. §. 58.6. The free∣dome of the guift.Consider lastly, how freely God hath giuen thee, what hee hath giuen thee. Bern. in Psal. Qui habitat. Serm. 14. Dupliciter gratis, saith Bernard: Sine merito; sine labore. Freely both wayes: freely, with∣out thy desert, and freely, without so much as thy paines. Freely first, without thy desert. Iacob, a man as well de∣seruing as thou, yet confest himsele Gen. 32.10. not worthy of the least of all Gods mercies. And St. Paul cutteth off all chal∣lenge
of desert, by that interrogatory, Rom. 11.35. Who hath first gi∣uen him, and it shall be recompenced him? as who should say, No man can challenge God; as if he owed him ought. If hee haue made himselfe a debtor to vs by his Promise, (and indeed he hath so made himselfe a debtor to vs;) yet that is still gratis, and for nothing: because the promise it selfe was free, without eyther Nulla Deo dandi beneficij causa est. Sen. 4 de benef. 3. Ego robur Spontane∣as esse numinū benignitates, vltro{que} ab his fluere inexpecta∣ta beneuolentiae munera. Arnob contr. Gent. lib. Deus nulli debet ali∣quid: quia om∣nia gratuito prastat. Et si quisquam dicet, ab illo aliquid debere meritia suis; certe vt esset, non ei debe∣batur: non enim erat, cui debere∣tur. August. 3. de lib. arb. 16. debt in him, or desert in vs. Nay more, God hath bin good to vs, not onely when wee had not deserued it; but (which still more magnifieth his boun∣ty, and bindeth vs the stronger to be thankfull) when we had deserued the quite contrary. And how is it possible we should forget such his vnspeakable kindnesse, in giuing vs much good when we had done none, nay in giuing vs much good, when we had done much ill? And as he gaue it sine merito; so sine labore too: the Creature being freely bestowed on vs, as on the one side not by way of reward for any desert of ours; so neither on the other side by way of wages for any labour of ours. To shew that God giueth not his Blessings for our labour meerely: hee sometimes giueth them not, where they are laboured for; and againe he giueth them somtimes, where they are not laboured for. If in the ordinary dispensation of his Prouidence, hee be∣stow them vpon them that labour, as Salomon saith, Prou. 12.24; & 13.4. The diligent hand maketh rich; and seldome otherwise, for 2 Thes. 3.10 he that will not labor, it is fit he should not eate: yet that labor is to be accounted but as the meanes, not as a sufficient cause thereof. And if wee digge to the roote, we shall still finde it was gratis: for euen that power to labour was the guift of God; Deut. 8.18. It is God that giueth thee power to get wealth. Yea in this sence, See before, Serm 3. ad Cler. §. 18. Nature it selfe is Grace; because gi∣uen gratis and freely, without any labour, preparation, disposition, desert, or any thing at all in vs. All these considerations; the Excellencie of the Dutie,§. 59. The third In∣ference; for Direction: by remouing the impedi∣ments of Thankeful∣nesse. the continuance of Gods blesings, our future Necessity, our Misery in wanting, our Importunity in Crauing, his free liberality in bestowing, should quicken vs to a more con∣scionable performance of this so necessarie, so just, so reli∣gious
a Duty. And thus hauing seene our vnthankfulnesse discouered in sixe points, and heard many Considerations to prouoke vs to thankefulnesse: it may be we haue seene e∣nough in that to make vs hate the fault, and we would faine amend it; and it may be we haue heard enough in this, to make vs affect the duty, and we would faine practise it, may some say, but we are yet to learne how. The duty be∣ing hard, and our backwardnes great; what good course might be taken, effectually to reforme this our so great backwardnes, and to performe that so hard a duty? And so you see, my second Inference, for exhortation; breedeth a third, and that is for direction: which for satisfaction of those men that pretend willingnes, but plead ignorance, I should also prosecute, if I had so much time to spare. Wher∣in should be discouered, what the principall Causes of our so great Vnthankefulnesse; which taken away, the effect will instantly and of it selfe cease. Now those Causes are especially, as I conceiue, these fiue. viz. 1. Pride, and Selfe-loue; 2. Enuy, and Discontentment; 3. Riotousnesse, and E∣picurisme; 4. Worldly Carefulnesse, and immoderate de∣sires; Carnall Securitie, and foreslowing the time. Now then, besides the application of that which hath alreadie beene spoken in the former Discoueries and Motiues; (for euery Discouery of a fault, doth virtually containe some meanes for the correcting of it, and euery true Motiue to a duty, doth virtually containe some helpes vnto the prac∣tise of it:) besides these I say, I know not how to prescribe any better remedies against vnthankefulnes, or helpes vnto thankefulnes; then faitlly to striue for the casting out of those sinnes, and the subduing of those Corruptions in vs, which cause the one, and hinder the other. But because the time, and my strength are neere spent: I am content to ease both my selfe and you by cutting of so much of my prouision, as concerneth this Inference for Direction; and desire you that it may suffice for the present, but thus to haue pointed at these Impediments, and once more to name them. They are Pride, Envy, Epicurisme, Carefulnesse, Se∣curitie.
I place Pride,§. 60. viz. 1. Pride. where it would be; the formost, because it is of all other Maxime facit ingratos nimtus sui suspectus. & insitum mortali∣tati vitium se sua{que} mirandi. Senec. 2. de be∣nef. 26. the principall impediment of Thanke∣fulnes. Certainely there is no one thing in the world, so much as Pride, that maketh men vnthankefull. Hee that would be truely thankfull, must haue his eyes vpon both; the one eye vpon the Guift, and the other vpon the Giuer: and this the proud man neuer hath. Either through Cacus amor sui. Horat. 1. Carm. od. 18. selfe-loue he is starkeblind, and seeth neither: or else through Partiality, he winketh on the one eye, and will not looke at both. Sometimes he seeth the Guift but too much, and boasteth of it: but then he forgetteth the Gi∣uer; he 1. Cor. 4.7. boasteth, as if hee had not receiued it. Some∣times again he ouerlooketh the Guift, as not good enough for him; and so repineth at the Giuer, as if hee had not giuen him according to his worth. Either he vnderualu∣eth the Guift, or else he overualueth himselfe; as if he were himselfe the giuer, or at least the deseruer: and is in both vnthankefull. To remoue this Impediment, who euer de∣sireth to be thankfull, let him humble himselfe, nay emptie himselfe, nay deny himselfe, and all his owne deserts; confesse himselfe with Iacob Gen. 32.10. lesse then the least of Gods mercies; and condemne his owne heart of much sinfull Sacrilegus in∣vasor gloria tua Bern. in Cant. serm. 13. sacriledge, if it dare but thinke the least thought ten∣ding to rob God of the least part of his honour. Enuy followeth Pride;§. 61.2. Enuie; the Superbia pri∣ma soboles ina∣ni gloria-mox in ridiā ginet. Greg. 31. Mor. 31. Daughter the Mother: a second Non potest quisquā & in∣videre, & gra∣tias agere. Sen. 3. de benef. 3. great Impediment of thankfulnesse. The fault is; that men not content only to looke vpō their owne things and the present; but Vehemens, & importunū malum Invidia; quae nos inquitat, dum comparat. Hoc mihi prastitit: sed illi plus; sed illi maturius. Senec. 2. de benef. 28. comparing these with the things of other men, or times: instead of giuing thankes for what they haue, Illis non tam iucundum est, multos post se videre; quamgraue, aliquem ante se. Senec. Epist. 73. repine that others haue more or bet∣ter; or for what they now haue, complaine that it is not with them as it hath beene. These thoughts are Ene∣mies to the tranquilitie of the mind; breeding many dis∣contents, and much vnthankefulnesse: whilest our Math. 20.15. eyes
are euill, because God is good to others, or hath beene so to vs. To remoue this Impediment; who euer desireth to be truely thankfull, let him looke vpon . Plutarch. de tranquil. anim. Nulli ad aliena respicienti, sua placents. Senec. 3. de Ira. 30. his owne things, and not on the things of other men: and therein consider, not so much what he wanteth, and faine would haue, as what he hath, and could not well want. Let him thinke, that what God hath giuen him, came from his free bounty, he owed it not; and what he hath denyed him, he withhol∣deth it either in his Iustice for his former sinnes, or in his Mercy for his farther good: that God giueth to no man, all the desire of his heart in these outward things, to teach him not to looke for absolute cōtentment in this life, least of all, in these things. If he will needs looke vpon other mens things; let him compare himselfe rather Quod{que} aliena capella gerat di∣stantius vber, Tabescat, neque se maiori pau∣periorum Turbae compares? Ho∣rat. 1. Serm. Satyr. 1. . Plutarch. vbi Supra. with them that haue lesse, then those that haue more: and there∣in withall consider, not so much what Nec a intui∣mur, quae nos a∣lys praposuere, sed ea Sola quae fortuna praese∣dentū ostentat. Sen. 3. de bē. 3. himselfe wan∣teth which some others haue, as what he hath which ma∣ny others want. If a few, that enioy Gods blessings in these outward things in a greater measure then he, be an eye-soare to him: let those many others, that haue a scan∣ter portion, make him acknowledge that God hath dealt liberally and bountifully with him. We should doe well to vnderstand that saying of Christ, not barely as a Predi∣ction, but as a kind of Promise too, (as I haue partly in∣timated See §. 49. before,) The poore you shall alwayes haue with you: and to thinke that euery Beggar that seeketh to vs, is sent of God, to be as well a Glasse wherein to represent Gods bounty to vs, as an Obiect whereon for vs to ex∣ercise ours. And as for former times: Let vs not so much thinke how much better we haue bin, as how well we are; that we are not so well now, impute it to our for∣mer vnthankfulnesse; and feare, vnlesse wee be more thankfull for what we haue, it will be yet and euery day worse and worse with vs. Councell is very needfull for vs in these declining times: which are not (God know∣eth, and we all know,) as the times we haue seene: the leprous humour of Popery secretly stealing in vpon vs,Math. 26, 11.
and as a leprosie spreading a pace vnder the skinne; and penury and pouertie, as an vlcerous sore, openly breaking out in the very face of the Land. Should we murmure at this; or repiningly complaine that it is not with vs, as it hath bin? God forbid: that is the way, to haue it yet, and yet worse. Rather let vs humble our selues for our former vnthankefulnesse, whereby wee haue prouo∣ked God to withdraw himselfe in some measure from vs: and blesse him for his great mercy, who yet continu∣eth his goodnesse in a comfortable and gracious measure vnto vs, notwithstanding our so great vnworthines and vnthankefulnesse. Thousands of our brethren in the world, as good as our selues: how glad would they be, how thankefull to God, how would they reioyce and sing, if they enioyed but a small part of that peace and prosperitie in outward things, and of that liberty of trea∣ding in Gods Courts, and partaking of his ordinances; which we make so little account of, because it is not e∣uery way as we haue knowne it heretofore. The third Impediment of Thankfulnesse, is Ryot,§. 62.3. Ryot; and Epicurisme: that which the Prophet reckoneth in the Catalogue of Sodoms sinnes, Ezec. 16.49. Fulnesse of bread, and a∣bundance of Idlenesse. This is both a Cause and a Signe of much vnthankfulnesse. , and , Fulnesse and Forgetfulnesse; they are not more neere in the sound of the words, then they are in the sequel of the things: Deut. 8.10.11. When thou hast eaten, and art full, Then beware least thou forget the Lord thy God, Deut. 8. It much argueth, that wee make small account of the good Creatures of God, if we will not so much as take a little paines to get them: but much more, if lauishly and like prodigall fooles wee make wast & hauock of them. He that hath receiued some token from a deare friend, though perhaps of little value in it selfe, and of lesse vse to him; yet if hee retaine any gratefull memory of his frìend, hee will Quod non me movet astimati∣one: Verum est  mei solais. Catul. value it the more, and set greater store by it, and be the more care∣full to preserue it, for his friends sake: but if hee should
make it away causelesly, and the rather because it came so easily, as the Ding-thrifts prouerbe is, Lightly come, lightly goe;) euery man would interpret it as an eui∣dence of his vnfriendly and vnthankfull heart. But Ryot is not onely a Signe; it is also a Cause, of vnthankfulnes: in asmuch as it maketh vs vnderualue the good thinges of God, at too low a rate. For wee vsually value the worth of things, proportionably to their vse; judging them more or lesse good, according to the good they doe vs, be it more or lesse. And how then can the Pro∣digall or Riotous Epicure, that consumeth the good Crea∣tures of God in so short a space and to so little purpose; set a just price vpon them, seeing hee reapeth so little good from them? A pound, that would doe a Poore man that taketh paines for his liuing a great deale of good, maintaine him and his family for some weekes together, perhaps put him into fresh trading; set him vp on his legges, and make him a man for euer; what good doth it to a prodigall Gallant, that will set scores and hundreds of them flying at one afternoones sitting in a Gaming-house? Shall any man make me beleeue, hee valueth these good guifts of God as he should doe, and as euery truly thankfull Christian man would desire to doe; that in the podering and perfuming of an excre∣ment that neuer grew from his owne scalpe, in the fur∣nishing of a Table for the pompe and luxurie of a few houres, in making vp a rich Suite to case a rotten car∣kasse in, in the pursuite of any other lustfull vanity or delight, expendeth beyond the proportion of his reue∣nue or condition, and the exigence of just occasions? To remedy this: who euer would be truly thankfull, let him liue in some honest Vocaion, and therein bestow himselfe faithfully and painfully; binde himselfe to a So∣ber, discreet, and moderate vse of Gods Creatures; re∣member that Christ would not haue the very broken-meates lost; thinke that, if for euery word idly spoken, then by the same proportion for euery penny idly-spent,
wee shall be accomptable to God at the day of Iudge∣ment. Immoderate Care,§. 63.4. Worldly Carefulnes; and Sollicitude for outward things is another Non patitur aviditas quen∣quam esse gratū. Senec. 2. de be∣nef. 27. Nullum habet malum cupiditas maius, quam quod est ingrata. ld. E∣pist. 73. impediment of Thankfulnes. Vnder which title I comprehend Couetousnesse especially, but not one∣ly: Ambition also, and Voluptuousnesse, and euery other vice, that consisteth in a desire and expectation of some∣thing Nivis semper cupiditatibus occupati, non quid habeamus, sed quid peta∣mus, i spaimus. Quicquid domi est, vile est. Se∣quitur autem, vt vbi quid ac∣ceperis leve no∣uorum cupiditas fecerit, author quoque eorum non sit in preto. — ideo{que} cidu∣ca memoria est, fuituro immine∣tium. ld. 3. de benef. 3. for the future: which desire and expectation if inordinate, must needs in the end determine in vnthank∣fulnesse. For the very true reason, why we desire things inordinately, is; because wee promise to our selues more comfort and content from them, then they are able to giue vs: this being euer our Errour, when wee haue a∣ny thing in chase, to seuer the good which we hope from it from the inconueniencies that goe therewith, and loo∣king only vpon that neuer so much as to thinke of these. But hauing obtained the thing wee desired, we find the one as well as the other; and then the inconueniencies wee neuer thought of before, Nihil aeque a∣deptis, & concu∣p scentibus gra∣tum. Plin. abateth much of the waight and the price wee formerly set thereupon, and taketh of so much from the estimation wee had of the good: whereby it commeth to passe, that by how much wee ouer-valued it in the pursuite, by so much we vnder-value it in the possession. And so in stead of giuing Thankes to God for the good wee haue receiued; wee complaine of the inconueniences that adhere thereunto, and so much vnderprise it, as it falleth short of our expe∣ctation: and looke how farre wee doe vnderprise it, so farre are we vnthankfull for it. To remoue this Impe∣diment: who euer would bee thankfull, let him mode∣rate his desires after these outward things; fore-cast as well the inconueniencies that follow them, as the commo∣dities they bring with them; lay the one against the other, and prepare as well to disgest the one, as to enjoy the other. The last Impediment of Thankfulnesse is Carnall secu∣ritie, joyned euer with Delayes and Procrastinations.§. 64.5. Delay.
When we receiue any thing from God; wee know we should giue him thankes for it, and it may be we thinke of doing such a thing: but wee thinke withall another day will serue the turne, and so we put it of for the pre∣sent, and so forwards from time to time, till in the end we haue quite forgotten both his Benefite, and our owne Duty, and neuer performe any thing at all. My Text doth after a sort meete with this corruption: for heere the Apostle saith, the Creature should be receiued with Thankegiuing; as if the thankes should goe with the re∣ceipt, the Qui gratus futurus est, sta∣tum dum acce∣pit, de reddendo cogitat. Senec. 2. de benef. 25. receipt and the thankes both together. To remoue this Impediment: consider, how in euery thing delayes are hurtfull and dangerous; how our affections are best and hottest at the first, and doe in processe of time insensibly deaden, and at last dye, if we doe not take the opportunity, and strike (as wee say) whilest the jron is hot; how that, if pretensions of other businesses or oc∣casions may serue the turne to put off the tendering of our deuotions, and rendering of our thankes to God, the Diuell will bee sure to suggest now of these pretensions into our heads, and to prompt vs continually with such allegations, that wee shall neuer be at leasure to serue God, and to giue him thankes. §. 65. The fourth Inference; and the Con∣clusion of all.Let vs remember these fiue Impediments and beware of them; Pride, Enuy, Epicurisme, Worldly Carefulnesse. and Delay. All which are best remedyed by their con∣traries. Good helpes therefore vnto thankfulnesse are, 1. Humilitie, and Self-deniall; 2. Contentednesse, and Selfe-suffiency; 3. Painfulnesse, and Sobrietie; 4. The Moderation of our desires after earthly things; 5. Speed and Maturitie. And so much for this third Inference of Direction. I should also haue desired, if the time would haue permitted, although my Text speaketh of our Thankesgiuing vnto God precisely as it respecteth the Creature; yet to haue improued it a little farther by a fourth Inference: that if wee be thus bound to giue God thankes for these outward blessings, how much more ought
wee then to abound in all thankfulnesse vnto him for his manifold Ephes. 1.3. Spirituall blessings in heauenly things in Christ; for Grace and Election, for Mercy and Redemption, for Faith and Iustification, for Obedience and Sanctification, for Hope and Glorification. If wee ought to pray for, and to giue thankes for our Math. 6.11. daily bread, which nourisheth but our bodyes, and then is Math. 15.17 cast into the draught, and both it and our bodyes perish: how much more for that Ioh. 6.51. Bread of life which came downe from Heauen, and fee∣deth our Soules vnto eternall life, and neither they nor it can perish? If wee must say for that, Giue vs this day our daily bread: shall we not much more say for this, Ioh. 6.34. Lord euermore giue vs this bread. But I haue done. Beseech we now Almighty God, to guide vs all with such holy discre∣tion and wisedome, in the free vse of his good Creatures; that keeping our selues within the due bounds of Sobriety, Charity, and ciuill Duty, wee may in all things glorifie God: and aboue all things, and Ephes. 5.20. for all things giue thankes alwayes vnto God and the Father, in the name of our Lord IESVS CHRIST. To which our Lord Iesus Christ, the blessed Sonne of God, together with the Father, & the Holy Spirit, three Persons and one only wise, gracious, and euerliuing God, bee ascribed (as is most due) by vs and his whole Church, all the Kingdome, the Power, and the glory, both now and for euermore. Amen, Amen. Here endeth the first Sermon.
A SERMON PREACHED AT St. PAVLES Crosse, Aprill, 15. GEN. 20.6. And God said vnto him in a dreame; Yea, I know that thou diddest this in the integritie of thine heart: For I also with-held thee from sinning against mee; therefore suffered I thee not to touch her. FOr our more profitable vnderstan∣ding of which words,§. 1. The Occasi∣on, it is needfull we should haue in remembrance the whole storie of this present Chap∣ter; of which storie these words are a part. And thus it was. A∣braham commeth with Sarah his wife and their family, as a Stranger, to sojourne among the Philistims in Gerar: couenanteth with her before-hand, thinking thereby to prouide for his owne safetie, because she was beautifull, that they should not bee to know that they were any more then Brother and Sister. Abimilech King of the place heareth of their comming, and of her beauty; sendeth for them both; en∣quireth whence and who they were; heareth no more from them, but that shee was his Sister; dismisseth him; taketh her into his house. Hereupon God plagueth him and his house with a strange Visitation; threatneth him also
with Death; giueth him to vnderstand, that all this was for taking another mans wife. Hee answereth for him∣selfe: God replyeth. The Answere is in the two next for∣mer Verses: the Reply in this, and the next following verse. §. 2. Scope,His answere is by way of Apologie: hee pleadeth first his Ignorance; and then, and thence, his Innocence. Vers. 4, 5. [And hee said; Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous Nation? Said not hee vnto me, shee is my Sister! and shee, euen shee her selfe said, He is my Brother: in the integrity of my eart, and innocency of my hands, haue I done this.] That is his Plea. Now God replyeth: of which reply, letting pafse the remainder in the next verse, which concerneth the time to come, so much of it as is contained in this verse, hath reference to what was already done and past, and it mee∣teth right with Abimelechs answere. Something he had done; and something he had not done: he had indeed Vers. 2. taken Sarah into his house, but he had Vers. 4. not yet come neere her. For that which he had done, in taking her; he thought he had a just excuse, and he pleadeth it: hee did not know her to bee another mans wife; and therefore, as to any intent of doing wrong to the husband, he was altogether inno∣cent. But for that which he had not done, in not touching her; because hee tooke her into his house with an vnchast purpose: hee passeth that ouer in silence, and not so much as mentioneth it. So that his Answere, so farre as it rea∣ched, was just: but, because it reached not home, it was not full. And now Almightie God fitteth it with a Re∣ply, most conuenient for such an Answere: admitting his Plea, so farre as hee alledged it, for what he had done, in ta∣king Abrahams wife, hauing done it simply out of igno∣rance, Yea I know that thou diddest this in the integrity of thy heart:] and withall supplying that which Abimilech had omitted, for what hee had not done, in not touching her; by assigning the true cause thereof, viz. his power∣full restraint, [For I also with-held thee from sinning against me, therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.]
In the whole verse we may obserue,§. 3. and Divisi∣on of the Text. First the manner of the Reuelation; namely, by what meanes it pleased God to conueigh to Abimelech the knowledge of so much of his will, as he thought good to acquaint him withall: it was euen the same, whereby he had giuen him the first informa∣tion at vers. 3. it was by dreame [And God said vnto him in a dreame] and then after the substance of the Reply; wher∣of againe the generall parts are two. The former, an Admission of Abimelechs Plea, or an Acknowledgement of the integrity of his heart, so farre as he alledged it, in that which hee had done, [yea I know that thou diddest it in the integrity of thine heart.] The later; an Instruction or Aduertisement to Abimelech, to take knowledge of Gods goodnesse vnto, and prouidence ouer him, in that which he had not done: it was God that with-held him from doing it, [For I also with-held thee from sinning a∣gainst me, therefore suffered I thee not to touch her. By occasion of those first words of the Text, [And God said vnto him in a dreame;§. 4. The Nature and vse of Dreames, &c.] if we should enter into some enquiries, concerning the nature and vse of diuine Reuela∣tions in generall, and in particular of Dreames: the dis∣course as it would not be wholly impertinent, so neither altogether vnprofitable. Concerning all which these seue∣rall Conclusions might be easily made good. First; that God  reuealed himselfe and his will frequently in old times, es∣pecially before the sealing of the Scripture Canon . Heb. 1.1. in sun∣dry manners: as by Visions, Prophesies, Extasies, Ora∣cles, and other supernaturall meanes; and namely, and among the rest, by Numb. 12.6. Ioel 2.28. Iob. 33.14.16. . Homer. Iliad. , Dreames; Secondly, that God imparted his will by such kinde of supernatural Revelations, not on∣ly to the Godly & Faithfull, (though to them most frequent∣ly, and especially:) but sometimes also to Hypocrites within the Church, as to 1. Sam. 10.10 Saul and others; yea and sometimes euen to infidels too out of the Church, as to Gen. 41.25.28.28 45. Pharao, Numb. 24 2.4. &c. Balaam, Dan. 2.28.4 Nebuchadnezzar, &c. and here to Abimelech. Thirdly; that since the writings of the Prophets and Apostles were made vp, the Scripture-Canon sealed, and the Christian Church by the Preaching of the
Gospell become Oecumenicall; Dreames, and other su∣pernaturall Reuelations, as also other things of like nature, as Miracles, and whatsoeuer more immediate and extra∣ordinary manifestations of the will and power of God, haue ceased to be of ordinarie and familiar vse: so as now, we ought rather to suspect delusion in them, then to expect  direction from them. Fourthly; that although God haue now Esa. 8.20. tyed vs to his holy written word, as vnto a perpe∣tuall infallible Rule, beyond which we may not expect, and against which we may not admit, any other direction, as from God: yet he hath no where abridged himselfe of the power and libertie, euen still to intimate vnto the sonnes of men the knowledge of his will, and the glory of his might, by Dreames, Miracles, or other like supernatu∣rall manifestations; if at any time, either in the want of the ordinary meanes of the word, Sacraments, and Mini∣stery, or for the present necessities of his Church, or of some part thereof, or for some other just cause perhaps vnknown to vs, he shall see it expedient so to doe. He hath prescri∣bed  vs: but he hath not limited himselfe. Fifthly; that be∣cause the Diuell and wicked spirits may suggest dreames, probably foretell future euents foreseens in their causes, and worke many strange effects in nature applicando actiua passiuis; which because they are without the sphere of our comprehension, may to our seeming haue faire appearan∣ces of Diuine Reuelations or Miracles, when they are nothing lesse: for the auoiding of strong delusions in this kinde, it is not safe for vs to giue easie credit to Dreames, Prohesies, or Miracles, as diuine; vntill vpon due tryall there shall appeare, both in the end where∣to they point vs, a direct tendance to the advancement of Gods glory; and in the Meanes also they propose vs, a See Deut. 13.2. &c. conformity vnto the reueyled will of God in his written word. Sixthly; that so to obserue our ordinary dreames, as thereby to Contra Onire triticos, See A∣quin. 2.2. qu. 956. Ioh. Sa∣tisb. 2. Polyer. 17. Petr. Bles. Epist. 65. diuine or foretell of future contingents, or to forecast therefrom good or ill-lucke (as we call it) in the successe of our affaires: is a silly and groundlesse, but with∣all an vnwarranted, and therefore an vnlawfull, and there∣fore
also a damnable, superstition. Seuenthly; that there is  yet to be made a lawfull, yea and a very profitable vse, e∣ven of our ordinary dreames, and of the obseruing there∣of: and that both in Physicke and Diuinity. Not at all by foretelling particulers of things to come: but by taking from them, among other things, some reasonable conie∣ctures in the generall, of the present estate both of our Bo∣dies and Soules. Of our Bodyes first. For since the pre∣dominancy of Secundum mo∣rum & humo∣rum varietates, variantur & semnia. Alij nam{que} vident sanguinei, alia cholorici, alia flegmatici, alia melancholici. Auctor de spic. & anim. cap. 25. apud Au∣gustin. Tom. 3. Choler, Blood, Flegme, and Melancholy; as also the differences of strength, and health, and Iuntae etiam in∣firmitaetum di∣versitates, di∣versa accidunt somnia Ibid. dis∣ases, and distempers, either by dyet or passion or otherwise, doe cause impressions of different formes in the fancy: our . Arist. cap. 1. de divinat. ex in∣som. ordinary Dreames may be a good helpe, to leade vs in∣to those discoueries, both in time of health, what our na∣turall constitution, complexion, and temperature is; and in times of sicknes, from the rankenesse and tyranny of which of the humours the malady springeth. And as of our Bo∣dies; so of our Soules too. For since our Dreames for the most part A dreame cōmeth through the multitude of businesse. Eccles. 5.2. Res, que in vita vsurpant homines, cogitant, curant, vident, Quaeque a∣gunt vigilantes, agitant que, ea fi cui in somnis accidant; Mnus mirum est. Attius Quaecun{que} meutis agitat infestus vigor, Ea per quietem sacer & anus refert Velox{que} sensus. Senec. in Octau. Act. 4. See Delr. ibid. looke the same way, which our freest thoughts encline; as the Voluptuous Beast dreameth most of pleasures, the Couetous wretch most of profits, & the proud or ambiti∣ous most of prayses, preferments, or reuenge: the obseruing of our ordinary Dreames may be of good vse fo vs vnto that discouery, which of these three is our Master sinne (for vnto one of the three euery other sinne is reduced,) 1. Ioh. 2.16. The Lust of the flesh, the Lust of the eyes, or the Pride of Life. But concerning Reuelations and Dreames▪§. 5. The first Part of Gods Reply. it shall suffice to haue onely proposed these few Conclusions without far∣ther enlargement: the manner of Gods reueiling his will here to Abimelech by Dreame, being but an incidentall circumstance vpon the bye, and not belonging to the maine of the present story. We will therefore without more a doe proceed to the substance of Gods reply, in the rest of
the verse: and therein begin with the former generall pat which is Gods admission of Abimelechs Plea and Apo∣logy for himselfe. The ground of whose Plea was Igno∣rance, and the thing he pleaded his owne Innocencie, and the integritie of his heart: and God who is the searcher of all hearts, alloweth the allegation, and acknowledgeth that integritie, [Yea I know that thou diddest this in the integritie of thy heart. §. 6. The Expli∣cation of the words.The . Originall word here translated Integrity, is ren∣dred by some Targ. Chald. Truth, by others . Septuag. Purity, and by others Simplici corde. Vulgar. Simplicity: and it will beare them all, as signifying properly In the perfe∣ction of thy heart. H. A. Perfection or Innocency. You would thinke by that word, that Abimelech had in this whole businesse walked in the sight of God with a pure, and vpright, and true, and single, and perfect heart. But alas, hee was farre from that. God Vers. 17.18. plagued him and his, for that hee had done: and God doth not vse to punish the carkasse for that, wherein the heart is single. Againe, God with-held him, or else hee would haue done more and worse: and it is a poore perfection of heart, where the actiue power onely is restrayned, and not the inward corruption subdued. Be∣sides, Sarah was taken into the house, and there kept for lend purposes: and how can truth and puritie of heart con∣sist with a continued resolution of sinfull vncleannesse? A∣bimelech then cannot be defended, as truly and absolutely innocent: though hee plead Innocency, and God himselfe beare witnesse to the Integrity of his heart: For had his heart bin vpright in him and sincere, in this very matter of Sarah, hee would neuer haue taken her into his house at all, as he did. But that hee pleadeth for himselfe is; that in this particuler, wherewith it seemed to him God by so threatning him did charge him, in wronging Abra∣ham by taking his wife from him, his Conscience could witnesse the Innocency of his heart, how free he was from any the least iniurious purpose, or so much as thought, that way. It was told him by them both, that shee was his Sister; and hee knew no other by her then so, when hee
tooke her into his house, supposing her to bee a single wo∣man: if hee had knowne shee had beene any mans wife, hee would not for any good haue done the man so foule an iniury, nor haue sinned against his owne soule, by defiling anothers bed: In the integritie of his heart, and innocency of his hands he did, what hee had done. This is the substance of his allegation: and God approueth the integrity of his heart so farre; viz. as free in this particular from any in∣tent, eyther to iniure Abraham, or to sinne against the light of his owne Conscience, by committing adultery with an∣thers wife. The meaning of the words thus cleared: wee may ob∣serue in them three things. First,§. 7. Obseruat. I. The grieuous¦nes of the sinne of A∣dulterie. the fact for which Abi∣milech pleadeth; and that was, the taking of Sarah, who was anothers wife, into his house. Secondly, the ground of his plea; and that was his Ignorance: hee knew not when he tooke her, that shee was anothers wife. Thirdly, the thing he pleadeth vpon that ground; and that was his In∣nocency and the integrity of his heart. Each of these three will affoord vs some obseruable instruction for our vse. And the first thing wee will insist vpon from these words shall bee, The grieuousnesse of the sinne of Adultery; hate∣full euen in the judgement of those men, who made small or no conscience at all of Fornication. See how this is rai∣sed from the Text, Abimelechs heart neuer smote him for taking Sarah into his house, so long as he supposed her to bee but a single woman: led with the common blindnesse and custome of the Gentiles, hee eyther knew not, or consi∣dered not, that such fornication (though in a King) was a Sinne. But the very frame of his Apologie sheweth, that if he had knowne her to be another mans wife▪ and yet had taken her, hee could not then haue pretended the integrity of his heart, and the innocency of his hands, as now hee doth, and God alloweth it: but hee should haue beene , his own heart would haue condemned him for it, and he should therein haue sinned grosly against the light of his owne Conscience.
§. 8. Fornication a deadly sinne;It cannot be doubtfull to vs, who by the good blessing of God vpon vs, haue his holy word to bee Psal. 119.105 a light vnto our feete, and a laut horne vnto our paths, from the evidence whereof we may receiue more perfect and certaine infor∣mation, then they could haue from the glimmering light of depraued Nature; I say, it cannot be doubtfull to vs, but that all fornication, how simple soeuer, is a sinne foule  and odious in the sight of God, nd deadly to the commit∣ter. As first being opposite directly to that 1. Thes. 4.3.4 holines and honour and sanctification, which God prescribeth in his wil. Secondly, causing vsually consumption of Prou. 5.10.6.26. Iob. 31.12. estate, rot∣tennesse of Prou 5.11. bones, and losse of Prou. 6.33. Prou. 7.22.23. good-name. Thirdly, Hos. 4.11. stealing away the heart of those that are once ensnared  therewith, and bewitching them euen vnto perdition, in such powerfull sort, that it is seldome seene, a man once brought vnder by this sinne, to recouer himselfe againe and to get the victory ouer it. Fourthly, putting ouer the guil∣ty  to the seuere Heb. 13.14. immediate judgement of God himselfe; who for this sinne lew of the Israelites in one day 1. Cor. 10.8. 23.  or Numb. 25.9. 24. thousand. And hauing Fifthly, one singular deformity aboue all other sinnes in all other kinds, that it is a direct sinne 1. Cor. 6.18. against a mans owne body; in depriuing it (by making it the instrument of filthines, and the 1. Cor. 6.15. mem∣ber of an harlot,) of that honour whereunto God had or∣dained it, to be a 1. Cor. 6.15. member of Christ, and 1. Cor. 6.19. the Temple of the holy Ghost. §. 9. yet excused by some:But yet of this foule sinne the Gentiles made no recko∣ning: So long as they abstained from Viri licitose errare credunt, si solo abstineant adulterio: me∣retricios autem vsus tanquam leginaturae suppetere putant. Ambros. 2 de Abrah. 11. Solo stupro atque adulteri condemnate, passim per lupanaria & ancillul as libido permittitur. Hieronym. Epist. 30. Vsum scortorum serrena civitas licitam turpitudium fecit. Augustin. 14. de Civit. 18. married persons it neuer troubled their consciences to defile themselues with those that were single by fornication, because they estee∣med it either as no sinne, or as one of the least. It was not onely the fond speech of an indulgent and doating old Father in the excuse of his licentious sonne in the Come∣dy, Mitio apud Terent. in Adelph. 1.2. Non est flagitium mihi crede adolescentulum scortari;
(and yet hee spake, but as the generality of them then thought:) but it was the setious plea also of the graue Romane Oratour, in the behalfe of his client,Cic pro Coelie. in o∣pen court, before the seuerity of the sage and Reuerend bench of Iudges, Quando hoc non factum est? quando re∣prehensum? quando non permissum? and Datur omniū con∣cessu, &c. 1. Thes. 4.5. Not in the lust of concupiscence, (saith S. Paul) as the Gentiles, which know not God. An Errour, so vniuersally spread, & so deepely rooted, in the mindes and in the liues of the Gentiles; who Eph. 418.19 hauing their vnderstanding darke∣ned through the ignorance that was in them, because of the blindnesse of their hearts, wrought such vncleannesse not onely without remorse, but even with greedinesse: that the Apostles had much a doe with those men, whom by the Preaching of the Gospell they had conuerted from Gentilisme to Christianitie, before they could reclaime them from an Errour so inueterate both in the judgement and practise: St. Paul therefore as it both became and concerned him being Rom. 11.13. Gal. 2.7. 1. Tim. 2.7. & 2. Tim. 1.11. the Apostle and Doctour of the Gentiles, often toucheth vpon this string in his As Rom. 1.29. & 13.13. 2. Cor. 12.31. Gal. 5.19. E∣phes. 4.19. & 5.3. &c. Col. 3.5. 1. Thes. 4.3. &c. Epi∣stles written vnto the Churches of the Gentiles. But no where doth he set himselfe more fully and directly, with much euidence of reason and strength of argument, against this Sinne and errour, then in the 1. Cor. 5.1.9-11 6.9-18.7.1. &c. 10.8. first Epistle he wrote to the Corinthians: because among them this sinne, was both it selfe mot rife in the practise, the Hinc  pro scortari. Hadr. lun. in Adag &  habet Aristoph. in Pluto Act. 1. Sc. 2. Quas u∣pra mille prosta∣re ad fanum Ve∣neris quod est in Corintho seri∣bit Strab. 8. Geograph. Atque hint na∣tam paraemiam. . Bourdin. in Comment. ad Aristopo. Thesmophor. Corinthians being notedly infamous for lust and wantonnes; and it was also as much - Libidnis, qua nusquam gentium regnabat impunitius, quam Corinthi. Erasm. paraphr. in 1. Cor. in Argum. sleighted there as any where, ma∣ny of them thinking that the l body was made or for∣nication, as the belly for meates, and that fornication was as fit and conuenient for the body, as meates for the bel∣ly. Out of which consideration, the Apostles in that first Generall Councell holden at Ierusalem Act. 15. thought it needfull by Ecclesiasticall Canon, among some other in∣different things for the Churches peace, to lay this re∣straint
vpon the converted Gentiles, that they should Act, 15.28.29. abstaine from Fornication. Not, as if Fornication were in it selfe an indifferent thing, as those other things were; nor, as if those other things were in themselues and sim∣ply vnlawfull as Fornication was: but the Apostles did therefore joyne Fornication, and those other indifferent things together in the same Canon; because the Gentiles accounted fornication a thing as indifferent, as what was most indifferent. Some remainders of the common er∣rour there were it seemeth among some Christians in St. Augustines dayes: who both Quod aliquan∣do qui commit∣tunt, nescio qua peruersitati con∣temnunt; & nescio vude sibi testimonia nul∣la & vana con∣quirunt dicētes, Peccata carnis Deus non curat. Augustin serm. 16. de verb. Dom. cap. 1. Ista pumind & nimium grauia mala, ideo a multis viris sie vi∣lo timore Domi∣ni committun∣tur, quia ita a pluribas. In consuitudinem missa sunt, & i∣ta viliae vel leuia duuntur vt nec iam inter grauia crimina puten∣tur. Serm. de Temp. 143. relateth the opinion and confuteth it. And some in the Popish Church haue not come farre behind herein: so many of them I meane as hold that Durand. 4. distinct. 33. qu. . & alij. simple fornication is not intrinsecally, and in the proper nature of it, a sinne against the law of Na∣ture, but onely made such, by diuine positiue Lawe. A strange thing it is, and to my seeming not lesse then a Mysterium i∣niquitatis. 2. Thes. 2 7. mystery, that those men that speake so harshly of Mar∣riage which God hath ordained, should withall speake so fauourably of fornication which God hath forbidden; preposterously preferring the disease which springeth from our corruption, before the 1. Cor. 7.2. remedy which God himselfe hath prescribed in his word. But howsoeuer, if some Christians haue spoken, and written, and thought so fauourably of fornication, as (to their shame) it ap∣peareth they haue done: the lesse may we maruell, to see Abimelech, a King and an Infidel, allow himselfe the li∣bertie to continue in the sinne of Vnderstand, that in this passage concerning Abime∣lech, I vse the word Fornication, as it doth include Concubinatum also. Fornication; and yet notwithstanding such allowance, stand so much vpon his owne innocency, and integrity as he doth. §. 10. but not A∣dultery by any.God forbid any man that heareth me this day, should be so either ignorant or vncharitable, as to conceiue all, or any of that I haue yet said, spoken to giue the least shadow of libertie or excuse, to Fornication or any vn∣cleannesse, which Saint Paul would not haue so much
as Eph. 5.3. named among the Saints; not named with allowance, not named with any extenuation, not named but with some detestation. But the very thing for which I haue spoken all this, is to shew, how inexcusable the Adulterer is: when euen those of the Gentiles, who (by reason of the Ephes. 4.18. dark∣nesse of their vnderstandings, and the want of Scripture-light.) could espy no obliquity in Fornication; could yet through all that darknesse see something in Adultery, de∣seruedly punishable (euen in their iudgements) with death. They could not so farre quench that  Basil. sparke of the light of nature which was in them, nor Rom. 1.18. hold backe the truth of God in vnrighteousnesse: as not by the glimpse thereof, to discerne a kind of reverend Majestie in Gods holy ordinance, of Wedlocke; which they knew might not be Heb 13.4. dishonoured, nor the bed defiled by Adultery, with∣out guilt. They saw Adultery was a mixt crime, and such as carryed with it the face of Iniustice, as well as vnclean∣nesse; nor could be committed by the two offending par∣ties, without wrong done to a third. And therefore if a∣nything might be said colourably to excuse Fornication, (as there can be nothing said iustly;) yet if any such thing could be said for Fornication, it would not reach to excuse Adulterie: because of the iniury that cleaueth therevnto. Against Fornication God hath ordained 1. Cor. 7.2. Marriage as a Remedie: what a beast then is the Adulterer, and what a Monster, whom that remedy doth no good vpon? In the marriage knot, there is some expression and represen∣tation of the Loue-couenant betwixt Ephes. 5.23. Christ, and his Church: but what good assurance can the Adulterer haue that he is within that Couenant, when he breaketh this knot? Euery married person hath ipso facto surrendred vp the right and interest he had in and ouer 1. Cor. 7.4. his owne body, and put it out of his owne into the power of another: what an arrant thiefe then is the Adulterer, that taketh vpon him to dispose at his pleasure that which is none of his: But I say too well by him, when I compare him but to a thiefe. Salomon maketh him worse then a thiefe. [Pro. 6.30. &c Men
doe not despise  thiefe if he steale to satisfie his soule, when he is hungry, &c. But who so committeth adultery with a wo∣man, lacketh vnderstanding: he that doth it destroyeth his owne soule, &c.] Where he maketh both the injury grea∣ter, and the reconcilement harder, in and for the Adulterer, then for the Thiefe. Nay God himselfe maketh him worse than a Thiefe in his law: in his Morall Law, next after murther placing Exod. 20.13.15. Adulterie before Theft, as the grea∣ter sinne; and in his Iudiciall Law, punishing  2.1. &c. Theft with  mulct, but Leuit 20.10. Deut. 21.22. Adultery with Death, the greater Punish∣ment. To conclude this first point: Abimelech, an Hea∣then man, who had not the knowledge of the true God of heauen to direct him in the right way; and withall a King, who had therefore none vpon earth aboue him, to controll him if hee should transgresse: would yet haue abhor∣red to haue defiled himselfe knowingly by Adul∣tery with another mans wife, although the man were but a stranger, and the woman exceeding beautifull. Cer∣tainely Abimelech shall one day rise vp in judgement, and condemne thy filthinesse and injustice, whosoeuer thou art, that committest, or causest another to commit adulterie: Rom. 1.32. Who knowing the judgement of God, that they which doe such things are worthy of death, either doest the same things thy selfe, or hast pleasure in them that doe them; or being in place and office to punish incontinent persons, by easie commutations of publicke penance, for a priuate pecunia∣ry mulct, doest at once both be guilty thine owne consci∣ence with fordide Briberie, and embolden the Adulterer to commit that sinne againe without feare, from which hee hath once escaped without shame, or so much as valuable losse. §. 11. Obseru. II. How far Ig∣norance doth or doth not excuse from Sinne.And thus much for that first Obseruation. The next thing, we shall obserue from Gods approuing of Abimelechs an∣swere, and acknowledgement of the integritie of his heart, is, That some Ignorance hath the waight of a just excuse. For we noted before, that Ignorance was the ground of his Plea. He had indeed taken Sarah into his house, who
was another mans wife: but he hopeth that shall not bee imputed to him as a fault, because he knew not she was a married woman; the parties themselues vpon inquiry ha∣uing informed him otherwise. And therefore he appea∣leth to God himselfe, the tryer and judger of mens hearts, whether he were not innocent in this matter: and God giueth sentence with him, [Yea I know that thou diddest this in the integritie of thy heart.] Where you see his Igno∣rance is allowed for a sufficient excuse. For our clearer vnderstanding of which point,§. 12. Sinnes of Ig∣norance the least sinnes. (that I may not wade farther into that great Question so much mooued among Diuines, then is pertinent to this story of Abimelech, and may be vsefull for vs thence, viz. whe∣ther or no, or how farre, Ignorance and Errour may excuse, or lessen sinfull Actions proceeding there-from, in point of Conscience,) let vs first lay downe one generall, certaine, and fundamentall ground, wherevpon indeed dependeth especially the resolution of almost all those difficulties, that may occurre in this, and many other like Questions. And that is this. It is a condition so essentiall to euery sinne to be Voluntary; that all other circumstances and respects layde aside, euery sinne is simply and absolutely by so much greater or lesser, by how much it is more or lesse vo∣luntary. For whereas there are in the reasonable soule three prime faculties, from whence all humane Actions flow; the Vnderstanding, the Will, and the sensuall appetite or Affections: all of these concurre indeed to euery Acti∣on properly Humane; yet so, as the Will carrieth the grea∣test sway, and is therefore the justest measure of the Mo∣rall Goodnesse, or Badnesse thereof. In any of the three there may be a fault, all of them being depraued in the state of corrupt Nature; and the very truth is there is in euery sinne (euery compleat sin) a fault in euery of the three. And there∣fore all sins, by reason of the blindnes of the Vnderstanding, may be called Ignorances; and by reason of the impotency of the Affections, Infirmities; and by reason of the peruersnes of the wil, Rebellions. But for the most part it falleth out so,
that although all th three be faulty, yet the obliquity of the sinfull Action springeth most immediately and chiefly from the speciall default of some one or other of the three. If the maine defect be in the Vnderstanding, not apprehen∣ding that good it should, or not aright: the sinne arising from such defect we call more properly a sinne of Igno∣rance. If the maine defect be in the Affections, some pas∣sion blinding or corrupting the Iudgement: the sinne ari∣sing from such defect we call a sinne of Infirmity. If the maine defect be in the will, with peruerse resolution bent vpon any euill: the sinne arising from such wilfulnesse we call a Rebellion, or a sinne of Presumption. And certainely these sinnes of Presumption are the Granius qui∣dem infirmitate, quant ignoran∣tia; sed mlio grauius studio, quam infirmita∣te peccatur. De paenit d. 2. ex Gregor. greatest of the three; because the wilfullest: and those of Ignorance the least; be∣cause there is in them the least disorder of the will, which doth its office in some measure, in following the guidance of the vnderstanding; the greater fault being rather in the vn∣derstanding, for misguiding it. And of sinnes of Ignorance, compared one with another, that is euer the least, wherein the defect is greater in the vnderstanding, & in the will lesse. §. 13. a Distinction of IgnoranceFrom this Principle doe issue sundry materiall conclusions: and namely, amongst many other, most pertinently to our purpose these two. The one; that all Errour and Ignorance doth not alwaies and wholly excuse from sinne. The other; that yet some kind of Ignorance and Errour doth excuse from sinne, sometimes wholy, but very often at least in part. The whole truth of both these conclusions, wee may see in this one action of Abimelech, in taking Sarah into his house. In him there was a twofold Errour; and thence also a twofold Ignorance. The one was an Errour in vni∣versals, (Ignorantia Iuris, as they call it;) concerning the nature of Fornication: which being an heynous sinne, hee tooke to be eyther none at all, or a very small one. The o∣ther was an Errour in Particulari, (Ignorantia facti,) con∣cerning the personall condition and relation of Sarah to Abraham: whose sister he thought her to be, and not wife, though she were both.
That former Ignorance (Ignorantia juris) in Abimelech,§. 14. The former ignorance did not ex∣cuse Abime∣lech wholly. was in some degree voluntary. For Abimelech had in him the common Principles of the Law of Nature; by the light whereof, if he had beene carefull to haue improued it, but euen so farre as right reason might haue led a prudent and dispassionate naturall man, he might haue discerned in the most simple Fornication such incongruity with those Prin∣ciples, as might haue sufficiently conuinced him of the vn∣lawfulnesse thereof. It is presumed, that all ignorance of that, which a man is bound to know, and may know if he be not wanting to himselfe, is so farre forth wilfull. Now Abimelech was bound to know, that all carnall knowledge of man and woman out of the state of Wedlocke was simply vnlawfull; and so much, if he had not beene wanting to himselfe in the vse of his Naturals, he might haue knowne: and therefore it was a kind of wilfull ignorance in him in some degree, that he did not know it. And therefore fur∣ther, he cannot be wholly excused from sinne, in taking Sa∣rah, notwithstanding both that, and his other ignorance: for although he did not know her to be, Abrahams wife, yet he knew well enough she was not his owne wife; and being not so to him, whatsoeuer she was to Abraham it skilled not, hee should certainely not haue taken her. To plead Ignorance, that he knew not Fornication to be a sinne, would little helpe him in this case. For men must know, they stand answerable vnto God for their Actions; not meerely according to the present knowledge they actually haue: but according to the knowledge which they ought and might to haue had, those meanes considered, which he had affoorded them of knowledge. Those meanes, euen where they are scantest, being euer sufficient at the least thus farre, Rom. 1.20. , as the Apostle speaketh Rom. 1. to leaue the transgressour without excuse, and to make void all pretensions of Ignorance. That Errour then did not wholly excuse Abimelech from sinne: because his Ignorance was partly wilfull.§. 15. but onely in part: yet wee may not deny, but euen that errour did lessen and extenuate
the sinfulnesse of the Action something, and so excuse him in part; à tant, though not à tot. Because it appeareth by many euidences, that his ignorance therein was not grosly affected and wilfull: and looke how much measure you abate in the wilfulnesse, so much waight you take of from the sinne. The light of Nature, thouh to a man that could haue made the best of it, it had beene sufficient to haue discouered the vitious deformity, and consequently the morall vnlawfulnesse of Fornication; yet was it nothing so cleare in this particular, as in many other things that con∣cerned common equity, and commutatiue Iustice. Besides, common opinion, and the Custome of the times, and consent (though corrupt consent) of most nations, in making out a light matter of it; might easily carry him with the streame, and make him aduenture to doe as most did, without any scruple, or so much as suspicion of such foule wickednesse, in a course so vniuersally allowed and practised. These respects make his wilfulnesse lesse, his ignorance more par∣donable, and his sinne more excusable. And I make no question, the premises considered, but that Abrahams sin in denying Sarah to be his wife, (notwithstanding Vers. 12. the equiuocating tricke hee had to helpe it) was by many de∣grees greater, then was Abimelechs in taking her: as be∣ing done more against knowledge, and therefore more wilfully. Abimlechs sinne in taking her, though with some degrees of wilfulnesse, being yet a sinne rather of Ig∣norance: whereas Abrahams sinne in denying her, was a sinne of Infirmity at the least, if not much rather a sinne of Presumption. §. 16. yet the later did.Now although this former Errour (Ignorantia juris,) could not wholly excuse Abimelech from sinne in what hee had done, but in part onely; for he sinned therein, by gi∣uing way to vnchast desires and purposes, against the sea∣uenth Commandement: yet that other Errour of his (Ig∣norantia facti, in mistaking a married woman for a single) doth wholly excuse his fact from the sinnes of injustice, in coueting and taking another mans wife, against the eighth
the tenth Commandements. He had not the least iniuri∣ous intent against Abraham, in that kinde and degree: and therefore, though he tooke his wife from him indeed, yet not knowing any such matter by her, especially hauing withall made ordinary and requisite enquiry thereafter, it must be granted he did it vnwittingly; and therefore vn∣wilfully; and therefore also vnsinfully, as to that species of sinne. St. Augustine saith truly, Peccatum it a est voluntari∣um, vt si non sit voluntarium, non est peccatum: without some consent of the will, no compleate actuall sinne is com∣mitted. Such ignorance therefore, as preuenteth à tote, and cutteth off all consent of the will, must needes also ex∣cuse, and that à tote, the Actions that proceed there-from from being sinnes. It is cleere from the wordes of my Text, that Abimelechs heart was sincere in this action of taking Sarah, from any iniury intended to Abraham therein; although de facto he tooke his wife from him: because he did it ignorantly. By what hath beene spoken wee may see in part,§. 17. The first In∣ference; con∣cerning the Saluation of our fore-fathers. what kind of Ignorance it is, that will excuse vs fom sinne, ey∣ther in whole, or in part; and what will not. Let vs now raise some profitable Inferences from this obseruation. First; our Romish Catholiques often twitt vs with our fore-elders: [What, say they, were they not all downe right Papists? belieued, as wee belieue? worshipped, as wee wor∣ship? You will not say, they all liued and dyed in Idolatry, and so are damned. And if they were saued in their faith, why may not the same faith saue vs? and why will not you also be of that religion that brought them to Heauen?] A motiue more plausible, then strong: the Vanitie whereof our pre∣sent Obseruation duly considered and rightly applyed fully discouereth. We haue much reason to conceiue good hope of the saluation of many of our Forefathers: who led a∣way with the common superstitions of those blinde times, might yet by those generall truthes, which by the mercie of God were preserued amid the foulest ouerspreadings of Poperie, agreeable to the word of God, (though clogged
with an addition of many superstitions and Antichristian inventions withall.) bee brought to true Faith in the Sonne of God; vnfained Repentance from dead workes, and a sincere desire and endeauour of new and holy Obe∣dience. This was the Religion, that brought them to hea∣uen; euen Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience: this is the true and the Old and Catholicke Religion, and this is our Religion, in which we (hope to finde saluation; and if euer any of you that miscall your selues Catholickes come to heauen, it is this Religion must carry you thither. If to∣gether with this true Religion, of Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, they embraced also your additions, as their blinde guides then ledde them; prayed to our Lady. kneeled to an Image, crept to a Crosse, flocked to a Masse, as you now doe: these were their spots and their blemishes, these were their 1. Cor. 3.11. hay and their stubble, these were their Errours and their Ignorances; and I doubt not but as St. Paul for his blasphemies and persecutions, so they obtai∣ned mercy for these sinnes▪ because they did them igno∣rantly in misbeleife. And vpon the same ground, we haue cause also to hope charitably of many thousand poore soules in Italy, Spaine, and other parts of the Christian world at this day: that by the same blessed meanes they may ob∣taine mercy and saluation in the end, although in the meane time through ignorance they defile themselues with much foule Idolatry, and many grosse Superstitions. §. 18. a Doubt re∣moued.But the Ignorance that excuseth from Sinne, is Ignoran∣tia facti, according to that hath beene already declared: whereas theirs was Ignorantia juris, which excuseth not. And besides, as they liued in the practise of that worship which we call Idolatry, so they dyed in the same without Repentance: and so their case is not the same with Saint Paules, who saw those his sinnes, and sorrowed for them, and forsooke them: but how can Idolaters, liuing and dying so without repentance, be saued? It is answered, that igno∣rance in point of fact, so conditioned as hath been shewed, doth so excuse à tot; that an Action proceeding thence,
though it haue a materiall in conformitie vnto the Law of God, is yet not formally a sinne. But I doe not so excuse the Idolatry of our fore-fathers, as if it were not in it selfe a Sinne, and that (without repentance) damnable. But yet their Ignorance being such as it was; nourished by E∣ducation, Custome, Tradition, the Tyrannie of their leaders, the Fashion of the times, not without some shew also of Piety and Deuotion; and themselues withall, hauing such slender meanes of better knowledge: though it cannot wholly excuse them from sinne without repentance damna∣ble, yet it much lesseneth and qualifieth the sinfulnesse of their Idolatry; arguing that their continuance therein was more from other preiudices, then from a wilfull contempt of Gods holy word and will. And as for their Repentance; it is as certaine, that as many of them as are saued, did repent of their Idolatries, as it is certaine no Idolater, nor other sinner can bee saued without Repentance. But then, there is a double difference to be obserued, betweene Repentance for Ignorances, and for knowne Sinnes. The one is, that knowne sinnes must be confessed, and repented of, and par∣don asked for them in particular, euery one singly by it selfe, (I meane for the kindes, though not euer for the indi∣uiduals,) euery kind by it selfe; at least where God allow∣eth time and leasure to the Penitent, to call himselfe to a punctuall examination of his life past, and doth not by sud∣den death or by some disease that taketh away the vse of reason depriue him of opportunity to doe that: Whereas for Ignorances, it is enough to wrap them vp altogether in a generall and implicite confession, and to craue pardon for them by the lumpe, as Dauid doth in the 19. Psalme, Psal. 19.12. [Who can vnderstand all his Errours? Lord, cleanse thou mee from my secret sinnes.] The other difference is, that knowne sinnes are not truely repented of, but where they are Prou. 28.13. forsaken; and it is but an hypocriticall semblance of Pen∣nance without the truth of the thing, where is no care, ey∣ther endeauour of reformation. But ignorances may bee faithfully repented of, and yet still continued in. The rea∣son;
because they may be repented of in the generall and in the lumpe, without speciall knowledge that they are sinnes, but without such speciall knowledge they cannot be re∣formed. Some of our forefathers then, might not onely liue in Popish Idolatry, but euen dye in an Idolatrous act, breathing out their last with their lips at a Crucifixe, and an Aue. Mary in their thoughts: and yet haue truely re∣pented, (though but in the generall, and in the croude of their vnknowne sinnes,) euen of those very sinnes; and haue at the same instant true Faith in Iesus Christ, and o∣ther Graces accompanying saluation. §. 19. Another Doubt re∣moued.But why then may not I, will some Popeling say, continue as I am, and yet come to heauen, as well as they continued what they were, and yet went to heauen? If I be an Idola∣ter, it is out of my Errour and Ignorance: and if that gene∣rall prayer vnto God at the last, to forgiue me all my Igno∣rances, will serue the turne; I may runne the same course I doe without danger or feare: God will bee mercifull to mee for what I doe Ignorantly.] Not to preclude all pos∣sibility of mercy from thee, or from any sinner. Consider yet, there is a great difference betweene their state and thine, betweene thine ignorance and theirs. They had but a very small enioyance of the light of Gods word, Math. 5.15. hid from them vnder two bushels for surenesse: vnder the bu∣shell of a tyrannous Clergy, that if any man should be able to vnderstand the bookes, hee might not haue them; and vnder the bushell of an vnknowne Tongue, that if any man should chance to get the bookes, he might not vnder∣stand them. Whereas to thee, the light is holden forth, and set on a candlesticke; the bookes open; the language plaine, legible, and familiar. They had eyes, but saw not: because the light was kept from them, and the land was darke about them, as the Exod. 10.21.23. darkenesse of Egypt. But thou liuest as in a Goshen, where the light encompasseth thee in on all sides; where there are Ioh. 5.35. burning and shining lamps in euery corner of the land. Yet is thy blindnesse greater, (for who so blind, as he that will not see?) and more in∣excusable:
because thou Math. 13.15. shuttest thine eyes against the light, least thou shouldest see and be conuerted, and God should heale thee. Breefly, they wanted the light, thou shun∣nest it: they liued in darknesse; thou delightest in it: their ignorance was simple; thine affected and wilfull. And therefore although wee doubt not, but that the times of their ignorance God Act. 17.30. winked at: yet thou hast no warrant to presume, that God will also in these times winke at thee, who Luk. 7.30. rejectest the counsell of God against thine owne soule, and for want of 2. Thes. 2.10.11. loue and affection to the truth art justly giuen ouer to strong delusions, to belieue fables, and to put thy confidence in things that are lyes. So much for that matter. Secondly, here is a needfull admonition for vs all, not to flatter our selues for our ignorance of those things,§. 20. The second Inference; Not to flat∣ter our selues in our igno∣rance. that concerne vs in our generall or particular Callings; as if for that ignorance our reckoning should be easier at the day gf Iudgement. Ignorance indeed excuseth sometimes, some∣times lesseneth a fault: but yet not all ignorance all faults; not wilfull and affected ignorance any fault. Nay it is so farre from doing that, that on the contrary it maketh the offence Ignorantia di∣recte & per so voluntaria, au∣get voluntarū & per conse∣quen peccatum. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 76, 4. much more grieuous, and the offender much more inexcusable. A heedlesse seruant, that Luk. 12.48. neither knoweth, nor doth his Masters will, deserueth some stripes. A stubborne seruant, that knoweth it, and yet tra∣gresseth it, deserueth more stripes. But worse then them both is that vngracious seruant, who fearing his Ma∣ster will appoint him something hee had rather let alone, keepeth himselfe out of the way before hand, and ieheth in a coner out of sight, of purpose that he may not know his Masters will; that so he may after stand vpon it when he is chidden, and say Hee knew it not: such an vntoward seruant deserueth yet more stripes. Would the spirit of God, thinke you, in the Scripture so often call vpon vs to Prou. 2.3.4.7; 23.23. get the knowledge of Gods will, and to increase there∣in; or would he commence his Hos. 4.1. suite against a land, and enter his action against the people thereof, for want of such
knowledge: if ignorance were better or safer? Oh it is a fearefull thing for a man to See Prou. 1.24 &c. shunne instruction, and to say he desireth net the knowledge of God. Psal. 36.3. Noluerunt itelligere, vt bene agerent. When men are once come to that passe, that they will not vnderstand, nor seeke after God; when they Ioh. 3.20. hate the light, because they take plea∣sure in the Eph. 5 11. workes of darkenes; when they are Impia mens o∣dit et am ipsum intellectum: & homo aliqa. so nimium mente peruersa timet intelligere, ne co∣getur quod in∣tellexerit facere. Augustin. de verb. Apost. serm 13. afraide to know too much, least their hearts should condemne them for not doing thereafter; when like the Psal. 58.4.5. deafe adder they stoppe their eares against the voyce of the charmer, for feare they should be charmed by the power of that voice out of their crooked and serpntine courses; when they are so Ex intentione voluntatis ad peccantū proue∣nit, quod aliquis vult subire agno vantia dmnum, propter liberta∣tem peccandi. A∣quin. 1.2.76.4. resolued to take freedome to sinne, that they chuse to be still ignorant, rather then hazard the forgoing of any part of that freedome: what doe they, but euen runne on blindfold into Hell? and through inner, poast a∣long vnto , Math. 25.30. vtter darkenesse, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth? Bernard. de 12. grad. nu∣mil. Frustrà sibi de ignorantia blandiun∣tur, saith Saint Bernard, Qui vt liberius peccent, libenter ignorant. Saint Paul so speaketh of such men, as if their case were desperate; 2. Cor. 14.38. [If any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant] as who say; if he will needes be wilfull, at his perill be it. But as many as desire to walke in the feare of God with vpright and sincere hearts, let them thirst after the knowledge of God and his will, as the Psal. 1.2. Hart after the riuers of waters; let them Prou. 2.3.4. cry after knowledge and lift vp their voyces for vnderstanding; let them seeke it as siluer, and dig for it as for hid treasures; let their feete tread often in Gods courts, and euen weare the thresholds of his house; let them delight in his holy ordinances, and reioyce in the light of his word, depen∣ding vpon the ministery thereof with vnsatisfied eares, and vnwearied attention, and feeding thereon with vn∣cloyed appetites: that so they may see, and heare, and learne, and vnderstand, and belieue, and obey, and increase in wisedome and in grace and in fauour with God and all good men.
But then in the third place consider,§. 21. Inference 3. against sins done with knowledge. that if all ignorance will not excuse an offender, (though some doe:) how canst thou hope to finde any colour of excuse or extenuati∣on, that sinnest wilfully with knowledge, and against the light of thine owne Conscience? The least sinne thus com∣mitted is in some degree a Presumptuous sinne, and carry∣eth with it a contempt of God: and in that regard is Quo quisque melius sapit, eo deterius delin∣quit. Gregor. in pastorali. greater, then any sinne of Ignorance. Iam 4.17. To him that knoweth to doe good; and doth it not, to him it is a sinne, saith St. Iames: Sinne beyond all plea of excuse. Saint Paul, though he were a 1. Tim. 1.13. Persecutor of the Truth, a Blasphemer of the Lord, and injurious to the Brethren; yet hee obtai∣ned Mercy, because he did all that ignorantly. His bare ig∣norance was not enough to justifie him: but he stood need of Gods mercy, or else hee had perished in those sinnes for all his ignorance. But yet who can tell, whether euer hee should haue found that mercy, if he had don the same things and not in ignorance? Ignorance then, though it doe not deserue pardon, yet it often findeth it: because it is not joy∣ned with open contempt of him, that is able to pardon. But hee that sinneth against knowledge, doth Ponere obi∣cem, (if you will allow the phrase, and it may be allowed in this sence:) hee doth not onely prouoke the Iustice of God by his sinne (as euery other sinner doth,) but he doth also dambe vp the Mercy of God by his contempt, and doth his part to shut himselfe out for euer from all possibi∣lity of pardon; vnlesse the boundlesse ouer-flowing mercy of God come in vpon him with a strong tide, and with an vnresisted current breake it selfe a passage through. Doe this then, my beloued Brethren. Labour to get know∣ledge, labour to increase your knowledge, labour to a∣bound in knowledge: but beware you rest not in your knowledge. Rather 2. Pet. 1, 5.7. giue all diligence, to adde to your knowledge Temperance, and Patience, and Godlinesse, and brotherly kindnesse, and Charity, and other good graces. Without these, your knowledge is vnprofitable; nay, dam∣nable. Eccles. 1.18. Qui apponit scientiam, apponit dolorem, is true in
this sence also. Hee that increaseth knowledge, vnlesse his care of Obedience rise in some good proportion with it, doth but lay more roddes in steepe for his owne backe, and increase the number of his stripes, and adde to the waight and measure of his owne most just condemnation. Know this, that although Integritie of heart may stand with some ignorances, as Abimelech here pleadeth it, and God allow∣eth it: yet that mans heart is deuoyd of all singlenesse and sincerity, who alloweth himselfe in any course hee knoweth to be sinfull, or taketh this liberty to himselfe, to continue and persist in any knowne vngodlinesse. And thus much for our second Obseruation. §. 22. Obseru. III. Morall Inte¦grity may be in the heart of an vnbe∣leeuer.I adde but a Third: and that taken from the very thing which Abimelech here pleadeth, viz. the integritie of his heart; considered together with his present personall state and condition. I dare not say, he was a Cast-away: for what knoweth any man, how God might after this time, and even from these beginnings, deale with him in the ri∣ches of his mercy? But at the time, when the things sto∣ryed in this chapter were done, Abimelech doubtlesse was an vnbelieuer, a strager to the covenant of God made with Abraham, and so in the state of a carnall and meere naturall man, And yet both he pleadeth, and God appro∣ueth, the innocency and integrity of his heart in this busi∣nes, [Yea I know that thou diddest this in the integritie of thine heart.] Note hence, That in an vnbelieuer and Na∣turall man, and therefore also in a wicked person and a Cast-away, (for as to the present state, the Vnregenerate and the Reprobate, are equally capable and equally inca∣pable of good things;) there may be truth and singlenesse, and integritie of heart in some particular Actions. §. 23. With the Explication,We vse to tech, and that truely, according to the plaine euidence of Scripture, and the judgement of the an∣cient Fathers, against the contrary tenet of the later Church of Rome; that all the workes of vnbeleiuers and naturall men, are not onely stained with sinne, (for so are the best workes of the Faithfull too;) bu also are really and truly
innes: both in their owne Nature, because they spring from a corrupt fountaine, for Ioh 3.6. That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and it is impossible that a Math. 7.18. corrupt tree should bring forth good fruite; and also in Gods estimation, because he beholdeth them as out of Christ Math. 3.17. in and through whom alone he is well pleased. St. Augustines judgement con∣cerning such mens workes is well knowne, who pronoun∣ceth of the best of them, that they are but splendida pec∣cata, glorious sinnes: and the best of them are indeed no better. We may not say therefore, that there was in A∣bimelechs heart, as nor in the heart any of man, a Legall in∣tegrity, as if his person, or any of his actions were innocent, and free from sinne, in that perfection which the Law re∣quireth. Neither yet can we say, there was in his heart, as nor in the heart of any vnbelieuer, an Euangelicall inte∣gritie; as if his person were accepted, and for the persons sake all or any of his actions approued with God, accep∣ting them as perfect, through the supply of the abundant perfections of Christ then to come. That first and Legall integrity, supposeth the righteousnesse of workes, which no man hath; this latter and Euangelicall integrity, the righteousnes of Faith, which no vnbelieuer hath: no mans heart being, either Legally perfect, that is in Adam; or Euangelically perfect, that is out of Christ. But there is a third kinde of integritie of heart, inferiour to both these, which God here acknowledgeth in Abimelech; and of which onely we affirme, that it may be found in an vnbe∣leiuer, and a Reprobate: and that is, a Naturall or Morall integrity; when the heart of a meere naturall man is care∣full to follow the direction and guidance of right reason, according to that light (of Nature, or Reuelation,) which is in him, without hollownes, halting, and hypocrisie. Rectus vsus Naturalium we might well call it: the terme were fit enough to expresse it; had not the Papists and some other Sectaries, by sowring it with the leauen of their Pelagianisme, rendred it suspitious. The Philosophers and learned among the Heathen, by that which they call a
good Conscience, vnderstand no other thing, then this very Integritie whereof we now speake. Not that an Vnbelei∣uer can haue a good Conscience, taken in strict proprietie of Truth, and in a spirituall sence. For the whole man being corrupted through the fall of Adam, the Conscence also is wrapped in the common pollution: so that Tit. 1.15. to them that are defiled and vnbelieuing nothing is pure, but euen their mind and Conscience is defiled, as speaketh St. Paul, Tit. 1. and being so defiled, can neuer be made good, till Heb. 10.22. their hearts bee sprinkled from that pollution, Heb. 9.14. by the blood of Christ, who through the eternall spirit offered himselfe without spot to God, and till the Conscience be purged by the same blood from dead workes to serue the liuing God, as speaketh the same Apostle, Heb. 9. and 10. §. 24. Proofe,But yet a Good Conscience in that sence as they meant it, a Conscience morally good, many of them had; who neuer had Faith in CHRIST, nor so much as the least inckling of the Doctrine of Saluation. By which Rom 2.14. Not hauing the Law, they were a law vnto them∣selues; doing by nature many of the things contained in the Law; and chusing rather to vndergoe the greatest mise∣ries, as shame, torment, exile, yea death it selfe, or any thing that could befall them, then wilfully to transgresse those rules, and notions, and dictates of piety and equity, which the God of nature had imprinted in their consciences. Could Heathen men and vnbelieuers haue taken so much comfort in the testimony of an excusing Conscience, as it appeareth many of them did; if such a Conscience were not in the kind, (that is Morally) Good? Or how else could Saint Paul haue made that protestation hee did in the Councell Act. 23.1. [Men & Brethren, I haue liued in all good Conscience before God vntill this day.] At least, if he meant to include, as some of the learned conceiue he did, the whole time of his life, as well before his Conuersion, as after? Balaam was but a crsed Hypocrite, and therefore it was but a copy of his countenance, and no beter, (for his heart euen then han∣kered after 2. Pet. 2.15. the wages of vnrighteousnesse,) when he looked
asquint vpon Balaks liberall offer, with this answere, Numb. 22.1 If Balak would giue me his house full of Gold and siluer, I can∣not goe beyond the word of the Lord my God, to doe lesse or more. But I assure my selfe, many thousands of vnbelieuers in the world, free from his hypocrisie would not for ten times as much as he there spake of, haue gone beyond the Rules of the Law of Nature written in their hearts, to haue done eyther lesse or more. Abimelech seemeth to be so affected; at least, in this particular action and passage with Abraham: wherein God thus approueth his integrity, [Yea I know that thou diddest this in the integrity of thy heart. The Reason of which morall integrity in men vnrege∣nerate and meerely Naturall, is that Imperium Rationis,§. 25. and Reason thereof. that power of naturall conscience and Reason, which it hath and exerciseth ouer the whole man: doing the office of a Law-giuer, and hauing the strength of a law; Rom. 2.14. [They are a law vnto themselues,] saith the Apostle Rom. 2. As a Law, it prescribeth, what is to be done, as a Law, it com∣mandeth, that what is prescribed be done: as a Law, it proposeth rewards and punishments, accordingly as what it prescribeth and commandeth is done or not done. A∣bimeleches owne Reason, by the light of Nature informed him, that to take another mans wife from him was iniu∣rious, and enioyneth him therefore, as hee will auoyd the horrors and vpbraidings of a condemning heart, by no meanes to doe it. Resolued accordingly to doe, and to o∣bey the Law of Reason written in his heart, before he durst take Sarah into his house, he maketh inquiry first, whether she were a single-woman or a wife: and therefore, al∣though (vpon misinformation) hee tooke another mans wife, vnwitting that she was so, he pleadeth here, and that justly, the integrity of his heart. And from obedience to the same Law especially, seeing those many rare examples of Iustice, Temperance▪ Gratitude, Beneficence, and other mo∣rall vertues, which we read of in Heathen men, not with∣out admiration: which were so many strong euidences al∣so of this morall integrity of their hearts.
A point that would beare much enlargement, if we in∣tended to amplify it by Instances; and did not rather de∣sire to draw it briefly into vse, by Inferences. A just con∣demnation, it may bee first,§. 26. Inferences thence: The first. to many of vs, who call our selues Christians, and Belieuers, and haue many blessed meanes of direction and instruction for the due ordering of our hearts and liues, which those Heathens wanted: yet come so many paces, nay leagues, short of them, both in the detestation of vicious and grosse enormities, and in the conscionable practise of many offices of vertue. Among them what strictnesse of Iustice? which we eyther slacke, or peruert. What zeale of the Common good? which we put of each man to other, as an vnconcerning thing. What remission of priuate iniuries? which we pursue with im∣placable reuenge. What contempt of honours, and riches? Which we so pant after, so adore. What temperance and frugality in their provisions? Wherein no excesse satisfieth vs. What free beneficence to the poore, and to pious vses? whereto we contribute penuriously and with grudging. What conscience of oaths and promises? which wee so sleight. What reuerence of their Priests? whom we count as the scumme of the people. What loathing of swinish drunkennesse? wherein some of vs glory. What deestati∣on of vsury, as a monster in nature? whereof some of ours make a trade. Particularities are infinite: but what should I say more! Certainely, vnlesse our righteousnesses exceed theirs, we shall neuer come to heauen: but how shall we escape the nether most hell, if our vnrighteousnessee exceed theirs. Rom. 2.27. Shall not Vncircumcision which is by nature, if it keepe the law, judge thee, who by the Letter and Circumcision dost transgresse the Law? said St. Paul to the Iewe: make application to thy selfe, thou that art Christian. Secondly;§. 27. The second. if euen in vnbelieuers and Hypocrites and Castawayes there may be, in particular Actions, integrity and singlenesse of heart: then it can bee but an vncertaine Rule for vs to iudge of the true state of our owne or other mens hearts, by what they are in some few particular Acti∣ons.
Men are indeed that, not which they shew them∣selues in some passages, but what they are in the more ge∣nerall and constant tenor of their liues. If we should com∣pare Abimelech and Dauid together, by their different behauiour in the same kind of temptation, in two particu∣lars of the sacred History, and looke no farther: We could not but giue sentence vpon them quite contrary to right and truth. Wee should see Abimelech on the one side, though alured with Sarahs beauty; yet free from the leaft iniurious thought to her husband, or adulterous intent in himselfe. We should behold 2. Sam. 11.2. &c. Dauid on the other side, enflamed with lust after Bathsheba, whom he knew to be another mans wife: plotting first, how to compasse his filthy desires with the wife, and then after how to conceale it from the husband, by many wicked and politicke fetches; and, when none of those would take, at last to haue him mur∣thered, being one of his principall 2. Sam. 23.3 worthies, in a most base and vnworthy fashion, with the losse of the liues of a number of innocent persons more, besides the betraying of Gods cause, the disheartening of his people, and the encou∣ragement of his and their Enemies. When we should see, and consider all this on both sides, and lay the one against the other: what could we thinke but that Abimelech were the Saint, and Dauid the Infidell; Abimelech the man after Gods owne heart, and Dauid a stranger from the Coue∣nant of God. Yet was Dauid all this while, within that Couenant: and, for any thing we know, or is likely, A∣bimelech not. Particular actions then, are not good eui∣dences eyther way: as wherein both an vnbelieuer, awed sometimes by the law of naturall Conscience, may manifest much simplicity and integrity of heart; and the true Child of God, swayed sometimes with Rom. 7.23. the law of sinfull concu∣piscence, may bewray much foule Hypocrisie, and Infidelity. But looke into the more constant course of both their liues; and then may you find the Hypocrite and the vnbelieuer wholly distingushed from the Godly, by the want of those right markes of sincerity that are in the Godly: no zeale of
Gods glory; no sence of originall corruption; no bemoa∣ning of his priuy hypocrisie and secret Atheisme; no sus∣picion of the deceiptfulnesse of his owne heart; no tender∣nesse of Conscience in smaller duties; no faithfull dependaence vpon the prouidence or promises of God for outward things; no selfe-denyall, or pouerty of spirit; no thirst after the saluation of his brethren, and the like: none of these, I say, to be found in any constant manner in the generall course of his life; although there may bee some suddaine light flashes of some of them now and then in some particu∣lar Actions. Measure no mans heart then, especially not thine owne, by those rarer discoueries of morall integrity in particular Actions: but by the powerfull manifestati∣ons of habituall grace, in the more constant tenor of life and practise. Wee may learne hence thirdly,§. 28. The third. not to flatter our selues too much vpon euery integrity of heart; or to thinke our selues discharged from sinne in the sight of God, vpon eue∣ry acquitall of our Consciences: when as all this may befall an Hipocrite, an Vnbelieuer, a Reprobate. When men ac∣cuse vs of hypocrisie or vnfaithfulnesse, or Psal. 35.11. lay to our charge things we neuer did: it is, I confesse, a very comfor∣table and a blessed thing, if we can find protection against their accusations in our owne hearts, and bee able to plead the integritie thereof in barre against their calumniations. Our integritie, (though it be but Morall, and though but onely in those actions wherein they charge vs wrongfully,) and the testimony of our owne consciences, may be of ve∣ry seruiceable vse to vs thus farre, to make vs regardlsse of the accusations of vniust men: that one testimony within shall relieue vs mo, then a thousand false witnesses without can iniure vs. 1. Cor. 4.3. With me it is a very small thing, saith St. Paul that I should be judged of you, or of mans judgement: as if he should haue said, I know my selfe better then you doe; and therefore so long as I know nothing by my selfe of those things, wherein you censure me, I little reckon what either you, or any others shall thinke or say by me. We may by
his example make vse of this; the inward testimony of our hearts being sufficient to justiie vs against the accusations of men: but we may not rest vpon this; as if the acquitall of our hearts were sufficient to justifie vs in the sight of God. St. Paul knew it, who durst not rest therevpon; but therefore addeth in the very next following words, 1. Cor. 4.3.4. Yea, I judge not mie owne selfe; for I know nothing by my selfe, yet am not hereby justified: but hee that judgeth mee is the Lord. Our hearts are close, false, and nothing so Ier. 17 9.10. deceit∣full as they: and who can know them perfectly, but he that made them, and can search into them? Other men can know very little of them: our selues some thing more: but God alone all. If therefore when other men condemne vs, we find our selues agrieued: we may remoue our cause into an Higher Court; appeale from them to our owne Consci∣ences, and be relieued there. But that is not the Highest Court of all; there lyeth yet an appeale farther and higher then it, even to the Iudgement-seat, or rather to the Mercy-seat of God: who both can finde just matter in vs, to con∣demne vs, euen in those things, wherein our owne hearts haue acquitted vs; & yet can withall find a gracious meanes to justifie vs, euen from those things, wherein our owne hearts condemne vs. Whether therefore our hearts con∣demne vs, or condemne vs not. 1. Ioh. 3.20. God is greater then our hearts, and knoweth all things. To conclude all this point, and there withall the first generall part of my Text; Let no Excusations of our own Consciences on the one side or confidence of any integrity in our selues, make vs presume we shall bee able to stand just in the sight of God, if hee should enter into judgement with vs: but let vs rather make suite vnto him, that since we canot Psal. 19.12. vnderstand all our owne errors, he would be pleased to cleanse vs from our secret sinnes. And on the other side, let no accusations of our owne Consciences, or guiltines of our manifold frailties and secret hypocrisies, make vs despaire of ob∣taining his fauour and righteousnesse: if denying our selues, and renouncing all integritie in our selues as of our selues
we cast our selues wholly at the footestoole of his mercie and seeke his fauour in the face of his only begotten Sonne Iesus Christ the righteous. Of the former branch of Gods reply to Abimelech, in those former words of the Text,§. 29. The second Part of the Text ope∣ned. [Yea I know that thou did∣dest this in the integriie of thy heart) hitherto. I now pro∣ceed to the latter branch thereof, in those remaining words [For I also with held thee from sinning against mee; therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.] . The word signifi∣eth properly to hold in, or to keepe backe; Vatablus in Schol. hic. Retinui or uius hic. Cohibui, or as the Latine hath it Vulgat. hc. Custodiuite: implying Abimilechs forwardnes to that sinne; certainly hee had bin gone, if God had not kept him in, and held him backe. The Greeke rendreth it, Septuag. hic. , I spared thee: and so the Latine Parcere, is sometimes vsed for impedire or prohibe∣re, to hinder, or not to suffer; as in that of Virgil Eclog. 3. Virgil, Par∣cite ves nimit in procedere. Or taking Parcere in the most vsuall signification, for sparing, it may very well tand with the purpose of the place: for indeed God spareth vs no lesse, indeed he spareth vs much more, when he maketh vs forbeare to sinne, then when hauing sinned he forbeareth to punish; and as much cause haue we to acknowledge his mercy, and to reioyce in it, when he holdeth our hands that we sinne not, as when he holdeth his owne hands that hee strike not. For I also withheld thee from sinning against mee. How? Did not Abimelech sinne in taking Sarah, or was not that as Psal. 51.4. euery other sinne is, a sinne against God? Certainely, if Abimilech had not sinned in so doing, and that against God; God would not haue so plagued him as he did, for that deed. The meaning then is: not, that God withhel im wholly from sinning at all therein; but that God withheld him from sinning against him in that soule kind & in that high degree, as to defile himselfe by actuall filthines with Sarah, which but for Gods restraint he had done: Therefore suffered I thee not] Segtuag. hic. , Vulg. hic. Non dimists, that is, I did not let thee goe: I did not leaue thee to thy selfe: or most agreeably to the letter of the Text in the
. Hebrew, Non dedi, or non tradidi; I did not deliuer, or giue. That may be, non dedi potestatem, I did not giue thee H. A. hic. leaue or power, and so giuing, is sometimes vsed for suf∣fering, as Psal. 16. Psal. 16.10. Non dabis sanctum tuum. Thou wilt not suffer, &c. and Gen. 31.7; Exod. 3.19. & 12.23; Nū. 22.13. Iud. 1.4. & 15.1. Ester. 9.14. elsewhere. Or non dedi te, tibi, I gaue thee not to thy selfe. A man cannot be put more despe∣rately into the hands of any enemy, then to be left in manu consilij sui, deliuered into his owne hands, and giuen ouer to the lust of his owne heart. Or as it is here translated, I suffered thee not. We should not draw in God as a partie, when we commit any sinne, as if he ioyned with vs in it, or lent vs his helping hand for it: we doe it so alone, without his helpe, that we neuer doe it, but when he letteth vs alone, and leaueth vs destitute of his helpe. For the kind, and manner, and measure, and circumstances, and events, and other the appurtenances of sinne; God ordereth them by his Almighty power and prouidence so, as to become ser∣uiceable to his most wise, most just, most holy purposes: but as for the very formality it selfe of the sinne, God is (to make the most of it,) but a sufferer; Therefore suffered I thee not, To touch her.] Signifying that God had so farre restrained Abimilech from the accomplishment of his wic∣ked and vncleane purposes, that Sarah was preserued free by his good prouidence, not onely from actuall adulterie, but from all vnchast and wanton dalliance also with Abi∣melech. It was Gods great mercy to all the three parties,§. 30. Obser. IIII. Gods Re∣straint of mans sinne. that he did not suffer this euill to be done: for by this meanes he graciously preserued. Abimelech from the sinne, Abraham from the wrong, and Sarah from both. And it is to be ac∣knowledged the great mercy of God, when at any time he doth, (and he doth euer and anon more or lesse,) by his gracious and powerfull restraint withhold any man, from running into those extremities of sin and mischiefe, where∣into his owne corruption would carry him headlong, es∣pecially when it is set a gogge by the cunning perswasions of Sathan, and the manifold temptations that are in the
world through lust. The Points then that arise from this part of my Text, are these. 1. Men doe not alwayes com∣mit those evils, their owne desires, or outward tempta∣tions prompt them vnto. 2. That they doe it not, it is from Gods restraint. 3. That God restraineth them, it is of his owne gracious goodnes and mercy. The common subiect matter of the whole three points, being one, viz. Gods re∣straint of mans sinne; we will therefore wrap them vp all three together, and so handle them, in this one entire Ob∣seruation, as the totall of all three. God in his mercy often∣times, restraineth men from committing those evils, which, if that restraint were not, they would otherwise haue committed. This Restraint, whether we consider the measure or the meanes which God vseth therein;§. 31. With the measure and meanes ther∣of. is of great variety. For the measure; God sometimes restraineth men a Totò, from the whole sinne, whereunto they are tempted; as hee withheld Ioseph from consenting to the perswasions of his mistres: sometimes onely á Tanto, and that more or lesse, as in his infinite wisedome he seeth expedient; suffering them perhaps but onely to desire the euill, perhaps to re∣solue vpon it, perhaps to prepare for it, perhaps to begin to act it, perhaps to proceed farre in it, and yet keeping them backe from falling into the extremitie of the sinne, or accomplishing their whole desire in the full and finall comsummation thereof; as here he dealt with Abimelech, Abimelech, sinned against the eighth commandement, in taking Sarah iniuriously from Abraham, say he had beene but her brother; and he sinned against the seuenth com∣mandement in a foule degree, in harbouring such wanton and vnchast thoughts concerning Sarah, and making such way as he did, (by taing her into his house,) for the sa∣tisfying of his lust therein: but yet God withheld from from plunging himselfe into the extremity of those sinnes, not suffering him to fall into the act of Vncleannes. And as for the meanes, whereby God withholdeth men from sinning; they are also of wonderfull variety. Sometimes he taketh thē off, by diverting the course of the corruption & turning
the affections another way. Sometimes he awaketh naturall Conscience; which is a very tender and tickle thing, when it is once stirred, and will boggle now & then at a very small matter in comparison, ouer it will doe at some other times. Somtimes he affrighteth them with apprensions of outward Euils; as shame, infamy, charge, enuy, losse of a friend, danger of humane Lawes, and sundry other such like dis∣couragements. Sometimes he cooleth their resolutions, by presenting vnto their thoughts the terrours of the Law, the strictnes of the last Account, and the endlesse vnsufferable torments of Hell-fire. Somtimes, when all things are ripe for execution, hee denyeth them opportunity, or casteth in some vnexpected impediment in the way, that quasheth all. Somtimes he Quosdam praescions Deus multa peccare posse, flagellat e∣os infirmitate corporis, ne pec∣cent: vt eis vti∣lius sit fraugi languo ribus ad salutem, quam remanere incol∣lumes ad damn∣tionem. Hug. 2. de Animae. disableth them, and weakeneth the arme of flesh wherein they trusted, so as they want power to their will; as here he dealt with Abimelech. And sundry other wayes he hath, more then we are able to search into, wher∣by hee layeth a restraint vpon men, and keepeth them backe from many sinnes and mischiefes, at least from the extre∣mitie of many sinnes and mischiefes, whereunto otherwise Nature and Temptation would cary them with a strong current. Not to speake yet of that sweet, and of all other the most blessed and powerfull restraint, which is wrought in vs by the Spirit of sanctification, renewing the soule, and subduing the corruption that is in the Flesh vnto the Obe∣dience of the Spirit: at which I shall haue fitter occasion to touch anon. In the meane time, that there is something or other, that restraineth men from doing some euils,§. 32. That there is such a re∣straint proued: vnto which they haue not onely a naturall ponenesse, but perhaps withall an actuall desire and purpose; might be shewen by a world of instances: but because euery mans daily experience can abundantly furnish him with some, we will therefore con∣tent our selues with the fewer. Se Gen. 31.23. &c. Laban meant no good to Iacob, when taking his Brethren with him, hee pursued af∣ter him seuen dayes journey in an hostile manner; and he had power to his will, to haue done Iacob a mischiefe, Iacob being but imbellis turba, no more but himselfe, his wines
and his little ones, with his flockes and heards, and a few Servants to attend them, vnable to defend themselues, much more vnmeet to resist a prepared enemy: yet for all his power, and purpose, and preparation, Laban when he had ouertaken Iacob, durst haue nothing at a to doe with him, and he had but very little to say to him neither: The worst was but this, [Thus and thus haue you dealt with mee. And Gen. 31.29. It is in the power of mine hand to doe you hurt: but the God of your father spake vnto me yesternight, saying; Take thou heed that thou speake not to Iacob either good or bad:] See the story in Gen. 31. The same Iacob had a Brother, as vnkind as that Vncle, nay much more despitefully bent a∣gainst him then hee; for hee had vowed his destruction, (Gen. 27.41. The dayes of mourning for my father are at hand, and then will I slay my brother Iacob:) and although the Ibid. ver. 44.45. Mo∣ther well hoped, that some few dayes time and absence would appease the fury of Esau, and all should be forgot∣ten; yet Gen. 31.38. twenty yeares after the old grudge remained, and vpon Iacobs approach Gen. 32.6. Esau goeth forth to meete him with 400. men, armed (as it should seeme) for his de∣struction: which cast Ibid. vs. 7.8. Iacob into a terrible feare, and much destressed he was good man, and glad to vse the best wit he had, by diuiding his Companies, to prouide for the safetie at least of some part of his charge. And yet behold at the encounter, no vse at all of the 400. men, vnlesse to be spectatours and witnesses of the ioyfull Gen. 33.4. &c. embraces, and kind louing complements that passed between the two bro∣thers, in the liberall offers and modest refusals each of o∣ther courtesies; in the 32. and 33. of Gen. A good Proba∣tum of that Obseruation of Salomon, Prou. 16.7. When a mans wayes please the Lord, hee maketh euen his enemies to bee at peace with him. Balaam the Coniurer, when King Balac had cast the hooke before him, baited with ample Numb. 22.7.17 rewards in hand, and great promotions in reuersion, if he would come ouer to him and curse Israel; had both Couetousnesse and ambition enough in him to make him bite: so that he was not onely 2. Pet. 2.15. willing, but euen desirous, to satisfie the King; for he loued the wages of vnrightousnesse with his heart, and
therefore made Numb. 23.13, 14.27, 28. tryall (till he saw it was all in vaine,) if by any meanes he could wring, a permission from God to doe it. But when his Numb. 24.3 &c. eyes, were opened to behold Israel, and his mouth open that he must now pronounce something vpon Israel; though his eyes were full of Enuy, and his heart of Cursing, yet God put a parable of Blesing into his mouth, and he was not able to vtter a syllable of any thing other then good concerning Israell, in 22.24. of Numbers. In all which and sundry other instances,§. 33. and that it is from God. wherein when there was intended before hand so much euill to be done, and there was withall in the parties such a forward desire, and such solemne preparation to haue it done; and yet when all came to all, so little or nothing was done, of what was intended, but rather the contrary: it cannot first be imagi∣ned, that such a stop should be made, but by the power∣full restraint of some superiour, and ouer-ruling hand; nei∣ther may we doubt in the second place, that euery such re∣straint, by what second and subordinate meanes soeuer it be furthered, is yet the proper worke of God, as proceeding from and guided by his Almighty and irresistable proui∣dence. As for that which happened to Balaam, that it was Gods doing, the euidence is cleare; we haue it from the mouth of two or three witnesses. The Wisard himselfe con∣fesseth it, Numb. 22.13 The Lord will not suffer me to go with you, Num. 22. The King, that set him on worke, vpbraideth him with it; Numb. 24.11 I thought indeed to promote thee to great honour: but loe the Lord hath kept thee backe from honour: Numb. 24. And Moses would haue Israel take knowledge of it; Deut. 23.5. The Lord thy God would not hearken vnto Balaam, but the Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing, because the Lord thy God loued thee. Deut. 23. It was God then, that turned Balaams curse into a blessing, and it was the same God, that turned Labans reuengefull thoughts into a friendly Expostulation; and it was the same God, that turned Esus inueterate malice, in∣to a kind brotherly conglation. He that hath set Iob. 38 8.11. bounds to the sea, which, though the waues thereof rage horribly they cannot passe, (Hitherto shalt thou goe, and here shalt thou stay thy proud waues;) and did command the waters of
the Exod. 15.8. Red sea to stay their course, and stand vp as on heaps; and by his power could enforce the waters of the Psal. 114.3. Riuer Iordane, to runne quite against the current vp the Channel; he hath Prou. 21.1. in his hands, and at his command the hearts of all the sonnes of men, yea though they be the greatest Kings and Monarchs in the world, as the riuers of waters; and can wind and turne them at his pleasure, inclining them which way soeuer he will. Psal. 76.10. The fiercenes of man shall turne to thy praise, (saith Dauid in Psal. 76.10.) and the fiercenes of them shalt thou retaine: the latter clause of the verse is very significant in the Originall, & cōmeth home to our purpose; as if we should translate it,  Residuum ira∣rum Cinges. Vatablus. Thou shalt gird the remainder of their wrath, or of their fiercenes. The meaning is this. Sup∣pose a mans heart be neuer so full fraught with enuy, ha∣tred, malice, wrath, and reuenge, let him be as fierce and furious as is possible; God may indeed suffer him, and he will suffer him to exercise so much of his corruption, and proceed so farre in his fiercenesse, as he seeth expedient and vsefull for the forwarding of other his secret and just and ho∣ly appointments, and so order the sinfull fiercenes of man by his wonderfull prouidence, as to make it seruiceable to his ends, and to turne it to his glory: but looke whatsoeuer wrath and fiercenes there is in the heart of a man, ouer and aboue so much as will serue for those his eternall purposes, all that surplusage, that ouerplus and remainder whatsoe∣uer it be he will gird; he will so bind, & hamper, and restraine him that he shall not be able to goe an inch beyond his ted∣der, though he would fret his heart out. The fiercenes of man shal turne to thy praise, so much of it as he doth execute: and the remainder of their fiercenes thou shalt refraine, that they execute it not. Be he neuer so great a Prince; or haue he neuer so great a spirit; all is one; hee must come vn∣der. No difference with God in this, betwixt him that sit∣teth on the throne, and her that grindeth at the mill: Psal. 76.12. He shall refraine the spirit of Prin nd is wonderfull among the Kings of the earth: in the last verse of that Psalme. §. 34. with the rea¦son of both,Now of the truth of all that hath beene hitherto spoken in both these branches of the Obseruation, (viz. that first
there is a restraint of euill; and then secondly, that this re∣straint is from God;) I know not any thing can giue vs better assurance, taking them both together, then to con∣sider the generality and strength of our Naturall corruption. Generall it is first, in regard of the Persons; ouerspreading  the whole lumpe of our nature: there is not a child of A∣dam free from the common infection; Psal. 14.2. They are all cor∣rupt, they are altogether become abominable, there is none that doth good no not one. Generall secondly, in regard of  the subiect, ouerrunning the whole man, soule and body, with all the parts and powers of eyther, so as Esay. 1.6. from the sole of the foote to the crowne of the head there is no whole part. Ioh. 3.6: Whatsoeuer is borne of the flesh is flesh; and Tit. 1.15. to them that are defiled and vnbeleeuing nothing is pure, but euen their mind and conscience is defiled; and Gen. 6.5. All the imaginations of the thoughts of their hearts are onely euill continually. Generall thirdly, in regard, of the Obiect: averse from all  kind of good, Rom. 7.18 (In me that is in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing;) and prone to all kind of euill, Psal. 36.4. (He hath set him∣selfe in no good way, neither doth he abhorre any thing that is euill.) Adde to this generality, the strength also of our cor∣ruption; how vigorus, and stirring, and actiue it is, and how it carryeth vs headlongly with full speed into all manner of euill, Ierem. 8.6. As the horse rusheth into the battell, so as we haue no hold of our selues, neither power to stay our selues, till we haue runne as farre as we can, and without the mercy of God plunged our selues into the bottome of the bottomelesse pit. Lay all this together and there can be no other sufficient reason giuen, then this restraint whereof we now speake, why any one man should at any one time refraine from any one sin being tempted thereunto, where∣into any other man at any other time hath fallen being a∣like tempted. Euery man would kill his brother, as Gen. 4.8. Cain did Abel; and euery man defile his sister as 2. Sam. 13.11 Amnon did Thamar; and euery man oppresse his inferiour, as 1. King. 21 16. Ahab did Naboth; and euery man supplant his betters, as 2. Sam. 16.3. Zi∣bah did Mephibosheth; and euery man betray his Master, as Math. 26.15. Iudas did Christ: euery man being as deepe in the loines
of Adam, as either Cain, or Iudas, or any of the rest. Their nature was not more corrupt then ours, neither ours lesse corrupt then theirs: and therefore euery one of vs should haue done those things, as well as any one of them, if there had not beene something without and aboue nature to with∣hold vs, and keep vs backe therefrom, when we were temp∣ted, which was not in that measure afforded them, whē they were tempted. And from whom can we thinke that restraint to come, but from that God, who is the Authr & the Lord of nature, and hath the power & command and rule of Na∣ture; by whose grace and goodnesse we are whatsoeuer we are: and to whose powerfull assistance we owe it, if we doe any good, (for it is he that setteth vs on;) & to his powerfull restraint, if we eschew any euill, (for it is he that keepeth vs of:) Therefore I also withheld thee from sinning against mee. And as to the third point in the Obseruation, it is not much lesse euident then the two former; namely, that this Restraint, as it is from God, so it is from the Mercy of God.§. 35. That this Restraint is from the Mercy of God. Hence it is that Diuines vsually bestow vpon it the name of Grace: distinguishing between a twofold Grace; a speciall renewing Grace, and a Cōmon restraining Grace. The speciall & renewing Grace is indeed so incomparably more excellent, that in comparison therof the other is not worthy to be called by the name of Grace, if we would speake pro∣perly and exactly: but yet the word [Grace] may not vnfitly be so extended, as to reach to euery act of Gods prouidence whereby at any time he restraineth men from doing those euils which otherwise they would doe; and that in a three∣fold  respect: of God, of Themselues, of Others. First, in respect of God, euery restraint from sinne may be called Grace; in asmuch as it proceedeth ex mero motu, from the meere good will and pleasure of God, without any cause, motiue, or inducement in the man that is so restrained. For take a man in the state of corrupt nature▪ and leaue him to himselfe; and thinke, how it is possible for him to forbeare any sinne, whereunto he is tempted, There is no power in Nature, to worke a Restraint: nay there is not so much as any pronenesse in nature, to desire a restraint: much lesse then
is there any worth in Nature, to deserue a restraint. Issu∣ing therefore, not at all from the powers of Nature, but from the free pleasure of God, as a beame of his mercifull prouidence, this Restraint may well be called Grace. And so it may be secondly, in respect of the Persons themselues: because, though it be not auayleable to them for their e∣uerlasting saluation; yet it is some fauour to them, more then they haue deserud, that by this meanes their sinnes (what in number, what in waight) are so much lesser, then other∣wise they would haue beene; whereby also their account shalbe so much the easier, and their stripes so many the few∣er: Chrysostom. in Gen. hom. 25. & alibisape. St. Chrysostome often obserueth it, as an effect of the mercy of God vpon them, when he cutteth off great offen∣ders betimes with some speedy destruction: and he doth it out of this very consideration, that they are thereby preuen∣ted from committing many sinnes, which if God should haue lent them a longer time, they would haue committed. If his obseruation be sound; it may then well passe for a double Mercy of God to a sinner, if he both respite his de∣struction, and withall restraine him from sinne: for by the one, he giueth him so much longer time for repentāce, which is one mercy; and by the other, he preuenteth so much of the increase of his sin, which is another mercy. Thirdly, it may be  called Grace, in respect of other men. For in restraining men from doing euil, God intendeth as principally his owne glo∣ry, so withall the good of mankind, especially of his Church, in the preseruation of humane society: which could not sub∣sist an houre, if euery man should be left to the wildnesse of his owne nature, to doe what mischeife, the Deuill and his owne heart would put him vpon, without restraint. So that the restraining of mens corrupt purposes and affecti∣ons, poceedeth from that Tit. 3.4.  (as the Apostle somewhere calleth it,) that loue of God to mankind, where∣by he willeth their preseruation: and might therefore in that respect beare the name of Grace, though there should be no good at all intended thereby to the person so restrai∣ned. Iust as those , those spirituall guifts, which God hath distributed in a wonderfull variety for the edify∣ing
of his Church, though they oftentimes bring no good to the receiuer, are yet stiled Graces in the Scriptures; be∣cause the distribution of them proceedeth from the graci∣ous loue and fauour of God to his Church, whose benefit he intendeth therein. God here restrained Abimelech; as elsewhere he did Laban, and Esau, and Balaam, and others; not so much for their owne sakes, though perhaps sometimes that also, as for their sakes, whom they should haue iniured by their sinnes, if they had acted them; as here Abinrlech for his chosen Abrahams sake, and Laban and Esau for his seruant Iacobs sake, and Balaam for his people Israels sake. As it is said in Psalm. 103. and that with spe∣ciall reference (as I conceiue it) to this very story of Abra∣ham, Psal. 105.14. He suffered no man to doe them wrong, but reproued euen Kings for their sake; saying Touch not mine annointed, and doe my Prophets no harme: He reproued euen Kings, by restraining their power, as here Abimeleches; but it was for their sakes still, that so Sarah his annointed might not bee touched, nor his Prophet Abraham sustaine any harme. §. 36. The Infe∣rences; of two sorts.We see now the Obseruation proued in all the points of it. 1. Men doe not alwaies commit those euils, they would, and might doe. 2. That they doe not, it is from Gods restraint, who with holdeth them. 3. That restraint is an Act of his mercifull Prouidence, and may therefore beare the name of Grace: in respect of God, who freely giueth it; of them, whose sinnes and stripes are the fewer for it,; of others, who are preserued from harmes the better by it. The Inferences we are to raise from the premises of our Christian practise and comfort, are of 2. sorts: for so much as they may arise from the consideration of Gods Restraining Grace, eyther as it may lye vpon other men, or as it may lye vpon our selues. First, from the consideration of Gods restraint vpon o∣thers, the Church and children and seruants of God may learne, to whom they owe their preseruation:§. 37. Of the for∣mer sort: 1. to bless God for our Pre∣seruation. euen to the power and goodnesse of their God, in restraining the fury of his and their enemies. We liue among Ezek 2.6. scorpions, and Math. 10.16. as sheepe in the middest of wolues; and they that Pal. 69.4. hate vs without a cause and are madde against vs, are more in
number then the hayres of our heads: And yet as many and as malicious as they are, by the Mercy of God still we are, and we liue, and we prosper in some measure, in despite of them all. Is it any thankes to them? None at all. The Gen. 3.15. seed of the Serpent beareth a naturall and an immortall ha∣tred against God, and all good men: and if they had hornes to their curstnesse, and power answerable to their wills, we should not breath a minute. If it is any thankes to our selues? Nor that neither: we haue neither number to match them, nor policy to defeate them, nor strength to resist them; weak, silly, Luk. 12.3. little flocke, as we are. But to whom then is it thanks? As if a little flocke of sheepe escape, when a multitude of rauening wolues watch to deuoure them, it cannot be ascri∣bed either in whole or in part, either to the sheepe in whom there is no helpe, or to the wolfe in whom there is no mercy; but it must be imputed all and wholly to the good care of the Shepheard, in safe guarding his sheepe, and keeping off the wolfe: so for our safety and preseruation in the middest, and in the spight of so many Enemies, Psal. 115.1. Not vnto vs, O Lord, not vnto vs, whose greatest strength is but weaknes; much lesse vnto them, whose tenderest Prou. 12.10. mercies are cruel; but vnto thy name be the glory, O thou Psal. 80.1. Shepheard of Israel, who out of thine abundant loue to vs, who are the Psal. 95.7. flock of thy pasture, & the sheepe of thy hands, hast made thy power glorious▪ in curbing and restraining their malice against vs. Psal. 107.8.15. &c.Oh that men would therfore praise the Lord for his goodnes, and declare the wonders that hee doth for the children of men. Wonders we may wel call them; indeed they are miracles: if things strange, and aboue, and against the ordinary course of Nature may be called Miracles. When we read the sto∣ries in the Scriptures, of Dan. 6.23. Daniel cast into the den among the Lyons, and not touched; of the Dan. 3.27. three children walking in the middest of the fierie furnace, and not scorched; of a Act. 28.5. viper fastening vpon Pauls hand, and no harme following: we are stricken with some amazement, at the consideration of these strange and supernaturall accidents; and these we all confesse to be miraculous escapes, yet such miracles as these, and such escapes, God woketh dayly in our preser∣uation:
notwithstanding we liue encompassed with so ma∣ny firebrands of hell, such heards of rauening wolues and lyons and tygers, and such numerous Math. 3.7. generations of vi∣pers; I meane wicked and vngodly men, the spawne of the old Serpent, who haue it by kind from their father, to thirst after the destruction of the Saints and seruants of God, and to whom it is as naturall so to doe, as for the fire to burne, or a viper to bite, or a lyon to deuoure. Oh that men would therfore praise the Lord for this his goodnes, and daily declare these his great wonders, which he daily doth for the children of men. Secondly, how this restraint of wicked men is so only from God,§. 38.2. Not to trust wicked men. as that nothing either they, or we, or any Creature in the world can doe, can withhold them from doing vs mis∣chiefe, vnlesse God lay his restraint vpon them: it should teach vs so much wisedome, as to take heede how we trust them. It is best and safest for vs, as in all other things, so in this, to keepe the golden meane, that we be neither too ti∣merous, nor too credulous. If wicked men then threaten and plot against thee, yet feare them not: God can restrain them if hee thinke good, and then assure thy selfe they shall harme thee. If on the other side they colloague, and make shew of much kindnes to thee, yet trust them not: God may suffer them to take their own way, and not restraine them, and then assure thy selfe they will not spare thee. Thou maist thinke perhaps of some one or other of these, that sure his owne good nature will hold him in; or thou hast had tryall of him heretofore, and found him faithful as heart could wish; or thou hast some such tye vpon him by kindred neighbourhood, acquaintance, couenant, oath, benefits, or other naturall or ciuill obligation, as will keepe him off, at least from falling foule vpon thee all at once. Deceiue not thy selfe; these are but slnder assurances for thee to bide vpon. Good nature? alas where is it? since Adam fell, there was neuer any such thing in rerum naturâ: if there be any good thing in any man, it is all from Grace; nature is all naught, euen that which seemeth to haue the preheminence in nature, Rom. 8.7. , is starke naught. We may
talke of this and that, of good natured men and I know not what? But the very truth is, set grace aside, (I meane all grace, both renewng and restraining Grace,) there is no more good nature in any man then there was in Caine and in Iudas. That thing, which we vse to call good nature, is in∣deed but a subordinate means of instrument, whereby God restraineth some men more then others from their birth and speciall constitution from sundry outragious exorbitancies, and so is a branch of this restraining Grace wherof we now speake. And as for thy past Experience, that can giue thee litle security: thou knowest not what fetters God layed vp∣on him then, nor how he was pleased with those fetters. God might full sore against his will, not only restraine him from doing thee hurt, but also constraine him 3. King. 17.4. to do thee good: as sometimes he commanded the Rauens to feede E∣liah; a bird so  Arist. 6. Hist. Anim. 6. - Pel∣lūt nidis pullos, sicut & corut. Plin. 10. Nc. hist. 12. vnnaturall to her yong ones, that they might famish for her, if God did not otherwise prouide for them; and therfore it is noted in the Scripture as a speciall argument of Gods prouidence, that he feedeth the Psal. 147▪9. Iob. 38.41. Luk. 12.14. yong ra∣uens that call vpon him. But as nothing that is constrained is durable, but euery thing when it is constrained against its naturall inclination, if it be let alone, will at length Vsque recurrit Horat. 1. Epist. 10. return to his owne ind, and primitiue disposition; as these Ra∣uens, which now fed Eliah, would haue bin as ready ano∣ther time to haue pecked out his eyes: so a Naturall man is a naturall man still, howsoeuer ouerruled for the present: and if God, as he hath hitherto by his restraint withheld him, shall but another while withhold his restraint from him, he will soone discouer the imbred hatred of his heart against good things and men, and make thee at the last be∣shrew thy folly in trusting him, when he hath done thee a mishiefe vnawares. And therefore if he haue done thee se∣uen curtesies, and promise faire for the eighth; yet trust him not: for there are Prou. 26.25. seuen abominations in his hart. And as for whatsoeuer other hancke thou mayst thinke thou hast ouer him, be it neuer so strong: vnles God manacle him with his powerfull restraint, he can as easily vnfetter himselfe from them all, as Iudg 16.9.12▪ Sampson from the greene withes and
coards wherwith the Philistines bound him. All those fore∣mentioned relations came in but vpon the bye & since; wher∣as the Gen. 3 15. hatred of the wicked against goodnes is of an anci∣enter date, and hath his roote in (corrupt) nature: and is therefore of such force, that it maketh voyd all obligations, whether ciuill, domesticall, or other, that haue growne by vertue of any succeeding contract. It is a ruled case, Math. 10.36. Ini∣mici domestici, A mans enemies may bee they of his owne house. Let not any man then, that hath eyther Religion or Honesty, haue any thing to doe with that man, at least let him not trust him more then needs he must, that is an Enemie either to Religion or Honesty. So farre as common Huma∣nitie, and the necessities of our lawfull Occasions and Cal∣lings doe require, we may haue to doe with them, and rest vpon the good prouidence of God for the successe of our af∣faires euen in their hands; not doubting but that God will both restraine them from doing vs harme, and dispose them to doe vs good, so farre as he shall see expedient for vs: but then, this is not to trust them, but to trust God with them. But for vs to put our selues needlessely into their hands, and to hazard our safety vpon their faithfulnes by way of trust; there is neither wisedome in it nor warrant for it. Although God may doe it, yet we haue no reason to presume that he will, restraine them for our sakes, when we might haue pre∣uented it our selues and would not: and this we are sure of, that nothing in the world can preserue vs from receiuing mischiefe from them, vnles God doe restraine them. There∣fore trust them not. §. 39.3. Nor to feare them.Thirdly, if at any time we see wickednesse set aloft, bad men grow to be great, or great men shew themselues bad, sinning with an high hand, and an arme stretched out, and God seemeth to strenghen their hand by adding to their greatnesse, and encreasing their power; if we see the Hab. 1.13. wic∣ked deuouring the man that is more righteous then he, and God hold his tongue the whilest; if we see the vngodly course it vp and downe at pleasure which way soeuer the lusts of their corrupt heart carrieth them without controule, like a wild vntamed Coult in a spacious field, God (as it were)
laying the raines in their necke, and letting them runne; in a word▪ when we see the whole world out of frame and order: we may yet frame our selues to a godly patience, and sustaine our hearts amid all these evils with this com∣fort and consideration; that still God keepeth the raines in his owne hands, and when he seeth his time, and, so farre as he seeth it good, he both can and will, checke and con∣troule and restraine them at his pleasure: as the cunning rider somtimes giueth a fiery horse head, & letteth him fling and runne as if hee were madde, he knoweth he can giue him the stop, when he list. The great Psal. 104.26. Leuiathans, that take their pastime in the Sea, and with a little stirring of themselues can make Iob. 41.31.32 the deepe to boyle like a pot, and cause a path to shine after them as they goe; he can Ibid. vers. 5. play with them as children doe with a bird: he suffereth them to swallow his hooke, and to play vpon the line, and to roll and tumble them in the waters; but anon he striketh the hooke through their noses, and fetcheth them vp, and layeth them vpon the shore, there to beate themselues without helpe or remedy, exposed to nothing but shame and contempt. What then if God suffer those that hate him to prosper for the time, and in their prosperity to Lord it ouer his heri∣tage! What if Princes should Psal 119 23. sit and speake against vs Ibid. vers. 161. without a cause, as it was sometimes Dauids case! Let vs not fret at the iniuries, nor enuy at the greatnesse of any: let vs rather betake vs to Dauids refuge, to be Ibid. vers. 23. occupied in the statutes, and to meditate in the holy word of God. In that holy word wee are taught, that the hearts euen of Kings, how much more then of inferiour persons, are in his rule and gouernance, and that hee doth dispose and turne them, as seemeth best to his godly wisedome, that he can Psal 76, 12. refraine the spirit of Princes, Psal 149.8. bind Kings in chaynes, and Nobles in linkes of iron; and though they Psal. 21.6. rage fu∣riously at it, and lay their heads together in consultation how to breake his bands, and cast away his coards from them, yet they imagine but a vaine thing; whilest they striue against him on earth, he laugheth them to scorne in heauen, & maugre all opposition wil establish the kingdome
of his Christ, and protect his people. Say then the great ones of the world exercise their power ouer vs, and lay what restraints they can vpon vs: our comfort is, they haue not greater power ouer vs, then Regum timn dorum in propri¦os greges, Reges i ipsos imperiū esi Iuis Horat. 3. Carn. Od. 1. God hath ouer them; nor can they so much restraine the meanest of vs, but God can restraine the greatest of them much more. Say our e∣nemies curse vs with Bell Booke and Candle: our comfort is, God is able to returne the curse vpon their owne heads, and in dispite of the too Deut. 23.5. turne it into a Blessing vpon vs. Say they make ware like preparations against vs to inuade vs: our comfort is, God can Psal. 48.7. breake the ships of Tarshish, and scatter the most Psal. 69.4. inuinceable Armadoes. Say they that hate vs be more in number then the heires of our head, our comfort is, the very Math. 10.30. haires of our head are num∣bred with him, and without his sufferance not the least Luk. 21.18. haire of our heads shall perish. Say (to imagine the worst) that our Enemies should preuaile against vs, and Psal. 106.41. they that hate vs should be Lords over vs for the time: our comfort is, he that loueth vs, is Lord ouer them, and he can bring them vnder vs again, whē he seeth time. In all our feares, in all our dangers, in all our distresses; our comfort is, that God can doe all this for vs: our care should be by our holy obedience to strengthen our interest in his protection, and not to make him a stranger from vs, yea an enemy vnto vs, by our sinnes and impenitency; that so wee may haue yet more comfort, in a cheerefull confidence, that God will doe all this for vs. The Assyrian, whose Esay. 10.7. ambition it was to be the Catholique King and vniuersall Monarch of the world, stiling himselfe the Great King, (Esay. 36.4. thus saith the great King, the King of Assyria;) when he had sent Esa. 27.28.29 mes∣sengers to reuile Israel, and an army to besiege and destroy Ierusalem: yet for all his rage he could do them no harme; the Lord Esa. 10.11. brought downe the stout heart of the King of Assyria, Esa. 37.33. put a hooke in his nose, and a bridle in his lippes, and made him returne backe by the way by which he came, without taking the City, or so much as casting a banke, or shooting an arrow against it. Nay he that is indeed Iob. 41.34. the great King ouer all the children of pride, and hath better
title to the stile of most Catholique King then any that euer yet bare it, whose territories are large as the Earth, and spa∣cious as the Aire, I meane the Deuill, the Eph. 2.2. Prince of this world; he is so fttered with the chaine of Gods power and prouidence, that he is not able with all his might and malice, no not though he raise his whole forces, and muster vp all the powers of darknesse and Hell into one band, to doe vs any harme in our soules, in our bodyes, in our Children, in our friends, in our goods, no not so much as our very Math. 8.31, 32. Pigges, or any small thing that we haue, without the speciall leaue and sufferance of our good God. He must haue his Dedi∣mus potestatem from him, or he can doe nothing. Fourthly, since this restraint is an act of Gods mercy,§. 40.4. To labour to restraine others from sinning. whom we should striue to resemble in nothing more Luk. 6.36. then in shewing mercy: let euery one of vs in imitation of our hea∣uenly father, and in compassion to the soules of our brethren, and for our owne good and the good of humane society, en∣deauor our selues faithfully the best we can to restraine, and withhold, and keepe back others from sinning. The Ma∣gistrate, the Minister, the Houshoulder, euery other man in his place and calling, should doe his best by rewards, punishments, rebukes, encouragements, admonitions, per∣swasions, good example, and other like meanes to sup∣presse vice, and restraine disorders, in those that may any way come within their charge. Our first desire should be, and for that we should bend our vtmost endeauours, that if it bee possible, their hearts might be seasoned with grace and the true feare of God: but as in other things, where we cannot attaine to the full of our first aymes, Cicero. Pulchrum est (as he saith) in secundis tertisve consistere; so here, wee may take some contentment in it▪ as some fruit of our la∣bors, in our Callings, if we can but weane them from grosse disorders, & reduce them from extremely debausht courses to some good measure of Ciuilitie. It ought not to be, it is not our desire, to make men Hypocrites; and a meere Ciuill man is no better: yet o vs, that cannot judge but by the outward behauiour, it is lesse griefe, when men are Hypo∣crites, then when they are Prophane. Our first ayme is to
make you good: yet some reioycing it is to vs, if wee can but make you lesse euill. Our ayme is, to make you of Natu∣rall, holy & Spirituall men; but we are glad, if of dissolute, we can but make you good Morall men: if in stead of planting Grace, we can but roote out Vice: if in stead of the power of godlinesse in the reformation of the inner-man, wee can but bring you to some tollerable stayednes in the conformity of the outward-man. If we can doe but this, though we are to striue for that, our labour is not altogether in vaine in the  Lord. For hereby, first, mens sinnes are both lesse & fewer:  and that secondly, abateth somewhat both of the number and weight of their stripes, and maketh their punishment the  easier: and thirdly, there is lesse scandall done to Religion; which receiueth not so much soyle & disreputation by close hypocrisie, as by lewd and open prophanenesse: Fourthly, the kingdome of Sathan is diminished, though not directly in the strength, for he looseth neuer a Subiect by it; yet some∣what in the glory therof, because he hath not so full and ab∣solute command of some of his subiects, as before he had, or  seemed to haue. Fifthly, much of the hurt that might come  by euill example, is hereby preuented: Sixthly, the people of God are preserued from many iniuries and contumelies which they would receiue from euill men, if their barbarous manners were not thus ciuilised; as a fierce Mastiffe doth  least hurt, when he is chained and musled. Seuenthly and lastly, and which should be the strongest motiue of all the rest to make vs industrious to represse vicious affections in others; it may please God these sory beginnings may be the In ipsis impro∣bis dum formida to supplicio fre∣natu facultas, muccato Deo sa∣nitur volūtas. August. Tom. 2 fore-runners of more blessed and more solide graces. My meaning is not, that these Morall restraints of our wilde corruption, can either actually, or but virtually prepare, dispose, or qualifie any man for the grace of Conuersion and Renouation; or haue in them Virtutem semana em, any naturall power which by ordinary helpe may be cherished & improued so farre, as an egge may be hatched into a bird, and a kirnell sprowt and grow into a tree; (farre be it from vs to harbour any such Pelagian conceipts:) but this I say, that God, being a God of order, doth not ordinarily work
but in order and by degrees, bringing men from the one ex∣treame to the other by middle courses; and therefore seldome bringeth a man from the wretchednesse of forlorne nature to the blessed estate of sauing grace, but where first by his restrai∣ning grace in some good measure he doth correct nature, and moralize it. Doe you then that are Magistrates, doe we that are Ministers, let all Fathers, Masters, & others whatsoeuer, by wholsom seuerity (if fayrer courses will not reclaime thē) deterre audacious persons from offending, breake those that are vnder our charge of their wills and wilfulnesse, restraine them from lewd and licencious practises and company, Leuit. 19.17. not suffer sinne vpon them for want of reprouing them in due and seasonable sort, Iude, vers. 23 snatch them out of the fire, and bring them as farre as we can out of the snare of the Diuell to Godwards; and leaue the rest to him. Possibly, when we haue faithfully done our part, to the vtmost of our power; he will set in gra∣ciously, and begin to doe his part, in their perfect conuer∣sion. If by our good care, they may be made to forbeare swea∣ring, and cursing, and blaspheming; they may in time by his good grace be brought to Eccles. 19.1. feare an Oath: if wee restraine them from grosse prophanations vpō his holi-day in the meane time, they may come at lenght to think his Sabath Esa. 28.13. a delight: if we keepe them from swilling, and gaming, and reuelling, and ryoting, and roaring, the while; God may frame them ere long to a sober and sanctifyed vse of the Creatures: and so it may be said of other sinnes and duties. I could willingly en∣large all these points of inferences but that there are yet be∣hind sundry other good vses, to bee made of this restraining Grace of God, considered as it may lye vpon Ourselues; and therefore I now passe on to them. First, there is a roote of Pride in vs all,§. 41. Inferences of the later sort: 1. Not to be roud of it, when God re∣strained vs. whereby we are apt to thinke better of our selues, then there is cause: and eue∣ry infirmity in our brother, (which should rather be an item to vs of our frailty) serueth as fuell to nourish this vanity, and to swell vs vp with a Pharisaicall conceipt, that forsooth we are Luk. 18.1. not like other men. Now, if at any time, when we see any or our brethern fall into some sinne, from which by the good hand of God vpon vs we haue bin hitherto preserued, we then
feele this swelling begin to rise in vs, as sometimes it will doe: the point already deliuered may stand vs in good stead, to picke the bladder of our pride, and to let out some of that windy vanity; by considering that, this our forbearance of euil, wher∣in we seeme to excell our brother, is not from nature, but from Grace; not from our selues, but from God. And here a litle let me close with thee, whosoeuer thou art, that pleasest thy selfe with odious comparisons, and standest so much vpon termes of betternesse; thou art neyther Extortioner, nor adulterer, drun∣kard, nor swearer, theife, slanderer, nor murtherer; as such and such are. It may be thou art none of these: but I can tell thee what thou art, and that is as odious in the sight of God as a∣ny of these: thou art a proud Pharisee, which perhaps they are not. To let thee see thou art a Pharisee, doe but giue me a direct answere without shifting or mincing to that Question of St. Paul, 1. Cor. 4.7. Quis te discrevit? Who hath made thee to differ from another. Was it God, or thy selfe, or both together? If thou sayest it was God; thou art a dissembler, and thy boasting hath already confuted thee: for what hast thou to doe to glory in that which is not thine? Ibid. If thou hast receiued it, why doest thou glory, as if thou haddest not receiued it? If thou sayest it was from thy selfe: what Pharisee could haue assumed more? All the shift thou hast, is, to say it was God indeed that made the difference, but he saw somthing in thee for which he made thee to differ: thou acknowledgest his restraint in part, but thine owne good nature did something. If this be all, thou art a very Pharisee still, without all escape. That Pharisee neuer denyed God a part, no nor the chiefest part neyther, he began his vanting prayer with an acknowledgment of Gods worke, (Luk. 18.11. I thanke thee, O God, that I am not like other men.) It was not the denyall of all vnto God, but the assuming of any thing vnto himselfe, that made him a right Pharisee. Goe thy way then, and if thou wilt doe God and thy selfe right; deny thy selfe altogether, and giue God the whole glory of it, if thou hast bin preserued from any euill. And from thy brothers fall, besides compassioning forlorne Nature in him, make a quite contrary vse vnto thy selfe; euen to humble thee thereby, with such like thoughts as these, Gal. 6.1. considering thy selfe least thou also be temp∣ted.
[Am I any better then hee? or better mould then he? or better temperèd then he? Am not I a child of the same Adam, a vessell of the same clay, a chip of the same blocke, with him? why then should I be Rom. 11.20 high-minded, when I see him fallen be∣fore me? why should I not rather feare, least my foot slip, as well as his hath done? I haue much cause, with all thankeful∣nesse to blesse God, for his good prouidence ouer me, in not suf∣fering me to fall into this sinne hitherto; and with all humili∣ty to implore the continuance of his gracious assistance for the future, without which I am not able to auoyd this, or any o∣ther euill.] Secondly, since all restraints from sinne,§. 43.2. How to entertaine the meanes God affoor∣deth vs of restraint. by what second meanes so euer they are conueyed vnto vs, or forwarded, are from the mercifull Prouidence of God: whensoeuer wee ob∣serue that God hath vouchsafed vs, or doth offer vs, any meanes of such his gracious restraint; it is our duty joyfully to em∣brace those meanes, and carefully to cherish them, and with all due thankfulnes to blesse the name of God for them. Oh how oft haue we plotted, and proiected, and contriued a course, for the expediting of our perhaps ambitious, perhaps couetous, perhaps malicious, perhaps voluptuous designes: and by the prouidence of God some vnexpected interuening accident hath marred the curious frame of all our proiects, that they haue come to nothing; as a Spiders webbe spunne with much art and industry is suddenly disfigured, and swept away with the light touch of a besome. How oft haue we bin re∣solued to sinne, and prepared to sinne, and euen at the pits brinke ready to cast our selues into hell: when he hath pluck∣ed vs away, as he plucked Gen. 19 16. Lot out of Sodome, by affright∣ments of naturall Conscience, by apprehensions of dangers, by taking away the opportunities, by ministring impediments, by shortening our power, by sundry other meanes! Haue wee now blessed the name of God for affording vs these gracious meanes of preuention and restraint? Nay, haue we not rather bin enraged thereat, and taken it with much impatience that we should be so crossed in the pursuite of our vaine and sinfull desires and purposes? As wayward Children cry and take pet, when the Nurse snatcheth a knife from them, wherewith
they might perhaps cut their fingers, perhaps haggle their throates, or putteth them backe from the wells mouth when they are ready, with catching at babies in the water, to type ouer: and as that merry madman in the Poet, was in good ear∣nest angry with his friēds for procuring him to be cured of his madnes, wherein he so much pleased himselfe, as if they could not haue done him a greater displeasure Herat. 2. satir. — Pol me occidistis, amici,- Non seruastis-: such is our folly. We are offended with those that reproue vs; testie at those that hinder vs; impatient vnder those crosses that disable vs: yea wee fret and turne a∣gaine at the powerfull application of the holy word of God, when it endeauoureth to reforme vs, or restraine vs from those euils wherein we delight. Let vs henceforth mend this fault, cheerfully submit our selues to the discipline of the Almighty, and learne of holy Dauid with what affections to entertaine the gracious meanes he vouchsafeth vs of restraint or preuen∣tion: as appeareth by his speeches vnto Abigail, when she by her wisdome had pacified his wrath against Nabal, whose destruction he had a little before vowed in his heat, 1. Sam. 25.32 &c. Bles∣sed be the Lord God of Israel which sent thee this day to meet me; and blessed be thy aduice, and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from comming to shed blood, and from auenging my selfe with mine owne hand. He blessed God, as the cause; and her, as the instrument; and her discreet behauiour and aduice, as the meanes; of staying his hand from doing that euill, he had vow∣ed with his mouth, and was in his heart purposed to haue done. Thirdly,; since we owe our standing to the hand of God, who holdeth vs vp, without whose restraine we should fall at euery turne,§. 43.3. To pray vnto God to restraine our corrup∣tions. and into euery temptation: we cannot but see what need we haue to seeke to him dayly and hourely to with∣hold vs frō falling into those sins, wherunto either our corrupt nature would leade vs, or outward occasions draw vs. We may see it by the fearfull fals of Dauid & Peter, men nothing inferi∣our to the best of vs, how weake a thing man is to resist temp∣tation, if God withdraw his support, and leaue him but a little to himselfe. Which made Dauid pray to God that he would Psal. 19 13. keepe backe his seruant from presumptious sinnes. He well knew,
though he were the faithful seruāt of God, that yet he had no stay of himself; but vnles God kept him back, he must on, and he must in, and he must in deepe, euen as farre as to Presumptious sinnes. No man, though he be neuer so good, hath any assurance, as vpon his owne strength, though it be neuer so great, that he shalbe able to auoyd any sin, though it be neuer so foule. When a heathen man prayed vnto Iupiter, to saue him from his Ene∣mies; one that ouerheard him would needes mend it with a more needfull prayer, that Iupiter would saue him from his Friends: he thought they might doe him more hurt, because he trusted them; but as for his Enemies, he could looke to him∣selfe well enough, for receiuing harme from them. We that are Christians, had need pray vnto the God of heauen, that he would not giue vs vp into the hāds of our professed Enemies; & to pray vnto God, that he would not deliuer vs ouer into the hands of our false-hearted Friends: but there is another prayer yet more needfull, and to be pressed with greater importunity then eyther of both, that God would saue vs from our selues, and not giue vs vp into our owne hands; for then we are vt∣terly cast away. There is a wayward old-man that lurketh in euery of our bosomes, and we make but too much of him: then whom, we haue not a more spightfull Enemy, nor a more false friend. Alas we do not thinke, what a man is giuen ouer to, that is giuen ouer to himselfe: he is giuen ouer to Rom. 1.26. vile affections, he is giuen ouer to a Ibid. vers. 28. reprobate sense, he is giuen ouer to Eph. 4.19. commit all manner of wickednes with greedinesse. It is the last and fearfullest of all other judgements, and is not vsually brought vpon men, but where they haue obstinately refused to heare the voice of God, in whatsoeuer other tone he had spo∣ken vnto them; then to leaue them to themselues, and to their owne counsells: Psal. 81.11.12. My people would not heare my voice, and Israel would none of me: so I gaue them vp vnto their owne hearts lust, and let them follow their owne imaginations. As we conceiue the state of the Patient to bee desperate, when the Phisician giueth him ouer, and letteth him eate, and drinke, and, haue, and doe, what, and when, and as much as he will without pre∣scribing him any dyet, or keeping backe any thing from him he hath a mind vnto. Let vs therefore pray faithfully and feruent∣ly
vnto God, as Christ himselfe hath taught vs, that he would not by leauing vs vnto our selues Math. 6.13. lead vs into temptation, but by his gracious and powerfull support deliuer vs from all those euils, from which we haue no power at all to deliuer our selues. §. 44.4. To labour for the grace of Sanctifica∣tion.Lastly, since this Restraint wherof we haue spoken, may be but a common Grace, and can giue vs no found nor solid com∣fort if it be but a bare restraint, and no more: though we ought to be thankefull for it, though we haue not deserued it; yet we should not rest nor thinke our selues safe enough, till we haue a well grounded assurance, that we are possessed of an higher and a better grace, euen the Grace of sanctification. For that will hold out against temptations, where this may faile. Wee may deceiue our selues then, and thousands in the world doe so deceiue themselues; if vpon our abstaining from sinnes, from which God withholdeth vs, we presently conclude our selues to be in the state of Grace, and to haue the power of godlines, and the spirit of Sanctification. For, betweene this restraining Grace, whereof we haue now spoken, and that renewing Grace wherof we now speak; there are sundry wide differences. They  differ first, in their fountaine. Renewing grace springeth from the special loue of God towards those that are his in Christ: restrai∣ning grace is a fruite of that generall mercy of God, whereof it is said in the Psalme, that Psal. 145.2. his mercy is ouer all his workes.  They differ secondly, in their extent: both of Person, Subiect, Obiect, and Time. For the Person; Restraining Grace is com∣mon to good and bad: Renewing Grace proper and peculiar to the Elect. For the Subiect; Restraining Grace may bind one part or facultie of a man, as the hand or tongue, and leaue ano∣ther fee, as the heart or eare: Reewing Grace worketh vpon all in some measure, sanctifieth the whole man, 1. Thes. 6.23 Body, and soule, and spirit, with the parts and faculties of each. For the Obiect; Restraining Grace may withhold a man from one sinne and giue him scope to another: Renewing Grace carryeth an equall and iust respect to all Gods commandements. For the Time; Restraining Grace may tye vs now, and by and by vnloose vs: Renewing Grace holdeth out vnto the end, more or lesse,  and neuer leaueth vs wholy destitute. Thirdly, they did differ in
their ends. Restraining Grace is so intended chiefly for the good of humane society, (especially of the Church of God, and of the members thereof;) as that indifferently it may, or may not doe good to the Receiuer: but Renewing Grace is espe∣cially intended for the Saluation of the Receiuer, though Ex consequenti it doe good also vnto others. They differ fourthly, and lastly, in their effects. Renewing Grace mortifieth the corruption, and subdueth it, and diminisheth it; as water quen∣cheth fire, by abating the heate: but Restraining Grace only inhibiteth the exercise of the corruption for the time, without any reall admonition of it either in substance or quali∣ty; as the Dan. 3.25. fire wherin the three Children walked, had as much heate in it at that very instant, as it had before and after, al∣though by the greater power of God, the naturall power of it was then suspended from working vpon them. The Lions that spared Daniel were Lyons still, and had their rauenous dis∣position still, albeit God Dan. 6.22. stopped their mouthes for that time, that they should not hurt him: but that there was no change made in their naturall disposition appeareth by their entertainement of their next guests, whom they deuoured with all greedinesse, Ibid. vers. 24. breaking their bones before they came to the ground. By these two instances and examples, we may in some measure conceiue of the nature and power of the restrai∣ning Grace of God in wicked men. It bridleth the corruption that is in them for the time, that it cannot breake out, and manacleth them in such sort, that they doe not shew forth the vngodly disposition of their heart: but there is no reall change wrought in them all the while; their heart still remaining vn∣sanctified, and their naturall corruption vndiminished. Where∣as the renewing and sanctifying Grace of God, by a real change of a Lyon maketh a Lambe; altereth the naturall disposition of the soule, by draining out some of the corruption; begetteth a new heart, a new spirit, new habits, new qualities, new dis∣positions, new thoughts, new desires; maketh a Eph 4 4. new man in euery part and faculty compleatly New. Content not thy selfe then with a bare forbearance of sinne, so long as thy heart is not changed, nor thy will changed, nor thy affections chan∣ged: but striue to become a new man, to bee Rom. 12.2. transformed
by the renewing of thy mind, to hate sinne, to loue God, to wrestle against thy secret corruptions, to take delight in holy duties, to subdue thine vnderstanding and will and affections to the obedience of Faith and Godlinesse. So shalt thou not onely be restrained from sinning against God, as Abimelech here was; but also be enabled, as faithfull Abraham was, to please God: and consequently assured with all the faithfull children of Abraham to bee 1. Pet. 1.5. preserued by the almighty power of God through faith vnto saluation. Which Grace, and Faith, and saluation, the same Almighty God, the God of power and of Peace, bestow vpon vs all heere assembled, 1. Cor. 1.2. With all that in euery place call vpon the name of IESVS CHRIST our Lord, both theirs and ours; euen for the same our Lord Iesus Christs sake, his most deare Sonne, and our most blessed Sauiour and Redeemer, to which blessed Fa∣ther, and blessed Sonne, with the blessed Spirit, most holy blessed and glorious Trinitie, be ascribed by vs and the whole Church, all the kingdome the power and the glory, from this time forth and for euer. Amen. FINIS.
