23525 S118126 99853335 18715
THE SWEDISH INTELLIGENCER. The Third Part. VVHEREIN, OVT OF THE TRVEST and choysest Informations, are the famous Actions of that Warlike Prince Histo∣rically led along; from the Norimberg Leaguer, unto the day of his death, at the Victory of Lutzen. With the Election of the young Queene of Sweden: and the Diet of Heilbrun. The times and places of every Action, being so sufficiently observed and described; that the Reader may finde both Truth and Reason in it. Vnto which is added The Fourth Part. VVHEREIN, The chiefest of those Military Actions of other Swedish Generalls, be related: wherein the King himselfe, was not personally with the Army. LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1633.
To the Favourable and Iudi∣cious Readers. THat my Dedication inscribes it selfe to the Favourable Readers, before to the Iudicious; is not so much out of Complement, as Con∣science: he that is guilty to him∣selfe of being lesse Iudicious, hath the more need his Readers should be Favourable. And yet (thankes to your faire acceptance for it) I have hitherto received no such discouragement from the most Iudicious, that I need complaine they were lesse Favourable. For your honest pleasures (Gentlemen) and in thankfulnesse to your courtesies; have I vndertaken this my last la∣bour. I have done all, with as much diligence, as a Scholler (morally) might doe: yea with importuna∣cy of diligence, have I sollicited such Gentlemen; as I knew to have beene in action, and that could teach me any thing. And something more then a com∣mon
diligence, have I used in it. The Italian Painter hath 3. degrees of Comparison, in the preferring of his Peeces. If he saies tis but done con diligenza, with di∣ligence; tis no great commendation of his paines, for he meanes no more then an ordinary diligence. His second degree of praysing it, is con studio, with stu∣dy: and by that would he tell you, that his braine and hand; have a little more laboured, both upon the designing and the colouring. But if he addes con amo∣re, that he did it with a love and an affection; to the Piece or Party; oh! tis di Madonna, then: and the Italian himselfe is at the highest of his expression. I have (as little as might be, and especially in the Kings Story) trusted to no written Relations; unlesse received from a knowne hand, or confirmed by per∣sonall eye, or eare-witnesses. No, I have not singly relyed, so much as upon that diligent amasser of the Dutch Currantoes, the Gallobelgicus, and the Ar∣ma Suecica; le Soldat Suedois, I meane by it: upon whose single credit, I have no where written any thing; excepting in those slighter encounters about Norimberg. And yet even there, had I beene in the same boxe, with him, and before him; the High Dutch Relations. I commend, (as much as any man) the queyntnesse of his language; and the neatnesse of his conceits, many times: which are the relishes of a French wittynesse in him. His best pieces, are the Abridgements of the lives of the two Kings. Divers of the conceits, therefore, of the first of these; have I made some use of, in my Character of the King of Sweden. The Second, have I wholly taken into my
Character of the King of Bohemia: and I had divers reasons for it. Tis finely done; I was glad to see a Frenchman give that good King, his due; and twas safer for me to Translate that, then to invent a new one. Beyond this, would I by this Essay of Translating; try Masteries with the French Language: I confesse my selfe to be but a bungling smatterer, at it; and yet thus farre dare I be deposed, That had a queynt penne the doing of it, the French it selfe should not be able to transcend our English, in the happinesse of expressions. For the truth of those Relations, wherein I differ from that French Author; I report me to those that have reade both, and have beene personally pre∣sent in the Actions. And thus much (because we dif∣fer) had I reason to say in mine owne defence; and to prevent, withall, the abusing of my Countrymen, should he happen to be translated into English. Mine owne ambition is not, that this Piece of mine should be exempt frō censuring, or to be taken for above the true value of it: nor doe I professe my selfe to be other thē (like an Architect) the disposer of other mens Materi∣alls, at my best value. I am Author of nothing, here, but of the mistakings; & even of those, though I strongly be suspitious: yet am I, (no way) conscious. Knowingly, I have committed nothing against Truth; nor tradu∣ced peevishly, the honour of any person. I could tell no more then I knew, nor would not: sure, I can∣not have written all; but what I have, is neere about the matter. In writing of this Story, those two objecti∣ons of the Turkes, against the likelyhood of all
Histories; may appeare to be well satisfied. A Story-Writer (say those Barbarians) In the time, dares not; and After the time, cannot, write truely. For the first of these: the distance of the place secures me, against the feare of writing too truely of the present. My selfe, (not since these warres) was never neere enough to the persons or places of action; to be either bribed or skared by them. And as for the Authors, whom chiefly I have consulted; though they were some∣times Gentlemen of the Army; yet have they now put themselues beyond the feare or hope, of pleasing or displeasing: because out of the service and depen∣dancy. And as for the second obiection, thats well ta∣ken away, too; for though my Story be written after the time of doing, yet not beyond the memory of it. And thus, in this Iland, have I done with this forraine Story; as in some Houses of pleasure, I have seene done with the Landtskip of a Countrey: where the Hills and Woodes, and Houses, have by Perspective and Art Optick, beene so brought thorow a small hole; that they have in little beene reflected upon a Paper, or polisht Stone, in a Study or a Dyning-roome. And I have used the same Art Perspective: the Landt∣skip of these Swedish Warres, have beene out of Ger∣many brought home into my Study, which my Paper here reflects off againe. In little, I meane, and as I could; and though not in their iust magnitude; yet something towards their proportions. If I have made my Readers waite, a while, in ex∣pectancy of my Relations: I hope they will please to allow of this answer, for a satisfaction. That I
onely said, till false rumours might be contradicted; true reports, brought home to me, by men present; and the passions of people a little over, which might either make them harder of beleefe, or over-credu∣lous. My office (so hath God disposed of it) hath beene, not that of an Historiographer alone, but of a Herald also: one, that having served a Prince, first in denouncing of his Warres, and then in celebrating of his Triumphs; performes his last duties to him, at his Funeralls. So have my Three Bookes beene. My First Part proclaimed, the King of Swedens comming into the Field, and the Causes for it. My Second Part marshalled him along, all in Victories and in Glories: and my vnlucky Third, here waites upon him, in his Obsequies. The end of the King of Sweden, hath si∣lenced his Intelligencer: it cannot be expected, that a Logician should proceed in his Argument; after that the Adversary hath taken away the Subiect of his Question. I have done with Novelties, now; and I henceforth desire my Readers to discharge me.
Errata. PAg. 27. line 1. For alwayes not, Reade alwayes worke not. In the same leafe, line 16. for elinquent, reade delinquent. Pag. 48. lines 26, and 27. for Crai∣sham, reade Crailsham: and for Master of the Army, reade Master of the Houshold. Pag. 61. line last save one, for April, reade October. Pag. 68. line 1. for 21. reade 12. Pag. 71. for 12000. Horse and 6500. Foote: reade, 12000. Foote and 6500. Horse. Pag. 101. line 28. for October 21. reade October 12. Pag. 106. line 20. for October 21. reade October 22. Pag. 127. line 33. (in some Copies) for Francis Charles, reade Francis Albert. Pag. 191. line 17. for imaginaned reade imagi∣ned. Pag. 193. line 28. for behold, reade beholden. Pag. 195. for thinke skales, read thinke the skales.
THE SWEDISH Intelligencer. The Third Part. From the time of the KINGS encamping before NORIMBERG, untill the day of his death at the Battell of LVTZEN. HOw noble a Master of his word (euen to the vttermost possiblity of per∣formance) the King of Sweden still was;The Story fetcht a little higher, then the end of the last Part. may (if we wanted the assu∣rance of other examples) abundant∣ly enough appeare by his present carriage, alone, towards the faire Ci∣ty of Norimberg. His Highnesse the Duke of Ba∣uaria hauing beene shouldred out of his owne Countrey, and taken his retreate into the Ʋpper Palatinate; (as in the latter
end of our Second Part we haue told you) the King, out of a desire to fight with him, before he should be ioyned with Wallenstein; had euen thither, also pursued him. And but lit∣tle missed he, of lighting on him. For hauing aduanced by Norimberg vntoNamely that Swabach, which in North-East of Norimberg, 20 English miles, neere the head of the ri∣uer Swabach. The King mis∣sing but little of surprising the Duke of Bavaria, Swabach: he left the Army 3. leagues fur∣ther, and aboue Sultzbach; going himselfe with his whole Horse, 4. peeces of Cannon; and Sir Iohn Hepburne, (as him∣selfe pleased to tell me) with 2000. Musketiers, to seeke out and to surprize Bavaria. A generall guesse hee now had, whereabouts the Duke should be enquartered; though by rea∣son of his being still in motion, he could haue no exact cer∣tainty. Going, therefore, on the left hand of Amberg; he comes to a little Towne thereby, lately forsaken by the Duke. That night, lay He within 4. English miles of the Bavarian: which had he surely knowne, he had without doubt, cut him all in pieces. But the Duke, that euening, hauing better in∣telligence where the King was; then the King had, where the Duke was: rose with all speed and hastned towards E∣gra, to conioyne with Wallenstein: both of them presently returning againe vpon the King. This caused His Majesty, to turne backe from them:retires backe againe; he being too weake, at that time, (by 3. parts) to meete them in Campagnia. And now remembers he his Royall word, passed hereto∣fore vnto the Norimbergers. Their towne, being mighty in power and example; had, at first, committed it selfe vnto his devotion: and he, againe, in the word of a King, had assured it of the uttermost of his protection. To disengage him∣selfe, of this promise: hee in November before, was once advancing from about Franckford, with his whole Army, to have levied Tillyes siege from before it: and now againe engages he himselfe, to be by Wallenstein besieged with it. Thus is he becomne, a full capitall pledge for it; whilest he aduentures to stand bound,and encampes about Norim∣berg. body and goods for it. Round about this Towne, we in our Second Part left him encamp∣ed: and there, he for 16. weeks after staied: for that Townes sake alone, submitting himselfe unto such multitudes of in∣conveniences,
and so many varieties of great dangers; as his victorious proceedings had not hitherto beene confronted withall: all which, a farre meaner experience then a King of Swedens could not but foresee, now ready like a tempest to come flowing in upon him. His Highnesse the Duke of Bavaria, had taken sore re∣grett at this Norimberg; and, for its entertaining the King of Sweden; had his Generall Tilly offered to beleager it. And had this Duke beene strong enough, he would, perchance, haue beene content, with an indifferent occasion to have quar∣rel'd it: for besides the addition of so strong a Passe, and able jurisdiction, unto his already devoured Ʋpper Palatinate;His reasons for it. it had beene an Inlett, withall, to his progresse into the Mar∣quisates ofThey write themselues Burgraves of Norimberg. Onspach and Payreit, belonging vnto 2. Princes of the House of Brandenburg; and by Onspach, into Franco∣nia. The Imperiall Generalissimo, besides, had now threatned to write it vp in red letters in his Almanack; to make a Martyr of it; and to change Norimberg, into Magdenburg: he had vow'd the City to the flames, and the riches of it, for a prey unto his souldiers. This danger, was the Towne now in; the more need, therefore, for the King to keepe his word with it. And yet was it a mixt action, too: there were other con∣curring causes, for the Kings sitting downe about Norimberg, besides the bare keeping of his promise with it. These were some of the preuailing reasons, that drew the King thi∣ther. First, should he have left it vnto the fury of the enemy,  the whole world might iustly haue condemn'd him, as a man more regardfull of his safety, then of his honour. Then, the Imperiall Cities (whose Champion he had heretofore pro∣fessed himselfe) perceiuing him so carefull to make his owne game, would also haue plaid the best of theirs: and Norim∣berg, among the rest, would quickely have falne off from him, and have saved its owne stake with the Emperor. Secondly, This Towne of Norimberg, was a Passe of migh∣ty
importance: not onely, by the aduantage of its situation, which was its neighbourhood vnto a many smaller Principa∣lities (all in League with it) but a very considerable State like∣wise of its selfe it is, for the largenesse of its owne Iurisdi∣ction. The soile, indeed, is but woody and sandy: but the Lordship of it, is (much what) sixteene English miles square, with about twenty good Towes, and sixe or seuen skore vil∣lages in it. Norimberg, therefore, was worth the looking after. Thirdly, the City it selfe had now giuen him an assurance, how excellent well it was provided; for the sustaining of his Army: which, notwithstanding that it maintained 30000 or 40000 people, for sixteene weekes together, yet at the Kings rising, was not bread much dearer, then ordinarily tis in London. And these three, together with the honour of keeping his word; were the chiefe of the reasons for the Kings en∣camping about Norimberg. Had he more entended the ad∣uancement of his other victories, then the safety of this Towne; he might then haue marched vp into the Bishop of Bambergs Country; and haue expected Wallenstein in these quarters: and so by laying the seate of the warres, in that Bishopricke, haue abundantly beene reuenged of that Prince; for the breache of his former promises. Againe, the Kings Armie was now but small: for though it had the reputation of 20000 men, by the ensigne; yet surely (so weake were the Companies, that the forces of the Towne excepted) they could not muster aboue 15500 reall marching men, to be rec∣koned by the Poll. Had, therefore, the chiefe of his care beene, to haue first reenforced his Legions; and then to haue returned vpon the enemy: he should (in all probabilitie) haue retired beyond Norimberg, towards the bancks of the Riuer Maine in Franconia. Thereabouts, was the whole Country at his deuotion; and hither, might the seuerall Armies which he had now sent for; with lesse danger, and more speed, haue marcht vp to him. But either of these, had he now done; then, doubtlesse, would Walenstein so strongly haue entrencht
himselfe before Norimberg in the meane time, that there would haue beene no remoouing of him. Seuerall Chieftaines with their Armies,The King sends for his seuerall Armies to come to him. had the King now abroad, vpon their employments. Duke William of Saxon-Weymar, was towards the Riuer Weser about Westphalia. The Landtgraue of Hessen, about Paderborn, and the Bishop∣pricke of Cullen: The Rex-Chancellor Oxenstiern, about Mentz; and Duke Bernard with the Generall Banier, in Ba∣uaria. All these Armies, he had at his first encamping, com∣manded with all speed to come and ioyne with him: which whilest they are about to doe; we shall entertaine our Readers with the chiefest of those military discourses, descriptions, and rencounters: which passed betwixt the two Armies a∣bout Norimberg. Begin we with the Kings Leaguer, and the description of it, as also of the strength he had to lay in it. He had, at his first sitting downe, sixe Brigades of foote forces: three where∣of were commanded by Graue Neeles; and the other three, by Sir Iohn Hepburn; which came to betwixt seuen and 8000,The Kings strength, and no more. About that strength, were his Horse: not full 8000 compleat, and yet fast vpon it. The Right wing of these horse, was commanded by Lieftenant Generall Strieff, and the left-wing, by Leiftenant Generall Goldstein. His Ar∣tillery, consisted of twenty Peeces of battery; and thirty Fielding Peeces, of three and sixe pound ball. The King, so soone as euer he had taken the resolution of retyring to No∣rimberg: had sent before hand to the Towne, to haue his Leaguer prouided for him about the City. Himselfe with his Army, staid two dayes in the Mountaines, whilest his Quar∣ters might be something towards a readinesse: so that at his first comming, he found the Trenches halfe wrought by the Burgers. They were found too little, when the King came to lodge his Army in them: for which cause, his Maiesty in person rode round about the Towne to lay out the ground for enlarging of the Quarters:with the de∣scription of his Leaguer. which contained 35000 Rods of ground, within the vttermost line of Circumualla∣tion.
And for my understanding of this strength and Leaguer; are the thanks due unto the Noble and valiant Sir Iohn Hepburne. The fashion of the Citie of Norimberg, enclines, mostly, to a circle; and yet something to an ovall figure. The small river Pegnitz, runnes in at the East, and out at the West of it. It hath many faire Suburbs; and in them, was the Kings Leaguer: it embracing both Towne and Suburbs, round a∣bout, within the compasse of its protection. I begin to de∣scribe the Fortifications vpon the East side, by the river, and the Suburb of Weert. Hence, all about the hill of the Iewes, vnto St. Iohns; was it taken vp with diuers Bastions, and Retrenchments: all these, being guarded by their Flanckers, and other ordinary Defences. On the other side of the water, was the Pent encompassed about with another Fort or Basti∣on: which being well Flanckered with a Curtaine: was also joyned unto a Fort new builded in the Suburbe called Gasten∣hoff: and that well defended likewise with diuers Halfe-Moones and Horn-works. The Suburb called Steinbuhel to∣wards Scheinaw; was strongly entrenched likewise; guar∣ded besides with two other Forts, joyning one upon another. Towards the wood of Rotenbach, was there a Fort-royall e∣rected: and another towards Gleishammer, upon the way that leadeth towards Altorff. Divers Batteryes were erected here and there, betweene: which were plentifully furnished with the Kings owne Ordnance; and others out of the Towne Magazine. The Works were strongest, upon the South side; for that the King suspected the enemy likelyest to encampe there: and upon the East side, towards the Vp∣per Palatinate; for feare the Imperialists should haue had the courage to have falne on upon the neerest side to them, at their first comming. The Moate or Graff round about all, was, generally twelue foot wide, and eight deepe: and about the Head-works, eighteene foot wide, and twelue deepe. The King of Bohemia's Quarter in the Leaguer, was at Weiershaus, (a house of one Weier, a Burger) on the South
side of the Citie, and in the way towards Newmarckt. Eight thousand souldiers laboured daily upon the Fortifications: the Works being not yet fully perfected, at Walensteins first comming: so that the King looked presently to haue beene assaulted. But our Generalissimo, in the point of fighting, deceiued the expectations both of his friends, and of his enemies. And this is something towards the description of the Kings Leaguer. And here was his Majesty now resolued to abide that shocke and tempest of warre; which from the whole power of the League and house of Austria; hee had last spring expected should at Mentz haue falne upon him. At Mentz, therefore, did he last yeere make those so large Fortifications and Bridges; which Page 51 of our Second Part you shall finde described. There had hee taken in the hils about the Towne; not so much to make the Citie stron∣ger (which plainly, hee did not) but to have a Camping-place for the lodging of such an Army; as might beare the brunt of the whole power of the Empire. Doe we now as much for their Highnesses the Dukes of Fridland and Bavaria. The Army was much about the same number that we haue before set you downe, Page 233 of our Second Part. For in the end of this Iuly, that they encampt in; Walenstein himselfe sent a List of his whole Forces, unto his Imperiall Majesty at Vienna. In it, were 191 Cornets of Horse besides Crabats and Dragooners: with 149 Foot Companies. The Horse, at 125 to a Cornett (which is the usuall proportion) amount to about 20000: And so many Dutch Horse he had indeed. His Foot, at 300 complete,The Forces of Walenstein and Bavaria. to a company for halfe of them (for so Walsteins List, was) and the rest, as strong as the Captaines could make them; amount to 40000: and so many marching men they had effective: (tis the word of the forenamed Gentleman) who accounted themselues 80000. The Crabats were full 5000 men, who gaue out themselues to be 8000. And this was their whole strength (and with the least too) 40000 Foot, and 25000
Horse: in all 65000. fighting men: who either for their owne credits, were apt to beleeue it, or for policy and terror helpt to giue it out, That they were 128000. And their great Officers.These were Walensteins great Officers. In his Campe was Gallas, (an Italian of Friuli, and a braue Gentleman) Liefte∣nant-Generall; and he gaue out the orders. In the Duke of Bavariaes Campe, had Altringer the same office: who yet was to be directed and controlled by Walenstein; the Duke of Bavaria himselfe (many times) knowing nothing, till the command was to be executed. Major-Generall of the Horse unto Walenstein, was Colonell Holck; a Holsteyner, as I take it. His Generall-Major of the Foote, was the Colonel Sparre, a little blacke Gentleman, and a Pomerlander. The valiant Baron of Cronenberg (as I take it) was Generall-Ma∣jor of the Horse unto Bavaria, but who was of his Foote, I know not: Cratz was not now in the Leaguer; for he was yet busie against Banier, in Bavaria: and he afterwerwards offered to hinder him, when hee came towards Norimberg. But this I haue but by heare-say. Other great Commanders, which had seuerally entrenched Quarters, in the Leaguer, were Count Maximilian Walstein, and Count Bernard Walen∣stein; Kinsmen, I suppose, unto the Generalissimo. The Baron of Schemberg, and Colonel Picolomini, an Italian Gentle∣man: with Mittscha and Gratzij, Colonells Generall of the Crabats and Hungarians, in their Quarter. Walenstein at his first comming, sate downe a night or two about Schwabach, untill his Quarters could be made ready for him: which done, then went he and sate downe in his Leaguer. The whole Imperiall Leaguer, was at first diuided into 8. seuerall Quarters: if the Figure cut in Copper be true, which I haue seene printed, with a High Dutch description, to it. The distance of his Quarters from the Kings,The Imperiall Leaguer, and the 8. seuerall Quarters of it, described. was about 4. miles English. Their first and Head-Quarter, (which was far the largest) was by Metzendorff, vpon the North-West of the riuer Pegnitz, betwixt the High-wayes unto Wurtsburg and Bamberg. This was almost like an Ovall: and the riuer Red∣nitz,
ranne close by it upon the Northerne border. The se∣cond Quarter, was by Scheurglung, betweene the way to Wurtsburg (which parted it from Walensteins) and the riuer Pegnitz: close upon the Westerne banke of it. Here Pic∣colomini commanded.. The third Quarter, was by Mueggen∣hoff; at a good distance from the Southerne banke of the ri∣ver, & from Piccolominies Quarter: with 2. Royall Forts be∣tweene, and their Batteries. Here was Count Maximilian Walenstein lodged. The fourth was on the South side of the Kings Leaguer, by Hoffen: and there lay Baron Cronenberg. The fifth was on the same side towards the right hand, by Saint Leonards: which was called Baron Altringers. Betwixt these two went the High-way to Reychelsdorff. The sixth, was by Pultmull, on the East side of Norimberg and beyond the riuer, on the Northerne banke, a great distance from Al∣tringers, with a very great Fort, betweene the way to Schwa∣bach and the Pegnitz. And here, Count Bernard Walenstein commaunded. The seuenth, was by Prentzengart; betwixt the High-waies that leade to Amberg, and to Culmbach: on the North-East of Norimberg: This was the Hungarian and the Crabats Quarter: whose chiefes were Isolani, Mittscha and Gratzij. The 8. and last Quarter, was by Rehenberg; be∣tweene the wayes to Culmbach and Bamberg, upon the North of the City; and neere unto the Head-Quarter. This was the Count of Schombergs. Betwixt each of these, was there Workes and Forts, one or two; according to the distance. This mighty Leaguer, was vaste, rather then accurate: Walenstein, surely, was defectiue in this point of military ex∣cellency, he is none of the best Spademen; nor had he any good Enginiers about him. Seuen of these 8. Quarters, were but slight ones; a little earth cast vp, and barricadoed with Wagons, trees and other encumberments. Nor were they close behind: as if out of a military bravery, they would have the King know, they trusted more to their strengths, then to their trenches. Nor did these 7. Quarters hold long; but onely till they heard of Oxenstierns comming: against
which time, the Head Quarter was enlarged and fortified: and all the forces of the rest, drawne into it. That we now describe. The Avenues or Passages of this great Leaguer, in and out, thorow the Retrenchments, had Barricadoes right before them, made with Truncks and mighty boughes of Trees, among: with broken Wagons, Turne-pikes, Gabions, or Cannon-baskets, peeces of old Cask filld vp with earth and stones; and many such other rude devises, to blocke up the way withall: especially against Horse, and sudden Camisadoes. The place for some of his Quarters, was a naturall Fortifica∣tion; hilly, wooddy, and bushye: and especially by the hill and old Castle of Altendorp; made famous on Saint Barthol∣mewes day following, by a most notable conflict for it. All the bridges over the 2. little rivers, had he caused to be broken downe: at Katzwang, namely, Reychelsdorff, Stain, Wayker∣hoff, and Furt; that so, no body might, on the sudden come at him. Divers villages were within these Quarters, the Duke of Bavaria being lodg'd in one of them: yea and Walenstein himselfe, though he had his day Pavilion in the open field, for the most part, and when it was faire weather; yet was his lodging (when he pleased) within a house. And this was fittest both for his diseases and humours: he is shrewdly troubled with the Gowte,Walensteins diseases. so that he goes softly, and is led sometimes. Some other crazynesses, is he likewise troubled with, for which the cold earth is not so kindly. He loues to keepe a State, fit for the dignity of his place: and that affects priuacy and retyrednesse. The Soveraignty (I must not expresse it in a lower stile) over the Militia; was absolutely, at the Duke of Fridlands disposure:Walensteins for so much he tooke vpon him, as Imperiall Ge∣neralissimo.Authority, He was Fellow in Armes, and no Generall, over the Duke of Bavaria: for that his Army, was independant; and he, as a Prince of the Empire by himselfe, had levied it at his owne charges. Yet did Walenstein commaund all; and that with a Switch (as it were:) his Orders being giuen out with an Imperious Eloquence, which is Breefenesse. His pleasure (so much
is due to a Generall) must not onely be uncontrolleable, but undisputable: and he is a most sudden and seuere Iusticier,Severity, (when he pleases) for his military discipline. Hang the beast, (thats his word) that obeyes not with a servile celerity.and Bounty. He is a bountifull-handed man, where he finds deseruing: and these two things, Rewards and Punishments (and enough of both) are the Secrets of his Discipline; these are the chiefe lawes that kept his Campe in exceeding good order, all the time of this Leaguer; and himselfe well beloued of his soul∣diers. There was no great good heartinesse of affection, (some will say) betwixt the 2. Dukes: and if Bavaria, at any time, interposed his counsell; Walenstein would take no more of it, then should serue his turne: good aduice, perchance, being now and then discountenanced, for the Giver. The Campe being fortified, the Generalissimo gave this generall order unto his souldiers, that they should make more use of their trenches, then of their weapons: That they should not, but with speciall leaue, goe out upon commanded Partees, and that very strongly: That they should not, but upon command, straggle abroad after forrage or adventures: but continue to make good the Posts, they were comman∣ded to, till they were relieved. That they should, for the most part, containe themselues upon the defensive within their Quarters: and when they were in commanded Partees sent abroad, they should then hinder the Swedes from get∣ting forrage. He had taken a very excellent order, for the victualling of his Army; for sure, the Duke of Fridlands Master-piece, is to be a good Provisioner:His provisions for his Army, what. and he hath a sin∣gular good Catering-wit of his owne. Aboue all, had he ta∣ken good care for his Provant-breade, which is halfe the stan∣ding diet of a souldier: and they will doe well enough, where bread is good, and plentifull. That which most incom∣modated him, was, That navigable river, he had none, for the seruice of his Leaguer. The river Rednitz though it ranne from his Campe, into the Bishopricke of Bamberg (a friends countrey) yet it being both narrow, and shallow, and against
the streame too;whence, and how, fetched. it was no way capable of any great carriages. His trust for the bringing of his victualls, therefore, must be by Convoyes over land: which were farre more casuall, and more chargeable. He had laid all the countrey for provi∣sions. Divers troopes of his Cavallery, were sent unto all the next greater townes and Passages, then at his devotion: which were there to hold their Quarters. As to Cronach, namely, and Forcheim, in the Bishopricke of Bamberg: Wills∣burg Castle, and Weissenburg, an Imperiall towne by it, in the Bishopricke of Aichstet. Some of his Forces had beene left beyond Norimberg in the Ʋpper Palatinate, to secure that, and Bohemia: and others were already advanced be∣yond it, to the townes upon the river Aisch, in Franconia. The Crabats roaved up and downe, from Forcheim, almost, unto Wurtsburg: yea he had made sure worke of it, euen as farre as the towne of Regenspurg in Bavaria: and had blockt up all the chiefe Posts and Passes, betwixt these townes and Norimberg. From all these (and from Regenspurg especially, whether it was sent him along the Danuby, from Ʋienna) was his Campe served with provisions, and the Kings Lea∣guer thereby cut off, from all necessaries: Every day were strong commanded Horse-Partees sent abroad, to lye upon severall Posts and Passages of advantage, to intercept the Kings Foragers. This was commonly the Crabats businesse: who lay up and downe, 4. 6. 8. or 10. miles from the Kings Leaguer. With these had the Swedish Partees their most en∣counters; but for brevities sake I must not insist upon every skirmish. All this, was done by Walenstein, with Iudgement, and like a Generall: and this was all the force he used to constreine the King, to dislodge from before Norimberg, and to aban∣don it up to his mercy.Walensteins purpose, in en∣camping by the King. Other force, he attempted none. He saw the Kings Works and Retrenchments, to be made so strong, that it would prooue a desperate peece of seruice, for whosoeuer should undertake to assault them. And Walenstein boldly gaue it out, That it sorted not with the Service of His
Imperiall Majestie to haue the new Army hazarded, upon a Battell or Invasion: That there had beene too much attempted that way, before; and That he would show the King of Sweden another kinde of Warre-faring. And thus much indeed, was by some prisoners of great note, confessed unto the King, afterwards: namely, that the Imperiall Generalissimo had this plot upon him. To draw the Warre out into a length; and to awayte the favour of opportunitie: hoping, at last, to serve himselfe so well, upon the Kings necessities; that, ei∣ther, they should so constreine him; or his friends so per∣swade with him; that he should, if not offer, yet not deny, to hearken; unto a good Treaty. This if it tooke well, then should the advantage, in the conclusion of the Peace, make him a faire saver for his patience; preserve Him a gallant Army, to be otherwhere employed for His Imperiall Maje∣sty: and gaine, finally, a most ample reputation unto the name of Walenstein; as one that had onely knowne, how to handle the King of Sweden. This was Walensteins Rest up, and he was resolved to act no part but of Fabius: hee had the King in a coope, or in a toyle already, and there (for a while) hee meant to keepe him, and Norimberg. Something, indeed, his Army did, at their very first comming into those Quarters:Walensteins first attempts, but they were not any attempts upon the Kings Trenches; but some out∣rydings and Cavalcadoes onely, upon the Iewes of Furt, and Burgers of Farenbach, whom his men plundered. Some o∣ther foraging voyages they also made upon the Boores barnes and houses; in the smaller townes of the neighbour Marqui∣sate of Onspach; (commonly called The Lower Marquisate) and into the Iurisdiction of the Norimbergers.upon the coun∣trey abroad. The poore towne of Swabach (8 or 9 English miles from Norimberg) now falling into the Lordly displeasure of the Generalissimo, (for that it had slaine 50 of his men, in the taking of it) was by him destinated unto an universall destruction. The execu∣tion was stayed, by the Duke of Bavaria's intercession; (which was granted, as the first motion he had made to him)
and the punishment commuted to a ransome: as a surety for which moneyes, the chiefe Magistrate was carryed away prisoner. Divers able troopes, were by our Generalissimo (at his ve∣ry first setting downe) dispatched further into the Marquisate of Onspach, and the Dukedome of Franconia. Neere Onspach, was the Towne and Castle of Liechtenaw within the Iuris∣diction of the Norimbergers, pressed, but not taken yet, by the Walsteiners. Three of their Regiments attempted an Aenslaught upon the Imperiall Citie of Winshaim upon the river Aisch, 30 English miles to the West of Norimberg: and 24 to the Northwest of Onspach. But this designe of theirs being discovered and defeated by the Swedish garrison, and the Burgers; the Imperialists gate a shrewd brush here, left many of their fellowes behind them, and carryed off the best part of 1000 more, wounded with them into Swabach. They rambled up and downe as farre as Ʋffenhaim also, eight miles more to the Westward. Kitzingen, and Swinfort both, were in some dread of them: but that the river Mayn was a good Barricadoe betwixt them and the present danger. All that countrey likewise, which you see bounded with that mightie compasse of the river Mayne, to the Northward; even from Bamberg, unto this Kitzingen, was daily ouer-run and brought under contribution by their Horse-Partees. On the Northern side of the Mayne also, those Crabats that had their Quarters in and about Bamberg, did at pleasure roave up and downe the countrey, euen unto the very walles of Wurtsburg. Due South of Norimberg, moreover, even as farre as the Bishopricke of Aichstet, for above 30 English miles together, was all at their devotion; and did daily fur∣nish the Imperiall Leaguer with provisions. The Crabats (who are the ranke-ryders, and common harryers of the Im∣periall Army) had by this time plundered Hippolstein, a pretty Towne betwixt Norimberg and Aichstet. Having lodged there a-while, they set it on fire at parting: barbarously e∣nough laughing at the poore mens miseries, That they never
used to pay their Hosts, in other money. The Townes of Carels∣berg and Rostall on the West of Norimberg, were also so ser∣ved: None faring so well, as those that worst used them; and that had the courage to let flye their Ordnance amongst them. And thus farre was our Generalissimo, absolute Master of the Field: excepting those good Townes onely, which had Swedish garrisons in them. All this was done by the mid∣dle of Iuly, 1632. and now turne wee backe againe unto Norimberg. We told you before, of the good order taken by Walen∣stein, for the victualing of his Army: which for all his care, must be contented with the entertainment of the Warres, and with many an Italian dinner. The Generalissimo's ordi∣nary dyet, was sixe dishes a meale, and two bottles of wine to it, as long as it lasted. The Kings table, perchance, was no∣thing better serv'd; as relying wholly upon the Magazine of Norimberg. Hence (as I find it from severall hands assured,) was his Campe furnished with 8000 pound of bread (80000 some name) daily. The Norimbergers wanted Milles, rather then come: which the enemy had burnt downe. Both par∣ties were faine to Steward their provisions, as thriftily as they could: Walenstein, that he might haue enough to starve the King withall: and the King, to be able to hold out, till his sureties, those other Armies which he had now sent for should be comne up to baile him. That which most necessi∣tated both the Armies, was want of straw and Horse-meate: for which, whiles both sides sent out a foraging, there fell out many a shrewd bickering betweene them: one side carrying away oftentimes, what the others had before mow∣ed. Walenstein kept his Army all this while, under very good discipline; nor durst he leave them any more at large, unto the libertie of that former licentiousnesse which in other Warres, they had beene let loose unto. He very well knew, how neere he now was, unto a King of Sweden: who still, as any of the Imperialists durst venture abroad a Boot-haling; had ever some Partee or other, upon the the powles of them.
And in the same manner were the Swedes also served: both sides taking their turnes, according to advantage. The first Warre that Walenstein now made with the King, was a contention of courtesie: for the man (certainly) is a gallant spirited personage, and full of noblenesse. Hee first of all, and without ransome,) sent him home his well esteemed Co∣lonell Dubatell: whom, (as in the latter end of our Second Part we told you) he had lately taken prisoner about New∣marckt. With him, sent he the King this complement: That he had no other ambition,Walenstein courts the King of Swe∣den. then once to see his Majesty, in good termes with the Emperour his Master; and himselfe to have the honour, to be the Instrument of it. About a three weekes af∣ter, the same courtesie did he againe unto Ritmaister Reyschel; whom as he was seeking his adventure abroad, the Crabats had taken prisoner. His ransome did Walenstein first pay unto the takers; and then entertaining him in faire manner at his owne Table: franke and free sent him home, after dinner, with this message, onely, unto the King his Master. That he esteemed his Majesty for the best Captaine of the World: and that he would abundantly rest himselfe contented, if he could not by force vanquish him; yet that he might be the meanes to bring him to a good Treaty with the Emperour. This being told the King as he after sate at table, Hee smiling said, That hee was ready to doe Walstein reason at all times;The Kings answer. and for that he show'd himselfe so honest a man, He had no cause to wish his Person any ill: the thing that he above all desired, being, that they two might have a crash together, upon a faire campagnia. Walenstein sends succour into Bavaria;The Imperiall Generalissimo purposing to contract himselfe into his great Leaguer: sends out, first of all, some of his Forces into other Countryes. Some Bavarians (and I have heard that there were 1000 of them, though I beleeue not so many) were sent backe into their owne Dukedome. and Holck, into Misnia.About the 20th of Iuly, was Holck, Generall-Major of the Horse, sent with 6000 Horse, and 4000 Muskettiers, to∣wards the Duke of Saxonyes countrey. His sending out of these Forces, was; first, to giue the rest more roome at home,
who else should have layne more pent and pestered in their Quarters. Secondly, to ease himselfe of the charges of pay and victuals: they abroad,and why. being to live (as they could) up∣on the Countrey. His sending out of the Bavarians, was to hinder Baniers ioyning with the King: Cratz, with them, first way-laying him about Weissenburg, and then afterwards with the helpe of Leopolds forces, recovering Landsperg, Schonga, Fuessen and Munchen in Bavaria. As for Holck, he also was sent to hinder the ioyning of Duke William of Saxon-Weymar, with the King: and if he should come too late for that purpose, then was he to fall into the Duke of Saxons Voitland and Misnia: where, after Duke Williams comming away, he should find the lesse resistance. Said it is,Bavaria moues Walenstein, to beate the Kings Quarter. that the Duke of Bavaria should now be earnest with the Generalissimo, to give on upon the King in his tren∣ches, and to venture the beating of him out, before his re∣liefes should be comne up to him. To this motion, the same Relation makes Walenstein returne this answer, That his Ar∣my was new, as yet; and if they should be beaten, then were all Germany and Italy were endangered:Walensteins answer. but if Bavaria please to fall on first, he would second him with all his forces. About the end of Iuly did the Duke of Bavaria send an Expresse vnto the Count of Pappenheim, to invite him, ra∣ther to come with his forces from the Weser, and to make in diversion in Duringen, or upon the Duke of Saxony,Bavaria invites Pappenheim. then to goe to serve the Arch-Duthesse. These letters being written in Cyphers, the Packet was intercepted about Altemburg in Misnia upon the seuenth of August, the Postilion was carri∣ed prisoner into Salfriet, and the letters sent unto the King of Sweden. This had the Court of Vienna likewise desired from the Count of Pappenheim: who being absolute of him∣selfe in Misnia, was looth to come too neere a Generalissimo: and was now going to relieve Mastricht. The King, towards the 20. of Iuly, hearing of a Convoye of Walensteins, that was to come out of the hether parts of
Austria, towards his Leaguer: sends out Colonel Wippen∣horst, with a Partee of 800. Horse, and as many Dragooners; to cut off that Convoye. With these 1600. did Wippenhorst light vpon 800. wagons laden with ammunition, and with Gunnes especially: which he destroyed. About the 27. of Iuly, a Partee of Swedish Horse, tooke one Captaine Darmis prisoner, amongst other Free-booters. He being examined by the King upon his oath, confessed that Walensteins great Magazine of victuals was at Freyenstat: which was the place appointed for whatsoeuer came from Ratisbone,The King lear∣ning out Walen∣steins Magazine. and the Vpper Palatinate, untill it were sent for to the Leaguer; which, within 3. or 4. dayes, a strong Convoye was about to goe for. The advantage of this opportunity, the king thought worth the taking: resoluing with the first to send either to bring away the provisions, or to destroy that which was to feede his enemies. This towne, is in the Ʋpper Palatinate; 5. Dutch miles, or 20. English, to the South of Norimberg, and 2. Dutch leagues from Newmarckt. The scituation of it, is in a Morasse, upon the side of a small namelesse river, and betwixt it and Schwart∣zach.Sends Dubatell towards it, The Leader that the King made choise of to doe the feate, was Colonell Dubatell: whom Walenstein had lately taken prisoner, and againe released; as we before told you, The Colonell knew the Countrey thereabouts, perfectly well: for it was not farre from thence, that he was taken prisoner. The troopes appointed to goe with him, I find to be 14. Cornets of Horse, some troopes of Dragooners, and 2. Wa∣gons laden with Petards, Storming or Skaling ladders, &c. With these, comes he unto Karnbergh first; 2. Dutch miles from Freyenstat. His season and march he so proportioned, as that he might be before the towne he went unto, before day-light, upon the Munday morning Iuly 30. He did so: and found most of the souldiers and townesmen, very secure∣ly sleeping: for who would have suspected, that the King of Swedens smaller Army; being besieged as it were, by two greater; durst have presumed to send twenty miles off,
to surprize Freyenstat. Dubatel, at his first comming before the Towne; surpri∣ses some drowsie Sentinells: and hangs 2. Petards upon the Sally-port. These not blowing open the gate, as he expected;who taking the Towne, he fearing the noyse of their going off, would send in the Alarme into the Towne; claps his skaling ladders to the naked and un-man'd walls; which he mounts and enters. Other Petards being by this time put to worke, had forced open the gate; and made an easie passage that way, for the residue of the Swedish. They thus gotten in, cut in pieces those few soul∣diers, which they found either sleeping or unprovided, upon the next Courts of Guard, and whosoeuer else, offered to make resistance. Hauing thus mastered all opposition, they make towards the Towne-Hall; which was the Magazine or Store-house they came thither for. There were in it, at this present, 2000000. pound weight of bread; great store of Meale, Corne, salt, and other provisions; sufficient for 2. moneths victualls for Walensteins whole Army. For the bringing of all this unto the Emperiall Leaguer, were there 1000. Wagons provided: many of them already prest, and some laden, or, not yet unladen, upon the Market place. Many hundred head both of small and great Cattell, were likewise found about the towne: which were to be driven alive unto the Imperiall Army, Of those provisions, the Swedish first of all choosing out so much, as they thought themselues well a∣ble to carry away: set fire immediately unto the Magazine. The towne they first plunder,Spoyles and brings away all the provisions. and then set fire to it in seuen places at once. Divers Ladyes, Gentlewomen, and Captaines wives being at that time lodged within the towne; these together with their apparell and such like feminine Baggage, as were not sitting for a souldiers wearing; did the Swedish, very honestly,Some Relations say, that Duba∣tell destroied al; for that he was not able to bring it away with him: set to shift for themselues without the towne. Twelue hundred Sheepe and Oxen, with 500. horses, they also driving away with them; put themselues the same day homewards upon their march againe: safely recovering to the Kings Quarters, before the now following conflict.
Some of the Imperiall souldiers (it seemes) so soone as the Swedes were gotten into the towne; went Post with the newes of it unto Walenstein. Which he hearing of; imme∣diately the same day dispatches the Sergeant-Major Generall of his Foot; towards Freyenstat: either to save the residue; or to cut off Dubatell in his comming home againe.Sparre going out to cut off Dubatell in his retreate; It was Colonell Sparre that was now sent: the same man whom the King had taken prisoner in April last, at Franckford upon the Oder: and who had beene exchanged for Colonell Kniphowsen, whom Tilly had taken prisoner at New Bran∣denburg. Sparre was sent out with 8. Cornets of Horse, of Colcredo'es and Gonzagaes Regiments, as I find specified. Twenty troopes of Crabats had he also with him: and 500. commanded Muskettiers. And he (as I have heard it told) was now going out towards Amberg, to find out a conve∣nient Post or Quarter, where to lodge 8. or 10000. men; to curbe in the Swedish foragers into that Countrey. He had a purpose, in his returne, to have spoyled Altorff; where the Norimbergers have an Vniversity. With these Forces, Sparre the same Munday, advances to∣wards Freyenstat. Some of his people (as I guesse) passed the river Schwartzach, about Schwartzpruck towne, over the bridge there: and some others of them (which I suppose to be drawne out of other Quarters) passed the said river beyond or about Burgtan; something more Easterly then their fellowes. The King of Sweden to prevent such a matter, and the bet∣ter to secure the retreate unto Dubatel; goes himselfe out the same day, before Dubatel was comne home) with a se∣lected Partee of some 2000. commanded men, towards the said Freyenstat. The King passed the river Schwartzach at Wendlestain bridge, (as I take it) betwixt which towne and Burgtan, was the future meeting and conflict. He being passed this bridge;Is encountred by the King, sends (as the manner is) a Sergeant-Ma∣jor with some Skowtes and Vant-curryers before him, to discover whither the coast were cleere, or whereabouts Par∣tees
of the enemies now where.And defeated. But yet the King had some muskettiers that followed him, though perchance they had not all this while kept pace in the march with him. The Swedish falling fowle of some of Sparrs troopes, was charged and rowted by them, and himselfe taken prisoner. He being brought unto Sparre, Wheres the King, saies he? At hand, answeres the Major. What Forces brings he with him? certaine troopes of Horse, quoth the other. Hath he no Muskettiers, saies Sparre? No, answeres the Swede. Then certainly it is the King, said Sparre, and hee shall presently fall into my fingers. The King having heard the peeces goe off, in the former conflict: had doubled his march upon it; and was comne so neere by this time, that he met his owne men flying, and the Walsteiners giuing chase unto them. The King riding up  his men, with his drawne sword in his hand; returnes their lost courages into them, and them into the Battell. Not ma∣ny charges passed betwixt the King and the enemies Horse; but that the face of the skirmish began to be altered: inso∣much that the Imperiall Horse and Crabats; were (to be briefe) quite rowted and defeated. The Horse of Gonzagaes Regiment, play the pultrons and ranne away: whereupon Gonzaga himselfe, (notwithstanding he be Cosin unto the Empresse) was at his comming to the Campe, cashiered by the Generalissimo: for all that he cleered himselfe to have beene forsaken by his Regiment, and to have beene the last man that stood to it. The 500. Muskettiers making their re∣treate into a small wood or groave, there at hand: held the King and his men play, a great season. Very good use made they of the wood; which is farre more advantageous for shot, then either for Horse or Pikemen. But the Kings Dra∣gooners alighting with their Muskets, and his Horsemen round besetting the said wood: discouraged by and by, and overthrew the Walsteiners. Sparre himselfe was taken priso∣ner: 600. of his men, were slaine upon the place: and di∣vers more drowned and buried alive, in the river and moorish places, thorow which they thought to have escaped. Sparre, had now quitted his Horse, and hid himselfe in a
bush in the said thicket.Sparre taken prisoner. Him, a Swedish common souldier thus light vpon. The Swede perceiuing a gallant empty horse standing tied up thereby, with a goodly embroydered saddle upon his backe: iudges him to belong to some brave Cava∣lier of the enemies, and goes out to find him. He was told by a Horse-boy (a Walsteiner then taken and threatned) that it was Sparres horse whom he presently directed the Swede unto. He had a rich and massie gold chaine about his necke; of which the souldier first disrobing him, reacht him a good rude brush over the shoulders with the stocke of his Musket, and so brought him prisoner to the King. Ha Monsieur Sparre (saith the King) I see you loue me so well, that you cannot finde in your heart to be long away from me. Sparre being brought prisoner into Norimberg, was faine to take Sperma Cti, for the bruise that the rough souldier gaue him. With him, was his Lieftenant-Colonel Tertaky likewise ta∣ken; together with 4. Captaines, divers Officers, and above 100. common souldiers. Three Corners were then obtained, and a Ensignes: as for the rest, the Ancients had slipt them off from their Flagge-stoves,The losses on both sides. and then runne away with thorn. The King rewarded each of those souldiers that pre∣sented him the Colours, with 100. Dollars. The losses on the Kings side where not many: but among them, was Co∣lonell Ries slaine, who belonged unto one of the Dukes of Saxon-Wemar. oye, a Swedish Gentleman, lost there his life; and Ycker Crenstein, that waited upon the King in his Chamber. This done, the King, the same night, retur∣ned towards his League: causing a most solemne Thankes∣giving to be made unto the God of Battells, for this double victory. The Swedes after the taking of this Fryesat, flow out as farre as Hmburg: some 9. or 10. English miles to the East of Burgan, where the last encounter hapned. This towne, and the Castle to it, they now take in; by which helpe was all the coast on that side indifferently well cleered: so that the Walstris being defeated of their intended Quar∣tering
place in those parts; the Swedes roave freely up and downe, as farre as Amberg. Generall-Major Sparre,Sparres exami∣nation and confession. being once againe the Kings priso∣ner, was strictly and upon oath examined, what he knew of his Generalls purposes. He confessed, that they had no other plot upon the King, then by famine to compell him to a trea∣ty. After this victory; there (for a while) passed nothing of moment, betweene the two Armies. The pettier skirmishes betweene commanded Partees abroad, or the continued night-alarmes upon one anothers Camps or Guards at home; I list not to stand upon.The mortality in Towne and Leaguers. With the same silence would I haue passed over, the diseases and fluxes both of the Towne and Leaguers: (notwithstanding that by midde August there dy∣ed 1000. and 1400. a weeke of it) had not his Majestie the King of Bohemia, beene at this time troubled with it. The running away of men, on either side, I omit.None are so well prouided against this noysomenesse: as the Crabats; who will eate you whole handfulls of raw Onyons & Garlicke, as familiarly as an Italian wrings downe sallets, or we apples: as if they meant to out-stincke the carrion, and their owne Quarters. The many dead horses: which by this beginning of August, came to some thousands, in both Leaguers: and which, (to the horrible noysomnesse of the Quarters, where they lay vnburied) dai∣ly more and more encreased, (or diminished rather) I would not haue offended you with, but to shew you how it was possible, for these two great Armies to be reduced to such small numbers; notwithstanding so few of them were in fight, killed. Leaving these particulars; I shall (for want of other acti∣on) here impart an Oration of the King of Swedens, on the first of August made unto the Officers of his Army: then which Speech, I desire no other Character of the King of Sweden, nor no other Interpreter of the Heroicke Iustice, of his great intentions. The occasion was this, A complaint of the Norimbergers unto his Maiestie, how that their lands and territories, had as ill beene plundered and destroyed, by those of the Kings owne Army, as by the enemies. Calling here∣upon, the Officers, great and small, of his whole Army to∣gether, he with the vivacity and passion of an Orator, (wherein he was excellent) as well as with the authority
of a King, uttered a most pathetick Oration before them; of which no more but this Extract, hath comne within my In∣telligence. Yee Lords and Gentlemen: The Kings O∣ration against plunderers.You, partly, are some of those numbers, that have shew∣ed themselves unfaithfull and disloyall to their owne coun∣trey; and who doe helpe to ruine it. You, my Generals, Leiftenant-Generals, and all you my inferiour Officers; I have ever, (as to your honours I here confesse it) esteemed you for brave Cavaliers: and I beare you witnesse, that upon all occasion of service offered, you have in battell given mee so sufficient a demonstration of your valours; as that I have therewithall rested satisfied. But, when having you all here before me, I am put in remembrance of your ravages, rob∣beryes, and plunderings; and that you your selves are guiltie of these insolencies, and companions besides, with them that neither observe Discipline, nor doe justice upon malefactors in these kinds: my haire standeth up on end, at the very hor∣rour of it. Let your selves be Iudges. Is it not a dolefull and a lamentable case, yea most odious in the sight of Almightie God; that one Christian, and of the same profession in Re∣ligion, should pillage one another? one friend, nay one bro∣ther, ransacke, spoyle, ruine and undoe one another? The ve∣ry divels in hell, are more loving and trusty one to another, then you Christians are, amongst those of your owne Coun∣trey. My heart almost fayleth mee; yea and my very bowels yearne within me, as oft as I here it complained of, That the Swedish souldiers are more insolent, then the enemies. But they are not the Swedes, they are the Germanes, that commit all these insolencies. Had I knowne, that you Germanes had beene a people of this temper; of a humor, that had borne no more naturall affection to your owne native Countrey, and that you would have done no better service for it, nor shewed more fidelity towards it; I would never have saddled horse for your sakes: much lesse have hazzarded
mine owne kingdome, my life and estate in your behalfes; nor with mine owne person, have adventured so many a brave and valiant Gentleman, as I have done, for your well-fares. No, but since I now perceiue, that your selves by these your carriages, seeme to affect and desire it; I would rather have suffered you to remaine in the case yee were in; even plunged in that more then most miserable condition, of an eternall ser∣vitude and slavery. Let your owne consciences bee my witnesses, that I doe not usually, deny any of you, a reasonable motion: Yea my God knoweth besides, That I never intended any other thing, then (by his blessed assistance) to restore every man to his owne, and his owne to every man; and for the remainder, especially what I should obtaine either in Franconia or Bavaria, to distribute and part it among the Nobility and Gentry of your nation, and to leave no mans good service unrewarded. But this most accursed, divelish robbing & stealing of yours, doth I must needs con∣fesse, much abate my good purposes, & keepe backe these my Christian intentions. Have you not so much iudgement left, as to consider what kinde of fame and praise that is like to proove; which posteritie shall leave of you, in all future Hi∣stories? Remember withall, I beseech you, what a clogge you hereby tye upon your owne consciences: and what iudge∣ments and punishments you draw downe upon your per∣sons, and posterities, Countrey and Successors, by these acts of oppression and inhumanitie. Oh, that you cannot consider with your selves, what a fearefull account you are to yeeld up to God, at that great and most dreadfull Audite. And for mine owne part; rather would I have still remained in mine owne kingdome, then have comne hither to behold these insolencies. You will say, perchance, That you want moneyes. But when I have the meanes to satisfie both you and the whole Army; and you by pillaging, robbing, and plundering, shall deprive mee of these meanes: where, I beseech you, is the fault, that you are not satisfied? What share have I at any
time receiued, out of all these your bootyes? Iust nothing. I doe protest before God, and it is most true that I say, that I have not by all this War so much enriched my selfe, as a paire of Bootes come to: and I professe withall, that I would ra∣ther ryde without Bootes, then any wayes, or in the least de∣gree, make my selfe the richer, by the damage or undoing of these poore people. I will make it appeare to you, whoso∣ever is desirous therein to be satisfied; That since the com∣ming out of mine owne kingdome, at 32 severall returnes, I have had full 40 tunnes of gold, made over to mee: all which, I have spent for your good, and for the re-establish∣ment of such Princes, as are united with mee, in the same truth of Religion.The eighth of this moneth, he gave his Ar∣my a moneths meanes, out of the moneyes then borrowed of the Norim∣bergers at sixe in the hundred. I might, I confesse, have herein beene si∣lent; but the remembrance of that great losse, which by the deaths of so many brave Worthies and Cavaliers, (whose vertues, indeed, were beyond all estimation) I account my selfe to have sustained, even constrained me to utter what I doe: for, truely, I ever valewed them, beyond all my riches. And you for your parts; what have you contributed towards all these Warres? This is all, that henceforth I shall desire at your hands, That you spoile not others of their goods, but leave every man unto his owne possessions. The choler and manhood that you have, skore it (a Gods name) upon the fronts of your enemies; but distaine not the honour of a souldiour, by insulting upon unarmed innocents. Live upon your meanes, like souldiours, and not upon pilfering, and spoyling, like high-way-robbers. This if you doe not, you shall ever be infamous, and I by such helpers, never become victorious. Piously spoken, and like a King of Sweden; like Gustavus Adolphus, who had the Religion of a Bishop, and the equity of a Lord Chiefe Iustice in him. And this Oration was said to be delivered with that sting and life, that it extracted teares of compunction from these Military hearers: even from men of that profession, who had rather bleed then weepe, and doe it oftner. But for that, though words may moove compassion,
yet they alwayes worke not reformation; this Speech was se∣conded with a Proclamation; and that made more severe by a Penalty: That his Majesty would from henceforth pardon no man, were he Earle, Generall, Colonell; or of what degree and condition soever, that should in this kinde be againe com∣plain'd of. Adding withall, That if to avoyd punishment a∣ny of them all, or all together should conspire upon a mutiny, that he with his Swedes and Finlanders would undertake so to rattle them, that the very shivers of their staves should flye about the eares of them. This prohibition was no soo∣ner by sound of trumpet Proclaimed; but to show how se∣vere he meant to be in his executions; he causes a Leiftenant to be hanged, for committing some of these aforesaid inso∣lencies. When also a Boore having complained of a soul∣diour for stealing his Cowe from him, there was meanes made to save the delinquent; My sonne, sayes the King to him, it is better that I should now punish thee, then that the wrath of God, for thy misdeeds, and his Iudgements, should fall downe upon me, and thee, and upon all of us here present. The same day of this Oration, was a Quarter-Master of Walensteins taken prisoner: who had the List, about him, of all the Imperiall Forces. By this time was the Court of Ʋi∣enna,Caesar well plea∣sed with Walen∣stein. very well pleased with the deportment of their Gene∣ralissimo. And he very well deserved it: for he held the King streightly coopt up hitherto; and had first found out the se∣cret, That the way to beate the King of Sweden, was not to fight with them. Boldly hereupon did they give it out, That the King of Sweden was starke foundred, not able to lift up his legge from the place he stood on: and had therefore de∣manded a Peace of the Emperour; and leave to retire him∣selfe out of Germany: But his Imperiall Maiesty would now handle him in another fashion. As for the King him∣selfe, he never desired any peace of the Emperor: but (be∣cause I will not call it an invention) the rumor might arise, perchance, from the King of Denmarks Ambassador: who in his Masters name (about this time) made some overtures
of a treaty unto his Imperiall Maiesty.Termes of peace talked of. The Articles hereof, being by an Expresse, sent unto Walenstein; Major-Generall Sparre a little after this, desired leaue of the King that he might goe into Walensteins Leaguer, to propound something, in his owne name, about a peace, and the exchange of cer∣taine prisoners. His motion came to nothing. Walensteins selfe, certified nothing but honor of the King, unto Ʋienna; wishing indeed, that there might be some accommodation by a treaty. The better to draw the King on to a treaty, was his Queenes Cosin, Christian William Administrator of Magdenburg, used in the businesse, (together with the Danish Ambassador:) whom the Emperor in April before, had a∣gaine set at liberty. The young Landtgrave of Darmstat still continued a strong solliciter for a Peace; and especiall to his Father in Law the Elector of Saxony. But neither could they worke it. Some other motions that way, were seuerall times projected; but the cunning was, so to bring about the termes, to give both sides satisfaction. The Story of the severall Ar∣mies, now com∣ming towards the King.Leaving these Treaties in the aire, into which they pre∣sently vanisht: we will turne our stile towards action againe. Omitting withall, those smaller skirmishes, which daily fell out about the Leaguers: we will prepare our Readers for greater matters. Those Armies which the King (as we told you) had at Walensteins first comming, had sent for to come and be his Maine-prizers: were by this drawing together about the river Mayne in Franconia. Turne we, then, aside a-while, to fetch these Armies into action. The Generalls of these Armies were Oxenstiern, the two Dukes of Wey∣mar, the Landtgrave of Hessen, and Banier: of all whom severally. Of Oxenstiern,The Rex-Chancellor Axel Oxenstiern, having by the Armes of Gustavus Horn, brought the action to a good passe in the Electorate of Triers, and with the Bishop of Cullen: had the better leisure now, to goe waite upon the King his Master. About the 11. of Iuly, set he out from Mentz: with about 8000. men (as 'twas giuen out) in his Army. To him
does the Landtgrave William of Hessen with 3. Regiments,and Hessen: first come, into Franconia. His way, was from the river of of Weser: Pappenheim (his great adversary) being now going to Maestricht-ward. Hessen and the Chancellor,who being ioyned, both met at Wurtsburg: there expecting the comming of the o∣ther forces. There whilest they are, they were not idle: the Imperia∣lists being masters of the smaller townes thereabouts, and go∣ing out upon daily Partees; gaue them occasion of exercise. About Iuly 20. the Landtgrave of Hessen sending out a Par∣tee of 500. Horse; with as many muskettiers: lighting up∣on 3. companies of Walsteiners; kill 100. of them, tooke 2. Cornets, and 500. Prisoners, which well helped to increase the Army. This was about Schweinfurt, in the Landtgraves way towards Wurtsburg. About this time, the Imperialists of Forcheim, made a Cavalcado out upon the Palace of the Counts of Cassel: which they surprised and plundered,doe something upon the Imperialists to the worth of 200000. Florens. Good store of provisions being found therein, the Walsteiners went home for some wagons, minding the next day, to goe fetch away this booty. By this, had the Chancellor heard of it: who sending out the Palatine Birckenfelt to way-lay them: he with 3. troopes of Dragooners charged them so home, that they were faine to leave their Carriages to the Swedish: and with the losse of 150. men and 30. prisoners,in severall places. to betake themselues into For∣cheim. The Finnish Colonell Stallhanshe (who also came up with the Chancellor) going along the Mayne with 4. Cor∣nets to seeke his adventure: he betwixt Ʋffenhaim and Kit∣zingen; met also with a weake Partee of Imperialists: that were convoying 100. Wagons lading of meale, towards Wa∣lenstein. These hee first rowting, and they flying towards Ʋffenhaim: the Fins so hard pursued them, that they en∣tred the towne pell mell with them. Thus was the towne and the meale-carts, taken both together: for which ex∣ploite, who can deny but the Fins very well deserue to eate white-bread.
About this 20. of Iuly (Stilo veteri) was Duke William of Saxon-Weymar, Lieftenant-Generall to his Majesty; comne up into Franconia.Duke William Weymars Story. This was his march, and Forces. How he and his brother Bernard, had beene left about Schwabland and Bavaria, at the Kings comming towards Norimberg: we leave to be read in our Second Part. Hee making towards the Bodensee (called the Lake of Constantz; so well settled the Switzers with the neighbourhood of his Army; that upon the King of Swedens letter to them (which see page 173.The King of Sweden then had an Ambas∣sadour wtih the Switzers (Chevalier Rache they call him:) with whom the Duke of Rohan joyned his Majesties minde, to the Switzers: by which two, and Duke William; were these Can∣tons brought a∣bout, to the King of Sweden The English & Scottish of my Lord Marquesse of Hamiltons Army, being reduced to 2. Regiments. of our Second Part) they (both Catholicks and Protestants) agreed together to stop up their passages against the Spanish out of Italy; and to give no aides unto the Empe∣ror: notwithstanding the vehement sollicitations of Chan∣cellor Wolmar; Ambassador with them for the Arch-Duke Leopold. Duke William having done this by the middle of Iune; was sent unto by the King of Sweden, to goe and take on the English and Scottish of my Lord Mar∣quesse of Hamiltons Armie, then about Halberstat. Some∣thing of whose Story, we demand leave here to impart un∣to you. Of their comming from Magdenburg unto Halberstat in Brunswick-land, we shall anon tell you. Here, at Halberstat they lay, upon their owne money, untill about Low-Sunday, the 8. of our April: at which time, by order from the King of Sweden, they were reduced unto 2. Regiments. The first was of the English; over whom was Sir William Bellendine (a Scottish Gentleman) made Colonell, and Captaine Terret Lieftenant-Colonell; They had order to enquarter at Blanckenburg in the little County of Regenstein, due South of Halberstat. Of the Scottish Regiment, was Sir Alexander Hamilton made Colonell: who was sent to lye at Warninge∣roda, in the same County, within 2. Dutch miles of the English.are taken on by Duke William Weymar. Here lay they both Regiments, untill they were drawne out by order from Duke William, to goe with him to dis-engage the King from before Norimberg. To meete with Duke William, they first by a South-Easterly march,
goe thorow the County of Mansfeld unto Hall: where they peec't in with 2. Regiments of Foote more; the Blue Regiment, whereof Rosse is Colonell: and the Greene Regi∣ment, led by Colonel Wardure. With these, came 4. Foote-Companies of Colonell Mitzvall Governour of Rain in Ba∣varia: and a Regiment of Horse, commanded by Colonell Wedels.The way of their march to him, first. Thence goe they to Lutzen in Misnia where the Battell was after fought) and so to Zeitz; where they first found Duke William; with some few troopes of Horse and Foote, which were, indeed, but some odde Squadrons of his owne guards. Thence goe they to Altemburg, where they stayd two or three dayes, being well entertayned by the Duke of Altemburg. Thence goe they something backe againe to Grea, on the River Elster, where they tarryed two dayes more: and thence to Greventall, on the edge of the Duringer-waldt. Crossing the said great Forest, at first to the South∣ward, they then turne to Hilperhausen; a towne of the Duke of Saxon-Coburgs on the other side of the wood,And with him to the Chancel∣lor Oxenstiern, afterwards. in Fran∣conia. In the field hereabouts, the Army quartered some 8. or 10. dayes: the Duke of Saxon-Coburg sending them some barrels of powdred Venison. Hither came there ano∣ther Regiment of Duke Williams: levied among the Boores, his owne subiects. But these Boores were sent backe, all but 400. which were ioyned in a Brigade with Colonel Hinder∣sons Dragooners, that were then a raising. Hither also came 5. Regiments from the Elector of Saxony. Two, of Horse, over both which the Baron of Hoffkirch was Major-Gene∣rall: one of them being his owne, and the other the Prince of Anhalts. The other three, were Foote-Regiments: 2. of their Colonels being Vitzdumb and Potlitz: whose Liefte∣nant Bosen had the Regiment after him.Duke Williams whole strength These made up Duke Williams 6. Brigates of Foote; compleate numbers. The first Brigade was made up of the 2. Regiments of our nation: 8. Dutch companies being put to them: that is, 4. of Mitz∣valls, and 4. of Steinbocks. This Brigade was commanded, by one Colonel one day; and by to'ther, another day. The se∣cond
and third Brigades, were the Blew and Greene, before mentioned. The fourth was of the new levied Boores of Duke Williams: and the fifth and sixth were of the Elector of Saxonyes: 600 Muskettiers being put to them. Besides all these, there was a Squadron of almost 600 men, which went for a weake Regiment. These altogether, might make up some 8000 strong. Of Horse forces, had he first his owne Regiment; secondly, Generall Baniers Regiment, commanded by Isler, that was his Leiftenant-Colonel: which two Regi∣ments made up some twentie Cornets; besides two compa∣nies of Dragooners; belonging to Grimes and Lather, two Scottish Captaines. The Dragooners ryde like Horsemen: but they fight on foot. From Hilperhausen, went the Army to Kunigshoven: and thence to Schweinfurt upon the Mayne; where the Duke entrenched. Hence was a Partee of 500 Muskettiers, sent to plunder a little towne, some halfe a-dayes march from Schweinfurt: whence they returned with good Booty. Here stayd the Army some 10 or 14 dayes: and the Chan∣cellor Oxenstiern and the Landgrave of Hessen, being now a∣bout Wurtsburg:All this Relati∣on of Duke Williams, recei∣ved I from Leiftenant-Colonell Ter∣ret, Captaine Feilding, and Captaine Legg, then present in the Action. the two Armyes about August 10th, moo∣ved one towards another, and met about Kitzing upon the Mayne, due East of Wurtsburg: altogether encamping on the Easterne side of the river, next unto Norimberg. Thence after foure or fiue dayes, goe they Southerly towards Win∣shaim on the river Aisch; mid-way betwixt which Kitzing and Winshaim, marching by Generall Baniers and Duke Ber∣nard of Saxon Weymars Quarters: whose forces joyn'd with them at Winshaim. And their march out of Bavaria; turne we backe againe to bring up, untill this their joyning with the other Armyes. The King at his last comming out of Bavaria, left the Ge∣nerall Banier with an Army about Auspurg: whose businesse was, to observe the Bavarians, and to keepe the new Con∣quest in as good order, as the enemies would let him. The two Brothers of Saxon-Weymar, (William and Bernard,)
were left with an Army on the out side of Bavaria; about Memmingen in Schwabland: who with Sir Patrick Ruth∣ven, were to looke to Ossa, the Leopoldish, and the Imperia∣lists in that Circle: those, namely, already in the countrey be∣twixt the Lech, the Danubye and the Bodensee:The Story of Duke Bernard, and Banier since the Kings comming out of Bavaria. or which were in the Dukedome of Wirtemberg or Alsatia; who were still Masters of that corner of Germany. Their chiefe Leaders were Ossa (both Generall and Commissary, for those parts) Eggon Count of Furstenberg, and Hannibal Count of Hohen-Ems: which two, having no Army, nor Military Commission from the Emperour (that I heare of) did but labour by raising the Boores (their Tenants and neigh∣bours) to keepe their own Lands quiet: Hohen-Ems, his; at the South end of the Bodensee; and Furstenberg, his;The rest of the Actions of this corner, shall be spoken off in Gustavus Horns Story. beyond the Bodensee and the Schwartz-waldt betwixt Wirtemberg-land and Alsatia, towards the Rhine-streame. In Alsatia, the Emperours two Generals were William (called) Marquesse of Baden, and the Count of Monte Cuculi: of all which we shall speake in their order. That Duke Bernard after the taking of the Towne ofThe Maps write Isne or Ine, and Isnau. Isnau among the mountaines towards the Bodensee; had al∣so taken the Count of Hohen-Ems prisoner in his owne Ca∣stle by Bregentz and the Bodensee: we have partly told you Page 172 of our Second Part. This done, while Sir Patrick Ruthven and Colonel Schavalitzi were employed on the Wirtemberger side of Ʋlm and the Danubye; the Imperia∣lists (as Page 179 we there told you) were busie about Ehin∣gen. To that towne (his brother William being now gone to take on the Scottish and English) turnes Duke Bernard.Duke Bernard takes Ehingen. Sater∣day, Iune 23, came hee before the Ports: those breakes hee open with a Petard; and by sound of trumpet after his entry, commanding the towns-men to avoyd the slaughter by ta∣king them to their Houses: he puts 150 souldiours to the sword: who had before surprized the Swedish Officers. Whilest Duke Bernard was thus in action about the Danuby; the Leopoldish forces, were as busie about the Lech; sixtie
English miles to the South-East of this Ehingen. There, about the 20th of Iune, reprise they Fuessen first, and Schonga after∣wards: the Towns-men befriending them. Thence advance they more Northernly towards Ansburg; infesting all pla∣ces about Landsperg: where the Citizens also admit them. They by night surprize the Cloyster of Munsgrett; and there put a troope of Swedish Horse to the sword, making the Cap∣taine prisoner. The Bavaria Major-GenerallFor Altringer was now Bava∣riaes Felt-Mar∣shall. Cratz, in the beginning of Iuly, recovers Munchen againe: and the fifth of the same moneth by the invitation of the Townes-men, are some troopes of his admitted into Friedberg, within five English miles of Ausburg. Generall Banier had, till now, beene em∣ployed towards Tirole, Iune 16, hee went from Ausburg, with foure Regiments, and twentie Peeces of Canon. Then besieged he Winegarten: which was taken on Sunday Iuly 8th: before which, himselfe in person was upon occasion of Cratz his comming so neere Ausburg; sent for backe againe. His Army upon the taking of Winegarten; made those of the Imperiall Townes of Wangen and Ravensperg, flee into Bregentz. Lindaw on the Bodensee, was sorely now frighted. and the Army should have gone further to stop up the passa∣ges in the Alps of Tirole: to keepe the Italian Aydes out of Germany. The particulars of all which, I for brevitie here omit. He being now return'd to Ausburg, hearing of this perfidiousnesse of the Friedbergers, sends the very next day, (Friday Iuly the sixth) to reprise the Towne againe. The gates are blowne open; and the Bavarians cut in peeces: just as they had done to seventy Swedish in the Towne, which were layd there, as the Safe-guards of it. And to make the Townes-mens false-heartednesse, an example to the rest: the Swedish putting the women and children out of the towne, burnt it quite downe to ashes. By this time is Duke Bernard return'd from Ehingen, a∣gainst these people of the Arch-Duke Leopolds. Comming neere Landsperg, the Citizens, fearing to be served like those
of Friedberg; meete and present their Keyes unto the Duke; on their knees begging their lives of him. The same doe they of Schonga: the Leopoldish still voyding the countrey before his comming. They still retiring up the Lechs side,Duke Bernards defeating of the Leopoldish Forces: to Rosshaupten; there the Dukes men were too quicke for them: for lighting there-abouts upon two troopes of Dragooners, and one of Carabines; the Weymarish killed some thirtie of them, and rowted the rest into Fuessen.and recovering of townes from them, upon the Lech. At the heeles of them, the Duke now followes; and his summons to the Towne being refused; he presently carryes it by Petards and Scaladoes. Here were 1500 men of Altringers old Regi∣ment, in garrison: 300 of which being in the heate of slaugh∣ter, cut off; the rest flung downe their Armes, and gave up their names to serve under the Dukes Ensignes. Here was Altringers brother in law taken, with the Lord of Diederick∣stein, and other Officers. Here the Duke passing over the Lech; surprises three Forts betwixt the Townes of Ernberg in the mountaines and Reutte upon the river Lech: into which, the Duke having put good garrisons; returnes his Army over the Lech againe, and advances towards Do∣nawert. This was about the 24 of Iuly: by which time there had a new command comne to Banier and him, to hasten towards Norimberg.The State they left Bavaria in. And they were by this time at indifferent good leisure. Now had Banier recovered Munchen, and chased Cratz out of the Countrey: and now too, had Duke Ber∣nard well cleered the Lech of the Leopoldish: So that lea∣ving the countrey well garrison'd, and Sir Patrick Ruthven to guard the rest; they now begin to draw together towards Donawert; and so to march into the Bishopricke of Aich∣stet; and by that into Franconia. In the beginning of our August, the two Generalls put themselues upon their march: going first unto Weissenburg; 20. English miles North of Donawert. Cratz knew his old Quarter: and hereabouts, and at Wiltsburg Castle (hard by Weissenburg) offered he to make some opposition. But this
came to so little,Either for not doing enough here, or in Ba∣varia; did this Cratz (I heare) fall into Wa∣lensteins dis∣pleasure: for which he was (as I haue heard) impriso∣ned. This is sure, that after this time, I haue read of nothing done by Cratz but by Fugger, Altrin∣ger, and Monte Cuculi. that other writings make no mention of it. Now were Banier and Duke Bernard, within 30. English miles of Norimberg: had they gone (I meane) the neerest way to it. But this they durst not venture: for besides that they were not strong enough, to have marched thorow the countrey, every where infested with the Walsteiners; they had beene farre to weake, too have passed by his great leaguer. Here, therefore, they begin to alter their course of marching; so that turning faces about to the left, they make towards the other Swedish Armies in Franconia. The way they tooke, was along the Forrest in which Guntzenhausen standeth. Thence advancing to the North-ward, they come to Roten∣burg; and so by Kregling, to Rotingen: their Army August the 14. meeting with the Chancellors and the rest, besides Vffenhaim; as we have before told you. With Baniers Army, came there a noble young Gentle∣man of our Nation, Master William Harvey onely sonne to the Lord Harvey; who now vpon his returne from a three yeeres travell, in Ierusalem, Constantinople, Italy, &c. meeting with the Armies: had a generous ambition to see the action at Norimberg: where he heard so famous a King to be en∣gaged. Munday August the 13. did Oxenstierns Army passe Kit∣zing bridge,They ioyne with Oxenstiern and that night, peect it with Duke William. Au∣gust 14. came Duke Bernard and Banier to them. August 15. they went but 2. English miles: whence the next day to Neustat on the Aisch. The Walsteiners that had before taken up all the Posts and Passages of this countrey, retyred still before them, towards their Generalissimo. August 17. The Swedish encamped not far from Hertzog-Aurach: which the K. for their commodity, had t'other day made himself master of.There may be an error of a day or twoes time, in the Iournalls of these Armies: which every Reader would not have ob∣served. But I will de∣ceiue them, no further then I my selfe am deceiued. Aug. 18. they advance to Bruck, 10. miles North of No∣rimberg: where the small river Aurach, falls into the Red∣nitz. On the Westerne side of which river, (the towne stan∣ding on the East) the Armies entrench for 2. or 3. daies: building up Batteries and Redoubts, in this neerenesse of the
enemy. Hither, came the King himselfe, and overviewed the Armie, as it was drawne up into Battaglia, which he found to be 26000. marching men, all fresh and lusty. They were 12. Brigades of Foote, besides commanded Muskettiers: but of the Horse I have no certaintie. The Imperialists hauing here broken downe the bridge, the King causeth it to be re∣paired: over which, August the 20. in the euening, the Ar∣my marched: entrenching the same night before Bruck. Now were 3. Regiments sent over to take up the passage at Furt: which were the English, the Blue, and the Greene Re∣giments: who there entrenching themselues; Major-Gene∣rall Kniphausen came to commaund over them. A solemne day of praier being had in the Swedish Leaguer, for the happy ioyning, and good successe of the Armies: the King quitting his Trenches about Norimberg, came the 21.Altogether ioy∣ning with the King, before Walensteins Trenches. of August, to meete the Chancellors Army; they likewise advancing to meete him: ioyned both Armies together, a∣bout 12. or one a clocke the selfe same Tuesday. All then being drawne up into Battaglia, before the enemies Tren∣ches; stood there all that day, to make a Brave upon him. And thus haue I concluded this long digression, for bring∣ing up of all the Kings forces to him: which if the Readers censure, for too long an interuption from the Kings Storie; I must, in stead of answering, craue a faire pardon of them. And yet to say something towards a Reason. Besides that it had beene pitty to have lost all their Stories: I knew not on the sudden, how to drop all these Armies, out of the cloudes into the Kings Leaguer; nor how, bluntly, and all at once; to shoote them in an Engine, as farre as Norimberg: and there∣fore have I brought them, faire and softly, upon their feete all the way, out of their severall Stations. Now was the King resolued, to bring the whole cause, to a day of hearing: and that as loud, as the Cannons could roare it. He was now full 36000. men in field; though not all then in Battaglia. The King of Bohemia, (by this time
well recovered of his Leaguer-sicknesse) was in the field with him:The fight described August 21. both the Kings being desirous to tempt the ene∣my out of his Campe, into faire Campagnia; fully purposed, if that offer were refused, to set upon him in his Trenches. And so might they if they pleased: Walenstein would not budge a foote, out of his Quarters. On the Norimberg side of his Trenches, therefore, the King casts up three great Bat∣teries; and from thence plaid incessantly into Walensteins, Quarters: he thundering as furiously upon them againe. The Swedish Muskettiers going neerer the Trenches; were with small shot answered from them againe: but neither small nor great shot, did much harme upon one another; sauing onely that Generall Banier, going too neere to view a worke; received a Musket bullet in the left arme above the elbow, where it was left sticking. The next day, the King caused some greater peeces of Ordnance to be mounted upon his Batteries: some of which, shot 21.August 22. pound ball, and some 42. Walenstein answering with some, that shot 48. These roared upon one another for a great time together: but the Kings plainely, did little spoile upon the enemies. The Walsteiners wisely withdrew themselues, out the beate and raking of the Swedish Ordnance: which were (after the making of 700. shot) perceived, to doe more execution on the earth and trees, then upon the ene∣mies. Now was it with perspective glasses to be discerned, from off the Kings Batteries; that there was scarce a Walstei∣ner to be seene stirring: For this reason: the King causeth his Ordnance to be dismounted: not willing to smoake away so much powder in squibs; nor to doe no more then plowe vp the ground, with the grazing of so many bullets, of that weight and height; meerely shot off at an empty randome, Yet one shot let me not omit, because the King made it. The King (as tis written) spying in the morning, with his per∣spectiue from one of his Batteries, a gallant Cavalier moun∣ted and prancing before his Companies: that surely (saith the King) should be either Walenstein or Altringer; and have
at him. Causing therefore a peece to be traversed and bent full upon him; the King tooke his levell, and bade giue fire to it. Vp into the aire flew the Cavalier, horse and man: but it proved to be but a Colonell. The King having dismounted his owne Cannon, and given order to haue the Norimbergers drawne out into the Tren∣ches about the Towne; he that day and the next, passes the most part of his Army over the river Rednitz, a little aboue Furt, before named. His purpose in it was, to possesse him∣selfe of a certaine hill thereby: by advantage whereof hee hoped assuredly either to batter out, or beate out, the enemy from his Quarters. This done, the 24. of our August (being Saint Bartholomewes day) was resolued upon for the generall onset. The same 23. of August, fell there out a skirmish on the further side of the Rednitz, betwixt the Crabats and the Kings people: at which, whilest, amongst other Gentlemen Master William Harvey (before named) was desirous to be present; he was most unfortunately drowned, in passing o∣uer the river. A Gentleman he was, who might one day haue merited a place in our owne Chronicles; for few young Sparkes were there among the Nobility of any Nation; either finelier made up, more gentilely bred, or more completely improued. Nor is this more then a moderate Laudative of him; for so say they, that could iudge him: very great therefore is the losse of such a Sonne, to his honourable Pa∣rents; but greater will be the want of such as he, to his Na∣tive Countrey. Walenstein perceiuing the Kings intention, he the better to assure his Cannon and Ammunition; retired himselfe in∣to the Forest called Altemberg: which belongeth unto the Marquesse of Onspach. Here could he make use, likewise, of a certaine old Fortresse; which had beene a Lodge, (or some such like thing) in the younger dayes of it. Here, likewise, did he very strongly entrench himselfe; and barricadoed up all the wayes, by cutting downe the trees round about him. The hill was high, and very steepe: craggie withall, and
bushie; so that it was an impossible thing (almost) to be taken from an enemy, that had any courage to dispute it. The Duke of Bavariaes Quarters (as it hapned) were at that time neerest to the King and the danger: and among his men, the Canon bullets mostly lighted. The great fight August 24.Bartholmew day being comne; the worke was begun with Prayers; for the happy successe of it. So the King of Sweden still used: nor thought he himselfe either arm'd or valiant; till he had prayed. That morning, about nine a clocke; was there a certaine Footman or Lackey of Altringers, brought prisoner to the King: who, (as by pregnant circumstances was afterwards collected) had beene purposely exposed by the enemy, to be taken prisoner by us. This slye fellow very confidently informed the King; How that the most part of Walensteins Horse, had already forsaken their Quarters, and were about to runne quite away from the leaguer. The King indeed, from this higher ground, saw the Army in motion: but it was not to runne away from their Colours, but with all speed to possesse themselues of the little mountaine and old Castle, and another Fort upon it: which it had beene easie o∣therwise for the King to have taken, and from thence to have beaten Bavaria, first, and then Walenstein, out of their Leaguers. The King by and by perceiving their intention, and againe observing the great advantage of the place: resolved, (which some thinke he had not, untill this newes of Altringers Footman) that notwithstanding the enemy had prevented him in it; and had now made the action more desperate: yet that it must immediately be set upon. Putting his Army, therefore, into Battaglia, (as well as the place would giue leaue) the King himselfe led on the Ʋant-guard of the left Wing: Duke William of Saxon-Weymar had the honour of the Battell, to cloase up the Kings right hand: and Duke Bernard, with the Landtgrave of Hessen, brought up the Reere. Some of these troopes, were sent to fall on upon that ruinous old Castle of Altemberg, on the hill aforesaid.
The other part, were still left at the bottome of the Hill, and upon the sides of it: to lye in ambush amongst the trees and bushes there, to keepe off the Aides and Seconds of the ene∣my; and to shrowd themselues withall, from the fury of the enemies Canon. This place also served for a Retreat unto their fellowes, should they chance to be overlayed: the men, besides, being there neere at hand, to be sent for upon occasion. The place, indeed, was naturally fit for such a purpose: for it was a hollow over-hanging in the hils side; where they lay in Covert from any offence of the enemy. The order of the Assault was to this purpose: Euery Colonel and Com∣mander was assigned to his Post; 500. men were ordered to fall on: which were every two houres releeued, with fresh Seconds. These were commanded Muskettiers all; drawne out of the severall Brigades: and the Colours staid with the rest, below the mountaine. And now began the conflict, for the winning and defen∣ding of that old Castle; which proved a medlye of 10. houres long, on both sides. Many a brave Gentleman, here lost his life; many a Cavalier was here wounded: and not a few taken prisoners. The King led on his men, with his sword drawne in his hand: and the Swedish, as if to show the enemy how little they dreaded any thing, that they could doe unto them; and how much they despised danger: exposed themselues all naked unto the enemies shot; having not so much as any one Trench or Earth cast up, to shelter them. In this equi∣page, runne they close unto the enemies Works and Batte∣ries: stoutly and manfully, fall they on upon them: and with the courage of undaunted spirits, doe they rush into the dan∣ger. But the Imperialists as full of resolution, made a most stout resistance unto the Swedish. For having the advantage, both of the higher ground, of their owne Trenches and Bat∣teries already before hand there cast up: and having the wals of the old Castle to retreate unto, and to shelter their fresh supplies in: they maintained it with extremity of confi∣dence. The naturall high standing of the place, gave them all
the advantages, that the providence of an enemy could have fore-thought of. Thence directed they their peeces with more aime and certainty, thence fell the Partisans which they darted, with more weight upon the Swedish: and be∣hind their owne Parapets they stood more then halfe cove∣red from those on the lower ground: so that more of the Swedish bullets, light upon the Imperialists Brest-works then into their Breasts. But notwithstanding all these inconveniences, the Swedish continued desperate, and the Imperialists as obstinate. The Cannons and Muskets went off all day long, incessantly: so that nothing was to be seene upon the Mountaine, but flame and smoake: and for the roaring of the Ordnance, the skrikes and groanings of wounded and dying men, could hardly be discerned. All this was performed with so much terror and fury, and on both sides maintained with so much obstinacy; that (considering the disadvantages on the Swedish side) the Battell of Prague or Leipsich, was not to be compa∣red to it. Regiment attacked Regiment, one Ensigne conti∣nued flying against another: untill the greater part of the Foote on both sides, were thorowly engaged in the medlye. The Imperialists had 6000. men, then upon the Hill; for the guard of it, and of the old Castle: those, still supplyed from the Campe: and all, so fenced with a Brest-worke behind which they stood to shoote downe, that nothing but their heads could be seene over it. Thus at length, the Swedes see∣ing no good to be done upon it: were enforced to quit the danger; the most of them withdrawing themselves, unto the foote of the Mountaine. The Cannon continued their vollyes above, still; and some Muskettiers were there left, to maintaine the skirmish. In this attempt upon the hill, whereas the King and Duke Bernard had fallen on upon severall places of it: it chanced that Duke Bernards proved farre the more convenient: and that he had gotten the height of the enemies Campe, and could see downe into it. He sending the King word of it, the King
dispatched backe Sir Iohn Hepburn to him, to take, and bring a view of it. Whilest Duke Bernard and Sir Iohn Hepburn were at their view, there was a Ritt-master shot dead, hard by them: which showed, that the place was not altogether so safe, as was hoped. Sir Iohn Hepburn ha∣ving carried the King word, and that it was much the better place; his Maiestie himselfe came to see it. Which done, you have reason (saies he to Sir Iohn) for what you say: but yet if I giue on here, I must doe it with my grosse of Foote; whereby I shall leaue my Horse and my Cannon naked: and the enemy, withall, may then choose where he will fight with me; either in this or that place, or in both to∣gether, as he pleases. This passage, I learned from the right valiant Knight, here mentioned: and that the presentnesse of the Kings iudgement, was approoued in it. And this I adde of my selfe; something to controll the rumor of it that ranne over Germany, that if the King would but haue descended from his obstinacy, and thought it no dishonour to giue over at the t'other Post, and to follow Duke Ber∣nards counsell; that the action had beene ended, and the ene∣my dislodged. Most of the Swedes being comne downe to the plaine (as is aforesaid) there beganne another encounter. The enemies Curiassiers then issuing out upon the Swedish Muskettiers, did so much there overlay them; that they forced them to give ground from them. Colonell Tortenson, and Colonell Erich-Hand; being to maintaine this Post; were both here taken; and the latter wounded, by the Curiassiers; whilest they bravely endeavoured to make their Muskettiers to give on againe, upon the enemy. The valiant Baron of Cronenberg with his Regiment of 12. Cornets of Horse (esteemed the flower of the Army) at this time, falling out, was rencoun∣tred by ColonelThis Colonel Stolhanshe, (a Finlander by nation) was sometimes ser∣vant vnto Sir Patrick Ruth∣ven: and he speakes excel∣lent good English. Stolhanshe with 200. of his Finnish Horse∣men: who so well entertained the Cronbergers, that they put them to the rowte: yea and so farre pursued them, till they came under the command of the Shot from the enemies ram∣piers
and that other troopes of fresh Horse, sallyed out upon them. It was beleeved among the Swedish, that Cronenberg was there mortally wounded: but besides, that I have since read of him in other actions: he was seene by some Gentle∣men of our owne Nation in the Imperiall Leaguer, a day or two after. It hath by others beene related to mee, That whereas the Count of Erpach (a Colonell of the Kings) was that day mortally wounded upon the place, and carryed off spoyled; the King meeting Sir Iohn Hepburn in the Field; desired him to make good the Count of Erpachs Post; which hee per∣formed. The night beginning now to approach, must of necessitie put an end to that skirmish: and yet it appeared by the eager∣nesse of the Swedish, that they had not yet enough of it. Still they continued to ply their small and great shot, and to offer to skale the mountaine, and rampiers of the enemies. The same resolutenesse, was also maintained by the Imperialists: the defendants budging not a foot from their Stations, and nothing behind hand with the Assaylants. But that great Mo∣derator and Stickler in all long encounters, (the Night) was faine at last to decide the controversie. And so began both sides, to fall off one from another, having lost their sights, ra∣ther then their courages. And thus was there a true drawne Battell made of it: for the darknesse being but a blind Ʋmpire, could not see to which party, to assigne the Victory. The Swedes, indeed, lost their hopes; and the Imperialists kept their ground. The Swedish, for all their magnanimous under∣takings, could not drive the Imperialists to the retreat; or beate up their Quarters: nor could they, much lesse, com∣pell the Kings forces to give it over. The Horse, (except, some few troopes) could not come to fight; the wood and hill not suffering them to encounter: which had they done, needs must the businesse have had a further progresse. The whole night after, did those Muskettiers that were left upon the hill, continue to giue fire upon those that defen∣ded
the old Castle. It prooved a very wet night: and the King lay in his Coach, under heavens open Canopy. There was a fire made hard by him, upon the wet earth; (which the raine suffered not well to burne) about which the Kings servants and officers tooke up souldiours lodgings: Sir Iohn Hepburn being also laid amongst them. The King by breake of day wakening, (and being very cold and wet) called unto his servants, to know if there were any of his Officers of the Field amongst them. They told him none but Sir Iohn Hepburne; who was but a Voluntier at that present. Him, now, the King desired to goe to those Muskettiers on the hill, and to view their posture: and to see, withall, whither there might be any neere place discovered, where there might be Ordnance planted to batter upon the old Castle. He going, found how these poore soules, lay all open to the enemies shot, from the wast upwards; and that the Imperialists had two places of Covert, one above another, for their shelter: that is to say, one above, upon the hill; and another Parapett or Brest-worke, lower; whence they let flye upon the Swe∣dish. He there found, where by casting up a little earth, the Kings people might approach within fiftie paces of the Ca∣stle, and mount foure peeces of Canon to batter upon it. Sir Iohn Hepburn had order also at his going from the King, to go call Duke Bernard to him; and in the mean time to command his troopes. Hee comming from his view, met Duke Bernard, and did his message to him: who told him, that he should not need to goe to his troopes, for that he had left them with the Count of Isenburg. The Duke also reque∣sted of Sir Iohn, that whilest he went to the King; he would doe him the fauour to goe and bring his brother Duke Willi∣am, unto his Majestie. But Duke William was gone to the King before; so that when Sir Iohn Hepburn returned to the Coach; he perceived, that they with some great personages, having beene in counsell together, Whither it were best to retreat or not? the Retreat had beene agreed upon. Thus when Sir Iohn Hepburn reported to the King, how neere to
the Castle he might bring foure Canons: I had rather (sayes the King) there could have beene a place found within 500 paces, then within 50: which would be safer for my peo∣ple. Hereupon was order given for the retreat, and to draw off the Muskettiers; who came running off presently. And thus much of the passages of this morning, have I learned from the courtesie of this Noble Warriour. The most of the rest had I out of a long Latine Letter, written by the Ba∣ronThe Letter was written un∣to his Brother Sir Benedict Skute, then in London: who imparted it un∣to mee. They are Sonnes un∣to the Lord Skute, Gover∣nour of Livonia for the Crowne of Sweden: three times Ambassadour into England. of Dudroff, then present in the action: and from a High Dutch Relation, written by an understanding Officer of the Army. And indeed it was high time for the King to sound the retreat: and much better had it beene, that a Charge had never beene sounded. It was almost an impossible thing, to get up that mountaine; and Sir Iohn Hepburn (amongst o∣thers) freely advised the King the day before, That the acti∣on was not faisible. And by this time it was made much har∣der. The Imperialists against this morning, had brought on more great Peeces upon their Batteries: which must sorely have disordered the Swedish, in their advancing. The moun∣taine, Castle, and Fort; were all by this time better'd mann'd then the day before: and the Imperialists being extremely encouraged, that the irresistible Swedish Armies, had not al∣ready overcomne them; were sufficiently now provided to entertaine them. But the King having attempted thus much, chiefely to put a Brave upon Walenstein: began now to think of the mens lives, that were to be cast away upon it. So that having experience by this time, that the enemy being likely to dispute it, would certainely kill and spoile him more men, then possibly he could doe of theirs; thought it no great wisedome, to consume too much time, where there was but small appearance of getting over-much honour. Order is therefore given, to have the Ordnance taken off their Batteries, and that the Muskettiers, yet in action, as also those that had beene laid in ambush, below the hill: together with those Horse-troopes, which stood ready at all assayes, to waite upon the motions of the enemy, should come away.
And this was the order of the Retreat. The Reere marcht off, first of all: and whilest they turne faces about to goe homewards, the Van and Battell, stood their ground, as ready to receive the enemy.The order of the Retreat. When the Reere was comne to their place of Stand; they there made Halt, facing about againe to the enemy. Whilest they stood, the Battell marched: obser∣ving in all points, the order and discipline of the Reere. When they make a Stand, the Van advances: the Wing of Horse, a∣fore spoken of, at the same time moving and flancking them. Three hundred Muskettiers, with some Cornets of Horse; were left behind to manne the Reere, and to make good the Retreat: in case the enemy (which he did not) should have falne out upon them. And in this goodly order and equipage, (which was a very beautifull sight to behold) was the Re∣treat made: all done in Battaglia, as if they had even then advanced into the Field, to have charged the enemy. Soone was the Army in their new Quarters; which were not farre from the foresaid mountaine. For now was the King resolued, to entrench himselfe close unto the enemy; choosing the place for his new Leaguer,The King en∣campeth hard by the Imperia∣lists. neere unto Furt, iust without the Forest: yea so neere unto Walensteins trenches, that some one of his greater Peeces, would haue rang'd her bullet even to the very Quarter. Early the next morning August 26. was the new Campe begunne to be fortified; that is, upon the open side of it: the backe-part being sufficiently assured by the woods. And now might the Generalissimo (if he pleased) have done as much for the King, as he had attempted upon his trenches. These had beene his advantages. His Leaguer was already fortified: but the Kings Works not perfected, for some dayes after. He, out his higher ground, might overlooke the Kings Quarters, and see every motion in it. The Kings Campe was in a faire Cam∣pagnia, and therefore accessible: nor was there any thing in the way, to have hindered the Imperialists; from falling in∣to the Swedish Leaguer. Two or three dayes after the end of the great rencounter;
were the prisoners and dead, on both sides, ransomed and ex∣changed. Monsieur de la Grange the French Ambassadour, was sent from the King, into the enemies Leaguer: who re∣turned with many prisoners: telling his Majesty of many things likewise, unto the hearing whereof but few were ad∣mitted. Major-Generall Sparre was not onely set at libertie by the King, but employed also by him unto Walenstein, with the prisoners. He made likewise some generall overtures of a peace, in which he had desired of the King, that he might use his owne liberty. In lieu of Major Sparre, was Colonel Leonard Tortenson, Generall of the Kings Artillery, freely set at liberty by the Generalissimo: and that with a great com∣plement to the King; as we haue before told you. As for Colonell Erich-Hand (a Swede) he was to stay in the Impe∣riall Leaguer, till his wounds were cured. In the Bill of the prisoners, that was sent from the Imperialists unto the King: were there many names read, whose persons were no where to be found among the Captives:The Prisoners, by which they were giuen for dead. In this former Action, were these men of account slaine on the Kings side. The Count of Erpach, who died of his wounds:dead, Generall-Major Boetius, a brave man: and Lieftenant Colonell Scepter. Of Duke Williams men, slaine; Lieftenant-Colonel Mackin. Vnder the Landtgrave of Hessen, slaine, Rit-master Maurice of Malsburg, with Rit-master Craisham, brother to the Marshall of his Maiesties Army. Of the English and Scottish, divers: whose names I have not. and wounded on the Kings side.Divers other Captaines, Lieftenants, Ensignes, and other inferior Officers, there lost their lives; with 7. or 800. com∣mon souldiers: none of whose bodies, fell into the hands of the enemies. There was found sticking in the body of one of his Maiesties Guards, a bullet of three pound weight. Wounded on the Kings side, the Counts of Eberstein, Cassel, and Thurne: with Erich-Hand, Rotstein and Bourt; all Colonels: together with divers other Captaines, Rit-masters, and other Officers. Of common souldiers, were
there some 1500. which were brought into the Hospitals of Norimberg. On the Imperiall side, lost, 3. Ensignes. Slaine, the Lord Iames Fugger, Colonell of 1000. Curiassiers, or Men at Armes. This Lord being deadly wounded and brought pri∣soner into Norimberg; there expired. He being demanded what he knew of Walensteins intentions; answered (as some report it) that he meant to keepe himselfe in the guard hee then lay at, and to wage battell no otherwise then in that posture. But some other report this way of his last words, That calling for drinke, he should say, t'is no time to dissem∣ble now; Walenstein will assault you: Which said, he dranke, and dyed. Said to be slaine besides, Colonel Aldobrandino, Colonell Dom Maria de Caraffa: with 5. Colonels more: though some Gentlemen of our Nation, passing next day thorow the Campe; affirmed that they spake with some of them. These things must be knowne from the prisoners, who being about 60. in number, perchance knew not all: the Imperialists having wit enough to conceale their owne losses. Those of the Swedish side reported it from the prisoners, that there should have beene slaine about 1000. Walsteiners: which (upon such disadvantages in the fight) I thinke not to be likely. The Corps of the dead Lord Fugger being sent into the Imperiall Leaguer; the souldiers that carried him, had 25 Dollars given them. My Dutch Officer reports me a pretty story of a complement (or an allegeance, rather) betwixt an humble bullet, and the K. namely, how that a piece of the sole of his Maiesties boote, neere unto the great toe of his right foot, was carryed away with a Shot. This bullet knew his duty: for a King should be toucht no higher: all are to stoope thither. Both he and the Swedish Lords Letter agree, that the Imperiall Generalissi∣mo had his Horse that day shot dead under him: whereas o∣thers (then in the action) bid me be confident; That Walen∣stein all that day, stirred not so far out of his Pavilion. Sure it is, that Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar had a horse slaine
under him: and that his behaviour all that fight, was beyond all expectation, valiant. Walenstein (tis written) having false notice brought him in the heate of the fight, that the old Castle was taken; answered with an oath, That he would not beleeue that there was a God in Heauen, if that Castle could possibly be taken from him. This the prisoners repor∣ted. And thus have I finished, this most memorable conflict. Turne we to other actions of lesse moment, done neere the Leaguer. The King not able either to dislodge Walenstein, nor to bring him into Campagnia:The King la∣bouring to cut off Walsteins victualls, cast about, in the next place, how to put another Brave upon him: the same too, that Walen∣stein first put upon him, to defeate him (namely) of his vi∣ctualls. Having therefore learned by the prisoners, that the provisions for the Imperiall Leaguers, (since the burning of their Magazine of Fryenstat) were either brought from Ba∣varia;sends out his Partees to Weissenburg, or from Newmarckt in the Vpper Palatinate: resolues now to way-lay their convoyes, in both places. Towards Bavaria, is Colonell Sperruter sent: with 4000. or 5000. men, to lye in the wind about Weissenburg; and to have an eye towards Nordlingen; both to the South-West of Weissenburg. The King having now learned out, that there were a many Wagons of provision,and Newmarckt. about Newmarckt in the Ʋpper Pa∣latinate, 20. miles from Norimberg: thitherward, with all speede, dispatches he a strong Partee of 3000. Horse, for the cutting off of this Convoy; which he had heard was pre∣sently to come into the Imperiall Leaguer. But the Swedish failed of their desire: Walenstein having taken good order, to have his Convoy well assured. Himselfe (tis reported) was gone out with some troopes: which the Swedish Par∣tee encountring withall, missed but little of taking the Gene∣ralissimo himselfe prisoner.Walenstein in danger to bee taken. His Page was taken, hard by him; who reported, how that his Lord himselfe, was glad to re∣tire into the wood. This report went ouer Germany: but yet I hold Walenstein with the wisest, to adventure so great a part of the world, in his owne person.
Now were the warres, made altogether by commanded Partees: whose sending out, was chiefely to get victualls and forage for themselues; and to defeate one another of it. The Crabats were the onely men, for such a purpose; they acknowledge no 8th. Commandement: for stealing, is one of the great uses of them, in the Army. These Crabats being lodg'd in a Castle, some 7. or 8. miles from Norimberg: would familiarly latche you up, 2. or 300. Horses and Wa∣gons in a day; and yet play halfe of it. These fellowes, pu∣nisht the King shrewdly: nor could his men be ever wary e∣nough of them. They flye out as farre as Altorff, a towne and Vniversity of the Norimbergers, 15. English miles East of the City. Here light they upon the poore Schollers; and as well they might have rob'd the Spittle: Agricola, Nesler,Some Actions with the Cra∣bats. and Bruno, Professors there, they carried away: and put poore Genus and Species, to their ransome. A little after this, did the King employ Lieftenant-Colo∣nell Cratzenstein with some troopes of Cavallery, to lay out for these mad Crabats. Cratzenstein had advice brought him, that they were now out towards Newmarckt. Thither∣ward makes he. Being comne as farre as Pelling, within 3. English miles of Newmarckt; a knave-Boore of the Towne, (one of their Receivers) spurres Cut, and rides and tels the Crabats of it: who having a gift (they neede no Spell for the matter) when they are like to be over-matcht, to make them∣selues invisible; plaid now least in sight, and ranne away to∣wards Altorff. After goes Cratzenstein; but thence were they gone also. Having in this towne rested his people, a while; he advances towards Castell; a towne upon an hill with a rich Monastery at it, upon the river Lauterach, 12. or 13. English miles East of Altorff. Here lights he upon 2. re∣verend Iesuites, one of which, willing to save himselfe by getting out at a window, missed some footing or stayer of the ladder (it seemes) brake his necke with the fall: and so, per saltum, tooke his Degrees backward: the other Father (but of how many is a quaere) being carried to Norimberg:
became a ransome for the Professors of Altorff. Hard by Ca∣stell, but neerer to Pfaffenhoven: is there pretty Castle, where a Cornet of Crabats were enquartered. Cratzenstein now forcing the place, cuts most of the Crabats in pieces; carried away their Lieftenant-Colonell with the House-keeper of the Castle, prisoners; setting divers of the Kings souldiers at liberty; which the Crabats there held in durance. This done, Cratzenstein returnes to Norimberg, with his booty and his prisoners. All this succeeded well to him; the next encounter, he came not off with, so fairely. Fleshed with this successe, he would needs out againe towards Sultzbach, thirtie English miles East of Norimberg. Encountring with no prize in that desolatred countrey; to Hambach he goes, hard by Amberg, three or foure miles more to the Eastward. The foremost of his people, there fell into an ambush of the Walsteiners: who not discovering themselves all at once, put the Swedish in such hopes of being strong enough for them; that they engaged themselues to buckle with them. Nor could they see their error, till it was too late to recover it: for there lost they 80. of their fellowes; and he was the bravest man, that would run away to tell his Lieftenant-Colonel. In other places at the same time, were the Foragers out on both sides.Divers skirmi∣shes, among commanded Partees. A Swedish Partee, ranging towards Newmarckt, chanc't upon 2. Cornets of Crabats of about 150. in the wooddy country betwixt Retenbacht and Feucht, 7. or 8. miles South of Norimberg. Falling roundly to it; the Crabats lost the odde 50. upon the place; and some of the rest were in their flight so knockt down by the Boores of the Country (whom these arrant Powlterers, had made their good friends) that but a few of them recovered to their garrison of Newmarckt. The Crabats from out of the Leaguer about this time, stea∣ling over the river of Rednitz; cut the throates of some Swe∣dish Sentinels, about Furt; cut in pieces Captaine Fuchs and his whole company, almost, which had the guard that night. At Eybach, one Dutch League South of Norimberg, there fell
out another skirmish: where after the exchange of some bullets, and the death of 40. men on both sides; the Swe∣dish were faine to giue it over: for that the Imperialists re∣tyring themselues, by degrees, towards their owne Quar∣ters, (then close at hand) did but traine the Swedish into the danger. A day or two after, the King himselfe would needs abroad, to discover the posture of the enemy: and it was much a∣bout the place of the last encounter. The King had some choise Lads, along with him; some of which scowring the coast before him, discoverd by and by,The King goes out upon a Partee. a good Squadron of Imperiall Hosemen. The King bade charge; and the Walstei∣ners made at them againe: so that there fell out some rude brushing betweene them. At last, every man of the Swedish being as good as two, where the King was one: the Wal∣steiners went by the worst of it; 150. men they left upon the place, divers prisoners they left behind them: and the rest ranne away as hastily towards their Leaguer, as if they did it to carry newes, that they had seene the King of Sweden. A little after this, a strong Partee of Crabats, cut short some Swedish Foragers; even as they had almost recovered to their Leaguer by Furt. Two hundred horses and Wagons, they tooke from them, and made the Foragers glad to goe home, without that, which they had laboured for. Thence goe the Crabats to Lauff, 2. leagues East of Norimberg: putting themselues there into ambush to entrap some Swe∣dish Convoyes. It chanc't, that a good company of Wagons and loden horses, passed by shortly after, from about Roten∣berg; 4. miles to the North of Lauff. The Crabats falling out upon the Booty, cut in pieces both the Wagon-drivers, and their guards: and vouchsafing to turne Carters them∣selues, they drive the Wagons towards Engelthal. It hap∣ned, that there were divers Bidets or Saddle-horses, of some of the Kings owne Gentlemen, that went lier, by; now sent for from grasse, for that the King was about remoouing. The
Gentlemen hearing how likely they were to serue on foote; petitioned the King for a speciall Partee to make out after these Crabats, that had vnhorst thē. The King himselfe would needs do his Gētlemen the service, to go out with the Partee: guessing at their haunt; the King advances towards the same Engelthall:The King de∣feates some Crabates. whereabouts (as lucke was) then finding them; He kills 100. upon the place, recovers all the Wagons with his mens Horses, and some other pillage besides, which the Crabats had there hoarded up, into the bargaine. The King having an item, a little after this, of 20. Cornets Imperiall Horse, that purposed to goe from Forcheim, to spoyle Grefenberg, a towne of the Norimbergers, some 18. miles North of the City: goes with the King of Bohemia, to have a course at these Imperialists. But they having no∣tice of it, had no desire to stay and kisse the 2. Kings hands; but recommended their safeties, to their spurres; and escaped by good Horseman-ship. The King presently upon this, had a designe, to have put Duke Bernard, with a good part of his, and Baniers Army into, and about the towne of Liecthenaw, (not farre from Onspach) which belonged unto the Norimbergers. Walen∣stein, (as we told you in the beginning) had offered before at the taking of this towne; but had beene put besides it. It was kept by one Scheverlin, a Patricius or City-Gentleman of Norimberg. His feare now fore-dooming, that because the King had not beene able to dislodge Walenstein, that therefore he was too weake for him:Walenstein gets Liechtenaw. delivers over his trust unto the enemies of his Country; when as no apparent, but a suspected necessity, drew it from him. The losse of this towne and Passe, shrewdly defeated the Kings projects: helpt to make him what Scheverlin had suspected him; the una∣bler to remooue Walenstein. For now, besides the victualls found in the towne; Walensteins other provisions out of those parts, came the freelyer into his Leaguer: the most of which, the King might haue cut off, could he but haue for∣med an Army thereabouts.
Other smaller bickerings betweene commanded Partees of both Armies, I purposely omit: for that these petty parti∣culars, doe lesse concerne a generall History. And now the King perceiving that all these slighter encounters, would not doe the great businesse; and that it now proved true, which had so often beene confessed to him: namely, that Walenstein most firmely was with himselfe resolued, to tyre him out with the expectation of a Battell; and that he would upon no other termes accept of the encounter, then such as with extremity of disadvantage, he should be enforced unto: iudges it his best course, to leave the sullen or temporising Generall, in the fastnesse of his Trenches; seeing he would not be trained out unto a Field-Battell. For point of action and honour, the King conceiued himselfe to be before-hand with his adversary: seeing he had so often bidden him base at his owne gole; and that the Lyon-couchant would not out of his Denne, no further then he were rowsed. Carefull,The Kings rea∣sons for his rising from a∣bout Norimberg. besides this, of the State of the good City of Norimberg, his Maiesty was: which his late encreased Army had over∣charged; his sicke men, and dead horses, both pestered and infected. His owne Army began a-pace likewise, to demi∣nish: he had lost (at least) 10. or 12000. horses, (I haue heard more) the rest, for want of forage being likely enough to follow. His men, withall, grew thinner every day and thin∣ner: for what with those that had beene slaine with the sword, or dead of the fluxe and other diseases; and what with those that were wounded, taken prisoners, or had runne away; he missed full 10000. of his old Army. His Quarters grew very nastie and noysome, with the multitudes of dead horses, which lay where they fell, vnburied. The rest of his Army, wanted ayring and refreshing: no enemy being so terrible to brave spirits, or so weakning to able bodies, as the long lying in one place, and the ordinary diseases, of a Winter-Leaguer. Resolued likewise he was, to doe as much for the Imperialists, as they had done for him: to cut off, namely, their provisions from them: and that part of it,
especially, with which their Leaguer had beene served, out of the Bishopricke of Aichstet. His Partees he resolued should flye abroad, euery where, for the same purpose: his Army he was minded to encrease, with new levies: and with them, to fall into some of the Emperors or Catholicke-Lea∣guers lands; and so to force up Walenstein; by a diversion. Some have disputed it with themselues, Whither the King should not have done better for himselfe, to have risen long before this? so soone, namely, as he was made able to get away, by the comming of the Chancellor to him with the o∣ther Armies. Then surely, had he saved a great sort of men and horses; and sooner had He gone, sooner must the Gene∣ralissimo have dislodged. When the matter was put to be decided upon a Carpett, Whither it were best for the King to rise or no? The chiefe hinderance of the resolution was, the Kings care for the safe∣tie of the Norimbergers: who were indeed very fearefull of themselves, that so soone as He were gone, they should be besieged. But in that care, the King was eased by his Major Kniphausen: who offered it upon the forfeiture of his head, to keepe the towne with 4000 men, in despight of all the enemies.How the King contented the Norimbergers, concerning his rising. The King taking him at his word; sent him into the towne to propose the conditions unto the Magistrates, and to know what they would doe in it. The conditions were, That they should give Quarter and stipends, unto the Soul∣diours, left for the guard of them: That they should take downe the old great Leaguer, and contract it; so as with 4000 men, it might bee made defensible. The Magistrates, though something fearefull, at first; yet so well did Kniphau∣sens arguments content them, that they came out to treate with the King about it. He told them, that they might safe∣ly relye upon Kniphausen; he had, upon His knowledge, fought in a village: and he knew he would doe much more, in so well a fortified City. His Maiesty, besides, told them, That he would leave his Chancellor with them: whose person he would not adventure, but upon a place that he put confi∣dence
in. As for besieging of their towne, that (he assured them) was not at all to be feared: the enemy, he knew, was too wise, at that time of yeere to set him downe before such a towne; and especially in the neerenesse of a royall Army, which had so often sought to fight with him. These argu∣ments, and the seale of the Kings royall word to them; pas∣sed for security with the Burgers. And so the rising was con∣cluded upon; and 2 daies before, order given for it: where∣upon the sicke and wounded men were sent into Norimberg: where a many sicke could not be relieved, but starved in the streets. The next day to this, was the 7th. of September;The 7. of Sep∣tember kept Holy-day. the fa∣mous Anniversary of the great victory of Leipsich: which was ordered to be kept Festivall by most solemne Thanksgiuings, both within the City and in the Kings Leaguer. The piety of the day being over-passed, and Generall-Ma∣jor Kniphausen having 3000. men (in stead of 4000.) left with him for the defence of the Trenches and Norimberg: Loebelfinger being the ancient Colonell of the City forces; and Colonell Slammersdorff put into him: the King resolueth upon dislodging. Before his rising, I read that he sent out Duke Bernard, to take in Schwabach, 8. miles South of No∣rimberg: both to giue the Norimbergers a little more aire, and something withall, to trouble Walensteins Convoyes out of the Bishopricke of Aichstet. Some talke of Rot and Carlspurg, and other townes, then likewise taken about No∣rimberg: but I cannot perceiue, why the King should trou∣ble himselfe in taking in these small Strengths; seeing He most certainely concluded, that Walenstein would not lye long after His going. This of Rot and Schwabach I have but out of Le Soldat Suedois; whom singly, I credit not. Saterday September 8th. the Kings Army dislodgeth.The King rises. The King marcht by, and almost round about, the Imperiall Lea∣gure, in faire order of Battell: with Colours flying, Drummes beating, and every way as if they had beene ready for the en∣counter. And Walenstein knew, as well as themselues, what
the Royalists were now about: this was the day, that he had long look't for. So farre therefore, was he from disturbing of them, that he calld in his owne Guards and Sentinells; and still kept himselfe within his Trenches.and arrives at Neustat. That night, lay all the Kings Army at a small Dorp: and the next day September 9th. with safety arrived at Neustat upon theSo called for distinctions sake: for that there is another Neustat in this Franconia, upon the river Stray, hard by Konig∣shoven. Aisch in the Mar∣quisate of Onspach, 20. English miles to the North-West of Norimberg. Here lay the whole Army, September 13: on which, the King removes it from Neustat, unto Winshaim, upon the same river of Aisch, 14. miles South of Neustat. About this time, came the Deputies of Franckford unto the King: of whom he now borrowed a great summe of money. In security hereof, his Majesty then empawned the Palace and Revenues, sometimes belonging vnto the Master of the Dutch Order: which (as we told you Page 20. of our Second Part) lye in and about Mergentheim upon the river Tauber in Franconia. Hither also came the Ambassadors of the Muskovite and Tartarians: to offer the King their assistance to fall into Polonia: which he refused. Here at Winshaim, the King getting notice, of Walensteins being gone towards Forcheim upon the river Main; and of the Duke of Bavariaes keeping still with him: he layes the plot how either to devide the 2 Armies, or how to divert the seate of the warres, out of Franconia into Bavaria. For the King now iudging by their keeping together, that their plot was to see what He would doe: he resolued to begin first; and either to make a division, or a diversion. Two de∣signes he might suspect that Walenstein now had: either to fall upon the townes of Franconia, which the King last yeere had conquered: or else to rush into the Duke of Saxonyes country, which He well knew, that Walenstein had vowed the spoyling of. The King de∣vides his Army.For the prevention of both these, he resolues upon the deviding of his owne Army: some whereof he would leaue with Duke Bernard in Franconia, to observe Walenstein, and to guard the Mayn-streame from him: and with the other
halfe, himselfe resolved to march up into Bavaria. These Regiments, I am told, the King tooke along with him. Horse Regiments. 1. Oem's Regiment: 2. Corviles. 3. Stolhanshe's. 4. Steinbocks; 5. Tysenhausens: with some others that are in the Figure of the Battell of Lutzen; and were not with Duke Bernard. These might make some 3000. Horse: be∣sides which, he had 300. of Steinbocks Dragooners:and whilest part of them goe towards Bavaria: which Dragooners used now and then to ride with him, for the usuall Guards of his Body. Of Foote-Regiments, these waited on him. First, Count Neeles with the Life-guards, 2. Carl Harts Regiment. 3. Winckles. All these, came also backe with him: besides which, there likewise went up some others, whom the King left in the Country, vnder the Pa∣latine Christian of Birckenfelt: whose names I have not. With Duke Bernard, he might leave about some 10. or 12000. Those that He purposed for Bavaria; September 15. were sent Southward towards Rotenburg: himselfe also purposing to have gone along with them. This thought of His, was by a message from Norimberg, thus diverted. His Chancellor Oxenstiern sending him newes, of Gallas his besieging of Lauff with a Partee of 2000. men, and some 3. or 4. peeces of Ordnance: He resolues to relieve the Towne and coape with Gallas, if he would stay for him. Taking therefore 2000. well mounted horse, and 1500. Muskettiers along with him, (which were all commanded men,Himselfe goes towards No∣rimberg. and chosen out of the whole Army) he goes with these towards Norimberg. Being comne neere unto Furt, His Maiesty was there met by Chancellor Oxenstiern, and Major-Generall Kniphausen; who informd him, that Lauff was already taken, and Gallas gone towards Ʋoitland and Bohemia. The King, upon this newes,Presently tur∣ning backe, to overtake his Army. staying but one houre there, for the refreshing of his people; returned with all diligence, backe towards Onspach; and so onwards to the rest of his Army, whom he over∣tooke at Dunkelspiel, in the way towards Donawert, and Bavaria.
At this Dunkelspiel, which is 6. leagues to the South of Rotenburg, did the maine body of his Army arrive, Friday September 21. His next Stage was at Nordlingen, 4. leagues further: where Tilly, last yeere, made his Winter-Quarter. Hither came he upon Satterday September 22. The weeke be∣fore,Some Switzers come to aide the King. had 4000. or 5000. Switzers (12000 some name) pas∣sed by this way towards Donawert, to be there conioyned to the Kings Army. They were led by Colonel Wormbrunt: and their way was from Schaffhowsen and Dutling, and so along the Danuby. By this time had the Count de Monte Cuculi, with some of the Duke of Bavariaes people, (whom he found in the countrey) and some few Florentines, (lately sent in from their Master the great Duke of Tuskany, to the aide of the Bava∣rian) laid siege to the towne of Rain upon the Lech in Ba∣varia, neere Donawert. Colonell Mitzval, whom the King had left Governour there; made not such good resistance, as was requisite. The towne, though not excellently, yet was it sufficiently fortified: Victualls and Ammunition, he wan∣ted not: of men, he had 13. good Companies, Horse and Foote: which were hands enow to have made good the place, for a longer time, against a farre greater opposition. I read of no breach yet made, but one threatned, and prepared for, is not unlikely. Some write, that Mitzval was in the name of his Company, threatned by one of his Ancients, that if he would not yeeld the towne, they would: but they that say so,Monte Cuculi takes Rain in Savaria. cannot proove that Mitzval either punisht Ancient or souldiers, for the mutinie. Others affirme, that he had the consent of a Counsell of Warre, of all the Officers of his garrison for it: which had it beene true, then would not the King have executed him for it. How-ever, September 25. did Mitzval conclude upon rendring, the next day march∣ing out with Bag and Baggage, and all good conditions for a souldier, though not of one. The King tooke off his head for it: and so would he have done of all the 8. Captaines of his Regiment, but that her Maiesty the Queene of Sweden
(who was comne all this expedition with her Lord) by the potency of a sweet and gracious intercession, prevailed with the King for a pardon for them. The King now comne to Donawert, made all the hast pos∣sible, to relieve his towne and garrison in it, from Monte-Cuculi: but was not able to doe it on the sudden, for that the towne was on the contrary side of the Lech to him. And it much concern'd him: for that by the taking of this towne, the Partees of Horse that should be lodged in it, would migh∣tily disturbe the trading and other intercourse, betwixt Aus∣burg and Norimberg. Preparing, therefore, to recover it; he advances towards Oberendorff upon the Lech (hard by Rain) where there is a house or Castle of the Fuggers: neere which, there was a bridge over the Lech, as Page 139 of our Second Part, we have told you. This Castle, was guarded with 150 men: and for the breaking of the bridge on that side next unto the King; were there some 250 Crabats now comne, These the King com∣ming upon after they had burnt the bridge, but before they could get to Rain againe (where they should have beene ta∣ken over) he cuts the throats of all the 250 Crabats,The King over∣throwes 400 Crabats, &c. toge∣ther with the other 150, that were the guards of the Castle; and tooke seven Ensignes from them. Hereupon fell he to repairing the bridge. About the 27th of September, was this done, and the Bridge-worke begun upon: which (strange it is) that Monte-Cuculi did little or nothing in the hinderance of. He was skared, perchance,and layes a Bridge, over the Lech. by that wonderfull passage o∣ver the same Lech, which the April before, the King had made; and how dearely it had cost Tilly to oppose it. He was now also taken off, by the distrust to his owne strength; and made, I beleeve, the more hast to looke to Ingolstatt and Re∣gensburg; and to stay thereabouts for the Duke of Bavariaes comming, which was within 8 or 10 dayes after. The King being, the second time, passed over the Lech: in a misty morning (one of the first dayes of April) comes before Rain; ere perchance he was discovered. The fight of
the towne,and besieges Rain. is low and plaine: on one side, fenced with the river and morassy hollow ground; not fit to be entrenched on. The other part, had the King, at his last parting from Bava∣ria; given order unto Mitzvall to new fortifie. This is the East side of the towne; and upon that, was the King faine to make his Approaches. Foure hundred men, had Monte-Cu∣culi left within it: who, either for that Mitzvall had made the place heartlesse and unlucky; or for that the fame and for∣tune of the King, were so irresistible in Bavaria, as that it were but folly to stand out against him: they within two dayes, so soone as ever they had felt but a few peeces of Bat∣tery:Rain yeelded to the King. send out to demand composition. But the King being angred for his Mitzvals late disgrace; would affoord no o∣ther termes unto the garrison, but for the Horsemen to goe out without either Horse or harnesse, and the Foot, like foot∣men; without other Armes, then their swords onely. And thus was the towne as easily recovered, as it had beene lost: saving that the defendants, this last time, had the honour to be overcome by the King of Sweden. October the fift, the King caused Mitzvall, by a Councell of Warre to be condemned; and the same day, in sight of the whole Army to be executed: establishing another Governour with∣in the towne; who needed no other schooling to looke bet∣ter to his Lesson; then to see his Predecessour ryde the scaf∣fold before him. This was done at Neuburg, some ten or eleuen miles Eastward upon the Danuby:The King go∣ing as farre as Newburg, to purue Monte-Cuculi. whither the King had by this fifth of October, retired with his Army. Thus farre was the King comne, to have pursued Monte-Cuculi; and (as 'twas beleeved) to have besieged Ingolstat. But Monte-Cuculi finding himselfe too weake, was with his flying Army of 500 Horse, and 4000 Foot, retired along the Danuby unto Regenspurg. Some troopes of Horse, had the King sent off after Monte-Cuculi; and the countrey was full of noyse, of the intended Seige of Ingolstat. Divers peeces of Ordnance, were for that purpose already sent for, out of Ausburg and Donawert; the Kings Commissaries and
Quarter-masters, were already gone before that way-ward, to take up victuals and lodgings for the Army: Boats and other materials, were providing at Neuburg to be sent downe the Danuby towards Ingolstat, to make Bridges. Provisions were also cōmanded to be ready at Vlm, for the victualling of the Leaguer: and the garrison of Ingolstat, sorely of late, wa∣sted with the pestilence; every day expected another plague of warres, to be comming towards them. Nor were these preparations, onely whisper'd of: but Art, perchance, made the rumour ring so much the louder, that Walenstein might likewise heare of it. But he either did not, or would not li∣sten to it: nor could any noise from Bavaria, frighten him out of Saxony. About these preparations, here at Neuburg, was the King, till the eighth of October: and was the next day provided for, to have gone personally into Ausburg. But this happi∣nesse of his Presence, the Ausburgers were defeated of: the King, the same day, being gone with all speed backe to Nord∣lingen. The cause of this so sudden departure of his Majestie; was an expresse Packet that night received from his Chan∣cellor; that Walenstein having quit Franconia,is diverted by the newes of Walensteins fal∣ling into Ʋoit∣land. was now fal∣ling into Voitland, to undoe the Duke of Saxony. The King, therefore, knowing how earnestly the Elector had heretofore beene pressed by Ambassages; feared, perchance, least the power of a vowed enemy, might by adding violence unto perswasiō, shrewdly prevaile to draw him off from the party: and resolved to quit his former purposes for Bavaria; and to make hast with all speed, to deliver Saxony. And in this was the difference of tempers and good dispositions betwixt the King and our Generalissimo, to be discovered. The King was first in Bavaria, and yet would not the Duke of Fridland for his friends sake, doe more then lend him his Altringer; with his, and Coloredoes Regiments; for the defence of his Countrey: but himselfe would not a foot out of his pace and march, for him. But the King, for his friend, on the
other side; was not difficult to leave his former conquests in Bavaria, to the hazard of the now returning Duke; and to adventure his life to save Saxony. And yet, (to deale with the ingenuity of an Historian) there was something else in it too; for that Walstein by falling into Misnia, put faire for it, to have cut off the King, both from his friends in Meck∣lenburg, Brandenburg, and Pomerania; and from his retreat out of Germany. whereupon, lea∣ving 12000 men in Bavaria, with the Pala∣tine Birckenfelt,The King, therefore, now leaving as many of those Swit∣zers that were newly comne to him; and of some new levied Forces, besides so many of those which himselfe had lately brought up with him, as would make up those already in Bavaria, 12000 men Horse and Foot, under the command of the Palatine Christian of Birckenfelt, for the guard of Ba∣varia: himselfe with the rest, goes backe againe towards Norimberg. Sir Patrick Ruthven Governour of Vlm, was now made Sergeant-Major-Generall unto Birckenvelt; and Colonell Strieff, was constituted Leiftenant Generall of the Horse to him. Ausburg, Rain, and Donawert, were left well provided: and so tooke the King his last leave of Ba∣varia. hee returnes with the rest towards Norim∣berg;His Majesty now leaving 17 Cornets of Horse, and all his three Regiments of Foot, to follow fairely after him: him∣selfe with a guard onely of some Germane Horse, and Stein∣bocks 300 Dragooners; made all the hast he could, backe againe unto Norimberg. Whilest the King was upon his way to Norimberg, had the Generall Major Kniphausen, besieged Lauff: which the King (we told you) before his going to Bavaria; was on the way to have reskewed. Kniphausen had 1600 Foot, and 200 Norimbergers Horse, with two peeces of Ordnance, be∣fore the towne; and two dayes had he besieged it, before the Kings comming had beene heard of.Kinphausen be∣sieges Lauff. The third day, by a breach made with his two peeces, he tooke the towne: the garrison in it, retiring themselves into the Castle. Betwixt the towne and the Castle, was there a Bridge; which for hast
they could not stay to burne or breake: but had onely torne up some of the ioyses and timbers, and so left it. Kniphau∣sens men making shift to passe this bridge, came to a little gate of the Castle: which offering to force open; the garrison presently yeelded up, without any other conditions,Lauff taken. then at mercy. The Governour (a Bohemian by nation, and but Lief∣tenant-Captaine to a troope of Horse) remained prisoner; with some 80. or 100. more of his souldiers: all which were afterwards carried prisoners unto Norimberg. Kniphausen now in possession of the Castle; 7. Bavarian Horsemen (not knowing of it) came that night on the land∣side, to the backe gate of the Castle, to give notice of Co∣lonell Munichs comming with 12. troopes or 1000. Horse, and 300. Dragooners, to the reliefe of it: desiring to speake with the Governour, and to advise him to hold out the Ca∣stle. The Swedish Sentinell that tooke their message, had the wit to conceale the Castles being taken; and to goe and tell Kniphausen of it. Kniphausen presently sent the late Gover∣nour to these 7. Horsemen: by some tricke, or other, to get them into the Castle. The Governour being afraid to be hang'd, as his Predecessor the Norimbergers Governour had beene, when Gallas tooke the Castle: durst not but doe his best to ingratiate himselfe with Kniphausen; and did indeed entice 3. of the 7. into the Castle. Kniphausen learning by these, of the Bavarian succours now comming to relieve the place; had a plot also how to haue gotten Colonel Mu∣nich himselfe into the pitfall. This was his stratageme.A pretty Stra∣tageme. He causes some out of the Towne, to giue false fire, all the night, against the Castle: and others out of the Castle, against them againe; as if they had beene still in skirmish. Twas 10. a clocke next morning, ere Munich came; by which time having notice of the taking of the Castle, he did but show himselfe before it: after an houre retyring himselfe backe againe. Hee being gone, Kniphausen returned unto Norimberg. The day of the taking of the Castle, (which was Fryday
October 21.) did the King arrive at Norimberg: the very next day being desirous to goe out upon a Partee. His men were these 700.The King be∣ing returned to Norimberg, commanded Horse, and 300. Dragooners, led by Colonell Steinbock (a Swede) which had beene his guards hitherto, out of Bavaria. The King now going out, meetes Kniphausen comming home: and of him he learned, which way Colonel Munich was retired: which was first to Hersbruck,goes out upon a Partee: and so towards Felden. The King thereupon commanded Kniphausen to turne backe againe with him after the Bavarians: for (saies He) Ile not goe home againe with∣out doing something. The Kings march, lay by Herschbruck, a good walled towne of the Norimbergers, which Gallas had also taken in.and leauing Kniphausen to take in Hersch∣pruck: There the King left Kniphausen, with his owne men and 2. peeces, to reprise it; which he did, within an houre after the Kings going. The King pursuing Munich by the tracke: light upon some of his people, as they were resting themselues at Schlu∣cten, and another village, hard by Felden. Many of these were Crabats; whom the King had the killing of 300. upon the place; with the taking of some 2. Cornets, and divers priso∣ners. The King having caused the villages they were enquar∣tered in, to be first surrownded, and then fired; had the knocking of them downe, as they start out to have escaped. Some Relations tell me of 600. Bavarians, that should be enquartered in a village betwixt Altfelt and Eismansberg, a little East of Herschbruck, who should have comne out of Reichelswang Castle:himselfe sur∣prises and de∣feates Munich, in his Quarters. and were of those that should have relieved Lauff. And these (tis said) the King at one a clocke at night falling upon; cut off a great many, tooke 50. priso∣ners of them; the rest saving themselues in Rotenberg. But I suppose both these, to have bin but one action; for that the taking of 2. Colours is mentioned in each of them: and then I am sure, the first first relation is the truer; for that it was told me by a very understanding Gentleman, at the same time with Kniphausen, (and very familiar with him) in the Actions both of Norimberg, Lauff and Herschbruck. This
done, the King October 15. betwiʒt 5. and 6. in the euening, returned againe into Norimberg. And thus had the King once againe cleered all the townes of the Iurisdiction of the Norimbergers,So that having vnblockt No∣rimberg; and unblockt the City: immediately resolues upon returning to the rest of his Army in Franconia, and so thorow Duringen into Saxony. And for that himselfe was likely to have more use of his for∣ces against Walenstein, then any employment the Norimber∣gers had for them: he takes with him those 3. Foote-Regi∣ments of Kniphausen, Gerstorff and Rosse; which at his first going to Neustat he had sent unto the City for their safe∣guards. These Regiments, with those other 3. that were fol∣lowing out of Bavaria; might make up some 6000. com∣pleate: and about that number of Foote, had Duke Bernard in his Army. Both together, might make up some 6500. Horse. And this was the Kings whole strength, (and after the largest reckoning too) in the day of the great Battell of Lutzen. The King October 17. taking his last leave of the No∣rimbergers, goes himselfe with Steinbocks old Convoy; to follow Duke Bernards Army: his owne men,He goes to∣wards Duke Bernards Army. both those that came out of Bavaria, and those that were now drawne out of Norimberg; following as fast as they could, after. October 19, the King came to Kitzing upon the Mayn; 40. English miles, to the North-West of Norimberg. Here his Queene then was; who thence went towards Wurtsburg: whence after a few dayes, She came unto Erfurt; being gotten thither, before the Kings comming. And here having mentioned Duke Bernard and his Army: let us now goe backe a little (in the meane time that the Kings owne Army is upon their march, this way-ward) to tell how he passed away the time, ever since the Kings going from him into Bavaria. The King (as we told yon) parted from him about Septem∣ber 15: whose charge to Duke Bernard was,Duke Bernards Story, in the Kings absence. To obserue the motions of the Imperiall Generalissimo; and well to guard
the Imperiall towne of Schwinfurt, with all the rest upon the Mayn-streame, from him. For this purpose, had the King left him an Army of some 9000. or 10000 men: or at least, so many they were voyced for. This young Duke, some dayes after the Kings going; re∣mooues from Winshaim first of all, unto Kitzing upon the Mayn: where he staid 6. or 7. dayes. That is, towards the very end of September. Thence advances he to Wurtsburg; where the Army staid 7. or 8. dayes, being enquartered in the Suburbs. Thence goes he to a Dorp within halfe an houres going of Schweinfurt: where he was 3. or 4. dayes more. About 9. or 10. a clocke the last of these nights, the Army had sudden order to remooue to Schweinfurt, and quartered there under the very walls of the towne. The occasion of this remoovall was; for that the Imperialists having some Horse Partees abroad, were likely enough to affront this their open Quarter. Here staid Duke Bernard but one day: remo∣ving the next towards Konigshoven, and enquartering short of it. Some fortnight before this time, had Dubatell with his Dragooners, beene sent into Coburg Castle: as in Walensteins proceedings we shall after tell you.Pag: 803. The Soldat Suedois re∣ports, that Duke Bernard before this time should haue de∣feated 40. troopes of Crabats, under the command of Isolani their Colonell Generall, and chiefest Commander of their Nation. But of this airy defeate; those Gentlemen of our Nation, all this time with Duke Bernard knew nothing: nor doe I beleeve Duke Bernard to have then beene strong enough in Horse,More of Duke Bernard see in Walensteins Proceeding. to have beaten Isolani, with 40. of his Cornets: which could not bee lesse then 3000. But to re∣turne. From Konigshoven, went Duke Bernard unto Hilperhau∣sen, and enquartered short of it. And now might he doe what he pleased in the country: for that Walenstein was a weeke or 10. dayes since, gone quite out of Franconia into Ʋottland. From Hilpershausen, goe they unto Schleusing: Quartering by it: and hither came the King to them. The
King himselfe, I meane, attended on by Steinbock and his Guards onely; his Army being still behind,The King comes to Duke Bernard. upon their march towards him. This was about October 21: so that in 14 dayes he had marched from Bavaria into Duringen: and stayed three at Norimberg. The next day, the King cashiered the English, and Scottish Regiments; and that by reason of the extreame weakenesse of the Companies. These being thus made Reformadoes, were ordered by the King to waite upon his owne person: he promising them good Quarters, and to preferre them. Thence went the King with Duke Bernards Army, thorow the Duringer-Waldt the next day, unto Arnstat, 9. English miles further, and in the County of Duringen. And here staid he 6. dayes, that is till his other Army was October 27. comne up to him. That day, went the Chancellor Oxenstiern backe from the King towards Franckford; to order things thereabouts, and in the Pa∣latinate. Simon and Iudes day, October 28. whilest the conioyned Army advanced before, towards Erfurt, iust 8. English miles North of Arnstat: the King staying behind a while, wrote his last letters unto the King of Bohemia: which letters are in the hands of many Gentleman. About an English mile without Erfurt, in a very faire Campagnia;The King musters. was the whole Army drawne up into Battaglia: the King taking a view of every Brigade; and appointing their place and orders to each of them. Now were divers Regiments reduced into one Brigade, being too weake each of them, to have stood by themselves against an enemy.His numbers. The whole Army was found to bee about 12000. Horse and 6500. Foote, indifferent compleatly. Hither the same afternoone, came 4. of the chiefe of Er∣furt, to invite his Maiesty into their City: for thither was his Queene the same day arrived. The King answered, that though he had much to say unto their Magistrates, yet knew he not how his leisure would serue him to come among them. He that writes this, was one of the 4. that now were
the Kings enviters: who affirmes, that the Kings words were so gracious; that he could not without shedding of teares, repeate them. Towards night the King came: a lighting from his Horse before Duke William of Saxon-Weymars lodging: who having a long time layne there sicke, the King now went to give a visit unto.Lodges in Erfurt. Returning thence, he went on horse-backe, to his owne lodging: before which, upon the Market place; he was received by his Queene and her Ladies. His Maiesty leading his Queene up the staires into her owne Chamber, returned quickly into his owne: where a great many of intercepted letters were presented unto him. These having scarce perused, he was called out to Supper: Duke Ernest of Saxon-Weymar being entertained with the King and Queene,That Duke Bernard was not now there, we shall by and by tell you the reason. at the same table. Scarcely halfe an houre, had the King beene at the table; but that he rose, and went to his owne lodging. Having spent a great part of the night in dispatches, giving order for letters, and sending away of Posts: he rose againe in the morning very early. Having broken his fast and taken his last leave of his Queene; he then gaue audience to the City Magistrates, who there waited for it. To their Speech, did the King himselfe returne a long, and very pleasing an∣swer: of which, these were the last words. You know, that in humane affaires, there is no constancy; and that for our sinnes sake, the warres, of all things else, are most uncer∣taine. Some mischance or other, may soone fall out, con∣cerning my person: which if God Almighty pleases so to have, let me earnestly now desire you to continue faithfull unto my deare Consort;The Kings speech to those of Erfurt. doe, as becomes honest and up∣right men; and so I heartily pray to God, to blesse and preserve you. Thus having said; leaving the hearers all in teares, he tooke horse, and followed after his Army. And these passages of the Kings, would I not omit; for that every word and action, so neere his end; may well deserve to be Chronicled. The Count of Pappenheim some 2. dayes before this, had
beene hanckering thereabouts, in his march from about the Weser towards Misnia: and certainely, had not the King made this extremity of haste to Arnstat, Pappenheim would haue taken Erfurt. Word having beene now brought the King, of his late being at Butstet in this Duringen, 12. Eng∣lish miles to the North-East of Erfurt:Duke Bernard sent out after Pappenheim. the King had sent away Duke Bernard with 1000. Horse; to fall upon Pap∣penheims Reere-guard. But Duke Bernard came too late: Pappenheim had already hastned along thorow the County of Frieburg; there passed the river Sala; and conioyned with Walenstein about Mersburg. The Kings Army following after, Quartered the first night in a little Fleck or Market towne, 3. Dutch miles from Erfurt. The second day, it advanc't much about the same proportion: and the 3.The King comes to Naumburg. day it arriv'd at Naumburg on the East banke of the river Sala, which parteth Duringen from Misnia. This was November the first 1632. Stylo veteri. The King having had notice in the way, how that Felt-Marshall Lieftenant Holck (for this new Title was devised for him, upon the comming of Felt-Marshall Pappenheim, into the Generalissimo's Army) had demaunded of the towne of Naumburg, the rest of that money which they had last yeere promised, (and not fully paid) to the Generall Tilly, to be spared from being plundered: and that Holck withall, had sent in 36. Muskettiers to lye there, in the name of a Safe∣guad for the Towne. The King upon this intelligence, had dispatched Colonel Brandistein away before hand,Brandistein sent by the King, to take Naumburg. with a Partee of Muskettiers to recover the Towne againe; for that his Majesty now purposed, to make his Quarters at it. Bran∣distein the last of October, (very early in the morning) pre∣senting himselfe before the Othmars Port, demands in the Kings name to haue it opened to him. The Sentinels made him answer, that they would informe the Magistrates first of it. But Brandistein never purposing to stay their answer, claps a Petard to the Gate and breakes it all to peeces. Hee was scarce well settled in the Towne, but about 9 in the fore∣noone,
comes there a Squadron of 600. Imp. Horse, to haue Quartered thēselues within the City: but hearing of the Swe∣dish Harbingers being there before them; they turn'd bridle againe, and went to informe their Generalissimo. The next day about noone, came the King himselfe into the Towne: his Army passing by the Bridge over the River Sala: which marching before the Gate called Saint Iames's, their Quarters were layd out for them upon the high-wayes, that leade to Zeitz and Leipsich. The weather was very cold now; so that the most of the Army, lay within the walls of the towne: though every man could not get a Billet, for good Quarter in it. The Townes-men of Naumburg were not onely glad, but secure; so soone as ever they had the King of Sweden a∣monst them: even as confident, as if they had seene their Tutelar Deity, or that their Angell-guardian had beene comne to their protection. This carnall confidence of an o∣ver-joyed people, the good King having by reflection apply∣ed to himselfe: he became (cleane contrary to Herods hu∣mor) the more humbled by it. And desiring, withall, to make the same impression in the people, which he felt within himselfe; for that it had beene too vnciuill to haue chidden the men for their good wills to him; he thought upon this handsome way of preaching it into them, in the presence of his owne Preacher. The second of November, therefore, calling his Chaplaine of Honour, Doctor Fabritius unto him; Mr. Doctor (saies the King) Our affaires are in a very to∣wardly condition at this present;A most religi∣ous speech of the King of Sweden. euery thing going on, as well as our hearts can desire. But I feare, I feare, that because every man doth so adore and honour me, even like a God, as it were, that God Almighty will thorowly punish mee for it, at one time or other. But my God knoweth, that I take no delight in it; nor am I desirous of it. Now let be as pleases God: This I know, that seeing the Action is for his owne glory, that He in his owne good time will blesse it with a most prosperous issue.
To see how holy men, can foredoome of their owne ends! and that the words of dying men very oftentimes have be∣comne Propheticall! What could King David have said more? And now, whilest the King for some few dayes, gives rest vnto his Army, and prepares for the great day of Battell: let us (according to our methode, in our for∣mer Bookes) goe backe awhile, to fetch up his great Adversaries Story: and that from the time of their late par∣ting about Norimberg; till we have brought them into the field together.
The Proceedings, Of the Imperiall Generalissimo the Duke of Fridland. His discamping, deviding of his Army; owne Atchievements; and his ioy∣ning with Holck, Gallas and Pappenheim. All Historically led along from his rising from before Norimberg, untill the day of the Battell of LVTZEN. THose two great Antagonists of our times, his Majestie of Sweden, and his Excellency the Duke of Frid∣land; were now becomne the pub∣lickest persons, of our Christian World: scarcely was there any one man, of all the affectionates to the Protestant Party, (that dealt for but 50. pounds a yeere) but the King of Swedens proceedings, had some secret influence and activity, upon himselfe and fortunes. For the Duke of Fridland; we first see, how much straining among the Catholike Party there had beene, to set him out; how many feares and hopes, did still depend upon his conduct; and what a weakenesse and emptinesse, there was in the whole Empire besides; all the time that the strength
of it was under him, employed against the King of Sweden. Whilest all men were in expectation, what the Norimberg Leaguers would come unto; that mighty and vaste bodie of the Empire, grew feebler still and feebler, in all the other parts of it: which, when Walenstein gat at large, was by the succours sent out of his Army, iollily cherisht and nurst up againe. So feeble was the Empire at home, even in its owne Au∣stria; that it was neither able to kill; nor so much as to shake off, its owne vermine: (for no better were they at Vienna esteemed) thoseThese Boores rise not for Re∣ligion (they were not Pro∣testants, all) but by reason of the new taxations. And therefore when they sent to the King of Sweden for Lea∣ders, he refused them: nobly scorning to conquer his enemy, by his Rebels. mutinous Boores, I meane, which became troublesome in the Over, Ens and upon the Danuby, in a po∣pular Commotion. Every where abroad, had the Swedish Armies the better; and the Imperiall the worst of it. Horn was victorious in Triers and Alsatia, and had thence frighted out Ossa and Monte Cuculi. Arnheim and Dubalt, had ut∣terly, almost, beaten downe all opposition in Silesia: and would have suddenly beene at very good leysure, either to have converted their Armes upon Bohemia; or to have sent home forces enow, to have throwne Holck out of Misnia. There was little to doe about Bavaria, till that Monte Cu∣culi had iust now broken in againe. Cratz (falling into Wa∣lensteins displeasure, as I heare,) was sent away prisoner to Vienna: and in his absence, Fugger did but shufflle up and downe, in those quarters. Duke Iulius Administrator of Wirtemberg,The State of the warres abroad, when the King and Walenstein parted. and Sir Patricke Ruthven about Vlm and Over∣land; were still upon the getting hand in the Circle of Schwa∣ben: there being no maine Army in the field, constantly, to oppose them thereabouts; but some few forces of the Arch-Duke Leopolds, and the Boores onely. The Army under Ge∣nerall Wrangle (with whom Sir George Fleetwood is, with his English Regiment) had a quiet Quarter of it, in Prussia: the Pole, (whom he was set but to obserue) being busied now at home, about the election of their owne King; and in feare of the Muskovite from abroad. The Swedish garrisons about Pomern and Mecklenburg; wanted worke: and the Spaniards
and the Lorrayners, were as good, at this time, as quite out∣ted, all over Germany. Of all the Imperiall Generalls, was Pappenheim onely able to wagge: and he, indeed, made a scambling kind of warre of it in the Lower Saxony: whom yet the Court of Ʋienna had desired, to ioyne with his Generalissimo. And this was the constitution of the Swedish Armies, when the King and the Duke of Fridland, rose from about Norimberg: the Kings men, had either no action at all, or every where (but in the lower Saxony) the better of it. The same power (now) that had given them these advantages; would every day also have increased them: and the Imperiall Armies were brought to that passe; that they were every day in danger to be beaten: after which it was likely to be a long day, ere they would be re-enforced. This was one of the reasons, by which the Duke of Fridland used to excuse him∣selfe, from fighting it out with the King of Sweden: for (saith he) if my Army be overthrowne,Walensteines reason for not fighting. the Emperor my Master can hardly (at least not this yeere) bring another Army into the Field: whereas the Swedish will quickely recreute their losses, by the emptying of their garrisons. Iust the an∣swer of a Turkish Captive, unto the Christians. The losse of an Army to the Grand Signior, my Master, is but like the shaving of his beard, the bush will grow againe: but tis like the lopping off a limme, to the Christians, never to be recovered. All this could hardly have beene avoyded on the Imperi∣all party, could but the King of Sweden have laine long e∣nough by it, to have made Walenstein rise first: who might not then have devided his Army, to relieve other places (which thereupon must have suffered) but have kept all his power together, out of the expectation to be fough∣ten withall. But this, the Kings necessities before spoken of, prevented. The Duke of Fridlands late comming unto Norimberg, was to coope up the King of Sweden: by which first act of
his power, he seem'd, at first hearing,What Walen∣stein had done all this time upon the King, to have gained this re∣putation unto his cause; That he had, at least, put the King of Sweden to a Demurrer, if not utterly Non-suited him. For this service, was the Generalissimo (as he deserved) much courted and thanked from Vienna: his discreet conduct in it, extraordinarily applauded by his Master: yea and his authori∣ty (upon demaund) by anew Imperiall Commission, strangely now augmented. The Kings necessities having brought him to it, That he must needs rise first, or lye still and doe nothing; Walenstein contented himselfe with this honour, That he had put him to these necessities. The King being first marcht off; and Walenstein by his es∣pialls assured, that it was no plot in the King; no tricke to wheele about, and to assayle him in another quarter;He rises: but that he was already set downe at Neustat, for the refreshing of his Army: he, having no more to doe here, resolues also to be rising. This motion was much put forward by these and the like reasons. First, Should he lye long, other places must suffer:and his reasons for it. so that there was a present and a pressing necessity for him to relieve other places, with some of his forces. The Generall-Adjutant Zinzindorff, is therefore sent with 2. Regiments into Austria; to represse the Commotion of the Boores, there. Gallas is with 4. Regiments, dispatched thorow the Vpper Palatinate into Voitland, to enable Holck to doe the more mischiefe there, and in Misnia: so to enforce the Duke of Saxony, to recall his Army out of Silesia. Secondly, He perceived his mightie vaste Army, to waste away apace. Some thousands had beene slaine; many dead, and runne away; divers spoyl'd, and made unserviceable. The bloody Fluxe reigned mightily in his Leaguer: and the souldi∣ers great complaint was, of an extraordinarie want, both of Physicke and of Surgerie. Thirdly, His Horses, (the pride and strength of his Army, at his first comming) beganne now to die apace: of which he had at least 14. or 15000. starved, & yet I speake much within
compasse, of what I have heard. Their Carrion was very noysome unto the Quarters: and yet had his men taken better order, then the Kings people had, to carry away and bury them. Fourthly, The Kings labour, he knew, to be one of these two: either to cut off his victuals or provisions from him; or else to fall into some friends country. If the King, now, should doe the first, then could not he lye long: and if the second, then would the King have gotten the start of him. The greatnesse of his spirit being to be of the active, fore-hand; to make the King of Sweden follow him; and not he to fol∣low the King of Sweden. Fifthly, The Towne of Norimberg, though it had beene part of his errand for comming thither; yet besides that hee should be likely to loose his labour, in attacking a place so well-provided for resistance: he did not thinke it Souldier-like done of him, to sit taking of one towne, whilest his enemy should be conquering of whole Countryes. For No∣rimberg, therefore, he tooke order to have it still blockt up; by Gallas taking of Lauff, and other townes and Passes about it: and for the rest, he would try Masteries with the King of Sweden, who should divert one another. Sixthly and lastly, he might doubt, That when the King of Sweden should have well ayred, refreshed and recreuted his Army: and have provided himselfe of new Horses: that hee were then likely enough to returne a-fresh upon his Leaguer; and then either put him to fight, or starve by it. Which of the two Armies, could then have found the sharper swords, or the fuller Bandeliers; must now have beene left unto the tryall: but the Walsteiners, by having the stronger place of encamping, and the fuller knap-sacks; pre∣vented their being put unto that tryall. Wednesday, September 12th, was the day appointed for dis∣camping. Repairing the Bridge, therefore, over the river Rednitz a little North of Furt: hee there wafts over his whole Army: not halfe so great now, as when he first came
to Norimberg. Some writing tels mee, that Walensteins re∣moovall was by night: but in that (me thinks) his haughty spirit is much injuryed: hee that upon a march, forbids to have the Ports shut where he Quarters: would never, I sup∣pose, steale away by a dark lanterne. And that it was not in the darke, was visible enough at present: for the Souldiours not onely set fire upon their Huts and Quarters, at their rising; but upon the Countrey too. A hundred Dorps and houses, were now drest up in flame, in the Marquisate of Onspach, and the Iurisdiction of the Norimbergers: as if to sacrifice to Mars or Bellona, with this Hecatomb. Foule warres, or no warres, is a Maxime among some souldiours, otherwise not cruelly minded: but Walenstein is not so well made up in this; for that his haughtinesse wants an alloy or temperature of pittie, in it. The Crabats, sure, had done nothing extraordi∣narily worthy of a triumph: and yet could they not find in their hearts to leave the Countrey, without kindling of 100 Bonfires in it. Nor is this the first time, that Walenstein hath done so: but as if he this way affected, to be called the Thun∣derbolt of Warre; hee nor goes nor comes, scarcely, but in flames and flashing, and in this imitated lightning. All the time that the Imperiall Army was marching by, the Swedish Forces in and before Norimberg; stood caute∣lously upon their guards: and the Army being a little past them, some troopes of Horse (as usually in such cases they will doe) fell out of the towne and Trenches, and exchan∣ged a few bullets with their Reere; though little or nothing to the purpose. I omit the Norimbergers rifling of the for∣saken Leaguer: where for want of Horses, the Imperialists had left an incredible world of Military luggage behind them. This, as it showed how excellently well provided, Walenstein had comne into the Field: so it was a kind of Iustice, to leave the Norimbergers something of good value behind them: to pay themselves withall, for the courtesie and cost, they should bestow upon the many maimed and sicke souldi∣ers; which were there found a starving and a stinking. This
is the guise and fortune of the warres: nor can these who have beene bred full tenderly have their mothers with them in the Leaguer, to looke to them. By these was the want dis∣covered, which since the Kings going, was increasing every day more then other: and the reasons given (which wee have before pointed at) for Walensteins discamping. The deviding of the Imperi∣all Army,A little beyond the Citie; is the Imperiall Army devided. Zinzindorff (as we told you) is sent to Austria: and Ge∣nerall-Major Gallas with part of the Army, goes Eastward towards Lauff,of Gallas, we shall tell you altogether, by and by. two leagues from Norimberg; which having taken, with some other townes, to keepe the Norimbergers blockt up: he marches by the corner of Bohemia, into Mis∣nia. The two Dukes of Fridland and Bavaria; turning fa∣ces about to the left; come the first night unto Bruck, ten English miles to the North of Norimberg, and sixe from Furt.Walensteins way, The river of Rednitz, he still kept upon his left hand: which was a sure barricado on that side against the King of Sweden. Walenstein in deviding his Army, had this good con∣sideration: that having sent away his two great Officers, Holck before, and Gallas now: yet it was but to the place where he meant to follow them; or could, if he were put to it, presently recall them. His meaning was, to undoe the Duke of Saxony: and thither had he sent these two. Him∣selfe advanc't now towards Duringen: and thither was it agreed that Pappenheim, from the Weser, should come and joyne with him. This was Walensteins happinesse, that the place marckt out for his revenge, lay so conveniently for him. Numbers,The numbers of his Army, were not above twelve thou∣sand (besides nine or ten thousand of the Duke of Bavariaes) Foote, or fifteene thousand complete marching men, (at the most) and nine or ten thousand Horse: and so much had the King intelligence of. The rest of his sixtie thousand, had beene kill'd, dead, runne away, sent other where, with Holck, Gallas, Zinzindorff and into Bavaria: put into garrisons in the Ʋpper Palatinate: or left behind, sicke and maymed, in
the Quarters: for certainly, both Walenstein and the King, lost more for either of their parts, at this lingring Leaguer; then the King and Tilly both, at the great Battell of Leipsich. Walenstein at his first rising, had given order for the sending before of some of his greater Ordnance, unto Forcheim: for guarding whereof, hee supposed a small Convoy would be sufficient.and order of marching. Some Swedish Horse-Partees (as it chanced) were at that time gone abroad into the Bishopricke of Bamberg: who being by the Boores discovered unto Walenstein; caused him to countermand his owne order, and to have his Ord∣nance, from thence-forth, to march with the grosse of his Army. Where the breadth of the way would suffer him, there he advanced in Battaglia: the Dragooners with their Muskets, Shovels, and Mattocks, (with which they still ride) were euer sent before, to make good the Passes: and the Cra∣bats, (being his nimblest Horse) were still left behind, to bring up the Reere of the Army. And in the souldierly wari∣nesse of this equipage, he marches unto Forcheim: for in the neerenesse of an active enemy, it much concerned him to bee thus wary. The Army being come to Forcheim; was there in a friends Countrey, and in good Quarter: and there I finde Walenstein to have stayed about ten dayes or a Fortnight. Here had hee notice first given him, of the King of Swedens going with halfe his Army towards Bavaria: and of Duke Bernards staying with the other halfe, about the Main-streame. Ac∣cording to this intelligence, he now disposes of his Forces. The Duke of Bavaria, being most startled at it; desires to take leave of the Generalissimo, with his part of the Army: requesting that Altringer with his Regiment and Coloredoes, might goe along with him, for the direction of the Militia. The Duke of Fridland grants it; and himselfe waiting (as he call'd it) upon the Duke of Bavaria, as farre as Bamberg:Bavaria parts with Walenstein, to goe home∣wards. after a few dayes he takes leave of him, with much seeming courtesie and solemnitie. Courtiers enough, they were both of them: and both of them though high-spirited Princes,
yet so artfully commanding of their owne carriages; that though each of then were conscious, how much cause they had given one another to dissemble: yet with studied words and faces, did they full masterly controll all that stomacke and disrespect, by which they had thorowly, heretofore, enchafed one another. The Duke of Fridland seemed to have forgot∣ten, that ever Bavaria had procured him to be cashiered from his Generallship, in the Diete of Ratisbone: and Bavaria gave the Generalissimo never a note in the Margent, how often (since this Leaguer) he had beene faine to waite, to get to speake with him. They are fellowes in Armes, from hence forward: they protested to serve one another, in all good offices; and to second one another, upon all occasions. One thing was noted betweene them, in this vieing of Comple∣ments: That Walenstein was not so supple and active in his cringes, as old Bavaria. But this, (what ever his great Spi∣rit meant by it) he excused by his Gowte, and other his un∣weildynesses. Leaving therefore, Bavaria to his march, home∣wards: we will wholly apply our selues to our Title, which is Walensteins Proceedings. Early, September 24. went the two Dukes with the grea∣test part of their Army, and 48. Peeces, from Forcheim to∣wards Bamberg: which is 16. miles to the North of For∣cheim; where the Mayne drinkes up the Rednitz. September 27. He is still in and about Bamberg, and those Quarters: so that his lingring thereabouts gave a shrewd suspition, of a meaning he might have to the Imperiall City of Schweinfurt,Walenstein sus∣pected to have a mind at Schweinfurt; which is seated upon the Northerne banke of the Maine, some 25. English miles to the West of Bamberg. Of this Schwein∣furt, was the Swedish Colonell Carl-Hart, Governour: who sending to Claus Hastfer, Governour of Konigshoven; 24. English miles to the North, and towards Duringen: did from him, about the 24. of September, receive some forces, for a strengthning. Much about the same time, had Colonell Du∣badell (who still hath the command of a Regiment of Dragooners) also marcht in thither, with 13. of his Com∣panies.
Duke Bernard, likewise,upon Duke Bernards ma∣king that way, being by the King entrusted with this Schweinfurt; did presently upon this, advance thi∣therward. All this appearance of resistance, caused the Imperiall Ge∣neralissimo (tis beleeved) to alter his determination for Schweinfurt: and now wholly to convert his Armes,alters his resolution: against the Princes and Countries, of the 2. Electorate Families of Saxony and Brandenburg. Of this latter Family, was the neighbour Marquesse of Bayreit; vnckle to young Onspach: whose Countrey for distinction from his Nephewes, is called the Vpper Marqui∣sate. This Prince, is also Marquesse of Culmbach: and both these townes with their Iurisdictions, Walenstein now pur∣poses to have about with. From about Bamberg, therefore, in the end of the moneth; sends he some forces unto Bayreit,falling upon the Marquisates of Bayreit, 43. English miles Eastward. The towne, they tooke with∣out much opposition: the Burgers, for their peaces sake, consenting to giue him 10000. dollars downe upon the naile, and hostages for as many more. Kreutzetz, a pretty towne of the Marquesses, some 6. English miles to the South of Bay∣reit (for what offence, I reade not) is given for pillage unto the souldiers: who have leave given them, to make up what pay the Generalissimo was behind hand with them, upon an enemies Countrey. Thence, goes the Army towards Culmbach towne;and Culmbach. the ordinarie residence of the Marquesse; 12. English miles to the North-West: neere which, the 2. originall streames of the river Mayne (the Red and the White) doe in one bed make an alliance betwixt their Issues. This towne being farre stron∣ger then Bayreit, had put it selfe into a Posture of resistance. When as September 21. it had by Walensteins letters beene summoned in the Emperors name, to be yeelded to him. In this if they obeyed not, he threatned fire and sword; to kill and burne all.Being put from Culmbach. The City suspecting his friendship to be as pernicious to them, as his enmity; sends him the deniall. Here∣upon his men now breaking into the country; to the full, per∣forme
as much, as their Generalissimo had threatned. They sometimes also are bold to come neere the towne, and to giue it summons: but these being answered by the Cannon, they finding themselues likely to get nothing here, but leaden and iron dollars; hote sent them out of the mint: content themselues to have burnt the Mills about the towne, and to have plundered the villages, and then to draw off their Army. And now have at the House of Saxony: whose lands lye all the way from hence, to the very Elb. From Culmbach, therefore, goe they unto Coburg: 22. English miles to the North-West of Culmbach: and so farre due North of Bam∣berg. The towne and faire Castle here, belongeth unto the Duke of Saxon-Coburg, unckle unto the Dukes of Saxon-Weymar: and that was one of Walensteins quarrels to it. A second was, for that the Duke of Saxon-Coburg, with the Marquesse of Culmbach, had the 7. of May before; con∣ioyned their forces with the Swedish Colonell Claus Hastfer: to make an Aenslaught upon the towne of Cronach, belong∣ing unto the Bishop of Bamberg. This enterprise, though through the cowardise of the Boores employed upon it, it had miscarried; yet had it given a iust occasion to an enemie, to be revenged of the affront-offerers. Walenstein, hereupon, presenting his grosse before the Towne; found not the same opposition here, which those of Culmbach had before made him. The towne being thereupon entred: thorowly e∣nough paid downe, for the ransome of its owne cowardise: and affoorded pay enough unto the souldiers; considering their small paines in taking of it. Here, were many a rich Packe and Bale of merchandise, made prize of: which ha∣ving beene sent towards Leipsich Mart, by the Merchants of Ausburg,He takes the townes of Coburg. Norimberg, and other places; were iust comne in∣to this towne, to be sent onwards, a night or 2. before that Walenstein came afore it. The Dukes Palace within the Towne, fell also to the souldiers ransacking: which the Duke, in the feare of an old man, having with too much haste for∣saken:
had there also left his houshold-stuffe, with a great part of his treasure. And this was done, in the very beginning of our October. The towne being thus mastered,and laying siege to the Castle, the Castle is next summo∣ned: into which, a little before Walensteins comming; Duba∣dell having gotten, from out of Schweinfurt: he now had the command of it. This strong Castle, stands upon a Rocke, without the towne; but yet so neere, that it lookes downe into it. The noise of the Summons, is answered, by the thun∣der of the Cannon: which being lowder then the sound of the Trumpet; would not let the offered conditions, to be hearkned unto. Walensteins Ordnance, therefore, are set to reply upon Dubatells Cannon: the Generalissimo having a great desire, to take Dubatell the second time; and Dubatell being as desirous to let the Generalissimo understand, that it was a disadvantage which he had before taken him upon. Walenstein (with much adoe) having shot a breach (two some say) in the lower part of the Castle wall; he about the 3. of October, prepares all things to give a generall assault upon it. Five hundred souldiers, thereupon, being comman∣ded into the dry Graff or Moate of the Castle; clap to their scaling ladders, to storme it. A great Ravelin there was, which defended the Sally-port of the Castle: and that, whilest they attacked; their fellowes, from the townes side, with continu∣ed vollyes of small and great shot, entertained the besieged. Dubatell perceiving the intended Scaladoe; issues with his Dragooners immediately out of the Castle; going downe the hill towards the skalers. Having with good diligence also, brought downe some new peeces of Ordnance unto a side-Worke which flanckered the Ravelin: he so skowers both it, and the Moate at the same time: that a many of the assailants, now already halfe way mounted; came fluttering downe headlong into the Moate, and their skaling ladders after them.is repulsed by Dubatell. The Imperiall Colonell that had the point in the assault, and ledd them on; was there shot thorow the head; and dyed in a ditch among his fellowes. A young Lord or Cavalier, of
Walensteins name and kinne; I find to have beene here slaine also. Some make him to be knockt downe by the Boores of Voitland, a little after this: but I rather consent to this wri∣ting, which giues him to be kild here; for that I reade his bo∣dy to be with much solemnity, carried from the Campe tho∣row Zroicka in Voitland, to be enterred in his owne Lordship in Bohemia; something before that Walenstein was gotten into Voitland. But this is no great controversie. Our Generalissimo perceiving the Castle to be strong, high situated,and raiseth his owne siege. well provided, and the besieged resolved for de∣fence; he gave no more on upon it after this one repulse, had beene given him. But this was not all the reason, for the rai∣sing of his siege: Duke Bernard Weymar was by this time come from Schweinfurt to Konigshoven, 17. miles due West of Coburg; and was thence marcht to Hilperhausen, upon the edge of the Duringer-Waldt, within 13. English miles to the North-West of this Coburg. And he, (as Walenstein might suspect) though not strong enough to encounter him in the open field, yet was hee able enough to disturbe him at a siege. And this siege, above all the rest; for that Duke Bernard is to be heire unto this Towne and Dukedome of Coburg, after the decease ofOne of these, is dead since: he namely that was then in pos∣session, when his towne was besieged. two of his old childlesse Vnckles. Now had our Generalissimo a purpose, to have advanced further to the Northward, and to have pierced thorow, by the way of the Duringer-Waldt into Duringen: where Pap∣penheim was to haue ioyned with him. But this designe was now defeated, by Duke Bernards putting himselfe iust before him:By Duke Ber∣nards good service. which was a very great piece of service. By this meanes, was the Castle of Coburg reskeued; and the whole little Country of Henneberg, in which it is seated. Had Walenstein gone forward with his proiect: then had Hilperhausen, Schleusing, Aischfelt, Ilmenaw, and Arnstat, beene taken by him. Then had all the Passes thorow the Duringer-Waldt, beene blockt up by his people, which the King of Sweden must by mayne force haue againe opened, before euer he
could have comne up to Walenstein. Then, in the meane time, would he and Pappenheim, have recovered Erfurt: with the townes about it: made himselfe master, of the whole Land∣graviate of Duringen; have over-runne the lands of the Du∣call, (and sometimes Electorall) Family of Saxon-Weymar. Then had he, thorow that rich Country, beaten out his way into the Elector of Saxonyes Misnia: have wintered and enriched his Army in those Countries: and beene ready with the first of the next Spring,is Walensteins great proiect defeated. to have fallen into Lusatia and Silesia. Then would he have made himselfe master, of the river Elb: and so have cut off the King of Swedens retreate, home againe. Then would Walenstein haue cleered his (titu∣lary) Dukedome of Mecklenburg: and hewen out himselfe a free passage, to his old Quarters in Brandenburg and Po∣merania; and againe possessed himselfe, of the banks of the Baltick Ocean. And thus handsomely had our Generalissimo contrived it: the effecting of which project was worth the abandoning all the lower Saxony, by the calling away of Pap∣penheim out of it: and in the highest degree concerned the King of Sweden, to make such hast out of Bavaria, to pre∣vent it. All the former part of this project, was now defeated by Duke Bernard: the taking, namely, of the Landtgra∣viate of Duringen, with the Dukedome of Weymar: as likewise the conioyning of Pappenheim, with his Ge∣neralissimo: which hee durst not after attempt to doe, till he knew that Walenstein was falne by another way, into Misnia. And thus was the Imperiall Generall enforced, not to raise his siege onely from before the Castle of Coburg: but to quit likewise his intended march thorow the rich, and (of late) un-plundered Countrey of Thuringia. Turning faces about therefore, to the right; (his souldiers burning downe Helberck, Neustat, and other Dorps about Coburg) he marches directly by the towne of Cronach, into Voitland;He falls into Voitland. which his owne Holck and Gallas with their Armies, had of late so foully
harryed. It was a deepe prepensed resolution in the Genera∣lissimo, to pay the Elector of Saxony, to the purpose: he was once in a quandary, when as he had newly taken Prague; whe∣ther he should first fall into Saxony, or come against the King Sweden. And had not the King beene so neere him, at that very time; in such danger to have overthrowne the Duke of Bavaria, first; and then, in his absence, to have falne into Bo∣hemia: he would, (no doubt) have first gone against the Ele∣ctor of Saxony. And now, at him he goes. The Elector of Saxonyes sub∣iects, (the poore Boores of Voitland) perceiuing this second tempest now comming upon them; resolue with themselues, that the best whood to beare off such foule weather, would be an head-piece. In great and confused numbers, therfore, gathe∣ring themselues together to be revenged: they with the best weapons, that a rusticall fury, could put into their hands; first turne feare into despaire, and that into desperatenesse: which in stead of skill, order, and true valour; they made to serue their turnes against the invaders. Besetting the woods, there∣fore, and the bye-waies; which the seeking for their lost Cowes, now and then, had heretofore made them perfect at: they with as good a will as ever Boores gate children; knockt downe such rambling and plundering boote-halers, of the Im∣periall Army; as they could singly light upon, and master. This is he that rid away with my horse, cries one; downe with him: that fellow stole my 2. kyne, saies a second; cut the throat of him: and he, carried away all my wiues ducks tother day, cryes a third Boore; knocke him downe too. All the Quarter they would give the souldiers, was to quar∣ter those whom they had killed; and to mangle those bodies, whom they had mawled: as if every blowe they gave a dy∣ing souldier, had killed them another enemy; because it (in part) satisfied their revenge, by the acting of another cruelty. And here (saies some Relations) was the young Walenstein killed: of whom we before spake, in the action of Coburg. But the Walsteiners were even with the poor Boores for it;
if burnings, and rapes, and ravages, could cry quittance: for,Making foule worke there: sure, the warres seemed not here to be made by enemies, but by furies. The place of this Country of Voitland, is betwixt Durin∣gen, Franconia, Misnia and Bohemia: and the reason that Walenstein did now enter into it, was partly, to beare all the country along before him; and partly, to lay the seate of the warres in an enemies Countrey. And who can denie this, to have beene souldierly done of him? But that he had first commanded in Holck and Gallas into it; and did now follow himselfe with fire and sword, in it: was not so much upon the barbarisme, or tyrannicall delight in blood and cruelty; but out of the terror of a military policy: that with the feare and horror to see his subiects so used,and his reasons for it. he might constraine the Duke of Saxony unto a sudden and disadvantageous com∣position; with whom the courtships of repeated Ambassages from the Emperor, had not heretofore prevailed. And who need suspect the constancy of the Duke of Saxony, that chose rather to endure all this; then to breake his League with the Protestant Princes, and the King of Sweden? Our Generalissimoes first Rendezvous in this Voitland, was at Plaun upon the river Elster: downe whose streame, at the distance of 60. English miles to the Northward, Leipsich standeth. To this Plaun did the Imperiall Vantguard arrive, upon Wednesday the 10th. of October: the rest of the Ar∣my going towards Weida, on the same side of the Elster, 12. miles neerer unto Leipsich. To this Weida, (after the Avant∣guard at Plaun had the second time plundered the poore peo∣ple thereabouts, as far as Zwicka) did the whole Army draw together; where he also formed a new Leaguer:He formes a standing camp. that so these severall Partees and divisions, which were sent abroad to spoile the countrey, and to bring in contributions; might have a standing Campe to retreate unto. Leaving, after this, the Duke of Fridland still encamped about Weida; let us surveigh the other destroyed parts of the Duke of Saxonies Dominions: and see what worke Holck
and Gallas had there, (singly and ioyntly,) since their severall sendings out from before Norimberg. And their Stories let us now fetch up; that wee may the more methodically bring them to their Generalissimo, and to the siege of Leipsich. The Story of Holcks actions, in the Duke of Saxonyes coun∣trey.And beginne we with Holck, first; who (as we have in the beginning told you) was about the 20th. of Iuly, sent out with 6000. Horse and 4000. Muskettiers, into Misnia: the reasons whereof, we have there likewise given you. He ad∣vancing to the edge of Voitland, within some few leagues of Egra and Bohemia; seases the smaller handsome townes first of all: as Dobruberg, Hirsberg, Lichtenberg, Sparnberg, and Hoff: all in this hilly and wooddy frontier. Next makes he towards these upon the Elster; which rises hereabouts, a lit∣tle to the Southward. Olsnitz a faire towne, a little more Easterly; is forced: and burnt downe to ashes for resisting. Plaun, a good towne, about a league more Northerly up the same river, is blocked up at the same instant with some Horse troopes: and divers of the villages that belonged to it put on fire, because it surrendred not at the first summons. The rest, I omit: not so much for brevities sake, as for horror: not listing to relate the Barbarismes committed by his Cra∣bats: as if they had falne in, not to make warres, but desolati∣ons; or, as if they had beleeved, that a country was never tho∣rowly conquered, till it were utterly destroyed. Holck, being farre, as yet, from the Electors Court at Dresden;He besieges Zwicka: and for that reason, finding the lesse opposition to controll him: advances boldly, and attacks Zwicka, the stron∣gest piece in all that country, standing about 14. or 16. miles to the North-East of Plaun aforesaid. About August 13th. he first presents himselfe before the towne: and demands it to be rendred. The summons being denyed, the place is sur∣rounded by his Army. It being scituated in a hilly wooddy countrey; Holck found a naturall Battery, or rising hill hard by the Castle, upon which he caused 8. peeces of Cannon to be mounted. With these, plaies he hard upon the Castle, and
the Castle as hard upon him againe. His carriage had beene so good towards other places, since he came into the land; that the men of Zwicka, as they despaired of his mercy; so were they by that despaire armed with a resolution, to sur∣mount his cruelty. The place was defended by Colonell Kalkstein; who had beene sent in hither with 6. troopes of Horse, and some Foote-Companies: so soone as ever Holck was heard of in Ʋoitland. Holck seeing it likely to prove a long siege, sends in his Trumpet to offer them a faire parlee. This being by Kalckstein refused: he fearing to lye here so long, till the E∣lector should have raised the country upon him: sends in his Trumpet the second time, with enlarged conditions. These (I reade) they were. 1. To alter nothing in their Religion. 2. To leave them in the allegeance of their Elector,which is ren∣dred upon con∣ditions. not tendering them an oath, to any other Prince. 3. To infringe none of the priviledges of their City: but to leave the keyes and Government, still with the Magistrates. 4. Not to spoyle the lesser neighbour townes in their Iurisdiction. 5. To give their garrison, souldierly and honourable conditions. 6. And not charge them with above 200. of his men, for a garrison. Holck made most solemne protestations, faithfully to keep these Articles; sending them in, good hostages for it: nor doe I find, but that he afterwards kept his promise, well enough with them. The Elector of Saxony being startled with these tydings; sets out his Ban and Arrier-ban, to call all his Tenants, and and those that held upon him in any Service: to arme for the defence of the Country. The Felt-Marshall Arnheim, like∣wise, is with all diligence sent unto, to dispeede downe such troopes as he could well spare, out of Silesia: Hereupon, is
the Colonell Ʋitzdum sent downe with his Regiment, unto Dresden. This was about the 20th. of our August. He plunders Aw,Zwicka now at Holcks devotion; he next assaults Aw (or Augusta) where the Elector had a house of pleasure. Here the souldiers found very rich Hangings, and other furnitures of Court; which were never meant for the entertainment, of such course people. Schopa, a towne upon a river of that name, which runnes into the Mulda, is next falne upon: 6. leagues to the East of Zwicka. Some oppositions being here made, did something colour over that steine of blood; liberally here shed by the Conquerors. and besieges Chemnitz:Chemnitz, some 7. miles to the North of Schopa, held them more tacke: the hilly and the wooddy scituation, ma∣king the place something the stronger; and the Townsmen the more confident. Desperate, I should have said: seeing to that degree had Holcks usage driven all those townes, that had but any hopes of resistance. Some tolerable conditions, Holck, offered unto them: which they durst not so well trust unto, as unto their owne strengths and resolutions. They are besieged: and Holcks men tooke the paines (which here onely, and at Zwicka they had beene put unto) to make use of the Spade, and to bring forward their Approaches. Some countrey Boores being gotten in hither, for their safe∣ties, (enow to make up 10. Companies) armed with desire of reuenge, (especially for their Barnes, which the Imperialists had set fire upon) now sallye out upon the Approaches. Shovells they had with them, which weapon, none could use better: and with these, they laboured to fling the earth againe into the lines and rowling Trenches, which the Im∣periall Pyoners were now a running. But this being but the Boores Schollers-prize, and they having to doe with Masters of Defence, they were quickly beaten in againe, under the fa∣vour of their owne Ordnance.which he is for∣ced to give over. The Townsmen kept their owne, for all this: and would not (like Zwicka) hearken unto termes of Treaty: so that the Imperialists were faine to levy their owne siege, and leave them to their liberty.
I can report nothing worthy of a History, in these actions. Plainely, there was not extraordinary much good service done, worthy of a souldier: unlesse this be of honourable report to him; that he made very foule warres of it. For next, burnes he Curbitz, Pesteritz, and Wilsdorp: this last, being within 4. English miles of Dresden. Early in the mor∣ning (which proved misty) August 28. did the Crabats make a Cavalcado to affront Dresden: where the Elector was then resident. The City taking the Alarme at it, let flye some peeces of Ordnance amongst them, whereupon they retyred. At broad day light the Ports being opened, some troopes of Iagers and Stalburgs, were sent out after them. The Horsemen of Colonell Stienau, having within a league of Dresden taken some of the Crabats: they confessed the intention they had for firing of the Suburbs. The night after, some of them burnt Oderen, upon the river Floe, 8. miles South-West of Freiberg. Others at the same time did as much at Doblen, 16. miles West of Dresden. By this it appeares that their forces were devided, for the doing of the more mischiefe: yea their prisoners avowed freely, that they had order from their Generall to set fire upon Dresden, and the whole Countrey. By this beginning of September is Colonell Vitzdumb ar∣rived at Dresden from out of Silesia: to whom divers hun∣dreds of the Countrey Gentlemen,By the Saxon forces, and some thousands of the Electors Tenants, and the undone Boores resorted: to make up an Army. These being so soone as might be sent out to represse these Boutefeu's: Holck was thereupon en∣forced to retire his people towards Zwicka againe; there to expect a re-enforcement by the comming downe of Gallas to him. In this expedition, did the Saxons light upon one of Holcks Quarter-masters; with whom they found some writings,is Holck enfor∣ced to retire, towards the Frontiers. which made the Imperialists to be more hated in those parts: and more and more averted the Elector, from listning to any Treaty. These Papers discovered no good in∣tententions in the Imperialists towards him: whatsoever
name of peace were pretended. He had also a list of Holcks and Gallasses whole forces, about him: which I wish the Saxons had sent hither. Vitzdumb and his men, having for the time, indifferently well cleered the Country of these Scarre-fire Crabats and Imperialists, (now retired towards Leutmaritz and Bohemia) the Elector, for easing of his purse licensed divers of these new forces. Divers Swedes also, that came out of the garri∣sons of Pomeren, Brandenburg, and Mecklenburg, were re∣fused entertainment: the Elector supposing the Foxe had bin dead, because he lay and stirr'd not. But Holck, did but stay for Gallas his comming in the end of September: whom (in this quietnesse) goe we a little backe, to fetch from Norimberg into Misnia. Gallas his StoryThis Gallas was by his Generalissimo sent into the Vpper Palatinate, September 13. the designe being, first to doe a service to the Duke of Bavaria, by recovering and taking townes in that Country for him. Secondly, to keepe No∣rimberg still blockt up, by taking of the neerest of their townes: Thirdly, when all was done, to conjoyne with Holck in Misnia. Gallas first of all, sets him downe before Lauff: a towne of the Norimbergers upon the Pegnitz, 8. miles East of them. Here had he not many above 2000. men and some 4. peeces of Cannon. He tooke the towne Sep∣tember 14th. in the night; after a dayes opposition, or else had the King of Sweden the next day relieved it. Here not∣withstanding that he tooke it by agreement, yet caused he the Lieftenant that was Governor, to be hanged. Hence goes Gallas stil Eastward unto Herspruck, 4. miles further: and took that also. Some of his, are about this time sent 9. or 10. English miles more Northerly: where they take Felden, upon the same Pegnitz. From Hershbruck, his Army advances due East, unto Sultzbach; 15. miles further. The chiefe of the Citi∣zens here, did he send prisoners into Amberg, 5. miles to the S. E. for that they had not paid in those 20000. dollars, which at Walsteins comming that way, had bin imposed upon them.
The good towne of Grefenberg, 11 miles North of Lauff,Having taken divers townes, in the Ʋpper Palatinate. making him some opposition; was taken, plundered, and burnt to ashes. Having served other townes so; his whole Army crosses over to the North-East, and comes to Weiden upon the river Nab; 10 or 12 miles from Sultzbach: going the same way out of the Ʋpper Palatinate, that Holck had done before him: saving onely that he goes neerer to Bohe∣mia. His march now lyes up the Nab to Dirschenreyt; and so towards Wonsledel, Ruckenitz and Egra. Vpon Friday Septemb. 21. he burnes downe Wonsledel: and the Sunday af∣ter, he did as much for Ruckenitz: both being the Elector of Saxonyes townes, in the edge of Ʋoitland. The good towne of Egra, on the edge of Bohemia; hauing by the Saxons beene recovered,He falles into Ʋoitland. since Walensteins sitting downe at Norim∣berg: was also destinated to the same destruction. But this, was by the Saxon Colonel Haxtel prevented: both by sen∣ding in provisions, for the defence of the towne; and by presenting Gallas with some moneyes, in the name of a con∣tribution, for the diverting of his fury. Thence advances Gallas, unto Hoff upon the river Sala, some 24 English miles to the North-West of Egra. His way, he directed thorow the hils and woods, upon those Frontiers: where the souldiers hoped, to light upon some of the Countrey Gentlemen and Yeomen; who with their wiues and families, were for feare fled in thither. To this Hoff, comes he, Munday September 24: and hee had an Army of some 7 or 8000 fighting men; though he demanded bread and provisions of the Countrey, for 14000. Eight peeces of Ordnance with their furniture, drew hee a∣long: and now takes he his way to Plaun,He goes to Plaun. 15 miles to the North-East of him. He had sent his Suttlers before him un∣to Zwicka, 12 miles from Plaun, that they should by Wed∣nesday night, provide and send him in, Provant bread enough for 14000 people: and indeed the Drablers and hangbyes of the Army, with the souldiers women and children that followed it; might make up 14000. Those of Zwicka sen∣ding
out some to treat with him; pacifie him with a Copy of the Articles, upon which his Forerunner Holck, had com∣pounded with them. Gallas answered honourably, That he would by no meanes violate that agreement: but gave them to understand withall, that they had done very well in so compounding, and that it were best for other townes to imi∣tate them: otherwise, there was nothing but fire and sword, to be expected from him. However, he must have victuals for his souldiers. Hereupon September 26th. He goes from Plaun, towards this Zwicka, as if he had meant to have seene their Store∣houses: but changing his mind (it seemes) he sent some 2 or 3000, Northward towards Altemburg: himselfe, with the greatest part of the Army, going to the Northeastward, 32 or 33 English miles from Plaun aforesaid, unto Chemnitz. Those that marcht towards Altemburg, tooke the little County of Werden along with them in their way, a little North of Zwicka: which, together with the other little Flecks or Market Townes, by the banke of the river Pleiss: they use their pleasure with. Thence goe they to Altem∣burg: the Citie and Residence of the Duke of Saxon-Al∣temburg: with whom, they compound for 5000 Dollars. But this would not proove a sufficient discharge against the Townes-mens being plundered: seeing that two dayes after, when Gallas sent away for them: they pillaged divers houses both in the Towne and Suburbs, at their parting. For now had Gallas need of them, he had engaged himselfe to finish what Holck before had given over in the plaine field:He takes in Chemnitz; and that was to take in Chemnitz. The Townes-men here, ha∣ving enough of the sufferings that Holck had before put them to: and fearing that if he came to ioyne with Gallas, they should never be able to withstand their owne ruines: they so soone as Gallas his men were comne up to him, upon the first of October yeeld up their Towne: and upon the same conditions,joynes with Holck. that Holck had before given to Zwicka. Thence goes Gallas towards Fridberg: and there Holck
peeces in with him. Holck since his retyring to the Frontiers from the Saxons, having by this time wel recreuted his Army: upon confidence of that, and of Gallas comming; returned into Misnia againe,Holck fals again into Misnia. still burning the country before him, wheresoever he found any discontent or resistance. In the end of September, Holck having some 8000. men in his Army,Holck & Gallas. goes to give a second affront unto Dresden. It was a very misty morning: under favour of which the Crabats and others were gotten into the Suburbs. Being dis∣covered more by the noise then sight; the Ordnance are from the walls turned upon them: some withall sallying out a∣mongst them. Holck knowing of that, comes in withall di∣ligence, hoping in the mist, to beate the sallyers, and to enter the Ports pell mell together with them. But Vitzdumbs Regi∣ment, sallying out upon the 2d. Alarme; maintaines the fight in the pother, till the mist about noone cleered. Then could the Canoniers better discerne, where to direct their vollyes:Conioyning with Gallas, so that Holck perceiving the Action not faiseable, drawes off his men, and gives it over. This being too tough a piece for him; his next project is, to conioyne with Gallas: for which purpose, he now goes immediately towards Frieberg. This coniunction being affected,They take Frawenstein: they October 3d. fall up∣on Frawenstein; a pretty towne upon a hill, some 16. English miles to the South of Dresden. Here finding some oppositi∣on, they carry the town by Scaladoe; and put all (both souldi∣ers and inhabitants) to the sword for it. Here they now pur∣posed to reside, with their Army: for that the towne was pretty and strongly scituated. October 4th. they assault Fri∣berg; a handsome towne upon the river Mulda, some 10. English miles to the West of Frawenstein. Here is a beauti∣full Church and a Cloyster: and in that, the Tombes of di∣vers of the Elector of Saxonyes ncestors. The towne was hard laid at by the Imperialists;and Friberg. and the Saxons showd them some little sport for it. But it was but for their exercise; they being no way able to hold out a generall assault, which was
next day threatned them: and a generall destruction withall, if they yeelded not. Hereupon, October 5th. is the towne given up: the defendants being able to obtaine no other con∣ditions, then the saving of their lives; marching out with no other weapons, but their swords onely. Some writing tells me, that they had souldiers conditions. Divers of the richer Country people, having fled in hither (as to a place of some indifferent security) the souldiers exacted from them, and from the Townsmen, 40000. dollars contribution. The Ele∣ctor of Saxonye was faine, likewise, to come off with 80000. dollars more, to save the Monuments of his Predecessors, from being ransackt and defaced.See what we have written of Tillyes souldiers ryfling of the Marquesse of Onspachs Toombs, pag: 115. of our Second Part. Tis the fashion of divers Germane Princes, to be buried in their Robes, and with their Ensignes of Honour, and perchance, Iewels, all which would have beene booty, good enough, to these Rake-shames, that make no conscience of this horrider kind of Sacriledge. Neere this Friberg, Holcks men taking, I know not what, high displeasure at a certaine Minister of the countrey, (a man of rare learning, as Gallobelgicus calls him:) miserably, first of all, hew'd him in pieces with their swords; and then flung him to their dogs to be eaten. But they, out of a cer∣taine horror, which overawed their Currishnesse and Canine appetite;The inhumane Barbarismes of the Crabats. would not so much as touch, or licke a drop of the blood of him: whereupon his Freinds, the next day, gathe∣red up his pieces, and interred them. And lest this should seeme incredible, to the Readers; the Author of Le Soldat Suedois avowes, That the Crabats showd themselues ingeni∣ous to invent new torments, for the poore Inhabitants: and that it was frequent with them, for want of Dogs-meate, to feede their curres with humane carneage. This if it may be true; though the dogs were the Man-eaters, yet the Crabats, surely, were the Canniballs. Having done with Friberg, the 2. Imperiall Majors, (af∣ter the taking of some smaller townes) advance towards Meissen: which is the towne that gives name to the whole
Countrey. The place of it, is upon the westerne banke of the river Elb, some 18. English miles to the North of Friberg, and within 10. of Dresden.They take Meissen. Hither came they October 10th. where finding small resistance, they the same day tooke pos∣session of it. Whilest this was a doing, the Saxon forces which were upon the Easterne side of the Elb; make towards the new bridge, that the Imperialists had over the river: which fal∣ling a-board with, they tooke in sunder, and carried with them, or let the pieces drive downe the streame from them.The Saxons cut off their bridge from them. The Imperialists flew in to the reskue of their bridge, but all with the latest: for that the Saxons having begunne with that end, which was next unto the Imperialists; tooke away all meanes of their getting over to disturbe them. They let flye Cannons and Musket shot, freely enough among them: but for all that, the Saxons went thorow with their bu∣sinesse. By this exploit, were the Imperialists staved off, from returning over the Elb any more, to the Eastward. This caused them to turne all along upon the Westerne banke of it: deviding their forces thereupon,Whereupon Holck turnes to∣wards Leipsich. to doe the more mischiefe. Some of Holcks men, upon Thursday Octo∣ber 11th. (as if to be revenged for their bridge) plunder and burne Lumnitsch: 6. English miles to the North-West of Meissen. Others of them, the same day, were flowne out as farre as Oschitz; as much further to the Northward: which, with other villages in the way, they did but pillage. October 21, they came to Wurtzen, upon the East side of the river Mulda: 10. miles to the West of Oschitz, and halfe way betwixt it and Leipsich. Here they encountred not with much trouble. The towne pretended poverty, and that they could not pay so many dollars, as the souldiers demanded for contribution. But souldiers not using to be paid with excuses: carry away their richest Burgers to their Army: as if the Cap∣tiving of their richest men, would have made the rest the abler, or, that they could have coynd the Burgers, into Dutch dollars.
October 13. doe 1800. Crabats flye out as far as Nieustat, and spoyle that countrey. Five hundred other Horse, offer as much at Salfeld: but the garrison there, perswaded them to goe home againe: which yet they did not, till they set fire upon the Suburbs. As much is by others done, to the lesser townes upon the Elb: so that the Elector of Saxony was by this time made sensible what it was to have angred Walenstein. By this time had the Elector of Saxonyes forces, under Ʋitzdumb and Kalkstein; pressed upon the Imperiall Leaguer at Frawenburg, and made them to forsake it: for Gallas was by order from his Generalissimo, now a going towards Bohe∣mia; upon the entreaty of Don Balthasar di Marradas, who commanded all in Bohemia: Arnheim and Dubalt, had sorely, by this time, over-laid the Imperialists in the lower Silesia;Gallas sent to∣wards Silesia: gotten Breslaw: and made their way open, either into Moravia, or Bohemia. But of this, in its owne division. Againe of Walenstein.By this time was our great Duke of Fridland, comne into Voitland; whom we left encamped at his Weida Leaguer. He (the more to anger the Elector of Saxony, whom he hated) sent againe some Partees towards Friberg: commanding ei∣ther the rifling, or the redeeming of the Electorall Monu∣ments. Holcks agreement and Safe-guards, being pleaded; Walensteins answer was, That he did not hold himselfe con∣cluded, by any bargaine with his Lieftenants: so that the Ele∣ctor was compeld to satisfie him. He goes to∣wards Leipsich.Holck being comne thus neere Leipsich; now beganne the Duke of Fridland to moue from his Weida Leaguer, towards Leipsich also. His march was to Altemberg, on the river Pleiss, about 24. English miles to the North of Weida where he sate downe; and cast up a royall Leaguer. Thence sends he some forces to Born, along the same river: mid-way betwixt Altemburg and Leipsich; and about 12. or 13. English miles from either.Holck mooues towards him. Thence goe they unto Schonfeld; Holck at the same time, moved also towards Leipsich.
The Leipsichers (to their terror) perceiving, which way these Cast of Falcons, (the 2. Imperiall Armies) made a Point: they, with all speede, Munday October 15. conveigh away the richest and lightest of their Merchandise, unto Wit∣temberg; and so downe the Elb, unto Magdenburg and Hamborow. The next day, a Partee of Imperiall Horse (some 60. in number) pillage the very neerest villages unto Leipsich: as Gonnewitz, Heida, Steteritz, with others. The chiefe of their expedition, was but a boote-haling voyage: for that they robbe even the market-women. Wednesday the 17th. betwixt 7. and 8. in the morning, were there divers troopes of Imperiall Horse, discovered at Vblessen, neere unto Dam∣berg: which continued there in Battaglia, most part of the day following. The City discharged some Ordnance at them: but they never offered to come neerer. The 18th. about noone;Walenstein sum∣mons Leipsich. came there an Imperiall Trumpet into Leipsich, with 2. letters in his hand: one whereof was di∣rected from the Duke of Fridland, to the Burgomaster: and the other, unto the Governor, and the military Commanders. That to the Magistrates, was to this purpose; That the Duke of Fridland his Excellency, did in faire termes desire, and in the name of his Imperiall Maiesty advise them, to commit themselues unto his mercy, as other Cities had done. That, moreover, they would receiue 200. of Colonel Hatzfelds Horse-men, into their Castle; and resigne up themselues wholly, unto the service and devotion of his Imperiall Ma∣iesty. This if they refused, then had his Excellency iust cause, with his whole power to come from Altemburg upon them; and to make their ruine an example, unto all the Cities of the Empire. The letter to the Military men, was, an invitation to them, to yeeld upon faire termes: an offer of good Quarter, to as many as would march out quietly: and of honourable condi∣tions, both to Officers and Souldiers, (either on horsebacke or on foote) as many as would take entertainement. The Mi∣litary
men answered plainely,Their answer. That they would not yeeld; and the Magistrates, shufflled off the businesse to the souldiery: answering by the same Trumpet, that the Castle was a Fort, which they had no command of: nor could they tell, how to get the souldiers out of the City: and that having tendered his Excellencies letters to the Governour of the Castle, hee would not open them, because not by name directed to him. And with these answers, the Trumpet returned towards the Leaguer. That which made the Leipsichers so valorous, in their an∣swers; was a hope they had upon their Duke, partly: who was now going from Dresden unto Torgau upon the Elb: there (as they hoped) to stay for Arnheims comming out of Silesia with the Army. They had a confidence also, upon Duke Bernards comming to relieve them, by the way of Du∣ringen. But that hope, was quickly dasht by Pappenheims falling into the said Duringen: who gat before hand with Duke Bernard: which Duke had neither strength nor com∣mand to relieue them. Friday October 19th. about noone; some Imperiall horse∣men, together with 80. Muskettiers; drew neere unto the wals of the City; and about the burying place (commonly cal∣led Gods-Aker) they made an orderly Court of guard: which they held unto the evening. About 2. a clocke, the former Trumpet came againe into the City. Being presently brought before the Magistrates: and delivering his summons by word of mouth; he by word of mouth had his deniall given him. His message was. That his Excellency the Duke of Fridland, had not been used to be put off with words; nor to send twice to one purpose: and therefore did now advise them to give him a speedy satisfaction, by putting themselues under his obedience: otherwise, they must not hereafter expect any mercy, but to be made an example to all that continued in their obstinacy. The Cities answer was, That they had no power to dispose of their Princes City, without their Princes leave for it: and therefore desired his Excellency to rest satis∣fied
with it. By this time, a greater strength of Imperiall Horse, presented themselues before the City, to answer whom, did some Muskettiers make a sally: the Ordnance from the walls likewise playing very hard upon them. About 4. a clock, divers Imperiall Cornets more, charging hard upon the Leipsich Muskettiers, beate them into the City. Sunday October 21. by breake of day, did the Imperiall Armies begin to draw round about the towne: and to bring on their Ammunition, and all other preparations for a siege. Then beganne the Walsteiners to breake the ground, and to bring forward their Approaches. Some Muskettiers, were immediately also lodged in one of the Suburbs. The Ordnance went off roundly from all parts of the wall: whose peales continued untill the evening. This day, were two other Trum∣pets sent from the Leaguer into the surrownded City; who were brought into the Statehouse before the Magistrates: to whom they in the afternoone delivered their message. About this time, was there a short pawse or cessation from shooting. These Trumpets being returned into the Leaguer; another was presently dispatched towards the City: so willing was our Generalissimo to winne a towne by parlyes, rather then by fighting. This Trumpet was not dispatched till within euen∣ing. The report went, of his message, That the Duke of Fridland vowed he would have the City, either by faire meanes, or by foule: and if they would yeeld it willingly, they should haue good Quarter: but in case they stood it out; he protested deeply, that neither man, woman nor child, no nor so much as a dog; should ever goe alive out of the City. Wa∣lenstein was as likely to be a man of his word, as any man (that I know) in the world, in Turky or in Christendome. The Imperiall Foote that were lodged in the Suburbs, let flye their vollyes into the City: with which, though divers were hurt, yet was there but one boye slaine out-right, neere unto the great Colledge. About night, they began on both sides to draw towards an agreement: and yet (as those of Leipsich write of themselues) very doubtfull it was whither
or no they should ever come to an accord; for that the townesmen were very resolute, and averse from yeelding. It being once darke, the Imperialists out of the Suburbs; heaved hand-Granadoes, and other Wild-fires, into the City: which not onely gave light, but fire also in 2. places unto it. This was with much diligence, and little losse, quenched: nor did Fire-balls doe much more hurt, then take off one souldiers right legge, whereof next morning he died. The fight on both sides continuing, another Imperiall Trumpet presented himselfe before the Ports of the City: but the small and great shot going off so incessantly, both from the walls and Castle; it was hote staying for him there: that he againe re∣turned, without delivering of his message. Presently was he sent backe againe: and this was the summe of his errand. That his Excellency the Duke of Fridland, was contented to allow them 6. houres more, to consider upon it: in which time if they resolved to entertaine parly, they should send him out their Deputies unto Schonfeld, where they should be treated with. By 6. a clocke the next Munday morning October 21. Some of the Ʋniversity, ioyned with others of the City Counsell and Magistrates; repaire unto Schonfeld: where af∣ter an houres deliberation, they on both sides came to agree∣ment for the rendring of the Citie. About noone, the Impe∣riall forces, with sound of Drumme, and all gallantry, entred the City, presently possessing themselues of the Petriner Col∣ledge. About 4. a clocke the same day, did the Felt-Marshall Holck, and many other Imperiall Officers; ride also into the same Colledge: taking a diligent view all about it; how they might most conveniently plant some peeces of Ordnance in it, to play thence upon the Castle. Hereupon were 4. halfe Cannons brought into the City; and 3. Batteries were with Horse-dung and boards upon them made up immediately, a∣gainst the Castle. One, was neere the Peters Tower, and the other 2. in the Petriner Colledge aforesaid. Vpon each of these Batteries, they mounted one peece of Ordnance: and
with every one of them, they plaid all that whole night, up∣on the Castle. Divers Ensignes of Foote, kept their guards upon the Market place, in the meane time: amongst whom, was there a goodly troope of Curiassiers (Horsemen in com∣pleate harnesse) consisting of some 180. The Commander of the Castle the same man (as I heare) that before delivered it up to the Generall Tilly, the day be∣fore the last Battell of Leipsich, and called Iohannes Vopelius, hung out the defensive Banner from the top of the Castle; and (as if he scorned to be twice taxed, with the shame of giving over one Castle) he plaid very hard with his great Ordnance upon the Imperialists: even from their first entring into the Colledge; untill broad day light upon Tuesday mor∣ning. That day, being the 23d. the Imperialists having dis∣charged their Ordnance but 17. times in all; the bloody Flag was taken downe from the Castle; and a white Flag of truice put up in the roome of it: to signifie their desire of a com∣position. Shooting is then given over: and hostages and Deputies are sent one to another, to conclude upon the con∣ditions: That evening were they accorded: and to this purpose. First,Leipsich Castle rendred. That all those Citizens that were fled into the Ca∣stle, together with the souldiers, should march out with bagge and baggage; the Citizens taking passes of the Gene∣ralissimo, to goe whither they pleased: or otherwise to abide in the City. Secondly, That the garrison should march out with co∣lours flying, matches lighted, full armes, &c. These marching forth of the Castle; 2. Companies of Imperialists, immediately take possession of it. That very e∣vening were the Burgers called together, and commanded to bring their Armes to be laid up into the State-house. That night, was the neighbour village of Eiteritch, by the Impe∣rialists burnt downe to the ground: divers houses also with∣in Leipsich; those especially next unto the Castle and river, were plundered. The next morning, were such like insolen∣cies
by sound of Drumme, and upon paine of death forbid∣den: so that the souldiers the next night committed no more such pillages. The 24th. day, nothing of moment passed more within the City: excepting onely that the Magistrates and Burgers were called together to pay downe 50000. Rixe-dollars, for a pre∣sent contribution, and were charged to discover what goods they had of the Ausburgers or Norimbergers. The 3. or 4. next dayes, were all the buildings and watch-houses about the Castle, puld downe or slighted. Other things done by Walen∣stein, in the time of the siege of Leipsich.In the meane time that the most of the Army, are at the siege of Leipsich: some other Partees are sent out from the Imperiall Leaguer at Altemburg, to reduce or plunder the countrey. Some advance out, as farre as Torgau upon the Elb, to intercept that Passe, if they had beene strong e∣nough. But into that, had the Elector of Saxony, put 6. Companies of Colonel Loesers Foote, 11. troopes of Colonel Taubens Horse, being also enquartered in the neigh∣bour villages. October 19th. other Imperiall Partees made themselues Masters of Weissenfels upon the river Sala,Hee takes Weissenfels, due West of Leipsich: and of Mersburg, a little more to the Northward downe the same river, and upon the other side of it. This is an Appropriate Bishopricke, held by the Elector of Saxony: and here is a bridge over the Sala. Now also did Holck make his demands for Tillyes arrier of money, due from Naum∣burg;Mersburg and Naumburg. and sent 36. Muskettiers into the Towne to be the safe-guards of it. From Mersburg, goe they with a strong Partee, unto Hall: still more Northerly downe the Sala. To this good towne, the Imperialists made this proposition; That it should furnish them with bread for 2000. men, but for 2. daies onely: and for so long a time, admit their Gene∣ralissimo with his Retinue into their City, and accommodate him. The Burgers obtaining respite till 6. a clocke the next morning; returned this answer: That whereas they had re∣ceived letters from Holck, that some of their Magi∣strates
should appeare before his Generalissimo at the Lea∣guer of Altemburg: they could not, till they knew his pleasure, furnish the demaundants with the bread desired of them. Some few daies after, is the Colonell Hatsfeld, (brother to the expulsed Bishop of Wurtsburg) sent with 6. troopes of Horse unto this Hall, to propose these, (not propositions, now, but) commands, unto the Burgers. First, That they should be well advised of the oath, which they had sometimes taken unto the Emperor. Secondly, That presently they should send, the bread be∣fore demanded. Thirdly, That they should take in, and for 2. daies main∣taine, the Generalissimo, with those that he should bring with him. Fourthly, That they should precisely send him word, how strong the garrison in their Castle was, and how well provided. The Burgers perceiving Walenstein to be in good earnest;Is admitted into Hall towne. open their ports, immediately, unto the Imperialists: who presently fall to besieging of the Castle. But the Swedes (whom the King had left in it, presently after the Battell of Leipsich,) so well put them off; that they were forced to re∣tire from it.but is repulsed from the Castle By this time, are the Towne and Castle of Leipsich taken; and the Army drawne together to Altemburg. Then had the Generalissimo a designe upon Torgau: from whence the Par∣tee he had lately sent thither, had beene turned backe againe.His designe upon Torgau diverted. By the taking of this Torgau; should he be master of a bridge over the Elb-streame: his way would be opened into the lower Lusatia, and the Marck, of Brandenburg: yea and the whole conquest of Saxony, made more faiseable to him. For this purpose, did the Imperiall Army about the 26. or 27th. of October, remove it selfe unto Eilenburg; a towne upon the river Mulda, halfe way betwixt Leipsich and Tor∣gau. To this place, came there an Expresse from the Count
of Pappenheim, of his being hard at hand with his forces: whereupon the Imperiall Army returned backe againe to the Westward, (besides and beyond Leipsich:) and went and ioyned with the Pappenheimers about Mersburg.by the cōming of Pappenheim: Pappen∣heim being comne, perswaded his Generalissimo, by and by; to passe over the Sala into Duringen, with the maine of his Army; and to goe and take in Erfurt, Weymar, and all the chiefe Passes and Posts, of that countrey. He wrought so upon him, chiefly with the faiseablenesse of the Action; that there was no likelihood of opposition in those parts: Duke William of Saxon-Weymar having but 4.And his designe upon Erfurt defeated; or 5000. men for the guard of all these townes; and himselfe lying now sicke at Erfurt. A shrewd counsell! seeing by the taking of this countrey, (and of the Passes thorow the Duringer-Waldt, after this) the backe doore had both beene barr'd and bolted; by which the King of Sweden should have broken in to disturbe them. This was once Walen∣steins owne plot, to have comne, namely, this way into Misnia. Whilest he therefore prepares to put this designe in exe∣cution, he hath word brought him, not onely of the King of Swedens being comne to Erfurt;by the com∣ming of the King of Sweden. but of the advancing of the Van of his Army, towards the Sala. This was Duke Bernard, indeed, who was comne a day or 2. before, to pur∣sue the Reere of Pappenheim: as in the end of the Kings Sto∣ry we have told you. Hereupon, is the case altered: so that Tuesday the 30th. of October, went there out a Proclama∣tion from the Generalissimo,Walenstein cal∣ling his Army together: That all Imperiall Officers and souldiers, should upon paine of death, repaire unto their Regiments and Colours in the Army: all Officers, the same evening, being by an Expresse commanded out of Leipsich. Wednesday October 31. did the whole Imperiall Army ad∣vance from Mersburg unto Ranstadt, and Lutzen; betwixt Mersburg and Leipsich: whereabouts they quartered. November the first, being Thursday; were there 3. Cornets of Horse sent backe into Leipsich, to be enquartered within
the Citie: more Horsemen with their Baggage, the next day comming in after them. The Soldat Suedois affirmes, that Walenstein and Pappenheim both, came into Leipsich to take a view of it, and to have it fortified for the place of their Retreat: but the Iournall or Diarye of these Actions, printed in the selfe same Leipsich Novemb. 13. mentions no such matter. The same first of November, went there two Posts thorow Leipsich, unto Gallas; to cause him to hasten backe with his Forces: which I heare to bee about nine or ten thousand: though fifteene thousand say some Relations. And now were the Leipsichers enforced to pay in their fifty thousand Dollars: which October 24 they had agreed upon. Vpon this first of November, likewise; did the Imperiall Army remoove towards Weissenfels upon the river Sala;encamps at Weissenfels. eight English miles West of Lutzen. He sent also the Colonel Suvis, with his Regiment of Foot; and the Colonell Bre∣daro (so my Spanish Relation writes both their names) to take in Naumburg. The Horsemen leading the way, found the King of Swedens Vantgard there before them: so that Bre∣daro's Horse having some slight skirmish in the Suburbs, with the Swedish; returned againe to Weissenfels. These were those, which we called the 600 Imperiall Horse; who (as in the end of the Kings Story we told you,) were com∣ming to take in Naumburg. And now for that we can by no better meanes come by the motions on the Imperiall side, then by the discovery made by one of their owne: I will here, therefore, make use of my Spanish Relation written by a Walsteiner, and twice printed in Lisbone. The King (sayes my Author) being passed the river, and lodged with his Army before Naumburg: the Imperiall Ar∣my marched up likewise in Battell array, before Weissenfels. The Kings men about this time, putting out some few troopes of Horse, there fell out some encounters betwixt them and the Crabats, but nothing to the purpose. The Kings men retiring suddenly, the Imperiall Army disposed
of it selfe, in the small villages about Weissenfels: newes be∣ing brought after a while, that the King did fortifie his Campe about Naumburg. Walenstein was once in the mind, to have marcht presently, and to have encountred with the King of Sweden: but by reason that the ordinary way be∣twixt Weissenfels andtwelve English miles distant. Naumburg, was but narrow and troublesome to march; because of the continued moun∣taines: he onely sent out Iulio Deodati Quarter-Master-Ge∣nerall, to goe with a good guard of Crabats about by the way of Zeitz; to take a view of a more commodious pas∣sage; and of the place and posture that the King was lod∣ged at. Zeitz, is up the Elster, the river of Leipsich: 14 miles South-East of Naum∣burg: and 12 from Weissen∣fels.But his excellency the Generalissimo in an action of that importance, was first desirous to heare the advice of all his Colonels: for the getting whereof he employed the Count of Pappenheim. The Colonels disswaded the encounter, up∣on these considerations. First, of the Kings being already lodg'd and fortified, in a Post of so advantageous a situation. Secondly, for that the time of yeere was so farre spent, and winter so neere comming on, that keeping the Field would be most incommodious for the Army. The Reasons why Walenstein assaulted not the King.Thirdly, and above all, for that tydings were now comne apace, of Count Henry Ʋanden Berghs going towards Cul∣len: which would put a necessitie upon the Generalissimo, to hasten towardsBut this of Henry Ʋanden Berg, was but a false Alarm. the diversion of the danger of that place; the losse whereof would bee of so perilous a consequence. Vpon these reasons, (in which the Colonels with one Con∣sent agreed) it was concluded to be unfit; and at that time un-usefull, that the King should be assaulted. All these reasons served for the foundation of that reso∣lution,and why hee sent away Pap∣penheim. which his Excellency tooke presently; for the sen∣ding away of the Count of Pappenheim towards the river of Weser, with two Regiments of Crabats onely: to the end, that with those, being joyned to those Forces which he had before left with the Count of Groensfeld, hee might
succour Cullen: and take order, withall, for the levying of some new troopes, in Westphalia and Paderborn. In the meane time, was his Excellency resolved, to put his owne Army into Winter Quarters, about the river of Sala;He resolues to put his men in∣to their winter Quarters. as also in Leipsich and other places neere unto Dresden. All these divisions was he minded, so proportionably to have parted into Bodies of Horse and Foot; that each of them might be able to make resistance, till the next Quarters could well come in to their succours; should the King, perchance, at∣tempt upon any one of them. For the putting this designe in execution; his Excellency remooued his Army from about Weissenfels: sending the Count of Pappenheim with two Regiments of Foote, and some of Horse, from Mersburg, for to goe and take in Hall Castle: which was very strong, and guarded by 200. Swe∣dish. Pappenheim had order likewise, for the lodging of some troopes thereabouts; according as he should find things disposed. His Excellency, after his dispatch intending to march to∣wards Wesler, came to lodge with the rest of his forces about Lutzen. But apprehending, no improbable suspition, that the King would never suffer him, to take in that place; under the nose, as it were of his whole Army: and that by turning backe and passing over the river Sala,Walenstein opens a gap, for the King to have march away. he might easily succour the Castle of Hall: he resolved upon another purpose. Sen∣ding Colonell Contreras to take up Altemburg: his Excellen∣cy himselfe was resolued with the rest of his Army, to have gone (Northward) and lodge at Mersburg. By this dispo∣sing of himselfe, should he (at Mersburg) be neere to backe Pappenheim: and by sending the other Colonels to Luca and Altemburg, should there have beene a space left in the middle, for the King to have marcht away, even from Naumburg unto Dresden. By this cautelous forecast, might his Excellen∣cy have after followed the King with his mayne strength, and either utterly have overthrowne him, or at least cut off his passage, and have shut him and all his forces, utterly
out of the Empire. But the Kings conveniences, were measured by other de∣signes, farre different from our suppositions. Fr He having understood of the sending away of Pappenheim, and the o∣ther 2. Regiments; resolued presently to come and set upon us. Insomuch, that the Count Ridolfo Coloredo, being marched with the Crabats towards Weissenfels, to fetch off a Cap∣taine, who was left in the Castle with 100. souldiers: he found the KingThis was the 5th. of Novemb. with his Army, already advanced farre up∣on his march, in sight of the City, towards Lutzen. Yet Coloredo came so fit, and in so good a time; that he had lea∣sure enough (notwithstanding the King had alreadie sent some Muskettiers,But the King comes upon him. to take in the Castle) to bring off the men with him. This having performed, Coloredo still valiantly skirmishing, with his few Foote and Crabats; made his re∣treate unto Ripach, in sight of the Kings Army. At this very time, had his Excellency, thorow the reitera∣ted messages of Coloredo, given the Alarme unto his Army, by the accustomed signe of shooting off 3. peeces of Ord∣nance: notwithstanding all which, it was even now night, ere the Regiments could have recovered to their place of Ren∣dezvous, about Lutzen. The King by this time, was comne from Ripach; and had taken up his lodging, about a league from thence.Walenstein puts his men into array, and sends backe for Pappenheim. But Colonel Holck for all the darkenesse of the night, went about to put his forces into battaglia: and indea∣voured by perpetuall skowtes, to discover the proceedings of the enemy. Neither wanted his Excellency any diligence, to dispatch messengers to the Count of Pappenheim: giving him notice of the Kings resolution; and a command therewithall, to returne backe with all his forces: and to advance, in the meane time, his Cavallery and Dragooners, with all speede possible. This message overtooke him, iust at that instant when he had entred Hall, and had clapt a Petard to the Castle gate: in which there was a Swedish Commander, with a gar∣rison of 200. souldiers. And thus farre are the very words of my Spanish Relation: wherein, though the defeate given
by the King the night before the Battell, be united: yet, cer∣tainely, there be many other particulars on the Imperiall side; which but from one of their owne, we could not have comne at. And so farre, in my Readers names, I thanke my Spanish Relater: whom I have done no wrong unto, in Translating. And now have we brought Walenstein to the stake; for the morrow morning begins the Battell. This I adde, that Gallas, though he were sent for, yet could he not come time enough to the encounter. What may seeme defective here, of Walen∣steins Proceedings iust before the Battell: shall be supplyed by and by, in the description of the Battell.
The famous Battell of Lutzen; fought the sixt of November 1632. Old Style. Wherein you have the manner of the King of Swedens death, WITH The overthrow and flight of the Imperiall Army and their Generalissimo; the Lord ALBERT Walenstein Duke of Fridland, &c. HOw we have heretofore waited upon that incomparable Prince the King of Sweden, from Erfurt unto Naumburg; you may remember to have read, pag: 73. of this Booke. In which 3. daies march of his; there was no such thing as the defeate of the Count of Merode with 2. Regi∣ments; which the confidentPag. 823. The true name of Merode, I am told to be Werningeroda: of a towne by Halberstat, which he is Earle of. Le Soldat Suedois avoucheth. Nor was Merode at all in the Bat∣tell: whom he maketh to be slaine there. The onely suspi∣tion of any opposition, to be made by an enemy in all this march, was; a newes brought his Majestie by the Boores, of
some 22. Cornets of Crabats under the command of Isola∣ni and his Lieftenant-Colonel Ʋorgage (commonly to the Germans knowne by the name of Vorgast:) who had beene seene a day or two before, about the countrey. But these Crabats were onely heard of, not encountred with. Pappen∣heim was also marcht thorow: without ever so much as of∣fring to take in Erfurt, much lesse of fetching any compo∣sition or contribution of 2000. dollars, as the same Soldat Suedois also affirmeth.pag: 812. Duke William Weymar was in the towne with 3000. men (voyced to be 5000) with Pap∣penheims small Armie of 5000. Foote and 2500. Horse; was much to weake to have meddled withall: though, by the counsell he gave to Walenstein it appeareth; how good a mind he had towards it. The King (as we told you) being arrived at Naumburg upon Thursday November the first, (old Stile) which is not Saint Martins day, as the formerPag: 824. Saint Martins day is Novem∣ber 11th. Old Stile: in all Martyrologies and Romane Kalenders. French Author mistak∣eth: tooke order to have his Army lodged in the field, towne, and Suburbs; even as we before told you. The same day the King went out upon a Partee, for discovering of the enemie. After him, that afternoone, went these 3. Gentle∣men of our Nation:Three English Gentlemen taken prisoners by the Crabats. Lieftenant-Colonel Francis Terret, Sergeant-Major Iohn Pawlet, and Captaine Edward Fielding, These 3. going alone by themselues, to a forsaken village where there were 2. waies thorow it: (the King having gone the left hand way, and they now taking the right) fell into an ambush of the Crabats: the first and the last named of these three, were taken prisoners by 2. Rit-masters of the Crabats: one of them named Potnick, a Greeke Captaine. This adventure would I not overpasse: for that these two Gentlemen being carried prisoners into the Imperiall Leaguer; kept under a guard in the Reere of the Armie, all the day of the great Battell; and after hal'd unto Prague among the fleeing Imperialists: have had the meanes to enforme me, of what otherwise I could not have comne by. And thus much they having with much courtesie affoorded me; I could not
but quote them, for my better authority. They were that night carried unto Weissenfels, where Walenstein, then lay in the Castle of it. He sent the Count of Pappenheim to them, the same evening; to enquire of the King of Swedens strength, lodging and intentions. The most of the Imperiall Foote, lay now in, and neere about this Weissenfels: 700. or 800. of them keeping guard upon the market-place. The Imperialists then gave out themselues to bee 50000. but it appeared to be spoken by a Figure, and to terrifie the King: for that they were not any thing neere that number. To returne to the King: His Majestie the next day (being Friday) in person visited all the Avenues and Passes about the towne: and went out againe with great Partees of Horse, to take some prisoners, by whom to learne something of the enemies. Finding that the Imperialists lay still; and that the Passes by which he should have gotten to them, were both dangerous and difficult: he returned at night againe, and gave order to entrench the Armie before Naumburg towards Weissenfels. Till the Trenches could be made,The King en∣trenches before Naumburg. the Armie lay in the field: after which, the Foote were enquar∣tered in the Towne and Suburbs, and the Horse in the next villages: some 2. or 3000. being onely left abroad all night, to watch the Trenches. Vpon Sunday September 4th. came there a Saxon Boore to Naumburg unto the King; with a letter in his hand, to shew him. The letter was written by the Count Coloredo Sergeant-Major Generall of the Imperiall Army; unto an Officer of his, that lay with his Regiment at Querfurdt; on the We∣sterne side of the river Sala right against Hall, and 10.A letter of Colo∣redoes brought unto the King. English miles from it. Coloredo had enforced this Boore, to carry this letter: and the Contents of it were to this purpose. That the Generalissimo had sent the Count of Pappenheim to take in Hall Castle: That his men of Querfurdt, should march up to ioyne with Pappenheim: and that the next morning, the Imperiall Armie was to part from Weissenfels. This letter
seemes to have beene written upon the Satterday night: accor∣ding to which date, it agrees rightly with Walensteins dis∣camping from about Weissenfels; which was, indeed, done up∣on the Sunday; after that Pappenheim was dispatched towards Hall Castle. A debate being had, whither it were best to fight, or not?Vpon this Intelligence, His Majestie the same day cals Duke Bernard and Sergeant-Major Kniphausen, to a counsell: propounding the great question unto them two; whither, that in Pappenheims absence, the Duke of Fridland alone were to be set upon? Duke Bernard (I am enformed) was for the valiant Affirmative: That the advantage was good; and that seeing they knew not how long they should enioy the oportunity of this Division; Walenstein was present∣ly to be attacked. But Major Kniphausen, was for the so∣ber Negative, and that the enemie was not to be fough∣ten withall. His Reasons were two. First, No man is to fight, but when he is apparently stronger then his enemy: which the King at this time was not. Kinphausen diswades it.Secondly, No man is to attacke a stronger enemy, un∣lesse compeld by a pressing and unavoydeable necessity. That is, either to force his passage when he is hembd in; or when hunger and want of victualls constraine him to it. Neither of which being the Kings case, there was no reason for pre∣sent fighting. Good reasons: which so farre preuailed with the King, that giving over all thoughts of present fighting,Whereupon, the King resol∣ving to goe joyne with Saxony. he was re∣solved to have left a garison in Naumburg, and to have marcht with his whole Army to conjoyne with the Dukes of Sax∣ony and of Lunenburg. And these reasons are different (I must confesse) from those flourishes ofFrom Page 815. to Page 820. Le Soldat Suedois; which take up five whole Pages in him. I dare pawne my morall and historicall Faith upon it, that his muster of reasons there, are but his owne mistakings or Inventions, and never by the King nor Walenstein, so much as dreamp't of. You here for the Kings
part, have Kniphausens two arguments: and for Walensteins, you may please to take notice of Coloredoes Letter, and of the Generalissimoes intentions, agreeable to this Letter; which wee have before given you out of ourIn Walensteins Proceedings, Spanish Relator. I will but confute my Soldat once more; and that for his con∣founding a noble Story, which very next followes in him: and may seeme to crosse my Relation. His mistake, (I meane) of Walensteins taking of Leipsich: which having beene done ten dayes before (full three weekes before St. Martins day) he now affirmes to be but first attempted upon our second of November. These few Failes have I fairely noted in him; to dis-abuse my Countreymen: to whom I heare him re∣commended, for the French Tacitus. Pardon my digression. The King being thus resolved; sends Post unto the Elector of Saxony, to enforme him of his purposes, and to lay the plot for their uniting. The King de∣sired him, to come to Eilenburg, upon the West of the ri∣ver Mulda, 14 miles West of Torgau, where the Duke then lay: the King himselfe resolving that he would advance to meet him unto Pegau first;goes from Naumburg to∣wards Pegau: which is upon the Elster 14 miles to the South of Leipsich: and to Grim, afterwards; upon the river Mulda; 18 miles East of Pegau, and 14 to the South of Eilenburg. True it is, that the Elector of Saxony lay at Torgau at the same time, with an Army of 4000 Foot,to joyne with the Duke of Saxony. and as many Horse: whereof 2000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, were the Duke of Lunenburgs. Walenstein the same Sunday, drew out from Weissenfels: leaving a Captaine onely with his hundred men, for the kee∣ping of the Castle. Thence marcht Walenstein unto Lutzen,Walenstein goes to Lutzen. two Dutch Leagues to the East of it: where, and in the Dorps round about it; his whole Army enquartered. The next day being Munday, November 5th: the King ac∣cording to his former resolution, parted out of Naumburg, to goe towards the Duke of Saxony: leaving the towne & garrison, under the Command of the Saxon Colonel Vitz∣dum. For the more lightnesse and expedition in his march;
he commanded his Baggage to stay with the garrison still in Naumburg; for a day or two; being, he thought but onely to have gone and joyned with the Elector of Saxony, and then to have returned againe to Naumburg. Hee supposing, withall, that Pappenheim being now absent, and Walensteins men not together, that he should not be disturbed in his march: about foure before day-light (the Drums having beaten ever since one a clocke,) on the Munday morning, he advances towards Pegau. The King having notice, of Wa∣lensteins forsaking Weissenfels: sends by the way, to take in that Castle. The hundred men that Walenstein had left in it, did Coloredo come so timely to fetch off; that he had done it, a very little, before the Swedes comming. In the middle of his march, about ten a clocke, the same forenoone, came there some Gentlemen ryding, and some Boores running to the King; with advice that the Imperia∣lists were lying still in severall Dorps and Villages hard by,The King ha∣ving notice by the way, of Wa∣lensteins scatte∣red lodging. about Lutzen; without any intelligence at all, of the Kings being in motion. This the King being enformed of: con∣vokes presently his high Officers to a Councell of Warre; to advise what were best to be determined. His Majesty, even then, (and then first) put on the resolution for fighting: openly speaking it out, That He now verily supposed, that God had given his enemies into his hand. Hô! brave occasion, sayes the Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg. Now God blesse us (say divers great Officers) tis a happy oportunitie. And truely so it was: for divers prisoners (even then brought in, by the Kings Partees, and by the Boores) being by the King exami∣ned whither they had any Alarm in their Quarters, of his marching: freely confessed that they had none, And so much was evident enough, for that they were now surprized in their Quarters. Thus thought all the Officers: all being re∣solved to fall on presently. And, indeed, there was great rea∣son for it:resolves to fall upon his Quarters. for could the Kings Army have falne in amongst those villages; he had given a Camisado to severall of their Quarters at once; have cut them off singly: for that they
could never have comne together, to unite their Forces, or have succoured one another. This was evident. And thus neere were 100000 good mens hopes and wi∣shes, of having arrived to the very highest of their expecta∣tions: nothing in the whole world being betwixt the King of Swedens desires and his absolute victory; but the length of the way onely. The Gentlemen and Boores that brought him the Intelligence, told him Lutzen was but hard by: which the King was in good hope of, for that He was even then in sight of it. The Army advanc't stoutly, and doubled their march upon it: but their legges found it a longer way then their eyes; it being a sad Campagnia; full eight English miles of ground to Lutzen. Besides all this, was there a fil∣thy Passe in the way, at a Bridge over a River; (where but one or two men could goe over a-breast) which hindred the Army full two houres going. By this hinderance, was it even night, before the Army could get within two English miles of Lutzen: so that had the King (as he said) but two houres more of day-light;of which victo∣ry; the length of the way, and shortnesse of the day; de∣feated him. Walenstein (doubtlesse) had beene taken Sleeper: had beene ex-Imperator'd, and un-Generalissimo'd. But God that is both Ancient of Dayes, and Lord of Hosts, had otherwise disposed of it: Hee had made the way so long, and the time so short; (no doubt) for a better purpose. This ill-fauoured Passe, was within two English miles of Lutzen: and in the Village that belonged to it, were there two Imperiall Regiments of Horse (one of them Crabats) enquartered. These having a little notice of the Kings com∣ming had gotten upon their Horses, and taken up a high hill on the other side of the Passe, next to Lutzen. They made as though they would have disturbed the Kings Passage; but they did not; the Kings Foot marching fairely over, with some Horse amongst them. Some of the Kings Foot, were still marching over, till it was darke night, or within it. Those that got over first, entertained a slight skirmish with the Imperiall Horsemen: without any losse to the King,He rowtes two Regiments of the enemies. kil∣ling some 50. or 100. of them, and taking one Crabats
Ensigne. And now the King taking another hill, (right against that, which the Imperialists possessed) he from thence let flye some peeces of Ordnance amongst them: which caused them to take the benefit of the night, with some confusion to march off in. This is that Ensigne, so much spoken of: which had For∣tune and the Imperiall Eagle, depainted upon it. But it is no such raritie; for that most (or all) of the Crabats En∣signes, have the displayed Eagle for their bearing. This was presented to the King for a faire Omen; as if He had already now conquered, both Fortune and the Eagle. But the King (tis reported) tooke no great content at it: being sorry (I beleeve) for that the night had prevented him, for taking more of them. and is faine to sit downe till the morning.And here the King being surprized with the darkenesse; was forced to sit downe in the open fields, with his Army: himselfe lying in his Coach, as other Officers did that had them. Here lay he all night in Battaglia: every Regiment lying downe, in the same order that they had marched, with their Armes by them. The Pikemen, they stucke up their Pikes an-end by them: and every Rott, (that is every sixe) of Muskettiers bringing their Muskets to their Rottmaster: he set them right up with their mouthes upward, and bound them together with a peece of Match: where they stood ready at hand, for all occasions. The Imperiall Army was in a terrible Hubub, at the Kings comming over the Passe: for now was the Alarm sent in hot, to all the severall Dorps and Quarters, even from Lut∣zen unto Hall and Leipsich. Order upon paine of death was given, for every man with all speed possible; to repaire to∣wards Lutzen, to their Generalissimo. Presently upon this, began all the Regiments to draw together; some of which, were all night upon their marches: and some Horse that were Quartered very farre off, being not able to reach up, till ten a clocke next morning. And thus (even then) dist the mist so long keepe off the King next morning, till his
enemies could be made strong enough for him. As every Regiment came in, so were they put into order: which continued all night long; as the two English Gentle∣men (then prisoners there) observed. About ten at night, did Walenstein begin to thinke of the places most advantageous, for the planting of his Ordnance: some of which, having mounted upon the Wind-mill hills; he then began to cast up a trench of earth about them. All night and next morning, his Dragooners and Pioners, wrought with their Spades about the High-way; and to make the Ditches, or Draine by it, serve them for a Brest-worke, to lodge their Muskettiers in. And this was their worke too, all the next misty morning; which fatall weather gave them also the more respite, to re∣cover their feares and wearinesses; and to fortifie them∣selves against their unconquered enemy. And thus was the night (the last night to some thousands) overpassed. The King now over the Passe, had put himselfe into a ne∣cessity of fighting: and being thus engaged, the sooner he fought, the better: for that his enemy should be the lesse pro∣vided for him. The Bride, therefore; more longd not for her wedding morning, nor slept lesse, then the King that night did. Tuesday, (that fatall 6th. of November) at last began to draw neere: and alas! it came all to early. A gentle mist, as if fore-dooming how blacke a day it would be; did his good will to have kept it night still: and the Sunne, as if his great eye had before-hand over-read the fatality of the fol∣lowing day, seemed very loath to have begunne it. So sweet a correspondencie (though secret) and so sensible a compassi∣on, betwixt Gods more noble instruments, there is; that the day had rather have beene no day, then become Gustavus his last day: and the Sunne had rather have conceal'd his owne glory, then his fellow Gustavus beames, should be extin∣guished. But the martiall King, even forcing himselfe to a∣waken Time, and hasten on mortality; would needs make those clocks and larums of the warres, his fatall Drummes, to beate two houres before day-light. Arme, Arme, Repaire
to your Colours, keepe your Orders, stand to your Armes: these were the morning summons, to awaken the heartie souldi∣ers; from a cold, a hard, and an earthly lodging. The Armie was easie to be put in order, for that the most part of it, had laine, and slept in Battaglia. One while, was the King pur∣posed to have advanc't, and falne on presently: but the warre being Gods cause; he would, like David and Himselfe, first aske counsell of the God of Battells: and at least recommend His owne cause unto Him. The Drummes having beaten the first March, Hee caused prayers to be read to himselfe, by his owne Chaplaine Doctor Fabritius: and where there were Ministers at hand, the same was done thorow every Regi∣ment of the Army. The morning proved so mistie, that it was not possible to see which way to march; nor where to find an enemie to strike at. And this (vnluckily) staid the Kings thoughts, from advancing presently. This was a fogge of advantage, unto Walenstein: who purposing but to stand his ground; (which by working all night about the ditch and high-way, his Pio∣ners had made more troublesome to be assaulted) was now resolued; that if he must fight, he would there abide the first shocke: and no way to seeke the Battell, or to mooue to∣wards his Adversarie. About 8. a clocke, the mist brake up: and (but for one mischance in it) promised as faire a day, as ever was 6th. of November. As it beganne to cleere, the King tooke occasi∣on to encourage up his souldiers: and going to his owne Sub∣iects first,The Kings Orations, he to this purpose bespake them. My deare bre∣thren; carry your selues bravely this day: fight valiantly, a Gods name,to the Swedes; for your Religion, and for your King. This if you doe, Gods blessing, and the peoples praises, shall be your guerdon: and you for ever shall even be laden, with an honourable and a glorious memoriall: nor will I forget to re∣ward you nobly. If you play the Pultrons, I here call God to witnesse, that not a bone of you shall ever returne againe into Sweden.
To the Germane Troopes, this was the Oration,To the Ger∣manes. ô you my Brethren, Officers and fellow-souldiers of the Germane nati∣on! I here most earnestly intreate and beseech you, to make full tryall of your valours this one day, against your enemies. Fight manfully against them this day, both with me, and for me. Be not faint-hearted in the Battell, nor for any thing dis∣couraged. Set me before your eies, and let me be your great example: even me, who dreadlessely for your cause, am here readie to adventure my life and blood, to the uttermost of any danger. This if you doe, there is no doubt but that God him∣selfe, will from Heaven reward you with a most glorious vi∣ctorie: of which both your selues and long posteritie, shall plentifully enioy the benefits. This if you doe not, farewell for ever to your Religion: and your liberties must for ever remaine enslaved. These Orations of the Kings, being from both nations, with a horride clashing of their Armour, and with cheere∣full vowes and acclamations, answered; the King as cheereful∣ly then replied. And now, my hearts, let us on bravely against our enemies: and God prosper our endeavours. Sprightfully withall casting up his eies to Heaven, he with a loud voyce thither sent up this forcible ejaculation. Iesu, Iesu, Iesu,The Kings Prayers. vouchsafe thou this day, to be my strong helper; and give me courage this day to fight for thy glorie, and the honour of thy great Names sake. This Praier (according to other Relati∣ons) I find that he sometimes thus varied (for he led on, pray∣ing:) ô my Lord Iesu, Sonne of God! blesse these our Armes, and this dayes Battell, for thine owne glory, and holy names sake. This said, he drew out his sword, which waving over his head, hee advanced forward, the formost of all his Army. His royall person was that day waited upon,His atten∣dance. by Duke Francis Charles of Saxon-Lawenburg; and by some of his Maiesties owne neerest servants. The Lord Crailsham also, Great Master or Marshall of his Majesties Houshold; had the leading of a bodie of Reformadoes; which were especially
commanded, to waite upon the Kings owne person. And a∣mongst these, were our English and Scottish Gentlemen and Officers; whom (as I have before told you) the King had at Schleusing heretofore Reformed. Of this Bodie, (which con∣sisted of severall nations) were there still 3. or 4. close about the King, readie to be sent with orders, up and downe the Armie: who were still supplied by Crailsham. The King was that day attired, as usually he was accustomed, in a plaine Buff-coate, and un-armed. Some report, that a tendernesse he had in his shoulder, where a Musket bullet had a long time stucke: would not suffer him to endure armour. And there∣fore when he was this morning desired to put on his Corslet, he said The Lord God was his Armour; and refu∣sed it. The Kings Watch-word, was the same which had beene of so good an Omen,His Watch-word. before at Leipsich, GOTT MIT VNS: God with Vs. The Generall Walensteins being now the same, which Tillyes then was; IESVS MARIA. This was the Kings order of Embattailing. His whole Army, (which now, after he had left some at Naumburg, and at Weissenfels, was betweene 17 and 18000 men) hee devided into two Fronts; and each of these, into the Wings and Battell; with their Reserves. Each of the Wings, were composed of sixe severall Regiments or Squadrons of Horse; lined with five severall Bodies,His Order. of Commanded Muskettiers: every one of which Bodies, had two small Drakes or Feilding Peeces, which advanced playing still before them. The Battell in each Front, consisted of foure Brigades of Foot: a Reserve of Foot, being betwixt the two middle Brigades of the first Front; and a Reserve of Horse hindmost of all, betwixt the two middle Brigades of the Reere or Second Front. Before each Brigade, marcht sixe Peeces of greater Ordnance: and thus much the first sight of the Figure showes you. The Right Wing, markt with the Letter I, was led by the King himselfe: whose place is to be seene just over the said letter, and number 6. neere to the first Brigade. The five
Bodies of Commanded Muskettiers, all marked with the number 7. were commanded by the Count of Eberstein. The Horse Squadrons of the left Wing, were committed unto the glory of the Day, Duke Bernard of Saxon Weymar: whose place is at the letter K, over the number 12. by the fourth Brigade of Foot-men. The five Bodies of Foot in this left Wing, marked with 13: were the charge of the Colonell Gersdorff: The Battell made up of the foure Brigades of Foot, was commended to the Swedish Count of Neeles, Colonel of the Kings Life-guards. The foure Foot Brigades of the Second Front or Reere, were Commanded by Dodo Kniphausen, Sergeant-Major Generall of the whole Army: to whose faire Conduct, the Victory is also much beholden. The Horse of the Right Wing were entru∣sted to Colonel Claus Conrade Zorn, of Bulach: by which name of Bulach hee is commonly knowne. The Horse of the Left Wing, were committed to Prince Ernest of Anhalt. The Reserve of Foote marked with 37, was commanded by Colonel Iohn Hinderson, a Scottish Gentleman: and the Re∣serve of Horse, marked with 38, by Colonel Oeme, of the Palatinate. The Imperiall Army, had his Excellencie the Generalissimo,Walensteins order. thus ordered. He first drew it all up into one mighty Front: which he then devided into three Bodies. His Right wing of Horse, marked with the letter A, (whose end was neere the Towne of Lutzen,) was committed to the Count Ridolfo Co∣loredo, that day Sergeant-Major Generall of the Armie. This Wing, had also its commanded Muskettiers: besides some o∣thers that were lodged in the gardens, by the towne afore∣said. This Wing having also the advantage of the Windmills and their hills, by the towne-side: made use of those naturall Batteries, for the planting of 9. peeces of Ordnance: the Mills and Millers house, serving them also for a good shelter. The Battell or Middle-Ward, markt with the letter B, was commanded by the Duke of Fridland himselfe, whose place was said to be in the head of that great Regiment of Piccolo∣mini'es
Horse, which is in the very middle of the Foote-Regi∣ments, marked with 49. The Left Wing, opposite to the Right Wing, and markt with the letter C: was led by Colonel Hendrick Holck; newly made Lieftenant-Felt-Marshall un∣to Pappenheim: who but commanded till Felt-Marshall Pap∣penheim should be comne into the Field. All this Imperiall Order of embatteling, I have presented in one mighty Front: so, namely, as it appeared to the Kings people, and to him that tooke the Figure of it: since (very largely) cut and imprinted in Copper,The Figure described. by Iohn Iaacob Gabler of Leipsich: who also by the Kings owne directions, and the description of Oluff Hans his Majesties Enginiers; last yeere set forth the Figures of the Battell of Leipsich. And the manner of the same Figures of the Battell of Leipsich; we have in this also followed. We know, that betwixt every Brigade of Foote, there should be so much roome left, as that another Brigade might advance vp betweene: the distance betweene them, being the breadth of one of them. But our Cutter (plainely) to make his Figures fairer, hath straight∣ned the distances. And this (I hope) is mended, by telling of. The 2. Reserves also, were to be drawne up betweene the 2. Brigades that stand next before them: but these we have left behind, as Oluff Hans in the Battell of Leipsich also did: which, I suppose, was there done; for distinctions sake to the vulgar beholder; every souldier knowing the true place of them. The explication of the severall letters and numbers, shall follow by it selfe, immediately after the Figure of the Battell. Having thus described the Order; the Field of the Battell would next be considered of. The King had a North-Easter∣ly march of it, from Naumburg towards Lutzen: so that the rising Sunne was something within a while, favourable. The wind, also, (that little that was) blew fairely for him: so that the King very ioyfully spake it, I thanke God I have both wind and Sunne to favour me. The Countrey was a goodly vast levell and Campagnia, as
Corne-lands could be; even,The field de∣scribed. as farre almost as the eye could roave over. And yet was the place of Battell subiect to as many accidents (and Walenstein was Master of them all) as a plaine countrey almost could be. The King, right in his way of advancing, had a wet ditch (made by hand) called the Flossgraben, cut traverse to him: so that he was faine to edge about to the Right, with his whole Army; to passe by it: and then to edge as much to the left againe, to put him∣selfe right before the enemy. The Imperiall Army was em∣batteled all along beyond a broad high-way, which led from Lutzen unto Leipsich. On this side of this, was there a kind of broade draine or ditch, which served for bounding and sa∣ving the ploughed lands, and to keepe withall, the High-way the dryer.Advantageous for Walenstein. This had Walensteins Pioners bestowed some cost upon: so that putting some commanded Muskettiers downe into it, it served them as well as a Trench or Brest-worke. This was so troublesome for the Kings Horsemen, that many of them were overturned and left behind, in the getting over to charge Walenstein: for indeed there were divers gaps tho∣row it, which the Horse iustling for, overturned one ano∣ther. The ground also, behind the ditch, had 2. little risings: and those did Walenstein make choise of, for the planting of those Peeces, marked with the letter F, in the Figure. That Part of the High-way also towards Lutzen; had an old Trench or dry ditch, drawne to it; which being nothing of it selfe, but a Boundary for lands; that also did Walenstein put Musket∣tiers into: which served them like the High-way ditch, for a Parapet or Brest-worke. This is markt with theGallobelgicus Figure of the Battell, hath omitted this Trench. He hath also turned the Highway wrong letter H. A pretty distance beyond the High-way, neere unto the Towne of Lutzen, (markt with D,) were there 3. or 4 Wind-mills: amongst which, the letter E standeth. Behind these, had Walenstein lodged some Muskettiers: and the Mill-hills served as naturall Batteries for him to plant 9. peeces of Ordnance upon. Betweene the Mills and the towne, were there divers gardens with mudd-walls round about them: and in these also, (in one of them 300. being after found
dead) had he caused Muskettiers to be placed. Leipsich High-way, as it went sloaping along: so had he caused his men to bend and hang towards it. And now to the Action. The Sunne having by 9. a clockc cleerely dispeld the Fogge; it prov'd as promising a morning, as ever was 6th. of November: and that commendation should our Almanacks have hereafter given it, but for one mis∣chance in it. And now the King shot his losing or warning-peece; and so advanced. The King advances.Being passed the Floss-graben: He left also the Dorp of Chursitz behind him: betwixt which and his Army, he left his Coach and Ammunition-wagons: of which there were not aboue 100 at most: the King having left the rest at Naum∣burg, with no purpose of fighting. The King advanced, till he came with the end of his Right Wing, within Musket shot of a little wood: having all the way a full view of the Im∣periall Army. That Walenstein much over-powred the King in numbers; may appeare by the mighty long Front that he put out; full 2. English miles, from one Wings end to another. This is also to be considered:Walensteins numbers much more then the Kings. that Walensteins (and all the old) Dis∣cipline; is to march 10. deepe in File: whereas the King, was no more but 6. deepe: of Foote (I meane:) and of Horse, but 3. or 4. deepe: according as the Brigades were either stronger or weaker. Besides this, that Walensteins Files were all the way almost as deepe againe; his Ranks also were in Front so much longer:The King en∣forced to lengthen out his Right Wing that the King was faine to send for Bulach, and all the Squadrons of Horse, from the Right Wing of the Reere or second Front to imp out his Feathers at the end of his Right Wing: for feare that Walenstein should sur∣round him. These Squadrons when Generall-Major Knip∣hausen missed out of their places; he sent a Gentleman to his Maiesty: to know whither he had otherwise employed them? The King was at the same time, likewise; sending the the Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg unto Kniphausen; to tell him, that he would but use them in that first charge; and then re∣turne
them backe againe to their Order. The Duke meeting with the Gentleman, and telling him thus much: both then returned to their places. The King wondred not a little at it, when he saw how faire a Clew Walenstein spread: affirming to these about him; That if he had any Seconds behind his first Front; he could not iudge him to be lesse then 30000. True it is indeed, that Walenstein had given out Proviant Comissions for 40000. and sometimes for 50000. people: but yet had he not so many fighting men: for that there were at least 10000. women, servants, children, and such Hang-byes, belonging to the Ar∣my; which are to be discounted. Besides this, it is to be con∣sidered, that Walenstein had but one Front, and the King 2. so that we may well allow Walenstein to be 20000. in the First Front: at the very first ordering of the Battell. After which, accounting those that were still comming in, even till 10. a clocke; and Pappenheims Horse and Dragooners, which came in about one or two a clocke: and his Foot, thought to make the second fierce charge towards night: and then (doubtlesse) these could not be fewer then 10. on 12000. which made up in all, full 30000. fighting men. The Armies being comne within Cannon shot, the great Ordnance, began to play one upon another, terribly. The Aire roar'd, and the earth trembled: and those manly hearts that feared not dying, were yet very loath to have no more play for their lives, then to be beaten to pieces, with the bullet of a Cannon. And here had Walenstein, surely, a great advan∣tage over the Kings Army:The Battell be∣gun with great Ordnance. for his Ordnance being all ready planted upon steaddy and fixt Batteries: the Canoniers tra∣versed their Peeces, and delivered their bullets with more aime, then the Kings men could possibly: who gave fire in motion still, and advancing. His Maiesties Cannon, ever as a peece was discharged, was there left to be brought after: the Army still advancing, and marching away from it. Plaine∣ly, the King liked not this sport: for that the Imperiall Can∣non did his men farre more spoile and execution; then he pos∣sibly
could againe returne them. Seeing therefore no good to be done this way, he causes his Army to advance upon the very mouth of the Cannon, and to charge towards the High-way, and to beate out those Muskettiers, that were lodged in it. The Imperiall Army stood their ground all this time; ex∣pecting that the fiercenesse of their enemies charge, would indifferently well be abated, by that time they had beaten out those Muskettiers, and had put themselues out of order and breath, with scambling over the ditches. And indeed the place being almost mans height, a many of the Kings Horse∣men, were there left tumbling up and downe; but of the rest that gat over, this was the order of their Charge. The com∣manded Muskettiers, and the Foote of the Swedes Brigade having cleered the High-way: the whole Front advanced to charge together. The order of the first charge.This whilest they were doing; the little Drakes or Field-Peeces, (2. of which marcht before every Body of Musket∣tiers, that lined the Horse of the Wings) were first fired: and the Muskettiers at the same time giving their first Saluee: the Horse then charged home upon the Imperiall Horse: by the Drakes and Muskettiers, something before disordered. This order was held in the first charge, by the whole Front of the Army: but I must now leave the Battell and Left Wing enga∣ged, to speake of the Right Wing first; where the King in per∣son commaunded. The King at his first advancing, having observed wherea∣bouts in the Imperiall Left Wing; (now opposite to him) the Crabats were marshalled; and where the Curiassiers; (who were compleatly armed in blacke harnesse Cap á pied) he cals the Finnish Colonel Stolhanshe to him, (as tis likely he did o∣ther Colonels, as he rode along:) and pointing to the ene∣mie. As for those fellowes (meaning the Crabats) I care not for them;The Kings speech of the Imperiall Curiassiers. saies the King: but charge me those blacke fellowes soundly: for they are the men that will undoe vs. Thus much did Stolhanshe himselfe oftentimes, (and at table) relate unto
divers Gentlemen of our Nation: Some of which tell the Kings words from Stolhanshes mouth, this way. Charge me those blacke fellowes soundly: for tis prophecyed that they shall be the ruine of me. But this word prophesie, others confesse that they heard not. The King fought at the head of the Smolanders Squadron.The couragi∣ousnesse of the King. Himselfe was still the formost: with his pistoll in one hand, and his sword in the other; and when his pistolls were dis∣charged, laying on, and slashing with his sword: and the enemy giving fire in his face, and laying at him againe, freely. Some have complained, that onely with the Smolanders Squadron, which you shall find at the number 6. and the Ostro Gothes, at the number 5. or at most the Vplanders, at the number 4. did now onely advance and charge the enemy. Perchance these 3. now gat the start, and were something forward, then the 3. Squadrons of the Ingermanlanders, the West-Goths, and the Finlanders: whom you see in their orders and numbers; 3. 2. 1. towards the end of the Wing. These 3. Squadrons, indeed, fell not on at the same place with the King; but advanced directly upon the faces of those 3. Impe∣riall Regiments of Curiassiers, which you see right before them, at the numbers 56. 57. 58. Nor were they blamed af∣ter the Battell, for any slacknesse or not charging: for that the King (as we told you) had ordered Stolhanshe to charge these Curiassiers soundly. And as for Bulach and those Squa∣drons of his, now placed to the right hand of Stolhanshe and his Fins, beyond number 1; they were in the very beginning of the encounter so diverted; that they could not charge right forward as the King expected. And for that, this is the true reason. That Regiment of Crabats in the very end of the Im∣periall Left Wing, which you see in the Mapp, at the number 59. did in the very beginning of the charge, wheele about be∣twixt the Wood, and the end of the Kings Right Wing;The Crabats wheeling about upon the Kings Waggons: and there endeavour to fall upon the Swedish Ammunition-Wa∣gons, in the Reere of the Army. These Crabats would haue made a foule pudder among the ammunition, and haue blowne
up most of the powder, doubtlesse; had not Bulach had an eye to them. He giving a home charge upon them; beat them off from the wagons, for the present: but the Swedish Colo∣nell facing it about,are beaten off by Bulach. to returne to his owne place againe; was by the Crabats charged upon the croopes, and put to some disorder. And this dis-array is easie enough to be beleeued: for that the manner of the Crabats fighting, being but for a spirt, and in no good order: whosoever will answer their charge, must necessarily doe it in disorder too: or else they cannot follow the Crabats; to doe any good upon them. And iust now, fell the mist againe: which did this good in that part of the Battell, that this disorder among the Swe∣dish Horse, was not discerned; and so no advantage taken of it. In this Interim, yea iust at this instant; was the King slaine: You see so loath I have been to come to it; that I have wheeld about in my Relation, after the Crabats: rather then too suddenly to strike the Readers hearts dead; with the same bul∣lets and wounds, that the King now died withall. But I must come to it. The King (as was said) out of the greatnesse and heate of his courage; having made a home charge upon those iron-men, the Curiassiers, according as himselfe had spoken to Stolhansh; he was there overlaid with numbers: for his men being in danger to be hembd in, both by them and Piccolomi∣ni, whose Regiment now also charged: were faine to give ground, and to retire towards their owne Bodies againe. There did the King receive a shot in the left Arme: which he not feeling enough at first, thought it had beene nothing; and would needs have led on still.The King be∣ing wounded in the fight: But perceiving by and by his royall blood to gush out abundantly; and that part of the bone was withall broken: hee thus calls to Duke Francis Albert of Saxon-Lawenburg: Cousin (saies the King) I am sorely wounded, helpe me to make my retreate. This whilest the Duke, and those that were with the King and him, were about to doe, and were already turned, (the Squadrons that
the King charg'd withall, being now also put unto the re∣treate) there came up to them an Officer or Cavalier of the Curiassiers; who too well knew the King and observed him, when his face had beene towards him. This Curiassier, com∣ming behind the King, as he was now retreating;in his retreate shot thorow the Body. This is the right Bird, (saies he) with his pistoll at the same time, shoot∣ing him thorow the Body. But the Curiassier (though this were no sufficient satisfaction for such a Kings life) did not carry it away so: for that Luchau who was Stall-master, (Master of the Horse) unto the Duke of Lawen∣burg; shot him dead presently:He slaine, that shot the King. that no man might e∣ver live to glory, how hee had slaine the King of Sweden. The King was held up in his saddle a very little while: but the Curiassiers charged so fiercely in upon the Swedish; that they were not able to bring off the dying King, who fell pre∣sently. And plyed he was with bullets, even in that interim: his Horse being also shot in the shoulder about the necke;The King falls. who ranne homewards to the Swedish Bodyes, without his royall Master: even very lately, the soule of all those Swe∣dish Bodyes. And iust now, fell the mist: the Sunne, who before shi∣ned so brightly, (even almost from the height of his Meridi∣an, it being now past a 11. a clocke) on the sudden muffling up his face in a mourning Cloud: as if not able to looke up∣on, the falling King of Sweden. The Duke of Saxon-Lawen∣burg seeing the King fall, and his men beaten backe, gaue all for lost presently: shifting himselfe withall out of the Battell, unto Weissenfells. This made him to be so ill spoken of,Saxon Lawen∣burg gets him out of the Bat∣tell. tho∣row the whole Armie; and to be censured for worse then cowardise: the souldiers not sparing to charge treacherie upon him. But this scandall, those that better knew him haue thus excused. The troth is, that he had beene at Vienna till the end of Iune before: had since that time serued the Impe∣rialists; and was but a fortnight or three weekes since, comne into the Kings Armie. So that he fearing all lost, gatt him
out of the Battell unto Weissenfels; that he might have this to answer to the Imperialists, should they become victorious; that he was not at all in the Battell. But hearing, that night, how the Swedish had the victory; he was by 4. a clocke next morning in the field, as forward as the formost. However, he was the man that first gave abroad the rumour, that the King was kild: and by him was it sooner knowne in Weissen∣fels, then in the Kings owne Army. This Duke finding no employment, after the Battell, nor great good will among the Army towards him: went after 2. or 3. dayes, to his Cousin the Elector of Saxony; who sent him to the Army in Silesia, and there he is now Felt-Marshall, unto Lieftenant-Generall Arnheim. All this while, are the Imperialists masters of the Kings body; and of the ground they had beaten the Swedish from. They had the King, I say, in their possession; and there they stript him first of all:The King stript every man being greedy to get some part of his spoyles, that they might hereafter glory to have taken it, from the King of Sweden. Some got his Spurres: one of which, had the buckle broken of it: a common soul∣dier got his Sword, another his Ring, which was presented to Holck: his Buff-coate, his Hat, and other parts of his cloaths; all were now pillaged from him. Why not carri∣ed off, by the Imperialists.And this greedinesse of the souldiers, (every man to get something) was one of the causes that his body was not car∣ried off, and kept for ransome. Another reason for which might be, that every man beleeved him not to be the King of Sweden; for notwithstanding that himselfe told them he was the King: yet divers (for all that) suspected him rather to be some great man, that said so to save his owne life: as desi∣rous rather to be taken prisoner. Severall reports there went abroad the Army, of the cir∣cumstances of his manner of dying. Some relate it thus, that one Truckses who waited upon the King in his chamber, be∣ing himselfe falne downe wounded besides the King (and af∣ter brought off alive) was demanded by an Officer of the
enemies, Who the King was? and that asking the same que∣stion of the King, he should answere That he was the King of Sweden; whereupon he thrust him thorow the body with a broad sword, and then ranne away: for that the Swedes now charged. Not much varying from this, is the Letter of Nice∣phorus Kesel, Preacher vnto Duke Bernard: who names one Loebelfinger (a young Gentleman) in stead of Truckses.This Loebelfin∣ger, is sonne to Colonell Loe∣belfinger of No∣rimberg: who was now ser∣vant, indeed, unto the Lord Marshall Crail∣sham: and so very likely to be neere the Kings Person. Adding that some Horsemen of the enemies a-lighting to strip the dead bodies, askt the King who he was; who answe∣red, I am the King of Sweden; who doe seale the Religion and Libertie of the Germane Nation, with my blood. After which subjoyning, Alas my poore Queene! and commending his soule to God; they then kill'd this dying Conquerour. For one of the Imperialists at this time shot him thorow the head, into the right temple, the bullet passing againe out at the left: an∣other, thrust his sword into his body and right side: and he, or a third; gave him a chop withall in the legge; and so left him naked, with fiue wounds upon him:The dying King wounded and mangled. the Swedes by that time comming on to charge againe. This was reported by the young Gentleman (saith the Preacher) who hauing there receiued three wounds, was laid among the dead as one of them, but being afterwards brought off aliue, hee then re∣ported thus of it. But were it Truckses, or were it Loebel∣finger: hee is said to have dyed of his wounds, so soone as ever he was fetcht off: so that he had no time nor strength, to tell more of it. That there is a difference in the names, is an easie mistake: especially so suddenly after that huddle. Truckses might report it from Loebelfinger;Different re∣ports, reconci∣led. or Loebelfinger from Truckses: However, I have divers Writings that runne upon the same thing: and therefore, surely, there was at that time such a beliefe amongst a many in the Army. This pro∣babilitie is very much strengthened, by the Imperiall souldi∣ers owne report of it, made at Prague to those Gentlemen of our nation, then prisoners there. How, namely, that the King being first wounded and in his retreat pursued by them, would as they offered to shoot and strike at him, call out and say, That hee was the King of Sweden. My Spanish Relation
addes this to it. In the beginning of the encounter, one Inno∣centius Bucela, Comrade to Colonel Piccolomini, knew the King, as he lay wounded and dying upon the ground: where∣of giving Piccolomini notice,The Imperia∣lists goe to see the dying King. he with ten more went to see the Body, which was yet quivering: and whilest they were about to bring it away; a troope of the enemies charging, forced them to retire and leave it. The noise of his death, was presently dispersed abroad: but yet beleefe was not ful∣ly given to it, for that some prisoners affirmed that he was but hurt, and carryed in a close Coach, following his white Ensigne. Thus farre my Spaniard. All this might be true. The Swedish prisoners that reported him to be but wounded: were those that were taken so soone as ever he offered to retreat: and before he was shot the second time. But that they said he was carryed off in his Coach, &c. was their Iudgement: that being wounded, it was likely he would goe off in his Coach, which at first stood behind the White Regiment. What, now, if putting all these together, we should sup∣pose Piccolomini himselfe and his Company,A conjecture: to be the men, that thus questioned and wounded, the dying King of Swe∣den? Was it for meerely charging with his Regiment, when the King of Sweden was first shot, that Walenstein after∣wards bestowed as much Lands in Bohemia upon him, as he was offered 400000 Dollars for, which amounts to 100000 pound Sterling? But this I make but a suspition, no accusati∣on: nor have I heard it from Prague, that Piccolomini should thus use him. Past conjecture it is, that he who could not be conquered, was there slaine, and for the principall manner, in this very fashion: in the possibility and circumstances whereof, I for mine owne part doe rest satisfied. His death was knowne but to some few, of the great ones, (no not to those of his owne Army or Wing,The Kings death concea∣led from his owne Army.) for 24 houres after: all beleeving, what was either by Art or Error, given out; how that hee was but carryed off wounded. Hence it is, that the Letters written the very same night, speake so doubtfully of his
death; or so hopefully of his life: and that those few words, which He is reported to have spoken, when he lay on the ground a dying; were after mistaken to be uttered at Weissenfels, in that 6 houres, or 36 houres, which hee was said to have lived. The Royall Corps; was after a quarter of an houre, recovered by Colonell Stolhanshe: and in an Am∣munition wagon (out of which the powder was purposely shifted) was it privately carryed out of the Field unto Weis∣senfels: for that his Coach was runne away among others,The Body re∣covered. in the fright which the Crabats lately put the wagons to. And this long insertion concerning the manner of the Kings death, I confesse to be rather seasonable, then methodicall:The Authors excuse. an Histo∣rian (I know) would rather have referred all this, unto the latter end of the Combate. But for that I have still obser∣ved, how curiously inquisitive men have beene, after the manner of the Kings death: I supposed that an indeavour to give content, in that kinde, would be no unseasonable di∣distraction; (though the very heate and fiercest of the en∣counter in other parts, be a while deferred) to those that so much longed for it: yea more, then for any other part of the Story. Returne we now into the Battell, and to the Right Wing againe. The mist that we before told you of; was not (by their owne side) judged to be any way prejudiciall, but ad∣vantageous rather unto the Swedish: seeing that the Imperia∣lists who had now the better of it, were by the falling of this Mist so arrested, as that they pursued not the Retreat, which they had put the Swedish unto. The rumour likewise of the Kings death, made them so to clutter about the Body; that that also stayed them. All this while were the foure Foot Brigades of the Swe∣dish Battell, pell mell at it:The Second charge. and they (even by my Spaniards confession) gat ground a-pace of those Imperialists whom they had attacked. And now also did Stolhanshe (who cer∣tainly had an Item given him of the Kings death, or great danger, by Crailsham, Saxon-Lawenburg, or some other)
charge so fiercely toward that very place,The Kings body recovered that he beate off the Imperialists, recovered the Kings Body: which he brought off naked; after it had beene a full quarter of an houre in the enemies possession. And now was Piccolominies Regiment soundly peppered: the Swedish both Foote and Horse after an houres fight, beating all the Imperialists along before them; till they had driven them to the very gallowes, which you see behind them. And now did the Swedish get possession of these 7.and the Impe∣rialists beaten to the gallowes peeces of Ordnance which you see together at the letter F, under the number 50. which was Piccolominies Horse Regiment. These Ordnance were the easier to be ta∣ken, for that they played not, Walensteins Powder-Wagons were by mischance blowne up so that his Cannon were scarce heard of, all the day after. And thus ended the second Charge: for by this time was the mist becomne so extraordinary, and by the smoake so thick∣ned, as the Swedes could not see how to pursue their advātage. And here was the mist, becomne as beneficiall to the Imp. as it had been favourable before, unto the Swedish. In this time fell there so terrible an affrightment in the Imperiall Army; that 1000. or 1500. Dutch Horse, ranne all away together. One of them was by a Gentleman of our nation (then prisoner in their Reere) over-heard to say: Oh, I know the King of Sweden well enough, I have served him; he's best at the latter end of a day. But the chiefest fright was among the Ladyes, the Captaines wives, and other women, then behind the Army. Many Gentlewomen gat out of their Coaches, cut asunder the harnesse, and mounted stradlings upon the bare horse backs, and away they spudded among the soul∣diers. Now went the Wagon-horses and the Ordnance-hor∣ses to it; all were ridden away with. Divers women and children, were there trodden to death: nor would the Horse∣men turne head, notwithstanding they heard the charge pre∣sently againe renewed, and those about the Mills, all this time at it: till they were gotten over a Passe, 4. or 5. English from the place of Battell. The fright so pursued them, though no body else did: that comming to this Passe, the Officers
drew out their swords, and slasht and beate off the souldiers, to give them way to get over it. There were at least 4. or 5000. people of them, and they quartered themselves confusedly up and downe in the villages which the Boores had forsaken: nor durst they ever returne into the Battell. Amongst these was my Author carried away: from whom I learned it.Pappenheim renewing the charge; After a little pause, the Count of Pappenheim with his Horse and Dragooners, arrived; whom some will needs have, to have beene in person at the beginning of the battell. By his comming, was the charge thereabouts renewed. He put himselfe into the Imperiall Left Wing, (which was most distressed, and which had beene reserved for him:) to be op∣posite to the Swedish Right Wing; where he supposed the King in person had commanded.is slaine. Iust as he was ordering his Horse, he was strucke with a bullet of a Falconet, or small Sling-peece about the shoulder; of which he died presently: even so soone as he was taken downe from his horse, to have beene carried unto Leipsich. This was a brave fighting Gen∣tleman: whose body was by Walenstein carried unto Prague; where it was to be seene publickely. The Emperour (as a little French Relation that I have, affirmeth) had newly sent the Collar of the Golden Fleece unto him and Walenstein: which honour, before ever he received; he was in the place where he should have worne his Order, thus dubbed with a Sling-peece. He had make his Will, a little before: had shryven himselfe and communicated at a dry-Masse: and made this short Testa∣ment upon it. His Soule, he commended to God; his Body (if he were slaine) to the Emperour: and his wife and children, unto Walenstein. He being shot, his Officers flocking about him,His men run∣ning quite away upon it. were heard to cry, ô our Generall is slaine, our Generall is slaine: imme∣diately whereupon his Horse turned head, and ran out of the Battell without stroke-striking; backe againe towards the Weser and the Lower Saxony. But the Walsteiners, whom Pappenheims comming had set on; fell to it closely: Piccolomini advanced, and Tersica,
with their Cavallery;The 3d. charge. and the Foote-Regiments seconded them with extremitie of resolution. And now began the so∣rest, the longest, and the obstinatest conflict; that had beene, since the King was killed. The charge was sustained by the Swedish, with much gallantry: and never was Battell better foughten: nor seldome have Battalions ever stood, amongst whom so much spoyle hath beene committed. Full 2. houres, were they in hote Battell.A terrible onset On ths Imperiall side was Picco∣lomini, twice or thrice, shot; Sergeant Major Bruner, slaine; and so was a young Count of Walenstein; and if the old one were there, I wonder how he scap't pelting. The Abbot of Fulda, was at this charge also slaine: and thinke, then, how many Officers and common souldiers, was it likely that these great Commanders did take along, to waite upon them into the next world. On the Swedes side, the chiefe of the spoyle light upon the 2. middlemost Brigades of Foote belonging unto Grave Neeles and Colonell Winckle: which you see at the numbers 9. and 10. The Imperialists charged with so much fury, and with Battalions of 2. or 3000. in a Regiment: that they by fine force drove the Swedish to the retreate, in the plaine field; and (as the most say) even then recovered their 7. peeces of Ordnance. Grave Neeles, Colonell of the Life-guards (which is the yellow Regiment) was there shot a little above the knee: of which being carried off spoyled, he after dyed. Out of this Brigade, did the Imperialists carry away 7. Co∣lours: and to tell the troth, the Kings owne company which served here among the Guards, lost their owne Ensigne or Standard Royall too. He that had carryed the Colours, was after seene with his sword in his hand: but his clowte was missing. Colonell Winckles Blew Regiment, likewise; found as hard treatment. Himselfe (brave man) was shot in the arme a little above the elbow, and in the hand; and carried out of the Battell. His Lieftenant Caspar Wolff, was slaine upon the place, and most of his Colours taken. These 2. Brigades, were
of the flower of the Army: old souldiers of 7. or 8. yeeres service, (the most of them) and whom the King had there placed, for that he most relied on them. These old Blades, stood to their Armes, stoutly; and the adverse writers con∣fesse, That their dead bodies now covered the same ground, which living they had defended. These were old beaten soul∣diers, indeed, but it was so long since they had beene last bea∣ten; that they had by this time forgotten how to runne away. This is the reason that they were so shattered: that when to∣wards night, they were to have falne on againe: both these Brigades put together, could not make one Squadron strong: which is but the 3d. part of one of them. By this you see, that 5. of 6. were there killed. The Swedes Brigade, marked with the number 8. fared something better; because neere unto the Horse: and yet there came not aboue 400. off, alive or unwounded. Duke Bernards Brigade, marked with 11; was something more out of Gun-shot: for that next the Horse of the Left Wing. Yet here was Colonel Wildestein shot in the breast, of which he after died: Duke Bernards Lieftenant-Colonel Winckler, being slaine upon the place. In this sore bickering, the spoyle on the Imperiall side, fell mostly upon old Bruners and young Walensteins Regiments, both which were here killed; with full halfe, if not 2 thirds of the souldiers. These Regiments performed their duties so valiantly, and Walenstein himselfe tooke such speciall notice of them; that he along time after (if not still) maintained them in his owne house at Prague for it. Hindersons Reserve of Foote, in the meane time, which you see at number 37. had also their share in the knocking: one of the Offices and uses of the Reserve being, still to sup∣ply and second where most need is; with fresh men to derne up the holes, and stop up the gaps of the slaughtered. And whereas those 4. Brigades of the Van had so terribly beene shattered; Generall-Major Kniphausen, had out of his care sent up these 2. Brigades of the Count of Thurn, and the Colonell Mitzlaff, which you see at numbers 28. and 29.
to relieve them. After a while, he sent them up those 4. Squadrons of Horse, which you see at the numbers 33, 34, 35,The Imperia∣lists beaten off: and 11. pieces takē. 36. who so well (altogether) restored the encounter; that the Imperialists began to give ground: which the Swedes so farre pursued, till they had recovered the 7. peeces againe, and those 4. others which you see at the letters F F, to the left hand of them. Looke we now aside, to see what was done in the Reere and Left Wing, by Kniphausen and Duke Bernard. Generall-Major Kniphausen having sent 2. Brigades of his 4. and 4. Squadrons of Horse,What Kniphau∣sen did, to the reliefe of the Vantguard: sent also his other 2. Horse Squadrons, at the numbers 30, 3. commanded by the Prince of Anhalt, and the Lieftenant of Baron Hoffkirch, unto Duke Bernard. As for the other 2. Brigades of Foote, (his owne and Bosens) which you see at 27. and 28 together with Oems his Reserve of Horse, to be found at number 38. these did Kniphausen still keepe by him, in the Reere of the Battell. Duke Bernard had as hard a Chapter of it, as any man, against the Imperialists Right Wing,and what Duke Bernard. at the Wind-Mills, and (surely) had the most renowned Don Quixote beene there, there had beene exercise enough for his valour, at these Wind-Mills. Soberly, this was the hardest Post, for advantage of situation, all the field over: and Count Coloredo, as well main∣tained it against him. Never man did more gallantly behave himselfe, then Duke Bernard did that day: sure it is, (and himselfe avoucht it) that first and last, in this and other places, he charged 12. severall times, one after another: any of which was a more desperate piece of service, then all Hercu∣les 12. labours; bae me but his going to hell to fetch out Cerberus. And Coloredo gave Duke Bernard leave to charge, all: he had so good an advantage, of the 2. ditches and the Wind-Mills; that hee would not scarce offer upon Duke Bernard. His great valour.The brave young Duke, pressing on in the beginning of the fight, had set the towne of Lutzen on fire: his reason
being, that seeing if he would get the Wind-Mills, he must with the end of his Wing, even touch (as it were) the very walls of the town. Should Coloredo, then, have first filled those wals with Muskettiers; they must needs have so sorely galled his Horsemen, that there had beene no comming neere: nor could Horse and Pistols, have done any service against wals and Muskettiers. In one of these Charges, did Coloredo so thunder upon Duke Bernard, that the valiant Prince thought it not un-souldier-like done, to shelter himselfe behind the Millars House, which you see at the let∣ter N. All this time (as we told you) did Major Kniphausen keep his 2 Brigades and Oems his Reserve, together un-engaged: do∣ing no more with them, then faire and softly advance them towards the enemy; at such time as he saw the Brigades of the Ʋan, to get any ground of them. The distance of his Reere from the Front, was about 600. paces: and at that scantling he still kept himselfe, behind the other. This was no small occasion of the winning of the Battell: see∣ing that so often as any of the Ʋan were disordered and put to the retreate; they with him, still, found a whole great Body together, unbroken, by the sight, of which they resumed new courage, and were set in order againe. And very glad was Duke Bernard when in the next break∣ing up of the Mist, he came and found Kniphausen in so good order; whom (as he openly professed) he feared to have found all to pieces. For now, betwixt 3. and 4. a clocke, (which was a little before Sun-set) did the Mist breake up; and there was a faire halfe-houre after it. At which time Duke Bernard going abroad, to over-view the posture and countenance of the Army: (which since his hearing of the Kings death, the mist and smoake had not suffered him to discover any thing of:) he came now along by the Battell unto the Right Wing; speaking to the Officers and souldiers, and encouraging them to a new on-set. Plainely he found the
whole Army (except Kniphausens part) in no very good order: which he and Kniphausen (who tooke much good paines likewise about it) did their best to reduce them to. When the Word was given for a new Charge: alas Cam∣rade (said the poore souldiers one to another) must we fall on againe! Come saies the tother (embracing him,) Courage; if we must, lets doe it bravely, and make a day out. As Duke Bernard was leading on: the Imperiall Generalissi∣mo sent his 2. Colonells Tersica and Piccolomini, to discover in that cleere weather, what the Swedes were a doing: who brought his Excellency word againe, that they were r'allied together about the Wood, and in very good order advancing towards him. The 4th. charge.This (no doubt) made the Imperialists hearts quake; to thinke upon the terror of a fourth Charge. And now could the Swedes discover the Imperiall Horse, retreating in indiffe∣rent good order towards the Wind-Mills: whereupon they bringing forward 10. pieces of Cannon, and turning those 11. likewise upon them, which were before taken: they gave the Imperiall Horse such a rowsing Salvee of great Ordnance, and charged so upon it, that they put them into disorder.The Imperia∣lists beaten to the Wind-mills. And here (as my Spanish Relator saies) did the Ge∣neralissimo light upon a slight fillipp: by a favourable Musket bullet, namely, which made no wound; but left a blue re∣membrance onely upon him. That hee was indeed shot thorow the Coate, was at Prague reported: though some would even there say privately, that he was in no such danger. And now were the Imperialists beaten round about, even to the very Wind-Mills: the Swedes being Masters of the ground, that they shouldred the others out of. But iust now a little before Sun-set, fell the fatall mist againe: which so hastned on the night, that the Swedes could not well see, which way to pursue their enemies. Duke Bernard in his comming backe was thus heard to say, Mercifull God! but for this mist, we had even now gotten the victory. Hence
went he backe againe over all the Battalians, his owne Post againe: towards which, he now perceived the Imperialists to be making. And now by Sunne-setting, was all the Field cleere of the Imperialists, excepting onely about the Wind-Mills: and there, plainely, were both Coloredoes and Duke Bernards men, falne off one from another: like 2. Duellers leaning on their swords, to take breath againe. Certainely, they had so bangd one ano∣ther, that neither of both were in order: but either party shot at adventure right forward, and let the bullet find his owne way, as it could, thorow that night of smoake and mistinesse. Those Muskettiers which (we told you) were lodged in the mudd-wal'd gardens, were seene to give fire, give fire, conti∣nually: but no men to be discerned. And the Swedes at adven∣ture shot at them againe: and as at night they got ground, they stormed into the gardens; as if they had beene so many Castles, Here the next day, were a many found dead: 300. in one of them. And iust in the edge of the evening, when the Swedish well hoped all had beene finished: had Duke Bernard fresh word brought him, that Pappenheims Foote were even now arrived, from Hall; and were beginning a fresh Charge,The 5th. charge. a∣bout the Wind-Mills. Thus ranne the Word over the Army, Pappenheims Foote are comne, Pappenheims Foot are comne. This the Swedish beleeved: though Captaine Feilding assures me, that the Imperialists at Prague, would never acknow∣ledge it, that the Pappenheimers came at all into the Battell. Now was all the service, (after halfe an houres silence on both sides;) turned unto the Wind-Mills. The Imperialists courages, like the throwes of a dying body; struggled hard, at the last cast, for life; and made, for the time, as fierce a Charge of it, as any had the day before passed. To withstand this, now does Kniphausen bring on his 2. fresh Brigades: with whom are the other 2. of Thurns and Mitzlaffs conioyned, that he had before sent to the reliefe of the Vantguard: which,
indeed, had not so cruelly beene shattered. Now also Duke Bernard r'allying all the Horse together, advanced to the Charge. The Imperialists had, anew, put downe some more Muskettiers into the crosse ditch or Boundary of Lands, mar∣ked with H: which not a little troubled the Swedish. Once or twice, did they offer to force that Trench, and to Storme over it: but it was so troublesome and dangerous in the darke, that they did but over-tumble one another, and were faine to keepe on the other side of it, to bring on some Muskettiers, and from thence to give their vollyes. The best of it was, that it was not above 100. paces distant from the High-way; close behind which, the Imperialists were ranged. That which most galled the Imperialists, was the Swedish Ord∣nance: which on the Right hand Flancke of them, and on the neerer side of the High-way; were now turnd upon them. This most cruell and hote fight, continued till about 5. a clock in the euening:The Imperia∣lists give it over much about which time, the Walsteiners or Pappenheimers or both together; fell off in the darke, and gave it quite over. And thus ended this long, cruell, bloody, and bravely fought Battell: which in continuall exercise, in one place or other,and so the bat∣tell ended. (or at least with small intermissions) had lasted from 9. in the morning untill this time. Eight or 9. long houres, was every man in danger of a sudden death: when at other times, he would have thought himselfe ill handled; by so long a Fit of an Ague. I have cast the whole Battell, into 5. grea∣ter and more remarkeable Charges: not because there were no more, but for that these were most eminent. And yet, perchance, were not these so distinct Acts of this Tragedy, that they might be said to have begun iust now (because the whole Battell was but one continuall Charge, some where or other) but for that the greater Heates and Executions; were much about these times, and in those manners, that I have spe∣cified. These Charges mostly concerne the Battell and Right Wing: for of the Left, I have not such particular Intelligence. If the valour of particular and deserving Gentlemen, cannot
here be described: it is for that the malignity of that envious Mist, would not suffer it to be discerned. Assuredly, there hath beene no such cruell Fight, that hath yeelded so few ob∣servations. The Imperialists being marcht off; the Swedish (gladder of victory, then of enemies) had neither eyes nor wills good enough, to pursue the Retreate upon them: espe∣cially over such troublesome passages, as the Ditch, the High-way, and its Ditch: the Wind-Mills, and their Ordnance: and the Gardens with their Muskettiers in them. Nor had the Im∣perialists, after such an afternoones drinking; any hearty good stomacks to such a supper, as were likely to cost them such a Reckoning. Beating their Drummes, therefore, after a while; they sent away their Baggage and Ammunition, and made their retreate towards Leipsich. The Swedish at first hearing of the Imperiall Drummes, knew not what to make of it: but doubted that their ene∣mies meant to retire into the next Dorps; and what they would doe to morrow, they knew not. Now were Duke Bernard, Kniphausen and some others, in consultation what to doe? Whither to lye all night in the Field, to expect ano∣ther Charge in the morning; or to carry off their sicke and wounded men, and to retire the Army towards Weissenfels. Colonel Hinderson had order in the meane time, to burne the carriages of those 11. peeces of Ordnance, which were taken from the Imperialists: because in the night time, the Swedes despaired of drawing them along with them. But Walensteins selfe had already yeelded up the Field (and the Victory consequently) unto the Swedish: and by this acci∣dent, put an end to their doubtfull consultation. The Genera∣lissimo, already upon his retreate to Leipsich,) had given order for all the Regiments to follow after him. Hereupon, a Rui∣ter or Horseman of the Baron ofBrother to that Hoffkirch, that served on the Kings side. Hoffkirchs Regiment, was sent to find his Colonell; and to give him order to goe after the Generalissimo. This Horseman (it so chanced) had in the darke stumbled upon the Swedish Colonel Oems Reserve of Horse: which having not beene brought to fight all the day,
was now ordered to make the Retreate, and to keepe the Watch for the whole Army. Qui va là, who goes there? Whom seeke you? saies Oems Sentinell: Hoffkirchs Regi∣ment, saies the Ruiter: Here tis, saies the Sentinell; and with that brings him to his Colonel. To him he told, that his Ge∣neralissimo was gone to Leipsich, and had commanded all to follow him. This being discovered to Duke Bernard and Kniphausen; they concluded the Victory to be their owne, resolved to keepe the Field; and sent to countermand Colo∣nell Hinderson; who had already burnt one or two of the Ene∣mies Carriages. The Victory was then published thorow out the Army: and Word given, to stay all night upon the Field of Battell. All this night was there a pittifull crying heard, of the dy∣ing and wounded on both sides: none being able to find, know, or relieve his friend or Camrade in the darkenesse. Twas a frosty cold night: in which many a brave man dyed of the anguish of his wounds miserably; who might other∣wise have beene cured: they being frozen to death, by the morrow morning. The anguish and dolour of a wound, is the complaint that Nature makes, for a remedie: but here alas! the confused complainings of the wounded, hindred many a man from his friends hearing of him; who might else have given him remedie. The enemies Cannon taken.The next morning did the Swedish finde the rest of the enemies Cannon, upon their Batteries by the Windmills; which together with those already taken, made up some 20 or 21 Peeces: whereof 9 were Demi-cannon, and the rest Feild-peeces. By which fewnesse you may collect, that even Wa∣lenstein was halfe surprized: who (doubtlesse) otherwise, would more sufficiently have beene provided. No Wagons, either of Baggage or Ammunition; were left behind: seeing Walenstein had time enough all night, to carry off them with him. Nor were there any prisoners of either side taken, (ei∣ther for numbers, or persons of qualitie) worth speaking of. The numbers of the slaine upon the place of Battell; is
best collected by the burials. The Swedish for their parts,Numbers of the slaine. af∣firme to have buryed next day, betwixt 2 and 3000 men: of which the common souldiers were buryed in the bed of ho∣nour, the Field they dyed in; being put together by heapes into the ditches by the High-wayes-side, and earth cast over them. The Officers, were buried in Lutzen Church-yard, with some more military solemnity. The Imperiall car∣kasses were buried by the Boores of Saxony: which kept tale of 3530. bodies by them enterred: besides which, there were some to be seene unburied a moneth after. But besides these of the Imperialists slaine upon the place, the Boores had knockt downe God knowes how many hun∣dred souldiers (2. or 3000. say some) as they fled away stragling about the Countrey. And the souldiers were even with the Boores for it: for that in their flight towards Bo∣hemia; some would goe out purposely upon Partees, to kill Boores: one Captaine being heard to professe, That he had that day kill'd fiftie. And thus, both of Boores and souldi∣ers; there might perchance be 2. or 3000. slaine after the Battell. The Wounded, were as many more as the slaine: but how many of them dyed after of their hurts, comes not within our numbers. The High Dutch Relation annexed to the Figure of the Battell (which Gallobelgicus hath transla∣ted into his Booke) mentions 9000. but Fame (I beleeve) kills more then the Sword, ever. Halfe of the Swedish slaugh∣ter, light upon the Lifeguards and Winckles Regiments: of which more were carried off spoyled, then were slaine upon the place. True it is, that when 2. dayes the Swedes overviewed their Army, they wanted about 4000. of their former numbers: but into those are the wounded to be reckoned, which were not then able to muster. The reason now, the slaughter was no greater, in such a long and hard fought battell: was for that there was no chase after the Victory: for there vses to be the terriblest of the execution. Of great Commanders slaine on both sides; these onely
doe I find mention of. On the Kings side. First, the Kings Majestie himselfe: whose death is never enough to be la∣mented: and to whom the more ingenuous Imperialists at Prague were heard to give this honourable Testimony, That he was the bravest Enemy, and the best Captaine, that ever was in Christendome.Men of quality slaine on both sides. Next to the King, was Grave Neeles, Ni∣cholas Count of Wesenburg, Sergeant-Major-Generall Isler, and Colonel Gersdorff: with divers Lieftenant-Colonells, Majors, Rit-masters and Captaines; whom I have not heard named. On the Imperiall side slaine, The Abbot of Fulda by his place a Prince of the Empire. 2. the Count of Pappen∣heim, 3. Count Berthold Walenstein, 4. Sergeant-Major-Generall Breuner. 5. Lo, Westrumb, Lan, Comarga, Witzleb, and Foves: all (as I heare) Colonels. Together with Borda, Taxheim, Lampert, and Cammerhoff. Lieftenane-Colonels: besides Sergeant-Majors Captaines of Horse and Foote, and other Officers. Whereas therefore you have heard of Merode and Gallas, to be wounded to death; Ile assure you they were not in the Battell, nor was Holck wounded to death; nor at all: nor Pappenheim cut off by the middle; nor Isolani slaine: which man is still Colonell Generall of the Crabats; of which nation himselfe is. Our 2. Countrimen, were his prisoners; and they saw him at Prague: and describe him to be, an old beardlesse man, full of the palsie; a Gentleman of much va∣lour, courtesie, and extraordinary hardinesse of body. As this is true, so beleeue the rest of that Writer, that told you of the death of those great Imperialists. The Imperiall Ordnance, whose carriages had beene bur∣ned; were at the Swedes going towards Weissenfels Novem. 7th. slipt under the Castle walls of Lutzen: into which they put a garrison of 200. Muskettiers. For the drawing away of the rest; every Regiment was charged to take care of one: and to lend horses for the doing of it. That night went the Kings body to Weissenfels: where they found themselues to have gotten but a dolefull and a wofull victory: losing that incomparable Conqueror, who was alone worth 2. Armies.
The Rovall Body, was carried to Naumburg to be embalmed:The Kings Bo∣dy being em∣balmed: after which when the Armies went againe into the field, the dead King was carried along in his Chariot, marching be∣twixt the Horse and the Foot, in the middle of the Army. This so long continued, untill upon the comming of the Chancellor Oxenstiern, the Corps was sent with a mourning Convoye towards Spandaw,is convoyed into Spandaw. in his Brother of Brandenburgs country. And thus dyed this great Deliverer: which is a higher and a more holy Title, then that of Caesar, or of Con∣queror. Thus dyed he with a victory: which, had he expe∣cted but 3. dayes longer, he had obtained without a Battell. So confident was the enemy that he never durst have attemp∣ted them; that the Generalissimo had even already given out Orders, for the dispersing of his Army to their winter Quar∣ters. This is sure: for besides that it is intimated in my Spa∣nish Relation; the Imperialists themselues freely at Prague confessed it. Then had he falne in among them, as he thought to have done, the 5th. of November. But he is dead: and that as heartily bemoaned of the Germanes, (to say of no more) as of his owne Subiects: who yet professe their losse to be unspeakeable. And in both their Chronicles shall his sa∣cred memory be made immortall: and his Name shall ever live in their mouths, glorified. Speake we now a little, of the distemper in the Imperiall Army. When Walenstein first beate his Drummes, to retreate to Leipsich: he had purposed to have made no more then a faire retreate indeed of it. But no sooner did his men heare that signall: but they fell to running presently, without ex∣pecting further order for their Rendez-vous.The flight, and wonderfull confusion among the Imperialists. This fright was so great, that the most of them never came in order againe, till they recovered into Bohemia: yea even there, full three weekes after the Battell; were there divers multitudes of souldiers, and some almost whole Ensignes seene; then first enquiring after their fled Colonels: who had not yet seen their owne Regiments. And this was not onely so, with a great many straglers; but even amongst those that were neerest
about the Generalissimo: there was not a Regiment (scarce∣ly, if at all) that marcht or Quartered in any order; but strag∣lingly up and downe in Dorps, as every man shifted. Once did our Countrimen (that were carried away among them) see 25. Colours of them together: but this was in Bohe∣mia; and the greatest show that they had till that time seene of them. Divers Officers confessed, that they had lost 6000. men: which others made more nice of, and professed to have lost but 4000.Their owne confessions of the Battell. And as freely withall did they confesse, that had the Swedes but sent off 1000. fresh Horse after them, they might have cut all the whole Army to peeces. When in their Flight, (Retreate is now too faire a word for them) they came at night to any Quarter; their custome was to stay still there, till some Swedish Horse were heard of, or discove∣red to pursue them: of which though there appeared but a troope of 40. they had order to hasten away after the Generalissimo. This was the Crabats worke commonly: who being of the nimblest Horse; were still left last in the Quarters, and to bring word of the comming of the Enemy. And yet durst these, afterwards at Prague, contend for it; That they had as good of the Day, as the Swedish: for which their Arguments were, that they kill'd the King; much about as many men; and brought away almost 60 Ensignes. Had they onely mentioned the King, their argument had beene better, then their other reasons can make it. Tis true indeed that when our 2. Countrimen told Duke Bernard afterwards, that they boasted to have taken so many Ensignes:They tooke more Colours, then the Swe∣dish. nay (saies he) thats too lowd: but they have indeed taken 45. and we have 17. or 18. of their Colours. But, now, the losse of their Cannon, their leaving the field unto their enemies; and their right downe running away, when none pursued after them: the Court of Ʋienna it selfe can never speake with honour of it.How the newes of the Battell, was resented at Ʋienna. And therefore, there was but a faint Thanksgiving made for it: a few peeces shot off, but not a Bonfire that I heare
of: and that expression rather for the death of the King, and to make the people; then for the Ʋictory. The Victory, (absolutely,) must all forraine and Neutrall Historians, give unto the Swedish: which was such a one, as would have made Austria quak't, had the King surviu'd it. The Generalissimo having taken Sanctuary in Leipsich; there came the next day, some 1000. or 1500. Footemen to him: whereof some had Colours, and other some had lost them. These were the remainders of 40. Ensignes. A little after,The way of Wa∣lensteins flight. came the Lieftenant-Felt-Marshall Holck, with the Sergeant-Major-Generall, Count Ridolfo Coloredo, the Marquesse of Grande, and some others of great quality. And now also came their Baggage-Wagons: waited upon with a Horse-Convoye. In the night about 6. a clocke, were all these com∣manded to Born, 14. miles onwards of the way, towards Bo∣hemia: the Generall himselfe within three houres and a halfe (the same night) following them. Holck staid still in Leip∣sich: who going away next day, delivered up the Keyes un∣to the Magistrates againe; with such a like Complement. That he was now as good as his word, as it became every honest man to be. He hoped therefore, they would speake nothing but honour of him: and show themselues merci∣full (as became good Christians) unto such sicke and woun∣ded, as he left in their towne behind him. That day, some 16. or 17. troopes of Horse passed by, in sight of the City, with abundance of the Boores Cattle, going towards their Generalissimo. His Excellency, went not into Born, but Quartered that night hard by it. Thence went he to Altemburg; thence to Ca∣mitz: thence to Frawenstein: thence thorow the Passe of the Behemer-Waldt unto Diewitz in Bohemia: 30. miles short of Prague City. And now were the shattered troopes, dis∣persed into their winter Quarters: Walenstein himselfe with the remnants of the 2. Favourite-Regiments, of young Wa∣lenstein, and old Brenner, going directly towards Prague City. These 2. Regiments, for their good service at the
Battell, & their diligent attendance upon him in the flight: he ordered to waite upon him in his owne Palace; and by Squa∣drons to keepe guard about him. They were as his meniall servants; they had their allowance for a standing table in his Court; his owne people served them: and he himselfe sometimes would see they had their allowance. These were relieved, (that is changed) every 8. dayes: and then had every man 6. or 8. Bohemian dollars given him (each worth 3s. English) and their Wives or Wenches halfe as much. Examples of his vast bounty,Those Officers that did well in the Battell; he at New-yeeres-tide rewarded with Gold chaynes; with his owne Me∣dall or Picture at them: some of them (to the great Lords) being set with Diamonds; and worth 1000. ducats. Thus were all the Gold-smiths in Prague set a worke, upon his New-yeeres-gifts. And whereas there was a dispute betwixt Holck and Piccolomini, whose Regiment was that which charged, when the King was slaine; he adiudged it to Pic∣colomini; rewarding him with as much confiscated lands for it, as was better then 100000. pound Sterling. Holck he made Felt-Marshall, in place of Pappenheim; who is now the man that can doe all in all with him. And hereas the King of Denmarke (whose subiect Holck is) sent to command him home, under penalty of confiscating his goods: let him (saies Walenstein) Ile bestow tenne times so much up∣on him: giving him his choice thereupon, of any of these 4. Cities, Teplitz, Brix, Saiss, and Diewitz: the meanest of which had 16 or 18 pretty villages, belonging to the Lordship of it. And thus much, of the doings of the Im∣perialists, both in their flight and in Bohemia have I learned from Captaine Edward Feilding. Those that had done cowardly in the Battell, he said no∣thing of: but as they came to Prague, he seases and im∣prisons them. Of these by Christmas time, there were alrea∣dy 18. apprehended. Of whom, some were Counts and Ba∣rons: notwithstanding, wch, he February 4th. following, strucke
off eleuen of their heads upon a publike Scaffold.and severity. Some in∣feriour people, he hanged and headed in a baser fashion: o∣thers of their names, he caused to be hang'd upon the Gal∣lowes, and to be poasted up for cowards. One piece of mirth fell now out, as it were to vary this scene of Martiall severity. A young Colonell being brought upon the Scaffold, (which was iust before Walensteins window) began alowd; I come here to dye, for running away after my Generalissimo: but the Drummes strucke up, and the Trumpets sounded upon it; so that the short breath'd Orator could bee no further list∣ned to. And thus leave I our great Imperiall Generalissimo:The State he keepes. who keepes a State in Prague: no Maiestie in Christendome, com∣parable to him. About Christmas, was there a feare of Duke Bernards falling into Bohemia: whereupon such a puzzle there was amongst them, that Potents or Commands were presently given out, for the drawing of 6000. men towards the Frontiers. So easie was it to have conquered Walenstein and Bohemia. And now for that the contrarily affected may not say, that my Intelligence is particular, or all from one side: I will here affoord them the Relation made by the Spanish Gentleman before quoted; fairely, barely, without additions or altera∣tions translated: the originall whereof I am ready to com∣municate unto any ingenuous Gentleman. Two or 3. other Relations (I confesse) I have in French, printed at Brussels: which are so ignorantly and insolently done; that even that side may be ashamed to give credit to them. I have taken no∣thing out of le Soldat Suedois; for that ther's litle but words in him. Two or three High-Dutch pieces, and some Latine also I have by me, as foolish as the former: but this onely of the Spaniard, I have thought worthy your perusall.
THE morning began to peepe, when newes came that the King now altogether in Battell-ray did march up to∣wards us: whereupon His Excellency presently cast his Ar∣my into that forme, which appeareth in the Figure, leaving a little way on the right hand some Wind-mills, according to the disposition and necessitie of the situation. The King had in the meane while, put his Army right opposite to ours, not full distant the reach of a Cannon: approaching with his left Wing neere upon Lutzen; and with the right, touching upon a little Wood: which also was very neere united with his Front. In this order did his Excellency stay, till the King should begin to moove: wee having a small ditch along the Front of our Army. The King mooved soone after, with all his forces, making a show that he was resolv'd to invest vs, some-while upon one side, some-while upon the other. At length, hee set upon us in the Front, and sent his Cavallery of the right Wing, to overturne ours. By reason hereof, we were forced to retire our Baggage which was upon our left Wing, quite behind all our Army, to the end it should not be cut off from us. Thus began the Encounter with equall order, and continuall shot of Cannon: which did on each side mutuall hurt: every one striving to get forward, thorow the midst of mortalitie and slaughter of men, for to drive the enemy out of his place. The Earle of Pappenheim came in at the very beginning of the fight, with some Regiments of Horse and Dragooners: whom hee instantly carryed into the left Wing where it appear'd the King did charge with most ob∣stinacy. And here the Earle giving the onsett with his ac∣custom'd valour, was in the very beginning mortally woun∣ded by a Fauconett: so that being taken off his Horse to be brought to Leipsich, He ended his life before his Iourney: This valerous Cavalier having sacrificed himselfe to Gods service and the Emperours, in the most important occasion which ever hath offerd it selfe to benefit the Catholike Reli∣gion, and the whole House of Austria. In the meane time the Front of the enemies Army, got
ground apace,  Resolution: our Artillery being neuer able to disorder it though many a shot was made upon it: and being now comne neere the ditch which was made on our side, a great number of Muskettiers was let downe into it, from whence they gave us many good Salu∣ees. But especially did they powre lead, into the Regiment of the Colonell Piccolomini: Who after he had beene expo∣sed a-while to the discretion of those Muskettiers, determi∣ned to set upon them, and to drive them out of the Ditch. And this he did accordingly, with so fortunate a successe, that if he had beene seconded by other Regiments, no doubt but that part of the Enemies Army would have beene utter∣ly rowted. But there being none to backe him, and he fearing to be cut off from the Army, (if hee went too farre for∣wards) resolv'd to set with might and maine upon a Regi∣mentWinckles. of the Enemies, which He also utterly defeated, lea∣ving it stretched out upon the ground, in the same manner as it had stood before ordred in Squadrons. After Pappenheim was wounded, the Cavalry which he had led, never so much as turn'd their faces against the Enemy: whereby advantage was given him to get the better of our Foot also on the left side. For all this, on the right side was the fight maintained, with equall and all possible obstinacie: at which time, a newes being spread of the Kings death, it seemed that the Enemies Army began to give backe by little and little under the favour of a very thicke mist which was risen: insomuch that at first, it was not possible to finde where it stood: Here∣upon, for the present, the victory was held to be ours. We being desirous to goe forward to seeke out the Enemy, intel∣ligence was had, that he went to rejoyne his Squadrons a∣bout the Wood side: for which reason his Excellence sent his Colonels Tercica and Picolomini to take more exact notice of what was rumor'd. They being past on a little forward towards the Wood, saw the Enemy in full Battell-ray, marching up towards us: in as good an order as at the first. It was now very neere night; and our Army not well joyned
together: necessitie constrain'd vs to make a stay in our owne place, neere the Wind-mills, which the Earle Coloredo defended valerously. He being charg'd by forces, incompa∣rably much greater, should have beene forc'd to quit the Mills, had not his Excellency sent to his succour the Colonels Tercica and Picolomini with their Cavalry, to sustaine the shocke of those Foot; as in effect they did. It was now upon shutting in of the Euening, when the Enemy begin∣ning afresh a round Salvee of his Cannon, did notably annoy our troopes and was like to have done more harme, had not the Night come on. His Excellency, when he least fear'd such an accident,Then was hee not in his Lit∣ter, as Le Soldat Suedois geeres him. (being now in the Front of the Regiment of Picolomini, speaking with him) was hurt in the left arme with a Muskett Bullet: but (as we may say) almost miracu∣lously: since it did him no other harme, then to leave a blacke and blew mark behind it. His Excellency showed that day no ordinary valour, riding up and downe in the Front of all the Regiments: where from time to time necessitie call'd him: encouraging with his presence, every body to the accom∣plishment of their duty, being accompanied by the two Princes, brothers of the great Duke of Tuscany, of whom the one call'd Don Francisco lost his Horse he sate on by a Cannon Bullett. The Colonels Lò and Camargo dyed on the place Picolomini came off with ten Muskettado's, five wher∣of, wounded him in divers parts of the body; th'other five went no further then his armour. He lost foure Horses under him,In these foure numbers, lyes the chiefest of my Authors mis-intelli∣gence, or par∣tialitie. and three hundred of his best souldiers: His Sergeant-Major, two Captaines, and most of his officers were hurt. It is thought, that of our side, there dyed neere upon three thousand; but a great many more wounded. Of the enemies side, were lost neere sixe thousand, and as many more woun∣ded: it having beene the most bloody and obstinate Battell, which ever hath beene fought in Germany; especially in so small a number of the Imperialists which came not to twelve thousand, where on the other side, the Enemies Forces a∣mounted to above twentie thousand.
At length, the fight being ended by reason of the night; his Excellency, was not resolued whether he should keepe his army in that place, or else to retire to Leipsich. But having heard the opinion of all his greatest Officers, he determined, with their good liking, to retire to Leipsich, notwithstanding the arrivall of five RegimentsThis sets the report right for both sides. The Swedish say that the Pappenheimers came vp in the night: and the Imperialists affirme that they came not to the Battell. of Pappenheims now newly comne from Hall. Because it was probable feared that thorow the wearinesse of the souldiers, the number of the wounded, the excessive cold: and which was most materiall, lest tho∣row want of provisions in that place, the souldiers might scatter about the neighbour townes to provide themselues against their wants; and in the morning if need should be, none would be found ready for service. Hereupon our Army after three houres in the night, began to march towards Leipsich: who not being able for want of Horses and Boyes (who in the beginning of the Battell, were either kild or hurt) to cary off their Ordnance, left it there in the field; As the Enemy did likewise his owne,In these 2. re∣lations of the Swedes leaving their Cannon, and Gallas his ioyning, he had false Intelli∣gence. But this showes that Gallas was not in the Bat∣tell. marching on towards Naumburg. His Highnesse sent immediately for the Baron Gallas, who ioyned with him in Bennis with the forces he had: He sent likewise to fetch Monsier Altringer to come to him with his men, with an intent to make another grosse, wherewith to goe and defeate the troopes of the Enemy, which were left a-foote. His Excellency now being in Frawenstein, upon the Confines of Saxony and Bohemia, intends from thence to goe to Prague. In the beginning of the Encounter of both Armies, Inno∣centius Bucela Camrade of Piccolomini, knew the King; who lay hurt and dying upon the ground. Whereof having given notice to the Colonell; he wnt with him and ten more, to see the body which was yet quivering: and while they were about fetching of it away, a troope of the Enemyes charging, forced them to retire. The noise of his death, was presently scattered abroad; yet beliefe was not fully given to it by rea∣son of the relation which some prisoners made, as that the
King was hurt, but carrried off in a close Coach, following his white Standard. But an Astrologer entertained by his Ex∣cellency, being taken prisoner accidentally in the Battell, and ransomed eight dayes after; brought undoubted newes, that the King was wounded with a Musket in his arme and two Pistoll bullets, and falne downe dead in the field. The death of the King halfe verified the Prognostication of an Astrologer named David Herlicius of Stargard in Po∣merania; who said some moneths before, that the King should never passe over the Kiver of Elve againe: which he inter∣preting to his benefit; beleeved he should become Master of the Empire, (as among his Collegiates he was already repu∣ted,You have no word here, of the Imperialists arrogating of the Victory to their partie.) and cease to returne into Swedland, where is nothing else but craggy mountaines. But God who disposeth all things, hath made vaine the issue of that hope, and given us to understand, that to him alone is reserved the disposing of Empires. Printed with all necessary priviledge. In Lisbon. By Antonio Aluarez. 1633. Febr. 16.
THE EXPLICATION OF THE SEVERALL LETTERS and Numbers, in the Figure of the Battell of LVTZEN. The Imperiall Army. A VVAlensteins Right Wing of Horse. B His Battell or Body of the Foot: in the middle whereof is one Horse Regi∣ment. C His Right Wing of Horse. D The Towne of Lutzen. E The Wind-mills: upon the higher ground and hills whereof, he had planted some Ordnance. F Three other places, where he had planted Ordnance. G The Gallowes. H A dry Ditch or Boundary for lands, which Walenstein made to serve him for a Brest-worke, to lodge Muskettiers in. The Kings Army. I The Right Wing of the Kings Vant-guard; consisting of sixe Horse Squadrons, lined with five Bodies of Muskettiers. This was led by the King himselfe: whose place is over the letter I. K The Left Wing of the Swedish Vantgard, composed of Horse and Muskettiers, like the Right Wing. Of this, Duke Bernard had the leading: whose place is right over the letter K.
L The Fluss-graben. M The Kings Battell or Body of his Army; consisting of 8 Brigades of Foot: wherof 4 were in the Van, and 4 in the Reere. Each Brigade, hath 6 Peeces of Cannon before it. N The Millers house. O The towne of Chursitz. The Numbers of the Van, or first Front. The Right Wing. 1 The Finland Horse, commanded by Colonel Stolhanshe. 2 The West-Goths Horse Regiment. 3 The Ingermanlanders Horse. All these sixe Regi∣ments of Horse of the Right Wing, were the Kings owne Sub∣jects. 4 The Vplanders. All these sixe Regi∣ments of Horse of the Right Wing, were the Kings owne Sub∣jects. 5 The Ostro-Goths. All these sixe Regi∣ments of Horse of the Right Wing, were the Kings owne Sub∣jects. 6 The Smolanders, Sope All these sixe Regi∣ments of Horse of the Right Wing, were the Kings owne Sub∣jects. 7 All the 5 Bodies under the number 7, are the Commanded Muskettiers: which lined the Horse Squadrons: and were led by the Count of Eberstein. The Battell. 8 The first Brigade of Foot being all Swedish: belonging to Carl Hart, and led by his Lieftenant-Colonel. 9 The second Brigade of Foot, which was the Praetorian Regiment or the Life Gards, Dutch and Swedish: and led by Grave Neeles, a Swede. This was also called the Yellow Regiment.
10 The third Brigade of Foot, called the Blew Regiment, led by Colonel Winckle. 11 The fourth Brigade of Foot, commonly called the White Regiment, the Greene sayes Gallobel∣gicus. Made up of Duke Bernards, and Colonel Wildensteins Regiments: which Colonel, now led the Brigade. Here were 200 Scots in this Brigade. The Left Wing. 12 A Squadron of Horse of Duke Bernards. 14 Another of his. 15 Colonel Karbergs Regiment. 16 The Curlanders, led by Colonell Wrangle. 17 The Lieflanders, led by Colonel Tiesenhausen. 18 A German Regiment; led by Colonel Corvile. 13 All the 5 Bodies under this number 13, are the Commanded Muskettiers that lined this Left Wing of Horse: They were led by Col: Gersdorff. The Numbers of the Reere, or second Front. The Right Wing. The Horse of the Right Wing of this Reere, were Commanded by Colonell Bulach, Sergeant-Major-Generall of the Horse. 19 Duke William of Saxon-Weymars Regiment of Horse, led by his Brother Duke Ernestus. 21 Lieftenant-Generall Goldsteins Squadron: led by his Lieftenant-Colonel Rhelinger. 22 Generall-Major Bulachs owne Squadron. 23 Colonel Beckermans Regiment.
24 The Landtgrave of Hessens Regiment: made up of two weake Regiments: Colonell Rosteins, namely, and Colonel Dalwicks: this last Colonel, leading the Regiment. 25 Colonel Islers Squadron: who was a Sergeant-Major-Generall: though now he Commanded his owne men onely. 20 Vnder this number 20, are the 5 Bodies of Commanded Muskettiers, that lined the 6 Horse Squadrons. The Battell. 26 The first Brigade of Foot of the Battell, in the Reere or second Front; This was made up of two weake Regiments of the Elector of Saxonyes, and Duke Williams of Saxon-Weymar. This Brigade was led by Bosen, the Elector of Saxons Colonel. 27 The second Brigade of Foote, belonged to Colonel Kniphausen; Sergeant-Major-Generall of the whole Army: who Commanded all these foure Brigades in the Reere of the Battell. 28 The third Brigade of Foot, ledde by the Count of Thurn; In this was the Count of Eber∣steins weake Regiment, and some Hassians: which helped to make up the Brigade. 29 The fourth Brigade of Foot, led by Colonel Mitzlaff: made up of his owne, Gerstorffs, and Rosses Regiments. The Left Wing. 30 The first Squadron of Horse of the Reere of
this Left Wing: led by Baron Hoffkirck. These were the Elector of Saxonyes men; which hee sent unto the King, then at Norimberg. 32 A Squadron of the Prince of Anhalts. 33 The Count of Loewensteins Regiment. These had no Cornets, for that they were newly leuyed; and their Ensignes not yet made. They were led by their owne Sergeant-Major. 34 Colonel Brandensteins Squadron. 35 Colonel Steinbocks. These being the Kings ordinary Guards, were sent for up into the Front, and joyned to the Smolanders: the King himselfe figh∣ting at the head of Steinbocks Squadron. 36 Colonel Sticknits Squadron. Here were some French Horse. 31 Vnder this number 31. are the 5 Bodies of the Commanded Muskettiers, that lyned the Horse Squadrons. 37 A Reserve of Foot, for the Van of the Bat∣tell: led by Colonel Iohn Hinderson, a Scottishman. 38 A Reserve of Horse for the Reere of the Bat∣tell: led by Colonel Oeme, of the Lower Palatinate. Walensteins Army. 39 3 Squadrons of Crabats, Light Horsemen. 40 3 Squadrons of Crabats, Light Horsemen. 41 3 Squadrons of Crabats, Light Horsemen. 42 3 Regiments of Curiassiers, or men at Armes, being heauy armed Horsemen. 43 3 Regiments of Curiassiers, or men at Armes, being heauy armed Horsemen. 44 3 Regiments of Curiassiers, or men at Armes, being heauy armed Horsemen.
45 4 Regiments of Foote. 46 4 Regiments of Foote. 47 4 Regiments of Foote. 48 4 Regiments of Foote. 49 A strong Regiment of Horse of Piccolomi∣ni's in the head of the Battell. Here (tis said) Walen∣stein himselfe was. 50 4 Regiments of Foote: with some lynings of Horse amongst them. 51 4 Regiments of Foote: with some lynings of Horse amongst them. 52 4 Regiments of Foote: with some lynings of Horse amongst them. 53 4 Regiments of Foote: with some lynings of Horse amongst them. 54 2 Regiments of Horse with Foote among. 55 2 Regiments of Horse with Foote among. 56 3 Squadrons of Curiassiers. 57 3 Squadrons of Curiassiers. 58 3 Squadrons of Curiassiers. 59 Crabats.
The Swedish Intelligencer. THe Swedish Army having staid 2. dayes at Weissenfels, after their fatall and mourning Ʋictory; and having in that time, over-viewed and ordered their Army: they not as yet knowing, the fright the enemy was still in; or whither he might call Gallas and his Army to him: resolve to pursue, what the dead King had before the Battell purposed; which was to conioyne with the Dukes of Saxony and of Lunen∣burg. These 2. Dukes, indeed, had beene united with their 8000. men about Torgau; some fortnight or 3. weekes be∣fore the Battell: Lunenburg being marcht up so farre, so soone as ever Pappenheim had forsaken the Lower Saxony. And they now hearing of the Battell, and of the Imperi∣alists forsaking of Leipsich: begin to stirre for the recovery of it. Friday November 9th. a little after noone; some 10. or 12. Saxon Horsemen come to the Grimmisch port of Leip∣sich: where professing themselues to be Imperialists; they are admitted. Being gotten in, some one or 2. of them clogge up, and make good the gate; till another troope of their fellowes (then hard at hand) were comne into them.The Saxons recover Leipsich towne; The Court of guard at the Port, is cut in pieces: and much execution done upon the wearied and unprovided Imperialists. Towards night, the 2. Dukes of Altemburg and Lunenburg, with the 3. Colonells Hoffkirck Tauben & Pfort; attended on by 40. troopes of Horsemen and Dragooners: enter also into the City. These taking the absolute possession and Mastery of the Towne, give present summons to the Castle of Pleissenburg; where there yet was an Imperiall garrison. Satterday being the 10. they order the City, and prepare to besiege the Castle.and besiege the Castle. The 11th. they get up 3. Batteries, where Holck, had before done: and made like his, of Horse-dung and Woollsacks; with boords over them. That day, the Horse marcht out of the towne: and in the night, 500. Muskettiers came in place of them. Some also, were sent from the Swedish Armie: that all might ioyne together in the cleering of the countrie. All this day the ordnance thundred so vpon the castle, that a peece of the Bulwarke was beaten flatt downe with it. Mun∣day,
being the 12th, the castle, about noone, was againe sum∣moned: but the Gouernour Mozer, not onely sent his deniall to those Summons; but to all that should bee made after∣wards: which was, a vowe to live and die in his owne de∣fence: and as for mercie or conditions he expected none from them: nor would he accept of any termes, but what himselfe should offer them. Now therefore are the ordnance sett to argue the case forboth parties: at which mooting: we, for a while, leaue them; to tell what was in the meane time done in other parts of the Country. The Swedish Army being parted from Weissenfels, and Naumburg;The Swedish and the Saxons ioyne. Satterday November 10th. arrived at Pegau. The next day, they move to Born: and (thence as we told you) are some forces sent to Leipsich. Generall-Major Dodo Kniphausen having intelligence with the Burgers of Frieberg: reprises that by an Aenslaught; and cuts of some 3. or 400. Imperialists in it. Duke Bernard does as much, to 2. or 300. Crabats, in another little towne thereabouts. Munday No∣vember 12th. the Army marcht to Grim; where they found themselues to be some 12000. and hither came the Saxon and Lunenburgers Army to ioyne with them. And now it is a∣mongst them resolved; either to pursue the enemy, if he any where durst in the field abide them: or else to reconquer those townes of the Duke of Saxonyes: wherein the Generalissimo had left any garrisons. Chemnitz reco∣vered.Chemnitz is now first set upon, 30. miles up the same ri∣ver, due South from Grim, towards Bohemia. Here were the remnants of the 3. Regiments of the dead Comarga, Palant, and Contreras. Some service was on both sides done, before the towne would render: but my purpose being but to relate things brieflyer, now since the Kings death: I shal only affoord you the generall Acts and Articles. Vpon these conditions, was the place rendred. and the conditions.1. That the Imperiall Governour should give over the towne; and leave all his Gunnes, Ammunition, Victualls, and Ensignes unto the Swedes and Saxons.
2. That no Protestant, were he Ecclesiasticall or Laye-person; should bee forcibly carryed away by the Impe∣rialists: nor should any harme or damage bee done to them. 3. That the Imperialists should not, (either now or hereafter) make demands to the Elector of Saxonyes sub∣iects, of any thing due for Contribution or upon any o∣ther colour: nor should be troublesome to them for that matter. 4. The Governour, so soone as ever the Articles were sig∣ned; should deliver up the towne keyes: and should draw up all his souldiers together into the place of Parado, in the mar∣ket-stead: and that without matches lighted, or any corne of powder, or bullet of lead, about them. 5. Both Governour and souldiers, Ecclesiasticks, sicke and wounded people, should so soone as ever they requested it; have leave to goe out of the towne: but yet without sound of Drummes and Trumpets, and with no other wea∣pons, but their swords onely. 6. The Governour should have leave to carry away his owne baggage, upon his owne Horses and Waggons: of which, none of the other Officers, should have more then one apiece. As for the common souldiers, they should carry away no more, then they could beare upon their backs. 7. If any of the garrison were disposed, to turne to the Protestant Party: the Governour should attempt no∣thing against them, in preiudice either of their lives or honours. 8. The Governour and his souldiers should be convoyed as farre as Frieberg: who should be bound from plunde∣ring or burning any thing by the way, in the Duke of Saxonyes Dominions. And in lieu of the souldiers that should convoye them, they were to leave pledges for their safe returne: after which; the pledges should have their Passes.
9. In these Articles, should not those common harry∣ers and plunderers, the Crabats; by no meanes be compre∣hended. 10. If in any tittle, these Articles should be prooved to bee infringed; the Governour was to bee laid hold of: and the conditions to be of no force, against the besiegers. Shall I call these 10. Articles, or 10. Commandements? for as yet have I seldome read, that any enemy did not scorne to yeeld up his towne, upon such unsouldierly and dishonoura∣ble conditions: who was not forced by Storme, to yeeld at Mercy. Looke all History over; and you shall hardly find me 10. such Articles: scarcely worse; and upon that, I dare give you the booke you find them in. By this you see, what estate the Imperiall Army was in. Let all that side hereafter, for∣beare to say, that theirs had the victory at Lutzen; seeing that so suddenly after it, and within 25. English miles of Bohemia; 3. Imperiall Regiments did yeeld up such a towne, upon such pittifull conditions. Chemnitz being taken; the Swedish Army is devided: Ge∣nerall-Major Kniphansen,Kniphansen goes to Leip∣sich Castle. being with some forces sent to Leipsich, to hasten on the taking of the Castle: whilest Duke Bernard sent out Partees every way, to skowre the coast of the Imperialists. Kniphansen being comne to Leipsich; and some greater peeces of Battery brought thither from Dres∣den; the siege is gone on more sadly withall. I find (I con∣fesse) writing for 2. or 3. sallyes made by the Imperialists: and of an offer made by the besiegers, to breake the ground and to begin their Approaches, (one Moone-light night) right against the Thomas Gate. But I write no more parti∣culars. Let it suffice to know, that on Sunday December 2d. the Governour Mozer (for all his stoutnesse) as faine to condiscend to these 9.Pleissenburg Castle taken, Articles: which had they beene of his making (which he before protested to stand upon) I suppose they would have beene more favourable to his party.
1. That the Governour with his Officers and souldiers, that defended the Castle; as also the Ecclesiasticks,the Conditions sicke and wounded people, shall depart out of it the day fol∣lowing. 2. The Governour shall be bound, either this night, or to morrow morning; to deliver up his prisoners, whither Churchmen, or of the Laity. 3. That neither Governour nor souldiers, shall now or hereafter, pretend any thing upon the subiects of the Elector of Saxony. 4. The Governour and his Officers shall have leave to car∣ry away their owne baggage: provided there were nothing amongst it, belonging unto any of the Electors subiects. As for the common souldiers, they shall march out with no more, then they could carry upon their shoulders. 5. The Governour shall leave all his Ordnance, Artillery, Ammunition, Provisions, Armour, and whatsoever else was necessary for defence; behind him in the Castle. 6. And so shall he doe with his Ensignes, if he hath any. 7. The Governour shall not onely be bound, but give sureties for it; that he should have no powder-mines in the Castle: nor should his souldiers doe any other wrong to it, at their departure. 8. The Governour shall pretend nothing, either against their lives or honours; that were disposed to turne to the Protestant party. 9. Lastly, That by vertue of this agreement, the Gover∣nour with his Officers and souldiers, might freely come out of the Castle; and should have a Saxon Convoye, even to the Frontiers of Bohemia: provided that he left hostages for the returne of the Convoye. Articles, within a very little, as lowly as the former: and yet upon these was Pleissenburg Castle rendred, December 3d. being Munday. The Saxons having delivered the Impe∣rialists upon the Frontiers of Bohemia; the Boores there,
not suffering them to enter: beate them backe as farre as An∣naberg in Misnia: where they were forced to become Swe∣dish. This I find writing for: but I wonder how Walenstein would use these Boores for it? I passe by smaller rencounters; because I hasten (like the Swedish) to cleere the greater townes, of the Imperialists. And they, it appeares, made such hast to do it, that they gave farre better conditions to the next towne, (for a packing penny) then they had done to both the former. Twas now in the depth of Winter; when as the souldiers would faine be in their Quarters; and their two Commanders (Duke Bernard and Kniphansen) at Dresden. Thither the Protestant Princes, began to come and send, to the holding of a Dyet: and to consult together, how the Warres were to be prose∣cuted, now after the death of the great Director of the Warre; the incomparable King of Sweden. Pleissenburg Castle being taken, and restored (like Chem∣nitz) to the Elector of Saxony: Generall-Major Kniphausen goes with the Army unto Zuicka; which by this time Duke Bernard had given a girdle to. And now are the Saxon For∣ces, returned againe towards Silesia: for that thereabouts, the Imperialists began a-new to bustle. The Baron de Suvis, was now Governour of Zuicka: and he preparing for defence, burnes downe the Suburbs; forti∣fies and mans the great Church, the Towne-house, and Ca∣stle. Duke Bernard and Kniphausen (to be briefe) making up Batteries of Timber-worke; upon the fifteenth of Decem∣ber,Zuicka rendred, began to talke in the tone of thunder to them: By this, in ten dayes space, the besieged were brought downe to lower and milder language: and contented upon Christmas Day, to take this cold Pye to their dinners. Then were these Articles concluded upon. 1. That by 5. a clocke on Saint Iohns day in the morning, the Governour and souldiers,and the conditions. belonging either unto his Im∣periall Maiesty, or unto the Catholike Leaguers; should with flying Ensignes, Drummes beating, matches lighted, bullet
in the mouth, and full Armes; depart out of the City: carrying along with them, some field pieces; of powder, bullet, leade, and match, of each 2000. weight. 2. That the Foote forces, shall take all their Horses, Wa∣gons, Baggage, Moveables, and their Leaguer-servants; along with them, without molestation. 3. That the Horsemen, servitors either to the Emperor or the Leaguers, of what nation or quality soever they are; shall have leave to march out compleatly. That is to say, with Horses, Saddles, Pistols, Carabines, and Cornets: and with their Baggage in like manner, as was granted to the Foote-forces. 4. That the Imperiall Commissary Conradus à Schleisburg; shall also be comprehended in the Treaty. 5. That the sicke and wounded men, shall goe out upon the same termes with the other: who if they want wagons to carry them away; the Duke will please to allow them some: or else to suffer them so long to stay in the City, and be carefully looked unto, till they be thorowly cured. After which, they shall be suffered to depart, without molesta∣tion. To this end, shall order be given to the Swedish and Saxon souldiers; that the Baron De Suvie and his souldiers (Horse and Foote) be suffered to depart, without wrong or molestation. 6. The Swedish assure also, that they shall not goe about, either by money or other wayes; to debauch or inveigle away any of the Imperiall souldiers, into their service. 7. The departing Imperialists, shall have a sufficient Con∣voye, (of 2. or 300. Horse at least) under some Commander; to guard them as farre as Preswitz in the way to Commotha: who shall not enforce them to march above 2 Dutch leagues a day. Vpon these honorable conditions, went the Baron De Su∣vis out of Zuicka: attended with a garrison of 1150. Foote, under 5. flying Ensignes: and 600. Crabats, with some o∣ther Horsemen. Two hundred and fifty Waggons-loade of
Baggage and Ammunition, he had along: and was, in state and leisure, conveyed into the very borders of Bohemia. The Swedish, towards the end of the Market, were contented to affoord good penny-worths: for this being the last towne of the Elector of Saxonyes, possessed by the Imperialists; the countries of Saxony, Ʋoitland, and Misnia, were now quite cleered of them.The Army put into Quarters. And then was the over harassed, tyred, and victorious Army, put into their winter-Quarters. And by this time was that wise States-man, the Rex-Chancellor Axel Oxenstiern,Oxenstiern com∣ming, comne into the Countrey. He first convoking the Military Commanders, unto Altemburg, (as I take it) some part of the glorious Conquerors Will and Testament, was made knowne unto them. And whereas the King in his life time,the Army is, devided. had appointed Dodo Kniphausen to goe with an Army into the Lower-Saxony; and to have the Title of a Felt-Marshall: the Swedish Army is thereupon divided; part remaining to that valiant young Prince Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar, and another smaller part, going along with the new Felt-Marshall. Kniphausen made Felt-Marshall: and sent into the Lower-Saxony.Both these Armies, (as also all those other of the severall Swedish Commanders about Germany) were to take their or∣ders and directions, from the Lord Chancellor: who was to command all in chiefe; by vertue of the Commission which the King had given him: of being Ambassador to the Armies. This is that ancient and honourable Title among the Romanes, called Legatus ad exercitus: For the pleasure therefore, and better understanding of the Readers; give me leave to rubbe up my old notes, and to deduce this Office from Antiquity. The Romane Senate, still used to send some of the prime Nobility, and skilled in the warres, unto the Generall: whose counsells and directions he was to have regard unto, in all but in the manner of fighting the Army. Twas the honourablest military employment of all, and the most reverend. The Am∣bassador to the Armies, hath in him both the power of a Generall, and the sacrednesse of a Priest: sayes Dionysius lib. XIo. speaking of Lucius Siccius. Hence the Greekes stiled
them  & ; Elders and Counsellors. When there was a Romane Dictator (an absolute soveraigne and Military Emperour, or more) then he appointed this Ambas∣sador. Then also he commanded him: and so did the Consul too, when he was abroad as Generall of the Army. Dolobella me sibi Legavit; saies Cicero, Consull, Generall Dolobella, hath appointed me his Ambassador. Their place was above the Tribunes. They were chosen out of the Senators: and when there was no Dictator upon the Army; then had they a so∣lemne election by the whole Senate. Legati ex Senatorū ordi∣ne: and, ex Senatoria authoritate legarentur, sayes Cicero. Chosen out of the Senate, and by it. Legati, publicè lecti; quorum operâ consilioque uterentur, peregrè Magistratus. They were chosen publikely: and the Magistrates sent abroad into the Provinces, were to use their counsell and assistance. Cicero in Ʋatin: calls them Nuncios pacis & belli: Curatores, In∣terpretes: bellici consilij Auctores; Ministros muneris Provin∣cialis. Heralds and Denouncers of peace and warre: Curators and Interpreters, Authors of military directions; Administra∣tors of the affaires in the Provinces. In this they differed from the Imperator or Great Gene∣rall. Aliae sunt Legati partes, aliae Imperatoris. Alter, omnia agere ad praescriptum, alter liberè ad summam rerum consulere debt, sayes Caesar: The Generall is to execute according to the words of his Commission: but the Ambassador, may ex∣traordinarily give his advice, upon the highest point of the businesse. In the Generalls absence from the Army, the Am∣bassador kept the state: he had his Lictors and his Secures; his Sergeants with the Axe and Rods to goe before him. Verres in Achaiam, sumptu publico & legationis nomine; eum imperio & securibus missus est: saies Cicero. Ʋerres was sent into Achaia upon the charges of the Common-wealth; and the title of an Ambassador: with command and state. There were 2. degrees of these Ambassadors, among the Romanes: Consulares, and Praetorij. The first sort, was for the whole Army: the other were but Duces, Colonels to their
Brigades, Regiments, or Divisions. Augustus Caesar, did all a∣broad in the Provinces, by the first: whom Tacitus cals Con∣sulares. And of this dignity (as neere as ancient orders may be compared to new imitations) is the Lord Axel Oxenstiern, Baron of Kimith, Lord of Fiholmen and Tydoen, Praesident of Lapland and of the North Marches, Knight, &c. Councellor and Chancellor of the Kingdome of Sweden; and Ambassador Generall unto the Armies in Germany. And here must I conclude my Story (my unpolisht and un∣worthy Story) of the most incomparable valiant and good Prince; that ever (yet) honored any age or Story. The Protestāt and well affected party (me thinks) may well be compared unto the 2. Bookes of the Prophet Ieremy. Experience, is a kind of Prophet. People, therefore, certaine in experience of what he had done; were so strong in hopes, of what he would doe: that they even seem'd to prophesie. But now, alas! when their hopes are fail'd, they conclude with Ieremies La∣mentations: Iosiah is dead, and well they may lament him. How likely, (had God spar'd him life) he was to have fulfil∣led all mens hopes;) and how deservedly, he is now to be la∣mented: See here (good Readers) by this following, course Character of him.
The Character Of the High and Mighty Prince, and most victorious Conqueror Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, &c. Wherein the best of those conceits, in Le Soldat Suedois, are not neglected. THat this Prince was a Descen∣dant by the Male-line, not from a Kingly Stemme, onely, but from a Family of Deliverers: and that his Nobility by theBy his great Grandmother; descended of the ancient Gottori and Fu∣cones, Dukes & Kings of Swe∣den. His Father line being from Trolle and the Trollioes, Knights and Councellors of Sweden, of 400. yeers standing. A Knight, of a Knights family there; is equall in esteeme with them, as a∣mongst us those are, of the Garter. Females, is of a more ancient extraction, then the vulgar He∣raldry hath yet taught us: are the advantages of his Birth, the additions to his Inheritance, and the com∣mendations of his Fortune. Nor could lesse be expe∣cted to the propagating of such a Prince; then a Crowned Merit and Nobility; in his Ancestors. And that, not of the first head onely: least it should have beene mistaken for a chance of Natures, and not an
Industry: but to produce the Conqueror of Germany, there was the preparation of many Ages, required. Like as in the delicatest Fruite-trees: tis not enough, that the Cyon be of a noble Stocke; but that it be bet∣tered by many Engraftings and Removings. Ancient, descending, and continued Merite and Nobility, derived from the loynes of many Ancestors: nothing lesse could have begotten such a King of Sweden. Sweden glories in his Birth;He was borne in December 1594. thats Her honour: but his Pe∣digree and Alliances, are from Germany. The more kindly and naturall, therefore, was his ambition to de∣liver it; and the lesse exception lay there, to his be∣ing a Stranger. To be a signe, of whence he was de∣scended; were his 2. names given him. Gustavus, hath beene the ancient Christian name of divers of the Kings of Sweden: though none of them till his carrying it, put the world into the conceit, that it was the Anagramme of Augustus. Adolphus hath beene the bearing of the Houses of Holstein and of Mecklenburg; from both which, he lineally was ex∣tracted. So was He borne, and thus Christned. His youth was bred up, with royall exercises: such as might season him with Vertue and Religion, and prepare him for grand businesses. His body, though brought up, Princely; yet not Cocknied up, tenderly: nor with too much soft, and warme, and gaye, and sweete; effeminated. The Poets faine, that Mars was borne in this Country: who had never prov'd the God of Warre, had not his body beene enured to the Frost, and Ice, and Rocks, and hard∣ship of this Northerne Clymate. His spirit, was by the
tutorage of the best learning and examples, elevated; to esteeme no good designe too high for him: forti∣fied with a courage, that knew not how to stoope beneath a King; and (like his sword, afterwards) tem∣pered with so irresisteable, and steely an edge, as should cut thorow all dangers and necessities. At home, he learned Latin; in Italy, Mathematicks; o∣there where abroad, the French, Italian, and Germane languages: all which as he learned very readily, so he spake as promptly and elegantly. Travaile refin'd and furnisht him: yea he privately travailed Germany, under the concealed name of Mr.This assumed appellation, was made up of the 4. first letters of his Title Gustavus Adolphus Rex Suecia. GARS, even af∣ter he was King of Sweden. At 16. yeeres old, he was not onely a souldier, but a Colonell; and though the youngest, yet (per∣chance) not the unskilfullest, of his Fathers Army. Next yeere, which was Anno 1611. King Charles his Father dyed: when himselfe, then but a Minor of 17. yeeres of age, was called to the Kingdome. The entry into his reigne, was the tryall of his education: his Father left him embroyled with the Dane and Muskovite; and shortly after, began the Polander to confront him. The pretences of these Princes, were indeed much different: but in the ruine of a young King, they all had the same intentions. Poland clai∣med the Crowne; Denmarke and the Muskovite; put in to recover what bordering lands they had before claimed; and which, had either beene conquered from them, by his Ancestors, or freely for merite granted them, by the others. I will not write a Story, where I intend but a Character. Let this suffice to
know; that he gate the better of all 3. Nations, both upon the greene grasse, and upon the greene Carpet: in the field, I meane, and upon the Treaty. Two of his young schollers prizes, twere pitty to passe over. In his warre with the Muskovite, hee would needs lay siege to Notteburg Castle:Anno 1617. which among other lands, the Muskovite had granted his Father, for his service. The place of this, is upon an Iland; in the middle of the mouth, of the most ra∣ging swift river of Nerva, and at least Culvering shot, from either shoare of it. His Colonells, not willing their young King should receive a checke in his rising fortunes, by attacking an impossibility: diswade the Action; himselfe onely remaining con∣stant to pursue it. See how God Almighty made our young Iosua, to be honoured among his people. The Muskovites proved to have such thrushes,See the booke called Descrip∣tio Regni Sueciae. and warts, and blisters, growing in the insides of their throates and mouthes; that they could neither feede nor swallow: so that having abundance of Ammu∣nition, and a whole yeeres victualls by them; yet came they out and yeelded up the Castle to him. An inpregnable piece! which could neither be battered, starved, nor have a bridge laid over to it. That yeere, tooke he another Castle, almost as strong: whereup∣on the Muskovite was glad to make King Iames his good friend, to procure his peace with the young Sweden. Some while after this, had he a difference with the Dantzickers: who man'd out 20. or 30. good Ships of Warre; with the first opening of the Spring,
to have burnt up his Nauy in the Harbour. Twas about the end of winter then, when his long and nar∣row Swedish Sea, was a yeard or two deepe frozen. This Ice, our young King causing his Boores (for 10 or 12. English miles together) to cut open; came with his Fleete in the night, upon the Dantzickers; and burnt, sunke, spoyled, or tooke the most of them. In his Warres with his Vnckle Sigismund King of Poland, hee conquered so many townes from him, both in Prussia and Livonia: that the Pole was en∣forced to request the mediation of King Charles and the French King, to make up a peace for 6.Sir Thomas Ro was our Kings Ambassador. yeeres betwixt them: which he afterwards desired to be perpetuated. This was concluded September 29. 1629. King Sigismund acknowledging Gustavus A∣dolphus to be King of Sweden; and in his Treaty, so styling him. And thus, wheresoever this young Mars entred; the dread of his Armes and Name, were as full of terror to the enemy-Country,Annibal ad port. as Annibal sometimes unto the Romanes: nor ever returned he out of them, but with the Olive and the Palme branches; the Em∣blemes of Peace and Victory. But these Northern Trophyes upon his next neigh∣bours, though they had much of glory; yet have they much of Credit and possibility, also in them: but Chronicle and Beliefe must straine hard, to make his Germane Conquests any thing probable, with poste∣rity: and were they not written in the times of the doing, and acknowledged by his enemies: scarcely
would the Legend be more Apocryphall. For what credulity, (not facile to be abused) could perswade it selfe, that 2. third parts of Germany, could (and by him that entred but with 11000. men) in 2. yeeres and 4. moneths space, be wrested from so puissant an Emperour? A mighty Empire and a Potent; formidable for its greatnesse, confident upon the power of its Colleagues and Vpholders: vast in its extent, terrible for its Armes and Captaines; renow∣ned for its Conquests, beyond expectation, successe∣full in all its enterprises: and that knew no bounds, but the Alpes and the Ocean. And yet this Empire, which either with its Armies, or garrisons: if not by a cheaper way, the meere reputation of what it had, or might doe; held so many Princes at a Baye: was it selfe constrained to take on the yoake, which Swe∣dens Gantlett put upon it. In lesse then 2. yeers and a halfe, he did all this: what might He more haue atchieved, had he gone on another yeere and two moneths: and fil'd up the time of that malicious and false prediction, which the Iesuites had cast abroad of him? They comforted their credulous Novices, with his being Antichrist; and that he should raigne 3. yeeres and a halfe, and no longer. The beleefe of his conquering so much, will be the more facilitated: if we could but conceive (once) his familiar way of doing it: he made but a Comedy of the warres: which others are so solemne upon; and make so full of Tragedy. I will giue but two examples. Comming before Elbing with an Army, scarce so strong as their garrison; he after Summons
and Hostages; wormes out by faire words, the Bur∣gomaster and some great ones, to his Tent unto a Parlee. Himselfe, in the meane time, with some few of his Gentlemen, goes to the Ports and desires to come in as a travayler, to please his sight with the rarities of their City. Such pleasancy of words and conceit he used, that the Citizens were as desirous to see the King of Sweden, as he to take their City. Being in, he walkes gazing up and downe, the peo∣ple flocking still after him. Now in truth good peo∣ple (saies he) if I had thought you had desired to see the King of Sweden, I would have put on my best cloathes to day. What need you feare me? my Swedes and Fins shall be your drudges, cleave wood, fetch water, and doe you any servility: and with that he calls a stubbed Finn to him, and commands him to remoove some lumber, or piece of rubbish. This said, he goes into a Stationers shop, and there calls for Buchanans Poemes: iust as in such a case Alexan∣der sometimes did, for Homers Iliades. And thus the Burgomaster knowing, that the King was in the towne; and He being sure, that the Burgomaster was in His Tent: the composition became the easier. At that very strong towne of Konigshoven in Franconia, after this; showed he another example of this face∣tious facility. Having summoned the towne, hee rides up along towards the Ports: where when hee saw the guards blowing their matches, and making ready to shoote him: Sacrament (saies he) if you make but one shot, the King shall know of it; and he hath vowed that not a man of you shall have Quar∣ter.
But if you will treate fairely, you shall have your owne conditions. This was his order (mostly) in taking of a towne: he would not stand entrenching and building Redoubts, at a miles distance: but clap downe with his Army presently, about Cannon shot from it. There would he begin his Approaches, get to their walls, Batter and Storme, presently: and if he saw the place were not by a running pull to be taken: he would not lose above 4. or 6. dayes be∣fore it; but rise and to another. And thus did hee at Ingolstat. Tis a hard taske to give you the iust portraiture of this Prince: he was so perpetually in action, that he seldome gave himselfe time to sit, to have it ta∣ken. But these (in generall) are the rough drawings of his personall excellencies. He bare a Port and Presence, full of a gracious Majestie; full flesht, and fac't: a rich and a gallant stature, 2. yeards and a∣bove: a hawkes eye; the world thought an Eagles. His more then flaxen-coloured haire, inclined to the colour of Apolloes: a signe hee had much of the Sunne in him. His tone of speech, was of a manly and a masterly pronunciation: and his answers were quicke, full, smart, but not gybing: cleane limb'd he was, strong, active, and hardy: made up as fitly for a King, as for a Generall. But for the guest that raigne in this Palace, & actuated it; his mind, and his spirit: thats to be best guessed at by his Conquests. An vndaunted courage, a strong iudgement, an ad∣mirable quicknesse of conceit, a naturall vigilancy and indefatigablenesse, a marvailous forecast, with
the best advantage to apprehend and dispose of his occasions: these were his personall forces, that con∣quered so much of Germany. Looke else into his Lea∣guer. See there his encamping, his fortifying, his new wayes of fighting, and embatteling; his orders, his provisions, his directions, and the soule and spi∣rit of all these, his owne diligences: and then tell me, how he were easie to be resisted. An excellent dex∣terity besides, was he endowed withall, to extricate and untangle the Gordian knottinesse of a businesse; the master-spirit he had, over all that came before him; a gift, withall to take the advantage of mens humours; and a native attraction in him, to winne hearts, as well as Provinces. A great Student hee was, upon any businesse of importance: and when his Chancellor was with him, a diligent disputer and Can∣vasser of the Answer, which he was to give to Am∣bassadors. He would have the proiecting of the designe, still to passe from his owne invention; seldome calling a formall Councell of Warre; and yet not despising to aske upon the Bye, the advises of his Commanders. He contented not himselfe to be the Generall of an Army, but he would be a Captain, yea a Sergeant of a band; an Enginier, a common souldier, a Canonier: all, or any thing. The surprise and suddennesse of a danger, seldome astonied his iudgement: but the more desperate the peril were, the nimbler, common∣ly, was he in his deliveries; still shewing most vigor, where there was most need of it. There was not an enterprise to be gone upon, not beneath the honour
of a Colonell; but let the danger be what it would, he would leade on the Partee. And twas an asto∣nishment to behold, that he was not onely not worne out with the affiduity of his labours and his hard∣ships; but that he battned and grew fat upon action: comming fresh off from one, and still prest and rea∣dy for another enterprize. Hee grew fat, I say, not with eating and drinking; no Prince was more tem∣perate then he, those wayes. His feeding was upon strong and souldierly dishes: not such delicacies, as were dainty of taste, and easie of digestion; but such lusty, bearing meates, as would encrease strength, and make resistance in the stomacke. Drinking, he was not taxt for: and notwithstanding it be the Nor∣therne way of sinning; yet came not he to out-drinke the Germanes: they were not that way to be conque∣red. Briefly, that Northerne corner of the world, hath not brought forth a Prince of his temper, and temperance; or a man so generally well put together, in all imaginable abilities and perfections; to make a Generall of. And so much, have the contriving and conduct of his designes, manifested; which hee had even almost given their period unto. I have left out the best part yet; and that was his Religion: his devotion in his Religion, (publike and private) and his frequent Prayers and Thanksgivings, (especially upon all eminenter occasions) were the things that rendred him admirable. He would pray a ship-board, and a shoare; in the Field, and in the midst of a Battell: as if Prayer alone, were the su∣rest piece of all his whole Armour. And in his open
Prayers, this one thing is of all the rest, most conside∣rable; That as other times he had sworne, publikely sworne; that his purposes were not to Conquer, but to Deliver: so in his Prayers for divine assistance, would he boldly appeale to God the searcher of the hearts, that Hee knew his intentions to be no other. That a Prince, now, should thus dare it in the face of Heaven; and call downe iust vengeance from thence, if hee meant not Gods glory in sincerity: they must bee his enemies, that will not beleeue it. The greatest imperfection of his body, was that his eyes, were dimme sighted: that though he could forsee, no eye better, yet could he not discerne farre from him. The greatest infirmity of his mind, was his Cholericknesse: a passion, indeed which he could not so well controll; and which would easily, now and then, burst forth, upon a slight, or imaginaned provocation. But this was an inbred humour, not a humorousnesse in him: and the usuall uncorrected vigourousnesse of those Spirits it is, that have a rich∣er allowance of Spirit and Fire in them. This though it must be confessed, to be a peccancy, and a distem∣per; yet is it to be observed withall, that of the pre∣dominancies of the 4. Humours, this principally ren∣ders a man fit for action. And truely, it might in him the better be excused, for that he was still enchaft with businesses; and had so many dispositions of men, and successes of affaires, to encounter withall: espe∣cially sometimes, when he found but awckward∣nesse. This fault indeed, was he noted for: and tis for him that writes his Apologie, not his Character; to
denie or defend it. And yet this helpe there was for it: that vpon a very litle consideration, he would take himselfe with the maner, and take vp, presently: and with a gratious debonnairenesse and sweetnesse, which was naturall to him, giue checke to the ouer∣lashing of some lesse aduised and indigested speeches, that had in choler slipt from him. Ready, besides, of himselfe, he was, to giue satisfaction: not vnto the Grandees and Chiefes onely of his Armies, whose merits and seruices might take the more exceptions to such vsage: but euen to the common souldiers also, who ought not to stand vpon such puntilioes with a King their Generall. This would he doe easily; es∣pecially where he found himselfe vsed like a King, and sued vnto. Himselfe would say, when he tooke notice now and then, of this touchinesse of his owne nature, so apt with a little spark to take fire: That he must endure, ever and anon, the diversities of their humours; the flegme of some, and the drinke of others: and that in e∣quity, therefore, they ought something the better to beare with his cholericknesse. And an indifferent temper in men, would have passed by this infirmity in him; could they have but consideted the multitudes and varieties of those greater thoughts, which were still agitated in that ever working braine and spirit of his; wound up, and labouring upon the stretch, without intermission. A man, me thinks, should doe with a bad humor in a Prince, as with a bad Angell: give him his full Graines, and Allowances; and then weigh him. But if you please to put into the either skale,
those extraordinary many vertues in him: his sweet∣nesse of disposition, his easinesse of accesse, the fami∣liarnesse of his carriage, his care that every common souldier should have his due, and his moderation in the greatnesse of his successes, not thinking his shad∣dow one spanne the more spreading; then surely, the beame would so cast it on the better side, that his choler would seeme but as the dust of the balance, to them. But yet another fault was there in this most excel∣lent Prince, which (now) hath spoyl'd all the rest. That, namely, his courage suffered his Iudgement no better to distinguish, betwixt the duties of a com∣mon Carabin, and a Generall of an Army; but would adventure the King, as farre as the Leader of a Partee: and that, by consequence, he tooke no better care for the saving and sparing of the best blood of the Army; but was too too prodigall an unthrift of it. The marvaile is not, that he was so hazardous of it, in a Cause so glorious; but that in all those encoun∣ters, he lost no more of it: his owne life, perpetually, being as farre and forwardly engaged, and still run∣ning the same hazards; with the meanest of his Ar∣my. But yet for taking off this blame from him; this, in his discharge, is to be said: That that natu∣rall constitution of his, not of fire onely, but of flame, made all the valour and couragiousnesse of his Ar∣my, behold unto his example; and that the well speeding of his so many victories, was principally to be ascribed to his presence in the encounters: the very sight of such a Leader, like some puissant Aspect
in the heavenly Constellations, infusing a secret in∣fluence and irrradiation of courage into his owne; and of fright and terrour, into his enemies. And by these excellencies, arrived he to this height of glory: even of a military glory. And see what a true-rais'd Fame can doe! it hath something in it, not onely beyond the nature of an Eagle, but of a Starre, too; for the higher aire this Prince wrought himselfe up into, the fuller, still, and the liker Statua, his vertues have appeared; and he big∣ned upon the eye of envie, in his Mountie. Bo∣dies meerly up of craft or fortune, doe out of cun∣ningnesse affect to conceale their owne greatnesses. Like Mercury among the Plantets: who though of a fiery and a flushing luster: yet so politicke a Courtier and close a waiter he is, (and that upon in∣dustry:) as by ever crowding neer the Sunne, he hath gained to walke so farre obscured under his Masters glories; that his devoutest servants (the Astronomers) can seldome or never procure the sight of him. Wher∣as Bodyes made up of true worth and substance; are like the Sunne it selfe, then arrived to the brightest of their Beauties, when in the highest degree of their Exaltations. And this is something, towards the Character of the King of Sweden, whilest he was. And alas that I must say, Whilest he was! Now would I give all my part in Grammer, to alter but one Tense, and to say He is. But because He is no more amongst us, this Character and Story of his, may serve in stead of his Picture; to conserve his memory. I confesse I
am not Limner cunning enough, to give every part of him, his true stelling and proportion: nor have I the Art, either with sweete touches or bold and ma∣sterly stroaks, so to heigthen up my Peece, or make it to stand off, as every way to be like him. In this onely doe I please my selfe, that those who have had the honour to be about his person; may here refigure a touch or two, that come something neere the Life of him. This also I assure my selfe of, that those no∣bler foes, who have sometimes beene made feele his Armes: will be amongst the liberallest to contribute towards his praises; if it be but onely to take off something from their owne losses, to justifie their owne disgraces; and to show that no man inferiour to this Character, could have beene thus active and successefull upon them. That which is admirable beyond all the rest, is, That this Prince hath left the affaires behind him, in an estate seeming advantageous to both parties. The one side, thinke skales turn'd, by his killing. His owne Allyes, he left in possession of more then two third parts of Germany: of the better townes, and the greater rivers; even from the Vistula in Mus∣kovia, unto the Rhine and Danuby: the Oder, the Elb, the Danuby, the Mayn and the Rhine; all these are witnesses of his personall Trophees: and so are the Weser and the Mosel, of others of his Captaines. To continue these Conquests, he left seven faire Ar∣mies behind him, with their Generals. In the Vpper Saxony, his owne, to Duke Bernard; in the Lower Saxony a 2d. under Baron Kniphausen: In Silesia a third,
under Dubalt. In Bavaria a fourth, under the Pala∣tine Birckenfelt. About Cullen a fifth, under Baudissin: in Alsatia a sixth, under Gustavus Horn: and in Schwabland a seuenth, under The Duke of Wirtem∣berg, and Sir Patrick Ruthven. I reckon not the Saxons: the Lunenburgers, the Bremers, nor the Hessens; be∣cause under their owne Princes: though all, whilest he lived, by him, as the Generall Director of the Wars, to be commanded. Adde to this, the strength of his Confederacies: all Princes, (excepting those of the House of Austria, some few Italians, and the Catholike Leaguers) being his Allyes. What now remaineth, but that the Protestant Prin∣ces of the Empire, doe goe on still, to pursue the advantages, which he left unto them; to banish all personall jealousies, and mis-intelligences; to soder up all old ruptures and divisions; to lay aside the standing upon their punto's, and the Heraldry of their genealogies; and to suffer the Warres to be conducted, not by Princes of the best Houses, but the greatest abilities; to husband their time and oportunities; to presse action, and not to bee too tedious in their con∣sultations; to take advantage of what is both passed and present; to study how to conserve their owne estates, under that of the Empire; to communicate their counsels, and unite their Forces, for the redu∣cing of Freedome and Religion. This if they be neg∣ligent in; then, all the travels of the deceased King; together with all their owne paines and charges: yea all their Forces, Armies, and advantages; shall not long serve their turnes, but they must become the
prey of their Enemies, an Amphitheater of Tragedies, and an example to posteritie of confiscated estates, and of bodies incurably diseased. And to say the troth, these Princes have even un∣till this present, gone so well on, that their vnitie hath quite dasht all the exultations of the contrary party; and they have trumped upon the best of the others hopes; and happily gone beyond the feares of their friends, that still doubted them. They have given the world to see, that the Schooling and lesso∣ning of the King, hath made good impression in them: and that the losse of so great a Patrone, though it ex∣tremely pull'd downe the side; yet hath it caused their motions to be concentricall, to goe all one way; and by union, to redouble their vigours. And yet all this notwithstanding, and that the King of Sweden hath left these Princes of his partie, in so good estate, that they have the lesse cause to la∣ment the losse of him: they being well set up on their feet againe, and in case to maintaine their owne freedomes. Admit the truth of all this: yet hath the adverse party, which he gave checke unto, reco∣vered the better of the game, since this King is taken. Great are their advantages, by the death of this Prince: these few pellets of lead which kill'd him, being worth more to them, then a million of Du∣cats possibly could have advantaged them. And this losse of him, who was the Sole Director of all; gave not onely hopes, but probabilities; that now, when the businesse was to fall to be managed by a many; the diversities of Cheefes, would bee so apt
to foment iealousies and mis-intelligences: as that it would give more facility to the contrary party, to conserve what was not yet conquered; to satisfie some privately discontented; to vnite their counsels: to recall exiled tranquility; and firmely, once againe, to re-establish a good peace over all the Empire. If now, the Imperiall party please to make pro∣fit, by their former losses: then shall wee see them turne a deafe eare to all bloody and violent counsels; avoide the enforcing both of Princes and people, to turne desperate: remove all suspitions and bad cor∣respondencies; regaine exasperated spirits, by sweet∣nesse; and seeke how to raigne by love, rather then by terrour: no more attempting the breach of the peace and publike faith, vnder pretence of consci∣ence: it being to be dealt withall by perswasion, and not by enforcing; as having to answer before another Tribunall, then mans Iudgement. And hereunto, it appeareth, that this party ought so much the rather to aspire; because it may have hope even forthwith and henceforward, to continue in their owne rights and advantages: the death of this King, having cured them of a bodily feare they were deeply already in; least he should have taken a higher flight, pretented towards new Diademes: and fully have verified his Anagramme, by changing the name Gustavus, into Augustus. What-ever in this dull Character of mine, may seeme defe∣ctive; is abundantly supplyed in this most learned and concise Epitaph. Written by an Honourable Sonne of the Muses; and worthy the Tombe-Stone of the great Gustavus.
Epigraphe. SISTE VIATOR, NEC DESPONDE ANIMVM; VT NEQVICQVAM SPERES, NI MORI SPERES; VIX EST QVOD METVAS, NI VIVERE METVAS. FATO CESSIT VITAE MORTISQVE ARBITER SVMMVS: PROXIMVM COELITIBVS NOMEN. QVIN ILLVD EXIGIS? DABO. SED VT LITES LACHRYMIS, REGI POTENTISS. PIENTISS. GVSTAVO QVO SEXTO NOVEMBRIS NECI DATO TOTA EVROPAE FACIES MVTATA EST, IN PLANCTVM SOLVTIS HVMANISS. QVIBVSCVNQVE; QVIN MAIORA POSTVLAS? ACCIPE. ILLE QVI DISSIDIA PVBLICA, PACE TERMINARE; PACEM, BONIS ARTIBVS EXCOLERE, ILLE QVI OPPRESSOS IN SVVM IVS ASSERERE; ASSERTOS, LIBERTATE DONARE; LIBERTATEM, SECVRAM REDDERE AGGRESSVS EST: PROH DOLOR! INTERIIT: SED VT SVMMVM ARDVAE VIRTVTIS EXEMPLVM AVDIAT: NVLLVS, QVIPPE, POST HOMINES NATOS, BONO PVBLICO POTIORA INTENTAVIT, GRAVIORA PASSVS EST. ABI IAM, SI LICET, IN REM TVAM.
The Copy of the Swedish Conclusion. By the Princes and Peeres of the Kingdome of Sweden: Which was vnanimously consen∣ted unto by them, at their Dyet and Assem∣bly holden at Stockholm on the 14th. of March 1633. The Originall was printed at Stockholm, by Ignatius Murer. WEE vnder-written, the Councell, Peeres, Earles, Lords, Bishops of Sweden. Gen∣try, Clergie, Officers of Warre, Citi∣zens, and the whole Commonalty who have beene convoked to this honoura∣ble Assembly; as well in our owne names and behalfes, as also in the name and be∣halfe of all the Countries: doe hereby make knowne and certifie. That whereas it hath pleased Almighty God of his providence and good pleasure, so heavily to visit us and this Kingdome, and in so great a measure to afflict us, by taking unto himself, (by bodily death) the renowned high and migh∣ty Prince and Lord, Gustavus Adolphus King of the Swedens
Gothes and Vandales, Great Prince of Finland. Duke of Estland and Carellen. Lord of Ingormanland, &c. and to translate his blessed Maiesty (of ever happy and famous memory) out of this vale of misery, into his eternall happinesse and heauenly ioy: and to exchange his temporall Crowne into an ever∣lasting Diademe of glory: and so to have put a period, not onely to his Maiesties carefull and labourious life and dayes, but also to his sufficiently noted and renowned Counsells, worthy actes, couragious and vndaunted spirit; almost in∣credible, at leastwise wonderfull Victories, against part of the mightiest and most powerfull Princes and Potentates of Europe. And which wee chiefely must condole: in him it hath pleased God to take from vs our head, our King, our father and Pater patriae: Vnder whose worthy, famous, and most excellent raigne, we aboue all other Nations, in these dolefull and calamitous times; haue found our selues with∣out any opposition, in all security, safety and tranquillity. And which aggrauates our misery, it hath not pleased God to suffer any Heyer-Male to proceed from the loynes of his said blessed Majesty, to remaine upon, and to possesse his Fathers seate. So that, not without reason, ours and the Kingdomes care and danger is the greater; and wee cannot but so much the more take to heart this inestimable losse. Wherefore, vpon the Iniunction of the Peeres and Coun∣cell of the Realme, at their conuenting: we haue thought good, vnanimously and obediently to come together, in the feare of God; and to take into consideration the present State of our Kings Majesties: Heyer, as also the State of our deare Kingdome. And how the same may be happily up held and maintained: and (next under the ayde and helpe of God) bee defended against all danger and opposition. To this end, we are all of us ioyntly and willingly assembled here, and wee haue pondered and consulted together, which might best con∣duce to the good of the Realme. And at last, by the helpe of the Almighty, and in the name of the Blessed Trinity; we haue closely vnited, and strongly bound and tyed our selues;
and after this coniunction, promise, and obligement, among our selues; we have confirmed and established, That which is here underwritten, and as followeth. 1.1. Article. Inprimis. Whereas the death of our blessed and renow∣ned King, hath caused a Kingly raigne to cease among us: and the Cause so being, that their is no Heyer-Male left behind his Maiesty: nor any Children of any Hereditary Prince; which might by undoubted right, succeed according to the Lawes and constitutions of the Realme. We have not dis∣approoved of that, which was concluded at Workoping, Anno 1604. concerning the Renewing of the Hereditary coniunction: and concerning the Daughters of our Kings and Heyer-Prin∣ces: which in that assembly was confirmed and enacted. As also that, which unanimously and ioyntly was concluded by us here present, at Stockholm, anno 1627. on the 4th. of De∣cember, as followeth. That in case his blessed and famous Maiesty should happen to decease: We did conclude, that his daughter the Princesse, the High borne, Christina, should be chosen for our Queene and Inheritrix of our Kingdome. And therefore at this time doe we againe establish unanimously, (and that in consideration of the famous and magnanimous acts and deeds, of the two worthy Kings; King Gustavus the first, and especially of King Gustavus the last, lately deceased: (whom iustly we may terme Gustavus the Great) by which two, and more especially by the latter, we have received ad∣mirable benefit and fame; and consequently, are bound to render all honour and respect, to this well-borne Princesse) according to our former promise and obligation: and doe now renew, what we heretofore have maturely confirmed. That is to say; Wee doe declare, pronounce, and con∣firme; advisedly, unanimously, freely, and without con∣straint; The high and mightie Princesse Christina, Daugh∣ter of his renowned Maiestie Gustavus Adolphus the Second and Great King; Queene of the Swedes, Gothes and Ʋandales; lawfully chosen: as also Haeredi∣tary
Princesse, Great Dutchesse of Finland, Dutchesse of Estland, and Carellen, our most deare and gracious Queene. And by these presents wee doe oblige our selves and our associates, confederates and Princes and Peeres of our King∣dome, inhabitants and subiects of this Realme; to affoord her gratious Maiestie: all true and due service and obedience: and doe inaugurate her said Maiesty: and establish her, in whatsoever in righteousnesse maybe answerable before God and Man. Insomuch, that her Maiesty shall have full pow∣er and Authority, to command us in all particulars. And to this end, as true faithfull and loyall subiects, we doe confirme and ratifie the Lawes of the Realme, for her Majestie. And moreover, we doe here promise and oblige our selues to stand for her Maiesties safety good and welfare, as of the Kingdome, even upon the danger of our lives, and losse of our goods. Provided, that her Maiestie when she shall come to yeeres, and full possession of the Government and rule of the Kingdome; shall make assurance to us, and the whole State, of whatsoever may concerne the maintaining of all our liberties, lawes, and priviledges, &c. as the like hath former∣ly beene done by our late Kings, (in the best forme that may be) especially by her Maiesties Father: his Maiestie of bles∣sed Memory, King Gustavus the 2d. and hath by the State of the Kingdome beene approoved. 2d. Article.2. Secondly, we conclude, that in case any one, (high or low, of whatsoever place, dignity or quality; whether of the State of Sweden, or other parts subiect to the Crowne of Sweden) doe refuse either with meanes, presence, obedi∣ence, and all requisite subiection, to subscribe and submit to this our resolution and establishment: and shall dare to op∣pose this Act of ours; or to bend his heart, eye, or hand, to any other whosoever it may be, Inhabitant within our Do∣minions or forrainer: We doe hold, esteeme, and declare the same party to be a distracted and separated member from our Body; and an enemy, yea Traitor of the Kingdome:
and the same person who ever it be, being once convin∣ced of a crime of this nature, shall bee punished without mercy. 3.3d. Article. Thirdly, although it seeme not absolutely necessary, now to relate the former Constitutions and Statutes, made and con∣cluded upon against King Sigismundus of Polonia, and his Children: which were grounded upon good reasons, and ne∣cessary proofes: yet notwithstanding, to remoove all ob∣stacles and obiections from the simply honest meaning peo∣ple, We doe confirme and establish, by these presents; That this may be lawfully done, which we doe now; notwithstan∣ding whatsoever hath formerly beene concluded against King Sigismund his Children, and Descendants. And therefore doe declare them to have no right or interest to the Crowne of Sweden; or to any part of the Dominions or Iurisdictions, there under comprehended: but all their right, and preten∣ces, to be lost, void, forfeited, and in the lapse; from this time forth for ever. And if it should so fall out (which God forbid,) that any Swedes, or who-ever they may be; under the Crowne of Sweden, in high place and dignity: should unad∣visedly goe about (either secretly or openly) to stand up in the behalfe of any of the Children of Sigismundus or his Descendants, to be received into the Kingdome of Sweden: or to yeeld them any footing within the Iurisdictions, or up∣on the Frontiers of the same Kingdome: Wee doe hold the same person (how soever he be) for a pernicious and hay∣nous Traitour, both to us and the whole State. And if any such, shall dare to stand out and persevere in so vile an inso∣lency; he shall be sure to meete with the mercilesse punish∣ment, due to such a Traitour. And moreover, whosoever he be, that shall give eare, and leave to any such; and not in time make it manifest and knowne, with his intent that way; shall be subiect and lyable to the same punished. In like sort shall all those be punishment, that shall dare to harbour or lodge any such persons, without giving notice and intelli∣gence
to authority. Now whereas at Orebroo in the yeere 1617. the 27th. of February: an expresse and absolute order and decree was established, against all such, by the Peeres and whole State of the Realme: we will and ordaine by these presents, that the same decree henceforward remaine as invio∣lable, as if the same were herein expressed word by word. Wherefore, It is now by us concluded and decreed, that the same decree of Orebroo, shall be fully executed; and that to the same end, all Lords, and Iudges, Officers, &c. each accor∣ding to his place and office; shall be bound to have an especi∣all care for the execution and performance of the same; as he will otherwise answer it, at his perill. 4th. Article.4. Fourthly, With unaminous consent and deliberation, we here confirme, renew, conclude and establish what formerly at other times Assemblies, and Diets, hath concerning the Ser∣vice of God and his Church beene concluded and settled: and doe generally, all of us, oblige our selues to remaine in the same forme, discipline, and truth of Religion; according to the revealed truth of Gods holy and heavenly Word; and the Articles of our Christian beleefe, contained in the 3. Creedes: that is to say, the Apostles Creede, the Nicene, and of Atha∣nasius: together with the true and invariable and ulalterable Confession of Augspurg. In a word, as it hath formerly beene solidely concluded, in the Councell of Vpsal. 5th. Article.5. Fifthly: Whereas our Queene as yet is not come to her compleate yeeres, and full age; so that she can be suf∣ficient of her owne selfe and ability, to defend and Go∣verne the Kingdome and the Realme: we could wish (and happy were we, if it had beene so) that there had beene a full decree and order made by his Maiesty of blessed Memory, and the Princes and States of the Realme; so that in the same there had beene comprehended, whatsoever in this re∣spect we ought to have cleaved unto. But since it is other∣wise, and must needs be so; and that wee doe understand,
that his renowned Maiesty of blessed memory, did commit his intent and resolution concerning this matter, to the Councell and Lords of this State; and had often comman∣ded and desired them, to conceive a right order concerning the same: which they having performed, and therein de∣clared their opinion, and shewed the same to his Maie∣sty, with his full approbation: yet notwithstanding, by reason of his sudden death, and other occasions thereup∣on ensuing, hath it not had its full effect: although wee may well wish it had. Therefore in this case, we have read and manifested the said order (made by his Maiesty in his time) to some of the cheefe amongst us, and of our State: who, as they haue found the same most sound and wholsome; so could we wish that the same were published to the common view and eyes of all men: and might be con∣firmed and ratified unanimously by us all, and so be published. But whereas we doe also perceive and understand, that divers instructions and necessary appurtenances belonging thereunto, by reason of the shortnesse of time, could not conveniently be in readinesse: we, notwithstanding, being desirous to fur∣ther the welfare and State of the Realme, in all good man∣ner of proceeding; and likewise, that his Maiesty: our most gracious and renowned King (of blessed memory) his will and care (for which we are for ever bound to extoll his Maiesties name and memory) may really be performed and executed: we do especially; all of us, in the name of the whole State and Realme; desire and ordaine that the same decree and ordinance of his Majesty: shal be put in execution and performed, in the best maner and forme that may be possibly, for the good and wel∣fare of our Realme and Countries; by the 5. chiefe States and Officers of the Realme: to wit. 1. The Lord high Steward, 2. Marshall. 3. Admirall. 4. Chancellor. 5. Treasurer. And in the ab∣sence of the one or other, or of any: the Eldest of the Councell of State shall supply the place. And these 5. shall be in lieu and place of Government of her Maj: for the Kingdome of Swe∣den, untill her Maj: be grown (by Gods grace) to perfect yeers.
And this businesse have we sufficiently pondered. For wher∣as the said five States and Lords, have ever beene of Councell with his Maiestie of blessed memory: and have undergone and waded thorow, the most weightiest affaires of the whole Kingdome: wee have thought good unanimously with one generall consent, to ordaine and establish, as well for our Associates and Brethren, as for our selues; that from henceforward, the five aforesaid Grand and Chiefe Officers of the State and Realme, and in either the one or the other his absence, the Eldest of our Councell of Stock∣holm, being of the same Colledge and Assembly supplying the place, for the welfare and managing of the State of our Kingdome, and the Tuition of our Queene; shall governe and beare rule, during the Minority and Nonage of her Ma∣iesty: onely in her name and stead: and without any preiu∣dice to the Realme or State; or violation or breach of the Lawes, Rites, and Priviledges of the same; but rather power∣fully for her Maiesty maintaining the five brotherly Offices and State-Rankes. To wit. Courtright Councell: Councell of War, Admiralty, Chauncery, and Treasury or Exchequer: as the same have beene by former Kings instituted establi∣shed and upheld, especially by our last King of blessed me∣mory Gustavus the 2d. Also, all dexterity shall be vsed and employed by them, for the maintaining and upholding of the Swedish Rights, Lawes, Iustice, and Policy; as farre as their vttermost industry and power shall be able to extend: de∣fending, protecting, all manner of waies, the Realme and Kingdome, and whatsoever depends upon it: In such wise, as they in their Conscience shall be willing to answer before God, the Queene, and the State; when they shall be thereunto called; And as these doe at this present oblige themselues to those that are, and hereafter shall be called, into Authority: and as they doe now oblige themselues by oath. On the other side, We the Peeres and Lords of the Realme, doe promise to yeeld unto these five selected Chiefe Offices: and to the Eldest of the Councell that shall supply ei∣ther
of their roomes; not onely all worthy respect and ho∣nour; but also all obedience and submissiue subiection: in whatsoever they shall require and command us, tending to the glory of Almighty God, the good and welfare of the Queene, and of the State and Common-wealth. And in case any one should goe about to oppose and to crosse this manner of proceeding, or government; either in deed or word: We shall by all our powers labour to suppresse such insolencies, and to punish such parties; and so constraine them to true obedience. 6.6th. Article. Sixthly, Whereas our Kingdome and Countrey is as yet in an open Warre and Hostility, against the Roman Empe∣rour, and the Popish League in Germany: We professe our selues desirous and resolved to maintaine it (as the same hath not onely beene undertaken, furthered, and happily main∣tained; but sealed also, with the very blood of our most re∣nowned and blessed King) even with our uttermost power and endeavours, untill it shall please Almightie God (in his due time) to establish and settle a happy and desired peace for the good of his Church. Whereas also it is most ne∣cessary, that wee Arme, strengthen and provide our selues, against other accrewing and newly growing enemies; and to have a speciall care, to prevent all dangers and oppositions which may ensue: we have therefore ordered and ordained; and doe now will and ordaine, That the same Edict and Proclamation, which the last Harvest time was concluded and confirmed: shall with all speed and expedition be pub∣lished through out the whole Realme and Kingdome: direct∣ly according to the same forme, as we first ordered: with condition, that all mens rights and priviledges shall thereby be kept inviolable. And by these presents we doe promise, and doe freely consent and grant; with and upon mature de∣liberation, that in case the neede and necessity of the King∣dome shall so require; whether it be by reason of the en∣mity that we are already fallen into; or in respect of some
new enemies, which haply may make opposition and enmi∣ty against our most gracious young Queene, and the State of this Kingdome; in one manner or other: then we with life and goods are ready and willing, to maintaine our right and liberties: and to stand with all our might and ability, in opposition against all such, as shall dare to confront and with∣stand our proceedings. 7th. Article.7. Seventhly, We know well enough, that no Kingdome can possibly subsist without means: neither can any Warre be rightly managed, without great charges. And therefore, we have likewise thought fit and good, that the Lille and Quarne Toll or Custome, shall be continued for the good and profit of the Kingdome, according to the order and man∣ner as the same is now raised and received. As also, that the Messengerships granted the last yeere, shall for this time goe forward and take place. Moreover, if so be that the Warre in Germany should yet longer continue; or if it should happen, that our King∣dome and Countrey should fasten upon some other warre and trouble; We doe likewise promise and oblige our selves; That when thereupon we shall be required, by the Peeres States and Lords of the Realme; Wee will with all our meanes, power and abilities, stand and fight for our Re∣ligion, Queene, Kingdomes, and liberties, Whensoever necessity shall thereunto invite us. For we have ever hi∣therto esteemed, the welfarre of our Kingdome and State, to be our chiefest happinesse: and therefore haue cou∣ragiously adventured both our goods and lives upon it. To this wee oblige our selves by these Pre∣sents. That We in all these particulars above written, are re∣solved: and have unanimously, generally and particularly; in our owne, and in the behalfe of our brethren, present and absent: as well unborne, as borne; freely and willing∣ly
consented, agreed; approoved and concluded; and therein sufficiently accorded: and doe promise, as faithfull religious and true sincere meaning Subiects, to performe the same: Wee the Councell, State, &c. of Sweden, have Vnderwritten and Sealed. Actum. At Stockholm the 14. of March. 1633.
The Diet of Heilbrun. ANd that the Reader (for a Farewell) may perceiue the present constituti∣on of the affaires in the Empire; and in what good correspondency the Protestant Princes are at this pre∣sent one with another; and how well disposed to the continuance of the warres, for so good a Cause: I will conclude my Booke, with that new League, of these 4. Prin∣cipall Circles of the Empire, that is to say, The Franconian, Suevian, the Ʋpper and Lower Circles of the Rhine; made in the Diet of Heilbrun in the Dukedome of Wirtemberg, 18. English miles from Heidleberg; in the moneths of March and April last past: that so my Story may end, as it begun; with a Diet.What Princes were present. There were personally present at this meeting, the Duke of Wirtemberg and the Administrator, the Mar∣quesse of Baden, the Count of Hanaw, with the most of the 17. Earles of Wetteraw. For the Prince Elector Palatine, and the Administrator Lodowicke (Broher to the King of Bohemia) were there 4. Commissioners: whereof Colonell Peblitz being the chiefe; he sate above all the Princes, at the upper end of the Table; all the Propositions were directed to∣wards him, and he had the opening of all letters, in place of the Elector Palatine. There were present besides, the Ambas∣sadors
of other Princes, and the Deputies of the Imp. Cities in these 4. Circles. The Lord Chancellor Oxenstiern, (by whose procurement this Diet had beene convoked) had his lodging in the towne, and came not at all into the State-house, among the Princes: but sent them in this discourse, and these Propositions following: which were the grounds and mate∣rialls, for the Diet to worke upon. His stile in the present Diet, was, Councellor, Chancellor and Extraordinary Am∣bassador, for the most Illustrious and High-borne, the He∣reditary Heyer and Princesse of the Crowne of Sweden. And with this Declaration, he began his Propositions. Illustrious and Right Honourable Princes and States Evan∣geliacall here assembled. I will not too much trespasse upon your patience,Oxenstierns Propositions. with an over tedious recitall of the Causes, upon which the High and mighty Prince of ever-glorious memory, Gustavus A∣dolphus King of Sweden, &c. was enforced to take Armes; and openly to make opposition against the Roman Emperour Ferdinand the Second of that name, and his confederates the Catholike Leaguers; more and more, at that time, every day prevailing in their oppressions of the Evangeliacall Electors, Princes and States; and of their Honours, priviledges, and immunities, all the Romane Empire over; yea, and most in∣iuriously, beginning to encroach upon the next neighbour Princes, and their Provinces: forasmuch as these things be notorious unto the world, and that the Iustice of the Kings Armes, be by no man doubted of. And yet some briefe recapitulation, doe I thinke convenient to make of them. Most apparent it is, that his said sacred Maiesty (now at rest in the Lord) was without any formall denuntiation of warre, infested by the Emperor. His Ambassadors, comming with the offer and meanes of a peaceable compounding of depending Controversies; most disgracefull entreated: yea, and (contrary to all lawes of nations and civility) not with∣out scornefull affronts offered, turned home againe; and the
whole Treaty by that vsage, abruptly broken off with him. That his subiects of Sweden, even contrary to long usage, amity, and Covenants, heretofore, in generall, contracted with the Romane Empire; and in particular, with certaine neigh∣bour Princes and Free-States, have beene disturbed in their Commerces, Embargo's laid upon their Ships, and fetters up∣on their saylers. That the Catholike Leaguers, likewise, notwithstanding that among other Electors of the Empire they had beene re∣quested, that they would be pleased to forbeare the making themselues parties in these differences, but rather to seeke how to find redresse for them: and notwithstanding, that at the request of the French King, confederated with his sacred Maiesty; there had beene Neutrality granted unto the said Leaguers, if so be they thought good to accept of it: yet did they not onely refuse that Neutrality, but entred also into a stricter confederation of warres against his said Maiesty; and conioyning their forces under their Generall Tilly, with those of his Imperiall Maiesty: they forbare not to doe their utter∣most against the said King; whom out of pure necessity they by this meanes enforced, in hostile manner to oppose himselfe against all of them. And notwithstanding that these and the like motives, (which for brevities sake be here omitted) doe sufficiently iustifie his said Maiesties Armes-taking, being he was enfor∣ced to them: yet this is the thing above all the rest to be considered, the devises, namely, and vast projects of the House of Austria: not onely famous in discourse all the world over, but so farre actually advanced already, and so neere to execution; that the very principall Ports of the Dukedomes of Mecklenburg and of Pomerland, were really already seased upon; and the Imperialists wholly, by this time, busied in rigging out such a fleete; as might be able not onely to disturbe the Commerce betwixt the neigh∣bour Kingdomes; but also at pleasure to divert it to o∣ther places. By this meanes should the Spanish yoake be
first put upon the shoulders of the Northerne people; and from thence, (as the fittest place for such a purpose) might it be flung upon the necks of all other Kingdomes and Common-wealths in Europe. And iust in the selfe same manner, and upon no other reason; was that most anci∣ent Family of Mecklenburg, without hearing of their cause, or any legall formalities of Proceedinge: actually and de facto despoyled of their iust Principalities and Roy∣alties. The Dukedome of Pomerland, likewise, without any colour of right at all, contrary to all equity and deservings, was actually seased upon; yea, contrary to all covenants and sincere promises of the Emperour: more then barbarously entreated. The most iust King, therefore, seeing by the excellent acutenesse of that Iudgement which God from on high had endowed him withall; he was easily able to foresee, what all this was likely in the end to tend unto: resolved to connive no longer, at so prevailing and daily more ap∣parent a mischiefe: but iudg'd it to belong to him, and to his neighbour King (against whom also, these and the like projects were a hammering) in time to prevent this encroaching danger. Vnto this was his Maiesty the more provoked, by the serious consideration of the Romane Empire, and the most lamentable condition which with∣in these few yeeres last past, it had beene brought unto: wherein he observed, that those Princes that were neerest to him in the bond of Blood or Religion, were partly dis∣seised of their Countries and their dignities; and either thrust into Banishment abroad, or tyrannised upon at home, sometimes by their equalls; and which worse is, even by their inferiours otherwhile domineer'd upon, and with skomes and contumelies abused. His Maiesty perceiued withall; how these Princes with their neighbours, were with a continuall feare kept under; their rights, without all respect wrung from them: the fundamentall constitutions
of the Empire, overturned; and that the other party might at pleasure doe what they lusted; were the Princes over∣charged with the Imperiall Armies. And to cast the fairer glosse of Iustice, upon all this; was that most extremely pre∣iudiciall unto the Evangeliacall Electors, States, and Prin∣ces; The late Imperiall Decree pretended, for the re∣stitution of the Church goods, (forsooth) and the execu∣tion of it. By these devices, was there nothing of the ancient Em∣pire, Customes and Constitutions, left unviolated: the peace, both of Church and Common-wealth, was disturbed; the Sanctions and Constitutions of the Empire, prophaned, the orders for convoking and holding of Diets, abused, broken, and subverted; the articles and practice of Commerce with neighbour States, innovated and distracted: yea all places tho∣row the whole wide Empire, filled with complainings, teares and sighings. All these miseries, did so cordially affect that blessed King and most valiant Champion: (who being a Chri∣stian, Evangeliacall neighbour Prince, had also his share in these sufferings, and was by the pride and insolency of the adversaries, withall enforced to take Armes) that he suppo∣sed it well became him, not to be forgetfull of the Prin∣ces of his owne blood and Religion; and that he ought, withall, to give way unto that evident Divine calling, which pressed him to endeavour the delivery of Gods people. And what event hath followed upon this his resolution, from the first undertaking unto this very day: is sufficiently every where made manifest. Namely, that his Maiesty clee∣red, first of all, the Coasts and Port townes of Pomerland and of Mecklenburg, of the enemy: restored the Dukes of Mecklenburg, againe into their Countries, freed the Ele∣ctorate of Brandenburg; chased away the enemy, from the banks of the river Elb, and how after the Ʋictory of Leipsich, he led on his owne Armies, against the Catholike Bishopricks and Electorates; and how those Leaguers, whose businesse
chiefly was, which way, handsomelyest, to devide the lands of the Evangeliacal Electors, Princes and States, and to live up∣on their bloods: He made to play least in sight, and to shift themselves away out of their owne houses; which they, ere∣whiles, supposed had beene so surely founded. By which victorious proceedings of his Maiesty, the whole course of the businesse was so turned about againe; that the Electors, Princes, and States Evangeliacall in the Empire: who must suffer, before, and say nothing, tooke cou∣rage, now, to put their heads into the world againe, and to looke after the recovery of their ancient liberties and Do∣minions: yea, and to grow so bold upon it, as to goe thorow with the Diet of Leipsich; and to resolue upon such Con∣clusions there, as apparently made show of their purpose to conserve and defend the declining liberties, both of their Country and their Consciences: yea and boldly to make de∣monstration unto the Emperour, of their being sensible of the vniustnesse of his Proceedings. And notwithstanding that before the Decrees of that Diet, could be brought to perfection; they were by the over-powring inundation of the Imperiall and Leaguer Armies, washt away into nothing; and their assumed weapons, beaten out of their hands againe: yet did the selfe same Princes after the Leipsich Victory, so well recollect their deiected courages; and the greater part of them by single and private confederacies, so inter-league themselues with the Maiesty and Crowne of Sweden; that ei∣ther by re-assuming the performance of the Decrees of that Diet, or by some other reall and actuall engagement, they did wholly commit themselues unto his Maiesties sole direction and protection. And thus, from that time untill this; together, with the said King, have they taken up Armes, together, with, and for the Crowne of Sweden, against the Emperour and the Leaguers. Which Armes, hitherto, (the Lord of Hosts them graciously assisting) have they honourably maintained: and though with much perill, yet not without much happinesse.
His Maiesty, of ever honoured memory, had of long time, verily, desired nothing more; then how he might con∣solidate the Evangeliacall Electors, Princes, and States, by a common league, into one and the same Body of Confe∣deracy. But for that the power of the enemy, still with such fiercenesse pressed in upon him; he could never find him∣selfe at so much good leisure, as the bringing about of so difficult a businesse would require of him. For which rea∣son, He iudg'd it most conducing to the common interest, to enter into some particular, and as it were preparatory Con∣federacies in the meane time: that the Cause, notwithstan∣ding, might effectually goe on, untill some fairer oppor∣tunitie of occasion might at length bee presented unto his Maiesty; as well to provide for his owne and their safeties; as also to make vp one common tye and obligation betweene them. Vntill the happinesse of which opportunity, hee thought to uphold and continue on the businesse, by the love of their common safeties; and by the counsels and assistance of the Crowne of Sweden: which, for the time being, might countervaile a more formall Confederacie. But for as much, as by reason of the continuall expeditions and Marchings from place to place, that he was still put un∣to; he could never haue so much good leasure, as to begin those faire Courses, nor to settle a better order for the ob∣serving of Military Discipline: it is thereby come to passe, that not onely whole Provinces (as in such deadly warres it ever falleth out, and especially where the Field of Warre is so universall) have beene wasted and much spoyled; but the licentiousnesse of the souldiery growne to that head; as that without a speedy remedy, the whole action must of necessity come to nothing. Verily, his Maiesty of ever glo∣rious memory, had thought of nothing more seriously: and out of the fatherlynesse of his care to the common Cause, had endeavoured nothing more diligently, then to have made his personall residence amongst the Princes, in these Vpper Parts of the Empire; and with his owne neigh∣bourhood,
not onely the more to have assured the Prote∣ction of those Ʋpper Circles, (according as hee had begun already) but how also he might have beene personally pre∣sent in a Diet of these foure Circles, for the concluding of some settled good orders; how the something decayed Military Discipline, might have beene repaired. And notwithstanding that my selfe for mine owne part, was so stonyed with the dolefull and most lamentable death of my said deare Lord and Master; as that I seemed to have cause enough to give over any more dealing in these busi∣nesses, and to leave the managing unto their handlings, whom so deeply it concerned: yet upon maturer considera∣tion, how easily in the middest of these fiercenesses of the enemy, there might betide some notable confusion, either a∣mongst the Armies or the Princes: and that the whole Cause might of its owne weightinesse, fall to so low a Conditi∣on as were not easie afterwards to bee repaired: and that by this meanes, all the Counsels, proceedings, designes and victories of my said sacred Lord the King; would come to no other end nor purpose, but to the giving occasi∣on to the finall and totall ruine of all his Confederates and Part-takers: I had rather lay aside mine owne private re∣spects to mine selfe, then so abruptly to desert the em∣ployment. For this onely reason, therefore,This clause a∣lone, does cleerly enough confute that scandall of the dead King; How that un∣der a publike pretension, he sought meerely his owne pri∣vate interest: which was the Empire. This if so, why should the Swedish kingdome now continue on the warres? Seeing their King is dead, and their young Queene, not capable of being Emperour. have I so earnestly hi∣therto endeauoured, to uphold the businesse; and couragi∣ously (according to my power) so to dispose of all opor∣tunities, as might suite to the best advantage of the publike. Yea, and not onely so, but I have beene an earnest suiter withall unto the Crowne of Sweden; that the State would bee pleased still to continue on the warre; that that most commendable and praise worthy intention of His Sacred MAIESTIE: might obtaine the desired and intended issue. In this my suite I have so farre prevailed; that I have already from thence received a full Commission,
to treate and conclude with the Electors, States, and Princes of the Empire, upon that matter: and if I find the Confe∣derates and Partakers so inclined, I have power from the Royall Heyer and Crowne of Sweden, in their names to con∣tinue on the worke to a perfection. For mine owne part, therefore, I would see nothing with more gladnesse, then a Generall Diet of all the Evangeliacall Electors Princes and States, of the whole sacred Romane Em∣pire, together. But forasmuch as Summer is now neere at hand, and that the enemy is notably by this time, upon the growing hand; and earnest in his preparations for some new expedition: and for that these 4. Vpper Circles are not onely round encompassed by the common enemies; but have them already within their very bowels: therefore, there be∣ing danger in delaies, and for that a Generall Diet could not be convoked without much time spending, and its peculiar solemnities, (by which meanes the whole businesse would be in danger in the meane time to be rather ruined then remedi∣ed; so long it would be before a publike and ioynt determi∣nation could be agreed upon: therefore have I thought it more necessary, (which also was sollicited and desired by divers States both of this Ʋpper Part of the Empire, and the Vpper Saxony) that upon the death of my said Soveraigne Lord the King, to deferre the procuring of a Generall Diet, and so to hasten on the Diet of Ʋlm, as out of hand to bring it to conclusion. This my pur∣pose so soone as it was made knowne unto divers of the most Illustrious and Right Honourable Princes and States; there was occasion given and meanes proje∣cted for another new meeting, for the causes before rehearsed. And here I render all due and humble thankes, both to the Princes and States personally here assembled, and to the Am∣bassadors of the absent, severally and altogether: for that up∣on the earnest invitation of my good intention; they disdai∣ned not to give this meeting. And now most earnestly doe I
beseech you all, that you would take to heart and with matu∣rity consider upon the common estate of the Cause Evange∣liacall; and with your prudentest and providentest consulta∣tions, and readiest of your assistance; promote and set forward the common businesse of the Empire, the safety of your native Country, and your owne proper welfares. And most heartily doe I desire of God, that you may haue profitable designes, happy expeditions, and all prosperous and desi∣red successes. And for mine owne part, thus much I make free tender of, that I will at no time in any thing be wan∣ting, in what I shall either iudge to bee beneficiall to the Cause; or wherein I may any way bee servicea∣ble. And this I promise both for my selfe, and in the name of the Hereditary Princesse, and Crowne of Swe∣den. To the end, therefore, that the points necessary, may the better and more orderly be deliberated upon; and the Con∣clusion the better speeded; I have thought it necessary, that the chiefe heades of the Deliberation, which are in these Convocatory letters comprehended and exhibited; should be distinguished into Articles: most obsequiously, and in the humblest manner entreating of your Highnesses; that you would bee pleased to make construction of them to the fairest sence; and so to accommodate and hasten forward your owne resolutions, as may be most advantageous for the present state of the businesse, and the eminentnesse of the danger. 1. That all the Evangeliacall Electors, Princes,The Chancel∣lors Propositi∣ons. and States of these 4. Ʋpper Circles now assembled, would conclude an Vnion in the best forme; and confederate and colleague them∣selues together, with such firme conditions; as never to breake off againe, untill the desired scope: that is to say, the restituti∣on of the Evangeliacall Electors, Princes, and States, and the fundamentall lawes of the Empire, be obtained; and due satisfa∣ction made to the Hereditary Princesse and Crowne of Swe∣den.
Much lesse descend into any particular treaties with the enemy; but one be made to stand for all, and all as one man, untill the full and finall decision and determination of the whole businesse be agreed upon. And in case some one or o∣ther of them, should have a mind to fall off from the com∣mon League; that consideration be had, and a decree before hand made, how such a man ought to be thought of, and in what manner handled. 2. It is also to be considered upon, now that the Emperour after his agreement made and sworne, having done nor inten∣ted nothing, but the oppression of the Empire and the loyall States in it: and the Catholicke Leaguers, also, having added to the oppression as much as lay in their power; that is to say, helpt it forward, provoked one another to it, and backt one another in it; and hath wrung or beaten the defensive Armes of the Electors, Princes and States Evangelicall, out of their hands: whether it were not the best course openly to de∣clare both Emperour and Leaguers, enemies, and so long to hold them for such, untill satisfaction be made unto the Crowne of Sweden, and unto the Electors, Princes and States offended. 3. It ought also thorowly to be considered and agreed upon, how many Armies be to be sent against the enemy, and how they are from time to time to be re-enforced: and where mo∣ney is to be raised for it. 4. What is the best meanes for getting of moneies, Ammu∣nition, Ordnance, and Victualls; and what paies are to be made unto the Generalls: as also for the horses to draw the Ord∣nance, and the Baggage Wagons; and how all this money is to be raised. 5. That the course of the whole Proceedings may the more orderly be carried, it will be necessary that some Office of Di∣rection
be legally set up and authorised: and that in other cau∣ses in like manner, some legall determination be now agreed upon. 6. And consequently, after this Office of Direction be resol∣ved upon and authorised; it will be very worthy considera∣tion in the next place, how the military Discipline may here∣after be better ordered, the Countries freed from the feares and insolencies of the souldiery, and Trading restored: and though not every thing, yet how the grosser abuses may be remedied. 7. And if it pleases the Kingdome of Sweden, any lon∣ger to engage it selfe in these actions; it shall bee wor∣thy consideration, how long it is fitting for it to stand engaged: and what assistance shall the said Kingdome of Sweden expect againe, if in the meane time it selfe shall happen to bee invaded, or come into other dan∣ger. All these Articles, and whatsoever may else be thought upon in the time of the deliberation; I doubt not, but the most Illustrious and Right Honourable States assembled; will maturely consider upon; and will so frame their reso∣lutions, as necessity and their owne safetie requireth: and thus farre forth, am I confident of all and every one of them. To whom againe in generall and particular, I make all humble tender of such faire offices, in which I may best serve them. Heilbrun March 8. 1633. These Propositions were tendred to the Princes, &c. the very first day of the meeting: that is to say, after the Sermon, and so soone as they had taken their places in the State-house. To these, after mature deliberation, the Princes punctually thus answered, Article to Article.
1. That they were all desirous to contract a most firme League amongst themselues, and with the Crowne of Swe∣den: and so long time constantly to hold it on, untill the desired libertie of Germany, as farre as concerned either Religion, or the Temporall Estate; were obtained: and that the Crowne of Sweden were satisfied their charges of the Warres. 2. They thought it better for the time, to forbeare declaring the Emperour and Leaguers, enemies; untill a generall Diet of the whole Empire: and in the meane time to set out a publike Manifesto and Apology, concerning their being pro∣uoked to this Defensive. 3. In the Third Article, they desired to consult with his Ex∣cellency, (meaning the Chancellor Oxenstiern.) 4. And if this Third were once agreed upon, they would de∣liberate concerning the meanes of maintaining the Armies. 5. They requested his Excellency that he would be pleased to take upon himselfe the Directorship, for these foure Ʋpper Circles; untill the desired restitution were obtained. And least this charge should bee too heauy for him singly; they thought to joyne some other Assistants with him: and if he pleased, they would in euery one of these foure Circles, ap∣point an Office of Sub-Directorship. 6. For restoring of the decayed Discipline, there should be new and certaine Orders conceived and authorized; the trans∣gressours whereof, should exemplarily bee punished. The Regiments moreouer should be reduced and reformed; the superfluous numbers of Officers restrained; and the govern∣ment and punishing of offending souldiers, left unto the Ma∣gistrate of the place where they were enquartered. Permissi∣on should also, with the Magistrates knowledge, be unto the
Subjects and inhabitants of every place; to defend themselves as they could against plunderers. As for the billetting of the souldiers, it should be committed unto the Magistrate. 7. And whereas the States of Sweden had pleased to declare their willingnesse for the entring into a stricter Vnion with them; they accepted of the offer with all due thankfulnesse. And for their parts, they were ready mutually to oblige them∣selves to procure them all due satisfaction, if his Excellen∣cy would be pleased to show them how to doe it. Faire Answeres, all of them. After this, had the French Ambassador his Audience: whose Oration was, To encou∣rage the Princes to goe on where the victorious King had left: He in his Masters promising them all due assistance; and desiring to be taken into their Ʋnion. The English Ambassa∣dor, likewise, Sir Robert Anstruther, made his Proposition; which was a desire, chiefely, for the Restitution of the Pala∣tinate Concerning all which demands, to this purpose was the faire and satisfying Resolution of the Diet, which brake up about the twentieth of our Aprill. 1. That the foure Circles shall be firme one to another in a League offensiue and defensiue: untill such time as they can have vindicated their Liberties against the Emperour,The Resoluti∣on of the Diet. These Arti∣cles, some Co∣pyes contract into ten. whom they esteeme as a reall enemy. 2. That to maintaine these warres, 16000 Horse and 40000 Foot, are to be leuyed. 3. That the monies to be contributed, shall be raysed accor∣ding to the Taxe of the Imperiall Matricula, in the warres against the Turke: and the summe needfull, is to be 12 times as much, as one Contribution then was. 4. That the Magazines are to bee appointed at Ausburg,
Ʋlm, Norimberg and Franckfort. 5. The Direction of the whole Warre, shall be carryed by his Excellency the Lord Chancellor of Sweden Axel Oxenstiern: who shall manage both it and the Affaires of State, in the name of the Imperiall States and the Crowne of Sweden. 6. To him shall certaine Commissioners be adjoyned, as Assi∣stants, one or more from every Circle: and some likewise from the Imperiall Townes of this Confederation. 7. That in every Circle there be a Sub-Directorian Office, to see to things belonging to the collecting and disbursing of the monies; the disposing of the Ammunition and the Victuals, and the well ordering of the Magazins, in their owne Precincts. 8. That the Magistrates of every place, shall have full Iuris∣diction in their owne hands; and dispose of the levying and mustering places: as also of the Enquarterings and Rendez∣vous, as they shall thinke fitting. 9. That the Military Discipline shall be reformed; the weake Regiments broken to complete others: the superfluous Of∣ficers cashiered, Recreuts made, strict order kept, and con∣stant full Payes allowed. 10. To this end, the first Contribution is to be raised in May nevt; and for the procuring of sufficient Summes, till the exhausted lands be somewhat restored: the neighbour States are to be sought for to lend moneyes. As for the Neutralists and such other members of the foure Circles as are absent, they are to be put under Contribution. 11. The Palatinate is to be surrendred to the Administrator; and all State-holders, Governours and Commanders in the King
of Swedens name, are to be put downe: onely Manheim shall still keepe a Swedish garrison in it, that they may have assu∣rance to passe without let at all times, over the Rhine and Neckar. 12. No Free Quarters are in any place to be allowed: but the souldiers must live upon their payes. 13. That these foure Circles shall labour with the rest of the Evangeliacall States (of all which, a generall meeting is much wished for) to give sufficient satisfaction to the Crowne of Sweden. 14. That the King of France shall be a confederate on the same conditions, as heretofore in the time of the King of Sweden. Other Princes may also come into the League. 15. That the lands belonging to the Empire, shall by no meanes be alienated from it, by any contract with a forraine Prince. 16. That if any of the Confederate States or Townes in these foure Ʋpper Circles, fall off from this League, without ho∣stile constraint; they shall first be admonished: and if they then returne not, to be held and dealt withall as an enemy. The Lord Chancellour was offered to be Generall of all the Forces: which he modestly the first time refused: but being the second time put to him, he accepted it. And thus you see the Palatinate in tearmes to be restored, Heidleberg Towne and Castle are since rendred: the warres goe well hi∣therto. And this is some comfort, for the death of the King of Sweden. FINIS.
A Table drawne by way of a Iournall or Diary, to shew where the King and Walenstein still were: and what they and their Armies did, upon those dayes, that are mentioned in the Margent. This belongs to the Third Part. The King. Walenstein: and Bavaria. Iuly. Iuly. 5 About Norimberg: and hath some smaller skir∣mishes with the Impe∣rialists.   6 About Norimberg: and hath some smaller skir∣mishes with the Impe∣rialists. 5 Sends abroad to take up the Posts and Townes of the Countrey. 7 About Norimberg: and hath some smaller skir∣mishes with the Impe∣rialists. 6 Sends abroad to take up the Posts and Townes of the Countrey. 8 &c About Norimberg: and hath some smaller skir∣mishes with the Impe∣rialists. 7 &c Sends abroad to take up the Posts and Townes of the Countrey. 11 Oxenstiern sets out, to∣wards the King.   20 King sends out Wippen∣horst to beate a Convoy. 20 Sends Holck towards Mis∣nia. 22 Oxenstierns and Hessens Army, in Franconia.   23 &c Oxenstierns and Hessens Army, in Franconia.   27 King learnes out Walen∣steins Magazine.   30 Dubatell takes Freyen∣stat: and the King de∣feats Sparre. 30 Bavaria writes to Pappen∣heim. August. August. 1. The Kings Oration. Some skirmishes betweene com∣manded Partees, in the be∣ginning of this moneth. 4 Partees sent abroad into the Countrey. 5 Partees sent abroad into the Countrey. 8 Payes his Army.   10 Oxenstiern and Duke William Weymars Army, moove one to∣wards another.   11 Oxenstiern and Duke William Weymars Army, moove one to∣wards another. Partees abroad.
13 Duke Bernard and Banier joyne with Oxenstiern and Duke William. 13 Holck takes Zwicka. 14 Duke Bernard and Banier joyne with Oxenstiern and Duke William. 16 Holck spoyles Misnia. 17 The Armies come to Bruck. 17 &c Holck spoyles Misnia. 18 The King comes to view them.   21 They joyne with his Army: and Walensteins Trenches attemp∣ted. 21 Walensteins trenches attempted. 22 The fight continues.   24 The great fight for the old Castle. 24 The great fight. 26 The King formes a new Campe, hard by Walensteins.   29 Partees sent abroad. Partees abroad. 30 Partees sent abroad.   September. September. Severall small Actions. All done by commanded Partees. 4 Consultations with the Norim∣bergers about discamping.   5 Consultations with the Norim∣bergers about discamping.   7 Kept Holyday.   8 The King dislodges.   9 Sits downe at Nieustat. 12 Walenstein dislodgeth. 13 Removes the army to Winshaim. 13 Gallas besieges Lauff. 14 Devides his Army. 14 Walenstein comes to Forcheim. 15 Goes towards Norimberg: but returnes to goe for Bavaria.   21 At Dunkenspiel. 21 Summons Culmbach. 22 At Nordlingen. 24 Goes to Bamberg. Gallas spoyles Voitland. 25 Mitzvall yeelds up Rain. 27 The King defeats 400 Crabats about the Lech in Bavaria. 25 Bavaria parts with him. 29 Walenstein takes Bayreit. October. October. 1 Passes the Lech. 1. Takes Coburg, and Gallas, Chem∣nitz. 2 Passes the Lech. 3 Recovers Rain. 3 Beaten from Coburg Castle. Holck and Gallas joyne in Misnia.
  4 Holck and Gallas take Friberg. 5 At Neuburg upon the Danuby. 5 Walenstein goes towards Voit∣land. 6 Prepares to besiege some townes in Bavaria. 8 Takes townes in Voitland. 7 Prepares to besiege some townes in Bavaria. 9 Takes townes in Voitland. 8 Retires to Nordlingen. 10 Comes to Plaun. 12 Kniphausen takes Lauff. 11 Formes a Campe at Weida.   12 Holck and Gallas take Wurtzen. 13 King pursues and defeats Mu∣nich. 13 Walenstein mooves towards Leipsich. 14 King pursues and defeats Mu∣nich. 14 Walenstein mooves towards Leipsich. 15 King returnes to Norimberg. 17 Sends some Horse to brave it. 17—goes towards his Army, 18 Summons it.   19 Takes Weissenfels. 21—Recovers up to his Army. 20 Besieges Leipsich.   21 Besieges Leipsich. 22 Cashiers the English & Scottish. 22 Takes Leipsich towne. 23 Comes to Arnstat. 23 Takes the Castle. 28 Musters at Erfurt. 25 takes other townes in Misnia. 26 &c takes other townes in Misnia.   28 Pappenheim joynes with him. November. November. 1 Comes to Naumburg. 1 Sends backe some Horse to Leip∣sich: and remooves his Army to Weissenfels. 2 His religious speech to the people. 3 Entrenches. 4 Hath Coloredoes Letter brought him. 4 Sends Pappenheim to Hall: and mooves to Lutzen. 5 Falls amongst Walensteins Quar∣ters. 5 Prepares for the Battell. 6 The victory of Lutzen. 6 Overthrowne, and retires to Leipsich. 7 The Kings body embaulmed. 7 His Army flyes in disorder to∣wards Bohemia. 8 &c His Army flyes in disorder to∣wards Bohemia.
The Index to the Third Part. A ALtemberg Castle, the great fight about it, p. 39, &c. Armies sent for by the King, their Stories, 28 Articles at the yeelding of Zwicka, 93 At the yeelding of Leipsich Castle, 107 Propounded by Walenstein unto Hall, 109 At Kniphausens recovery of Leipsich Castle, 175 At the Swedes recovering of Chemnitz, 172 and of Zwicka, 176 B. BAnier employed towards Tirole, 34 His actions in Bavaria, ib. goes towards Norimberg to the King, 35 shot before Walensteins Leaguer, 38 Battel of Lutzen begings, 125 Bavaria Duke. Ioynes with Walstein, 2 —His Forces, 7 —mooves Walstein to as∣sault the King, 17 —invites Pappenheim, 17 Bavaria Dukedome, some a∣ctions in it, 34 the State in which the Swedes left it, 35 The King marches up into it, 59 His Acts there, 61 Bayreit taken by Walstein, 85 Bernard of Saxon-Weymar, his actions about the Bo∣densee: and about the Da∣nubye, 33 and in Bavaria, 35 —goes towards Norim∣berg to the King, ibid. joynes with Oxenstiern, 36 His actions at Altemberg Castle, 42, and 49 Left with halfe the Army in Franconia, 58 —His good service there, 69. 88 his valour in the Battell of Lutzen, 146 Hath halfe the Swedish Ar∣my committed to him, 178 Birckenvelt, Palatine; defeats some Imperialists in Fran∣conia, 29 Left with an Army in Ba∣varia, 64 Brandistein takes Naumburg, 73
C. CHemnitz in vaine besie∣ged by Holck, 94 Taken by Gallas, 98 Recovered by the Swedes, 176 Campe, the King formes a new one by Walenstein, 47 Walstein formes one at Weida, 91 Coloredo, a Letter of his brought to the King, 119 Fetches his Captaine out of Weissenfels, 114 Hee commanded Walen∣steins Right Wing in the Battell, 129 Complement betwixt Bava∣ria and Walstein, 83, 84 Crabats, Garlick-eaters, 23 Take the Schollers of Al∣torff, 51 —a Partee of them de∣feated, 61, &c. —and by the King, 54 and in Bavaria, 61 Their Barbarisme in Mis∣nia, 100 Cratz recovers Munchen, 34 Culmbach towne puts off Walstein, 85 D. DANISH Ambassadour makes some offers concerning a Peace, 27 Dubatell sent to Freienstat, 18 —burnes the Magazine there, 19 —puts Walstein from Co∣burg Castle, 87 E. ELector of Saxony his con∣stancy, 91 The King goes to joyne with him, 120 Emperour well pleased with Walstein, 21 What his Court gave out of the King of Sweden, 27 Emperours Court, how it tooke the newes of the Battell of Lutzen, 156 Empire, the State of it, whilest Walenstein lay at Norim∣berg, 77 English and Scottish of my Lord Marquesse Hamiltons Army, reduced, 30 taken on by Duke William, ibid. cashiered by the King, 71 two English Gentlemen, ta∣ken prisoners by the Cra∣bats, 118 carryed prisoners into Prague, 143 Ensigne of the Eagle and For∣tune, presented to the King of Sweden, 124
Erfurt the King musters at it, 71 saved by the Kings com∣ming, 110 Explication of the Figure of the Battell of Lutzen, 165 F. FIght before Walensteins Trenches, 38 the great fight, Aug. 24. 40 Friedberg in Bavaria, burnt. 34 G. GAllas sent out by Walen∣stein, takes Lauff, 96 Takes townes in the Ʋp∣per Palatinate, and in Ʋoit∣land, 98 Ioynes with Holck, 99 Their Actions after it, 100 Sent towards Silesia, 102 Grave Neeles slaine at Lut∣zen, 154 H. Mr. HArvey unfortunate∣ly drowned, 39 Hepburn, St. Iohn, Commands three Brigades before No∣rimberg, 5 Employed by the King in the great fight, Aug. 24. 43, & 44, & 45 The Author beholding to him, 46 Holck-Major Generall of the Horse to Walenstein, 8 Sent into Misnia, 16 His doings there, 92 Takes Zwicka, 93 Raises his siege of Chem∣nitz, 94 forced by the Saxons to re∣tire, Ioynes with Gallas, 99 His Acts with him after∣wards, 99, 100 Ioynes with Walstein, 102 Made Leiftenant—Field-Marshall, 130 Mightily rewarded by Wa∣lenstein, 158 The onely man in credit with him, ibid. K. KIng of Sweden, noble of his word, 1 Like to overthrow the Duke of Bavaria, 2 Sends for his Armyes, 5 His strength, ibid. and Leaguer, ibid. His answere to Walensteins Courtsship, 16 defeats Sparre, 21 His Oration, 23 His integritie in these warres, 25, 26 payes his Army, 26
Sets upon Walensteins tren∣ches, 38, &c. His sudden judgement up∣on view of Altemberg Ca∣stle, 43 H encamps by Walstein, 47 The soale of his Boot shot away, 49 labours to cut off Walsteins victuals, 50 Goes out upon a Partee, 53 defeats the Crabats, 54 Rises from Norimberg, 575 King of Sweden. How he contents the No∣rimbergers, concerning his rising, 56 Goes to Nieustat, 58 devides his Army, ibid. goes towards Bavaria, 59 overthrowes 400 Crabats: and passes the Lech, 61 Recovers Rain in Bavaria, 62 Comes out of Bavaria to goe after Walstein, 63 Comes to Norimberg, 68 Defeats Col. Munich, 68 Recovers up to Duke Ber∣nards Army, 69 Musters at Erfurt, 71 Comes to Naumburg, 73 Not purposed to have fought when he did, 120 Goes to joyne with Saxo∣ny, 121 Thinks to fall in among Walensteins Quarters: wch the night hinders, 123 Rowtes two Regiments, 124 Slaine, 137 His Character, 181 His Daughter Elected Q. of Sweden. 190 The Imperialists honoura∣ble testimony of him, 154 King of Bohemia sicke, 23 Recovered & in the Field, 38 Kniphausen, Sergeant-Major Generall to the King, keeps the Passe at Furt, 37 the commendation of him, 56 left to guard Norimberg, 57 Takes Lauff, 67 Disswades the Battell of Lutzen, 120 Kniphausens good service in the Battell of Lutzen, 146, 17 Recovers Leipsich Castle, 178. Appointed to bee a Felt-Marshall by the Kings Will. 178 L. LAndgrave goes towards the King, 29 defeats some Imperialists
in Franconia, ibid. Lauff taken by Gallas, 96 Recovered by Kniphausen, 67 Leaguer of the King about Norimberg, described, 5 Walensteins, 8 Lech river the King passes it, 61 Leipsich summoned by Wa∣lenstein, 103 The towne taken, 106 And the Castle, 107 Recovered by Kniphausen, 174 Letter of the Baron of Du∣droff, 46 of Walenstein to the Leip∣sichers, 103 Letter of Coloredo's brought to the King, 119 Lunenburg Duke comes to joyne with Saxony, 121 M. MAgazine of Freienstat destroyed, 19 Mist, advantageous and disad∣vantageous at the Battell of Lutzen, 136 Mitzvall a Swedish Colonel executed, 60, & 62 Monte-Cuculi takes Rain in Bavaria, 60 N. NAumburg taken by the King, 73 Norimberg the King encamps about it, 2 The towne described, 6 the mortality in the town, 23 Neustat upon the Aisch; the King goes thither with the Army, 58 O. ORation of the King of Sweden, to his Army at Norimberg, 23 Before the Battell of Lut∣zen, 126 Oxenstiern, concludes the Neu∣tralitie with Cullen, 28 Sets out with an Army from Mentz, towards the King, 28 left in Norimberg, 57 Comes to orders the wars, after the Battell of Lutzen, His Commission of Am∣bassador to the Armies. 178 P. PAppenheim, comes to∣wards Walstein, 73 & 110 Sent towards Hall, 112 Recalled, 114 Slaine, 143 His Testament, 143 Partees sent out from Norim∣berg Leaguer, 50, &c.
Peace, some overtures made of it, 27, & 28 Piccolomini his valour in the Battell of Lutzen, 144, 162 Sees the King of Sweden dying, 140 vastly rewarded by Walen∣stein, 158 Provisions for Walsteins Ar∣my, 11. R. RAin in Bavaria taken by Monte-Cuculi, 60 recovered by the King, 62 Reasons. for the Kings Encamping before Norimberg, 3 for his Rising from No∣rimberg, 55 of Walenstein for not figh∣ting, 78 for rising from Norimberg, 79 for spoiling Voitland, 91 given by Pappenheim to Walenstein, to have him take Erfurt, 110 Reasons debated, whither the King should fight or not, 120 Retreat of the King from Al∣temberg Castle, the order of it, 47 S. SAxon-Lawenburg, His speech the night before the Battell, 122 The wounded Kings speech to him, 136 Forsakes the King, and shifts himselfe out of the Battell, 137 made a Felt-Marshall, 138 Saxons cut off Holcks bridge, 101 Schweinfurt, jealous of Wal∣stein, 84 delivered by Duke Ber∣nard, 85 September 7th kept Holiday, 57 Sparre Colonell defeated, 21 propounds a Peace, 28 set at libertie, 48 Speech of the Kings, to those of Erfurt, 72 To those of Naumburg, 74 To Stolhansh in the Battell, 134 Stolhanshe his service in the fight, August 24. 43 The Kings speech to him in the Battell of Lutzen, 134 He brought off the Kings Body, 141 Stratageme of Kniphausens, 67 T. TOrgau, Walensteins de∣signe upon it, diver∣ted, 109 The Elector of Saxony,
and Duke of Lunenburg, conjoyn'd at it, 121 Tombs of Dukes of Saxony, in danger to be rifled: re∣deemed, 100 redeemed againe, 102 V. VIctory of Lutzen pub∣lished, 152 W. WAlenstein. joynes with Ba∣varia: and comes against the King, 2 vowes to burne Norim∣berg, 3 His and Bavaria's Forces, 7 His great Officers, 8 His great Leaguer descri∣bed, 8 His diseases: and Autho∣ritie in his Army, 10 His severity and bounty, 11 His good parts, 11 His Discipline and orders for his Army, 11 His purpose in besieging the King, 12 His first attempts upon the Countrey, 13, 14 Courts the King of Swe∣den, 16 The Emperour well plea∣sed with him, 27 His Trenches set upon, 38 Walenstein. his Horse said to bee shot under him, 49 said to be in danger of ta∣king, 50 Rises from Norimberg, 79 devides his Army, 82 His way and numbers, ibid. Parts with Bavaria, 83 Takes townes in Franco∣nia, 85 Put off from Culmbach, 85 and from Coburg Castle, 86 His purpose for marching thorow Duringen, diver∣ted, 89 Falls into Voitland, 90 Encamps at Weida, 91 Summons Leipsich, 103 takes the towne, 106 and the Castle, 107 Takes Weissenfels & Mers∣burg, 108 diverted from Torgau, 109 calles his Army together, 110 Opens a gapp for the King to march thorow him, 113 Prepares for the Battell, 114 Goes to Lutzen, 121 Toucht with a Bullet in the Battell, 162
Gives over the Field, 150 flyes into Bohemia, 155, &c Examples of his vast boun∣ty, 158 and Martiall Discipline, 159 The State he keeps, 159 Walenstein the younger, slaine at Lutzen, 154 William of Saxon-Weymar, his actions about the Bo∣densee, 30 Takes on the English, 30 Goes to joyne with Oxen∣stiern, 31 His Forces, 31 Winckle Colonel wounded in the Battell of Lutzen, 144 Wippenhorst Colonell; sent out by the King, 18 Z. ZWicka, taken by Holck, 93 Recovered by the Swedes, 176 FINIS.
An Elegie on the King of Sweden. VVHat sadd newes doth the curious strive to heare? So sad; he cannot safely live, and feare? I see in every eye a terror strooke, A griefe too great for credit; since we looke, On Kings, as if they were not clay and dust, Vaine hopes; in whom alone, men vainely trust. Say if at once, the great Gustavus dy'd In fight; such as would adde to Caesar pride. A death Triumphant, at whose spreading fall The Empire groan'd, as if t' expired withall. See how the cunning foes securely barke, Venting their malice from truth-hating darke, Reade their State-faces, for their hearts none can, But he who measures Heaven with a span. Observe their ioy, for such a barbarous thing, As ioy for losse, of a most manly King. What did you feare day-Owles? he would un-Crowne Your Triple-head, or breake your Idols downe? He sure had done it, but that God did see, It was not much to doe, by such as he: He saw we onely lookt upon his sword, And forgate him, who conqueres, by a word; Since then, so much on miracles you stand, God can raise up some weake and feebler hand, Flyes, Vermine, Frogges; such as did Pharaoh fright, A Lance of Bulrush, and a Lambe to fight. God sure will doe it, and his blood exact, At their foule soules, that ioy in such a fact. It is a souldiers trade, and pride to kill,
He may more safely doe, then you wish ill. Then doe not triumph on a Lyon dead, Whom living, all your men at armes did dread. Starting aside, as doe the fearefull brood, From his sterne eye that rules the gloomy wood. O thou wilt be long liv'd in Austrians feare, When thy great name shall strike their Nephewes eare. Yet let vs mourne thy losse, to all but thee: Who now art mixed with eternity, So was he borne, as he the heire had beene, Of skilfull warre; and victory his twinne: So didst thou show thy day, and close thy Eeven, As some new Planet had appear'd in Heaven. Predominant on Hills, and Vales, and Woods; Vnaccest Marshes, and resisting Flouds. Witnesse thy swift march on the various soyle Of German' pased, rather with power, then toyle. So art thou come and gone; as thou wert sent, To show what God can doe, not what he meant. For hadst thou liu'd one yeere above that day, Vien had beene thy seate, and Rome thy prey. But it was time to dye: least men had said, He was not mortall untill he were dead. And now he lives againe so full of glory: His deeds resist the credit of his Story.
Ʋpon the glorious King of Sweden. SEeke not (sadd Reader) here to find, Entomb'd the Throne of such a mind; As did the brave Gustavus fill: Whom neither time nor death can kill. Goe and read all the Caesars Acts, The Rage of Scythian Cataracts; What Epire, Greece, and Rome hath done: What Trophees Gothes and Ʋandals wonne. Reade all the worlds Heroick Story, And learne but halfe this Heroes glory; These conquered living: but life flying, Reviv'd their foes, He conquer'd dying: And Mars hath offered as he falls, An Hecatomb of Generals. The great Comparer could not tell, Whence to draw out his Paralell: Then doe not hope to know him here; For whom earth was a narrow Sphere: Nor by a search in this small narrow roome, To find a King so farre above a Tombe.
Ʋpon the King of BOHEMIA. STay (Reader) it is vaine to fly, Deaths universall Monarchy. Mankind hath no repose but one: A bed of dust, curtain'd with stone. Here lies a King whom envie must, Acknowledge to be good and iust; A Prince unflattered, worthier farre: Then his owne fame, or such as are. Pure gold by strong afflictions tried, By hope and patience mortified; Religious Martyr, Austrians hate: Vnchang'd in all the powers of fate. In this Tombe onely now at rest; Vntill the rising of the blest. It is enough this Tragedie to tell: This is the Prince for whom Gustavus fell.
AN ELEGY, Vpon the most victorious KING of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus. LIke a cold Fatall Sweat which Vshers Death, My Thoughts hang on mee: and my labouring Breath Stopt up with Sighes: My Phant'sy bigge with Woes Feeles two Twinn'd Mountaines struggle in her Throes, Of boundlesse Sorrow one, T'other of Sinne; For lesse let no one rate it. To Begin Where Honour Ends. In Great Gustavus flame That Stile burnt out, and wasted to a Name Does barely liue with us. As, when the Stuffe Which fed it failes, the Taper turnes to Snuffe. With this poore Snuffe; This Fiery Shaddow we, Of Fame and Honour must contented be; Since from the vaine graspe of our wishes fled Their glorious Substance is, now Hee is Dead. Speake it againe, and Lowder; Lowder yet: Else whilst we heare the Sound we shall forget What it delivers. Let hoarse Rumour cry, Till Shee so many Ecchoes multiply, Those may, like numerous witnesses, confute Our unbeleeving Soules, that would Dispute And Doubt this Truth for ever. This one way Is left our Incredulity to sway; To waken our deafe Sense, and make our Eares As open and dilated as our Feares; That we may feele the Blow, and feeling grieve At what we would not feine, but must beleeve: And in that horrid Faith behold the World, From her proud height of Expectation hurl'd, Stooping with Him; As if Shee strove to have No Lower Center now then Swedens Grave.
O! could not all thy purchas'd Victories, Like to thy Fame, thy Flesh immortalize? Were not thy Vertue, nor thy Valour charmes, To guard Thy Body from those outward harmes, Which could not reach Thy Soule? could not thy Spirit Lend somewhat, which thy Frailtie might inherit From thy Diviner part; that Death, nor Hate, Nor Envies bullets ere could penetrate? Could not thy early Trophees, in sterne fight Torne from the Dane, the Pole, the Muscovite? Which were thy Triumphs Seeds, as pledges Sow'n, That, when thy Honours harvest was ripe grow'n, With full Summ'd wing Thou Falcon-like would'st fly, And cuffe the Eagle in the Germane Sky: Forcing his Iron-Beake and Feathers feele, They were not proofe 'gainst thy Victorious Steele. Could not all these protect Thee? or prevaile To fright that Coward Death, who oft grew pale To looke Thee and thy Battailes in the face? Alas they could not. Destiny gives place To None. Nor is it seene that Princes Lives Can saved be by their Prerogatives. No more was Thine: who clos'd in thy cold Lead, Do'st from Thy selfe a mournfull Lecture read, Of Mans short dated Glory. Learne You Kings! You are like Him, but penetrable things: Though You from Demi-Gods derive your Birth, You are at best but Honourable Earth; And, how-ere Sifted from that courser bran, Which does Compound and Knead the Common Man: Nothing's Immortall or from Earth refin'd, About you, but your Office and your Mind. Here then breake your False Glasses, which present You Greater, then your Maker ever meant: Make Truth your Mirour now; Since you find all That flatter You, confuted by His Fall.
Yet since it was decreed, Thy Lifes bright Sunne Must be Eclips'd, ere Thy full Course was runne; Be proud, Thou didst in Thy Blacke Obsequies With greater Glory Set, then others Rise. For in thy Death, as Life, Thou heldest one Most just and regular proportion. Looke how the Circles drawne by Compasse meet, Indivisibly joyned head to feet, And by continued Points, which them unite, Grow at once Circular and Infinite: So did thy Fate and Honour now contend, To match Thy brave Beginning with thy End. Therefore Thou hadst, in stead of Passing Bels, The Drums and Cannons Thunder, for thy Knels. And in the Field Thou didst Triumphing Dye, Closing thy Eye-lids with a Victory. That so by Thousands, who there lost their breath, King-like Thou mightst be waited on in Death. Liv'd Plutarch now, and would of Caesar tell, He could make none, but Thee, his Parallell. Whose Tide of Glory swelling to the brim, Needs borrow no addition from Him. When did Great Iulius in any clime Atchieve so much, and in so small a time? Or if He did, yet shalt Thou in That Land Single for Him, and unexampled stand. When ore the Germanes first his Eagle towr'd, What saw the Legeons which on them he powr'd? But Massy Bodies, made their Swords to try, Subjects not for hisMagis trium∣phati quàm vi∣cti. Tacit: de Mor. Germ. Fight, but Slavery. In that so vast expanded peece of ground, (Now Swedens Theater and Tombe) he found Nothing worth Caesars valour, or his feare; No Conqu'ring Army, nor a Tilly there: Whose strength, nor wiles, nor practise in the Warre Might the fierce torrent of Thy Triumphes barre,
But that Thy winged Sword Twise made him yeeld, Both from his Trenches beat, and from the Field. Besides, the Romane thought he had done much Did he the Banke of Rhenus only touch: But though his March was bounded by the Rhine, Not Oder nor the Danube Thee confine; And, but thy Frailty did thy Fame prevent, Thou hadst Thy Conquests stretch't to such extent, Thou might'st Vienna reach, and after span From Mulda to the Baltick Ocean. But Death hath Spann'd Thee. Nor must we divine What Heire Thou leav'st to finish Thy Designe. Or who shall Thee succeed, as Champion For Liberty and for Religion. Thy Taske is done. As in a Watch the Spring Wound to the height relaxes with the String: So Thy Steele nerves of Conquest, from their Steep Ascent declin'd, lye slackt in thy Last Sleep. Rest then Triumphant Soule! for ever rest! And, like the Phoenix in her Spicy nest, Embalm'd with Thine owne Merit, upward fly, Borne in a Cloud of Perfume to the Sky. Whilst, as in deathlesse Vrnes; each noble Mind, Treasures thy Ashes which are left behind. And if perhaps no Cassiopeian Sparke, (Which in the North did Thy first Rising marke) Shine ore Thy Hearse: The breath of our just Praise Shall to the Firmament Thy vertues Raise, Then Fixe, and Kindle Them into a Starre, Whose Influence may crowne Thy Glorious Warre. HENRY KING.
On the famous CHAMPION of Christendome, Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, &c. CAn Christendom's great Champion sinke away Thus silently into a bed of Clay? Can such a Monarch die, and yet not have An Earthquake for to open him a grave? Did there no Meteor fright the Universe, Nor Comet hold a torch unto his hearse? Was there no clap of thunder heard to tell All Christendome their losse; and ring his Knell? Impartiall Fates! I see that Princes then, Though they live gods, yet they must dye like men; And the same passing bell must toll for them, Which rang but now, the beggars requiem. When such a soule is from the earth bereaven, Me thinkes there should be triumphs made in heaven; And teares should run at Tilt at his decease, To welcome him into a place of Peace: Who, though he made warre, yet did alwayes strive, Dying in warre, to leave peace still alive.
Ʋpon the most puissant and victorious Prince and Souldier, Gustavus Adol∣phus King of Sweden, &c. TIs sinne to weepe, or praise: oh let me vent My Passion only in astonishment. Who sheds a teare for thee, brave Swede, thus slaine, His eyes doe penance for his weaker braine. And yet those eyes themselves, deserve this doome: Which thus mistake a Trophie for a Tombe. Or else, Thy foes may weepe as then they dud, When as thou dy'dst: but all their teares were blood. Oh what a tempest, what a sea was forc't, Of tribute-groanes, and teares, to waft one ghost? No way, but death, they had, to fly thy face: Thou quit'dst thy body, to pursue the Chase. But, who pretends thy praise in best expression, Endicts his judgement of confest presumption. Bold tongue, touch not that head, that heart, that hand, Which brought on's knees, when he did tiptoe stand, The pride of Austria; back'd with all, but heaven; Himselfe of all, but of himselfe bereaven. Thus having plum'd th' Imperiall Bird, alone, Upon those Eagle-wings to heaven he's flowne. Why should he stay on earth? The game is done. Others can part the stake, which he hath wonne. Tis low ambition, underneath his Story, To aime at any Crowne but that of glory. Then Canon play, His bodie's sacrificed: He is not canon'd: no, Hee's canonized.
On the King of Sweden: An Elegie. IF thou be set in death, bright Northerne starre, That wert the Cynosure o'th'Germane warre, If (sublime soule) th'hast chose to disappeare In our horizon, to informe some spheare; (For, our incredulous hearts would misbeleeve Themselves faine, out of griefe, they have to grieve, And Fame and Fate are tender, yet t'addresse A truth so horrid to the world by expresse) Twas, lest thy superstitious legions shou'd Have idoliz'd an arme of flesh and blood. Oh thy prophetique soule that predivyn'd This cause, as prescious of th'Eternalls minde! So when God saw his Israel apt t'adore The glorious instrument, that wafted ore Their sea-sav'd tribes from Pharian servitude, Hee snatch'd that rich dust from the multitude. Or, wert thou (Brave Prince) thus subduc'd, to shew Twas to no thirst of Empire wee should owe Those rare atchievements, but to testifie Heaven was thy prize, thou mad'st such shift to die: Or, both to satisfie and yet convince The jealous feares of every rivall Prince, That at thy Mounty gaz'd with envious eye, Wert thou thus pleas'd un-emperor'd to die, For, thou hadst else characterd, in thy name And deeds, Augustus for thy Anagramme,
And all th'extracted quintessence, thy spirit Of all th'heroique Caesars did inherit; Only that thirst of purer glory stood Betwixt thy breath and such a publique good. So have I seene a Falcon (to soare high,) Lessen her selfe to invisibility: The glimpse of this made thee, so oft, expose Thy penetrable parts to shockes of foes, That one would thinke thou heldst intelligence With th'adverse Canon, or some Thetis drench Had fortifyed thee Cap a Pee'gainst steele, In all but (what foe never saw) thy heele, The sea-sequestring Chiefe, whose sceptred Rod Establish'd freedome to the Church of God, Had yet his period, and from Nebohs toppe Was faine, by Prospective, to tast that hope, He might not live to graspe i'th promis'd Land, Whose seizure heaven kept for a Ioshuahs hand: So thou (Mosaique Prince,) this faire foundation, By thee being laid to unslave the Germane nation: Dy'dst, though confin'd, content; Posterity Shall raise a roofe will crowne their liberty. Propitious heaven, some brawny nerves assigne To give perfection, to this high designe. Meane time, grim death, and greedy Destinies, Yee were not in some grave opinions, wise, To snappe his twine that sent you monethly shoales To plie your Stygian barck, of war-slaine soules: Now that his death hath dull'd Bellonas rage You may goe court Disease, or languid Age, Or blinde bold Empericks murthering ignorance; That quashes more lives then Art can advance, To keepe your Ferry custom'd, or depend On sinnes and plagues to expedite mans end. Since Fates grand factor for mortalitie, By your improvidence hath gain'd to die.
He that allai'd Bavaria's lofty puffe, Ruffled and discompos'd the Spanish Ruffe: Reduc'd Bohemia, the Palatinate Regain'd, check'd Colein, and gave Mentz the mate, Prick'd the swolne tympany o'th' Austrian pride, Taught her refluxes to the Catholique tide. Enforc'd that oyle of Empire from his brinke Of Vastnesse, downe to Reasons Center sink, That re-invested truth and liberty In all his visits, through faire Germany, That tooke-in Cities with his very name, And Caesar-like, Came, Saw, and Overcame, That having done th'Imperiall office, (sav'd Religion,) yet th'Imperiall wages wav'd, With the petard of whose Authentique word All ports flew ope: upon whose lightning sword Sate wing-clip'd Victory, who in sterne fight Wonne with his pike more then his pen can write: The fount of indeficient Stratagems, Th' Assertor of inthralled Diadems, That knew no quarrell, but the publique right, Whose valour forc'd all fortitude to flight; That rush'd through danger, as if none were neere, When nothing else was nigh; fear'd onely feare: Who though he could not daunce the Brawles, yet, in His compleat steele could tread a Matachin, And without Mimmick complements or Cringes, Had th'active Rhetoricke that turn'd the hinges Of all the grand designes of Christendome; And th'art, or to convert or conquer Rome; That like the Danuby rising but a spanne, Grew boundlesse as his Baltique Ocean, And by fine force, no Sinons slye surprise, Got, (Alexander-like) faire victories. That like the Sunne, which from his early East Gallops in twelve houres progresse to the West,
In eight moneths (as his historie reports) Conquer'd his eighty Cities, Castles, Forts; That, humble at his rise, knowing how nigh Supremacy borders on tyranny, Yet (Phaebus-like) concentred at his set His beames, to cleare with glory, Natures debt; That had the skill so rarely to combine, Sweetnesse with strictnesse in his discipline. That what the rigid Captaine could not bring To bow, crept to the milde Majestique King. (And yet how oft hath he the King declin'd To unscrue a Centinells or Perdues minde) That par'd those Vultur-talons, and that beake R'envers'd, that under Ioves bird joy'd to wreake Their bloody teene on the recrescent breast O'th'publike weale, for private interest. And (skie-borne Perseus) from the ravenous jaw Of Fridland, freed th'enchain'd Andromeda: Hee, he is slaine, and yet the stupid world Is not with him, backe to her Chaos hurld. For, staulking Eulogies, and talking tombes Are Popular incense, such as Fortunes groomes Are sacred with: and now each Burgers herse, Yawnes for her hachments, and her teares in verse; And shall He have no more? He whose retreate Was Crown d with victory; on whose last sweate (The steame whereof had fainted us) a flood Waited in stead of teares of Romane blood, Whose camp (the Campus Martius of the North, Where he sow'd soldiers) brought Commanders forth, Whose forward springs were differenc'd from ours, By putting winter sieges forth for flowers, Whose eager pursuites of adventures hard, Rivers nor Rocks nor Forrests could retard; Beyond whose courage no plus ultra's were, And yet no soldiers wants beneath his care,
Whose Mausolaean monument is All, That Germany shall henceforth freeborne call; And must He have no more? fond Griefe! no more! This sea that hath no bottome, knowes no shore. Yet thankes to Fortune, this grand-sacrifice (That did in him whole hecatombes comprize) Was, like a Romane expiation, lead To death with wreathes of honour on his head. Shee that sits Pilot at the sternes of States, And all these casuall conquests moderates, Saw that unlesse this Worthies blood were spilt, The fortune of the warre would over-tilt To us: and Sweden proving Conqueror Had triumph'd both 'ore Ferdinand and Her, Therefore to appease his Griefe, to peize our Pride; And ballast Fortunes Barke, Gustavus dyde.
Ʋpon the King of Swedens Death. BRave Prince, although thy fate seeme yet too strange To be believ'd in Paules, or on the Change, Though we lay wagers, and doe gladly choose, To take that side where wee are sure to loose. Wee but deceive our griefe, and faine would say Thou liv'st, to give our sorrow longer day: Were there no reason else, this might suffice To prove thee dead, that we want victories. Wee heare of no townes taken, and the Foe Hath beene too long without an overthrow. In thee the fortune of the warre expir'd, And now what can be done to be admir'd? To what use serves thy Army, but to weepe! Whose greatest conquest now must be, to keep. But when thou didst command the valiant host, How did thy victories out-fly the post? How were they here before the saile, or winde That brought the newes, but still left more behind? One scarce could travell so much ground so fast, As thou didst overcome: such warlike hast Went with thy deeds, which did all letters stuffe, That wee could not beleeve them fast enough. With thee to conquer was the same as passe: Anothers long siege, but thy journey was: And they which did thy sudden marches see, Say 'twas thy progresse to take Germany; Indeed, what was the citie, or the place That thought it not a siege to see thy face.
And did not to thy single terror yeeld More then thy troopes, who only mad'st the field. For, when, at first thy Army was so small That the Foes poorest Regiment was all, Who seeing with brave scorn that venturous sight, Might thinke thou cam'st to Muster, not to fight, Yet thou mad'st both sides equall, and with thee Thy few men prov'd more then thy foes to bee. Who when he lost the day found that the warre Lay more in thee then in his numbers farre: Which made him, when his Ensigne he forsooke, To fly, not from the ordnance, but thy looke, For though the Canon plaid, and bullet flew, Thou mad'st the battle, and from thee they slew. Who could'st instruct thy Engins; scarce a shott Went from thy soldiers gunne without a plot. And dangers which it felt, could not impart; Were still increast and made more sure by Art. As if it had not beene enough to kil, Unlesse thou didst subdue the foe in skill. Which from thy Childhood thou hadst learn'd so well, That thou didst then things for the Chronicle, And mad'st thy name great, even when so yong, Almost to use thy sword before thy tongue. And farre beyond thy yeares, thy face did move Feare in thy neighbours, when in Ladyes love. But all thou didst then in thy younger age, (Although enough for others) did presage Only thy riper Conquests: and did try, By lesser warre to conquer Germany. Now every march was project, and to move Did Stratagem and a new conquest prove. Hadst thou been then when the unpractis'd age Did know no other valour but their rage, When Alexander met his Asian Foe, Whose soldiers were no Army, but a show;
Each man so sprucely drest, each horse so gay, And only trim'd to make the braver pray. Thy deeds had then beene wonder, and lesse Art Had conquer'd all the world, then now a part. Alas 'tis easie to be victor there Where the Foe first disarmes himselfe with feare. And many have been great Commanders thought, For meeting with no enemies that fought. But there to purchase glory, and to bee A Conqueror, where so much victorie Had often gone before: and there to winne, Where to scape fairely had a Conquest beene: Shewes all the Stories that are writ of old, Are but small truthes when thy exploits are told. Of which this was a great one, that to show Thou gav'st thy passions first an overthrow. Thy fortune did not swell thee, none could guesse By thy vaine triumphs, at thy good successe. No soldier did insult, so tame the drumme Thy selfe so humble, as if overcome, When most victorious. These were things did move Thy enemies, and made them Conquest, love More then their peace before, who to be free Did gladly choose to be o'recome by thee: And if perchance they did one charge abide They did resist, as they were on thy side. For thou by all with such desire wert seene, As if no foe, but hadst their Captaine beene, And fought'st for them thou took'st: who did indure No other Change, but to be more secure. Such wert thou to thy foe, but more thy care, To be such to thy Armie, as they were To one another; who didst use to make Each meane impment glorious for thy sake. And would'st ennoble the obscurest place, And make the lowest office not seeme base,
By giving first example: while thy hand Did more then thou to others didst command. Each Captaine was thy equall, but in this: That still thy danger was farre more then his. While with an even presence thou would'st dare To passe the Canon, though thy death lay there. With such a bold and fearelesse march we reade The Angel did the holy Armies lead: Who free from all attempts would stand betweene Two furious Camps, as much unhurt, as seene. And so didst thou (great soule) till heaven did see That thy bare rules great Conquerors would be, And tooke thee hence: who to requite thy fall Left thy example to be Generall.
On the King of Sweden. I Will not weepe thy losse; nor say ther's none Can relieve bed-rid vertue; thou being gone. I will not curse thy victory, or say, Though we were Conquerors, we lost the day. That thou wert all of us; that in thy fall, (Thou being its soule) 'twas the worlds funerall; They that thus mourne, and sadly mention Thee, Pittie themselves; and make an Elegie On their owne hopes: and troubled at thy doome, With crafty sorrow write on Christendome: I that have read devoutly all thy Raigne, And fear'd a feaver, Age, or some such paine, As easie Princes die of; might surprise Thy ripe designes: robbing thy Obsequies Of wonder and amazement: blesse thy fall, Worthy thy Great selfe; braver farre then All Thy envyed Actions: there being nought to doe, Greater then what th'hast done, but to die so. When thou hadst tam'd all powers; made every thing So hopelesse weake, Embassadors might winne: Thou wouldst no longer stay: to shew thy hand Aim'd at a Nobler Triumph, then their land. That King who shall thy worth, thy warre intend; May get thy Empire, hardly such an end.
Ʋpon the King of Sweden. THe Youth, hereafter, when old wives shall chat Gustaves high deeds; will aske What Giant's that? For if by vertue wee may measure man, He did exceed sixe cubits and a spanne. That size was low to him: for wee now tell A Storie higher growne then Chronicle. Where wee finde none that ever labour'd more To take away, then he did to restore. When Austria's Court, Astraea out had hurld; Then up stood He, Chiefe Iustice of the world. O're Free States Caesar did himselfe extoll; And on their ruines, reer'd his Capitoll. When he usurpt that Peece which had not on His Image or his Superscription. What though the Eagle be the highest flowne? Yet was not th'ayre diffus'd for him alone: But every bird, how small so ere it be, Hath as good right to its owne nest, as he. Rome for her best example, is paid all: And Carthage for her oft lent Hanniball. Vertue the theme, the Schoole boy now needs none But Him, to make his declamation. Who by so much Romes Fabius doth surpasse; As others he; yet no Cunctator was, In his quick expeditions: Hee'd not be: Like to the crawling Spaniard: whom you see, Hath for the poore Low-Countryes warr'd so long, That they claime now by just prescription.
Which land though wonne at length, must cost too deare; Since that of Canaan cost but forty yeare: His speed will make time think, he had the hap, At once to view and conquer, by the Map. Whose hand fought Brachygraphie: and did take More in an houre, then ever tongue yet spake. For no Curranto in a weeke could say, So much as He could doe, but in a day. And when it seem'd to lie, or write too much In English; 'twas good Historie in Dutch. If it some townes, his Conquest had out-runne, As Prophecie; 'twas true ere all was done. Yet dealt he not with such as us'd to yeeld; They never gave; He alwayes tooke the field. For when the game was his, and wonne the day; 'Twas not their dotage, but his owne good play. Armed when he retreated; he would goe, Like a Sheld-Sea-Crab, backwards; and as slow. His front was to'ards; though from the foe his pace: And lookt then like a Ianus, both sides face, Like that stoutDavid 2 Sam. 24.13, 14. Hebrewes choise; rather then flying, Desyr'd his men should be three dayes a dying. Whose royall soule justly to dwell, deny'd, In her owne body, yet unglorifi'd. He was a Dog, no King, first chose to rub His wretched life out, in a narrow tub. "Who thinkes the world too skant; a holy heate "Iustly entitles to the style of Great. Besides, the body rightly thought upon, Is to the soule, but her Pavilion: Whose nerves about the bones do tye the skinne, As coards the canvasse doe, unto the pinne. And at the first wise Nature never meant, To make the soldiers mansion, of his tent. Wherefore this Prince like Moses, after Hee Had led the people from captivitie;
And scourg'd the nations, like some humane God, Till rivers bled, done wonders with his rod: Dy'd on the top of honour. Pisgah is For a brave height, a mount much short of this. But lest we worship Him: we know not where, This day to finde his hidden Sepulcher. FINIS.
THE SWEDISH INTELLIGENCER. The Fourth Part. RELATING THE CHIEFEST OF THOSE MILITARY Actions of the Swedish Generalls: wherein the King himselfe was not personally with the Armie. As in the Palatinate, Triers, Alsatia, Suevia, Westphalia, the Lower Saxony, and Silesia. Wherein you have Those Proceedings, omitted in the Second Part: which are continued, untill the time of the Kings death. LONDON, Printed for NATH: BVTTER and N. BOVRNE, MDCXXXIII.
THE SWEDISH INTELLIGENCER. The advancing of another Spanish Armie into the Palatinate, after the King of Swedens depar∣ture thence towards Bavaria. What they did and suffered there, from Easter Eve untill Whitsuntide 1632. with their retiring out of it; the Rhinegraves pursuit of them: and the State they left the countrey in. THat the Spaniards had twice before, since the King of Swedens cōming into these parts; attempted the re-enforcing of their weakned garri∣sons in the Lower Palatinate; and how they had, both times, beene forced over the Mosel againe, by the King and Rhinegrave: we in ourSee pag. 58. and 75, of that booke. Second part have before told you. Hearing now the King to be marcht up after Tillie; and their friend the Imperiall Generall Commissary Ossa, to bee very desperate & busie in Alsatia, next unto the Palatinate:
they in March following, resume their former enterprise; & provide thēselves of two several armies, for that purpose. Foureteene thousand strong, (though some mention but 10000, & others 80 0) was the first armie said to march up, and the Count of Embden was their Generall. Some beleeve that the Spanish Marquesse de Santa Croce,The Count of Embden comes wih an army into the Palati∣nate. was also in the action with him. The second armie was to be brought up by Don Cordova: who was to releive the Count of Emb∣den. Much encouragement had the Spanish, to hasten this their undertaking; for that they had intelligence sent them home from about Triers, that there was some contrast and jealousies betwixt diverse of those chiefer Commanders and Governours of townes in the Palatinate; whom the King had left there at his departure. The Count of Embden with the first armie, upon our Easter eve, the last of march 1632; passed himselfe in good order,They being past the Mosel, by the bridge of Triers citie, over the river of Mo∣sel: which they might freely enough doe, for that they had the favour generally of the Elector of Triers subjects; and a garrison of their owne men in this citie The Spaniards be∣ing now upon the Easterne side of the said river, they first of all (as both times heretofore they had done) go along the banck of it, unto Traerbach: two and twenty English miles, to the North-east from the bridge aforesaid. In the strong castle of this towne (like as in the most of all the good townes of this Electorate, those excepted which the Rhine∣grave ere whiles had put them out of) had they their gar∣risons. Thence advance they unto Kirchberg in the Hunts∣ruck, twelve English miles to the East of Traerbach. In this towne,take in Kirch∣berg, had the Rhine-grave at his late taking of it, left 200 men (who indeed were not above 160) for the de∣fence of it. These (though but a weake garrison God knowes,) yet endured they some Canon shots before they would listen to a composition: which, there being no other remedy, they were glad upon souldiers termes to accept of; and the Spaniards as glad to yeeld them, their intent be∣ing
to make hast into the further parts of the Palatinate. Next advance they unto Simmern,and Simmern. 5 or 6 English miles to the North of Krchberg: which towne they found not in so good a posture of defence as that they came last from, but readyer to take the Law from the stronger Some Swe∣dish forces there were, enquartered here and there, in the better townes of this countrey of the Huntsruck. These rallying themselves now together; were resolved to make some head against the proceedings of the Spaniards. But not being of themselves strong enough to confront the grosse of the Spanish armie, and out of hope withall to be seconded from about Mentz; and all through the bad correspondency betwixt their chiefe leaders: (Duke Bernard I meane, and the old Rhine-grave) contented themselves onely to lie up∣on the catch, and to intercept some loose troopes of their enemies; which for pillage sake,but afterwards loose 5 Cor∣nets to the Swedish. durst adventure the strag∣ling a little further from the armie. At severall times, they latcht up 4 or 5 of the Spanish Ensignes, which were at Mentz afterwards presented unto the Queene of Sweden. This countrey of the Huntsruck is very apt indeed for such like military reprisals: it being a very hilly and woody place: as if nature had meant it for the dressing of ambusca∣does; into which such strangers as are not well traded in the countrey, may easily enough fall. The Count of Embden never staying to revenge this, mar∣ches North-ward towards Over-wesel first, and to Boppart afterwards, this last lying not far from Coblents, where the Rhine entertaines the Mosel. These two townes,They cleere the countrey, as farre as the bancks of the Mosel. and by their taking, all that corner of the Huntsruck, and Bishop∣ricke of Triers, betwixt the Rhine and Mosel, being thus a∣gaine made Spanish, (even as farre as Coblents, where of old they had a garrison:) the Count of Embden converts his armes up againe by the Rhines side towards the Southward,and making all the speed he could to the bancks of the river Nah, whose streame runnes traverse to his marching.then passe the Nah into the Palatinate. Where this river droppeth into the Rhine, stands the town
of Bingen, and 10 English miles to the Northward up the said streame, is the towne of Creutznach. To both them the Spaniards now send some Partees, who bringing these word againe that the townes were defended with good Scottish and Germane garrisons: they forbeare to attempt either of them, quietly passing the river Nah, betwixt both, into the Palatinate. In none of these their proceedings hitherto (except where wee before told you) had they met with any consi∣derable power of opposition. The Swedish armie was not yet advanced into the field,The Rhinegrave now sent out to observe them, the Rhinegrave onely with his Horse-regiment had hitherto beene by Oxenstiern sent out from Mentz towards them; and that rather to observe them then oppose them. He perceiving them after their passing of the Nah, to advance to the Eastwards towards Mentz, retires still before them, till he came to Nider-Vlm; within 6 or 7 English miles of Mentz,sits downe to stoppe them at Nider Vlm. to the South-west-ward. Here sets he downe his Regiment: because that this was the neerest Passe, by which the Spanish must come at Mentz citie. At this dorp, ends that ledge of little mountaines; which by a small rivers side (for 8 or 10 miles together) comes trending along from the very Rhine bancks. The Spanish having borne up close hitherto, with the Rhinegrave; and being now approacht within halfe a league of him: they at that distance, about the tenth of our April, there sate downe and rested. Hereabouts (at Mentz) they learned by some countrey Boores, that the chiefest of the Swedish forces were now amassing; and that here, if any where, they were likely to meet with opposition. And they judged rightly: For now at Mentz, was the Rex-Chancellor Axel Oxenstiern: who together with that gal∣lant yong sparke Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weimar; had an armie in readinesse of 15000 foot, and 72 Horse Cornets. The Spanish had notice,who, whilest Duke Bernard prepares to draw out the Armie. besides, given them, of the new and great fortifications about the citie; and that Duke Ber∣nard had already drawne out the most of these troopes, into
the new worcks: which the King before his going had given order to be made; aswell for the lodging of a campe royall there, as for the safe-guard of the 2 new bridges, over the Rhine and Maine; all which you may see described page 57. of our Second part. Thus much had Duke Bernard done, by the seventh of April; at which time, the Spanish were comne up within a day and halfes march of Creutznach. The towne lying at this guard; and the Rhinegraves horse (at the Poast we last told you of) enquartered betwixt the Spaniards and the citie: they, (having intelligence of his posture) first resolve to set upon him there; before those o∣ther forces should be drawne out of the citie, to assist him. Friday morning before day light, April 13. was the time they appointed to make a Cavalcado upon his Quarters; and Lucas Cagro, Commissary Generall of the Cavallery, was the man; that with 1400 horse in 12 Cornets, undertooke the action. It so chanced, that the Rhinegrave, the very night before, had received both notice and assistance; and was both wayes now provided, to entertaine them. The Chancellor Oxenstiern had newly sent him 400. Finland horse, under the well-tryed Colonel Stolhanshe, who had also taken up his lodging upon the side of the same hill, on which the Rhinegraves men lay nquartered. Towards them (though not close up to them) the Rhinegrave that night hitched; giving notice unto Stolhanshe withall, of the Spanish purposes, Don Lucas knowing nothing, that his e∣nemies knew so much; thinkes in the darke morning to get the advantage of the hill-knap, and then to fall downe upon them with the more weight afterwards: he still supposing his enemie to be in his old Quarters. The hill top that Don Lucas thought to have gotten, was the same knap which the Rhinegrave had before possessed himselfe of: on the side of which, Stolhanshe was also lodged. The Spanish thus in the darke morning, with as much silence as they could, mounting up the climb of the hill; stumbled first upon Stol∣hanshe and his Finlanders, all ready in array to entertaine
them. These charging one another; downe comes the Rhine∣grave at the noise of the first volleyes, upon the polles of them.defeates 1400 horse of the Spaniards, that first set upon him. The Spaniards having once discharged their pistolls and Carbines; and not being able to discerne, what forces they had now to deale withall: never staid to charge the second time; but turned their backes with all speed, and in much disorder hastened downe the hill againe. The Fins charge them upon the croopes: and the Rhinegrave follow∣ed them downe the hill likewise. There were 10 fresh Spanish Cornets, now comming into the succour of their fellowes: who meeting them altogether now in rout, turne the bridle in like manner, and runne away with them for company, towards the leaguer. The Swedish still pur∣sued, till the Spanish had recovered under favour of their owne Canon. In this flight, the Spanish left 5 (8 some say) Horsemens Cornets behind them, with about 120 com∣mon souldiers. Don Lucas his Liefetenant-Colonel (whom they called Generall Adjutant,) was here taken prisoner: to∣gether with 2 Ritt-masters or Horse-captaines, some few Officers, and divers common souldiers; all which were sent to Mentz, to be kept in durance for their ransome. And now because wee have chanced upon these two names, of Commissary-Generall of the Cavallery; and Gene∣ral-Adjutant: it shall not be amisse (I hope) for the under∣standing of our storie the better; to digresse a little, for the expounding of these two offices. I take it, that this Com∣missary-Generall of the Cavallerie: is not altogether unlike a Sergeant Major of the horse, in the Swedish discipline: be∣yond whom, he hath the power of a Commissarie, for the provision of the troopes,See how ma∣ny marching men make up a compleat Brigade: in our Booke of the Swedish dis∣cipline. over which he is Major. Hee is called Commissary-Generall; because his command is not in a single Regiment alone; but either over all the horse of the Armie; or some Brigade at least in it. Which Brigade in the Spanish discipline is not so small a Bodie of men, as the Swedish Brigades be: but it is a full Tercio (so the Spanish call a Brigade) that is, a whole third part of the Armie, how
many soever the Armie be. The General-Adjutant, that was Leiftenant to this Commissary: was the Leiftenant-Colo∣nel to his Regiment. The General-Adjutants office, is to bee assistant to the Generall: That is, to be sent abroad for the giving or speeding of the Generalls commands, to the rest of the armie. He is commonly some able man, or some fa∣vourite at least unto the Generall. His place in the Armie, is that of a Leiftenant-Colonel; of whom hee hath prece∣dence, but is behinde all Colonels. A General-Adjutant is the same officer, which in our English discipline, wee call a Cor∣porall of the field. The French call him Vn aide de Camp: an Aide or Assistant of the field. To returne to our Storie. The Spaniards being thus put to the rout: and having in the time passed since the last fight had about 100 of their men slaine, and as many more taken prisoners; that had beene sent out upon espyalls, and for pro∣visions: the rest collecting by the sequell, that the Swedish armies were alreadie drawne out into the field: they all that day, and the next after it, contained themselves within their quarters. There (if by their next actions wee may sup∣pose) did they thus resolve among themselves, That seeing Mentz was too strong to be medled withall, and that the Swedish forces (now comne together) were likely to be up∣on them at every turne, and to way-lay them withall, upon their march, betwixt Mentz and the Palatinate;The next purposes of the Spanish that there∣fore the best of their play would be, by a sudden advan∣cing to get before them; and by making towards Franken∣dale, to re-enforce themselves by joyning with Don Philip. Their next purpose was to take in Spires citie, and the townes next unto it: where, being backed with the neigh∣bourhood of William Marquesse of Baden, Ossa and Harin∣court, (all then in the neerer parts of Alsatia) they resolved to expect the comming of the Swedish: and there to accept or offer battell, according to occasion, or advantage. This, (as if it had beene the maine of their intention) they next day put in execution. April 14, therefore, brea∣king
up from thence,They dislodg, they march to Altzeim 12 English miles to the Southward of them. Here they quarter for that night: holding very faire correspondencie towards the towns∣men. From Altzeim goe they the 15 unto Bockenheim; a dorp with a castle at it,and make to∣wards Spiers citie. nere unto Neulingen, 16 English miles further to the Southward: where, upon the downes or wylde and hillie heath, they for that night encamped. Hence mig their fires be discerned, from off Wormbs steeple. Facing it about now to the Left, they the 16 arrive at Grunstat; a towne but one league and a halfe from Boc∣kenheim, to Wormbs-ward; and within 7 or 8 English miles of it. Hither, the same day, out of Franckendale, (9 Eng∣lish miles to the South of Wormbs, and upon the same river of Rhine with it) comes Don Philip de Sylva,Don Philip de Sylva joynes with them. with 2000 horse and foot (3000, some name) and 10 pieces of ordi∣nance, to joyne with them. The Spanish thus re-enforced, and so neere now unto the Imperiall citie of Wormbs: verily beleeved it was, that they had a moneths minde towards it. But from these thoughts, was Don Philip able to disswade them: who having beene so neere a neighbour unto Wormbs these many yeares; could well enough now enforme them, how strong a garrison of Swedish foot, with 8 Cornets of horse, (besides the Traine-bands of the Burgers) there now was within the citie. For this reason (perchance) did the Spaniards forbeare to attempt upon it. The next day, April 17, againe facing it about to the Right: towards Spiers ci∣tie they make, which then bare due South of them. That night unto Turckenheim they come: 2 leagues and a halfe from Grunstat. By this time, had they well enough stored themselves with other mens cattell, and such like countrey provisions: Souldiers commonly (especially if enemies) having this good qualitie with them, not to leave, but to take,The wood is called Hart, in which it stan∣deth. things where they finde them. April 18, they get up as farre as Neustat upon the Hart, by the small river of Spier∣bach: a very good towne, 9 English miles due south of Turckheim.
All these places, tis true, lie not in a straight line from Altzeim unto Spiers: and yet not much out of the way, nei∣ther: but being good townes, the Spanish thought not too much of the labour, to steppe aside a little, for to take them. April 19, turning a little more to the Eastward: they reach 4 leagues further: and within 5 English miles of Spiers ci∣tie. The next day being the 20 they first shew themselves before the ports of it: and the grosse of their Armie being in the afternoone comne up; they immediately shew them their Canon, and demand up the citie. A faire, but not very strong Imperiall town this is, (yea the Chamber of the Em∣pire.) The place of it, is upon the Westerne bancke of the river Rhine; some 11 or 12 English miles on this southerne side of Manheim, in the Palatinate. It had heretofore ac∣corded with the King of Sweden, and accepted of his gar∣rison: as Page 59 of our Second Part, wee have told you. It was now kept with some 200 men, by Colonel Horneck: who had heretofore done the King very good service. And now also, as if he had not yet forgone all his former courage and reputation; he answeres the first summons, as if he had meant to have beaten the Spaniards out of Christendome: for he thunders and sallies upon them, bravely. But the Spa∣nish bringing forward their Approaches or Rowling tren∣ches, soberly; and with many hands, having by the next morning almost perfected their lines, and gotten up 1, or 2, Batteries: Horneck, fearing another Blacke May day of it, should his towne be stormed: he upon the very next sum∣mons, the second day of planting of the siege; hangs out his white flag, to treat upon the rendring. The chiefe of the Articles which he desired for his gar∣rison, were these foure.The Spanish take Spiers. 1. To goe out with full Armes, swords by their sides,The conditi∣ons. Colours flying, drummes beating, bullet in the mouth, and matches lighted. 2. To have all his baggage, for himselfe and company.
3. To have foure field peices. 4. To be convoyed by the Spaniards as farre as Wormbs, 20 miles English, downe the Rhine, to the Northward. For the townesmen, (Lutheranes for the most part) hee to this purpose articled. That they should not be molested in their persons goods, priviledges, nor consciences. For the Cloyster-people, and the Lawyers (which were many) and such other Officers and dependants upon the Imperiall Chamber; he needed not make any conditions for their safeties: for they being all Catholicks, were of themselves so able to make a partie in the Citie, in favour of the Spanish; that they had beene one of Hornecks chiefe feares, and the occasion of his so sudden giving up the citie. And thus was the faire and Imperiall citie of Spiers ren∣dred up unto the Spanish; about 10 a clock in the forenoone April 21, This being May-day, according to the Spanish computation. Some say, that Colonel Horneck had (with that garrison) undertaken the keeping of the citie; and had refused other succours:Duke Bernard going to re∣lieve Spiers, comes too late. which if he did, he was then the more to blame for it; for that, had he held it out, hee had within a day or two beene relieved. Duke Bernard Weymar, with the Pa∣latine Birckenfeldt, having once learned which way the Spaniards after the last fight April 13, had directed their march, he upon the 16, advanced with 8000 foot and 3000 horse, out of Mentz, to have followed after them: and to have adventured to releive whatever place, they should have attacked. He was already comne as farre as Wormbs, to this purpose: which was within little more then a dayes march, of the Spanish leaguer. Some say, that Horneck had notice of all this: and so much was at his sending for to Mentz, laid unto his charge by the Chancellor Oxenstiern; who immediately sent up word to the King, of his manner of yeelding up the citie. Horneck, indeed denied, any notice he had of Duke Bernards comming: notwithstan∣ding which, he was still kept under arrest, till his sentence
came out of Bavaria from the King, that hee should lose both Horne and necke too, for it. But execution was defer∣red, and his excuses, of the impossibility for him with 200 men, to make good such a compasse of walls; when, especi∣ally, so potent a faction domineered in the towne, were accepted: which were, indeed, presented to the King, in his behalfe, by the Queenes Majestie, Duke Bernard, and some others. Duke Bernard hearing Spiers to be thus taken by the Count of Embden;and and that Don Gonzales de Cordova was alreadie upon his march in the further parts of Luxemburg,returnes home againe, upon hearing of Don Cordo∣vaes comming. to passe the Mosel also into the Palatinate, for the seconding of Count of Embden: he sends part of the Armie to∣wards Manheim, first, and returnes the other towards Mentz againe:Manheim, whence the Rhinegrave was with some of them, sent towards the Mosel, for the stopping of Don Cordova. Wormbs was at that time also taken new order for;Wormbs, and that gallāt Cavalier Christopher Haubald (who had late∣ly taken Hanaw, as P. 22, of our Sec. Part we told you) now became their Governor. Hanaw citie (you may please to understand) had beene restored to its Earle, the Lord of it; and Haubald with the Kings garrison, drawne out of it. He being now Governor of Wormbs, had 24 foot-companies, and one troope of horse, left in it for his garrison: the o∣ther 7 Cornets of horse which were in it, when the Spani∣ards, tother day, marcht by it; being now drawne out, to augment the Armie, Haubald, first of all, slights and disman∣tles part of the Suburbs: the better to fortifie the citie: at which worke, causing 1500 Labourers to be daily employ∣ed; he hoped within 14 or 16 dayes to make it so fensible; as not to feare the first sight or terror of an enemie.and Mentz, strengthned. Mentz had all this while beene new strengthned, by the labours of 3000 Boores and souldiers; and some new worckes made to it: especially by the Gustavi-Stadt, or New towne, which the King of Sweden had caused to be added to it. In this towne, and a little before this; had the Bailiffe of
Mentz beene laid hold of and imprisoned by the Chancel∣lor. His fault was, for having continued a secret correspon∣cie with his old master the Archbishop: and for having made a late and secret voyage to him unto Cullen. The Chancellor, it seemes, since the Spaniards marching by, had beene abroad to looke to other places. At his comming home, about this April 20. the French Ambassador still resi∣dent in Mentz, made a great complaint of the Colonel the Governor, whom the Chancellor had left within the citie. The cause was, for that he upon the hearing of the Ecclesia∣sticks faction in Spires, in favour of the Spanish: had com∣manded those at Mentz, to depart the citie; and had arre∣sted some of them, for not obeying. The wise Oxenstiern willing to gratifie the Ambassador, released the arrest quiet∣ly, and restored the Ecclesiasticks to their Cloysters. Towards the end of April, came the Queene of Sweden into Mentz: whom the Chancellor with some gallanter troopes of horse, went to meet withall. Diverse Princes and Gentlemen (both of the Countrey and Armie) went al∣so to receive her Majestie as farre as Costum;The Queen of Sweden comes to Mentz. about a mile or 2 from Mentz, and on the other side of the Maine towards Franckford. Here were 80 Companies of foot also put into Battaglia: through whom, the Queene with a traine of 20 coaches passing over the new made bridge; tooke up her lodging in the Electorall Palace, where shee remained till August after, that she went towards Wurstburg. The Queenes person thus brought into a place of safetie, and these 3 good townes, with others, taken order for; part of the Armie is sent with the yong Rhinegrave towards the Mosel:The Swedish sent towards the Mosel, to oppose Don Cordova. fresh newes being againe brought to Mentz, that Don Cordova was comne almost as neere as Triers, with 22 troopes of horse, and 6000 foot forces. This was about the beginning of our May, the 8 of which moneth, Duke Bernard Weymar having at Mentz discharged him∣selfe of the Armie; goes through Wormbs immediately up into Bavaria, to the King of Sweden: the cause of whose
discontent, wee shall anon tell you; when namely, wee en∣ter into Gustavus Hornes Storie. Wee left the Count of Embden within Spires, whose Armie since their taking of that towne, had attempted no∣thing upon the rest of the countrey: excepting onely that he enquartered some troopes in Aenwiler, Cron-Weissen∣burg and Landaw. The occasion for this was (I suppose) in the Marquesse of Baden; as wee shall tell you by and by. From the townesmen of Spiers, (notwithstanding any former conditions made with Horneck) did the Count de∣mand 100000 Dollars,The Count of Embdens do∣ings in Spiers. which upon their complaint of pover∣tie, were moderated to 80000. His souldiers made bold with their Hosts, now and then, if they saw any thing that liked them. Diverse of the richer sort, were now likewise accused for former practises with the Swedes: but the quar∣rell was not to the men, but to their purses. The Marquesse William of Baden (he that is commonly called so) having beene by his Imperiall Majestie appointed his Generall heretofore, in this Circle of the Rhine:The Mar∣quesse of Baden demands to have Spiers surrendred unto him. sent word now, unto the Count of Embden, that he had order from his Imperiall Majestie, to take the citie of Spiers (which was the Chamber of the Empire) into his owne charge, and Imperiall protection. The Count returned him this answere; That he for his part, had commission from the King of Spaine to take in so much of the countrey, as had heretofore beene Spanish: so that every man being obliged to perform his best service for his owne Master,The Count of Embdens deni∣all of it. & to expect his commands only: hee could not see that hee ought to yeeld up his possession in the place, untill hee saw some or∣der for it from the Court of Brussells. This returne was the Marquesse constrained to accept of for an answere. But the Count of Embden very suddenly after this, was fayne of himselfe, to forsake the towne, without receiving any other Commission from Brussells, then that hee could not from thence be relieved.His necessi∣ties. The Swedish troopes alreadie advanced towards the Mosel, intercercepted a Courryer
and a Packet of his to Don Cordova, and her Highnesse the Archduchesse: That unlesse he might be seconded from thence, within 14 dayes; he should no wayes be able to keep his possession in the countrey: but be constrained to venture his Armie into the mercy of the Swedes, at his countermar∣ching. And so it fell out indeed: For the Rhinegrave ha∣ving with his Armie by this time taken possession of the Huntsruck; Don Cordova that was now advanced as high as Triers, judged it a better peece of Soldiery to retire a∣gaine with his Armie, then to adventure it upon such diffi∣culties. Some of his horse, and 2 Commissaries (as I find) amongst them, being sent over Triers bridge into the Hunts∣ruck, to discover the posture of the Rhinegrave, and to make provisions for the following Armie:Don Cordova cannot get o∣ver the Mosel. were light upon by the Swedish, and sent prisoners into Mentz. Those that escaped, carryed this word backe unto Don Cordova, that the Swedish were too strong for him in the Huntsruck, and that they had possest themselves of all the advantageous Poasts, in the woods and mountaines. This newes caused Cordova to retyre, and to leave the Count of Embden but in a bad taking. The Count of Embden forced to forsake Spi∣ers.Some other necessities, pincht at the same time upon the Count of Embden. The Chancellor Oxenstiern had an Ar∣mie in his way to hinder his retreate: and so made it dan∣gerous for him to goe: and the Marshalls De la Force and D' Effiat, were alreadie parted out of Lorrayne, and into the edge of the Palatinate, with a French Armie: and this made it as dangerous to stay also; So that goe or stay, there was danger in it. And true it is, that the French Army was by the 21 of May,and the Rea∣sons. comne as farre as Zweibrucken, (the town of the Palatine the Duke of Deux Ponts) upon the Westerne frontiers of the Palatinate; about 40 miles distant from Spiers citie. The comming of these French forces, was in favour of the Elector of Triers: whom his Majesty of France had (against the Spanish) taken into his protecti∣on. Two prime forts had this Elector of Triers: both
which he had yeelded to consigne over into the French Kings hands: and these, this Armie now came (though the Elector, perchance, could have better beene contented not to have beene put to it, to make this consignation) to take possession of. One of these Fortresses, was the towne and castle of Vdenheim: and this was close by Spiers,The French come with an army through the Palatinate. with∣in 6 English miles of it: too neere to be ill neighbours. The other strength they went to take seisin of, was the castle of Hermanstein; where the Mosel falls into the Rhine: and this corner if the French gat into, they would prove very troublesome to the Spanish in their passage backe againe, through the Huntsruck. And so, indeed, it after hapned. To these two, is a third necessity to be added. The Prince of Orange was now preparing for the field; so that there was likely to be more use for the Spanish at home in the Low-Countries, then here above in the Palatinate. And these are some of the reasons, that constrained the Count of Embden, so suddenly to forsake these quarters. This is sure. That about the same day moneth, that he took Spiers citie upon, he againe forsooke it, Saturday April 21. he entred it, & upon Whitsun Munday May 21, he again leaves it. Don Philip de Sylva, who had so long beene Generall in theseHe was Ge∣nerall of all the Spanish, in the Palatinate, and the 2 Ele∣ctorates of Mentz and Triers. parts upon the Rhine; now prepares likewise to re∣turne home with the Armie. This Generall, tooke order before his parting, for the re-enforcing of the garrison of Franckendale, with 3 fresh troopes of horse, and 1200 foot∣men. The Magazine he also caused to be new stored, and the sicke and unserviceable people, to be brought out of it. For the defence of Spiers, did the Count of Embden appoint 1000 horse and Foot; and so left the neighbour countrey, to the direction of the Marquesse of Baden, as hee had desired. The Generall Ossa perceiving the Spanish about to goe; hee forsakes Alsatia, just about this time, going with all speed to the siege of Bibrach: of which see Page 170. of our Se∣cond Part. The 2 Spanish Generalls parting from Spiers May 21, and
having drawne out all their troopes of the neighbour quar∣ters: and taking but 5 fielding peeces along with them: they give it out, before their going out of Spiers, that their purpose now was to march upwards into Alsatia, by the Rhines sides, and there to joyne with the Generall Ossa. This was a devise to amuse the Swedish withall:The Spanish feining to march up the Rhine, whom the Spaniards (the chiefe of their desire now being to make a quiet retreate) were not willing to have any thing to doe withall. Having advanced to the Southward as farre as Germersheim, (or thereabouts) that is, some 8 or 10 English miles from Spires: they that very night, turne faces about to the right,suddenly turn aside towards the Mosel, towards the Mosel. And indeed the old Pro∣verbe is here true enough, That the furthest way about, is the neerest way home: seeing that by this meanes they scaped that rugged and woody passage through some of the crags of the old mountaine Vogasus; which all the way to the West∣ward, they left above them upon the right hand. The first good towne of the Palatinate which they toucht at, was Keysers-Lauter; about 30 English miles from Spiers, upon the river Lauter. Here staid they but one night, May 23: their desire being to make such hasty marches; that they might be past by, before the Chancellor Oxenstierns armie at Mentz, should heare of it: or at least before the Rhine-graves Armie about the Huntsruck,narrowly sca∣ping by the French Armie. should bee conjoyned with him. One night before that the Spanish lodged at Key∣sers-Lauter, did the Van of the Frēch Army arrive at Zwei∣brucken: which was within 18 English miles of Keysers-Lauter. Thus the Spanish being in good time passed by, The French (as soone as they heard of their going by) in∣stantly send away the troops appointed to take possession of Hermanstein: into which the Elector of Triers entertained them, upon Saturday May 26 following. The Spanish, with long and hastie marches, still advance towards the Mosel: and the Chancellor Oxenstiern having notice brought him of it unto Mentz, the same night of their departure; he with all speed, the next day, preparing
all things necessary for the expedition: parts, upon the 23,The Chancel∣lor Oxenstiern, makes out af∣ter the Spanish, with the Palatine Christian of Birckenfeldt, from Mentz unto Altzem; Fifteene thousand foot (halfe so many per∣chance) and 80 troopes of horse, was hee said to lead along with him; and having sent word of it to the Rhinegrave; and given him order to come towards him: hee for that night encamps before Altzeim. This having been the way that the Spanish had before taken, in their advancing to∣wards Spiers; the Chancellor supposed they would make their retreate that way againe; and had therefore thought to take up that passe before them. But their march lay not that way, now; but some 2 or 3 leagues more to the West∣ward. The next morning May 24, was there word brought unto the Chancellor, that the Spanish had quartered the same night at Gelheim; a market towne some 7 or 8 English miles from him. The Chancellor not willing to loose this opportunitie; prepares to goe to meet with them; and to give them as good a farewell out of the countrey, as they had received an entertainement into it. The yonger Rhinegrave was dis∣patched, before hand, with some troopes of horse of his owne and Hornecks Regiment, to attack the Spanish; whi∣lest the grosse of the Swedish foot, with the Canon, might get up to them.whom the Rhinegrave first lights upon. The Rhinegrave first found the Spanish Ar∣mie in an indifferent faire and large valley, neere unto Stein∣bach cloyster: where encountring those 4 Cornets of horse, that then had the Van of the Armie; he routed them first of all, and (as some say) tooke away 3 of their Cornets. The Spanish having field-room enough to put themselves into Battaglia, did it presently: and rightly supposing withall, that it was not some few troopes, or any one single Regiment alone, that durst thus confront their whole Army: and that too, in a place of no advantage; and where they might well discover their whole strength: they certainely concluded thereupon, that the whole Swedish forces were at hand, and they (doubtlesse) withall resolved to bid them
battell.The Spanish entertaining the skirmish, Putting out therefore some primer horse-troopes (and those well lyned with muskettiers) to entertaine the Rhinegrave: they first of all wheele about their whole Ar∣mie a little to the left; the better to gaine the advantage of the wood, in case of necessitie to retreate unto. And as if they had now also considered; That their former way to∣wards the river Nah betwixt Creutznach and Bingen, was so stopt up by the Swedish, that they must either fight for their way, or decline it: they then resolved upon the latter. Sending away their baggage-wagons and heavyer lumber, on before towards the towne of Lautereck:send away their baggage before, and al∣ter their cours of marching. they maintai∣ned the skirmish with the Rhinegrave, till their baggage were well advanced into the woods, which was a place of safetie. Yea they did not maintaine the skirmish alone, but they had the better of it. Two of the Rhinegraves owne troopes, having too fiercely and too forwardly given on upon them; they make to get them further off: the Swedish feeling, by and by, that horsemen and muskettiers, were too hard for pistolls and Carabiners, onely. These two troopes being soundly pelted by the Spanish; take the rout presently upon it;They route 6 troopes of the Rhin graves, and turne the bridle towards their owne people. Foure troopes of Hornecks Regiment, being sent by the Rhine∣grave, for the succouring of these runne-awayes: received into themselves so great an impression of cowardise, from the others feares; that they also turne the bridle with them, and gallop with all speed towards Altzeim. Nor could the Rhinegrave by any meanes get them to make head againe: one Cornet and one Sergeant (2 of each, say some relations) he presently caused to be hanged: and yet would the others ever stay to profit by the example. and recover the advantage of the woods.The Spanish contenting themselves to have thus beaten them away, and to have recovered the honours of their 4. former Cornets: continue on their march, never looking to pursue after them. And this, indeed, was their wisest course: more conducing both to their safeties, and their pur∣poses:
their intention was not to fight, but to retreate; and hitherto they had made thus much good of it. By this time was the Chancellor neere at hand, with the ordnance and grosse of the Armie: upon whose comming, the Spanish disdained not to save themselves (though in good order) among the trees and thickets of the forrest. Some troopes they left upon the edge of the wood, to entertaine the time with the Swedish; till their baggage should have gotten on further out of danger. I doe not finde that there was much more that day done, against those in the woods-side. It was almost night, by this time; for the Swedish Foot had met with so many hills and bushes in their march, that they could no sooner get up to make a day of it. The Spaniards, so long as day light lasted, made very good use of the wood to defend themselves in, against the Swedish. Every tree, served their muskettiers, both for a Rest, and for a Buckler: every bush, was as good as a Turn∣pike or a Galthrop, to keepe off any charge of horses, and to hinder their comming on in order. Among the boughes of the trees, were not the enemies Pikes manageable. Nothing but Canon, could doe them any mischiefe: and out of their reach, they could quickly get them. In this posture did the Spaniards maintaine it, till the approaching darknesse: the favour of which advantage, being the thing they most lon∣ged for; they now marcht away with all their diligence. The Swedish not daring to pursue them,Continuing their retreate, for feare of ambu∣shes: were faine for that night to encamp, without the edge of the wood aforesaid. All that night, the Spaniards marched: and by breake of day the next friday morning, May 25, did the Swedish horse againe pursue after them. But the woods and hillie wayes, proved so cumbersome; and the Spaniards had so farre gotten the start of them; that though the Swedish Cavallerie did, now and then, over∣take some of them,They are pur∣sued by the Rhingrave. and made some spoile upon their Reere (among such especially, as were by any mischance cast be∣hinde their fellowes) yet still did the others get so much
ground of the Swedish Infanterie, as that they could never get up, to give them a generall onset. Those Spanish horse that were left behinde, either to manne the Reere, or to guard the baggage; would turne a∣gaine, now and then perchance, and give the Swedish their pistolls, and so kill or spoile them a man or two, that way; but yet they never stood to it: their purpose being to make good their retreat, & if they did skirmish, now and then, yet still was it but retyring. The Swedish being all horse, had this advantage upon the Spanish Foot: that they could ride out and in,The manner of the retreat. and charge them upon which flanck they pleased, the Rhinegrave upon one hand, and the Fins under Stol∣hanshe upon the other, and both at pleasure. And yet that which afflicted the Spanish worse then all this, was, that their enemies still soliciting them with renewed Alarmes; they could never be suffered either to pitch or sleepe; nor to take any manner of rest, night, or day, for 40 houres to∣gether. Being thus enforced to march forwards, still, & for∣wards; if any encūbrance withall, chāced to fall among their wagons, or any carriage of their ordnāce to be brokē: either must those necessary impediments be forsaken, or the mens lives most desperately be exposed that durst stay behind ei∣ther to mend or defend thē. The whole Army would never make Halt or stay, for any private occasion: and in this po∣sture did the Spaniards retreate, and the Swedish horse pur∣sue (the grosse of foot following on as fast, as might be) till they came to Lautereck aforesaid; full 16 miles of ground from Gelheim, (neere which the fight beganne) and as hea∣vy to march, as some other thirtie. The Spaniards seeing now no remedie, but that the Swedish were likely to pursue them ever;They burne their carria∣ges at Lauter∣eck: and perceiving withall, diverse of their owne wheeles and carriages to be by this time much broken and shattered in the woods and rugged mountaines: they there resolve to ridde them∣selves of that lumber. Here set they fire unto a many of their wagons; the carriages of their ordnance, they burned;
and the peeces they drowned in the river Lauter. Their sicke and wounded men, they put upon the horses that had drawn them; and so hasted to the Northward, towards the Mosel. Being thus lightned; now double they their march: and from thence to the river Nah, (which gave them entrance into the Duchie of Semmern, and the Huntsruck:) they had something a more champion countrie to doe it in. Here the Swedish gave it over, staying about Lautereck awhile to refresh thēselves: frō whence, the Armie turned aside,and there the Swedish give it over. partly towards Creutznach, 15 English miles to the right hand, and North of Lautereck, and partly back again to Altzeim. The way betwixt the first encounter and parting of the Ar∣mies, lay strewed with dead, maimed, sick, and wearyed bodyes, ever and anon; Spaniards, Italians, Wallons and Burgundians: of which (if you will take the Swedish and the Boores reckning) there were full 2000. The drowned ordnance were found, and weighed up againe. Some 400 (others name 800) wagons, either burnt or left behinde: 40 of which the Spaniards hoping to have caryed away, and therefore not burned,Their losses. fell whole and wholly into the hands of the Swedish. In these, were much bedding, brasse, pew∣ter and iron: with such like leaguer-housholdstuffe. Di∣vers prisoners were taken; and among them, about 60 Of∣ficers: all which were carryed into Mentz. Of the Spanish Armie that thus marcht away, were there said to be 8000 foot, and 3000 horse; or neere upon it: which I beleeve not: all which, by the beginning of June, were gotten as farre as the Mosel; and some part of them already passed it. Much encumbrance did they after encounter withall, in the Elector of Triers countrey. The French forces, and his owne, hee now made to way-lay them;and encum∣brances in the Bishop of Tri∣ers countrey. employed 3000 Boores, to cut downe the trees for the hindering of their passage: and all victualls was conveyed away out of their reach. Thus the Spaniards made good their retreate: and though they did it with much hazzard, and many losses; yet, al-together, was it a very good peece of service of them
And (I beleeve) the Swedish were as glad, as the Countrey, that they were so cheape ridde of them. Don Gonzales de Cordova & Monterry Governor of Maest∣richt, having not beene able to get over the Mosel, to the reliefe of the Count of Embden; now, for feare that the Swedish should have passed over after him: stayed for the said Count in the countrey of Lutzenburg: and afterward peecd in with him about Naamen and the river Maze. The Count of Merode, with those forces which he had therea∣bouts newly levyed for the Emperor; was then about the Mosel towards Cullen; but he went not along with Embden nor Don Cordova: he being then in entertainement with the Elector of Cullen. And thus ended that expedition of so much expectation, of the Spanish Armies into the Palatinate. But this is the fortune of the warres, that the masters of the field must now and then take their turnes, and be beaten out of it. The Swedish part of the Armie, which returned from the fight, to Altzeim; went presently with the Chancellor back againe to Mentz: and the other part, that moved towards Creutznach; went forward with the Rhinegrave, after a while, into the Huntsruck. There hee reprised (though with some little adoe, at first,) the townes of Kirchberg, Simmern, and others; wherein the Spaniards had left some weake garrisons. Nor had the Swedish, after this, much a∣doe about the Palatinate: till that in July after, they were sent for by the King to Norimberg. The state in which the Spaniards left the Palatinate, shall wee now tell you of.The state in which the Spa∣nish now left the Palatinate, and the Bi∣shoprick of Spiers. Having made themselves masters of Spiers, they forced some garrisons upon the next neighbor walled townes, that had beene voluntarily quitted by such Swedish, as were there enquartered: even as the selfe-same townes had beene before quitted by the Spanish, as Pag. 59 of our Second Part, wee have before told you. These townes were Aenwyler, Cron-Wessenburg, Landau, and some others: and out of these (as being nothing fencible) they now at
parting withdraw their new-put-in garrisons. At Germer∣sheim onely, did they now leave some companies. This be∣ing a pretty tight place of it selfe; would be a good safegard, besides, unto the strong towne of Vdenheim (or Philipsburg) which lyes but one Dutch league to the East of it; the Rhine running just betweene them. The garrison of this towne, which had beene put in partly by the Bishop of Spires, and partly by the Chapter: and which by often going out upon Boote-haling Partees, with the Spanish garrisons of Heidle∣berg and Franckendale, (especially before the Spanish and the Bishop had any difference) had beene three quarters Spaniolized: they now left in very good termes with them∣selves; and upon termes with their Lord the Bishop, now enemie to the Spaniards. The Chapter or Dom-Herren of the Cathedrall Church of Spiers was their friend; and their owne Bishops adversarie: and for their sakes, did the Spa∣nish now forbeare the other lands of the Bishoprick. The quarrell was this. The Bishop Philip Christofer of Spiers, was now Elector of Triers also: whither in the yeare 1623, he had beene chosen. This Prince had not onely concluded his Neutralitie with the King of Sweden:See Page 69, and 72, of our Second Part. but put himselfe under the French Kings protection; and by a Proclamation commanded all the Spaniards out of his countrey. His Fort and Electorall castle of Hermanstein, had he now also actu∣ally consigned over unto the French: and had likewise sent unto Vdenheim, (the towne of his Residence for his Bishopricke of Spiers) to have that delivered over to them. This so enraged both his Chapters, of Triers and of Spiers, (who were wholly Austrianized) that they forthwith proceeded to a formall and legall Admonition of him: which amounts to little lesse, then a Deprivation.Differences betwixt the Bishop of Spi∣ers, and his Chapter con∣cerning Vden∣heim: The Bishop sen∣ding his Trumpet unto the garrison of Vdenheim, to deliver up the place unto the French; his desire was countermanded by the Chapter of Spiers: so that the Governour answered peremptorily, That he held for the Emperor. Thus were the French Generalls frustrated of this hope.
Having here made mention of the Elector of Triers and his French dependancie, Swedish Neutralitie, and enmity with the Spaniards: it shall not be amisse to repeate some∣thing here, (though from an ancienter originall) which may conduce to the understanding of his State, and our Storie. This Philip Christofer, then Bishop of Spiers onely; had his ordinarie Residence at this Vdenheim:and some old discontents betwixt the Palsgrave and the Bishop, a∣bout it: concerning which, there had formerly fallen out a controversie betwixt the last Prince Palatine & him, and upon this occasion In the yeare 1618. the Bishop had a mind to fortifie this Vdenheim: against which, the Palsgrave thus argued. That the place had beene viewed, and the modell projected by Spinola. That it thereby being made suspitious; would become also dangerous to his Estate; if either his enemies should get in thither,and the cau∣ses. or the Bishops in time to come, prove enemies to the Palatinate. He urged also, that this fortification would hinder his right of sending convoyes or Safe-Conducts by, or through the towne. That it was contrary to the priviledges of the citie of Spiers; which was, to have no new Fort ere∣cted, within 3 leagues of it. The Bishop not desisting for all these reasons, the Elector Palatine procures a meeting of some Princes at Heilbrun, upon it. There did the Duke of Wirtemberg, the Marquesse of Durlach, and the Earles of the Wetteraw, assist the Palsgrave with 4000 armed men, to slight and dismantle the whole Fortification. Hereupon was it thus agreed betwixt the Palsgrave and the Bishop, with consent of the Dom-Herren or Prebends of Spiers: that the part betwixt the Fore-towne and the Castle, should bee left unfortified: and never to be made up, but by consent of the Palatines. That the Bishop should never put above 30 men into it, for Day-Warders: and that in time of warres, the place should be a refuge for the Paligraves subjects. But this agreement was in time of these late warres then bro∣ken by the Bishop; when the Palsgrave had no power left, to exact the performance of it. But thus much hath the Bi∣shop now gained by it: that this towne of Vdenheim, which
hee built against the will of his friends, he hath now forti∣fied for his enemies. The Captaine that now commanded in this Philipsburg, having made this denyall to the Bishops Trumpet; to shew him withall how much good earnest he meant in it: set fire presently upon some of the new buil∣dings next the castle, to prevent the lodging of any enemies in it: and prepares himselfe throughly for resistance. This was the state of Udenheim, when the Spaniards forsooke the Palatinate. The constitution of all the countrey together, was this. In Franckendale the Spaniards left, (or were to leave) 1200. In Heidleberg, 2000. In Spiers, 1000; and in Germersheim, about halfe so many. In Neustat, likewise, Bretten, Sintz∣heim, Pfeddersheim, Germersheim and Fidelsheim; they left some smaller garrisons. Some writing tells mee, that Don Philip de Sylva did not send in those 1000 foot and 5 Cor∣nets of horse into Franckendale, as he had promised. I per∣ceive that the chiefe command over the Militia in the Pa∣latinate; was entrusted, principally, in the hands of Colonel Metternich, Governour of Heidleberg All the Countrey of Alsatia, was left to the Marquesse William of Baden. But he staid not long in that his regencie. For hearing how ill the Spanish had sped in their retreate; that the Swedish armie was returned to Mentz; that Gustavus Horne was comne downe to be Generall about the Rhine and Mosel: and that the passages betwixt Heidleberg and Franckendale, were likely to be every where blockt up, by his horse quarters: he by mid June drawes all the forces, out of Spiers and Ger∣mersheim; and retires home-wards to the defence of Alsa∣tia; and that which he calls his owne Marquisate of Baden. And into these parts, Gustavus Horn presently sent the wars after him. The Rhinegrave after the departure of the Spanish; (for want of other employment) made a designe for the recove∣ry of Kirchberg; wherein they had left a garrison. The Rhinegrave had advanced the service, even to the making
of a saultable breach in the wall;The Rhinegrave besieging Kirchberg, and the mounting of his scaling ladders. His men, having order now to storme; so soone as they perceived the resolutenesse of the defendants, and that a Leiftenant who had the point, and fell first on up∣on the Breach, was with 50 of his followers shot dead up∣on the place: they could by no meanes bee perswaded to give on, after them: but (cowardly enough) came running off againe, faster then ever they went forward. And thus was the Rhinegrave faine to sound the retreate, and, for that time,is beaten off againe. to levie his owne siege of Kirchberg Shortly after this, when, namely, the French Armies were comne a little neerer to these quarters: and Gustavus Horne upon his march thitherward, to the sieges of Coblentz and of Grafen∣berg: the Spanish in this towne, Simmern, and other places, yeelded upon the first summons: and went off with sold∣ierly Conditions. This siege, was in the end of May, and the beginning of our June: by which time, was Gustavus Horn comne downe out of Bavaria from the King of Sweden: with commission to command the Armie, in the parts about the Rhine and Mosel.
GUSTAVUS HORNS PROCEEDINGS. From the time of his being sent downe out of Bava∣ria by the King: untill the time of his going up againe thither with an Armie, after the Kings Death. HOw the gallant yong Cavalier, Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar, (second brother unto Duke Willi∣am) had at the Kings marching up into Bavaria, beene left behinde with the Armie about the Palati∣nate: you may collect by what hath beene before written. The reason forwhich his leaving there, is no secret in those parts. His birth, which is of an Electorall familie: his hopes, sure (if he lives) to be heire to his Unckle, the Duke ofThis old Duke being since dead, there is ano∣ther heirelesse Prince, in the possession: af∣ter whom, the Honor is en∣taild upon Duke Bernard. Saxon-Coburg: with his personall valour and abilities: had allured the King of Sweden, to settle some desires upon him. Sel∣dome hath there beene any great act of warre, but that something of Love hath chanc'd in betweene, as if to cheere and sweeten the sad Scene of it. This observation, would the Poets thus represent, by still bringing in a Venus, into
Mars his storie. The God of love, is painted, armed: and Love though a comicall passion, yet still beares it a Part, ei∣ther in the Plot or the Catastrophe, of warres Tragedie. All Stories would be full of these discourses, had they the luck of it, (like that of the 12 Caesars) to have a Suetonius, as well as a Tacitus: a chamber-Blab to tell tales of what was ena∣cted in the withdrawing roome, as well as what was execu∣ted in the Leaguer. The King of Sweden, plainely, had made some private overtures unto Duke Bernard, of a marriage betwixt him and a faire yong Swedish Ladie, daughter to his owne Sister, whom his Queene had brought with her into Germanie. This Ladie being left with the Queen about Franckford, Duke Bernard was left about Mentz also: by which neerenes, he had the better oportunity to make Court unto his Mistresse. Where the fault was, I know not. Sure it is, that in the Kings absence, there had fallen out some discontent betwixt Duke Bernard, and the Rex-Chancellor Oxenstiern. The occasion was, for that the Chancellor had given some command over the Armie,The cause of Duke Bernards going up to the King. (which Duke Ber∣nard had expected) unto the Rhinegrave. Not unto that Cavalier the Rhinegrave, Otto Lodowick Leiftenāt of the horse but unto the Rhinegrave Otto, unckle to this Gētleman: who had heretofore been a suiter unto the King, to bestow the towne and Jurisdiction of Bingen upon him, which had beene part, erewhiles, of the Elector of Mentz his Bishop∣ricke. Duke Bernard, hereupon, going up to the King, then at Munchen: received some hopes of satisfaction; and of be∣ing made Leiftenant Generall of the Foot, unto his Majestie: which hee withall expected, should by sound of trumpet have beene proclaimed throughout the Armie. But the King suspecting, how ill Sir Iohn Banier, (whose place that is) must needs take that: gave not that content unto Duke Ber∣nard, in this particular. A speech there sometimes likewise was, in the Armie, that Duke William Saxon-Weymar, should have beene Generalissimo, or Leiftenant Generall overall
the Kings Armies and Commanders. These misses, caused some private discontent in Duke William and his brother Bernard, which, some suspect, was never heartily taken off againe, to the Kings dying day. However, the King to give Duke Bernard and his brother some content; immediately sent away Gustavus Horn to command that Armie about the Rhine and Mosel; which Duke Bernard came from: that so there might be one lesse in the Armie, betwixt the King and them; and when at his comming out of Bavaria, hee left Duke William with an Armie, he had the Title of Leiftenant-Generall. And this is some part of the secret,and of Gusta∣vus Horns com∣ming downe, to this Armie. for Duke Bernards going up; and Gustavus Horns so sudden comming downe, towards the Palatinate. Gustavus Horn comming Post out of Bavaria; upon Mun∣day being Barnabee the brights day June 11 arrived at Franckford: whence the next day hee went to Mentz, un∣to the Chancellor. Here they 2 first overlooking, and then new ordering the Armie, drew it out into the field present∣ly. The Spaniards, then in possession of most of the best townes, in the Elector of Triers his countrie, (the Chapter and some of the people favouring them) perceiving by this time, that the Swedes were likely to come against them in favour of the French: and that the French themselves, under the marshall D'Estre, D'Effiat (now dead) in 2 severall Bodies, were comming neerer every day, and neerer to them: they finde meanes,The Spaniards thrust a garri∣son into Co∣blents. (by the favour aforesaid) to choppe a garrison, all on the sudden, into Coblentz. The si∣tuation of this towne, served their turne severall wayes. 1. It commands the passage of the Rhine: on the Western bancke whereof it is seated, and there too,Of the mee∣ting and con∣fluence of these 2 rivers together, is Coblentz, in La∣tine called Confluentia. where the ri∣ver Mosel falls into it. 2. It became as ill as a Blockhouse a∣gainst the most strong Castle of Ehrenbreisten or Herman∣stein, which is the Bishops Palace upon the other banck of the Rhine: into which he had lately admitted a French gar∣rison. 3. It was a strong place of it selfe, and had a great com∣mand, over all that corner of the Huntsruck. This shrewd∣ly
startled, both the Elector and his Frenchmen: who meant to have put themselves into it, but that the Spaniards had thus leapt into the saddle before them. This neighbour∣hood of these 2 great and emulous nations, (the breadth of the Rhine onely being betwixt them) was the occasion of many a quarrell. The French author of le Soldat Suedois complaines, that the Spanish once, having taken some of his Countrey-men prisoners, upon promise of good quarter: cut their throats afterwards, in cold blood. It had beene privately agreed (it seemes) betwixt their Majesties of France & Sweden,The private agrement be∣twixt France and Sweden, concerning Triers. that France should have the sole Protection (so was it yet called) of the Elector of Triers countrie: and that, if need were, the Swedish should helpe to beate the Spanish out of it. It appeares also by the storie, that Gusta∣vus Horn had Commission from his master, for the same purpose: and that he now prepared to execute it. He had a good minde likewise, to get the Dom-Herren or Chapter of Triers into his Clutches: but they being then at Triers towne, shifted themselves away into the neighbour-coun∣trie of Lutzenburg: so soone as ever they gat an inckling of his comming. Horn staid not long within Mentz: ere that the Armie advanced towards the Mosel. Marching all together in one Grosse, (or not very farre asunder) towards Triers citie and the country of Lutzenburg; the Rhinegrave Otto Lodowick,Horn advances towards the Elector of Tri∣ers countrey. (the most of whose Army was already in the Huntsruck,) all on the sudden, with his part of the forces strikes down on the right hand, keeping the Mosel on their left: towards Coblentz. Horns division that came presently after, held on their march through the Huntsruck, towards Trarbach: whose army was now said to be some 8000 foot, and about 6000 horse, under 126 Cornets. June 17, the Rhinegrave first invested Coblentz: and (to omit the usuall advancings of all sieges) having gotten up a Batterie on the Lands side, the French, from over the wa∣ter, out of Hermanstein castle, thunder also with their ord∣nance, into Coblentz. The Spanish within the towne, being
conscious of the scantnes of their ammunition,The Rhinegrave besieges Cob∣lents, fall the third day to parlie with the Rhinegrave. The Elector of Cullen had in this meane time of the seige, sent in some Ambassa∣dors from his castle of Bonne, up the Rhine, to perswade thus much with the Spanish: that in case they must needs render, they should rather article to deliver up unto the French, then unto the Swedish. But besides that the Spanish had in the time of this little neighbour-hood, contracted a greater spight or scorne, of the French then of the Swedish; neither would the Rhinegrave consent to that motion: be∣cause, that though he well knew, that the towne was here∣after by Commission from the King of Sweden, to be turned over unto the French: yet should the French never say, that they had received it from those that lost it, but from those that wonne it: and not glory in it,and takes it. as their owne con∣quest, but as the King of Swedens Resignation. The Spaniards could get no quarter at the Rhinegraves hands, till they had delivered him the Elector of Triers his chiefe Marshall: whom, together with two great Iewes Merchants, they had before seased on. It had gone hard with the Marshall, per∣chance, if the Rhinegrave had not stood upon these termes for his deliverie: the Spanish were very angrie with his Master the Elector, for thrusting them out of his countrey, and not trusting their Master of Spaine with his protection, as well as France: the one being as much a Catholick as the other. All conditions being agreed upon; Thursday June 21, being the 4 day of the siege,The Spanish forsake Triers countrey. the Spaniards march out of Coblents, with soldiers conditions every way; and were by the Swedish convoyed into a place of security. This towne being taken, (which was the chiefest strength of all that countrie,) the weaker Spanish garrisons on the further (Eastern) side of the Rhine, in Ober Laenstein, Nyder Laenstein, Engers, Mantenau, Hamerstein, Lanneck, and Montabour; voluntarily forsooke their old quarters; all retyring themselves quietly towards Luxenberg. Three Regiments of the Catholicke-leaguers, which had by the
Count of Merode beene newly levyed in the Electorate of Triers, and its neighbour countries of Gulick-land, and the land of Marck: were by this time upon their march, to∣wards the reliefe of Coblents. They were the Regiments of Metternich (Governor of Heidleberg) Roelinger and the Count of Bronckhorst; which were comming upon the ser∣vice: but meeting, by the way, with those that had forsa∣ken these townes; they presently convert their march to∣wards the mountainous parts of Alsatia; where they first enquarter themselves in the townes of the Strasburgers ju∣risdiction: and peece in presently afterwards, with Ossa and Monte Cuculi. The Elector of Cullen (brother to the Duke of Bavaria) upon the returne of his Ambassadors, being startled with this neernesse of the danger; he on Saturday June 23, ships away himselfe and Treasure, downe the Rhine unto Cullen citie:The feare of the Elector and Bishop∣rick of Cullen, upon it. whither he was followed by the most and chiefest of the Spiritualitie. His whole Electorate was in a bodily feare also; for that the warres were, by this time, brought so neere them. Neere them indeed; Bonne it selfe, (the Pa∣lace and Residence of the Elector) being not above 30 Eng∣lish miles (by a line) from Coblentz; some of the Bishop∣rick, not a dozen: and that downe the Rhinestreame also. The Elector (as I finde written) presently sent away to en∣vite Pappenheim to his succours; and entertained the Count of Merode with 7 Regiments of horse and foot, into his service. But Pappenheim being before engaged to the Arch∣duchesse for the reliefe of Maestricht; could not now helpe him: and Merode expecting every houre, to be by his Ge∣neralissimo the Duke of Fridland, commanded for other ser∣vice. These uncertainties put the Elector of Cullen, and his neighbour the Duke of Newburg, (in the same case, and feare with him) to bethinke themselves of those safer coun∣sells; which wee shall presently tell you of. Gustavus Horn takes Trarbach,Whilest the Rhinegrave is at the siege of Coblentz, Gusta∣vus Horn with the other part of the Armie, was as busie a∣bout
Trarbach: the most considerable towne upon the Mo∣sel, on that side; and mid-way betwixt Coblentz and Triers citie. The Spaniards were possest of this towne also: but the place being not to be defended; they without much for∣cing forsake it, and retire into the strong Castle of Grafen∣burg, hard without the towne upon the Mosel. The Spanish having good store of all militarie provisions within the ca∣stle; maintaine the siege very resolutely: and Horn as fiercely layes about him. He had within 4 or 6 dayes, brought his Approaches close up to their castle moate;Besieges the Castle of Gra∣fenburg. and had a day or two battered their hard wals, with 14 peeces of Canon He had so soarely shaken a great Rundle or Tower of the castle that he could within a few houres make it saultable. Upon another side also, close by the water; had he a second Batte∣rie: and there would he within a day or 2, be readie for a storming. The Spanish Governor perceiving all this; and that he had hardly men enough to defend all his walls, in a generall assault; nor hope of being relieved, from other parts: he having done his part very well, on Munday July 2 hangs out his white streamer from the castle, to signifie his desire of a Parlie. Articles being the same night conclu∣ded upon, the Spanish march out the next Tuesday, being the 3: and were convoyed towards Luxemburg.and takes it. This was a strong place; and of as much importance (almost) as the Castle of Hermanstein. Here did Horn finde so suffici∣ent a store of victualls and ammunition; that had it beene as throughly manned, as victualled; he could not in thrice that time have mastered it. In this meane time, had the Elector of Triers given a ve∣ry friendly interview unto the Rhinegrave, about Coblentz: shewing good content towards him, for his cleering Cob∣lentz of the Spanish.The Elector of Triers well contented with the Swe∣dish. So well was he appayed with the Swedish usage of his subjects; that he sent presently into Spiers citie, and other places of both his Bishopricks, to publish the new agree∣ment,
and confirmation of the Neutralitie, that he had con∣tracted with the King of Sweden. To this towne of Coblentz, had the Elector of Cullen by the 26 or 28 of June, likewise sent his Ambassadors: and thither were the Rex Chancellor Oxenstiern comne from Mentz, and Gustavus Horn for 2 or 3 dayes too, whilest his Armie was before Graenburg. There did the Elector a∣gaine solicite and obtaine his Neutralitie, both from the Kings of France and Sweden:The Bishop of Cullen obtains a Neutrality, the French Ambassador being also at the Treaty. The Neutralitie extended no farther, then to the Electors Bishoprick of Cullen upon the East side of the Rhine: but to his Bishoprick of Paderborn, and his lands in Westphalia, it extended not: for the Landgrave of Hessen had his garrisons then, in many of the townes of those parts. The Neutralitie, was also to be confirmed by the 2 Kings; for whose seeing of the Articles, and returne of the Expres∣ses, there were 6 weekes, (2 moneths say some) allotted. Upon this agreement, was the Elector to casheire the Count of Merode and his Regiments, and not to give him passage through his countrey, unto Ossa and Monte-Cuculi in Al∣satia. This is the reason, that though Merode presently af∣ter this, received a command from Walstein to march into Alsatia, yet could he not obey those directions, but was faine to passe the Rhine at Keyferswert, and conjoyne him∣selfe with Pappenheim, then going to Maestricht. The Duke of Newburg also,and the Duke of Newburg treates for it. whose house and residence then was about Dusseldorp upon the Rhine, next neighbour unto Cullen, he likewise solicited a Neutralitie: but what termes he obtained, I know not, this one thing is observed, that this Prince hath either beene not constant, or not fortunate, in his Treaties. Horn takes in Bern castle and Veldents.Gustavus Horn being master now of Trarbach and of Grafenburg, seases, in the next place, upon Bern Castle, and Veldents towne: both upon the Mosel towards Triers, and within 5 or 6 English miles of Trarbach. And thus the Spanish being on both sides of the Mosel,
and by the Rhines side, cleered out of the Elector of Triers countrie; even as farre as Triers citie: the Elector contented; the townes which the Swedes had taken, delivered backe into his hands; and by him, consigned over to the French, (according to the King of Swedens agreement with the French King:) the Elector of Cullen, also, having sued out his Neutralitie, and discharged erode of his service, and attendance upon the Rhine and Mosel: all these things be∣ing so quickly and so quietly dispatcht, about those parts, and the French then likely to be made strong enough, by the comming of the marshall D'Estre and the vicount Arpaiou, to attack Triers citie: Gustavus Horn retires the Armie back againe unto Mentz. And all in good time.Oxenstiern goes towards No∣rimberg. The Chan∣cellor Oxenstiern, with 8000 of the forces, that had beene left about Mentz, and with some of the Rhinegraves Armie, now returned out of Triers countrie; was by the 11 of July marcht up to the reliefe of the King of Sweden before No∣rimberg; so that there was some want of an Armie about Mentz and the Palatinate. Duke Iulius, Administrator of the Duchie of Wirtemberg; had likewise sent word unto this our Swedish Felt-Marshal; of Ossaes & Monte-Cuculies being upon the wing upon the frontiers of Alsatia, Wirtemberg, & the Palatinate: and of Metternichs, the Governor of Heidle∣bergs purpose, to take in Wiseloch: so that now it was high time for Gustavus Horn to have dispatched with the Spa∣nish, and to looke this way againe, towards the Imperialists. True it is that the Rhinegraves Armie, after the taking of Coblentz, had beene sent backe towards the Palatinate: and had there recovered Sintzheim and Bretten both a little East of Spiers, and South of Heidleberg, towards the land of Wirtemberg, and Marquisate of Durlach. Upon this neerenesse of the Swedish;Spiers forsaken by the garri∣son. the Imperiall and Bavarian garri∣son, which the Spanish had left behinde them in Spiers city; voluntarily abandon it. Captaine Onrust with 250 men, was commanded to goe for Heidleberg: some companies of Metternich, with the new levyed forces of the citie; went
with Commissary Eltzen, to the Marquisate of Baden. They tooke 12 peeces of ordnance along with them, 100 double muskets, one wagon laden with match, many barrells of Gunpowder, great store of Salt-peter, and all the Armor of the townsmen, that they could lay their hands on: so that the Burgers were faine to keepe their watch and ward at the ports and upon the tower, with battons, barres of iron, and such other wepons. The Boors were fain to furnish the depar¦ting soldiours, with horses for their wagons: many of which were returned them, by Tom Long the caryer. Three hun∣dred Swedish, are upō this, thrust into it, & 4 troops of horse. That, now, wee may the better understand the warres of Alsatia and this part of the Palatinate: we shall doe well to looke into the neighbour Dukedome of Wirtemberg, and Circle of Schwaben; from whence the Imperialists came in∣to these quarters. Duke IuliusHis yong Cosin was not yet comne to the govern∣ment: as He since is. Hee yet was with his mother at Geneva, to keepe out of the Emperors reach: to whom by a∣greement of Duke Julius, with Fursten∣burg; they were to have beene com∣mitted for e∣ducation, as Page 33 of our First Part, wee told you. Administrator of Wirtem∣berg, having (as wee told you Page 173 of our Second Part) againe consented to the King of Sweden, according to the Conclusions of the Diete of Leipsich: and that agreement of his, having a little before that, been consented unto in a Diete of the States of Wurtemberg at Stutgard: the King gives him order to this purpose. 1. That the Imperiall townes of Reutlingen and Esling within that Duchie; (which is a part of the Circle of Schwaben) with the townes of Salmensch∣weil, Zwifalten, and S. Blasi, in the Schwarzwaldt with the Counties of Baar and Zollern: and (finally) the whole Coun∣try betwixt the towne of Tubingen and the frontiers of the Switzers, to the southward; should afford place of billetting, to the 2 Regimēts of the Count Crafft of Hohenloe, to those 2 of Schavalitzki and Kanofski, Colonells; and to the com∣panies of Cranckh, Leiftenant Colonell. 2. That the appointed Treasurers and Commissaries, should have monyes ready collected for the soldiers pay, & necessary provisions: upon assurance, that their Chiefes and Commanders should be bound, for the keeping the soldie∣ry in good Discipline, and restraining them from disorders and wrongs doing.
Upon the publishing of these orders, the levies went for∣ward; and the 2 Imperiall cities aforenamed, were each charged with the billetting of 3 Companies. But they, fea∣ring the unrulinesse of the soldiers, bought it out. All the o∣ther places of the countrey, came in with little adoe; decla∣ring for the Diete of Leipsich and the King of Sweden, as Generall director of the warres. The towne of Elwang only, (which is the chiefest of the Bishoprick of that name, in the Northern parts of the Circle of Schwaben) stood out against these orders. Some Imperialists had beene newly thrust in thither, and they signified their obedience to the Swedish and Wirtembergs Officers, with their pikes and muskets: whereupon some troopes being sent for to enforce them, the Elwangers lost 4 or 500 men, and 2 of their greater Officers: being faine also to depart the citie. The rest of the Imperi∣all troopes in the lesser townes hereabouts, hearing of this defeat: betake themselves into the stronger towns, and espe∣cially into these about the Bodensee or the lake of Constāts; on the Southwesterne corner of the Circle of Schwaben, next to Schwitzerland. This corner a man may call one of the backe doores to Germanie: for that this and Tirole, are the great Passes and Avenues, to the Succors out of Italie. The Com∣missarie Ossa (a notable pragmaticall man) had with great judgement and diligence taken order for the locking up of this back doore, and for keeping the key of it. And that was Lindaw especially: which standing in a little I let in the lake of the Bodensee, he had taken good order, heretofore, both to provide and fortifie. The same service had hee done the Emperor, in the townes of Constantz, Ratolfsell, Vber∣lingen, Moerspurg, Buochorn, and Bregentz, all round about this lake; which is in length 44 or 45 miles English; and 12 in breadth, in some places. The same had he done to Zell, Wangen, Ravenspurg, and divers others: which helpt much unto the securing, besides, of the Arch Duke Leopolds lands, and the Emperors second Sonnes lands, in Alsatia; which joyne upon the west of it. This that followes, was some∣thing
towards Ossaes order. The Regiment of ColonellHe that had beene Tillies Enginier, to take Magden∣burg. Farensbach he billetted upon the County of Rechberg, the Lordship of Weissenstag, and the Tenants of the Abbesse of Buchau. The Landgrave of Stullingen, (a Protestant, and chiefe of the familie of the Pappenheims, unckle to the sol∣dier, and hereditarie Marshall of the Empire) hee, and the Count of Bultz, were charged with the Regiment of Bal∣deron. The Counties of Furstenburg and Witzleb and towne of Memmingen, were faine to entertaine the Count of Ritbergs Regiment: The Duke of Savellies Regiment was laid upon other Lordships. Other troopes were sent to Kempten, Isnau, and Pfullendorff. Colonell Vithzthumbs Regiment, was sent towards Alsatia, and some into Za∣bern, the place of Residence for the Bishop of Strasburg. And for that there had beene divers companies of the Catholick-leaguers forces, billetted up on the hereditary lands of the house of Austria, and betwixt Vlm and Ausburg: Ossa re∣quired the Duke of Bavaria to remove them, that there might be some Imperialists brought in place of them. This the Duke tooke regret at; rather contented to have such guests, as those, upon another mans lands, then in his owne countrey. As for the Emperors Tenants and Copie holders, they were warned to appeare at Stockheim; and either to take soldiours into their Countrey, or to buy it out with their readie money. All this had Ossa done, very substanti∣ally: by which he first of all made himselfe sure of thse 3 principall townes of importance, Zell, Lindau, and Con∣stantz: all which, he perswaded either to take in garrisons from him; or to raise some of their owne, for the Emperors service. Zell promised to raise 500. Constantz took in 10 Companies from him, and Lindau as many. And very well secured he, in the next place, the Bishopricks of Moerspurg, and Constantz, with the Lordships of Bregentz and Veld∣kirch: and kept, lastly, the passages free from out the Gri∣sons, and the Switzers Countries, as also out of the possessi∣ons of the Imperiall familie, on that side of Alsatia.
By this you know something of the state of that Circle of Schwaben: and what townes and enemies the King of Sweden and the Duke of Wirtemberg, had there to doe withall. The Duke had by the beginning of this yeare, en∣creased his Armie to 8000; and had well begunne to put the Kings orders in execution.The Duke of Wirtemberg puts into the field. Beginning on that side of his Duchy, which was next unto the King; hee had by the 20 of June, taken in the Princely Abby of Zwyfalten; with the towne and jurisdiction about it: with those other pla∣ces that lie in that Southwesterne frontier of Wirtemberg by the Danubie side, towards Bibrach. Thus skimmes he o∣ver some other of his Frontiers on the South, and towards the Westward: from divers of the weaker townes whereof, which were Catholick; he drives out the Imperialists, and thrusts his owne and the Kings forces upon them. For all this that was done by the Duke of Wirtemberg, in his countrey; or by the Swedes, in the Palatinate: the Imperialists beganne againe to bustle very sturdily in the neighbour Alsatia. The Commissarie and Generall Ossa, who about the 22 or 23 of May, had beene skared from Bibrach by the King of Sweden,Ossa, Monte Cu∣culi and the Marquesse of Baden, rallee together in Al∣satia. (as Page 171 of our Second Part, wee have told you) was by this time comne through Schwaben by the way of Weingarten: where having (this second time) left the best order that he could, and 3000 Boores up in commotion; he was now with some forces, conjoyned with the Count of Monte-Cuculi in Alsatia. So was the Marquesse William of Baden too; so that now they had an Armie in the field of 5 or 6000 men, whereof about 25 Cornets of Horsemen. The next good townes, of Ben∣felt, Schletstat, Colmar, Brisach, Elsas-zabern, and others; were all indifferently well garrisoned, and at their devoti∣on. The 3 Regiments of Count Bronckhorst, Metternich, and Roellingen; which should (as we told you) have relieved Coblentz; were long before this, comne through the Coun∣ty of Luxemburg, and part of Lorraine into Alsatia; and kept a quarter in the jurisdiction of the Strasburgers. These
were Monte-Cuculies friends too, and readie to joyne with him upon occasion. Upon confidence of this strength; Ossa (being Imperiall Commissarie,) sends a Trumpet unto the towne of Stras∣burg, to require entertainment and quarter for these troops, in the townes of their jurisdiction. Strasburg having before accorded with the King of Sweden, (as Page 174 of our Second Part we have told you,) refuse Ossa in his demands: who gives order, thereupon, to Monte-Cuculi, to seise on Marlenheim, Barr, and other townes of the jurisdiction: the subjects whereof they made to pay, for the refusall of their Masters.who advan∣cing into Dur∣lach, Having done their pleasure here, they with their whole Armie aforesaid, passing with speed through the Lower Marquisate of Baden, (then in possession of their partner the Marquesse William:) they all on the sudden, in the end of Julie, overspread his cosins land, the Marquesse of Durlach: where they found more booty, then opposi∣tion. Thence passe they onwards into the Palatinate; where they attack Bretten: a prettie towne of the Palatines, lately by the Swedes recovered from the Spanish: about 12 or 13 English miles to the East of Vdenheim.taken Bretten in the Palati∣nate. Here having broken open a Port with their Petards, they enter into the towne, and sack it; burne the gates, dismantle the walls, and enforce 200 Germanes (which the Swedes had lately left there in garrison) to follow their Ensignes. This shewes their mer∣cie, or their need of soldiers; for that they gave so faire quarter to the Swedish. Nine of the principall Burgers, they tooke away with them: whom they meant to retaine with them, as Capitall pledges, for the good abearance of the re∣sidue. The Duke of Wirtemberg making to∣wards them; they counter∣march to Knit∣lingen,The Administrator of Wirtemberg, seeing the danger now so neer him, (Bretten being within 4 English miles of his frontiers) knew there was no way to avoid the storme, but by making a hole in it. Drawing, thereupon 8000 ar∣med men unto that side of the countrie, hee resolves to fall
upon the Imperialists. But this they prevented: for no soo∣ner heard they of the Dukes comming; but forbearing to advance any further to the Northward into the Palatinate; they call off their troopes from that haunt, and hunt-counter with them. Back againe to Knitlingen they goe; 3 English miles from Bretten: where hearing, by this time, that the Administrator was not so neere them as they expected; they resolve to have a bout with this Knitlingen. Covertly, therefore, and out of ambush laid there in the night time, sending some of theirs to seise upon one of the citie gates: they present their Armie before the walls, to second them. The Port being gained, the townsmen, and some countrey people gotten in thither for shelter; make towards the gate to regaine it. But there was Monte-Cuculi too hard for them; and there they lost their towne to him, and betwixt 300 and 400 of their lives, into the bargaine. Lost their towne, I say; for the goods of it being pillaged, fire was put to the 4 corners of it: so that now, a travailer can hard∣ly finde Knitlingen; unlesse he rakes for it in the ruines. Thence after a day or 2, forfeare of the Wirtembergers,and so to Rhinehausen. make they Westward some 10 or 12 miles, unto the Rhine∣ward, putting themselves there, under the favour of the garrisons of Germersheim and of Vdenheim. Their chiefe Quarter thereabouts was at Rhinehausen, about 3 miles from Spiers, and 4 from Vdenheim.where they have a designe to recover Spiers. Here have they a new de∣signe to recover Spiers: so that getting together all the Ponts and Rhine-ships, that they could lay their hands on; they trust to be in the night let in by their correspondēts within, and so to reprise the citie. This, whilest in the beginning of August, they are about; they found the Scene to become more suddenlie varyed, then they expected. For Gustavus Horn being returned un∣to Mentz, by the end of Julie;Gustavus Horn advancing in∣to the Palati∣nate. and having intelligence of their recovering of Bretten; and of Metternichs besieging of Wiseloch: he by the 10 or 11 of August, had rallyed all the forces he could spare out of the Electorate of Mentz, and
the townes along the Rhine; and was resolved, now, to goe out in quest of these Imperialists. His horse, hee first of all passes over the Rhine, by the bridge of Mentz, putting them upon the Easterne side of the water, next unto the Imperia∣lists. His foot, advance along the other side, unto Wormbs; and are there passed over the Rhine, unto their Horsemen. The appointed Rendezvous, was at Manheim: 12 English miles from Spiers,encamps a while at Man∣heim. and 16 from Wiseloch. Under favour of this strong towne, and the Neccars meeting there with the Rhine, Horn for a while encampeth. His purpose in it was, that he might learne out by his espyalls (now every where sent abroad) what was the state of the Wirtembergers armie, the countenance of Metternichs before Wiseloch; and the posture of Monte-Cuculi. Of Wirtemberg he heard, that he was readie to second him, and that he lay, in the meane time, at his close-ward, keeping his eye still, upon the point of Monte-Cuculi. Of Wiseloch, he learned thus much, that Metternich, Go∣vernour of Heidleberg, and Lamulius, (or la Mulie, as others write him) Governour of Vdenheim (as I take it) had put their strengths together, to attack it. That Captaine Rosberg having beene first sent thither about the 16 of Julie; had first summoned it, and then presented them his Canon. That upon the townes refusall to render,The storie of the siege of Wiseloch. the 2 Governors afore∣said, had round begirt them with their garrisons, and ever since, continued to besiege them. That Colonel Strasburger had beene surprised neere unto Heidleberg; and slaine in his owne defence, by Metternich: who embaulming the dead Colonell, sent his bodie to the Governour of Mentz, to be redeemed with the exchange of some Imperiall prisoners: sending him word withall, that money went hard with him; that his oile was deare, and that his men had taken a great deale of paines about him, That Metternich had late∣ly received some small seconds, from Monte-Cuculi; had sore pressed the besieged, and was alreadie gotten so neere the walls, that they could heave in hand-Granadoes into the
towne, and shoot in other artificiall wild fire. Upon this newes, Horn marches to the releife of it:Metternich, up∣on Horns com∣ming, raises his siege. but Metternich getting intelligence of his comming needed not be bidden goe; for that he the 15 of August, in all hast rai∣sed his siege, made all speed possible to recover into Heidle∣berg. It so chanced that some few howers before that Mit∣ternich had received tidings of Gustavus Horns comming, he had dispatched a trusty Officer of his Armie, (a Corpo∣rall) accompanied with 6 Horsemen, with letters unto Os∣sa and Monte-Cuculi, to give them newes of Horns com∣ming, and to desire this their last succours, with which hee beleeved, to take in the towne, before it could be releived. Horn came so suddenly upon Metternich at his rising, that the Swedish Vant-curriers had alreadie surprised some of those laggs, that had not made so much hast as they should, into Heidleberg. Some out-riders of the Swedes, had light upon Metternichs Corporall likewise, as he was now com∣ming home againe, from Monte-Cuculi. The letters found about him, discovered thus much: that the next day, (be∣ing the 16 of August) he would send some good troopes, to reenforce the siege of Wiseloch. A flying report, after the dispatch of the Corporall, was (I know not which way) brought unto the 2 Imperiall Generalls, that Metternich had alreadie taken in Wiseloch, but was himselfe by the sudden comming of some Swedish, againe besieged in the place. This false report, caused them to send the very flower of their Cavallerie, to disengage Metternich. Gustavus Horn having by the Corporalls letters under∣stood, that Monte-Cuculi the next day, would send some succours unto Metternich, (though this latter circumstance he understood not) resolved to prevent their ever comming to him. And whereas there was a place of Covert neere the Highwaies syde betwixt Rhinehausen (whence the Imperia∣lists were to come) and Wiseloch: the shadines of that place did Horn make choise of, to dresse his ambush in; out of which he meant to fall upon the others, as they were by∣passing.
Monte Cuculi sending 1000 Horse towards Wiseloch.The next day came there a full thousand Horsemen along, of the very flower of the Imperiall Armie; lead by Colonell Vitzthumb (a Colonel of Elsas Zabern, as I take it) and the Colonell Montbaillon: who had the Reere of them. Their owne strength, and the mis-intelligence of their ene∣mies posture, whom they had thought to have surprised at the siege of Wiseloch; made them advance with so much the more speed, and securitie. Horn had so ordered it at first, that they should passe along by the place where his horse lay, unto the Post where his Foot were lodged; that so he might have gotten them into the middle of him. But perceiving,they are way∣laid by Horn, when they came something neere him, that they strooke short downe on the tone side of him; and did not come so right forward, or so close to his ambuscado, as hee expected: he was faine to send out the Rhinegrave with a forlorne hope of Horse, to engage them to the encounter; whilest hee could bring up some stronger troopes to second him. The Rhinegrave was presently upon the Polls of them: for the Imperialists perceiving so few to come upon them; never doubled, or so much as mended their march for the matter. Montbaillon (a gallant Cavalier, as it appeared) drawing out some Curiassiers of Harincourts, for his se∣conds: now making a vertue of necessitie, leads on some of his owne Horse to confront the Squadron of the Rhine∣graves. Montbaillon falling on, lay too't bravely, fellow soul∣diers, saies he: Vitzthumb, thereupon, bringing up the rest of the forces. The Swedish Felt-Marshall having made his game, as well as ever he desired, (which was but to make them fight) brings on some Squadrons of Horse and Foot upon the front; and others, upon both the flancks, of the Imperialists. Montbaillon, by this time, perceiving the cards to be pack't against him; would faine have flung up his game & have been gone towards Mingelsheim, to the East of Wiseloch. But the Swedish being dealt much the fairer; would not consent they should goe off so, without leaving their stakes behinde them. There was Montbaillon shot dead
with a Carabine; and Treilly, his Leiftenant-Colonel,and defeated. fell at the same time by him Diverse Rittmasters were there dis∣mounted, and above 200 of the common soldiers. Vitz∣thumb scap't a scouring, by his good Horsemanship, and so did 6 or 700 others. The Swedish had the chase of them, till they came to Mingelsheim, full 6 English miles from Wiseloch. Diverse of the fleers having runne their horses out of breath, were faine to light on foot, and runne into the woods to hide them: but a bush was not baile good enough, to hold them from being prisoners. Their Horses, Armes, and Buff-coats, were good spoile to these that tooke them: and so was their moneths meanes too, which they were by the Law of Armes, to pay for their ransomes. The priso∣ners confest, that these 1000 Horse, were the very pride of their Armie (almost halfe of them being Curiassiers and Dragooners) and that the rest, were not much to bee re∣doubted. Ossa and Monte-Cuculi having newes, by those that esca∣ped, of this soare defeat, looked for no more courtesie,Monte-Cuculi fleeing over the Rhine; if they should there expect the Swedes comming: and there∣upon they the very same day, leave their old quarters at O∣berhausen and Rhinehausen, and hie them away towards V∣denheim. The boats which they had before gottē together to surprise Spiers withall, they were now enforced to convert to another purpose: to carrie, namely, their luggage towards Vdenheim, and there, the selfe-same night and next morning, to waft themselves over the Rhine in them. The next day August 17 being Friday, comes Gustavus Horn unto Rhine∣hausen, in pursuite of his enemies: but there found he none, besides some sick and maimed men, who had not been able to follow after their fellowes. By them did Horn learne, how their 2 Generalls had passed over the Rhine:and being pursued to the bancks of it by Gustavus Horn; and the project they had for their many boats, to have taken Spiers citie. The Imperialists staid not upon the further side of the Rhine, neere the place where they had passed it: but hasting along to the Southward by the side of it, they goe immedi∣ately
towards the faire citie of Hagenau in Alsatia,they go to so∣licite Hagenaw, about 10 English miles from Strasburg. This towne, they solicite to their partie: but the townsmen liked better to stand up∣on their owne guard, then to undoe thēselves, by the charg∣able entertainement of such guardians. Now doe Ossa and Monte Cuculi solicite the 3 Regiments of Bronckhorst,joyne forces with the 3 o∣ther Regi∣ments, Metternich and Roelingen, to come and joyne with them: which their owne safeties, made the other willing enough to consent unto. The Marquesse William of Baden, now puts his subjects to it, to doe their uttermost for their owne safeties: which was for them to take Armes, as many as could be gotten to it Now does the Commissary Ossa be∣stirre himselfe (that was properly his part) to supply the good townes of Benfeld,and prepare their townes, to be besieged Schletstat, Colmar, and the rest with garrisons, victualls and ammunition: all of them loo∣king shortly to be besieged. For these provisions, were the villages of the Strasburgers harryed. Nor did they faile of their expectations. For Gustavus Horn sending instantly to the Magistrates of Strasburg, to desire passage for his Armie over the Rhine, by their bridge: the ill usage of their subjects by Monte-Cuculi, and the dan∣ger thēselves should perpetually be in, (nothing being now left them, but the walls of their owne citie:) became most prevailing arguments for the obtaining of the passage. Upon Tuesday, therefore, August 21, is the bridge freed for the Swedish Felt-Marshall, who with the Rhinegrave Otto Lodowick,Horn obtai∣ning passage of the Stras∣burgers: with 6 Coaches, and 2 troopes of Horse in his at∣tendance, came the same day into the beautifull towne of Strasburg: where he was received with the Towne-Orati∣on, and such a present of Wine, Fish, and Oates: as is accu∣stomably made unto Princes and Ambassadours. The bridge demanded, is about an English mile without the towne of Strasburg, towards the Palatinate. It is about 3 quarters of an English mile long: the Rhine there entertaining some other riverets, and they together, making some overflow∣ings, and continued pooles of water. The bridge is upon
wooden Arches; no broader then the length of a Deale-board; which lie so loose and unfastned upon it, that the ci∣tizens have a saying of their bridge, that if a dogge runnes a∣long upon the ends of the boards, he will be gibbetted, or tilted over into the water. The Swedish Armie the next day comming after their Ge∣nerall; had not beene very squeamish (that's none of a sol∣diers sinnes) in taking what they found in the Marquisate of Baden, as they had passed through it. Marquesse William, had made himselfe an active man in these warres, and a fur∣therer of the demolishment of Knitlingen. Now therefore doe his subjects pay for it: made to redeeme their houses, from the fire, by a readie paying in of their Contributions. August 22, the Swedish Van of Horse, were passed over the bridge aforesaid; and so over the river Ill, into the enemie countrey of the Vpper Alsatia. This Vantgard consisted of 3000 Horse, and some few Regiments of Foot-men.passes his Vantgard o∣ver into the Vpper Alsatia. In the Rhinegraves Regiment, were 12 Cornets; in Colonell Islers, 5, Zillart had but 4, Schavalitzki had 10 there, him∣selfe in person being behinde, Vrseler 3, besides some troops of Curiassiers of the Generalls, and 2 Ensignes of Dragoo∣ners: in all, about some 36 or 37 Cornets. They drew 12 peeces of ordnance (besides field-peeces) along with them, and the chiefe of all the baggage and provisions for their whole Armie. The rest of the horse, were behinde with the grosse of the Foot, unto which, divers troopes of the Wirtembergers, under the leading of Colonell Helmstat, were by this time conjoyned. This Reere, (consisting of 6000 Foot, besides Horse) was brought up by Colonell Christofer Haubald, Governour of Wormbs; who as it appeares, was Leiftenant generall of the Foot unto his Excellence the Felt-Marshall; as the Rhinegrave was over the Horse. The Imperialists had no certaine Armie in the field at that time, but disper∣sed themselves round about Brisach, Schletstat, Colmar, O∣bernheim, and Hagenaw.
Haubald had commission from his Generall, to take in Stol∣hoven,leaving Hau∣bald behinde with the Foot, to take in Stolhoven. by the way: an indifferent strong towne of Marquesse William of Badens; upon the East, and contrary side of the Rhine from Strasburg, and about 14 English miles from it. Summons being given and refused, the approaches are be∣gunne, and the Batteries. Haubald gave such free fire upon the towne, that not a man, scarcely, durst appeare upon the Bullwarke. The defendants having lost all their out-works, and their breach being almost saultable: were said to have hung out a white flagge, in signe of parlee. Shooting being thereupon, given over, hostages sent into the towne to treat, and the Swedish before the walls upon confidence thereof, roaving up and downe too carelesly without their owne Covert, and within the command of the towne ord∣nance; had a volley, all on the sudden, sent in amongst the thickest of them. There, were divers both killed and spoi∣led; and Colonell Schavalitzi had his horse shot under him. Haubald perceiving this treacherie, sends to demand his hostages againe, and to bid them looke to themselves, for he would bee bobd with no more parlies from them. Commanding all his Batteries, therefore, to give them a∣nother generall Salve: the terror of that wrought such a re∣pentance in the townsmen, that they hang out their white flag againe, and send out their wives and children to begge mercie of the Swedish. This was against the minde of the Governor,which service Haubald ha∣ving done, Iohn Philip Schawenburg, (Sergeant Major Ge∣nerall unto Monte-Cuculi) and those Lorrayners and Itali∣ans, that were of the garrison: he, having beene before o∣ver-wrought by the inhabitants to the parlie, had beene a∣gaine provoked by the Lorrainers and Italians, to thunder out this second defiance: and now againe enforced by all this feminine importunitie, to condiscend unto a finall yeel∣ding. He, therefore, with those that had beene against sur∣rendring, was kept prisoner, by Haubald: the Germane soldiers finding good quarter, upon the usuall condition of taking entertainement with the conquerors. Here did
Haubald finde 4 great peeces of Canon, and 50 double Mus∣kets, as they call them. Small store of ammunition, was there to be had: the great want of which necessaries, was the cause of the soone yeelding: though Schawenburg, like a brave enemie, made countenance to the contrary. Stolhoven being in this manner taken in;passes his Ar∣mie over the Rhine to his Generall. Haubald thence advances towards Strasburg: and there with 12 peeces of ordnance, besides fielding-peeces; passes the bridge over to his Generall: who had before this time, blockt up the strong towne of Benfeld. Leaving both them, thus employed: turne we aside, a lit∣tle, unto their neighbour and Confederate,The actions of Wirtemberg. the Administra∣tor of Wirtemberg; who is presently to come into these parts and into our Storie. He, in the meane time, (that is, since that Ossa and Monte-Cuculi had beene taken up with Gu∣stavus Horn) had presently upon that, withdrawne his Army from his frontiers next to Bretten and Knitlingen; where, we told you, he had in the end of July and beginning of August, waited upon Monte-Cuculi. Thence goes the Ad∣ministrator more inwardly into his owne countrey, to the Southward; and along the Westerne bancke of the river Neckar. There, towards the middle of August, takes he in Rotenburg, 6 English miles from Tubingen.who having taken in Roten∣berg and Horbe, A little after this, he recovers the good towne of Horbe; 10 miles up the same river, and same side of it. Both these, were on the neerest frontiers (almost) of the Dukedome; next unto those parts, where Horns warres now lay; and by taking of them, was the midway betwixt both their forces, made the cleerer; and they the neerer together to conjoyne them. This done, and the Administrator having notice of the ta∣king of Stolhoven; some few of his, being now sent (by or∣der from the King of Sweden) to augment the garrison of Ausburg: he sends the greater part of his Armie over the mountaines, through the rich and pleasant Kintzkher thale (commonly called the Kintzinger dale) which the river Kintzkh both watereth and nameth. Some Swedish troopes
had beene left behinde, on that side the Rhine, about Stolho∣ven, to re-enforce these Wirtembergers: and their designe now was, upon the Imperiall citie of Offenburg, upon the said river Kintzkh;now comes and besieges Offenburg. about 10 English miles from Strasburg. This was the agreement betwixt the Administrator and the Swedish Felt-Marshall: to give action to the Imperialists, on both sides of the Rhine, at one instant; that they might not well know, which way next to turne them. But of this siege, presently; and in the order of time, that it ought to be. Wee left Haubald, even now, passing over the Rhine-streame. That done, and he advancing to the South-west∣ward, by St. Arbogast and Nidernheim: the Imperiall garri∣son of Obernheim, a little beyond Benfeld; avoide out of it before his comming. But the townsmen taking themselves to be more interessed in the keeping of their owne, then the mercenary soldiers: put on a resolution in their State-house, to defend themselves against the Swedish. But for all their bigge words, after they had beene once beaten in, upon a slight sallie which they made,Haubald be∣sieges Obern∣heim; to hinder the Swedish Appro∣ches; and that they heard the Canon bullets ratling a little among the tiles of their houses: the good men suffered themselves to be perswaded by their wives and daughters, to make but a money matter of it, and to hearken to a parlie. The townsmen,which is yeel∣ded to him. thereupon, being used to driving of bar∣gaines, more then to driving away their enemies; now bar∣gaine for their liberties: and 10000 Dollars they paid for it. Whilest this is a doing about the end of August, the Wir∣tembergers assisted by some Swedish, are at the siege of Offen∣burg. Summons being given; the citizens having first obtai∣ned a little respite, to consider of it; seeme desirous to enter into a Parlie. This was but a trick of theirs, to gaine time withall: seeing they were assured to be relieved from Mon∣te-Cuculi, if there were any port yet open, by which to re∣ceive the succours into their citie. The Wirtembergers thin∣king all their owne; were not so carefull, either to surround the citie; or to have their Sentinells and espialls abroad, as
they ought to have beene: By this negligence of theirs, 30 Imperialists thrusting themselves into the citie; the townsmen breake off their Parlie,The Wirtember∣gers besieging Offenburg; and let flie their ordnance among the Wirtembergers. Here was Colonell Iagermaister slaine; with divers others of the Wirtemberger Officers. The besiegers finding the besieged to plie them hard with sallies; to beate them out of their Approaches; and to fill up their Lines, by flinging in the earth againe: were faine, di∣rectly, to send for Gustavus Horn to come and helpe them. Thither came he in person, with some re-enforcements. By his strength, and skill, and diligence; the lines in 4 or 5 daies were perfected, Batteries, and wide breaches made; and ladders gotten readie, for the Scalado. The garrison and citizens perceiving this; they, to beginne the moneth, and end the weeke withall,Are faine to send for Gusta∣vus Horn to helpe them: Saturday September the first (old Style) sent out to treat the conditions of surrendring. They are granted upon indifferent termes unto the garrison: whereupon the next day, September the 2, 300 soldiers on foot, and 120 on horseback, march forth freely out of the towne, to him that sent them. Munday and Tuesday were the dayes appointed for the treating with the townsmen: who for having dealt so treacherously with the Wirtember∣gers, were compelled, first,By whom the towne is ta∣ken. to redeeme themselves with 20000 Dollars: & 2, to prevent their correspondencie with the Imperialists, was there a garrison of 500 men put upon them. 3 Their suburbs which themselves had partly burnt downe, and partly beaten downe, for the fortifying of their towne, were they made promise, not to build up againe, for ever. 4. They were to take an oath of homage to be∣come hereditarie subjects unto the Crowne of Sweden. 5. and lastly, to be forbidden medling with any Armes, for ever Here was found an excellently well furnished Maga∣zine; both for victualls, Guns, and ammunition: which wel helpt Gustavus Horn to beate all the rest of the countrey. Whilest these conditions are a treating, the Armie had gi∣ven summons to the strong & well provided Castle of Or∣tenburg;
Ortenburg Ca∣stle surren∣dred. the chiefe strength of the Kintzinger-dale aforesaid, which (to be briefe) was faine to follow the example of its predecessors, and to resigne up it selfe on wednesday the 5 of September. By the taking of these 2 most important places, was the towne of Brisach quite foundered: which though full 30 English miles, from this Offenburg; yet it being upon the same side of the Rhine with it; there was never a conside∣rable strength betweene, to shelter it. Hereabouts, had Monte-Cuculi all this while laine: as if to give aime to the losing of the Countrey.Ossa and Monte Cuculi, avoide the countrie The Swedish Army now making that way; both he and the Commissary Ossa, (not able to a∣bide their comming) are faine to depart the Countrey. Ossa (as I finde) went first of all towards Nancy in Loraine, or else to Bisanson in Burgundy; to leave his Lady there, in a place of securitie: presently returning over the Rhine again, into Schwabland. Monte-Cuculi resigning his Generalship, in those parts, unto Marquesse William of Baden; adven∣tures with some troopes of Horse, especially, to brush through the Easterne skirts of the Duchy of Wirtemberg, and so to Kempten in the very edge of Schwabland; and to get that way into Bavaria. Thereabouts (as I finde) had Sir Patrick Ruthven a blow at him: being said to kill him 300 men, and to take 150 prisoners. Thus, with much adoe, gets he over the Lech about Schonga and Fuessen: and in Bavaria you have before heard of him, in the Kings storie. The coast being thus cleered of the Imperialists; there was not a foe, in the field, to make opposition against the Swedish or the Wirtembergs.The Earldom of Furstemberg, taken. Hereupon, is the faire Kintzinger-dale brought under Swedish contribution: and in it, the inheri∣tance of Eggon Count of Furstemberg, who, as in our First Part we have often told you, was sometimes the Emperors great Generall, in this Circle of Swevia. How he had re∣signed his Generalship, and retyred into a privacie; you may see Page 119, and 220, of our Second Part. In what estate, the countrie & himselfe were now in; tis best know∣ing
out of his owne Letters, written unto Iames Hannibal, Count of Ems: which were by the way intercepted. MY LORD: I Yesterday received a Letter from the Marquesse William of Baden: and the sad newes in it,Furstenbergs letter, and complaint. of the falling of the Marshall Horn with 10000 men, into his Marquisate. That also he had required 300000 Florens from him, in present paiment; and a place of Rendezvous, for 4 fresh Regiments. I am very sorrie to see him made a beggar as I my selfe am; though otherwise, there be no comparison betwixt us: he having received at the Emperors hands so brave and good a countrey, as is his Marquisate; whilest I, for mine owne part, have neither master nor money. Thus am not I able to help him; nor he me; nor you either of us. I had before spent al∣most all I had, in these warres; and now am I utterly ruined of the residue. And thus much could I not but give you part of, that you might helpe to condole with us. Your LOPS. true friend and servant, Eggon Count of Furstenburg. Heyligenburg Septemb. 8. 1632.
THis conquest, was felt as farre as the Count of Hanaw-Lichtenbergs possessions: all the Lords and Gentlemen on that side the Rhine, being likewise made sensible of it. The Kintzinger-dale was againe opened for the Strasbur∣gers;The advan∣tage of these Conquests. and the way quite cut off from the Imperialists, that no succours could passe from Schwabland or Italie. By this conquest, was all cleere againe from Strasburg unto Kit∣zingen in Franconia, to the North-Eastward: to Rotweil up∣on the Neckar in Schwabland, to the South-Eastward: on the 3 side, unto Vdenheim in the Palatinate; and on the 4 side quite through the Hercinian forrest or the Swartz-walt into Bavaria. All this, was by these conquests, put into the power of the King of Sweden. Some say, that the griefe of of this newes, added some speeding malignity, unto the Arch Duke Leopolds infirmities: which Prince, now lying for his pleasure at Swatz in Tirole;The Arch∣duke Leopold dyes, was unexpectedly (and after much hunting) taken with a Catarrhe in his head, which fell downe and put one of his eyes out: which being followed with a fluxe, and a continuall feaver; in few dayes made an end of him. He dyed September 13, at which time, his Imperial Majesty, likewise, was most unprincely hādled, by an unmannerly & rebellious Quartan ague.and the Empe∣ror is sick of a Quartane. The Archduke dyed in an ill time: seeing, at this instant, his owne Estates, laid open to the prey: his familie, all embroyled; his Allyes, much adoe to subsist; his faire hopes, blasted; his great de∣signes, returned upon himselfe; his enemies, beginning a∣pace to be many; and his friends, few; his neighbours, not much to be relyed on; for that, they beganne to recall the bad remembrances, of ancient and forepassed jealousies and mis-intelligences. In this ill time, dyed the Archduke: who had he lived but 2 moneths longer; would well have cheered up himselfe, with the death of the King of Sweden. Presently after the death of this Leopold; his Counsellors take care for the ensuring of the passages of his countrey of Tirole: and confirme Marquesse William in his Generall∣ship,
against Gustavus Horn: helping to make him up an Armie of 4000 men, with which hee kept himselfe about Ensisheim. To returne to our Swedish Felt-Marshall. The countrey on that side of the Rhine being thus ranged into order; the selfesame Wednesday night, that Ortenburg castle was ta∣ken upon; did Gustavus Horn with certaine of his troopes,Horn returnes to Strasburg: both Horse and Foot, passe Strasburg bridge againe: him∣selfe lodging the same night within the citie. His forces went to their old quarters againe, beyond the river Ill: whither a little after that, the rest of his Armie followed. The Wirtembergers returned into their owne Countrie, first; and so towards the Bodensee; and that to divert the Impe∣rialists from disturbing Horn at his siege of Benfelt; as by and by wee shall tell you On Thursday, September 6. did Count Henrie of Nassau Dillingberg, come and joyne his Regiment, unto the Swedish Armie. Friday, the 7 of Sep∣tember, being the Anniversarie day of the famous victory of Leipsich; was a day of devotion both in the Camp and Ci∣tie: to the celebrating whereof, the Lord-Marshall was himselfe gone into his leaguer. There were Prayers added unto the Thanksgiving;going thence, to the siege of Benfelt. for the prospering of the designe in∣tended; and that was the siege of Benfelt: which by an Ex∣presse, the same evening his Excellencie certified the Stras∣burgers of: and that he would the next morning, put him∣selfe upon his march, thitherward. The place, is in the lower Alsatia, which there beginneth: & on the Westerne banck of the river Ill; which having run 12 or 14 English miles further, through Strasburg, drops presently into the Rhine. East of the towne, (which is but a very small one) is the river. The place of the towne, is by a morasse: the river there, branching out, into at least 20 small Ilets. Before it, is there a hillie and a woodie coun∣trey. The Citie of Strasburg, had some pretences to it;The towne described. and it now was a troublesome neighbour unto it: that, holding for Prince Rodolfe William Bishop of Strasburg, second
sonne unto his Imperiall Majestie. Tis a royall fortification and a regular: in forme of a spurre or Mullet, 5 cornered. The walls, strongly beset with towers, and rundells: the Bulwarks, thick and high: with two wett ditches about them; and on the East side, a little Suburb, washed by the river. All this, was very strongly pallisadoed, with some outworks to it. A worck is was said to be, of well neere 20 yeares forti∣fication. Count Herman Adolph Count of Salm Rifferschet, Statholder or Governour of the Bishoprick of Strasburg (in which Benfelt standeth) and Deane of the same Strasburg:The Rhinegrave is of this Fa∣mily of Salm. had excellently well provided it, of victualls and ammuniti∣on: some peeces of full Canon, had they upon their Bull∣warcks; which shot 48 pound bullet. Their garrison, was about 800 Foot, and 140 horse: some of their Foot, being sturdie Boores, which there learned to be soldiers. Their Governor was one Colonell Bulach, a discreet Gentleman, and a very resolute Commander. Saturday September the eight, did his Excellencie Gu∣stavus Horn advance thitherward. That very night, did his vantguard take in some Mills, with the Hospitall or cloister on the North side of the river (which betwixt that and the towne, had many great Ilets and branches) cutting off, and beating in, some of these townsmen, that had undertaken the guard of them. Munday September the tenth, beganne Horn to plant his Ordnance,The siege laid which I heare to be 3 whole Canons, 4 halfe Canons, 12 fielding pieces, and 4 mortars. And now was he engaged upon a hard peece of service, and all eyes were fixt upon the issue of it. Horns head Quarter, was upon the westerne bancke of the river, and North side of the towne: and on that side he begunne his Approaches. His trenches went round from North to South The defen∣dants (twas knowne) were resolved to dispute it, and the Swedes had here pitcht themselves upon their hopes, for the command of the whole Bishoprick of Strasburg, and for the Lordship of all the neighbour Alsatia. The Strasburgers
were deeply interessed in the successe of the Action; for be∣sides that Benfelt was the great hinderer of their traffick; they, by their giving passage unto Gustavus Horn, had com∣mitted such an act of enmitie against the Emperor, as they must now doe like a sick man; not take so weake a Dos of Physicke, as should be but able to stir the humors; but a potion strong enough to expell them. If Horn prevailed not before Benfelt, the weight of the warres would, certainely, fall hea∣vie on their side. Horn, therefore, knew well enough, that all their Magazins and their Armories, were at his devoti∣on. Thus was he backt. Ossa, and the Count of Salm, then resident in Zabern (a good soldier) with Metternich of Heidleberg; had all en∣gaged their words, that Bulach should be relieved: and to cut out Horn so much worke, otherwhere, by their diversi∣ons; that he should never be able to lie long before Benfelt. And thus was the towne backt: so that it was a siege of the greatest expectation (though not of so much noise) next un∣to that of Maestricht; that hath beene in these latter trou∣bles. The quiet of the Palatinate, the securitie and profit of the Strasburgers, and the Conquest of Alsatia; much de∣pended upon Benfelt. By September the twelfth, were the Swedish masters of the Toll-Sconce on the East side of the town, a good distance from it, and upon the third branch of the river. This sconce had the command of the Bridges over the river Ill: and over the Causey which led thence into the Suburb. By the taking of this, was the river it selfe also at their devotion. By the thirteenth, were they Approached within 30 Rodd of the outtermost Graff: and under the command of the enemies Canon. Horns lines first brake ground, midway betwixt his owne Head quarter and the towne: which he led cranckling in and out, gaining still neerer and neerer upon the towne. They were runne sloaping along the north side of the town and so ended right against a Bulwarke, on the very West of it. All along this Trench, were his Batteries, Blinds, Tra∣verses:
and Redoubts, to watch and save the Approaches: and out of this, was begunne another lesser line, from a great batterie. This lesser and neerer Approach, was runne all along the Northwesterne side of the towne, in a halfe Circle, just as the towne ditch directed it: of which it was within a few paces. At the westerly end of this lesser Approach, was the Ditch cut and drained: and there was the Callerie led over: of which we shall in its time, tell you. Horn begin∣ning his Approaches, hath his Pyoners beaten out, now and then, by the townsmens sallies; who flung the earth in again into the Trenches. And this was done often, for, certainely the place was very well defended. Ever as Horn brought his Lines neerer, hee also brought forward his Batteries. Strasburg sent him supplies of Canon, Granadoes, Fire∣works, and Ammunition, (and victualls too) as much as he desired: so that he was nothing sparing of his lead nor gunpowder. The most of those buildings which a Canoni∣er could have but a cleere view of, from off his Batterie, he beate about the townsmens eares: steeples, towers and run∣dells, as well as houses. For the furie of the great and small shott, and the terror of the Fire-workes (which had twice alreadie, set fire upon some Courts of Guard, Centry-hou∣ses and stables, next unto the rampiers:) was no man (with∣out extreame hazzard) able to appeare upon the Bullwarke: so that though the towne kept some peeces of Canon yet un∣dismounted upon their wall, yet hardly durst a Canonier tarry by them, unlesse when the rampier were to bee assaul∣ted. A triall of this, was made September 13, whenas 30 Swedish Horsemen made a dare, close up to the very brinck of the outtermost moate, and came off againe without dan∣ger. Horn by the middle of the moneth, having gotten for∣ward, as far as the outtermost wet-moate, had a designe for the cutting of that, and to derive the water out of it into the river. To hinder that, doe the besieged issue through a
sally-port; and resolutely beate off the Boores that were Horns spade men, and the soldiers that defended them. Yet was that service by degrees performed;The first mo wonne. and so much of the water drained out, as lay higher then the river. The rest was partly filled up, where needfull: and Horn being now gotten to the Suburb (which the townsmen partly had de∣molished, and Horns Fireworkes consumed) made use of the rubbish for filling up the moate; and of the timberwork, for the making and bringing over his Gallerie. September 26 in the night, was the Gallerie begunne to be put over the moate: upon which, though the besieged sallyed, yet were they perswaded in againe; and the Gallerie after a while per∣fected. These militarie Galleries, are in the manner of Bidges: made upon Piles fastned into the ground, and joyse  osse over them and plancks over all, like a Bridgework. Now were his men lodged in this slighted Suburb; which was some shelter to them: and hence, was every Orlope or peeping hole of the wall so flanckerd with their Firelocks, that hardly could a head appeare out of the towne, or over a work, but he was dasht in the teeth with a bullet. Horns next worke, was to make up a great Blynd, for the shelter of his Enginiers and labourers: who were now working towards the second Graffe, close under the Bullwarke Sep∣tember 29, did the Strasburgers furnish him with 4 more Canon, for a new Batterie upon his Approaches: so that un∣der the favour of these volleyes, did hee in a short time in crooked lines, advance as farre as that second Graffe: the bancks whereof they now fall to cutting. Doe the Benfel∣ders what they can, by their sallyes; yet, they within a few dayes, lost halfe the water out of that moate too: the Swe∣dish were well forward with their second gallerie; and lod∣ged on another side, within a few paces of their Foretowne.The second moate wonne. This was the worke of the first moneth: by which time the Swedes were become Masters of the river, the Tol∣skonce, the Bridge, both the moats, the Suburbs, and finally of all without the walls and ports of the very citie.
Munday October the eighth, the Swedes thinking to make a short worke of it: made a furious assault upon the Fore∣citie: but being not able to carrie it by Scaladoe, they were faine,Divers assalts repulsed. with some losse, to give it over. And yet this attempt was once or twice renewed in the weeke following: and the besieged kept waking by the expectation of an Alarme, every day. The Saturday after, being the thirteenth of Octo∣ber, the besieged, towards evening, desired a parlee, that they might have a truce granted for a few dayes; requesting a safe conduct for their Drumme, to be sent unto the Gene∣rall. Hee not liking the propositions; no sooner was the Drumme received into the towne againe: but he comman∣ded a rouzing volley to be sent in after him:The beseiged desire a truce which is deni∣ed them. to signifie unto the besieged, that no other cessation of Armes was to be ex∣pected; but till his Canoniers could lade their peeces againe, when they had discharged them. The Count of Salm that was Governour for the Empe∣rors Sonne, of his Bishoprick of Strasburg, to which this Benfelt belongeth; wrote his letters unto the French Am∣bassador at Strasburg, to request his mediation for a truce for Benfelt. The colour for his request was, that the truce might last till the French Kings pleasure might bee knowne, upon what termes he would take the Bishoprick into his protection. But neither would this be granted: and the de∣nyall was sent to Zabern, 9 or 10 miles from Strasburg, where Salm resided. Presently after the leaguer was first laid, and the Quarters entrenched:The Rhine∣grave blocks up Schletstat. had the Rhinegrave beene sent out with the most of the Horse, to block up Schletstat; a very strong towne upon the same river of Ill, some 8 or 9 English miles to the Southwest of Benfelt. His Partees flew up and down the countrey, to spoile the Imperialists mustering places; to observe the motions of the enemie: and to prevent their sudden disturbing of the leaguer. He had sent word, a little before this, unto the Felt-Marshall; of the Count of Salms assembling of some good forces together, on that side the
Countrey: and that they had given it out, how they would shortly give the Swedish a Camisado in their owne trenches: being very confident of beating up a quarter, and of thrust∣ing in some supplies into the besieged. Horn upon newes hereof, had sent into the Palatinate and to the Strasburgers; that they should lighten their garrisons (as many as they could spare) and send the forces to his leaguer, with all speed possible. Upon this, did the Count of Solms, and the Colo∣nell Smidberger come into the Camp, with their Regi∣ments. Munday October 15, towards evening;An offer to re∣lieve the town Count Salm first shewed himselfe, within a little of the Trenches: with some 4000 Boores, 2000 soldiers, and 600 Horse, in his Armie. Whilest Horn sent out some good troopes to enter∣taine and stave them off; the besieged fall also out, upon a worke of the Swedish. But the Count of Salms Boores, plainely, came not on with that bravery that soldiers would have done, nor did they once touch upon any one of Horns Quarters: so that the besieged perceiving their Aides to presse no neerer, they fall off againe, and withdraw them∣selves into their Citie. Salms his men also, after some lighter skirmishes, retyre themselves into the Dorps to∣wards Schletstat; which next morning they fire at parting. That day, out went the Rhinegrave Lodowick, with a Partee of 500 Dragooners, 500 Horse, and 1000 commanded muskettiers; to trie what metall they were made of. Hee lighting on them by the flame and smoake, which they made in the Countrey; kills 300 of them as they were scattered up and downe, and takes about 150 prisoners: whereupon the most of the rest retyred unto Molsheim on the river Brusch, 10 miles North of Benfelt: which was the appoin∣ted Rendezvous for them. The defeate of these succors, and the hopes of them:is put by. made his Excellencies and the Rhinegraves Healths, to be hearti∣ly remembred at Strasburg; for that now they esteemed Benfelt as good as taken. But the Count of Salm said not so:
for he gave it out, that hee but recoild to come on againe with more furie, & that the next time he would bring 1000 men with him: yea, that hee would either leave his bones before Benfelt, or relieve it. The garrisons of Heidleberg, Franckendale and Vdenheim, twas given out, should make diversions:The King of Bohemia comes to Franckfort. but that threat was quickly taken off, by the comming of the King of Bohemia unto Franckeford: who though he levyed no forces, yet did hee much amuse the neighbourhood, with the beliefe of his purpose to doe so. As for those of Franckendale, the Benfelders hopes of their aide was defeated, by his Majestie of Bohemiaes entring in∣to a Treatie with them. For all this, the Count of Salm di∣vulged it, that all the Imperiall garrisons of Brisach, Kenzin∣gen, Endingen, Molsheim, Dachstein, Schirmeck, Schletstat and Colmar; even all the power they could make, they would rallie together into one Armie, and put it to such a push, as either to hazzard all their townes, or relieve Benfelt. These hopes found he meanes to convey into the town, which Bu∣lach had art enough by great circumstances to make proba∣ble: and upon hope of that, to keepe his men in courage and expectation. The Count of Salm indeed, after this, shewed himselfe in the field now and then, but could never bring his 10000 men together. Commissary Ossa had now need of men about the Lake of Constantz, so that he could spare him no forces to succor Benfelt. This was Ossa put unto, by the Duke of Wirtemberg: who had purposely made this diversion upon those parts, that Horn might have the lesse disturbance before Benfelt. There had the Wirtembergers gotten the townsmen of Cell,The Wirtem∣bergers take townes about the Lake of Constaniz. to take in a garrison from them; which they had before de∣nied unto Ossa. This was a towne of very great importance. Richenau Abby upon the Lake, they had by force, taken, for they were 10000 men, now in the field: and Lindau and Bregentz both, were sorely afraid of them. Neerer home, did the Rhinegraves troopes skowre the coast up and downe, daily, making their Cavalcadces some∣times
to the very gates of Zabern it selfe, one way; and o∣therwayse, as farre along the Rhines side as Brisach: there affronting the Imperiall Quarters: who before Brisach had a few forces. Those of Brisach againe, would now and then put into the field: The Count of Salm also would send out some Partees; but the Rhinegrave put so betweene them, and so spoiled their mustering places: that they could ne∣ver bring their Armie together, according as they had pro∣mised. The besieged, by this time, wanting forage for their hor∣ses, they about October 20,The state and hopes of the besieged. turne 100 horses out of their port among the Swedish: and even yet they held it out reso∣lutely. Their hope now was, that the raines at this time of the yeare, would fill the Ditches & Mines up againe, which Horn was now a working: but that hope failed them. His Galleries being now perfected; he a few dayes after, causes the enemies walls to be attempted, if but to see what coun∣tenance the besieged still carryed.They beat off an assault. But those hee found so good, that his men were beaten off againe: one of his sol∣diers onely having snatcht down an Ensigne from the Ram∣pant, in despight of all the small shot of the defendants, pur∣posely aimed upon him. By this time, was Gustavus Horns Armie more increased, then when he first sate downe be∣fore Benfeldt: and that especially and of late, by the com∣ming of Battalie a French Colonell, with 600 men: which he hoped to make up a Regiment compleat, out of those forces which his King had a little before casheired in Lor∣raine. By the 25, had Horn sapt himselfe, close unto the Rampi∣er, and by the 26, (notwithstanding all Countermining) had he brought his mine under it, put in his powder, and made it readie to play. The 27, he prepared all things rea∣dy to storme into the Breach, which upon the springing of the mine he infallibly expected. That morning, did Gover∣nor Bulach send out a Trūpet with open letters in his hand; which he desired leave of the Felt Marshall to carrie to the
Governor of the Bishoprick of Strasburg, then at Zabern: to discover the weake estate of the towne to him, and to desire him to propound the conditions for his rendring: re∣questing a 3 dayes truce in the meane time, till the returne of the messenger. But this message was by Gustavus Horn, controlled;The last as∣sault. and the Trumpet sent backe againe. Towards night, doe the Swedish resolve upon the firing of their mine: which the besieged perceiving; resolutely fall out upon it, and fight with them at the mines mouth, all that afternoone the whole night following, and the next day till 2 a clock after dinner. Horn continually relieved his men, with new seconds: yea his dragooners and Horsemen too, were on foot brought on, still to pursue the storming. His men were very earnest with him, that he would accept of no composi∣tion, but that they might have leave to take it by force; and that their reward for all their hardship before it, might bee the pillage of it. But Bulach having both done and suffered, as much as might be expected from a man in his place; perceiving his men to be sorely harassed and over-watched; his enemies forces encreased; they backed by Strasburg; and himselfe not likely to be relieved from Zabern; that the mine was ready to spring, and the besieged hasty to fall into the first breach:Benfelt yielded is contented that some of his people had alreadie hanged out a white Ensigne, in signe of parlie: himselfe sen∣ding out to require hostages. This was done in the after∣noone of Simon and Iudes day, October 28: whereupon the next day, both parties agreed upon these thirteene condi∣tions. and the condi∣tions.1. That the Governor, with all the Captaines, Officers, and common soldiers, should depart freely: going out with Colours flying, drummes beating, matches lighted, bullets in the mouth, and with full Armes. And that they should carry all their families with them, with horses and wagons sufficient, for the carrying away of their baggage; that they should have a field peeces, and one wagons loading of pow∣der,
bulletts and matches. That the Governor, moreover, should with his wife, children, cosins, sisters, and servants with their baggage, be convoyed into Zabern: and the other Captaines and soldiers, to Brisach: pledges being given on both sides, according to the custome. 2. That the Ecclesiasticks and Religious persons, and espe∣cially those that lived in Achle; should have free exercise of religion, as heretofore they have had: and leave to main∣taine themselves upon Almes; and as for those that were re∣solved to go otherwhere, they should have free leave to go: together with their goods and soldiers for the guard of them. 3. That the citizens also should have free exercise of the Romane Catholick religion. 4. Those that were Officers of the Bishoprick, should have leave of departing, likewise, with their goods and fa∣milies; 2 wagons with their horses, being allowed them: they first of all delivering unto certaine deputies appointed in the King of Swedens name; their Coucher-bookes and o∣ther Records concerning the estate of the Bishopricke: to∣gether with a true account of all things hitherto deposited. 5. The sick and wounded, which were not now able to march out with the rest; should have leave to tarry in the towne, till they were recovered: after which, they should have Passes, to goe whither they desired. 6. That the Governor, Captaines, Officers, Soldiers and Citizens, that had any lands within the Bishoprick; should have libertie among the rest who had yeelded themselves into the King of Swedens protection: either to inhabite and make the best of them, or to sell them, as they plea∣sed. 7. That the Governor, now presently after the rendring, should have a Passe from Gustavus Horn, for the sending of an Officer with his letters, unto the Governor Generall of the Bishoprick, to certifie him of the proceedings. 8. That none of the priviledges, freedomes, jurisdictions,
and Rights of City or Citizens; should be diminished; nor should any ransomes be exacted of them: but that they should have a protection rather, against any injurie that might be done by the garrison, which was to be put upon them: and that right and justice might indifferently be ad∣ministred to every man. 9. That all and singular the citizens now within the towne, should have leave either to sell their goods pre∣sently, or within a certaine time, when they could: after which they might freely depart, and take Passes to that purpose. 10. That the Citizens having houses either in the towne or Countrey, should have leave to till their lands; and en∣joy their stocks, horses, cattell, and other goods serving to that purpose, without ransome. 11. That the prisoners on both sides, should bee set free without ransome. 12. That all militarie ammunition, victualls, and other things, not particularly belonging unto the Governor, Offi∣cers, Soldiers, nor Citizens; should without fraud be delive∣red unto such persons, as should be appointed by the Felt-Marshall. 13. That the yeelding of the towne, should be at eight a clock the next morning; and of the Suburbs, before evening. And if the Governor by reason of some hinderance, could not goe in the morning, he should then have leave to tarry with his familie in his owne house, till the next morning and the soldiers, in the Suburbs Upon these Articles Tuesday October 30, was the town delivered: the Governor marching out with 400 Foot, and 120 Horsemen. One of his Foot-Captaines and whole com∣pany, turned soldiers to the Swedish. The towne thus con∣quered, was afterwards entrusted over unto those of Stras∣burg:The town be∣ing made over to the Strasbur∣gers, by which courtesie, they were not a little strength∣ned; this strong towne, having, shrewdly heretofore puni∣shed them.
It pleased his Highnesse the Duke of Lorraine, about the end of the next moneth;is claimed by the Duke of Lorrain, to lay some claime unto this towne of Benfelt, as also unto Dachstein, (which the Swedish had by that time taken) and to Zabern. His Commissioners met with Gustavus Horns, at Marienkerch. His plea was, that he had lent certaine monyes upon them, and that they had therupon beene consigned over to him, for securitie. Wher∣fore he in friendly manner requested, that Benfelt might now be returned over to him. The Swedish Commissioners gave good words: but as for the towne, they could say no∣thing to it, till a Diete might be convoked in the Empire.which is deni∣ed him. In the meane time, they desired the Duke to rest assured, that if he neither supplyed the Emperor with Aides nor Pro∣visions; the Swedes would no way bee injurious unto his Highnesse lands, or subjects, but help to defend them rather: should the Emperor, upon pretence of his Highnesses being friend to the Swedish partie, offer to assaile them. Benfelt thus taken, his Excellencie the Swedish Feft-Marshall sent the Rhinegrave to take in Marckelsheim;The Rhine∣grave takes Marckelsheim. a towne hard by, defended but by one company of Imperia∣lists. The Rhinegrave had but a weake Partee as yet with him: the cause, that his summons were gybed at. The Im∣perialists told him, he was no customer for them: nor had hee companions enow, to make them afeard of him. Tis ill jea∣sting with edge tooles. The Rhinegrave, hereupon, sending to Benfelt with all speed for some field peeces; he the same day, made his entrance into the towne, by force and battery. Here found he but 20 Horsemen, and those he tooke priso∣ners: the rest of them that belonged to the garrison, were gone out that morning to convoy in a Foot company, which was comming from Colmar to reenforce those of Marckel∣sheim. These the Rhinegrave having notice of, way layes, meets withall, and defeats: bringing the Captaine of the Foot-Companie, his Leiftenant, and all his men, prisoners with him. Other Swedish Partees severally sent abroad, doe at the
same time take in all the best of those small Strengths, that lie along the river of Ill towards Schletstat-ward or a little beyond it: about 2 or 3 English miles from the river. These townes were, Epffich, Vpper Bercken, Dambach and Kesten∣holtz; together with Gemar upon the Ill, a little beyond Schlestat: so that Schletstat became hereby blocked. But the chiefest of the Armie, and Gustavus Horn with it, advances towards Molsheim: a good towne upon the river Brusch,Horn takes Mutzig, and about 10 English miles West of Strasburg: and little above that distance North of Benfelt. Horn causes Mutzig to be first taken,Molsheim. a pretty towne one English mile West of Molsheim, belonging to one Lansperg a private Gentleman, that had served the Bishop. Molsheim, the fourth of our November Horn likewise investeth. The towne not able to resist, begins to treate within 2 dayes: & the very sixth of November, (that fatall sixth of November, the day that the King of Sweden was slaine upon) receives in 3 troopes of Swedish Horse, with some Foot-Companies for a garrison. This secured Strasburg on that side. Thence turnes our Felt-Marshall back unto Schletstat: and that wee now relate unto you. For though our purpose was, to have lead on our Storie no further then the Kings death;Horn turnes towards Schlet∣stat. yet for that there wants but one moneths worke, for the taking of 2 or 3 townes more, in this Alsatia; and consequently, of Gustavus Horns marching up thence, into Bavaria: we chose rather to transgresse upon your patien∣ces, after the Glasses being out, then to leave the Story of these parts, unperfected. This Schletstat is a very strong Imperiall towne, (and the strongest, next to Benfelt) upon the river of Ill, about nine English miles to the Southeast of Benfelt.The Iesuites found to be Coniurers and Poysoners. There is a Colledge of Iesuites in it; and those, famous (or rather infamous) for the Studie of Magick or the Black Art: which some ex∣cuse, by the name of Iudiciall Astrologie. I feigne nothing upon them: for so much was at Strasburg by a novice of theirs, publiquely upon his execution day (since Christmas
last) confessed. This yong fellow being native of Strasburg was brought up by the Iesuites of Schletstat; and by them employed, for the poysoning of some chiefe men of Stras∣burg, for which he was executed. He confessed, that all the Iesuites of the Colledge, (excepting two) were Magicians; and a many of them Poysoners. And, indeed, both these Arts diabolicall, doe our Cunning men and women, in these latter dayes practise together: that if by one of them, they shall foretell, the being in love, sicknesse or death, of any that requires their counsell; they may by the Figgs, and Philters and Potions of their other Art, endanger to make good their prediction. Nor are these feates onely practised by the Iesu∣ites, in their Colledge of Schletstat; but in other places too, as the world beleeveth. These Arts, and lying, confute stronglier, then all their Schoole Divinitie. Murder will out; but these, I leave till their discoveries. This Schletstat, though as strong as the Divell could make it; was not able a moneth together to resist the Armes of Ju∣stice, and a good cause, that were now brought against it.Schletstat be∣sieged. Leiftenant Colonell Breitenbach defended it: who had two troopes of Horse and 600 Muskettiers of Colonell Metter∣nichs Regiment; which we heretofore told you to have comne from out of Cullens countrey, into the Strasburgers Jurisdiction. I purposely omit to relate the order of the siege laying, the maner of the Approaches, or the sallyes of the be∣sieged: minding to tell you of what strength the Imperia∣lists were still in these parts, and what endeavours they now made, to deliver this and Colmar; which Gustavus Horn caused at the same time to be blocked, that he sate downe to Schletstat. By this time was Monte-Cuculi gone through Schwab∣land into Bavaria: and Commissarie Ossa had his hands full about the Lake of Constantz; so that the Generalship in these parts of Alsatia, was againe made over to Marquesse William of Baden: and he now the second time againe ap∣peared, after the spoiling of his countrey. The Marquesses
troopes, were commanded by Major Ascanio; and sent to lie at Ensisheim, a towne upon the river Ill, 12 English miles South of Colmar, where the Chamber and Iudgement seat is, for the Marckraviate of the Vpper Alsatia. Some few Im∣perialists, lay also encamped at Brisach upon the Easterne bancke of the river Rhine, due East of Colmar and 12 miles from it. To these, were some Foot-Companies to be con∣joyned, out of Lorraine; whose levying for the Emperors service, the Duke had there given way unto. To take on these Lorrainers, doe 12 Cornets of the Brisachers Horse, upon the sixteenth of November passe over their Bridge to the Westward; to meet the other, comming out of their owne Countrey. Ascanioes men, were by that time comne from Ensisheim unto H. Crux a towne within 5 English miles of Colmar.The Imperia∣lists gathering together to re∣lieve Schletstat. And these were about 18 Cornets more, (besides Foot:) all resolved to affront Horns Quartiers, and to attempt the relieving, at least of Colmar. The Rhine∣grave Otto Lodowick, having notice of the Brisachers being abroade; he with 3 Regiments flyes in upon the necks of them: kills, takes, and disperses them; scarce 100 of them recovering with safety unto Brisach. Seaven Ensignes tooke he from them: and that he might pursue the victorie, be∣fore Ascanioes men should have notice of his being so neer, he falls upon his Quarters about Heiligen Crux aforesaid. These taking the route, at the first charge; fled with all speed towards Ensisheim. Being come to Wittenen hard by Ensisheim; they beganne there to unbridle and disperse, thinking themselves there, in a good place of securitie. But the Rhinegrave having pursued them upon the spurre; hembd them in upon the sudden, set fire upon the 4 corners of the towne, to fire and smoake out the Imperialists. Of these, as they came without order, & at severall places running out; were 300 knockt downe upon the place: and among them, 2 Barons of Reiffenberg, Leiftenant Colonell Roben; a Serge∣ant Major, 6 Horse Captaines, with diverse Cornets, and under Officers. Three hundred, (the most of them Dragoo∣ners)
being on the outside of the towne, had, at first,are defeated by the Rhine∣grave. flung downe their Armes, and desired to be taken into the Rhine∣graves service. Ascanio being at Ensisheim, escaped with 3 Cornets of Horse, (the remainder of 200) away to Mar∣quesse William: who then lying at Thann; departed present∣ly upon it towards Burgundie: Thus lost he all his countrey, fortunes and reputation in the Emperors service; which hee had before received from his favour. Horn lying close to his siege of Schletstat all this time, and a great part of the towne next the walls, being alreadie burnt and spoiled with his Fireworkes and Granadoes Governour Breitenbach was upon the second of December, enforced to treate a composition. The first demand made by Gustavus Horn was,Schletstat ta∣ken. that the townsmen should pay him 2000 Dollars: and the many Iewes there, a summe by the Poll proportionable; each Iew asmuch as 2 Christians. These Iewes, are many there, and have a free Sinagogue to blas∣pheme Christ in: and these, the Iesuites for filthy lucres sake, endure well enough; but a Protestant they worse hate, then the Divell they Conjure by. The money was paid December the fifth, the garrison being 2 dayes before, de∣parted upon these articles. 1. The Impēriall garrison both Horse and Foot, shall December the third, depart freely, with flying Ensignes, Drummes beating, trumpets sounding, matches lighted, bullet in the mouth, 2 field peeces, one wagon of match and bullett, together with their baggage and sick people: all to be convoyed to Brisach; sufficient hostages being left in the towne, for the safe returne of the Swedish Convoy. 2. Such sick and wounded soldiers as were not able pre∣sently to travell, should be left in the towne Hospitall: who if ever they recovered, should not be compelled to serve the Swedish partie; but upon their desire, should have the Felt-Marshall or Governors Passe, to returne back to their owne Regiments. 3. All spoiles and bootie gotten in the time of this siege;
whither Horses or other prises; shall remaine still unto the takers: but as for the prisoners, a reasonable exchange or ransome, shall end the difference. For the safeties of the citizens, were these following Ar∣ticles agreed upon. 1. No kinde of revenge shall be taken upon the towns∣men, for any defence made by them during the time of this siege: but they, together with the Ecclesiasticall persons: shall still be permitted the free use of the Romane Catholick religion. All Cloysters, likewise, Castles and Jurisdictions heretofore possessed by the townsmen; shall still remaine to them. Nor shall any Citizen or Inhabitant, of what condi∣tion soever he be, who hath either beene an Imperiall Offi∣cer, addicted himselfe to the warres, or done any speciall peece of service in defence of the towne; suffer any thing, either in life or fortunes, now nor hereafter, for it. 2. Neither King nor Kingdome of Sweden shall assume more authoritie to themselves over the towne, then here∣tofore the Romane Emperors or their Deputies, have done usually: and therefore shall all the immunities, priviledges, and Customes of the Citie; and in particular also, the town of Kinzen with its Castle and Jurisdiction, bee left free to them. 3. If any of the Citizens, Officers, Servants, or Inhabi∣tants, Spirituall or Temporall; shall be desirous to depart the Citie, either now or hereafter: he shall at any time have free leave so to doe; and either to carry away his goods with him or otherwise to dispose of them. 4. The Burgers shall not be over-burthened with Billet∣ting or enquartering of soldiers: only shall the garrison have their competent allowance made them; for which, the sol∣diers shall be bound to keep good discipline; and accept of such lodging as the Magistrates shall appoint them. Dated December 2/12 1632. and confirmed by Gustavus Horn, and the Councell of war.
A day or 2 after this, was the Swedish Leiftenant Rem∣thinger with a Partee of 70 Horse, set over the Rhine at the dorp of Schona, which hath a Castle to it:The Dutch Re∣lation calls him Leifte∣nant General and Gullobelgi∣cus, but a Cap∣taine. 9 or 10 English miles East of Schletstat. Early in the next morning, was hee followed by Zilhart, with more Horses and Dragooners. These 2, upon Saturday December the eighth, steale sudden∣ly upon the good towne of Endingen; about a league from the Rhines side, to the Eastward. Here was the Imperiall Colonell Croneck, with 5 troopes of Horse enquartered: who was himselfe in the very beginning of the fight shott dead upon the place; above 100 of his men slaine,5 Imperiall Cornets de∣feated; and all the rest dispersed; Croneck had a designe, to have surprised the Swedish Colonell Einhausen and his Regiment; whose Post was neere the Rhine, not farre from Endingen. It was a mistie morning, when this defeate happened; under fa∣vour of which gloominesse, the Imperialists made the bet∣ter shift to escape Zilhart, who had the chase of them. Cronecks dead body, was presented to Gustavus Horn; who sent it into Schletstat Church, to bee interred.and the towne of Endingen ta∣ken. Endingen towne, did hereupon become Swedish: who having that footing on that Easterne side of the Rhine; the Imperialists, that till then had kept a kinde of Field-leaguer, without the walls of Brisach: (but 8 English miles South of Endin∣gen) breake up their Quarters presently upon it, and retyre themselves into the citie. Presently upon this, does Gustavus Horn take in Horburg: a pretty towne upon the river Ill, with a bridge at it. 2 Eng∣lish miles East of Colmar: by the taking whereof, was this Colmar the more streightned. All this time, that is ever since the beginning of Novem∣ber, had this Imperiall towne of Colmar, beene also blocked up: which since the taking of Schletstat, had beene more pressed. The place of it, is upon the small river Lauch, (which a little from thence falleth into the Ill) about 13 English miles to the South of Schletstat.Colmar besie∣ged. The Imperiall Go∣vernor being resolved to hold the place, and the Citizens
perceiving him not able to doe it; there fals out a difference upon it, betwixt the Burgers and the Soldierie: The towns∣men feared, that by the Governors obstinacie, their City would be taken by assault; and then should their houses be plundered or worse served: and therfore presse the Gover∣nour to a Parlee. He refusing; the citizens getting all their Billmen at once together; they just at dinner time, on Sunday December the ninth, sease upon the Governor with his Leiftenant, and imprison them: kill many of his soldiers that resisted them; and sent word with all speed unto Gustavus Horn, to come and take their citie. This made their condi∣tions to be the better, and these they were. By this you see that these townes of Schletstat and Colmar did not as yet know of the death of the King of Sweden.1. His Majestie of Sweden is contented to suffer the citie of Colmar, still to remaine as a Romish Catholicke citie: and in the enjoyment of the same her priviledges, Immunities, and rights, (aswell the Spiritualty as the Temporaltie) which they had in the yeare 1626: nor will his Majestie assume more authoritie over the same Citie, then the Romane Cae∣sars have heretofore exercised. 2. The King will receive the Ecclesiasticall persons (both men and women) into his protection: and leave them the free exercise of their owne Religion. 3. In the ordering of the Magistracie, the King shall please to haue consideration, of the wellfare and safetie of the townsmen; and that with respect unto the ancient cu∣stomes: not bringing in any new impositions. 4. The citie shall not be over-burthened with a greater garrison, then they shall well be able to maintaine: and the billetting of them shall be at the discretion of the Magi∣strates, according to their former orders. 5. All that were willing still to remaine within the City, would his Majesty take the protection of: and whoever were minded to depart, should have free leave and libertie. These Articles were dated at Horburg, Decem. 10. 1632. and signed Gustavus Horn.
Munday morning December the tenth, was the Imperiall garrison turned out at the Ports, to shift for their own safe∣ties, the Townsmen not so much (you see) as putting in one Article, in favour of them. The same night, did Gustavus Horn personally enter into Colmar: without exacting any one halfe Dollar from the townsmen. The onely thing that he added unto the Articles, (which was by entreatie too) was, that the Lutherans might have their old Church again within the towne, with the free exercise of Religion, as heretofore they had enjoyed. This being granted, the Lord Commissary-Generall and Resident, Glazer,Religion re∣stored in Col∣mar. the Lord Iohn Noe, and many principall Protestants, who now lived in e∣xile for their conscience sake, at Strasburg; did the 14 of December returne backe againe, unto their owne houses in Colmar. That day, was there a Sermon of Thanksgiving preached there, by Doctor Iohn Smidt, Superintendent of the Augustane Confession: who, with the rest, had the selfe∣same day five yeares, beene exiled out of Colmar. His Excellencie Gustavus Horn, had in the meane time sent the Leiftenant-Generall the Baron of Croneck,Hagenau yeel∣ded to the Swedish. unto the Imperiall citie of Hagenaw; 12 English miles to the North of Strasburg. His message to the Magistrates was, that if they thought good to submit themselves unto the Swedish protection; then should their ancient Estate, Priviledges, Rights, and Customes, be left entire unto them: but if not, all should be by force confiscated. The charges of the war, moreover, which he should be put unto for the conquering of them, should doubly bee exacted out of their purses. These offers being sent unto them, by a fortunate and a con∣quering Armie; became prevalent at the first motion, and were accepted of. Thus easily, was Hagenau made Swedish; having not so much as seene the countenance of a Swede, till they tooke some of them in, to be their garrison. And thus became the valiant and discreet Gustavus Horn, the great conqueror of the Vpper Alsatia: and as much of the Lower too, as there needed.
And that wee may dispatch all the warres in these quar∣ters neere the Rhine, at once; by this time was the town of Franckendale in the Palatinate given over by the Spani∣ards. The King of Bohemia by treating with the towne, had before his death, drawn the Governor Werres unto these conditions. 1. That upon the eleventh of November, himselfe with all his soldiers should march out of Franckendale,Franckendale rendred. in this e∣quipage: That is to say, with Colours flying, Drummes beating, trumpets sounding. 3 Brasse peeces of ordnance, and such other ammunition, as themselves had brought in thither. 2. That the Spaniards should be allowed 200 wagons, for the carrying away of their baggage. 3. That they should have a sufficient Swedish garrison, to convoy them unto the frontiers of Luxemburg. Upon these termes, were the Spaniards by agreement with the King of Bohemia, to have left the towne upon the eleventh of November: but whereas they were to have re∣ceived 7000 Rex Dollars for such ordnance and Ammuniti∣on, as they had heretofore brought into it, and now left be∣hinde them: perchance upon the King of Bohemia'es sick∣nesse first, and death afterwards, they could not sooner re∣ceive their monyes. The Gentleman employed by the King, to treate with the Spaniards, was Colonell Colb; and they were put to it by the King of Spaines and the Arch∣duchesses agreement with King Iames (now also pressed by King Charles) to deliver up the towne unto the Prince Pa∣latine, so soone as he should be able to keepe and maintaine it. The Spaniards would never treate with the King of Sweden about it; but with the Prince Palatines Ministers only: so that now, the King of Bohemia being likely enough to hold it, they condiscend to deliver it. And indeed they had Commission from Brussels for it: being the willinger now to part with it, so faire a way; for that they saw, Gusta∣vus Horn (perchance) would not let them long have held it.
And yet this might they have done too, had they known that he should have beene so soone sent for out of those Quarters, towards Bavaria. The Spaniards marching out, November 26. a garrison of countrey boores is put into Franckendale, to keepe it for the Princes Palatines. There being now no more townes (besides Vdenheim and Heidleberg) in those parts of the Rhinish Circle; which were not Swedish; the victorious Gustavus Horn received directions from Chancellor Oxenstiern, to march up into Bavaria, and to joyne with the Generall Banier: the Bava∣rians being strong enough at that time, to fall a great way over their river Lech,Gustavus Horn leaving part of the Armie with the Rhinegrave; marches up into Bavaria, with the resi∣due. even to the bancks of the Danubie in the Duke of Wirtembergs countrie. Leaving therefore a suf∣ficient part of the Armie with the Rhinegrave, for keeping what was conquered in Alsatia: he the eighteenth of De∣cember passes the Rhine at Schona, to goe against the Bava∣rians about the Danubie. These, he quickly made to finde the way over their Lech againe; and since then, with the as∣sistance of Duke Bernard and Banier: hath forced quite out of Bavaria, to another part of the Danubie: even their old starting holes, of Ingolstat and of Regenspurg. But this pro∣secution, I meane not to meddle with. Turne we back now to the Landgrave of Hesseus victories.
THE ACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE LANDGRAVE OF HESSEN: From the time of his receiving some aides from the King of Sweden, at Werben; untill his joy∣ning with the said King againe, about the Rin∣gaw. A Storie of some 3 moneths. THat our Reader may not mistake the chief person in the Action, tis Land∣grave William of Hessen-Cassel, whom wee treate of: Son and heire unto that so famous and learned Prince, Maurice of Hessen who was yet alive, at Franckford: banisht from his owne Estate by the Empe∣ror. The chiefe of the quarrell which the Emperor had to him, was for his Religion, and some Church-lands; The Landgraves complaint against the Emperor, againe; was for
a Sentence (partly) by Caesar passed against him Anno 1623, by which, the towne and Universitie of Maxpurg in Hessen were adjudged away from him unto his Cozin the Land∣grave Lodowick of Hessen Darmstat: a Lutherane by profes∣sion, and not so point blanck opposite unto the Catholicke partie: and whose sonne hath been a diligent instrument of the Emperors, to draw the King of Sweden to a Treatie, when he lay at Mentz; and still works with his Father in Law the Elector of Saxonie to the same purpose. Of this Im∣periall Sentence, the Elector of Cullen, (with him of Saxo∣nie) had been one of the Commissioners and Executioners: which made the Landgrave stomack him. After that the businesse of Germany became (on the Ca∣tholicke side) a Leaguer-warre, and a Quarrell of Religion; then were the Protestants, on all hands laid at; by these Lea∣guers, as well as by the Emperor; every of them flying upon his next neighbour. Whereas, therefore, the Landgrave had chiefely been borne downe by the Electors of Mentz and Cullen, on the one side; and by the neere Abbies of Fulda and Hirschfeld, on the other; with these he now begins to cry quittance: so soone (namely) as he findes himselfe strong enough, and that the King of Sweden had so potently already advanced into Germany. To make way therefore for this Landgraves invading of others; wee will first shew you, how hee cleered his owne Countrey at home: even then infested by the Imperialists. About the beginning of September 1631 (as in our First Part wee have told you) the Landgrave returnes from the King of Sweden, with some aides for the guard of his owne Countrey: and that gallant Cavalier Duke Bernard of Sa∣xon-Weymar, was also at this time with him. The Land∣grave being returned; first, musters up an Armie of some 4000 Foot; whereof 3600 were old soldiers; the rest, traind Boores: and amongst them, 3 Companies of hardie Forre∣stiers and Huntsmen: of which last kinde of people, the Princes of these woodie countries have a great multitude.
To these 4000 Foot, were 1000 Horse and 2 peeces of ord∣nance joyned. His quarrell seemed chiefely to be intended, against the Bishopricks and Abby-lands: which was as crosse as might be, unto the late Imperiall Decree of Ratisbone. And not so onely, but even against the Imperiall familie also. The Em∣perors second sonne, Prince Rodolph William, was now Ab∣bot of Hirschfeld in Hessen-land, next neighbour unto the Landgraves owne possessions. This yong Prince, upon the resignation of his Unckle the Archduke Leopold: was made Priest, and had his Bishopricks of Passaw and Strasburg: in lieu of which, the Archduke was made Administrator of all the lands of the house of Gratz (of which this Emperor is) in Alsatia, Tirole, &c. This Princely yong Priest, was in the yeare 1628, chosen Abbot of Hirschfeld aforesaid; and should have beene Archbishop of Madenburg also: whose missing of it, was the destruction of that goodly Citie. He had the Abby of Hirschfeld, with condition, that the Land∣graves right unto the Citie, and the Citizens freedome of religion, should be reserved. The present Abbot and Prince of Fulda, was one Iohn Bernard Schenck of Schweinsberg; Elected Anno 1623. who by the Title of his Abby, is like∣wise one of the Princes of the Empire. To the towne of Ful∣da hath the Landgrave some pretences also. This towne of Hirschfeld, and the Abby-lands about it, (being upon the river Fulda, in the very heart of Hassia) were since these warres, still guarded by some Imperiall forces: and military men (for the most part) being nothing daintie of commit∣ting Actions of Trespasses; had trenched, with the furthest, upon the Landgraves Royalties, and the Cities priviledges. This was another of the greevances. Towards this Hirsch∣feld, therefore, so soon as he came from the King; the Land∣grave converts his forces.He cleeres Hirschfeld The Generall Fugger, was alrea∣dy gone out of his countrey: hasting to be one at the Battle of Leipsich; by which meanes had the Landgrave the better opportunity, to bring the place to a composition. That done,
he about the middle of the moneth, advances Westward unto Fritzlar, with the 5000 men afore mentioned. This handsome towne, though scituated upon the river Eder within the boūds of Hassia close unto the Frontiers of Wal∣deck; yet belonged it unto the Archbishop Elector of Mentz: and had beene often heretofore quarrelled at, by the former Landgraves. The garrison answeres his summons, as if they held for Iupiter, in thunder and lightning, namely, such as they could make with their ordnance. The Landgrave re∣plies, as if he had Commission from Vulcan: for having gai∣ned to the gate by his Approaches, he claps to a Petard; & by that breach, his soldiers rush into the City. Then would the garrison have compounded:Takes Fritzlar but soldiers (whose very vocation suffers them not to be too tender-hearted) use not (when victorious) to listen too suddenly to the word Quarter. The Execution being over, the towne is plunde∣red: and doe the Landgrave what he could, with his drawn sword to beate off his owne people; yet for 2 houres toge∣ther they flew upon the spoile. The Landgrave gave as good order, as the present furie would hearken to, for the sparing of the Ecclesiasticks: for all which, a many soldiers came Masking abroade in the Monks and Friers Cowles and Ha∣bits: the rude Forrestiers, perchance, mistooke the Monks in their severall Weedes, for some strange wilde beasts; such as they used to kill in the woods, and to goe marching home with the skinnes upon their shoulders. The Hassians shewed the more spleene against this towne, for that the Governour had scoffed heretofore at their Landgrave; had plundered 2 of his dorps in the jurisdiction of Girdersberg: and disarmed the soldiers that defended them. For this rea∣son also, was the Governor himselfe now carryed prisoner into Zingenhaim. Altringer and Fugger in the meane time, having upon their hearing of Tillies defeat, hasted back againe;Altringer and Fugger fall in∣to Hessen. were pas∣sed through Duringen, and now fallen into the Eastern parts of Hessen. They there first take in the towne of Vach; and
Fredeland Castle next to that: both about the river Werra. Passing this river after this, they advance towards Hirsch∣feld, before mentioned, and take that also: but the Land∣grave having by this dispatched about Fritzlar, sends Duke Bernard Weymar with some 18 troopes of horse and 1000 Foot towards them; himselfe immediately following with the grosse of his Armie. The Imperiall Generalls, quit Hirschfeld upon this newes; and notwithstanding that the Count of Tilly had ordered them to fall Iustily upon the Landgraves forces: yet they now taking the Count of Manfeld unto them, (who lay with some forces in the neighbour jurisdiction of Fulda; for the guard of that good∣ly rich Abby) all together march Eastward out of the land of Hessen, towards Isenach, and so to the Weser; by which river Tilly now was comming to joyne with them. The Count of Sultz, then about Gelnhausen, (or betwixt that and Fulda) comming also to peece in with them, marches back againe towards the Lorrainers, upon the newes, name∣ly, of Fuggers retreate, and of the Swedish entrance into Franconia. Hassia cleered of the Imperi∣alists.Thus became Hassia cleered, though but for a very little space. The Landgrave, presently upon it, defeating foure troopes of the rambling Crabats by the way; comes and pitches his armie by the river of Fulda, neere unto his owne court and chiefe towne of Cassel. And time it was to doe it: seeing Tilly before the end of the moneth, was falne upon his Frontiers; and Altringer and Fugger returned towards the river Fulda, againe to spoile his countrey, and to joyne with Tilly. The storie of which actions, we leave to be read in the Generall Tillyes Proceedings: already prin∣ted in our Second Part. Tilly being gone out of his Countrey, in the beginning of October; the Landgrave with 8000 Foot, 10 troopes of Horse, and 14 peeces of ordnance, (whereof 6 peeces of Battery) sets forward againe to pursue his former purpose against the Bishopricks. October the seventh to Munden he
comes,The Land∣grave takes Munden a Bishops See some 7 or 8 English miles to the north of Cassel, where the river Fulda falleth into the Werra. Here had Tilly been lately; and there left some 600 men. A∣gainst this, the Landgrave casts up 2 Batteries: from whence he all that night thunders upon the Tillians. The garrison now out of hope to defend themselves, or to be relieved by others; parly and yeeld. Their conditions were, to goe out with flying Ensignes, Bagge and Baggage, Full Armes, &c. And to be convoyed by 2 troopes of the Hessens Horse into Gottingen, 12 English miles to the East of Munden. Hence marches the Landgrave Northward, into the Bi∣shoprick of Paderborn; which is upon the West side of the goodly river of Weser, and holden in Commendam by the Bishop of Cullen, who writes himselfe Administrator of it. Hereabouts, September 27 (old Style) had Tilly left the Count of Gronsfelt and Colonell Reinacher, with a small ar∣mie; for the guard of this Bishoprick of Paderborn,advances into Paderborn. and of the rich Abby of Corbey, which lies close upon the Western banck of the Weser. Three of the formost of the Landgraves troopes, did Count Gronsfelts men light upon; and cut the throates of the most of them, carrying away their Ensignes. Full of desire to revenge this, out goes Leiftenant Pfaun∣kuck with a troopes of Horse: but these staying to refresh themselves (or to doe worse perchance) in a small Dorp neere unto Paderborn;Some of his troopes, twice defeated. were also surprised by the Gronsfel∣ders, and cut in peeces like their fellowes. The Landgrave himselfe was at first gone towards Hox∣ter, in the jurisdiction of the Abbot of Corbey; which yds unto him: paying him 8000 Dollars for a Ransome. Thus doe other townes thereabouts. Thence advances he towards Raderborn, from which parts, Gronsfeld and Reinacher (be∣ing too weake) were retyred along the Weser towards Hamelen. Paderborn City compounds with him, and gives him 50000 Dollars for its ransome. At Nienhus upon the river Lippe, some 2 English miles to the North of Pader∣born; he takes downe the Elector of Cullens Armes, and
causes the King of Swedens Eschutcheon to be set up in the roome of it. Some 8 English miles to the South-west, hee takes in Soltkott: whence some of his troopes advance into the neighbour countrey called The Dukedome of Westphalia;He takes townes in Pa∣derborn, and take Geseck. Others, keeping, still in Paderborn Dio∣cesse, and upon the South of it: take in Warburg upon the river Dimel: a faire towne just upon the Frontiers of Hes∣sen, the County of Waldeck and Paderborn. The next good towne of Waldeck, is Volckmarsen, upon the small river of Tuisch, some 5 English miles to the South of Warburg. and in the Dukedome of Westphalia.The same Division of his Army turning now Westward into the aforesaid Dukedome of Westphalia; takes in Stat∣berg: a fine towne upon a hill by the river Dimel, some 15 English miles from Warburg; thence goe they to Brilon 10 English miles more Westerly. In this part of Westphalia, is the Elector of Cullen Lord of a many places. At Arensberg a very faire town upon the river Rhur, (some 25 miles West of Brilon) hath he a goodly Castle: which the Landgrave now seases. Out of Paderborn and Westphalia, tooke hee a world of Cattle of all sorts; which hee sent home to his Boores of Bischehausen, in recompence of what the Tilli∣ans had lately taken from them. All these above-named townes, in the Dukedome of Westphalia, and the Bishop∣rick of Paderborn; are to be seene partly, in Mercators Se∣cond Table of Westphalia, and partly, in the particular Mapp of Paderborn: but best of all, in the Mapp of the Dukedome of Westphalia. The Elector of Cullen writes unto him.The Elector of Cullen having heard of the Landgraves progresse in his Diocesse of Paderborn, and Dukedome of Westphalia; writes to him to hold his hand: the Landgraves answere to which, is as followeth.
Most Reverend, most Illustrious and loving Cosin, &c. YOur Letters dated at Cullen 2/18 of this October,His answere. wee have received by your Trumpet. And whereas you in them complaine, of us for our invasion of the Bishoprick of Paderborn, in answere thereunto Wee will not conceale, how heartily sorry wee are, and how sensible; of those ma∣ny and severall Armyes, which as well from the Catholicke leaguers, as others; have for these many yeares together, beene sent into this our deare Countrey of Germany. How unchristianly and inhumanely, the Protestant Princes, and States of the Empire, and our owne dominions in particular, since wee came to the Government thereof, have beene u∣sed by these Armies: and that against all reason, without a∣ny cause, and besides all colour of right and justice: wee are yet sensible of. And which is worse then all this: wee yet feele, that when wee and our poore Subjects, did at any time complaine or sue for justice or redresse; wee were but scorned and rejected for our labours: contrary to all lawes and rights of nations in generall, and unto the Imperial Ca∣pitulations in particular: as also against the peace of Religion and of Policie, all Constitutions and Articles of the Empire, and of the Circles thereof. Wee have endured the most barbarous usage that might be, in our said dominions: En∣quarterings, namely, Taxations, Burnings, Robberies, Sac∣kings of our townes and villages: yea also and of putting to the sword, innumerable innocent subjects of ours of all sorts.The misera∣ble estate of the Prote∣stant Princes, before the Kings com∣ming into Germany: for even thus, were all of them served. But wee haue since understood, what their intent and drift then was, in so doing: by all force and violence, namely, to render us every where odious, and to make a most misera∣ble beggar of us withall; by at once depriving us of our Countrey, goods, and subjects. During all which procee∣dings of theirs, and most lamentable sufferings of ours; the worst of all yet was, that upon those infinite complaints, prayers, cryes and lamentations, which both by word of
mouth, letters and Ambassages we made unto his Impe∣riall Majesty, your selfe, and other Princes our Cosins, &c. wee were never able to obtaine so much, as that any one of all these, would once vouchsafe to take the lest pitty of our cases, or shew any Christian compassion towards us: as if wee had utterly beene uncapable, yea unworthy altogether; of any law, Justice, kindnesse, favour, or benefit. By this meanes (God is our witnesse) wee being become a Prince rejected altogether, by such as beare sway in the Empire; found our selves (and that upon just grievances, not to bee longer endured) enforced to take upon us such a resolution, as is indeed lesse desperate and more salutarie; then if wee had longer suffered and wincked at, the said horrible and most enormous proceedings. For this reason therefore, have wee made allyance with those, that by the most especiall providence of God, and to their owne great hazzard, dangers and expences, are comne armed into Germany; to the comfort of the Evangelicall Professors, and consequent'y of our owne selves: whom (fighting for the just cause) God hath already blessed with such notable victories, as wee already most heartily thanke him for them. Thus being obliged, to seeke (by Gods helpe) together with our said Allyes and our sword, (which our enemies have by force put into our hands) such a Peace and quietnesse; as wee have not beene able heretofore to obtaine, by any prayers, or any (even almost unworthy and unprincely, and therefore unexcusable) patience, complaints or petitions. Being now by these reasons obliged, to take the same courses, as your said league hath given us exam∣ples to doe; and being now utterly robbed and despoiled of what was our owne, to seeke what heretofore was not our owne. Wherefore wee kindly pray you (as being a most excellent and high member of the said Catholike league) not to take it in ill part, if wee now follow the Rule, which is so solidly grounded upon Reason and Iustice, Quod quis iu∣ris statuerit in alium, eo ipso, ipse utatur. That every man
would be content to have the same sentence passe upon him∣selfe, which he hath pronounced upon another. And thus, since there cannot at this present, any end of these Germane miseries be expected; without such condi∣tions be first assented unto, whereby those insupportable grievances of the Protestants may before-hand be removed: and without the consent of such Princes, (not of us alone) as the Catholicke League hath by force (as it were) drawne into this warre; and in whose hands the right of peace-ma∣king yet remaineth. And forasmuch as the Generall Dire∣ctor of the Protestant warre, his royall Majesty of Sweden,The King of Swedens Title, given him by the Prote∣stants. by name, (our most deare and honoured Lord and Cosin) hath appointed us what to doe, untill either by the sharpnesse of our swords, or rather by some faire meanes (if it were pos∣sible) such a true peace might once againe be setled, where∣by both our selves and posterities might become sufficiently assured of our safeties, and that hereafter wee might no more stand in awe of the like miseries and abuses. Meane while that such a peace is expected, his said most Excellent Majestie hath promised us his royall Protection: intending to bring all to consent unto such conditions, and to give such assecurations, as shall be sufficient to hinder all further bloodshed and destruction. We therfore for our own parts, now doe, and ever hereafter shall, (according to our peace∣able and Christian inclination) so soone as ever wee shall un∣derstand the said Lord Generall Director, and other interes∣sed Princes, to be satisfied in themselves, and be pleased to signifie unto us, the meanes whereby this warre (which hath beene enforced upon them and us,) may have a happy conclusion; offer our selves with all readinesse, to performe whatsoever may become a Prince that keepes a good Chri∣stian Conscience within him, and is not desirous of any trou∣bles; even as we have not been the causers of these miseries. Thus Wee remaine, Yours, &c.
With this breaking in of the Landgraves into Westpha∣lia, and upon such a quarrell too; was Francis William Bi∣shop of Osnabrug (though something out of the way) so much affrighted, that he fled speedily unto Cullen. And there he thought himselfe yet at home; seeing when hee was but Count of Wartenberg, he had beene Major Dome, Hoffmeister, or Lord Steward unto that Elector, till the yeare 1625, that he was chosen Bishop of Osnabrug. But the Landgrave meant him not: he was yet busie in Paderborn and Westphalia. About the middle of October, he first sum∣mons the Temporall Lords and Gentlemen of the Bishop∣rick, to appeare before him; to take the Oath of fidelitie to the King of Sweden and the Protestant Partie;The Landgrave summons the Gentry of Pa∣derborn. to agree a∣mong themselves concerning the levying of the Contribu∣tions; and to consult upon the enquartering of his soldiers. Here did he give out Commissions also, for some new levyes. Thus doth he likewise, in the jurisdiction of the Abbot of Corbey. In the conquered places of Westphalia, hee had at his first entrance published his Proclamation: which was, for the calling home of all such Westphalian soldiers, as were in service either with the Emperor or Catholike leaguers: giving them 6 weekes time to come in, after which hee would sease upon what ever they had in the countrey. Those of West∣phalia send to agree with him.The Catholickes of this Duchie of Westphalia, being start∣led by the neernesse of the danger, send their Deputies unto the Landgrave: desirous to purchase their peace at the best hand of him. To their Proposition, this was his Answere. Although in respect of Tillies, Altringers and Fuggers vile demeanors in his country, by ravishing of wives and virgins; by burning,The conditi∣ons he offers them. plundering and massacring of his subjects, and that in such a manner, as the like was scarce to bee found in any Storie; he had provocation sufficient given him, to slac∣ken the reines of all good militarie discipline; and to suffer his soldiers in the like manner, to ryott it in all formes of licentiousnesse within the Lordships of the Catholickes: yet
his disposition being better enclined unto faire and just courses; he would not now become rigorous upon the re∣venge, against those that had in so good time requested their peace of him. And yet thus much withall, would he have the Deputies to take notice of; that if within 8 dayes next, the Governor of the Province Frederick Furstenburg, with some of the Magistrates of Arnsberg, did repaire unto him∣selfe or his Commissioners; and there conclude upon the admission of his garrisōs into the towns of Weele,See for these townes, in the Mapp of the Dukedome of Westphalia; in Mercators Ap∣pendix. Meschede Geseke, Kallenhard, Beelick, Brilon, Morsburg, Niderbach, Hallenberg, Smallenberg, & Winterberg; and that his soldiers might be maintained by these townes; which should more∣over redeeme themselves from pillaging, by paying him a summe of ready money: they should then be free from all danger. But if herein they hearkened not unto him, then would he not forbid his men to do as the Tillians had done himselfe would force what garrisons he pleased upon them: and what calamities might befall unto Westphalia thereup∣on, let themselves or any man conjecture. The Landgrave was now at Cassel; here was this treaty held, and hither, indeed, were the Westphalians glad to send as he would have them. Thus made hee but a short worke of it in Westphalia, Paderborn, and Corbey: for by the middle of November, were part of his forces received into the above-desired garrisons; and the rest returned into Hessen. At home in Hessenland in the meane time, were the 2 great Abby townes of Fulda and Hirschfield (the first Ab∣bies of the Empire) glad to compound with him. The ju∣risdiction of Hirschfield is reformed: that is,The Abbyes of Fulda and Hirschfield ac∣cord with him all the Imperi∣alists put out (indeed Tilly had called out the most of them, to goe along with him) and the Landgraves forces taken in. Those of Fulda, send him 6000 Dollars unto Cassel; and will be content to continue their Contributions; and with∣all to take an oath unto him, as their Protector, so that the King of Swedens name might not bee used in it. This is a
clause which many Catholicke townes and persons, have u∣sually indeed checkt at: but how farre the Landgrave had power to condiscend unto them, I know not. He goes to the King of Sweden.The Landgrave, thus, having given the law to all these people, and finding no more worke at home; goes to seeke it of the King of Sweden: to whom (as you have heard in our Se∣cond Part, in the Kings Storie: he went with his Armie to∣wards the end of November.
THE ACTIONS OF THE LOVVER SAXONIE. Of the taking of the great citie of Rostocke in the Dukedome of Mecklenburg, by the King of Swedens and Duke Iohns forces, October 16 1631. HOw farre Duke Iohn Albert of Mecklenburg had by mid-Septem∣ber, proceeded in the siege of Ro∣stock; wee leave to be read page 81, &c. of our First Part, and the Third Edition of it. The Lord Virmont, that was Sergeant-Major Generall of the Imperiall Armie, which Walenstein had lately left in those parts; was now Governour within the said Citie. A brave valiant Gentleman, truely he was; one that did what might be done, for the keeping of that so important a Citie. But hearing it to be now se∣conded
by every man, that the Generall Tillie was so utterly defeated at Leipsich, as he was farre unable to resist the so much prevailing fortunes of the King of Sweden, and there∣fore no way likely to levy this siege: he findes himselfe ne∣cessitated to give way (with the rest) unto the times; and resolves to prevent a Scaladoe, by a Parlie: hee wanted pay to content his soldiers, and therefore they want wills, to performe their duties: The Townsmen grew weary, and would trust no longer: and the soldiers mutinous, and would fight no longer. Every man now called for a Parlie. and therefore by the 15 of October, was the Governour enforced to send his Drumme out into the enemies leaguer, to demand it. The Treatie, in the upshot, came to these 14 conditions. 1. That the Lord Virmont Sergeant-Major-Generall, should be licenced by Duke Iohn of Mecklenburg, to depart the towne the next day, with all his Officers, Soldiers, and their families. Have leave also to carry with him 2 halfe Cur∣toes, or Quarter-Canon, and one Field-piece: provided that none of them had the Armes upon them, either of the King of Sweden, the Dukes or Dukedome of Mecklenburg, or of the City of Rostock. And that they should have 100 bullets to them, 2000 pound of powder, and as much match, and musket bullets. That they should goe out with full Armes, matches lighted, bullet in the mouth, colours flying, and with bagge and baggage upon their wagons. And that they should have a Swedish Convoy as farre as Wolfenbuttle in Brunswick-land; whither they should be suffered to goe in, if it were not besieged: and in case it were, then should they be convoyed into some other towne neer unto the said Wolfenbuttle or the river Weser, which then had an Imperi∣all garrison in it: and that they should leave sufficient hosta∣ges with the Duke, for the safe returne of the Swedish Con∣voy.
2. That Iohn Duke of Mecklenburg his Grace, and the Lord Achatius Todt, Leiftenant-Generall of the Horse to his Majestie of Sweden: should take order for the furnishing of these Imperiall forces now going out, with sufficient bread, beere, and Horse-meate, all the way, untill they came unto the place aforesaid. And to the end they might bee no wayes disturbed in their march on the further side of the Ebb; the said Duke and Lord should give them their joynt letters, unto the Dukes of Brunswick and of Lunenburg. 3. That the Officer who should now be appointed to goe a∣long with, and to command this their Swedish Convoy, should have a charge not to forsake the said Imperialists, un∣till he had fully and safely brought them to one of the places aforesaid. And to the end that this Officer should take no advantage or occasion, to excuse himselfe from going thorough with them; the Lord Virmont should have a private letter given him under seale, wherein the names of this Of∣ficer Frederick Ilenfeld, and of those 150 Horsemen which were to goe upon the convoy, should be written: that in case the Swedish should offer to returne, Virmont might then produce this letter to stay them. 4. That this convoy allotted them should take care, that no injurie were offered upon the march unto the Imperialists; either by the King of Swedens troopes, the Dukes of Saxo∣nier, or of Mocklenburg. 5. That the Imperiall Officers should have horses sent them for the carriage of their private baggage and Valeeses; and for such wounded and sick men to ride upon, as had no hor∣ses
of their owne: and that they should have 40 wagons goe along with them, so farre as the said convoy was to conduct them. That the Magistrates of the citie should like∣wise furnish them with horses, for the drawing away of their ordnance: which should also be returned by the same Convoy. Virmont should passe his word also, that the Swedes in their returne should no wayes be molested by the Imperialists: and that (if necessitie seemed so to re∣quire) the Swedish also should have a Convoy back againe of some of these Imperiall Horse: untill they should be pas∣sed all the danger: which Horse taking their Hostages back from Rostock with them, should by a Swedish Trumpet bee brought home againe. 6. All prisoners should on both sides be set at libertie, with∣out ransome: paying only for their victualls, for the time passed. 7. Such as had runne from their Colours unto one anothers armie, should also be turned home againe. 8. All conference, upon the way, betwixt the soldiers of ei∣ther partie, should be forbidden: and no Officer was to in∣veigle away one anothers soldiers. 9. All differences risen heretofore betwixt the Imperialists and the Burgers of Rostock, should be buryed in oblivion: and those personall and particular suites which were at this present depending; should be made an end of by the Ma∣gistrates or Officers appointed on both sides: who should with all speed convenient, procure redresse unto the plain∣tiffe.
10. All such workes, as had beene made up of late for the for∣tifying of the Citie, should so remaine unslighted: and that for avoiding of all danger, all the new digged mines about the towne, should be discovered to the Enterers. The Bur∣gers also should not be plundered nor exacted upon, by the departing Imperialists. 11. That the Lord Virmont should have free leave, to send Volponius (his Leiftenant Colonell) into Wismar, to disco∣ver the state of that City: and if he saw occasion to advise that garrison, to goe out also; they of that towne should have the same conditions, with those of Rostock; whither they thought good to goe out presently, or to stay 3 weeks longer: till which time, a Cessation of Armes should on both sides be granted. 12. That it should be free for the Duke of Fridlands Chan∣cellor and Counsellors, either to goe now out of the towne with the soldiers, and to carry all their goods and Records with them; or to stay behinde still: and to bee assured that they should no wayes be damnified. 13. Whereas the Armes of the Citizens, had during the siege time beene made use of by the soldiers: all those peeces of Armor which Virmonts people had not evident and present use of, should be left in the towne behinde them. 14. If (which God forbid) any scarrefire should breake out in the towne, at the going forth of the Imperialists; there should no advantage thereupon be taken by the Swedish,
to quarrell either Virmont or his people: but an examplary and severe punishment, should light only upon that person; by whose negligence or mischeivousnesse, such a Casualtie had beene occasioned. These 14 Articles being the same day agreed, and signed by both parties; the next day being Friday October 16. did the Governor Virmont march forth of the towne; together with 3200 Foot, two troopes of Horse, and all other things formerly agreed upon: 150 Swedish Horse attending with∣out the towne, to bring them going to the place aforesaid. The Imperialists being arrived about Wolffenbuttle, made immediately towards the river Weser, whereabouts the Ge∣nerall Tilly at that time was; whom Virmont thought to doe a very good service unto, if he should now joyne with his weake Armie. Virmont being upon his march thitherward; was countermanded by the Count of Manfold, Governor of Magdenburg; then Imperiall Felt-marshall for the Low∣er Saxonie, and directed to conjoyne himselfe with Colo∣nell Bonickhausen (who had a Regiment neere hand, of 13 Cornets of Horse) and that they two should presently be∣siege Halberstat,Virmont be∣sieges Halber∣stat, in vaine. into which, some Swedish forces had very lately gotten. Virmont obeys presently, hoping for the losing of one towne, to make himselfe a saver, by the winning of another. His summons being by the towne denyed, he sets his 3 Gunnes to worke, which he had brought out of Ro∣stock. A furious batterie hee made so long as it lasted, and great hopes of a sudden breach he also conceived: but (alas) his hundred of bullets would not hold out ever, nor that small store of powder which he brought with him out of Rostock. Thus seeing no good to be done upon that nation, which came not into Germanie so easily to loose cities, but to winne them; he was faine to surcease his volleyes, and to be rising. This when he had signified unto the Count of Mansfeld; he received a command to repaire to him into Magdenburg: which he was bodily afraid, would be besie∣ged
by the Swedish: as indeed it was, within a few dayes after. That the towne of Magdenburg might not be over∣charged, nor the wayes ungarded, Virmont is sent immedi∣ately into Wansleben, about 10 English miles short of Mag∣denburg to the Westward, and Bonighausen tooke up his quarter at a lesser towne, not farre from it: where how they both sped, wee may hereafter tell you, when wee come to speake of Magdenburg. The Levies agreed upon by the Protestant Princes and Cities of the Circle of the Lower Saxo∣nie, in their Diet at Hamborow, 1631. for their owne defence against the Imperialists. THis goodly Countrey of the Lower Saxonie (which is the ninth Circle of the Empire) containes the 2 Archbi∣shopricks of Magdenburg & Bremen, the great Bishopricks of Hildesheim, Lubeck, Suerin, Ratzenburg, Minden and Schleswick: the 5 Dukedomes of Saxon-Lawenburg, Meck∣lenburg, Brunswick, Lunenburg and Holstein; the 2 Earle∣domes of Roffain and Delmenhorst: and the free Cities of Lubeck, Hamborow, Mulhausen, Northausen, Goslar, and Gottingen. Here also be most of those potent Hanse townes, (each being a compleate common wealth within it selfe) as Magdenburg, Lubeck, Wismar, Rostock, &c. so famous both in ancient and moderne Stories. The greater of these free, Imperiall, and Hanse townes, being of the Lutherane or Augustane confession; had sent their Duputies unto the famous Protestant Diet of Leipsich: which being ended April the third, no sooner were these Deputies returned home againe; but they are sent the second time unto another Diet held at Hamborow, in the beginning of May following. The consultation was, in what forme
they might safelyest subscribe unto the Decrees of the Diet of Leipsich, and how farre engage themselves in a joynt V∣nion and levie; for the defence of the Protestant Religion, and the liberties of Germanie. But this consultation, though something was done in it to countenance the cause; yet were no publike levyes set on foot, to defend it. That which broke the plot, (for the time) was the Count of Tillies let∣ters to them: not so much for the Reason or Rhetorick in them; but for the authoritie of the writer of them: an Army is a shrewd Topick-place, for to draw arguments from; it perswades terribly. The Germanes were very well able to distinguish of the obedience unto Caesar, which Tilly advised them to have regard unto. The thing, they were willing withall; it was their duty: but the degree of obeying, was that which most troubled them: What Tilly called obedi∣ence, they feared might prove slaverie: they found a conte∣station in themselves, betwixt the keeping of their obedi∣ence; and the preservation of their liberties; and how these two might possibly hold long together, was a difference which they had not yet reconciled. Thus hath it oftentimes fallen out in the Empire; divers Common wealths there, having great priviledges, they will league one with another and struggle hard to preserve them: so that when ever Cae∣sar hath projected great desires, then beganne the conflict. Better therefore (even for both parties) is a Monarchie, then such an Empire. This was the purpose of the Generall letters unto their assemblie. MY LORDS &c. Tillies Letter.I Have, to my great wonderment, received newes of late, of that generall meeting of certaine Protestant Electors, Princes, and States, at the towne of Leipsich: and how they have with one consent there agreed, to raise a common and a mighty army among them all; that they have already got∣ten
together a great power, and have more forces daylie in levying. Now, that these preparations of those princes, could not but with great danger be promoted; and must of necessitie be the causes of a great distraction, they all knew: seeing that all private armings which were undertaken with∣out the consent of the Emperor, did not only occasion many a sinister suspition among the people; but were flatly like∣wise forbidden to be made, by the fundamentall constituti∣ons of the Empire. Having assurance, therefore, of their present consultation at Hamborow, for the best way of sub∣scribing unto the said Diet of Leipsich; he could not but ad∣vise them friendly, that in their said consultation, they would make this the chiefest of their thoughts, how they might preserve their Faith and obedience unto Caesar. His advise unto them, therefore was, that they should be chary of withdrawing themselves from the Emperors service, who was their Soveraigne Magistrate: but that as faithfull and good subjects, they should persevere rather in their due obedience; not suffering themselves to be drawne aside un∣to any contrary undertakings. He wisht them seriously to consider withall, how that as all their safeties and well-be∣ings, did solely and wholly depend upon their Lord the Em∣peror: so on the contrary, was there nothing to be expected from other princes (and from forrainers especially, who meerly intended their owne private) but the losing of their priviledges and Commerce, the ruine of their States, and the necessary drawing on, of a publick servitude. How frequently hath experience taught us, what misera∣ble events hath unevitably befallen those people, that have leagued against his Imperiall Majestie, and had embroyld themselves in a warre against him. For these reasons he no∣thing hereafter doubted, but they would so well consider upon what might follow, that these his admonitions (which in the sincerity of his soule hee propounded unto them) should finde some place among their consultations: and that they should not hereafter need any other Monitor, to re∣member
them of persevering in their due loyaltie and obe∣dience. This if they did, it would be a most strong recom∣mendation of them, unto Caesar; both to continue his grace and favour royall unto them; to enfranchise them with more ample priviledges; and to doe any thing for the promoting, preserving, and inlarging, of their present conditions and commerces: For the doing of all which, their continuing in obedience, must needs give his Imperiall Majestie a most large occasion. May 19. 1631. Your very loving Friend John Count of Tilly. Who can blame an adversarie, for using the best Colours and flourishes he can finde, to carry his owne cause withall? And let this be the glosse to the Generall Tillies reasons, that they were pressed by an enemie. However, their owne feares prevailed with them; and what they did next, they did more privately. Their wills were still good unto the Cause; and they underhand promoted the Decrees of Leip∣sich. Thus as the King of Sweden grew stronger, they grew more courageous: and when the Protestant Princes struck in also with them, then was there another assemblie a little more boldly talkt upon. Greene wood laid neere the fire, naturally shrincks up it selfe, contracts its owne pores and opennesse, by which the flame might enter it; that by a neerer uniting of its parts, it might prepare it selfe for resistance. The same operation had the burning of Magdenburg, (now newly this moneth done) upon these its neighbour and confederate Cities: it did as much arme, as terrifie them. The King of Sweden, al∣so, dayly more and more prevailing; some of the Princes of this Circle, beganne to take Commissions from him, to le∣vy and arme for him: he became the Protector of their pub∣licke
libertie; and under him, they singly promoted their personall pretences. The Duke of Lunenburg, as next heire to the Dukedome of Brunswick; (the present ruling Duke Vlrick, having no likelyhood of issue,) he armes to put in for that, which Tilly had almost devoured. The Archbishop of Bremen, had lost his towne of Stoade: and almost all his whole Countrey, was now possessed by Imperiall garrisons which Tillie had left there. Other Princes (yea all of them) had the same grievances: and all now resolved, to recover their Countries. The Generall Tilly being throughly now defeated, as if the weight of his former reasons, had growne lighter with the decay of his power; the whole Circle in November fol∣lowing, appoint a more generall meeting at the same Ham∣borow; whither all the Bishops, Princes and States either came, or sent their Ambassadors. Here they resolutely con∣clude for the levying of 3 new Regiments, upon the com∣mon charges of the Circle: the purpose being, to cleere the countrey of the new encroached Imperialists. The first Re∣giment was undertaken for, by the Archbishop of Bremen, the Duchy of Lunenburg and Zella-Brunswick, with the Bishopricks of Lubeck, Brunswick, and Hildesheim. This was to consist of 1950 Foot, and 127 Horsemen. The se∣cond Regiment was to be raised by the Dukedom of Meck∣lenburg, the countrey of the Lower Saxonie, the Bishoprick of Ratzenburg, and the citie of Lubeck: which was to bee 1675 Foot, and 366 Horse, strong. The third, which was to be of 1448 Foot onely; was to be raised and paid by the Dukes of Holstein, and the Bishoprick of Schwerin. All these were to be joyned to Duke George of Lunenburgs owne Armie: he being to be Generall over them. The Hamburgers excused themselves, from bearing any part in these levyes; for that (as they said) they had very lately received some favours and priviledges from his Im∣periall Majestie; who had newly honored their towne with the Title of an Imperiall Citie. Thus much also I take leave
to adde out of mine owne private observation. There was a difference now depending, betwixt his Majesty the King of Denmarke, and the Hamburgers; wherein the Emperor had already interposed his letters and authoritie,The Hambur∣gers refuse to be against the Emperor: cited the Deputies of both parties, to appeare before the yonger Au∣gustus Duke of Brunswick, and Lunenburg, and other his Commissioners, at Lunenburg April the third, 1631. New style. The Hamburgers indeed appeared, but the King of Denmarke refused: and so the matter still hanging, the Ham∣burgers having continuall need of the Emperors good fa∣vour;by reason of their differen∣ces with the King of Den∣marke. durst not engage themselves amongst those Princes, that so openly thus opposed him. The other Princes went on with their new levies: of all which, the Archbishop of Bremen, and George Duke of Zella-Lunenburg, were most forward; both of which had received Commissions and in∣structions, from the King of Sweden. The Archbishop of Bremen thereupon, levies in his owne Countrey: and the Duke of Lunenburg goes to Hamborow, about monyes and Bills of Exchange; which tooke him up till mid-Januarie. Of both their commings into the field, wee shall speake in their due places. And while they are at their levies; let us entertaine our Readers with what hapned in this Lower Saxoni, in the mean time; & that is the yeelding of Wismar and Damitz, unto the Dukes of Mecklenburg. How this strong Hanse towne of Wismar, had beene by Adolph Frederick Duke of Mecklenburg besieged; we have told you page 83 of our First Part:The continu∣ation of the siege of Wismar Rostock being wonne, Generall Todts Armie that had taken it, removed to Wis∣mar, and sate downe before it. Colonell Gram comman∣ded in the towne; who to hinder the Swedish and the Meck∣lenburgers working; sends out 1000 sallyers, to beate the besiegers out of their Approaches. After a hard skirmish, and some slaughter; they are contented to retire againe into their Citie: first having in this sally, slaine Generall Major Breitenbach, that then commanded in the Approaches. Gram seeing his towne laid hard at, and no hope of suc∣cors;
sends out to the Duke of Mecklenburg, to treate upon Conditions. These were his desires: That he might have liberty to dispeed a Captaine unto Leiftenant-Generall Die∣penbach, to tell him what state the towne was in: and that there might be a Cessation of Armes till his returne with the Answere. A Councell of war being called in the leaguer,Wismar treats. Grams proposition was upon these termes assented unto. 1. That the towne Captaine should have a Mecklenbur∣gers Trumpet, to goe along with him. 2. That this Captaine, was to haveBecause hee was to goe as farre as Bohe∣mia. three weekes al∣lowed him for his returne; and if hee could not possibly make his journey in that time; then hee should have a moneth. 3. That the conditions of rendring the towne, should by Gram be consented unto, and under his hand and Seale, delivered to the Duke of Mecklenburg; before the Captaine should take his journey. 4. That in the meane time, there should be a Cessation of Armes both by Sea and Land, on both sides: and pledges gi∣ven for it. 5. That during this truce, the besieged should containe themselves within their walls and Out-workes, and the be∣siegers, in their Quarters: the one, not comming neerer to the Leaguer; nor the other, approaching no neerer to the towne. 6. That after the returne of the Captaine, Gram should immediately deliver up the towne and out-workes to the King of Sweden and the Dukes of Mecklenburg: according to the agreements, before hand concluded upon. 7. But if in the meane time, the Fort called The Whale, should for want of victualls be enforced to surrender; the taking in of that, should be no breach of truice, or treaty. This was much about the twentieth of our December: and whilest the Captaine is upon his way, the strong towne of Damitz was yeelded up: and that we now turne to. The place of it, is upon the very Southern Frontier of this
Dukedome of Mecklenburg;The siege of Damitz upon the Elb. neere unto the Marck of Bran∣denburg, next unto the Lower Saxonie: from which the ri∣ver Elb onely parts it. Tis a very strong place, and had beene long besieged by Colonell Lohausen: against whom Colonell Strauben with his owne, and some of the Duke de Savellies Regiment, ve∣ry well defended it. The towne, at length, prettily thus be∣trayed its owne weaknesse, unto the Duke of Mecklenburg. Strauben upon the taking of Rostock, fearing that the Baron of Virmond would have comne into his towne; and per∣chance have taken his command from him: writes a letter unto Virmond; to diswade him. His reasons were, for that his Magazine was so emptie, and his provisions so neere spent, that they would never maintaine both of them, a moneth together: so that he advised him to goe seeke some other Quarter.Yeelded. These letters fell into the Duke of Meck∣lenburgs hand: whereupon, the siege was more pressed and hastned. In the end, therefore, of December, was the ren∣dring concluded upon, on these articles. with the con∣ditions.1. That the garrison should next day depart the towne: without carrying away any victualls or ammunition: with∣out wronging the buildings, slighting any of the workes, or leaving any powder-mines or traines, in Cellars or other places. 2. That the Governour with all his owne soldiers and officers, and those of the Duke De Savelli, should freely march out of the citie, with all their Armes and Baggage-wagons, Colours flying, matches lighted, bullet in the mouth: upon no pretence soever to be disturbed. 3. That they should by Lohausens men be convoyed unto Munden upon the Weser: and be secured against all molesta∣tions by the way, either by the Kings forces, or any other his Allyes. 4. That they should have 16 wagons, for the carrying a∣way of their sick people. 5. That such Ecclesiasticall persons of the town, as had a
minde to depart: should have free leave to goe themselves, and to carry away their Church ornaments with them. 6. That the prisoners, on both sides, should bee set at li∣bertie, without ransome. 7. Lastly, that 2 principall officers of the garrison, should be left for hostages with Lohausen, till the safe returne of his convoy. Upon these conditions, was the towne rendred; 400 of the garrison, quitting their owne Ensignes, became soldiers unto Lohausen. Those that marcht towards the Weser, were in the end of Januarie after, met withall and cut in peeces by Generall Baniers men: as we shall anon tell you. About the eighth of Januarie, the Wismar Captain, whom Governour Gram had sent to Diepenbach, againe returned:Wismar yeel∣ded. whereupon, Tuesday January the tenth; was the towne rendred, upon the conditions before agreed. It chanced, that a Swedish Leiftenant, (one of those that was to convoy Gram and his people into Silesia:) offered, upon the way, to debauch some of his soldiers from him. Gram was so in∣censed with the Leiftenant, for enticing away his men; that bending his pistoll upon him, he shot him dead upon the place. Generall Todt (a fierce man) having notice of this feate; and of a discovery of false play withall, that Gram (contrary to his covenants) had carryed away 300 muskets in the straw and hay of his Baggage wagons; and that he had pillaged some ships in the haven; and drowned some peeces of ordnance, after the time of the agreement: he sends out Lohausen after him, with a powder,Upon occasi∣on of a quar∣rell by the way, with Commission to lay hold on, and to send him and his Commissary, prisoners into Gripswald, Gram was marcht out with almost 3000 men, whom Lohausen falling aboard with, kills 300 upon the place; and so terrifies 2000 more, that to save their lives they became soldiers to the King of Sweden. The Commis∣sary offered 12000 Dollars for his ransome:Todt takes Gram prisoner. but before hee gat out of Gripswald, more perchance were fetcht out of him The Swedes found 20 last of gunpowder within Wismar:
with great store of faire brasse peeces, and militarie ammu∣nition sufficient. And thus the whole Dukedome of Mecklenburg being cleered of the Imperialists, and the Walsteiners: and the true Princes r'impattiate into their owne possessions: the Generall Achatius Todt, (after a while) goes with his Ar∣mie to the assistance of the Bishop of Bremen: who having before risen with some 6 or 8000 men, and well recovered some of his townes againe: he was now hard laid at by the Count of Gronsfelt, by whom, the townes of Langwedel and Verden were reprised from him. of  But a more desperate ene∣mie was now comming upon him; Pappenheim was now entered upon the stage of this Lower Saxonie: to ne with him. and to him now turne wee. HOw inhumane a devestation of that so ancient & good∣ly Hanse towne of Magdenburg, the Counts of Tillie and Pappenheim had lately made,The Storie of Magdenburg. wee have in our First Part delivered. Of the cruelty of which fury; we did not then, nor can doe now; discover the one halfe to you. A goodly citie, reduced to such ruines: as if Hannibal had done it, and not Tilly: Hannibal (I say) who had the Art by fire and vinegar, to moulder away the rocks and mountaines into crumbles; for the forcing of his owne passage. Those that have since seene the 80 or 100 meaner houses, now onely (with the Cathedrall) left in Magdenburg: have admired not only how the stone buildings, but the stones themselves (unlesse in some vast Lime kiln) could possibly have beene turned into such scavage and such rubbish. Tis my Com∣plaint, this; not my Declamation. I know there is a sharpe Latine penne; that hath laboured to excuse Tilly and Pap∣penheim upon it; and to charge the whole blame upon the Townsmen, and the Administrator. Tilly (he sayes) offe∣red them I know not how much mercy. If to offer a man peace with the losse of his Freedome and Religion, be mercy; then must wee finde out another name for oppression. It was
not their Emperor, that the Magdenburgers resisted: but his Sonne: might Prince Rodolph William the Emperors se∣cond Sonne, have beene Bishop of Magdenburg, and the al∣teration of religion and old customes yeelded unto: then, upon those termes; might the Magdenburgers have had such a mercie. That was the quarrell against Magdenburg: they had accepted of Prince Christian William of Brandenburg, a Protestant; and refused Prince Rodolph William of Gratz, a Catholicke: and this ruined them. How willing that Champion of Religion and of the Free townes the King of Sweden would have been to redeeme the city; may appeare by his printed Apologie.See Page 100 of our First Part. And to shew that this was in earnest, had he then beene able; hee now goes a∣bout it, so soone as he is: no sooner had the Victorie of Leip∣sich made him both strong and famous; but he devotes him∣selfe to the regaining of it. How the Generall Banier, had at the Kings comming away from Hall and Leipsich, beene left thereabout with order to invest Magdenburg:The L. Mar∣quesse Hamil∣ton, goes to Magdenburg. we be∣fore pointed at, Page 28 of our Second Part. The Lord Marquesse of Hamilton likewise, then lying in the neigh∣bour Marck of Brandenburg, had commission for the joy∣ning with Banier for the reducing of it. His Lordships Ar∣my arryving in Pomerland in the beginning of August; pre∣sently did this service unto the King of Sweden; that it was confessed to be one of the occasions of the victorie of Leip∣sich. The same of its being 20000 strong; hastned Saxonie to joyne with the King, and encouraged the whole Prote∣stant Party: & made Tillie, besides, to leave his garrisons 6 or 8000 stronger then he needed otherwise to have done; who wold have shrewdly troubled the King at that great Battle. This Army being landed at the White house by Wolgast, August the second; lay there about 3 weekes or a moneth, for Arming and refreshing. Thence went they to Ancklam, Vckermund, and Stetin: about which they lay in Dorps some 3 weekes longer. Thence went they to Dam, Grip∣penhagen, Konincksberg, and Custrine: and some into Franck∣ford
upon the Oder. Hence, after some 40 dayes, they went to Moncheberg, Strausberg, and Bernaw: all on the West of the Oder. Thence to Spandaw Brandenburg, and Zerbst: where they crost the Elb. Thence to Kalbe and Saltz; and so to Magdenburg, a little before the middle of November. The towne of Magdenburg had ever since a weeke be∣fore the Battle of Leipsich; beene entrusted with a great part of the riches and spoiles of warre, a long time prowled to∣gether, by Tilly and his officers: who seeing the King would fight, had sent them into that place of safety. The Governor of it, was Count Wolff of Mansvelt: and his garrison, some 3000. The L. Marquesse Hamilton and the Generall Banier; sate downe to it; about the middle of November: their Quarters for the Foot-forces, being in 2 Dorps, about two English miles short of the towne, towards Saltz, the Elb being on their right hand. Both the Generalls, were lod∣ged in one of those villages, where the Foot lay: which were such decayed forsaken cottages; that the houses were neither enow, nor sufficient, to keepe the men dry. And thus had Tillie left the Countrey. Baniers Horse, were quartered in the next Dorps on the left hand of Magden∣burg: the neerest at the distance of an English mile: though their guards were neerer. Both Horse and Foot, might come to 6 or 7000 men. Workes they had none against the towne, but only 3 Skonces: first, a greater one, up∣on the top of a hill, halfe an English mile from the citie: se∣condly, another to guard the Avenue of their Quarter; and a third upon the right hand by the Elbs side, which was in∣deed never finisht. Generall Banier was, for the most part in the Quarters: though now and then he made a posting voyage to Hall; 44 English miles to the Southward: where about this time his wife lay in; and Bauditz was one of his Gossips. Peeces of service, there were onely these 2, all the time of the 7 weekes leaguer. The first was, (about the middle of the siege) upon a little Iland in the Elb: to which the
townsmen used to send their Boats, a fuelling. This being observed, some Dutch Foot were sent out against them, be∣twixt whom fell a slight skirmish, not worth relating.Two slight skirmishes. The mischance was more remarkeable, then the encounter: for that a sparke of fire lighting into the powder, in one of the Dutch boats; blew that up, and the assailants in it. The se∣cond service was towards Christmas, and by the horse: 300 of whom being put over to the further side of the Elb; there intercepted some of the towne garrison, that were sent over the bridge for forage. The towne, by Christmas eve, was brought to a Parlie, in which, had Banier beene as forward as my Lord Mar∣quesse, the towne might have beene rendred. Three Com∣missioners were on both sides appointed for the treaty:The towne Parlies: a Colonel, a Leiftenant-Colonel, and a Sergeant-Major. The Leiftenant Colonel, sent from the Besiegers, was named Sa∣lomon Adams (as I take it) who is now Governor of the towne: and the Majors name is Chamberlaine. The place of treatie was betweene the Quarters and the towne; each side bringing a guard of 100 foot, and 50 Horsemen. The conditions offered being something pressing, the towne Commissioners answered, that they were not as yet in such necessitie; but if they might have faire termes they would be willing to surrender. On Wednesday they met againe: but nothing was concluded: Drummes and Trumpets, go∣ing still betweene, from the towne unto the leaguer. The night following, there slipt 2 of Pappenheims horsemen into the town so that the L. Marquesses Trumpet being next day sent in, with a full expectation to bring the newes of yeeld∣ing: the Count of Mansfeld returned this peremptory word by him, that he desired to be excused,Broken off, upon the newes of Pap∣penheims com∣ming. he could not with his honour continue on the Treatie; for that he had intelligence that his succours were marching: Pappenheim would bee there by such a day and houre; and that would hee trust unto. A Comfort, as cold as the season. Newes being still
brought of Pappenheims comming: upon New-yeares day would Banier needs be rising. Now hee beganne to shew himselfe, & his Commission; by which he was not to fight, to the hazzard of the Armie: whereupon depended the Lower Saxonie. The L. Marquesse, (as his Captaines now in towne justifie it to mee) was very loath to have risen: but Banier now countermanding all counsailes, drew off his men the same evening and hastned towards Saltz upon the West side of the river Sala, 7 English miles South of Mag∣denburg.The siege le∣vyed. The English and Scottish being too weake to abide Pappenheim, were faine to goe along too: and Banier think∣ing not himselfe sure enough at Saltz; went next evening 6 miles more southerly, unto Kalbe; upon the same river. Beyond the towne on the other side the Sala, are there some strong Workes: for the guarding of the towne and Passe; which is of good importance; Into these, Banier now drew his men, over the Bridge; see now, who was most frighted. The English and Scottish with 4 Dutch com∣panies of Sir Alexander Leslies (Generall-Major to the L. Marquesse) staid within the towne upon the other side,Baniers feare. next unto Magdenburg, Banier sent to the L. Marquesse, to draw over towards him: threatning if he would not, to burne the bridge, and to leave him to the mercy of the enemy. He told the L. Marquesse also, that he would blow up his house in Calbe, which he was Quartered in: so soone as ever he were comne out of it. This house, was a good high one, and next unto the River: out of the windowes whereof, (tis supposed) Baniers feare was, that the enemies musket∣tiers might play into his Workes, and annoy his people. The Passe being viewed by Sir Iacob Ashlie: he assured the Lord Marquesse, that he might safely march away in a quarter of an houres warning, in despight of Pappenheim and his Ar∣mie. The L. Marquesse also by the sight of it being confir∣med; refused to goe over the bridge to Banier, but staid here with his men, till after Pappenheims quitting of Mag∣denburg: they went thence unto Halberstat. And thus
came this second endeavour of relieving Magdenburg;Pappenheim comes into Magdenburg. unto nothing. Whether it were Baniers feare or Commission, that left Pappenheim a faire way, to come into it, I know not: this is sure; that no sooner were the Besiegers gone, but hee entered into the towne: and to him now turnes our Storie. How the Catholike Leaguers in their Diet of Ingolstat, did in December conclude upon the setting forth of a flying Armie, under the command of Godfrey Count of Pappen∣heim: you may see Page 13 of our Second Part. His mo∣nies for the levie, were mostly made over to Cullen: thi∣ther went himselfe in person a little after the Battle of Leip∣sich. He was to be Leiftenant-Generall, for the Lower Sa∣xonie: and the Count of Gronsfelt; whom Tilly with some small forces, had lately left about the Weser, was to be his Felt-Marshall. Some Commissions had before his comming, beene given out for Regiments: as to Lambo, Quade, As∣chenburg, Ohr, Nienhausen and Palant; all Colonels. Part of Lamboes Horse Regiment gathered out of Luickland; him∣selfe saw mustered before him at Cullen, in the beginning of December: but being neither compleat nor armed; it went not along with him. Nienhausen that was Amptman of Stier∣waldt by Hildesheim: had not a long time after gotten up a∣bove 300 Foot, and 150 Horse. Palant, was to have a double Regiment, of Horse and Foot: Two Horse-Regiments of Westerholt and Westphalia, were said to be already in Mun∣sterland: so that none of all these went now along with him into Brunswickland. And yet he even now, promised to relieve Magdenburg; and about the middle of December, he sets out from Cullen to Wolfenbuttle in Brunswickland: 44 English miles, to the Southwest of Magdenburg. Thitherward he goes, onely with his owne private retinue: not so much as with a Cor∣net, or a Companie. For the patching up of of his Army, he was to lighten the garrisons of Brunswickland: out of eve∣ry one of which, these were his proportions. Out of Nien∣burg on the Weser, he drew 300 Foot, of yong Tillies Regi∣ment,
Governour of Ingolstat: commanded by his Leifte∣nant Colonell Steven Andreas. Out of Minden and Hame∣len, each 300, of Gronfelts Regiment: commanded by Cap∣tain Seubersdorff. Of Blanckharts Regiment, he had 300: and as many out of Kalemberg, Nieustettle and Steinbrugg: com∣manded by Captaine Pop. Out of Gottingen had he 400 of old Tillies Regiment; commanded by Wilich. Out of Wol∣fenbuttle, 1000: halfe belonging to Count Gronsfeldt, and halfe to Baron Glein, Governor of the towne. Glein went a∣long with his part: and Captaine Scharffseder lead the other moitie. Lastly, he had 7 Ensignes or 300, which wee told you came out of Damitz: which belonged to Baron Loebel, a Counsellor of Warre to the Emperor: who being not there, they were led by Stauder, his Leiftenant-Colonell. These were in all 3200. Cornets of Horse, he had 25: wher∣of, of Bonickhausens. 12: Of Horsts, 8. and of Lintlo's 5. in all about 1500. Horse and Foot, in all: 4700. Pappenheim, indeed, gave out himselfe to be 10 or 12000 and for so many he commanded bread to be baked at Wol∣fenbuttle: and yet to conceale the smallnes of his numbers, did he never march from Wolfenbuttle unto Magdenburg, but in the night, and in devided Companies. There had particular intelligence beene sent out of Ka∣lemberg to the Generall Banier, of the smalnesse of Pappen∣heims Armie: and the Prince of Anhalt (as I heare) offered to lay his owne head, to a Dollar, if he were 5000 men. But Duke Fredericke Vlrick of Brunswick being deceived by Pappenheims Bakers, (who shewed Commissions to pro∣vide for 12000) writing to Banier, that hee was indeed so strong: this was the thing that scared the Swedish Generall; who considered that the towne of Magdenburg, had 2900 more, to joyne with him. His Commission (I heare) was not to fight, as little as Baniers: the chiefe of this his first expedition, being to spoile the workes to fetch the goods and garrison out of Magdenburg: for which he was said, to have carryed 3 or
400 wagons along with him. These wagons served also to barricadoe the Armie on the wing: many of these having 3 or 4 soldiers in them with double hakes: which are peeces that shoot 6 ounces bullett. The weaker townes of the Duke of Brunswicks, betwixt Wolfenbuttle and Magdenburg; he now plunders: this was but to keepe his hand in ure, and for his recreation. Helm∣stat, a towne and Vniversite 24 English miles from Wolfen∣battle, is so served; after his lying 4 dayes at it, Here he left Loebels 7 companies of 300 men. Thence goes he to Scho∣ningen 12 miles further: and so to Garleben; whence hee thrusts into Magdenburg.He enters Magdenburg: There having a while refreshed his Armie; hee devides his owne and Manfelds men, into 2 great Partees: which are sent severally abroad upon both sides of the river, for the speedyer plundering of the Coun∣trey. No sooner were the L. Marq. Hamilton and the Generall Banier gone out of Saltz; but Pappenhelms men were the same day pillaging of it. Eroleben, Elendeleben, Biren,and sends out 2 Partees, to plunder the Countrey. and Altensleben, are made prey of: and so is Mulingen Castle; the Court and Residence of the Count of Barby. On the Easterne side of the Elb, is the Baron of Glein (Governor of Wolfenbuttle) sent out, with some 6 troopes of Horse and 1500 or 2000 Muskettiers. He goes or sends first, to Gomeren; 8 English miles South-East of Magdenburg. This Partee of his makes towards Bar∣by towne, within 2 miles of Calbe: where (if wee will be∣leeve Gallobelgicus) they were very strangly frighted. The plunderors (as they thought) discerned a great many fires a∣bout the towne: which they supposed to be so many Courts of guard: and that the Swedish, in this neerenesse to Kalbe, had beene there enquartered. The townsmen hearing af∣terwards, by what apparitions their towne had beene pre∣served, concluded verily (sayes he) that it was a guard of Angells, which had thus skared away their enemies. Those of our nation, then hard by Barby, never heard of this Ignis
fatuus: this, indeed, was upon our Twelfe day; and yet, I beleeve nothing of this Theophania, these divine apparitions. Something there might be in it: divers of our nation of Captaine Dowglasse Companie, lying that night at Rosenberg (within sight of Barby) for the guard of the baggage; set, by mischance, a Gentlemans house and another, on fire: which is likelyest to be the fires, imagined. January the seaventh, does Pappenheim draw out of Magdenburg:He forsakes Magdenburg. not as my last quoted Author delivers, for that he had newes of the Duke of Lunenburgs threatning to besiege Wolfenbuttle: for (plainely) neither this Duke nor his Brother, had as yet any one man levyed. Pappenheim and Manfeld having concluded, first that the towne was not to be maintained; and secondly, that the whole coun∣trey was more to be considered, then that one ruinated Ci∣tie; they had now resolved upon leaving of it. Pappenheim had done what he came for, and what should he stay there, longer? Having therefore charged all the goods hee came thither for, upon his waggons; he sends them onward with his Foot, towards Wolfenbuttle. The ordnance which hee had resolved to carry along with him; it seemes he wan∣ted horses for: seeing 18 of these were found standing up∣on the market place; with their harnesse or traice cut; after the draught-horses had beene put to them. Out of Magdenburg, carryed he these forces. Of Colonel Breuners Regiment, 10 Companies, or 1500. Of Marquesse William of Baden, 8 Companies, or 650. Of Cratz his Re∣giment 5 Companies, about 150. Of Goltz his Regiment, 500. Besides these, were 3 troopes of horse; one, of Man∣felds owne guards; and the other 2 of Crabats: but all so weake, that those 3 could not make up a hundred. In all, 2900: 1000 of which, he againe put into Wolfenbuttle. Pappenheim was gone almost 2 dayes, before the Lord Marquesse or Banier had notice of it.The Pappen∣heimers brave the Swedish. Whilest his Foot and Baggage, were marching away; some troopes of his horse made a Brave upon the Swedish before their Quarters. A
faire Compagnia there is betwixt Saltz and Kalbe: and a hill in it within halfe an English mile of this latter. Upon that, did some of them make a muster of themselves; stood still, and gazed upon the English and the Scottish: whom my Lord Marquesse now commanded to be drawne out in∣to Battaglia; Banier likewise having sent over some 6 or 7 troopes of Horse and Dragooners. Two houres, they stood looking thus one upon another: without exchanging so much as one bullet, betweene them. The Pappenheimers, it appeares, meant not to make a businesse of it: but did it on∣ly to amuse their enemies: either whilest their Foot and baggage, might get the more time to march away;but march a∣way without doing any thing. or that their other fellowes might, in the meane time, plunder some of the neighbour Dorps, undisturbed. After 2 houres, these Horse marcht off quietly; and followed after their Ar∣my unto Wolfenbuttle. Pappenheim leaving Magdenburg; did not commit that spoile and barbarisme, upon the towne, as was reported. Part of the bridge (some say) he burned: though others say twas burnt before. Some boates and mills also in the river; and blew up some of the Workes. Of ordnance, hee left 18 (as was said) upon the market place, 19 he drowned in the Elb; 2 he blew up with gunpowder, and left above 40 upon the walls. Three hundred Quintalls of gunpowder (each Quintall being 100 pound weight) he left behinde him; which had it not beene concealed from him: hee would, surely, have put fire unto, or have carryed away with him. A world of Match, was there left; and of corne, pease and oates, great plenty, And all this was found in it, when as up∣on the Munday, after Pappenheims going; my Lord Mar∣quesse entered it. The Generall Baniers Army,My Lord Marquesse enters Mag∣denburg. staid about Kalbe, till Duke William of Saxon-Weymar came into those parts to joyne with him, to pursue Pappenheim: and my Lord Marquesses men, till towards the end of the moneth, that they went towards Halberstate,He and Banier, part compa∣nies. Their way lay West∣ward; by Egelen, 16 miles; thence to Gruningen, 12 miles:
whence 6 miles further unto Halberstat; where they staid above a quarter of a yeare for the guard of the towne and countrey;He going to To the King of Sweden. till such time as they were taken on by Duke Wil∣liam: as in the Kings Storie wee have told you. From Hal∣herstat, upon the first of February, went the Lord Marquesse towards the King of Sweden: with whom the eleventh of the same moneth he arrived. His Lordship (as I have heard Sir Iacob Ashley tell, who in that journey waited upon him) was very graciously entertained by the King: a con∣cluding argument, that what his Lordship had undertaken, was very well accepted: The King of Sweden (besides his freedome of language, wherein he used not to bee sparing, against whatsoever had displeased him:) had a Spirit, with∣all, so highly mounted above all dissembling, that it scorned to speake or to looke, booty. The Count of Pappenheim being arrived at Wolfenbuttle, about the eleventh or twelfe of January,Pappenheim goes from Wolfenbuttle. hee leaves the lug∣gage brought out of Magdenburg, in this strong Citie; and 100 or 2000 men with the Lord of Glein, to defend it. This towne, was sometimes the Court and Residence of the Dukes of Brunswick: untill Tilly of late yeares, had taken it from the King of Denmarke: and thrust Duke Vlricke thence; by the unrulynesse of an Imperiall garrison. For the Duke perceiving he had no command over his subjects, by reason of the garrison: so soone as ever he had consented to the Diet of Leipsich; he pretending to goe a hunting, went to reside in Brunswick towne; and never since that time, re∣turned into Wolfenbuttle. About the middle of the moneth, the Count of Pappen∣heim sets forward into the countrey of Lunenburg: whose eldest Duke Christian of Zella-Lunenburg; is now heir ap∣parent unto the childlesse Vlrick of Brunswick, before-named. Before his going, he sends to the Imperiall towne of Brunswick; 7 English miles downe the same river of O∣nacre, with Wolfenbuttle, to the Northward. His demand was, to be by that Citie furnished with a Viaticum, or pro∣portion
of provisions for his journey. This being a very strong towne, which the Dukes of Brunswick, (though of∣ten they have attempted it) could never make themselves Masters of: had the courage to deny him this motion. Now marches he up into Lunenburg; and of that Duke he demands contribution;towards Lunen∣burg. and that his strong towne of Zel upon the river Alre, should take in a garrison from him. There be 5 Brothers of these Dukes of Lunenburg (as I heare) and all unmarryed except Duke George. The eldest, I have before named: The second Brother, is Duke George; the man now comming upon the stage of warre; for which purpose he was at this instant at Hamborow, about his Bills of Exchange, and getting up of monyes To Duke Christian was Pappenheim said to write his letters, to this purpose. That he should send Commissioners to him,Writes to Lu∣nenburg. to agree upon his contributions: labour to hinder the levies of his brother George: and if he could not that way prevaile with him; hee should either arrest his bodie and keepe it safely in Zell, or else send that and the men he had begunne to levie, into his Army. Some speake of Pappenheims threatning to besiege Zell: but this the Duke (perchance) would not be much a∣fraid of: his town being very neere as strong as Wolfenbut∣tle. To be briefe, the Duke excusing himselfe,and compoūds with him. that he had no power over his brother, agreed with Pappenheim to give him 40000 Dollars monethly contribution. This was the Dukes cheapest course; for hee well knew that Pappenheim could never stay to take up the first paiment of it: Duke William of Saxon-Weymar, the Landgrave of Hessen, and the Generall Banier, the Duke understood to bee all at this instant comming against Pappenheim; so that he knew he could never be able to stay in his countrey, But for this, Pappenheim had the best of Lunenburg: for that he had alreadie nestled himselfe in the Freyheit, (or Freedome) the strongest part of the Dukes countrey. His way to it from Wolfenbuttle, was to Steinbruck, on the ri∣ver Fuse, 18 English miles from Wolfenbuttle. Thence pas∣sing
by Hanover, 30 miles further, he settles himselfe at Betterlo in the Freyheit; 10 English miles from the river Weser. A place it is, to the North of Hanover; having a pretty strong castle by it: both round encompassed with 2 woods, the 2 rivers Aller and Leine; divers ditches and Morasses;Avoyding out of the coun∣trey, so that there is but hard comming at it But here could he not stay above 5 or 6 dayes; for that hearing by this time of the Generall Todts taking of Wismar, and his comming (or about to come) over the Elb, to the defence of the Bishop of Bremen, and Dukes of Lunenburg: as also of Duke Williams, Hessens and Baniers approaching, on the other side upon him: he fearing to be driven up into the middle betwixt them; makes with all speed towards the strong towne of Hamelen upon the Weser.he passes be∣yond the Weser He had a good minde (it appeared) to have lived with his Armie till the Spring, in the Lunenburgers countrey: but fore-dooming, by the preparations, that these winter-moneths might prove hotter to him then the Dog-dayes: that was the rea∣son that he by Hamelen passed over the Weser, to Quarter himselfe in a quieter countrey. And twas time for him, to get Hamelen upon his back: upon which, his enemies would else have beene. We told you before of the comming of 300 Imperialists under 7 En∣signes out of Damitz: these, at this instant, comming out of Helmstat, (where at his going to Magdenburg, wee told you he had left them) towards Hamelen to joyne with Pappenheim;300 Imperia∣lists defeated. were mett withall by a Partee of 150 Horse of Generall Baniers; and cut all in peeces, or made turne to the Swedish party. The reason that facilitated this defeate, was, for that they thought themselves so farre from enemies, and so secure in that neerenesse to Pappenheim; that they marcht without burning matches. This towne of Hamelen is seated upon the Easterne and Brunswicker side, of the famous river of Weser: betwixt it and the mountaines. Pappenheims march thither, lay directly to the Southward, through the Counties of Hoy and Schawenburg. Passing the Weser at this
Hamelen to the South, and Westphalian side of it:Pappenheim going to en∣quarter his Army beyond the Weser. hee in the end of Januarie, strikes up to the Westward, into the Coun∣ty of Lemgow: for there and in the neighbour Counties of Waldeck, Lippe, and Ravensperg his purpose was to have lodged his divided Armie; and to recreut it by the Spring time, with new levyes. He had not beene gone a full week, but that his Commissary-Generall Lirchenfelt, sent him ad∣vise from Hamelen; that Duke William Weymar, the Land∣grave of Hessen, and the Generall Banier, were all conjoyned about Hildesheim and Calenberg:is sent for backe to Ha∣melen. some of their troopes be∣ing within a dayes march of Hamelen. This causes Pap∣penheim to countermarch: and to draw out the garrison, which he had lately thrust into the towne of Lemgow, and to put it into Hamelen to strengthen it. Leaving him, for the present, about Hamelen, Rintelin, and those other many good townes upon the Westerne bancke of the Weser: let us go back, awhile, to bring his adversaries into the Cockpit to him. Todt, Bremen, Lunenburg, William Weymar, Hessen, and Banier: all 6 were now comming against or upon poore Pappenheim; and yet he shifted among all of them: yea not shifted only, but gat now and then, the best of some of them. The Generall Sir Iohn Banier, after that Magdenburg was taken some order for; and a small garrison left to de∣fend and helpe the poore people,Banier, which from all the parts of their banishment, beganne now to returne homewards to their owne Citie: advances to joyne himselfe with Duke William of Saxon-Weymar. This Duke having Commissi∣on from the King, to recover the townes in that corner of the Lower Saxonie; next unto his Duringen, Magdenburg, the river Weser, and the land of Hessen: sets out from Er∣furt about the tenth of Januarie, to march thitherward.and Duke Wil∣liam. His course layfull Northward; where first he comes to Mans∣feldt; the chiefe towne of the County of that name. Thence (as I find) he marcht to Quedlenburg: an Impropriate Abby, now belonging to a Lady Abbesse, a Protestant. Thence ad∣vances he to Osterwick in the Bishoprick of Halberstat, 40
English miles due West of Magdenburg: and there, about the two and twentieth of January, does the Generall Bani∣er joyne with him. This Osterwick, is just 20 English miles short of Wolfenbuttel,joyne forces. upon a branch of the same river with it: and was the Generall Baniers direct way, to goe after Pappenheim. They being thus conjoyned; send first of all their Partees up and downe the countrey towards the Weser: both for scouring of the coasts thereabouts, as also to make the Landgrave of Hessens passage, the easier to come unto them. And now it is, that Baniers men defeated 300 of Loebels Regiment: which Page 118. wee told you were going out of Helmstat towards Hamelen. And this Hamelen (belong∣ing of right unto the DukeThe towne of Hamelen, be∣longs halfe unto the Duke of Brunswick, and halfe unto the Bishop of Hildesheim: but of late dayes, wholy unto Brunswick: who also was Bi∣shop of Hilde∣sheim untill these last wars: in which it was vrung a∣way from the Duke, and gi∣ven unto the Bishop of Cul∣len: who is also Bishop of Leige, Munster, and Paderborn: Duke of West∣phalia, Angaria, &c. Marquesse of Franchimont, &c. of Brunswick) these 3 Gene∣ralls thought at this time to have besieged: but besides the great raynes, and low situation of the place, (which rendred it un-approachable) Pappenheim (as wee told you;) did even now thrust more succors into it, out of Lemgo. Hereupon, doe the 3 Generalls divide their forces: the Landgrave of Hessen setting him down to the siege of Goettingen, (a town sometimes the Duke of Brunswicks, lying upon the river Rhuma, 14 or 15 English miles to the East of the river We∣ser.) and Duke William and Banier, going to the siege of Goslar, an Imperiall towne betwixt the Bishopricks of Hil∣desheim and Halberstat, 40 English miles to the North-East of Goettingen. But before wee tell of these sieges; wee must steppe a little aside to the South-west-ward, to fetch the Landgrave of Hessen into the Countrey. This Prince, having received intelligence, that the townes which he had lately taken in the Bishoprick of Pa∣derborn, (as in the former Storie of his Actions wee have told you) did now upon his absence with the King of Swe∣den,The Landgrave of Hessen comes against Pappenheim. and the comming of Pappenheim into Brunswickland and towards the Weser, (on the West and South of which, Paderborn is) refuse their promised contributions: he in the end of December, taking leave of the King; makes that way∣ward
with his Armie, to recover them. Before the middle of Januarie, he had reprised Warburg: whereinto Pappen∣heim had newly thrust a garrison of nine hundred. The towne he tooke by Storme; and all that resisted, dyed for it. Thence advances he to Stathagen: which terrified by the former example, yeelds to him. And so does Volckmarsen; with some other Strengths thereabouts, of smaller conse∣quence. Having againe thus scummerd over the frontiers of Paderborn, he passes the river Weser and besieges Goettin∣gen; as wee before told you. To the reliefe of this towne,Some Pappen∣heimers defea∣ted. when Pappenheim upon his comming to Hamelen, sent some troopes; they were defeated by some of Duke Williams and Baniers Horse Partees, that scoured up and downe the Countrey. But Pappenheim was not long unrevenged for this: for that in the beginning of this February, having gotten notice by a Boore, how that Colonel Laus (Laurence) Cag a Swede; and Sergeant-Major-Generall, was with 3 new and weake Regiments of Dragooners, of about 1300 men, lodged neer unto Hoxter and Corvey by the Weser; some 20 English miles to the South of Hamelen: he hastens thitherward to defeate them. He had before this, taken a Swedish Leifte∣nant, whom he kept prisoner with him. Being ready to march, in the morning before day-light; Come, up, (say the Pappenheimers to the Leiftenant) you must along with us,Pappenheim cuts off 1500 Swedish Dra∣gooners. to the throat-cutting of your Countrymen. And indeed they were as good as their words: for that Pappenheim falling into their Quarters about 12 a clocke, (which was the usuall houre, that he still observed) hee cut in peeces the most of these Dragooners, or forced thē into the river & Mo∣rasses: where twas easie to kill them, that were first buryed. The Ensignes of these Dragooners, Pappenheim made a glorious flourish withall, at his returne againe to Hamelen: and all to magnifie his victorie.Pappenheims craftynesse. Twas a notable ingenious crafty Generall, this Pappenheim: for having thus cleered Hoxter; he would send his men along the Wesers side, be∣twixt
Hamelen, Munden, and Hoxter; who should goe o∣ver the bridges, and so come round about againe. And thus did some one Regiment walke the round, 2 or 3 times o∣ver; and all this was to make shew, as if every one of these Regiments had beene new forces comne to him, out of Wal∣deck; and to make a noise of a great Army, among the Boores, that the Swedish Generalls might heare of it, and be terrified. But for all these cracks and flourishes, and his giving out himselfe to be 10 or 12000 Foot, and 5000 Horse, when he was not above 10000 in all; yet durst he not appeare in Campagnia; nor goe very farre from the bancks of the We∣ser: so that the Swedish Generalls, went thorough, well enough, with their 2 sieges. Goslar taken by Duke Willi∣am and Banier;The towne of Goslar, is Imperiall; and the Magistrate there, was altogether for the Emperor: other garrison then of the towne, I finde none in it. There needed no streigh∣ter a siege, then the blocking first; and the presenting of the grosse of the Army before it, afterwards: for the Magi∣strate sent to compound for 10000 Dollars with the Gene∣ralls; and received 1000 of Colonell Mitzlaffs regiment, in to them, for a garrison. From hence, goes the Army un∣to Northeim; a towne upon the river Rhuma, some 12 Eng∣lish miles short of Goettingen. This is a towne of no garrison, nor resistance: for that the Generall Tilly had heretofore dismantled it;with other townes. and sligh∣ted downe the Fortifications. This were they comne unto before the 20 of this February. Then take they in Northen; midway betwixt Northeim and Goettingen. In Quarters a∣bout this last towne, had the Landgrave laid this whole fortnight: not so much, to offer any batterie to it; but so to block it up, that he might withal have an eye to Pappenheim. But now was the siege begunne, in good earnest, Colonell Carthaus commanded in the towne; and his garrison was some 900: good store of small peeces he had besides; with victualls and ammunition to have held out longer. The
Swedish bring forward 2 severall Approaches: and after 2 breaches, they cause the towne at both these places to bee stormed. This whilest the Swedish are in good earnest about to doe; they cause false offers & Sealadoes to be made shew of in other parts,Goettingen ta∣ken, the more to divert the defendants from their breaches. The towne is by force entred; and Carthaus with his officers flinging downe their Armes, are taken pri∣soners: and the houses plundered. Here were above 100 Field peeces, Mortars, and Sling peeces, made prize of: 7000 weight of musket bullet; with powder, match, and ammunition proportionable. Ericksburg castle (a very strong place, belonging to the Bishopricke of Hildesheim, so named of Duke Erick of Brunswick, the builder of it) is likewise yeelded upon composition, For the too sudden rendring of this Fort,with Ericks∣burg Castle. was Captaine Wolff of the Regiment of Blanckhart; by Pappenheim afterwards imprisoned. Up∣on the taking of this Castle; did the townes of Peyne, Ha∣selrode, and Duderstat, upon the North side of the Bishop∣ricke of Hildesheim, come in: which a Captaine of Blanck∣harts Regiment, now yielded; thus all was cleer on that side, even to Lunenburg, Bremen, and the Elb streame. By the winning of Goettingen also, are the other smaller townes, Duderstat brought in with little trouble; which lies betwixt that and Duringen.and the whole country clee∣red. And thus was all that you see in the Map of Brunswick and Magdenburg (excepting Duderstat and the towne of Wolfenbuttle) becomne Swedish: even from the Vpper Saxonie on the East side; unto the river of Weser, on the West side of the Countrey: as also North and South from Duringen unto Lunenburg, and the Middle Marcke of Brandenburg. And this was done by the 25 of our February:Duke William and Banier, sent for unto the King. about which time Duke William and the Generall Banier were sent for unto the King of Sweden: even then upon his march into Bavaria, Banier (as I take it) set forward a little before Duke William: and he recovered up unto the King, by the tenth of March following. The Duke staid something lon∣ger,
along the Dukedome of Lunenburg, by his old Quarters at Betterlo: beyond which, he passes the river Aller, leaving Zell upon the right hand of him.into the Bi∣shoprick of Bremen. But he forgate not by the way, to pay himselfe some of those 12000 Dollars moneth∣ly contribution; which the Duke of Zella-Lunenburg, at his former being in these parts had promised him: as Page 117 of this Fourth Part, we have told you. And now is his purpose wholly for the delivery of the towne of Stoade, by the Elbs side in the Bishoprick of Bre∣men: his owne uncle Bicknicker (as I heare) was now Go∣vernor in the towne; who with almost (if not full) 4000 men, were by this end of this April, blocked up by Otto (or Achatius) Todt; and Generall Major Lohausen, with the Lunenburgers forces. But before wee speake of this service let us leave our Pappenheim upon his march thitherwards: and goe backe to fetch up Todts Story, to shew how hee came into these quarters. Generall Todt comes into Lu∣nenburgland.Wee told you Page 106 of this Booke, of his comming to the reliefe of the Bishoprick of Bremen: and hither let us now fetch up himselfe and forces. His march from Wis∣mar which he last tooke (by which all the Dukedome of Mecklenburg was cleered) lay to the Northeast, to the Elb-ward, quite thorow the said Duchie. On the Mecklen∣burger side of the Elb, towards Hamborow, is there a little cantlet of land, called the land of Sachsen or Saxonland: the countrey (as I take it) of the Dukes of Saxon Lawenburg. In this land, were Todts Regiments a while enquartered: which staid not long there: but passed about Lawenburg o∣ver the Elb, and were drawne to Bardewick in Lunenburg∣land, Todt himselfe going into Lunenbung; about 10 or 12 English miles from Lawenburg, and 4 or 5 from Bardewick. His Army consisted of Swedes and Mecklenburgers; and of some English and Scottish Regiments: Duke George of Lunenburgs men, after a while comming also to him. Of Sir Thomas Conwayes Regiment, himselfe, his Leifte∣nant-Colonell Steward, and 300 soldiers; were upon the
fifth of November cast away on the coast of Norway:Sir Thomas Con∣wy drowned, and his Regi∣ment landed. the other 5 Colours with about 700 men; arriving upon the seven and twentieth of the same moneth, at Warnemund by Rostock. The Sergeant-Major over these 5 companies, was Captaine Thomas Grove, who now commanded them. And all these about Christmas after, had order to march to Wis∣mar. That being rendred (as Page 105 wee have told you) Todt and Lohausen with the Swedes and Mecklenburgers; in all not above 4000 at the most, made hast towards La∣wenburg on the Elb, some 50 English miles distant from Wis∣mar. On Newyeares day at night, the 5 English Colours (who marcht by themselves) were at Sarnine in Mecklen∣burgland. Wednesday January the fourth, they marcht and met the three Scottish Regiments. Thence on Sunday to Hagenow; whence to Boitzenberg on the Elb; and so crost the Elb at Lawenburg, whence they went to be enquartered with the Army in Bardewick; a very fine towne (and some∣times a rich one) before spoken of. To this towne came some of the Lunenburgers forces. About the time of that Sir Thomas Conwayet 5 Ensignes came to Warnemund;Sir Frederick Hamiltons, and the Lord For∣besses Regi∣ments ioyne with the Ar∣mye. did 5 of Sir Frederick Hamiltons Co∣lours land also. They were Scottish and Irish people: amongst which was 1 Sir Fredericks owne Company; 2. Coning∣hams, Leiftenant-Colonell: 3. Troopes, Sergeant-Major: 4 Gibsons, and 5 Flemmings, Captaines. The other 4 En∣signes that belonged to this Regiment, were landed other where; and came not, till summer into the Armie. The Lord Forbesse had also his Scottish Regiment there: himselfe being taken prisoner, comming betwixt Luckstadt and Hamborow, and carryed into Wolfenbuttel; where he yet is. Neither English nor Scottish Regiments, had any fixt Armes, as yet: which in plaine English phrase, is; They were not yet fully Armed. However, half armed, or unarmed, as they were; Sergeant-Maior Groves with his English, & the 2 Scottish Regiments; were after some 16 or 20 dayes lying about Bardewick,
commanded towards Boxtehude. The towne is belonging to the Archbishop of Bremen; and lyes upon the small river Essa, within 4 English miles of the borders of Lunenburg; the Elb it selfe being within 8 miles to the North; and Hamborow almost as neere it, to the Eastward. Tis a stronger towne then Stoade: and there was a good garrison now in it:Boxtehude be∣seiged, a place besides it is, of very good consequence; for that it is the Passe into that which they call the Old land, in which Stoade standeth. The Generall Todt with the rest of the Army, lay now at Hornburg; a pretty Fleck or market town, some seaven English miles to the Northwest of Boxtehude, that was now beleagred. At this Hornburg was the Hoff-Quarter (or Heade Quarter) for that this is also another Passe, into the Old land aforesaid: by which, Stoade was on that side also streightned. especially by those of our nation.The English and Scottish lay some 10 dayes at first, an English mile off from Boxtehude: with unfixt Armes, for a great part, and without powder or bullets. After this, they were sent to lye at a place called the Old Cloyster, which is within a quarter of a mile of the towne, to the Southward. Some few Dutch companyes there were, enquartered upon the Old lands side betwixt the towne and the Elb: but they were the English and Scottish that had the most to doe in the beleagring. In the time of this seige, upon Doctor Salviue advertise∣ments before given to the King,Todt is sent for away by the King, and Sir Alexander Lesly comes to the Armye. of the Generall Todts mis∣behaviour in the Army; had his Majesty sent away for him: and Sir Alexander Lesly was commanded from the Lord Marquesse Hamiltons Army, by the King of Swedens Com∣mission; to come and take charge of Todts Army, with the Style of Sergeant Mayor Generall Sir Alexander being now comne to the Old Cloyster, (aforenamed) and going about to take view of the Boxtehude; within 3 or 4 dayes after his first comming; was short from the towne into the instep of the left foot. He being thus disabled for the commanding of the Armie, and carryed off, unto Hamborow; Todt; for
the time, was to doe all againe:who being shot, Lohausen (a Colonell with one legge) being then made Sergeant Major Generall. And this order continued, till that Wolff Hendrick Baudissin (na∣tive of Lusatia, and commonly called Bauditz) was sent downe to be Leiftenant Generall;Baudissin is sent to take charge of the Army. and Tott now going a∣way, Duke George of Lunenburg became General of the Ar∣mie. But Boxtehude was first taken; and Pappenheim gone againe, ere Baudissin came to the Army. To returne to the siege. There were 3 severall Batteries by this time, gotten up against the towne: whereof 2 up∣on the Old cloyster side, and a third upon the other: from all which the Swedish Canon plaid every day into the Citie. Nor were the besieged, altogether idle. Having advertise∣ment by the Boores, that the English and Scottish Regiments, were not halfe armed, and but raw soldiers; 200 of the towne Horsemen; one night sallyed out upon their Quar∣ters. They fell out with a very great clamor and noise ma∣king: and were comne within 20 paces of their very Guards. Those of our nation that had Armes, stood their ground:A Sally re∣pulsed. and 2 troops of Horse were quickly at hand to second them. Tis said, that some of the Irish ventured upon the salliers horsemen, with their skeynes or swords onely: and did some peece of execution upon them. However, the leader of the sallyers was there shot dead and fell; his men forced to retire: being after some skirmishing, beaten into the ve∣ry Ports of their Citie. Another night, they fell out of the towne againe; and set fire upon the Scottish Guardes: and had they adventured but a little further, they had put the Quarters into a terrible confusion. But even now they were perswaded in againe. The siege went on in the meane time, and the Canon from all 3 Batteries did their duties: faggots and storming lad∣ders were also made shew of; nor yet would these offers fright out the besieged. Full 3 weekes, there was misery enough endured by those of our nation without the towne: about the end of which time, upon the fourth of March; the
besieged (as it were for pitty of our Countrymen) yeelded;Boxtehude yeilded. and marcht upon good conditions into Stoade. Boxtehude being thus taken, our English having done the chiefe of their service there; were offered to garrison the towne: which they gladly enough accepting of; the 5 Colours were put in∣to it. Here lay they 3 weekes: Sergeant-Major Grove be∣ing Governor. The Generall Todt having a purpose to put in a Swede (a servant of his) to be Governor over Groves head:The English being put into the towne, were by Todt commanded out againe. he being a high spirited Gentleman, that could not endure to be rewarded with such an affront for all his services: the English colours were commanded out, and a Swedish Leiftenant-Colonell (not Todts man) put in to be Governour, with 5 Ensignes. Thence were the English sent to block up Stoade; about which, the rest of the Army were quartered up and downe in Dorps; the snow not then suffering them to lye in open Quarters. But this served the turne well enough: Todts pur∣pose being,Stoade blockt up. but to block it up at a distance; victualls were so scarce with him, that he should not otherwise have beene able to have kept the Army together, in one leaguer. This towne is seated upon a small riveret called the Zwing, about 2 English miles from the Elb: a skonce being betwixt it and the Citie. The land on both hands of it, is low morasses: Causeyes running al along thorough them. The countrey on the North of it, is the Keydinger land, (vulgarly called the Land of Kayne) and that part to the East and Southward, is called the Old land of Stoade. There was a garrison of al∣most (if not altogether) 400 men in the towne. Pappen∣heims owne kinsman being the Governour. Here had the Be∣siegers exercise enough: the Besieged dayly falling out into their Quarters. Sometimes did they affront their Quarters, with mighty Partees, of a full thousand: otherwise, with 2 or 300 Horsemen, or more, with muskettiers behind them. Thus would they give a Camisado, beat and fire a Quarter, now and then; and so in againe, never standing to it to make good any thing. And thus went on the businesse, all this
moneth, and the next: Todt having neither purpose nor power, to attempt more upon the towne; the garrison (plainely) being neere as strong as his Army: especially af∣ter the taking of Bremersford; which next followed. In the end of Aprill, whilest Stoade was blockt; was this towne of Bremersford besieged by a Regiment of the Arch∣bishop of Bremens. At this towne, whilest the Bishop had it; was his Palace and place of Residence. The besieged were hard put to it for provisions; for all which they had taken a desperate oath, that they would never yeeld the towne, but to the Kings Army.Bremersford taken. The Generall Todt being advertised of this resolution; sends away Sir Frederick Ha∣miltons Regiment, under the command of his Leiftenant Colonell Coningham; to take in the Citie. The besieged no sooner saw his Colours flye, before their Walls; but they presently entred into a Parly. The Bremers Colonell here∣upon, being jealous of his honor, privately and presently, made tender unto them of better conditions: whereupon they immediately concluded, and marcht out every way like soldiers into Stoade. No sooner was this done, but there came newes instant∣ly unto Bremersford; that Pappenheim with 9 or 10000 Foot, and 5000 Horse, was comming, and within 10 houres march of them: and indeed this towne was directly in his way, to Stoade-ward Command was now sent from the Generall, that the Regiment should hasten away to Boxte∣hude, and deliver up Bremersford, to the Bremers Colonell. The Regiment being most Irish and Scots, used to wading and night-marching: came flouncing thorough the Bogs and By-places, and recovered safely into Boxtehude; not∣withstanding the enemies drummes, were all the night within hearing. This was about the end of our April. Pappenheims march was frō Hamelen and Nyenburg upon the Weser, along to the Northward, thorow the Bishoprick of Ferden, and the edge of Lunenburg, and then betweene the Fennes of Bre∣merland.
Leaving the river Zwing upon his right hand, and crowding in betweene Bremersford and Harseneld cloyster;Pappenheim en∣ters Stoade. hee thrust himselfe into Stoade Citie. Hee was, indeed, though not so many as he gave out himselfe for; yet much about 10000 Horse and Foot: which with the Towne-gar∣rison, was farre too strong for Todts Armie. He therefore now gave way to him: marching to Boxtehude and tho∣row it, to get all his owne Army to a head for resistance. Pappenheim was in Stoade, before the Swedes imagined he could have beene: himselfe giving them the first assurance of his being there, by the shooting off (in a militarie brave∣ry) all his Ordnance. He being now in Stoade, had the passage into the Key∣dingerland,Cutts off Leslyes Regi∣ment. (to the North of him) open. There was the Re∣giment of Major Generall Leslyes, and 4 Companies of Co∣lonell Monroes of Obsdell, enquartered, to block up Stoade on that side. Upon these now falls Pappenheim, cuts them off all; takes 19 Colours, and Major Leslyes owne Ensigne amongst them: Of those that were taken prisoners; Officers were made prisoners to Officers, Captaines to Captaines; and so forth: and notwithstanding that the Pappenheimers had spare horses enow, (for that they tooke a breed of Mares out of the Land) yet made they their prisoners to trott on foot at their stirrops, like their Horse boyes. Now did Pappenheim cast about to get into the Old land; both for the pillage of the countrey, and to get the Elb cleere, if it were possible: and withall to exercise Todts peo∣ple, whilest he provided to bee going. The Boores being now up in their owne defence, about the skonce; and some Dragooners and other soldiers being amongst them: Pap∣penheim supposed the action more faiseable, to beate thorow Hornburg and Todts Army there:Offers to force Todts Armye. then thorow the Boores, Causeyes and Morasses. This Hornburg, though it were well seated for a Passe, yet was it but a small Fleck, untill some new cast up Workes, had now well fortifyed the pas∣sage. Upon this, now falls Pappenheim; and upon this he so
thunders with his Ordnance, that he beates all downe be∣fore him. And yet here was good opposition made unto him, and by some Scottish too of Sir Frederick Hamiltons Regiment: amongst whom, Captaine Gibson was said to have behaved himselfe bravely: Here was Major Generall Lohausens horse shot under him. The Generall Todt per∣ceiving the towne not to be maintained, gives order to have fire put to it, and retreated with his Armie to a great work he had betweene the towne and the Old land: lying upon a water. This was maintained by a Forlorne hope, left for the defence of it, untill the Army retreated thorow the Old land to Boxtehude-ward. This done, the Forlorne hope came off safely. The towne of Boxtehude being not large enough to entertaine Todts whole Armie, hee marcht thorow it and laid them in Dorps, till he had occasion to draw them to a head againe. Pappenheim being thus defeated of his passage into the Old land by Hornburg, and put into Stoade againe: hee the third of May forced his way thorow, by the skonce afore∣said. There his Crabats were seene prancing and pricking up and downe, along the Causeyes, comming almost to Boxtehude.He gets into the Old Land: There being but small reliefe for them to bee had (Todt had taken order for that) they set fire upon the Countrey. Iust as highway theeves will beate those travai∣lers, that carry no money about them. But all this, could he make nothing of: Todt had all the countrey about him, the Elb and the way to it was shut up, so that there was no reliefe that way to becomne at. The towne of Stoade, was not to be maintained by him, because his Army could not be maintained by it. The way back againe was full of Passes and Streightnesses,But is faine to quitt that. so that there he might be coopt up and starved, should he stay so long till the power of the country could have time to come downe upon him. And especially was there a Passe at an old mill; by the Fennes and the old cloyster: and there, had Todt had the stomack to it, he might have hazzarded to have kept Pappenheim in the Coope, a
fatning. But he durst not, he was farre too weake: loath to hazzard the Army, and his owne credit, which he had gotten in Mecklenburg-land: for that Pappenheim being made desperate by stopping up, must needs have strugled like a tyed Tyger, to have gotten loose againe. What could the old Shephard doe with the Lyon, that kil'd his Lambs, after he had gotten him into his house; and then knew not how to tye him? So was it now with Todt: for whom it was farre better to let Pappenheim come out, and be so rid of him: who he was very sure, culd not stay long by him, in a devoured countrey. Some blame Todt for this; affirm∣ing, that he might have pinfolded Pappenheim, and have starved him: though others labour to excuse him, by the former reasons. However, Todt staid not with the Army, after this, but was commanded away to Rostock: and so to the Kings Army. Pappenheim not able to stay in Stoade, provides for his departure: resolving to take the garrison, the baggage, vi∣ctualls,and Stoade after it. and ammunition out of it: for which (as at his com∣ming to Magdenburg) he had brought a many empty wa∣gons along with him. Being ready to leave the towne, hee calls the Magistrates before him and demands 6000 Markes contribution of them. They going about to levy the mo∣nyes, came againe and tendered him 5000: with a solemne protestation, that the whole estate of the towne, was able to bring up the summe no higher.Pappenheims Noblenesse to those of Stoade City. Pappenheim seeing their poverty, and their good wills; nobly delivers them their monyes back againe, with the Keyes of their Citie: onely exacting these 2 conditions from them: first, that they should looke well to the sick and wounded soldiers, which he left behinde him; and secondly, that they should keepe the Citie, 3 dayes after his going. And this said, he the sixth of May, finally quits the towne; desperately (shall I call it) or valiantly? in the night adventuring along by the Old cloyster neere Boxtehude: even thorow these dangerous Passes, and close by Todts Army Being (quietly let goe, hee
retyres first to Rodenberg, and so to Ferden,He goes to∣wards Wolsen∣buttel, and thence the way that he came, into Brunswickland. All this, had hee done bravely. He was, indeed, at Stoade, in some distresse, especially of victualls: there laye 2 Swedish ships in the Elb, right against the mouth of the Zwing; to stoppe up all provisions from comming from Hamborow or Luckstadt, by water. And yet was Pappenheim streightlyer blockt up, then that; hee wan∣ted money to have bought any provisions, that might have beene brought to him: enough, I meane, to keepe the town withall. Going out of Stoade, hee carryed all the course, black, Rusck bread, that he could get: yea and tooke the very lead off some Churches, to make Provant bullets of. Some Peeces of ordnance he tooke from off the walls, to carry with him: blew up the side of a Port, and away hee went. Whither he had made any private overture of deli∣vering Stoade (for money) unto the King of Denmarks hands, I know not, though I have read of it: and of some letters besides, which the Syndicus or Recorder of Stoade should be taken with, as he was going to Luckstat, which should containe some secrets of correspondēcie entertained by the King of Denmark, that way. Those that write so, af∣firme this private correspondencie to have beene begunne, presently after Pappenheims comming out of Magdenburg: and that to bee the neerer to put men into Stoade, the King of Dermark should have surprised Friburg upon the Elb, by some forces sent thither out of Luckstat. Sure it is,Some corre∣spondencyes betwixt Den∣mark and Pap∣penheim. that the Danes did intercept this Friburg, and that the Bishop of Bremen (in jealousie least his Coadjutor the Prince of Denmark, should becom his supplanter) had sent the French Colonell Dumeni from about Ferden (where hee then lay) either to reprise it, or to keepe the Danish forces from com∣ming further. This Dumeni (a Colonell of Dragooners) was the man, that had done most in these lands, before Todts comming: and he now going towards Friburg with the Bishop of Bremens forces, did (as I finde it written) kill
some 40 Danish, and take 160 prisoners, that sallyed out of the Castle upon him. However, March the thirteenth fol∣lowing and in the night; did 2000 Bremers people, in white Frocks or shirts, give a Camisado upon the Castle: which they stormed, and killed 300 Danes in it. This was thought likely enough, to have made a breach betwixt the Kings of Sweden and of Denmark: as if these Danes had beene slaine by the Swedish. Some will also make Pappenheim so witty, as to contrive the Danish surprising of Friburg, foredoo∣ming that the Swedes would never suffer them to enjoy it, but rather goe by the eares with them. But the Generall Todt excused himselfe that he had no hand in it, but that it was onely done by the Bishop of Bremen: and so Pappen∣heims fine plot failed. He being in distresse in Stoade, and not able to put it over to Denmark (which hee had rather have done, then the Swedes or Bremers should have had it) is faine to leave it as wee told you. Being thus gone cleere off; I wonder (saies hee to Major Leslyes Ancient, which he had prisoner with him) that your men follow me not? were I behinde them, as they are now behinde me, I would bring up their Reere for them, I would fetch them up, to die for it. His order was, that if any of his men stragled upon the march, but a musket shot, he was sure to have horse sent after him; and either kil'd or han∣ged: and this to prevent running away, or giving intelli∣gence to the enemie. A Swedish gar∣rison put into Stoade.Stoade being thus deserted, Colonell Creitbon a Germane was put into it with his weake Regiment: being not above 160 men, under 7 Ensignes. And the substance of these Re∣lations, concerning Todt and Pappenheim: (with some of those that follow) have I learned from divers Gentlemen present in the action: and I hope I have made right colle∣ctions from them. In the beginning of May, and whilest Pappenheim was a∣bout Stoade, came Duke Francis Albert of Saxon Lawen∣burg, with 2 weake Regiments (one of Horse and another
of Foot) to joyne with the Swedish about Boxtehude. And now after Pappenheims going from Stoade, went the Gene∣rall Todt away, and Wolff Hendrick Von Baudissin tooke the charge of the Armie, as Leiftenant Generall to Duke George of Lunenburg: whom in Todts place,Baudissin takes charge of the Armye, the King had made Generall. The Duke himselfe, was also now neere at hand with his forces: who joyned with Baudissin a little after this about Hanover and Hildesheim. His Commission was, to suc∣ceed Todt, to cleere the streames of the Elb and Weser; with the townes of the Lower Saxonie: towards the Weser, ther∣fore, (after Pappenheim) was the march directed. Baudissin advanced from about Stoade and Boxtehude, due southerly unto Bremersford: and from thence to the towne of Bremen upon the Weser, about 6 Westphalian leagues, or 30 English miles from Bremersford aforesaid. Thorow Bre∣men by the way, I heare that Dumeni was sent to take in Wildshusen in the land of Oldenburg some 15 or 16 English miles to the South West of Bremen. Thence the march lay along the Weser, into the Bishoprick of Ferden: within 2 English miles of which towne, the Army encamped. Here they staid about 3 weekes, or till the beginning of June. Pappenheim was not yet farre enough off, for them to goe faster: whom though they followed, to see that hee should take as few townes as might be, and not fall thorow Bruns∣wickland into Duringen: yet were they not over-hasty to come too neere him, for besides that they were too weake for him: they had not Cōmission (perchance) to fight with him. In this time was there a Bridge laid over the Weser; for that they thought to have besieged Nienborg. But this pur∣pose altered.He followes Pappenheim. Thence goes Baudissin along to the South East∣ward; betwixt the rivers of Weser and the Leine, which falls into Alre the river of Ferden. On this Leine, is the good towne of Hanover; about 40 English miles from Ferden. Hither, now comes the Duke of Lunenburg, with about 5000 men in 4 Regiments; whereof one of Horse and ano∣ther of Foot, were his owne: the other 2 of Foot, were
led by Petan and Marrad (or such like names) both Colo∣nells. So soone as the Duke of Lunenburg was comne to command in chiefe;Lunenburg comes to be Generall. the Duke of Saxon Lawenburg tooke occasion to leave the Armie, and went up (after a while) to the King of Sweden. To this Hanover, came Sir Iohn Cas∣well also; with Commission from the King of Sweden, to be Colonell over Sir Thomas Conweyes Regiment: the 5 co∣lours whereof, were by this time wasted away to three hundred. These were joyned (by and by) with Sir Frede∣ricke Hamiltons Regiment: which twoe from henceforth marched in one Brigade together. Thence goes the Army to the good towne of Hildesheim, the chiefe of the Bishopricke of that name: 5 houres jour∣ney on foot from Hanover, to the Southward, and upon the river Innerste, which falls into the Leine. About this, the Armie Quartered themselves in Dorps: till the towne had agreed with the Duke of Lunenburg. The agreement was soone made; for that the towne was very curteous to the Army.Hildesheim ac∣corded with him. The Lutherans in the towne, condiscended to give him 10000 Dollars contribution, and out of the Pa∣pists, were 30000 wrung, which they paid one part in plate and 2 in ready mony. With this contribution, had the whole Army a moneths pay, (or Lendings) part in plate and part in money: as the others gave it. The towne also entertai∣ned the 2 Lunenburgers Regiment of Petan and Marrad, into their Citie. They sent the Armie Provant Bread and Beere also: with many other courtesies. The day after the Army came to lie by the towne, did the Duke of Lunenberg take in Steurwold Castle, a good strong peece about an English mile to the North of Hildesheim Pap∣penheims leaguer was now within some few miles of Lu∣nenburgs; so that there were daily skirmishes betwixt com∣manded Partees of both Armies. And now let us fetch up Pappenheim: Hee in his march off, having beene about Ferden; sent unto Zell in the Dukedome of Lunenburg, where he heard the States of the Low Saxonie, to be then as∣sembled.
Part of their Consultations, then were; how to continue their warres for the cleering of their Circle from the Imperialists; to reconcile the differences betwixt the King of Denmarck and the Hamburgers; and to confirme the King of Swedens Commission unto the Duke of Lunen∣burg and Baudissin;Pappenheim sends to terri∣fie the States of the Lower Saxony. for the Generallship and Leiftenant-Ge∣nerallship of their Circle. To them Pappenheims message now was; An advice to returne unto the Emperors devoti∣on, and to breake off with Sweden and with Lunenburg: to relieve his Army, and to casheire their forces: otherwise, he would come upon them with his whole Army, and force them to it. But notwithstanding that they either sent him no answer or a denyall; he could not now stay to make good his threat∣nings: for that he was by the Elector of Cullen solicited, to make hast against Clein Iaacob the Landgrave of Hessens Leiftenant, who had lately taken Brilon and some other pla∣ces, in Cullens Dukedome of Westphalia: where Boenighau∣sen was too weake to resist him. At him, now goes Pappenheim: for now layes he a bridge over the Weser, which he still carryed about with him. Lea∣ving then the Count of Gronsfelt, with part of the Army a∣bout the Weser, neere Hamelen and those parts: himselfe with the residue, passes towards Hessen. where he first reco∣vers Munden upon the river Werra, from the Landgrave. Thence falls he like a storme of Haile and Lightning, into the Landgraviate:He falls into Hassia. with fire and sword destroying all be∣fore him. Up the river Werra hee goes; to Witzenhausen first, and then to Allen-Dorff: spoyling all in the way, and plundering the 2 townes. Then turnes he Westward, to∣wards the towne of Cassel; the place of residence for the Landgrave: whose Father (the good Prince Maurice) be∣ing dead about our Lady day before, and his active sonne William, now in Mourning; gave Pappenheim the easier o∣portunitie to take him unprovided. But he now seeing oc∣casion of more sorrow; changed his mourning Blacks, into
a black Corslet; and armes for resistance. The Boores of Hassia, (becomne halfe soldiers by these continued warres) they start up too, and stoppe up the passages of the Country. Pappenheims Vantcurriers making a shew of themselves be∣fore the very gates of Cassel; were there encountred with a Horse-Regiment of Colonell Dalwicks; that now fallyed out upon them. The Pappenheimers had made their brave, so neere to the very towne, that the Ordnance from the walls, were let flye amongst them. Here tis said, that Colo∣nell Lohn that brought them on, was taken prisoner, and some 60 Horsemen slaine upon the place:He is put off. the rest being faine to retreate from Dalwick; to whom they left one Cornet behinde them. Pappenheim (I heare) had promised the Archduchesse Isabella, that he would take this Cassel: but was faine now to goe without it: the towne being one of the strongest of all Germanie. All this had Pappenheim done, to make a diversion: and to oblige the Landgrave to recall Clein Iaacob, out of the Elector of Cullens countries of Paderborn and Westphalia. He had purposed, also, to have falne into Duringen; which at Allen-Dorff he was very neere unto: the Werra, East and West, dividing this Hessen and Duringen. But both these purposes, he was now diverted from: by a Currier received from the Count of Gronsfelt, concerning Lunenburgs and Baudissins falling into the lands of Brunswick & Hildesheim. This made him faces about to the right; and to goe towards Volckmarsen:After which having taken Volckmarsen, which the Landgraves forces had also in pos∣session. To relieve this, 14 Hassian troopes of Horse, being now sent; and having taken up their Quarters upon a woo∣die hill neer the towne, in the night time to slip into it: they were discovered and surprised by the Pappenheimers. Of these, were 200 said to be slaine, and as many prisoners: with the losse of 9 Ensignes, 5 Field-peeces, and all their baggage. The towne was yeelded presently upon it; after which, Pappenheim goes to Warburg upon the river Dymel and frontiers of Paderborn; 6 English miles to the North of
Volckmarsen. Hither now calls he those new forces, which had beene levyed for him in that Bishoprick: with the Counties of Lippe, and Ravensperg. Thence in company of the Count of Gronsfelt (for whom he had laid a bridge over the Weser, betwixt Hamelen and Hoxter) passes he the river Weser againe: with 55 Horse Cornets (say some) advan∣cing directly towards the Duke of Lunenburg;He goes a∣gainst the Duke of Lu∣nenburg. at that time about Hildesheim. About 4 or 6 English miles from this towne, and asmuch from Kalenberg, hee about mid June sits down with his Army, to expect the next benefit of occa∣sion. The Lunenburgers suspecting, that Pappenheim would shortly visite them in their Quarters: they after 4 or 5 dayes drew out of the villages, and entrenched upon the Southern side of Hildesheim. And indeed Pappenheim was not long a comming. For Lunenburg having sent the Swedish Colonel Laus Cag with 1400 men, to take in Kalenberg: Pappen∣heim displanted him. This towne is seated upon the river Leine,He relieves Kalenberg, about an houre and halfes going to the West of Hilde∣sheim. Whilest Cag was here busie about his Approaches, Pappenheim marcht, and came towards him: whereupon he was faine to breake up his siege, & make his Retreate to Hil∣desheim: so that the towne was not taken, till after Pappen∣heims going out of the Countrey. This was done, about the middle of June: at which time there were daily skir∣mishes betweene the Armies, the Lunenburgers looking e∣very day for Pappenheim to come to beate their Quarters. Now was the Army mustered, and reduced; some weake Colours broken, and put to make others stronger: divers Regiments were also put together, to make one compleate Brigade of. The whole Foot forces, were after this, drawn out in Battaglia:Lunenburgs Army drawne into Battaglia. where there were found 6 compleat Bri∣gades or Battaglions. These were marshald (as a Herald would say) 3, 2, and 1: or into a Van, a Reere, and a Reserve. In the Van or Front; were 3 Battalions. First the Duke of Lunenburgs owne Brigade, which had the Right Wing of
the three: Secondly Lohausens, which made the Battle: And thirdly Colonell Grave (or some such name) a Swede who had the left Wing. n the Reere, were onely 2 Brigades. The first which made the Right Wing, was of the Scottish nation; made up of the 3 weake Regiments of my Lord For∣besses, Colonell Monro's, and Colonell Robert Leslyes; who commanded it. In the left Wing of the Reere, was the Bri∣gade made up of the English and Scottish nations; under Sir Frederick Hamilton and Sir Iohn Caswell. The Reserve, or Brigade behinde all: was commanded by the Swedish Colo∣nell Cag aforesaid. All these, together with the Horse (not now drawn up) might really make up some 9000 men: which though they were able to march no more, yet they went for 16000.His numbers. This is the Arithmetick of the Warres: to use Substraction from the countrey people, and Multiplication of their owne numbers. June the twentie eighth being Thursday, the Alarme was brought into the Lunenburgers leaguer: Arme, Arme, Pap∣penheim is comming. That night he came, indeed, to the o∣ther side of Hildesheim. At this time, the English and Scot∣tish Brigade had the Watch, or Guard: and it was verily be∣leeved, hee would have fallen into the Trenches. But this he did not: for having cast up some Batteries, in the hill of Moritsberg; and mounted about 8 peeces, close by the town: he did no more then only give them 20 or 30 Canon shot without attēpting any further With al this, he did not much more hurt, then kill 2 hoggs in the street; as the townsmen confessed.Pappenheim affronting the towne of Hildesheim: But they having their Ordnance ready mounted; thundered so upon his pioners, and those about the Ord∣nance; that they killd him 40 or 50 people. Some affirme, that his men were that day in mutiny; and cryed for Gelt Gelt:falls off again. and that this was the reason he gave no more on; nei∣ther upon towne nor leaguer. However, he that night dis∣mounted his Canon, drew off his troopes; and marched un∣to Kalenberg: where for 5 or 6 dayes hee entrenched. All that time, were there daily skirmishes betwixt Comman∣ded
Partees, from both Armies: but this held no longer,and goes to Maestricht. for that Pappenheim being now envited to relieve Maestricht, made hast thitherward; and so utterly (for the time) left this Countrey: rasing his workes before Kalenberg. In Pappenheims absence; was the Count of Gronsfelt left with some few forces about Westphalia, on the other side the Weser:Gronsfelt left in Westphalia, who by lightning the garrisons in the Bishopricke of Paderborn, and those parts, came afterwards to have an Army too strong for Baudissins; after that Lunenburg was parted with him. But of this, by and by, in its order. Pap∣penheim directed his march to the South Westward; going first to Groenaw, 12 English miles from Hildesheim and due East of Hamelen. Hence goes he to Poll, on the Westphali∣an side of the Weser, 14 English miles South of Hamelen: and here having passed the Weser, he faces about to the left, all along the Weser; and so to the Rhine-ward. Pappenheims Armie being thus marcht out of Kalenberg; (at whom let us turne downe a leafe, till wee againe meet them) the Swedish had present notice of it: and some of their Horse fell into it, so soone as ever the Pappenheimers were out of it. Yea before Pappenheim himselfe was: who being something amorous, and staying in the towne after his Army upon such an occasion; might there have been ta∣ken prisoner by the Swedish: had they either knowne him, or of him The Duke of Lunenburg purposing to remove, gives order to dismantle Steurwold Castle; whereupon, Ju∣ly the twelfth he rises from about Hildesheim: and leaving his 2 Regiments in the towne,The Duke of Lunenburg be∣seiges Duder∣stat. he marches with the rest of the Army towards Duderstat. This towne, is in the very Southern corner of the land of Brunswick, in the little Coun∣trey of Eischfelt; about 50 English miles from Hildesheim. Pappenheim had left these troopes for the defence of it Of Breuners Regiment, 350: of Reinachers, 300: of Fursten∣bergs, 250: besides 200 new levyed men, and 400 Horse∣men. Before this towne, was much good service done on both sides: the Lunenburgers, laboured upon their Approa∣ches,
and the Besieged upon their sallyes; where many a brave man was killed. Among the rest was Francis Beton, Captaine Leiftenant to Sir Frederick Hamilton, slaine with a bullet of a sling peece, in the shoulder. The Besiegers at last, brought their lines almost cloase to the walls, and were readie to storme: which the townsmen (then in want and mutinie) July 24 prevented; by sending out a Drumme, gi∣ving hostages,Takes it. and entring into a Parlie. And thus was the towne yeelded: diverse of the soldiers, taking pay of the Duke of Lawenburg. Hence were all the Ordnance, victu∣alls and ammunition taken; and the workes slighted and dis∣mantled. After this, some strong Partees being sent abroad into the Country of Eischfelt; perswaded the Boores (some∣thing at that time in commotion) to goe home and be quiet. And thus by the end of July, was all that corner (excepting Eymbeck) betwixt Brunswickland, Duringen, and the We∣ser; reduced into good termes againe: whom, after Duke William of Saxon-Weymars departure; the comming of the Count of Pappenheim, (like a storme among the waves) had wrought high; and all to be-ruffled into a foame of fury. Those parts being well shut of Pappenheim; the Duke of Lunenburg being solicited by the Brunswickers: hath a de∣signe upon the strong towne of Wolfenbuttel. Hereupon, August the first, is the whole Army divided, for 2 severall wayes and expeditions: Baudissin with 3 Brigades making towards Paderborn; and the Generall Lunenburg with the other 3, towards Wolfenbuttel. For now they thought to have taken in all the Countrey,Lunenburg and Baudissin part the Army at once: and that so soone as euer they shewed but their Canon; any towne would yeeld, presently. But they were deceived. Lunenburg comming neere the towne, there were 2 weake Regiments of the Dukes and Townes of Brunswick, sent to joyne with him. One of these, were Dragooners; but not yet furnisht with horses: and the other was a Foot Regiment. Hither also came a Scottish Regiment under Colonell King: the Regi∣ment was not wholy there; for they were not above 7 or 800
men: but these that did come, were held as good men as a∣ny in the Army. By these, was Duke George made up some 7000 strong, Horse and Foot together, or neere upon it: and with these, beganne hee now to block up the towne. Three severall Quarters he laid about it: his owne, Sergeant-Major Lohausens, (which was something neere the towne) and the Brunswickers. They made neither Approaches nor attempts upon it; their purpose onely being, to block and starve it. The first night of their comming before it,The Duke blcking up Wolfenbuttel; the towne Horse by the Governor Baron Gleiners appoint∣ment; fell out to burne up the next Dorps and villages, and to spoile what they could; that their enemies might have no shelter nor benefit of them. It chanced, that one Erick (or George) Anderson, the King of Swedens Commissarie for the Armie, and Major Lohausen, seeing these Boutefeu's and fire-carryers, and supposing them to have beene their owne men; rode up to them, to chide them in the Kings name. The Commissary having thus runne his head into the noose, by this mistaking, and betrayed himselfe in the Kings name: was there taken prisoner in the Emperors name. Lo∣hausen escaped narrowly, and that by the meanes of his Pages discovering the toyle, they were gotten into. The Duke, the more to incommodate the towne; derived away the streame that drove their Watermills: but that would not doe it. It so fell out, that Leiftenant Generall Baudissin being a∣bout Paderborn, and finding himselfe too weake to encoun∣ter the Count of Gronsfelt; (whom hee then heard to be comming against him) wrote unto his Generall Lunenburg, to desire some aide from him. Hereupon is Lohausen sent, with those that lay in his Quarter: who comming too late to succour Baudissin; turned short in, and went into Goslar. Whilest he was gone from Wolfenbuttel, in the night Sep∣tember 24, are 1400 Horse sent from Gronsfelt; who thrust themselves into the Citie: the Duke of Lunenburg not be∣ing able to forbid them. They being thus gotten in; 1000
of them, and as many Foot of the garrison, falling out upon the Brunswickers Quarter: beate that, take 9 Ensignes, and send the men packing. And as much (to tell the troath) did they to Duke Georges Quarters:is beaten from it by Gronsfelt. for they turned him go∣ing too; and so finally freed their towne from blocking. Hereabouts (sometimes in the field, and sometimes in Quar∣ters in the townes,) lived the Duke of Lunenburg and his Army: till that in October after, they went to joyne with the Elector of Saxonie about Torgau: a little before the Battle of Lutzen. Turne wee now after Baudissin. We left him ready for his march from Duderstat (where the Army was divided) unto Paderborn. Before which, he sent a Colonel with his Regiment unto Eymbeck: a good towne some 26 English miles to the Northward.Baudissin sends to take in Eymbeck: Here was Colonell Goltz left Governor, by Pappenheim; who was re∣solved to give his General a good account of it. The Swedes thinking presently to have the towne yeelded, finde their hopes deceived: for that the Eymbeckers so farre resolved to resist; as that they tooke downe the spires of their stee∣ple and planted Sling peeces upon them:but his men are repulsed. with which to shoot downe into the Swedes Quarters. Thus were they faine to returne againe, with having onely seene the towne: which all that had seene it, could not. From Duderstat to Paderborn, lay Baudissins march to the Westward; and he had some 60 English miles thither: in which march, hee twice or thrice crossed over the Weser. August the twelfth, he marcht by the towne; and the next day turned he backe againe, and sate downe before it. The English and Scottish were at first sitting downe, assigned to an old Cloyster, where there was good wine and Being: but that being thought too good a Quarter for them; there was a tricke used to get them out of it.Baudissin besei∣ging Paderborn, An Alarm was brought to them in the night, and a command to rise and march: so that having had a scurvie journey of it all that night, and the next day till 4 a clock; there were 4 or 5 Trumpetters then sent after, to countermand them back a∣gaine:
after which they were put into a worse Quarter. The garrison was 1500 strong within, and Colonell West∣phalen was their Governor. The Approaches were from se∣verall Quarters begunne; and Baudissin with the Duches, was gotten within a stones cast of the walls: the English and Scottish being not much further off. It was wet wea∣ther now; and that much hindered the Besiegers: besides which, the towne garrison sallyed night and day, and shot very fiercely; especially upon the Dutches Quarters and Ap∣proaches. In these sallyes and defences, were thought to be lost neere a 1000 men of Baudissins: and yet that which worse was, the newes of the Count of Gronsfelts comming,is raysed by the newes of Gronsfelds com∣ming. was brought so fresh and truly into the leaguer; that the eighth day of the siege, and the 21 of this August, was Bau∣dissin enforced to levie his owne siege, and hasten back to Corberg; a day and halfes march from Paderborn Hither did the Army arrive the 23; and there staid 2 or 3 dayes, to get some contribution out of the countrey. Hence prepared they to remove the 26. Here did Bauditzen in the corne-fields, draw up his small Armie into Battaglia: hourely expecting when Gronsfelt would have marcht up to encounter him. At this time, was there a Hollands Ambas∣sador and a Swedish Commissarie, gone from Baudissins lea∣guer; who had like, unawares, to have beene taken prisoner by the Gronsfelders: but escaping back againe, they brought too sure newes unto Baudissin, that Gronsfeld was marching night and day to surprise him. And he, indeed, having light∣ned all the garrisons, that were furthest from the danger; and being re-enforced with some new Recreuts: had thus gotten up an Army too strong for Baudissin, and was now marching to have fallen upon him, so soone as he had heard of the Duke of Lunenburgs parting with him. But hee ad∣vanced no further at this time, till the Count of Pappen∣heim was comne up againe;Klein Iaacob coming to joyne with Haudissin; whom hee presently peec'd in withall. And at this time, had Klein Iaacob with 2 or 3000 Horse
and Dragooners, lately conjoyned himselfe with Baudissin: having in the way had some bickering with the Gronsfelders.hath some skirmishes with Gronsfeld. This little valiant man, is native (as I heare) of Mompelgart, upon the edge of Burgundie: which belongeth unto the Duke of Brunswick. He being joyned, Baudissin marcht presently towards Hoxter upon the Weser. Some 2 Dutch miles short and to the West of which, is there a Passe at the towne or Fleck of Brakel: which the Gronsfelders being already possessed of; there fell out some rencounters for the cleering of it. Klein Iaacob having the honour of the first charge, was put to the retreate: whereupon two Dutch Regiments of Horse that should have seconded him, ranne quite out of the field to Hoxter. Then came it to the Fins orBoth Armyes, (of the Swedes and Imperia∣lists) usually call these Fin∣landers Horse, by the name of Hackapells: and that from the word Ha∣kapell, which they use when they fall on. It signifies Knock them downe for they look for no Quarter, to give or take any. Hackapells turnes to goe on; of whom there being but 4 troopes, yet shewed they a farre better resolution. So well they seconded little Iaacob, that the fight was restored and the better gotten of it: the Gronsfelders, finally, being beaten from the Passe, and that with the losse of one Cornet, and the leaving of  field peeces behind them The Passe being thus cleered; Baudis∣sin with the Armie goes on to Hoxter: where he arryved a∣bout August the twentie seventh. This towne having at this time no forces in it, yeelded at the first summons. Here laid he a Bridge over the Weser: by which, after he had laine a while on the Westphalian side, (on which the towne standeth) he passed over to the other side: and as he had fortifyed the towne on the other side, so he now fortifyed a Camp or Workes on that Brunswic∣kers side: which he daily relieved from the towne and lea∣guer.Baudissin going to lye at Hox∣ter, About this Hoxter he lay, till the ninteenth of Sep∣tember following; upon which day by 8 a clock in the mor∣ning, Pappenheim (who was now returned from Maest∣richt and conjoyned with Gronsfelt:) first shewed his Vant∣curriers on the Westphalian side of Hoxter.is forced to dislodge by Pappenheime About 12000 men, was he beleeved to have then beene: which was al∣most double unto Bandissins number. Hee, therefore, first
of all, had commanded his Horse over the river, to the Dorps on the other side where the leaguer was: so that the Count of Pappenheim at his comming, found none there to doe any spoile upon. That day, went the Ordnance off on both sides, over the Weser: the towne wall was also guarded with the Scottish muskettiers of Sir Frederick Ha∣miltons Regiment, and 100 of Forbesses: as the letter of that Gentleman testifies, who sayes that hee that day comman∣ded upon the wall. Baudissin thus entertained the time; till he could send a∣way his Baggage and military impediments, before hand unto Munden: whither in the evening, was he enforced to make his retreate, having quitted both towne and leaguer. And indeed it was high time for him to doe so; for that the Weser was in 2 places fordable, above and below the town; by which had Pappenheim (as that night he would) have comne over; hee had cut the Swedish Armie all to peeces. Baudissin leaving some Dragooners behinde to break the Bridg, marcht off: whose departure was discovered because his Ordnāce were no more heard of. He, thus being unable to recover up to his Generall the D. of Lunenburg (Pappenheim being between) he was faine to retyre himselfe towards Munden, and the Landgrave of Hessens countrey. And this way did Pappenheim well know to follow him: so that ha∣ving that night, passed his Horse over the Weser; their Vant∣guard by the morning had overtaken Baudissin; and brought up his Reere for him. This was September the twentieth: by breake of day which morning, had his horse fetcht up those Swedish Horsemen that mannd the Reere,Pappenheim pursues Bau∣dissin, and skir∣mishes with him 20 miles together. to make good the Retreate to the Footmen. Baudissins advantage was, that he was alreadie entred into the woods: so that sending some muskettiers from the Van into the Reere; they from behinde the trees so galled the Pappenheimers, that their horse could not come up to charge the Army of the Foot forces. However, Pappenheim thus pursued, and Bau∣dissin in this posture retreated; for above 20 English miles
together; skirmishing all the way and sighting. Plainly, there was good service done on both sides, Pappenheim did very much spoile upon the Swedish; and cut off all the sicke and tyred men, that could not so fast follow. For all this, the Finnish Horse having the Reere, tooke 2 Cornets from the Pappenheimers: who still pursued, till Baudissin had gotten Munden on his backe; at which time he sounded the retreat, and gave it over. Most of the Swedish Dragooners paid for it; and so did Pappenheims men too: there being 1000, perchance slaine upon both parties. From Munden the 21 and 22 of September, did Baudis∣sin march to Cassel in Hassia: for other place he had not to goe unto. In this land crossing uncertainely up and downe, backwards and forwards:Baudissin falls into the land of Cullen: he tooke a resolution to fall into the Bishopricke of Cullen: his purpose being to make a diversion; and to oblige the Elector to recall Pappenheim. Now therfore advances he thorow the Dukedome of Berg, on to the Rhine: neere which, October 19, he takes in the strong Castle of Siburg, upon the East banck of it right a∣gainst Bonn. Then takes he in Lintz, and Andernach, on the other side of the Rhine: this last, being upon the very frontiers of Triers Countrey.taking townes and castles in it. Then winnes he Draconfelt, a very strong Castle upon a high hill: so named (say the Countrey people) from S. George his killing of the Dragon. The hill though very high, yet was it commanded by ano∣ther, hard by it; neither hills nor Castle, being defended as they should have beene. This service was done by the English and Scottish Brigade: and here was found good plenty of provisions. December the third, was the Armie mustered at Konickswinter: and December the tenth, were the English, Scottish, and Irish Brigade, reduced. December the eleventh, was Dutz taken, right against Cullen: but December the twelfth, they were by the Ordnance from the towne of Cullen; againe beaten out of it. But of these things slightly: because beyond my time of the Kings death; and for that I could come at no particular instructions.
There was a Iournall of these Actions, brought into this Land; but it was not my good fortune, nor my Readers, to light upon it. I confesse I might have enlarged my selfe out of Le Soldat Suedois: had I knowne where to have tru∣sted him. The Count of Pappenheim, having thus chased away Leif∣tenant Generall Baudissins part of the Army; turnes now a∣gainst Generall Lunenburgs Division, before Wolfenbuttel: for within 4 dayes of Baudissins retreate, were the 1400 Horse thrust into the towne; as hath beene before recited. And now turnes Pappenheim (who might doe what he plea∣sed) against the towne of Hildesheim: upon which, hee had before vowed to be revenged. Being set downe before the towne, he plants those 9 Ensignes which had beene taken from Lunenburg and the Brunswickers at Wolfenbuttel;Pappenheim be∣sieges Hilde∣sheim: upon one of his Batteries, next the towne: which he caused them to understand were Baudissins Colours; and that he had ut∣terly overthrowne him. This he did, to put the townsmen out of all hope, of being that way relieved. Here sate hee downe September 26: where battering the townsmen with bigge words, as well as the towne with his great Ord∣nance; he had already cow'd and daunted their courages: whereas their towne might have held out tenne times lon∣ger. Pappenheims Approaches and his Batteries; so terri∣bly puzled the honest Burgers; that they beganne to listen to a Parlie: faine would they have made their owne conditi∣ons; had not their enemie knowne well enough, hee had to deale with those that would yeeld to any thing. Pappen∣heim continuing stout, peremptorily made proffer to them of these 5 Conditions; which he vow'd he would not alter from. 1. First, that out of his meere favour and grace to them,and takes it by composi∣tion. he would at present burthen their towne with no greater a garrison, then of 2000: which according as he had occa∣sion, he would draw out and lighten. 2. That they should give him 200000 Dollars, present
contribution: in consideration whereof, he would give or∣der, that strict military discipline should be observed by his Soldiers: whom he would forbid plundering. 3. That the Lutheranes should still be left in the free ex∣ercise of their religion: and be enforced to alter nothing in it. 4. That the townsmen should have free leave, either to goe or stay; as they pleased. 5. That there should, for the time, be a cessation from shooting on both sides: and yet should he be suffered to worke on still in his Approaches, and to bring forward his Lines even to their very Ports; until such time as they should be set open to him. Upon these most dishonourable conditions, was the strong & excellently wel provided town of Hildesheim; the last day of September, yeelded up unto the Count of Pap∣penheim. You have here no mention, of any conditions for soldiers marching out; for indeed there was none, but the townes ordinary garrison now in it: for notwithstanding that the Duke of Lunenburg had left 2 of his Regiments there, at his going thence to Duderstat; yet had he drawne them out againe, at his late going to Wolfenbuttel. At this easie taking, of so mighty a strong, and well provided a Ci∣tie, Pappenheim himselfe could not choose but wonder: Hildesheim was much easier then Maestricht to him. Being master of it, he used it thereafter: Cowards (he knew) would endure any thing. Now gives he order, to have all the townsmens plate laid hold of; and carryed into the Statehouse: and that to make present downe payment, of the 200000 Rixe Dollars agreed upon. A very great quan∣tity of victualls and ammunition, he causes to bee taken out of their Magazines, which hee sent into Wolfenbuttel. This was the place, that he was most carefull of: for besides that it so curbed and awed the neighbour Brunswickers; it was a sure retreate for himselfe, upon all occasions.
Having setled things in these parts, where no businesse, and scarce a considerable enemie appeared: hee was in this beginning of October commanded from the Court of Vien∣na, to march up to his Generalissimo the Duke of Fridland.Pappenheim leaving the Count of Gronsfelt about the Weser, Leaving, therefore, the Count of Gronsfelt in these parts, to looke to the Duke of Lunenburg; and the Count of Me∣rode being sent, a little after this, towards Cullen, against Baudissin: himselfe with the greatest and best part of his Armie, being some 8000 reall men: marches up into Mis∣nia. His march lay altogether thorow Brunswickland, to the Southward: the rivers of Leine and Weser, being upon his right hand. Into Duringen he first comes; a rich, and enemy countrey to him. All the better; such rich and weake ene∣mies, had he a desire to deale withall.marches up himselfe, to joyne with Walenstein. Having passed by Duderstat and the Countrey of Eischvelt; the next good place to that, in the very edge of Duringen: is the great towne of Mulhausen; famous, sometimes, for the Diets of the Empire: Presenting his Grosse before this, together with the terror of the name of Pappenheim, and the exam∣ple of Hildesheim: it yeelds to pay him 80000 Dollars. Thence sends he 3 troopes of 150 Horse, unto Isenach; a stronger place, and more out of the danger: as being 15 English miles to the South of Mulhausen. Being denyed here, these Horsemen plunder Creutzberg in their returne; a little towne some 5 English miles to the North West of Isenach, towards Mulhausen. From Mulhausen he advances due Eastward unto Tho∣masbruck: and there he gets contribution. Thenstat,He fetches contribution out of the townes of Du∣ringen. an ope∣ner towne, some 11 miles further; hee causes to be summo∣ned: and whereas the townsmen could not so suddenly bring up the demanded contribution; the Pappenheimers hang up 3 of the chiefe Burgers upon a tree: and who being halfe dead, they cut downe againe. Gebesen, he also fetches money out of: and sends to the Citie of Erfurt, that if they
would have their Countrey townes spared, they should send him 20000 Dollars. Duke William Weymar lay then (sicke) in the towne, with some 3000 men: so that Erfurt not fearing their owne walls, ei∣ther sent him nothing; or else contented him with 2000 Dollars, raised out of their Boores, who were in the danger of being rifled. Hearing, now of Duke Bernards being already on this side the Duringer Waldt: he marches away to Bud∣stet; & so along to Mer∣seburg: as Page 110 of our Third Part, we have before told you.
THE ELECTOR OF SAXONIES PROCEE∣DINGS IN LUSATIA, AND SILESIA: After their former putting out of Bohemia by the Duke of Fridland. HOw the Saxon forces under Felt-Marshall Arnheim, had in the end of May 1632, beene forced out of Bohemia: you may please to take notice of, by Page 232, of our Se∣cond Part. The losse of this King∣dome, will not altogether appeare to be so dishonourable; if the mul∣titudes of Walenstein be conside∣red, which were 4 times their numbers. Since the match hath beene made more equally, the Saxons have not onely collard with the Walsteiners, out overthrowne them and have shewne the world, that the losse of Bohemia was not cowardice, so much as negligence in them yea in these after warres, have they given us a better account of their diligences.
The Imperia∣lists falling into Lusatia:Don Balthazar di Marradas being left chiefe comman∣der of the Militia in Bohemia, by his Generalissimo; now thinking the fortune of the warres to be turned, and the dice to runne all on their side: hopes of as good a hand of it in Lusatia, as Walenstein lately had in Bohemia. Whilest, therefore, his Generalissimo recovers Egra from the Saxons; Don Balthasar is sent to take Lusatia from that Elector also: so great a spite had Walenstein unto Saxonie. About June the sixth, does Don Balthasar first set out some troopes, to fall thorow Silesia, into the 6 townes in the Vpper Lusatia, which joynes East and West, with Silesia. First recover they Gorlitz upon the river Neiss which lies next unto Sile∣sia:take Luben and Bautzen, and the towne making no resistance, because not able; hath no wrong done to it. Then also take they Zittau, Lu∣ben, and what they pleased. The Elector of Saxonie perceiving, that if he suffered this, the warres would be brought thorow Lusatia into his Mis∣nia: calls his Army together at Dresden: and sends Arn∣heim with them into Lusatia. He came both time enough and strong enough, to rescue Bautzen; the chiefe Citie of the 6: before which, the Imperialists being newly setled, are faine to rise againe and retire the way they came into Silesia. Upon Luben now falls Arnheim, a little towne; but an indifferent strong one: this being kept by some 700 Imperialists,which are re∣covered by Arnheim. was taken by assault by the Saxons; and the most of the garrison put to the sword, for so long resisting. A ma∣ny of these 700, were Crabats, indeed, who having done too much mischiefe to looke for Quarter, became the more obstinate in the rendring. Now comes the Elector of Saxony unto Bautzen; to whom, whilest Arnheim and the Army repaired, other Imperialists came and reprised Luben; serving all the Saxons that would not turne to their partie, as Arnheim had before used their fellowes. About the 25 of June, the Elector re∣turnes to Dresden againe; and Arnheim (his great Orator) with him: at which time the Army is drawne to the Fron∣tiers,
and Colonell Loeser with his Foot Regiment and 500 Horse, is laid along the Elb betwixt Prin and Dresden;Some offers of a treaty, diverted. for the guard of the Electors Castle and person, against all sud∣den Cavalcadoes. The occasion for the Electors going home, was the comming of a kinde of Ambassador from Walen∣stein, with the noise of some peaceable Propositions. The King of Sweden, also, to prevent all such private parlies, had already dispatched the Palatine Augustus of Sultzbach (who dyed in the imployment) and one of the Counts of Solms; unto the Elector: who under the pretence of directing him in the Militia: should keepe him firme unto the Partie. The peace was turned into silence; for the Propositions were misliked: whereupon the Elector musters once againe within a league of Dresden: where he layes a Bridge over the Elb, and sends the second time into Lusatia. By this time was Colonell Buckersdorff.Mentioned Pag. 95, of our First part. already upon his march, with the Elector of Brandenburgs forces: who staid but for Major Generall Iames Magdugall: who being borne in Swe∣den of Scottish parents, is by the Swedish usually called Du∣balt, as he shall by us, hereafter) that was to bring on the Swedish, now taken out of the garrisons of Pomeren, and some others newly landed. These were to fall joyntly into Silesia, by the Oders side: so that Arnheim with them, was likely hereafter to be strong enough for the Imperialists. Upon Arnheims second comming, the Imperialists aban∣don Luben, and retire to other of their fellowes at Zittau; 4 English miles to the South of Luben Thither followes Arnheim, and there besieges them.Arnheim besei∣ging Zittau. They sally upon his Ap∣proaches: and he there kills above 100 of them. The Sa∣xons making themselves masters of a great Worke, before one of the Ports; by that get to lodge themselves in the Sub∣urb: and from thence they set the towne on fire, by hea∣ving in Hand-granadoes. Now did Don Balthasar set him∣selfe to relieve Zittau: and whilest he sent 2 Regiments to entertaine skirmish with the Saxons: 5 other troopes thrust themselves into the towne. After these, came Don Baltha∣sar
himselfe; with the Imperiall Armie: of whose approa∣ching Arnheim being aware:is forced to rise by Don Balthasar. raised with all speed his siege of Zittau, and retyred himselfe unto Hoierswerd upon the river Spree; 2 dayes march to the North of Zittau. This was the safest place for him: for that it was towards Silesia, which way Dubalt was now comming with his Armie. And now came Dubalt, indeed, & with him Prince Vlrick of Denmarke: upon whom the Duke of Saxonie was to be∣stow Colonell Bindthauffs Regiment; who had been slaine in the Battle of Leipsich: and not that onely, but his daugh∣ter too;Dubalt comes into Silesia, to joyne with Arnheim. as was beleeved. Dubalt and Buckersdorff, having mustered 9 or 10000 men at Franckford upon the Oder; ad∣vance upwards along the northern banck of that river, unto Great Glogaw; one of the best Cities of Silesia. It is a Duke∣dome: the title whereof had the Emperor lately bestowed upon Walenstein, for recovering Prague from the Duke of Saxonie. In the towne, was a garrison of 6 troopes of Horse, and tenne Foot Companies: over whom, was Colo∣nell Goetz left commander: he who sometimes burnt down Paswalck in Pomerania, as Page 59 of our First Part wee have told you. Dubalt (to be briefe) about the tenth of Au∣gust, forces both towne and Castle: and compells Goetz to retyre into the Cathedrall, which had a good Fort for the guard of it, and good Workes round about it: the Fort a∣lone, having some 5 or 6 peeces of Ordnance upon it. Goetz having done his devotion in this Church, and ha∣ving against his will beene made a Church-man: could have beene contented to have robbed the Church of himselfe, (now its Patrone,) and have stolne away over the Oder. But there was the Saxon Colonell Kalckstein enquartered, with his Regiment of Dragooners. Goetz thus put to it, was faine to treate upon conditions of rendring: for all which, he could obtaine no other but the selfe-same Arti∣cles, which his Generalissimo had sometimes given to those of Prague: which was, to march out only with their swords, without Armes, Drummes, or Colours,
Great Glogaw having thus changed her master,They take Great Glogaw, though Walenstein would not lay downe his Title: the Swedish and Saxish Armies, being able together to make up some 14 or 15000 men; thinke themselves strong enough to attempt upon the countrey. They first send to summon Sagan, ano∣ther of Walensteins Dukedomes, about 20 English miles to the West of Great Glogaw: which together with its neigh∣bours Neustedlen, Prunka, Sprottaw and Freystad, in that rich countrey, betwixt the Oder and the Bober; were faine to give entertainement and contribution unto the Swedish.and draw the neighbour townes to contribution. From hence, at this time, was Colonell Kalckstein with some 1800 Horse and Dragooners, sent towards Steinau up∣on the Southern banck of the Oder, about 18 English miles to the North East of great Glogaw aforesaid. This is the Passe betwixt Glogaw, and the citie Lignitz: and it hath a Bridge over the river, with a good Fort before it. There lay one Imperiall Cornet and 4 Companies of Dragooners,Steinau Fort taken by the Saxons. for the guard of it. This did Kalckstein surprise: with some boates in the Oder at this Bridge, with good Merchandise in them. Thence advances he Southwards towards Lignitz, which hath a particular Duke of his owne, a Lutheran. The place is betweene 2 small rivers, 10 miles from the Oder. Here a∣bouts, some forces making opposition; Kalckstein cut off betwixt 20 and 30 of them; and tooke 100 more; which be∣came his soldiers, Kalckstein having given advertisement to Arnheim and Dubalt of the posture of the towne; and that it depended upon it selfe, without having any Imperiall garrison in it: Arnheim presents his Armie before, and sends to know the Dukes pleasure, whether he pleased to be Im∣periall, or would declare himselfe Swedish?Lignitz both Duke and towne, accor∣ded with Arnheim. The Duke see∣ing an Army at hand, which were likely to call to him for an answere: professes himselfe their friend; and that he and his towne should give free passage and reliefe unto both Swedish and Saxon Armies. This profession, was the safe∣guard of the towne, and an advantage to the Protestant Ar∣mies:
some of which now going into the towne, and en∣quiring whither there were any of the enemies goods there or no: found 4000 paire of provant shooes there, and some other necessaries provided by Colonell Goetz for his Regi∣ment. Arnheim having onely lodged 1000 muskettiers in the towne; sends back the greatest part of his Armie towards great Glogaw;Arnheim ad∣vances against the Imperia∣lists, himselfe with some Cavalery & field peeces, advancing towards Goldberg: a Fleck some 14 English miles to the South of Lignitz: whereabouts some Imperialists were now assembled. Having notice upon his march, that they were retyred thence, and gone to Lemburg upon the river Bober, towards the frontiers of Lusatia; and that Don Balthasar was there himselfe with his whole forces: hee faces it about towards great Glogaw,retyres from them. to joyne againe with Dubalt, who was busied in fetching contribution out of the countrey. Here at Lemburg was the whole Imperiall Army, (which might be some 12000 strong) now rallyed together: there were the Counts of Mansfelt and Schaumburg, with Serge∣ant Major Generall Schaffgotzy, and the chiefe Officers of the Field. They having notice of the Duke of Lignitz being accorded with Arnheim, and of his retyring to Glogaw: apprehend a present resolution to fall upon Steinau Fort a∣gaine,Don Balthazar recovers Stei∣nau. so to cut off the Passe to Lignitz. This they effect for∣tunately enough: for that there was as little opposition there made against them, as had at the former taking beene against Kalckstein. This done, Don Balthasar thinkes to advance towards Great Glogaw: hoping to finde the Swe∣dish and Saxon Armies, not yet comne together, but busied about the Countrey; and so to fall in amongst their Quar∣ters. But therein they were deceived; for they had not ad∣vanc't one league & a half, but they had the Alarme brought home to them; how that both Arnheim and Dubalt were already marcht, and within a league of them. Vpon this
newes,Where the Swedes and Saxons coming upon them, Don Balthasar counter-marches to the Passe at Stei∣nau: the neerest & the safest strength, which he thereabouts had the command of. Behind this town and in it, they made Alt; and there sate they downe with their Army. Vpon Sa∣turday August the seaventeenth, came the Swedes and Sax∣ons before Steinau; and tooke up 2 severall Quarters before it. Dubalt with his Swedes and Brandenburgers, had a sandy hill before the enemyes Leaguer, and upon that, getting up 2 Batteryes and 20 peeces of Ordnance: he cruelly with murthering shot &c. thundered both upon the towne, and the Imperiall Leaguer. Arnheim, hee charges upon their Horse Quarters at the same time:first rout their Army: and Dubalts Cavalery falls upon another flanck of them: who being now much di∣stracted by the raking of Dubalts Ordnance thorow their Battalions; their Horsemen after a charge or two, tooke the rowt upon it, running Eastward towards Schweinitz, and Breslaw; some 4000 of their Foot, having thrust themselves into the Fort. In this fight, (as I find 2 severall writings for) were some 2000 Imperialists slaine: there might perchance be halfe so many; and hardly more, for that they stood not long enough to it. Chace there could be none; for that the Imperialists having first sent away their ordnance and bag∣gage towards Breslaw, tooke care enough to burne Steinau bridge behind them. Now does the Protestant Army lay seige to the Fort, and to them in it: which the next day Aug. nineteenth, they falto to batter upon. Tis written that Don Balthasar himself, with the Coūts of Schaumberg & Mansfeld, besides other Gran∣dees of the Army; were now within the Fort: but I thinke they had too much wit to coope up themselves in a Count∣ing-house. This ill lucke they had, that the fourth day of the seige, within the Fort, some of their powder tooke fire: and the towne fell into a flame by Dubalts shooting. Di∣vers therefore here miscarried; Schaffgotzi was shot in the shoulder with a musket, and the rest sav'd themselves ei∣ther by getting over the Oder, or by boates downe the
streame of it. Colonell Goetz was comming to their reliefe, but meeting the newes of All's lost,and then reco∣ver Steinau. he retyred to Schwei∣nitz. Don Balthasar and the rest recovered to the walls of Breslaw; whereabouts the Army beganne to come to a head againe. And thus upon Friday August the twentie fourth, was the Passe and Skonce of Steinau, againe recovered from the Imperialists. The day before this, was Kalckstein sent out with 10 Companies unto Neiumarckt; a pretty towne betwixt Stei∣nau and Breslaw:They take Nieumarckt, and 15 English miles from this latter. Kalckstein sending for the Magistrate, demands entrance: and he desiring respite; Kalckstein shewed him 4 peeces of Ordnance. That bunch of keyes opens all the gates, and let in 5 Companies to lie there in garrison.and Kant. With the other 5, went Kalckstein unto Kant; 8 English miles due South of of Breslaw: which durst not but seeme freely to admit of 3 other Companies. Thus was Breslaw blocked up, both upon the North East and South quarter of it. By Sunday noone August the twenty sixth, had the Im∣periall Army gotten up to Breslaw; before the Oder gate where they were marshalled. These reported, how shamefully they had beene beaten out of the Skonce, with the losse of some hundreds, as also of 6 peeces of Ordnance and Schaffgotzi's silver wagon, to the value of 2 tunne of gold in it. Towards evening, the Army was commanded to the long Bridge; over which they marched, and, upon a faire Triangular peece of ground betwixt the wood, the water, & the morasses; they encamped. A place of mighty advantage; wch had but one Avenue to it,And pursue the fleeing Imperialists unto Breslaw. by which it might be assaul∣ted. Here they gave out themselves to those of Breslaw, to be 14000: but 10000 or 11000 is a faire allowance. The next day came the Swedish and Saxish Vantguard unto Lissau, a town & Castle within English miles of Breslaw. Thence ad∣vanced they towards Breslaw, in pursuit of the Imperialists. Being comne within halfe an houres march; a Squadron of Crabats encountred them: who were presently put to
the retreate. Presently after, 300 of them turned backe a∣gaine; by which time 2 troopes of Swedish were comne in∣to the Sweinitz meddow called the Faire bird, within mus∣ket shot of Breslaw. Now the Crabats called to the citizens on the walls, to assist them by shooting at the Swedish: which they refused. Hereupon, 300 Crabats fell upon the 150 Swedish: whom they put to the retreate. These being reen∣forced, came on again; but the Crabats keeping close to the Sweinitz port,Some skir∣mishes being made by their vantcurriers, the Swedish durst come no neerer for feare the towne should have given fire upon them: for which indeed there was order given. Now the Swedish looking to get betweene the Crabats and their camp; they discovering it, made hast thitherward. They gone, there was a very faire Coach espyed by the Swedish: which offered to come into the Citie: and this they fell upon and tooke. There was one Leiftenant Colonell Kurtzsh in it, and 20000 Dollars. The towne shot at them; at which they shaking their heads, ranne away with the Bootie: not so much as offering to re∣turne a bullet againe. About 6 at night, the whole Swedish and Saxonian Army appeared; with their great Artillery onely, and no baggage. Being comne within half an houres march of the Imperiall Leaguer, they ranged themselves into Battaglia; advancing with their Canon playing before them. Six faire Regiments had order to attack the Imperialists in their Leaguer:the whole Ar∣my followes, and beates the Imperia∣lists over the Oder. which they, with bravery enough, maintayned for an houre and halfe; being then constrained to forsake that most advanta∣gious situation, to set fire upon their quarters; and in hast to retyre themselves, baggage, and ordnance, over the long Oder bridge: which in 3 places they put fire unto. This had they not done, they had been all undone: and all this (saith mine Author) I my selfe saw with mine owne eyes, from the toppe of St Elizabeths steeple. By 2 a clock on the Tuesday morning August 28; they fell too 't againe; the Swedish putting hard for it, to get over the river: which the other with all violence, forbad them.
About 10 a clock, Prince Henry Wentzel of Bernstad, the Ba∣ron Donaw, and 2 other privie Counsellors of the town, that were Militarie Commissaries to the Emperor; went up to the walls: to take view of the skirmish; Baron Donaw (in my hearing (sayes my Author) thus beganne to the other 3, I pray let us trie the cast of this peece of ordnance,A device of Baron Donaw's to make the Swedish fall foule with Breslaw. and let us see how farre shee will range her bullet: but the Counsell would not consent to it. Hee seeing none that contradicted: sent for an old Gunner, Imperially affected in the towne; and bids him to traverse the peece upon the Swedish, and give fire: which being done (himselfe having helpt the Gunner) he laughed heartily: rewarding the fellow with a Ducate and a thanke; saying This is the first, in Gods name; This said, he goes to his Coach, and so to the Counsell Chamber. The townsmen understanding of this shot, all in furie runne to their citie Colonell the Lord of Sawish: complaine to him of the Baron Donaw, and all to raile at him. The Colonell shutting his doores at them, they made Alarme upon it: in great multitudes flocking to the Captaines of their severall Wards first, and then to the Statehouse. There called they for the Baron, the new Gunner, theirThis Baron being a Protes∣tant first, and then an Aposta∣ta; was sent by the Emperor to Breslaw, to be his Commis∣sary, for the de∣forming (refor∣ming I should have said) of the Protestant Churches in Si∣lesia. Being in∣solent in his office, and be∣comne odious; he would tell the people he did that to save them. Saviour: and doe the Magistrate what he could with perswasions, they would there stay his out-comming. About one or 2 a clock, comes a Ritmaster with 3 troopes of Horse from the Swedish Ar∣my, to demand the townsmens purpose in that peece of ordnance: which had killed a Leiftenant Colonels horse under him, and 3 soldiers. The Magistrate desiring respite for his answere, till the morning; the Ritmaster fairely re∣tyred: some townsmen first telling him, that it was Baron Donaw's doing. By this, were the townsmen starck mad, resolving to have torne the Baron in peeces; had not 2 Lords privately brought him off in their Coach; set him privately downe behinde the Cathedrall: whence at midnight hee was shifted out of the Citie, unto his owne Castle of War∣renberg: 32 English miles to the North East of Breslaw: whence he escaped to Vienna. Hence was he sent into Poland
where he raised some thousands of Cosacks, with whom he returned into Silesia. By this mans indiscretion, had this fairest City of Silesia like to have beene undone; by his offering the first act of ho∣stilitie against the Swedish: who were al this day in hot skir∣mish with the Imperialists. Wednesday morning, they be∣gann againe; the fight continuing till 8 a clock: at which time was shooting given over on both sides. The reason was, for that the Imperialists, at that instant, retyred to a place called Clarworder, not farre from the Oder: leaving some troopes to maintaine the Bridge; notwithstanding.The Imperia∣lists retyre a little. Towards evening, the Imperialists sent divers of their best baggage-wagons, with 4 great peeces of Ordnance, (each drawne by 20 or 24 Horses) and a goodly Mortar, to be ta∣ken into Breslaw: for feare (as the messengers said) least the Imperiall Army in their retreate, should be forced to leave them to their enemies. The gunnes were taken in; for that the citie could answere for them: they having lent more peeces then those, unto the Emperor. As for the Baggage, they would not meddle with it: for feare the sheltering of enemies goods, should occasion a quarrell with the Swedes and Saxons: who had yet done no injury to the townsmen. That night was there command given thorow the Citie, that every Burger upon pain of losing his Freedome; should meet the next morning at the Statehouse. There and then, were these 5 demands made, from Don Balthasar and the Imperiall Army. 1. Whether the Citie would stand firme to the Empe∣ror? 2. And serve his Armie with victualls and Ammunition? 3. In case the Army should not be able to maintaine it, (as they feared) against their enemies: whether they might have the favour to retreate into the Citie? 4. Whether they would grant passage to the Army, tho∣row the towne? 5. And if their Armie were put to the retreate, whether
the Citie would favour them with their Ordnance from the walls, and so afford them their best assistance? The Cities answere was. 1. For the Emperor, they were resolved, as they were obliged, to live and die. 2. Victualls and Ammunition for the Armie, they could not spare them: because that little they had there was need enough of, in so populous a Citie. And yet if they could be assured, how their towne should be maintained against the Swedes & Saxons; they would afford whatever they found their Magazines able to spare them. 3. As for the retreate of the Armie into their Citie; that might they by no meanes afford them. 4. As for leave of marching thorow their Citie; that could they not imagine how it could bee convenient either for the towne or Armie: for that seeing they must likewise afford the same favour to the Swedish; they should thereby bring their citie into a most eminent danger. 5. As for favouring them with their Ordnance from the walls, until they should have made their retreate far enough; that were farre lesse expedient for them. And therefore they would intreate the Army to consider, how much in∣convenience must needs be drawne upon the City by it. For whereas the Swedish had hitherto offered no hostility; either unto the City or any belonging to it; they had no reason to provoke them first of all: which if they should doe, they should never be able to give an account for it to posteritie. This courtesie they hoped for from the Imperiall Army; that if the Swedish should offer to assault their Citie, they would thē be ready to relieve it. The towne having thus handsomly declined, rather then denyed these demands: the Imperiall Officers all abashed at it, repaired to their leaguer. About noone the same Thursday, came there a letter unto the Magistrates, from the Generall Dubalt: full of good language and profession. Therein was the sincerity of his
Majestie of Swedens purposes expressed:Dubalt writes to the City. full of desire to re∣lieve all the oppressed; concluding all, with a desire of vi∣ctualls, for thankes and money. Victuals were denyed: for all which, those of the Suburbs came into the towne to buy: which they plentifully went and sold unto the Swedish. Now come the soldiers to St. Nicholas gate: and close under that, they bring their wagons to be sheltred. The most part of the Imperiall Armie in the meane time, forsooke their owne leaguer, and retyred into that Suburb on the other side of Breslaw called Elbing: the Swedish in the meane time continuing their assault upon those left at the Oder, & strive to force their passage over it. Friday the last of August, be∣times in the morning, the rest of the Imperiall Army brake up, and came before the Oder gate; and so retyred into the said Suburb. Here staid they not full 2 houres:The Imperia∣lists flee. but in great hast retyred themselves, some North Eastward to Namstau; others North Westward to Auris: whence twas thought they would have gone out of the countrey. About noone the same day, came the Swedish rushing into the said Sub∣urb of Elbing, having by boates gotten over the Oder. Here made they havock of whatsoever the Imperialists had left behinde them, but doing no wrong unto any of the Breslaw∣ers. Just then was newes brought, that other Swedish had slaine 200 Imperialists, taken Colonell Rotstall prisoner, with 300 horsemen more, at Olaw bridge; 16 English miles to the South East of Breslaw which were there set to main∣taine the Passe over the river Olaw, which falleth into the Oder at Breslaw. Saturday morning September the first, the Citizens of Breslaw were to meet in the Statehouse: and there to de∣clare themselves, whether they would admit the Swedish and Saxon Armies into their towne: make an accord with them: or otherwise runne the hazzard of hostilitie? And thus farre my Breslaw Author, hath beene my Intelligencer. Those that had taken Rostall at Olaw bridge aforesaid; were of Arnheims Armie: who whilest Dubalt was thus
employed about Breslaw; was with the most of his owne Saxon forces, other where taken up in the Countrey. And hee having understood that the Imperialists had another Bridge over the Oder, right against Olaw aforesaid: thither∣ward goes hee about August the twentie sixth, to force that; and that way to come at the Imperialists.Arnheims Acti∣ons. His having done this; forced the Imperialists so soone to quit their Breslaw leaguer, as hath beene before said. Hearing this Bridge to be maintained by Colonell Rotstall and 400 muskettiers; hither sends he Leiftenant Colonell Dahn with 600 Horse and 500 muskettiers.He getts the passe at Olaw: Now whiles Rotstall stayes too long to burne downe the Bridge, there was he taken and his men defeated. August the 29, comes Arnheim to repaire the bridge; and Colonell Eckstadt with 15 troopes of Horse, 300 muskettiers, and 2 peeces of Ordnance, is sent to hin∣der him. To stave off him, is Leiftenant Colonell Schidner sent, with some of Kalcksteins Dragooners: by whom is Eckstadt forced to retreate into a wood, a little from the Oder. August 31 comes Sergeant-Major-Generall Schaff∣gotzi to helpe Eckstadt hiding himselfe in the said wood, to be ready to cut the Saxons in peeces, so soone as ever they should have passed over. That night Arnheim having fi∣nisht his bridge, was ready to have put over his forces: but hearing in time of Schaffgotzi's comming,followes, forbeares it. All that day & night, had the Saxon Ordnance so thunderd into the wood; that so soone as ever Schaffgotzi heard Arnheims bridge finished (whom he suspected to have beene strong enough to have adventured over) he with all hast tooke the rout at it, leaving 2 peeces behind him. August 2 at night,and over∣throws Schaff∣gotzi: Arnheim passes the bridge; sending Dhan and Enhu∣sen with 450. Horse to fetch up and entertain the Imperia∣lists; whilst himselfe should be comne up to second him. There were 1200 Imperialists said to be slaine, the rest put to flight, and Eckstadt with many officers taken. This was in the way betwixt the Oder and Namstaw towne, 13 miles from the Oder. Hence did Schaffgotzi retire to Kolis∣chen:
and his men to their fellowes about Opelen. Arnheim had now his way open unto Brieg; the Duke whereof is a Calvinist, and elder brother unto the Duke of Lignitz. To him, does Arnheim propound the example of his brother:Accords with the Duke of Brieg: which, after a while, the Duke followes. His towne is upon the Southerne banck of the Oder 24 English miles to the South East of Breslaw: and his conditions were, to take an oath to the King of Sweden, and to the 2 Electors of Saxe and Brandenburg. Arnheim pursuing his fortune; brings the countrey as he goes, under contribution: fetches in the 2 fayre townes of Grotka and Monsterberg, South of Brieg: and September 18. takes Niesse 24 miles to the South of the O∣der. Thence goes he over the Oder at Brieg; and comes up∣on that part of the Imperiall Armie, then assembled at Ope∣len upon the North of the Oder. From thence he ferrets them, to the other side of the river againe;Driues the Imperialists over the Oder bak againe; even to the townes of Troppa and Iegersdorff, upon the frontiers of Mo¦ravia. Heither, in October, was he to have marched; a pa∣nick feare now every where possessing the Imperialists: but at this instant did Walstein make such foule work in Mis∣nia,and is recal∣led into Mis∣nia. that the Elector was faine to send for his Arnheim home againe And there he staid with his Master, till after the Bat∣tell of Lutzen. Dubalt is all this time in treatie with Breslaw: a towne worthy to be waited upon. In the meane time, his people lose no oportunitie, in taking the townes about the Coun∣trey. Towards the end of September, a Ritmaster of his, with 8 Horsemen onely in his Company, gets by a wile in∣to the Baron of Donaw's very strong Castle of Wartenburg:Dubalts men surprise War∣tenburg: who being in, found meanes and oportunitie to let in their fellowes. October the third, did Breslaw accord with Du∣balt: yeelding to maintaine those 600 Foot, and 1000 Horsemen which he already had about the Cathedrall. This Church, is (it seemes) in the Suburbs: and there had Du∣balts men beene enquartered, all the last moneth; having fortifyed it and themselves round about it. Dubalt would
gladly have put 2 Companies into the towne; but of that, the Citizens excused themselves; as having entertained no strange garrison,and he brings Breslaw to ac∣cord with him these 300 yeares. The getting of this faire towne, was a great worke; and done handsomely. And now did Dubalt dispose his people into their winter-quar∣ters, in the villages round about it: so that what was done after this, were but slighter rencounters, and by Comman∣ded Partees. And thus have the Saxons with helpe of the Swedes and Brandenburgers;Putting his Army after that, into their Winter Quar∣ters. made the reckoning in Silesia, to pay the last yeares shot in Bohemia. And so leave I the warres in those parts, in a most prosperous condition for the Saxe and Swedish. God send peace every where: which were wee at home enough sensible of the blessing of; we would in thankefulnesse acknowledge it, to be more glori∣ous then Victorie: and the most happy subject in the world, for a noble History. And to this place for a conclusion, have I reserved the Character of his Majestie the King of Bohemia: and that be∣cause I have mentioned his death page 76. of this Fourth Part, which was November the 19. and for that I was am∣bitions to finish this Part, as I did the former, and to crowne it with a King. THE CHARACTER of the King of BOHEMIA. LEast our latter ages should want exam∣ples, what God can doe to great men, or how hee sometimes exercises good men; was this Prince set up: even Hee, the greatest of the best Religion, of all Germany. The life of this good Prince, was a strangely
counterchanged mixture of fortunes; a Tablet, of di∣vers countenances. His entry into the Electorate, was glorious; his beginnings, happy; his vertues, re∣spectfull; and such as deservedly attracted all the eyes & courtship of Germany, upon him. The great allyances which he had contracted, his high paren∣tage; his mighty Supportments, both within Ger∣many, and without it; the considerable eminency of his House, his Estate, and the body of confederates, principally depending upon his directions; together with the hopefulnesse, that other Princes and Peo∣ples mo, had of him: these were the faire eminen∣cies that differenced him from other Princes; and these were the procurers of his election to the Crowne of Bohemia. An election, indeed, banefull, (for the time) to his person and House; yea and to the whole repose of Germany: all which, ever since that time, hath felt the dire effects of the lately-pre∣ceding Comet: as having beene deepely imbroyl'd in an universall warre; which hath over-run, not the better part alone, but al the 4. corners of it. A warre, that hath for these 14. long yeares, continued with such stomack fulnesse on both sides; and beene in∣famed with the ravages & overturnings of so great a part of the Estates and Provinces of the Empire; as are like to carry the markes and scarres of it, yet for a many ages. And notwithstanding that this Prince, both by himselfe and the potentest of his Friends; hath left no honorable meanes unattempted, for the quench∣ing of this Skarre-fire: yet hath he found such ob∣stinate and fatal oppositions, from time to time; such rigide stiffenesses, in the contrary party; yea such a
counter-bandings from day to day; and those en∣creased too, upon the fortunatenesse of their good successes: that all the mediations of the greatest Kings, have been rejected; and the Prince himselfe bandited for these many yeares, yea and dispoiled of his possessions. And yet againe, when he saw himself just ready to take Seisin againe of his own countrey, and to bid farewell to his afflictions: even then, just then, found he his hower-glasse runne out, and his period concluded upon. The calamity of this Prince, hath beene taken up for a Theme by a many licentious tongues, and unli∣censed pennes; to declaime against him: they groun∣ding themselves upon the successe and bad conditi∣on of his affayres, to make judgement of his mana∣ging thē: taking leave most outragiously to detract from him, with an unmanerly and ful-mouthd liber∣ty. Those that neereliest before knew him; confesse him, indeed, to have beene unfortunate: but could not devise, which way he came to deserve it: yea they beleeve withall, that there is not a spirit to be found, how well mounted and fortified soever it be; that could have borne the Crosse with a better tem∣pered moderation, then he had done his sufferings: & doe admire that patience of his, which was indeed most eminently remarkable in him. Most true it is, that a many excellent vertues of this Prince, have not onely beene over-clouded, but have also beene oppressed, by the unlucky weightinesse of his infeli∣cities: and yet have so many others broke forth, and beamd out from him; as might have beene sufficient to have dazeled the owle-eyes of Envy, and bungd up the mouths of that malignitie and mis-speaking;
with which he hath continually beene tongue-smit∣ten and persecuted. His House, his Extraction, his Kinred, his Allyances; together with his personall good qualities, even these ought of duty to commaund forbearance, in those Satyricall and mercenary spi∣rits; who are still provided of Common places, both for Panegyricks and Invectives: which they make serve their turnes according to the times; to make shew of their owne queint wits, even with dis∣paraging of great Princes: whose highnesse of Birth alone, should be enough to make such people know their distances. There is an honour due to Princes, of what side soever they be: yea and an Apologie for this very Gentleman: who though too too grossely undervalued he were, in these his misfortunes; yet was ever well respected by those that best knew him, even in the lowest declination of his disgraces. Highly honoured he was by a most ample testimo∣ny of that solide judgemented Prince, the King of Sweden, upon the offer of variety of occasions: who was sometimes enforced to moderate that thirst and pursuite of military honour in him; and other∣while professed himselfe to bee so inveigled (as it were) by the sweetnesse of his Conversation, as to engage his promise to him (many a time) to r'impa∣triate and re-estate him againe in his place of ho∣nour; with a request to him to manage his life so, as might be best for the improvement of the publick, & the comfort of his friends, and those about him. The Subjects of this good Prince, may have plen∣tifull matter of consolation, from that most heroi∣call, and masculine spirited Princesse, his Queene; and from that sweet and numerous Issue, which he
hath left behinde him: which promises them an en∣tire affranchisement, one day againe; and the reset∣ling of a Family so many wayes considerable, as is one of the first and ancient liest descended, of all Eu∣rope. A Queene, who for her beautie, and vertues; demerits to be made no lesse, then what shee was borne, or Crowned: and who for the unexampled bea∣ring of these varied afflictions, deserves to be made more, then there are yet Titles for. An Issue so faire; and for their numbers, such a blessing: as were not onely prepared by God, for a present Comfort to their widowed Mother: but, (which their owne ex∣cellent towardlinesse, gives pregnant hopes of) for the raising of their owne faire Family againe; and engrafting the Palatine branches, into most of the great Houses of the Empire. The Reader (I hope) will not take it amisse from me, that I have done that right, unto so great a Prince; which in all duty and conscience I felt my selfe obliged to. A Prince, who hath these many yeares beene the Butt of misfortunes, and of the in∣solencies and insultations, which, of course, follow upon them. And this have I done, so much the more confidently; for that this Prince hath had the ho∣nour of allyance, not onely with other great Kings; but also with mine own gracious Soveraigne. Tru∣ly all persons of honour, ought of right to esteeme themselves interessed, in the chary conservation of the honours of their equalls; and however other∣wise diversly affected, yet should they all joyne to rescew one another from malignity; and to palliate their disgraces, with their very Crownes & Purples. FINIS.
The Index to the fourth Part. A. ALsatia, what Towns the Imperialists had in it, before Horns comming. 39 Horne comes into it. 47 Altringer falls into Hessen. 81 Arnheym cleeres Lusatia. 157 Reysed from Zittaw, by Don Balthazar. 158 — Advances against the Jm∣perialists. 160 — Pursues the Imperialists from Olau bridge. 168 Chases them to Meravia. 169 Recalled into Saxony. ibid. B. BAnnier besieges Magden∣burg. 108 — His feare of Pappenheym. 110 — His men cut off 300. Jm∣perialists. 118 Ioynes with Duke William. 119 Sent for unto the King. 123 Baudissin takes charge of Todes Army. 137 — Left with halfe the Army by the Duke of Lunenburg. 145 In vaine besieges . 147 Beates the Gronffeers at Bra∣kel. 148 Reysed from Hoxter by Pap∣penheym. 148 Retreates into Hessen-land. 149 Falls into Cullen-land. 150 Benfelt, the siege of it. 55 — Taken. 64 Made over to the Strasbur∣gers. 66 Claymed by Lorraine. 67 Bernard Weymar, drawes out the Army in the Palatinate, against the Spanish. 4 — goes to relieve Spiers. 10 — strengthens Manheym and Wormbs. 11 — goes to the K. of Swed. 12 Discontented, and the causes of it. 28 Brandenburgers come with Dubalt into Silesia. 158 Bremen Bishop rysess 106 Bremersford taken. 133 Breslaw the great fight before it. 163 Refuses to succor the Jmperi∣alists. 166 Accords with Dubalt 170 Bretten in the Palatinate ta∣ken by Montecuculi. 40 Brieg Duke, accords with Arnheym. Brunswick Duke, thrust out of his own Town by Tilly. 116 Bulach maintaines Benfelt. 57
C. CAssel, Pappenheym put off from it. 140 Coblentz, the Spaniards thrust a Garison into it. 29 The Rhynegrave takes it from them. 31 Colmar taken by Horne. 74 Commissary Generall of the Cavallery, what Office. 6,7 Cordova, to come with a secōd Army into the Palatinate. 2 Cannot get ouer the Mosel. 11.14 Cullen Elector his feare of Horn. 32 — obteynes a Neutrality. 34 D. DAmitz taken. 104 Diete of Hamborow, 97 Director of the Warre, the K. of Swedens Title. 87 Donaw Baron, his tricke used at Breslaw. 164 Don Balthasar, reysc Arn∣heym from Zittaw. 157 Recovers Steinau. 160 Defeated at Steinau. 161 and before Breslaw 167 Flees before Arnheym. 162 Dubalt comes into Silesia. 157 Routes the Jmperialists at Steinau. 161 and again before Breslaw 167 His demaunds to Breslaw 167 Brings it to accord. 170 Duderstat taken by Lunen∣burg. 144 E. Emden Count, leads a Spanish Army into ye Palatinate. 2 Denyes Spiers unto Mar∣quesse William. 13 Forced to quit it. 14 Emperor sicke. 54 — his second son a Bishop. 80 — His missing the Bishoprick of Magdenburg, was the de∣struction of that City. 107 English Regiment joynes with Todt. 127 English and Scottish Regiments besiege Boxtchude. 128 F. FRanckendale rendred. 76 French, come with an Ar∣my towards Triers. 15 Enter it. 16 Fulda Abby accords with the Landgrave. 80 Furstenberg Count, his poore estate. 53 G. GOttingen taken by Duke William. 122 Goslar taken by Duke William. 122 Glogaw taken by Arnheym. Grburg taken by Horn. 33
Gram treates about yielding of Wismar. 102 Yeilds it. 105 Taken Prisoner for breaking his conditions. 105 Gronsfelt left by Pappenheym about the Wesr. 143 Relieves Wolffenbuttle. 146 Reyses Baudissin from Pader∣born. 147 Beaten from the Passe of Bra∣kel. 148 Left againe about the Weser. 153 Gustavi-Stadt, the new Towne built by the King of Sweden at Mentz. 11 H. HAckapells, a Nickname given to the Finlanders 148 Hagenaw yielded to the Swe∣dish. 75 Hamburgers refuse to joyne with their neighbor Princes in a league. 102 Hamelen Towne to whom it belongeth. 120 Pappenheym thereabouts. 119 Haubald made Governour of Manheym. 11 He takes Stolhoven. 48 and Obernheim. 50 Hildesheim Towne accords with Lunenburg. 138 Taken by Pappenheym. 151 Hirschfeld, the Emperors Son is Abbot of it. 80 Accords with the Landgrave 8 Horn, comes to command the Army in the Palatinate. 19 Advances into Triers Coun∣try. 30 Takes Trarbach and Grafen∣burg. 33 — and Veldentz. 34 Returnes into the Palati∣nate. 4 Reyses the siege of Wise∣loch. 43 Defeates 1000. Imperiall Horse. 45 Pursues Monte Cuculi. 45 Obteynes passage of the Strasburgers. 46 Helps the Wurtemburgers to take Offenburg. 51 Besieges Benfel. 55 — Takes it. 64 Takes Schletstat. 71 And Colmar. 74 Marches up into Bavaria 77 Hornburg, Todt, encamps at it. 128 Pappenheym offers to force it. 133 I. IEsuites of Schletstat, Conju∣rers and Poysoners. 68 K. KAlckstein takes Steinau Fort. 159
and Nowmarckt & Kant. 162 King of Bohemia comes to Franckford. 62 Dyes. 76 King of Denmarke, some jea∣lousies betweene him and the K. of Sweden reconci∣led. 136 Kirchberg taken by the Spanish 2 recovered. 26 Klein Jaacob joynes with Bau∣dissin. 147 skirmishes with Gronsfeld. 148 Knitlingen in the Palatinate burnt by Monte Cuculi. 41 L. LAndgrave of Hessen his Storie. 78 — he cleeres Hirschfeld. 80 — takes Fritzlar. 81 Cleeres his Land of the Jm∣perialists. 82 Advances into Paderborn. 83 — and into Westphalia. 84 His Letters to the Elector of Cullen. 85 Paderborn and Westphalia ac∣corded with him. 88, 89 He goes to the King of Swe∣den. 90 Leopold Archduke, dyes. 54 Lesly Sir Alexander, comes to take charge of Todes Army. 128 — His Regiment out off by by Pappenheym. 132 Letters of Tilly to the Prote∣stants of the Lower-Saxony. 98 Letters of Count Furstenberg. 53 of the Landgrave to Cullen. 85 Lignitz Duke accords with Arnheym. 159 Lower Saxony, the actions in it. 91 Lucas Cagro, defeated. 6 Lunenburg Duke, made Gene∣rall in place of Todt. 138 — his Army. 141 Takes Duderstat. 144 Devides the Army and goes to Wulfenbuttle. 145 Beaten up. 146 Lusatia, the actions in it. 155 M. MAgdenburg the Story of it. 106 The L. Marquesse Hamilton and Banier besiege it. 107 Brought to a Treaty. 109 Relieved by Pappenheym. 110 Forsaken by him, and entred by the Swedish. 115 Markelsheim taken by the Rhynegrave. 67 Marquesse Hamilton lands in Germany. 107 His way to Magdenburg. ibid Vnwilling to goe from the siege of Magdenburg. 110 Refuses to flee over the Passe to Banier. 110
Goes up to the K. of Sweden. 116 Marquesse William of Baden, demands Spiers from the Spaniards, and is denyed. 13 Left in Spiers. 15 Forsakes it. 35 Ioynes with Ossa and Mon∣te Cuculi. 39 Made generall in Alsatia. 52 Metternich Governour of Heidelberg. 25 the chiefe man in the Pala∣tinate. ibid. besieges Wiseloch. 42 Levies his owne siege. 43 Monte Cuculi comes into Al∣satia. 39 Seases the Strasburgers Townes. 40 Advāces into ye Palatinate. 40 His designe upon Spiers. 41 Burnes Knitlingen. 41 Two of his Regiments de∣feated by Horn. 44 He flees over the Rhyne. 45 Ioynes with Metternichs 3. Regiments in Alsatia. 46 Goes into Bavaria. 52 N. NEwburg Duke, treates a Neutrality. 34 O. OFfenburg takē by Horn. 51 Olan bridge wonne by Arnheym. 168 Ortenburg Castle surrendred to Horn. 52 Ossa busie in Alsatia. 1 the good order he had taken in Wurtenburgland. 37 & 38 R'allees with Baden and Monte Cuculi. 39 Summons Strasburg. 40 avoyds out of Alsatia. 52 Oxenstiern Chancellor pursues the Spaniards of the Palati∣nate. 17 Concludes a Neutrality with the Elector of Cullen. 34 Goes with an Army to the King. 35 P. PAderborn, the Landgraue actions in it. 83, &c. He summons the Gentry, 88 Palatinate, the Spaniards come into it. 2 Forsake it. 17 The State they left it in. 22 &c Pappenheym, set out by the Leaguers. 111 How he made up his Army. 111. 112 Enters Magdenburg. 113 Forsakes it. 114 Goes into Lunenburg-lād. 117 Passes the Weser. 118 Recalled by his Cōmissary. 119 Cuts off 1500. Swedish. 121 His craftinesse. ibid. Comes into ye field again. 124 Marches into Bremerlād. 126 Relieves Stoade. 134 Cuts off Lesly's Regimēt. ib. Offers to force Todts army. 133 Forsakes Stoade. 134 Thought to correspond with Denmarks. 135
Falls into Hassia. 539 goes backe against the Swe∣dish. 141 Affronts thē by Hildesheim. 142 Goes to Maestricht. 143 Puts Baudissin to the retreit. 149 Takes Hildesheim. 151 Marches up to Walenstein. 153 Takes Towns in Duringen. 154 P. PHilip de Sylva, Generall of the Spanish in the Palati∣nate. 152 Returnes into the Low Coū∣tryes. 16 Protestants how miserably u∣sed by the Leaguers, &c. 85 Protestant Princes of the Low∣er Saxonie, their Dyet and Levies. 97, 101 R Rhinegraue goes against the Spaniards. 4 Defeats 1400. of them 6 Pursues them going out of the Palatinate. 18, 19, &c. Beaten of from Kirckberg. 26 Takes Coblentz. 31 His Name and Familie. 56 Blocks Schletstat. 60 Takes Markesheim. 67 Left by Horn in Altaia. 77 Rstck rendred to the Duke of Mecklengburg 92 S SChafgotzi ouerthrowne by Arnheim 168 Schletstat blocked vp. 60 taken by Horn. 71 The Iesuites there, Conin∣rers. 68 Scottish Regiments ioyne with Todt. 121 Silesia, the Actions in it. 158 Simmern takē by the Spanish. 3 recouered. 26 Spaniards come with an Army into the Palatinate. 2 Theyr Story. Jbid. Loose 5. Cornets to the Swedish. 3 —1400. of them defeatted 6 They aduance towards Spi∣res. 8 Don Philip de Sylua ioynes with them. 8 They take Spiers. 9 Forsake it 14 Returne out of the Palati∣nate. 16 The Rhinegraue forces them to the Retreat. 18, 19 Theyr Losses. 21 They put a Garrison into Coblentz. 29 Forsake Triers. 31 Spiers taken by the Spaniards. 9 Forsaken by them. 14 Marquesse William takes charge of it. 15 His garison forsakes it. 35 Entred by the Swedish. 36
Steinau Fort taken by the Sax∣ons. 159 Reprised by the Impialists. 160 Recouered by Dubalt. 161 Stoade blockt vp by Todt. 130 releiued by Pappenheim. 132 Entred by Todt. 136 Stolhanshe helpes to beate the Spanish. 5 Strasburg refuses Ossa. 40 Gives passage to Horn. 64 Engaged in the siege of Ben∣felt. 57 T. TIlly writes to the Prote∣stants of the Lower-Sax∣ony. 98 Todt takes Wismar. 10 — goes to Lunenburg. 126 Encamps at Hornburg. 128 Takes Boxtehude. 130 Sent for frō the Army. 128 But stayes upon another oc∣casion. 129 Goes from the Army. Trarbach taken by Horn. 33 Tryers Elector, entertaines the French. 16 Troubles the Spanish in their retreat. 21 Differences betwixt him and the Palatine. 23 Well pleased with the Swe∣dish. 33 The Spaniards forsake his Country. 31 Horn advances into his Coū∣try. 30 V. VJrmōt yields up Rostock. 9 — in vaine besieges Hal∣berstat. 96 Pistoll'd at Cullen. 124 Ʋolckmarsen taken by Pappen∣heym. 140 W. VVArtenburg Castle sur∣prised by 9. of Du∣balts horsemen. 169 Westphalia Dukedome, the Landgraves actions in it. 84 The Conditions offered it, by him. 88 Williā Weymar, comes against Pappenheym. 119 Takes Goslar. 122 and Goettingen. 123 Go backe to the King. ibid Wiseloch the siege of it. 42 Wismar, the continuation of the siege of it. 102 It Treates. 103 yielded to Todt. 105 Wurtemburg Dukedome, the Orders sent by the K. to it. 36 What Towns the Jmperialists had in it. 37. 39 The Administrator armes. 39 — causes Monte Cuculi to retyre. 41 Ioynes with Horn. 47
His actions in cleering his owne Country. 49 He besieges Offenburg in Al∣satia. 51 Takes Townes about the Bodensee. 62 Z. ZElla-Lunenburg Duke, cō∣pounds craftily with Pappenheym. 127 FINIS.
Place this betwixt pag. 150. & 151. Our Cutter hath made the Ordnance too long, and to lye too farre into the River. The Hole also marked with R, should have beene on the right hand of the Bridge. diagram
