24095 99841933 6553
Now goeth ye Iudgment ouer this world: now is ye prince of this world cast out: Iohn 2: Now is ye Saluation ye por and ye Kingdom becom our gods and ye Might his Christs. Revet. 2 D.
Mirabilia opera Dei: Certaine wonderfull Works of God which hapned to H. N. even from his youth: and how the God of Heaven hath united himself with him, and raised up his gracious Word in him, and how he hath chosen and sent him to be a Minister of his gracious Word▪ Published by Tobias a Fellow Elder with H. N. in the Houshold of Love. Translated out of Base Almain. Now come hither and behold the works of the Lord, Ps. 46 66. Know ye that the Lord leadeth his Saints wonderfully, Ps. 4. a. And take heed that ye do not despise the works of the Lord, lest there come upon you that which is said in the Prophets. Behold, ye despisers and wonder and perish, for I do a work in your days, which you will in no wise believe though a man declare it unto you, Hab. 1. a. Acts 13. b.
THE PREFACE. Tobias (with H. N. a fellow Minister of the gracious Word of the Lord) wisheth to all lovers of Truth, Salvation and Peace, in Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. FOrasmuch as I Tobias, a fellow El∣der with the Oldest Elders in the Houshold of Love, have alwayes been present with H. N. (in all what the Lord hath revealed un∣to him) and now in this day of the Love of Iesus Christ, am impulsed of the Holy Ghost, to declare and to publish among the children of men, under the obedience of the love of the
Truth of certain wonderful works of God, which befell H. N. and us the oldest Elders in the house of Love, and that I also know, that H. N. (Gods chosen Minister) and his ministration of the gracious Word of the Lord hath been disorderly rejected, and censured with several false judgements, by many false hearts, and good-thinking wise-ones, by many false Christians, and unsent Teachers, or Preachers, and by some unfaithfull and opinionated self-seekers, who are turned away from us. And that the Godly Testimonies of the holy Spirit of the Love of Iesus Christ (published by H. N. were by many disgracefully contemned and reproached, (as if God had neither chosen nor sent H. N. to be a Minister of his holy and gracious Word, and as if the holy Spirit of the Love of Iesus Christ were an un∣clean thing.) So have I for Gods cause, and in regard of the Love which I bear and have to all mens salvation, I could not omit to declare to all God-fearing-understandings and Lovers of the Truth, (That they may believe the Truth, understand the Godly Testimonies of the holy Spirit of Love, and may be preserved in these dangerous times) and to witnesse the Truth before them, how and in what manner the Lord, the living God of Heaven hath chosen H. N. from his
youth, to the ministration of his holy and gracious word, and hath sent him thereun∣to in his old age of the holy and godly under∣standing through the holy Spirit of his Love. 2 For the holy Spirit of the Truth of God, and of the Love of Iesus Christ was alwayes powerfully abiding upon H. N. (in all his mi∣nistrations) after that the Lord had anoint∣ed himEsay 61. a. with the same spirit, and hath through the same spirit raised and sent him for to declare to all people, the trueEsay 58. a. 4 sd. 1. a. re∣pentance for their sinnes, and to draw and bring in (through his ministration of the ho∣ly and gracious Word) all those that love Gods Truth, and the accomplishment of the Godlinesse in Iesus Christ, and hunger and thirst after righteousnesseMat. 9. a. to the peacea∣ble Love and his Godly service for the pre∣servation of them all in the Godlinesse) that all they which H. N. and our fellowship may have their communion in Iesus Christ, and may not be seduced in these dangerous times, (in which if it were possible the ve∣ry electMat. 24. b. Act. 7. g. Heb. 10. c. should be seduced) with the unprofitable prating of the false hearts and unsent Teachers or Preachers (which al∣wayes oppose the Truth of God;2 Thes.  and blas∣pheme against the holy Spirit) nor through any depraved hearts and Apostates, (who continually accuse with falshood the true
Ministers of the gracious word, and endea∣vour with all their power to abolish the same ministration,) nor should be kept of or held back, from our most holy Service of the gracious word under the obedience of the Love, to their condemnation. 3 And therefore, and for the Truth of Gods cause, and for to declare the know∣ledge that the Promises of God the Father, and of the Lord Iesus ChristDeut 10. 30. Mat. 22. d. Rom. 13 b. 1 Cor. 13. b. 1  1. a. be fullfilled and established in the Love. So is there al∣so now presently in this same day of the Love (in plain words) to all understanding, and before all good-willing hearts unto the righteousnesse through H. N. testified and published, what that very thing which the Gracious Word of the Lord, (which the Lord now hath raised up according to his Promises) doth require of all men. 4 And for to witness and publish the truth that the Lord hath chosen and sent H. N. therefore have I (through the holy Spirit of the Love of Iesus Christ) [plain∣ly] testified and declared the sending of H. N. also certaine wonderfull workes of God, which from his youth hapned unto him from the living God, That all those which read or hear all the Godly Te∣stimonies of our writings, may believe the Truth with a single heart, to have a right
regard to the true Promises of the Father, and of the Sonne (our Lord Iesus Christ) and of the accomplishing of the same, and may hope upon the fulfilling of the requiring of the gracious word and of his service of Love; aud rightly and in Truth follow and imitate our Lord Iesus Christ (in the saving word of his holy Spirit of Love)Mat. 16. c. 1 Pet. 2. c. and might be of one mind with us and our communialtie of the SaintsIohn 17. c. in the Love of our Lord Iesus 1 Cor. 1. a. . Cor. 13. b. into all unity and peace. 5 And likewise that through the same declaration the enemies of H. N. together with all the opposers and reprochers of the Truth, and of the holy Spirit of the Love of Iesus Christ may see and know, That they have villified and contemned not onely H. N. a choseu servannt of God, but also God the Father (the builder of our house of Love) and the Lord Iesus Christ (our Phi∣sician and Saviour) and the holy Ghost (the inheritance of our spiritual and heavenly goods)Math. 1. and have pulled upon their own necks, the wrath and judgement of their condemnation, That they with humble hearts) might bring forth real fruits of re∣pentance. 6 For it is not unknown or uncertaine to us that H. N. doth testifie out of the Truth of God and his gracious word; and that the
office of the ministration of the gracious Word is imposed and intrusted to him (through1 Cor. 3. b. 15. a. God's (grace) to administer, for the Lord hath chosen him thereunto from his youth, to witness the same Testimonies of the Truth of God, And to administer Gods holy and gracious word, and to manifest his heavenly works, and to declare upon the earth now in these last times (under the obedience of the love of Iesus Christ) Gods Truth and upright being, and the acom∣plishment of the Godlinesse in Iesus Christ. 7 Thus in this election by the living God: H. N. hath declared on earth to this present day, from the1 Cor. 13. b. 2 Cor. 3. b. uncovered face of God and of Christ) Gods real Truth, and the requi∣ring of his upright righteousnesse, together with his righteous Judgement and the fulfil∣ling of the Godlinesse in Iesus Christ. 8 Now whether this be believed, or not believed, however he hath revealed the the same out of Gods true light & eternal life) & in manifest declaration brought it to light in this holy day of the love of God and Christ. 9 And the same day of the love of God and of Christ (which is come unto us from Gods grace) is the newest or last day of which long agoe the Prophets of God, and the Evangelists of Iesus Christ have foretold and published, and is the dayActs 17. c. which God
hath appointed or ordained, for to judge on the same the whole circuit of the Earth with righeousnesse. 10 For on the same day of the Love of God and of ChristRom. . a. 2 hes. 1. 2 b. shall all unbelievers and disobedient ones to the gracious Word of the Lord, and all evil surmisers towards the Ministers thereof, together with all op∣posers of H. N. and blasphemers of the holy Spirit of the Love of Iesus Christ, be1 Cor. 4. re∣vealed, andMat. 25. d. Jude 1. b. judged, and according to their works shall receive their reward. 11 Therefore take warning by this declara∣tion of mine, all ye people which love the truth of Iesus Christ, that you in no wise oppose neither the gracious Word of God, nor his chosen servant H. N. because God the Father with his Son Iesus Christ, dwelleth and liveth perfectlyPerfectly, that is, withall that concerns the Diety of Iesus Christ, or is of one being therewith. in H. N. in the heavenly being, and hath anointed him with the holy Spirit of God and of (s) Iesus Christ,Esay 61. a. and that no man without the fellowship of H. N. or without the obedience of the requiring of his doctrine, can be brought or gathered to the true living God, nor to his Sonne Iesus Christ, nor united with the same good being. 12 Behold out of a very hearty love, which I have to all your preservations in the godlinesse, am I presently in this day of the Love, impulsed and forced, (through the
holy Spirit of the love of Iesus Christ) to make the same known before all your understand∣ings, and to declare unto you how the cal∣ling H. N. came to passe by the living God, and how he was chosen of the same God to Administration of his holy and and graci∣ous word, under the obedience of the love of Iesus Christ. 13 And also to testifie unto you some my∣steries Mat. 13. b. of the Kingdome of the God of heavens, and of the heavenly revelations and workings of God, which were revealed and shewed to H. N. by the living God, out of his heavenly being, even from the youth of H. N. 14 The Lord grant unto you all mercy and his Graee that in the hearing of these Testimonies, your hearts may not be offend∣ed nor be hardened against the TruthHeb. 3. b. of the same Testimonies, but that yee may hear them humbly, receive and accept of them in all thanksgiving to God for his grace, be well minded to the holy and gracious word of the Lord and his service of the Love to your preservation in the Godlinesse, and may enter into the requiring of the same obediently. Amen, So be it. Take it to heart.
Certaine wonderfull Workes of God, which befel H N. from his youth. CHAP. I. IN the eighth year of the age of H. N. (in the days of Maximilian the first, being made Roman Emperour by vertue or power of the Electoral Princes of the Roman Empire and the German Nati∣on) it fell out on an Evening in a Win∣ter season, That the Father of H. N. ex∣horted his Family, and instructing them (with many words,) That they should fear God,Iob. 4. a. and to give praise and thanks unto him for the grace he bestowed on man. 2 The same time, The Lord ope∣ned the mouth of the childe H. N. and touched his lips and tongue, and with this the childe spake to his Father, and said. Instruct me, O my Father,
what is that singular Grace bestowed on us, for which we ought to give praise and thanks to God. 3 When the child had asked this questi∣of his Father, The Father looked on the child, and wondered that the child should aske him so earnestly, and an∣swearing the child said to him. 4▪ O my sonne, doest thou aske what that especial grace is which God hath be∣stowed on us, and for which we are bound to give praise and thanks to him? The same you read daily in the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, and is set forth unto us dayly in the service of the Masse, and often also and abundantly is attest∣ed by Preaching, how that God the Fa∣ther by reason of Adams sinne; (whereby we all became the childrenRom 5. b. ph. 2. a. of death and damnation,) caused his deare Sonne (Jesus Christ) to suffer the ignomi∣nious sa. 5. b. Wisd. 2. c. Mat. 27. Phil. 2. a. death on the Crosse, and that thus Jesus Christ hath (born) the sins of Adam, satisfied for the same on the Crosse, and delivered us from that sinne, (into which Adam did fall) hath reconciled us to his FatherRom. 5. b. Col. 2. b. and hath set up again the sincere righteoness, and the trueTim. 1. b. life of Godliness, and so all is found and restored againe that was lost
by Adam, & that same is joyned againEzek. 34. c. & made whole which through Adam was broken and wounded: And this is that sin∣gular Grace, which God, bestowed on us, to the laud and praise of his great Power. 5 Then said the child, O my Father, I doe read indeed of the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, and I heare it daily testified in Sermons, that God the Fa∣ther hath bestowed on us his great mer∣cy, and that his beloved Sonne Jesus Christ hath suffered the ignominious death of the Crosse by reason of sinneMat. 27. Rom. 5. a. 1 Pet. 2. c. but I finde not according to Truth, that the sinne is amended in us, nor that the true righteousnessGen. 1. e. 2. b. (wherein Adam was created and placed) is restored in us or set up again. 6 Then said the Father, Oh my sonne, what I have told you about the grace of God shewed to us through Jesus Christ, you need not to doubt of it, beleeve the same in simpleness of heart, and, that it all is come to passe as I have told you. 7 Then said the child, O my Father I make no question of the mercy of God, which is come unto us through Je∣sus Christ, and all that which is preached to us of Christ, and his satisfaction for
the sinne, as that he (through the death on the Crosse) hath prepared and obtein∣ed for usMat. 1, c. Eph. 5. c. the Salvation from the Sinne, I believe also firmely, That Je∣sus Christ (for to bring us againe in all Godlinesse to God his father)1 Pet 2. c. is gone before us inMat. 16. c. 1 Pet. 2. c. that death of his Crosse, and hath opened to us the way and passage to the Kingdom of God his Fa∣ther, and to the everlasting life, AndJohn 14. a. hath prepared the way for us, that we might obtein the same. 8 For I understand (out of the preach∣ing of Christ,) That Jesus Christ is preached unto us (in his Gospel) to such an end, that we should beleeve in him,John 3. b. and should obedientlyHeb. 5. b. 12. a 1 Pet. 1. 5. follow him in the same Passeover of his sufferings till unto the fulfilling of our Godlinesse, in the same Jesus Christ, and then also, that we (through Jesus Christ) should obteine againe the inheritance of our God, the uprightEphes. 1. . righteousnesse toge∣ther with the spiritual & heavenly goods, the (which as it stands to me in my un∣derstanding) is the same Grace and Mercy of God, which is come unto us through Jesus Christ: So I cannot conceive, that it is any otherwise brought again, or shall be restored: which was lost through the
fall of Adam, or that we have missed by reason of Adams sinne. 9 For as I have heard preached in the Church, that the Worke of God, which he did make in the beginning, and also the manGen. 1. c. Wisd. 2. c. Ecclus 17. a. when he created him, was perfect, between which perfect worke of God, there came in a breach or rent through the sinneGen. 3. b. whereby the man al∣so is turn'd off from his God, and is whollyEphes. 4. b. estranged from his upright manly estate, and from the union with his God. 10 Now if all this same shall be resto∣red again, then that which was torn and broken, must beEzech. 34. c. joyned together again, and the man, with all that God hath made and ordained, (even as it was in the beginning) must be set againe in his uprightGen. 1. c. forme and order, which we see now plainly and perceive, that the same is not yet come to passe, or accom∣plished in us; Therefore it appeareth alto∣gether (in my understanding,) That God for the bringing again of the man into his upright being, & that the repentance or satisfaction for our sins, must have another performance, and fulfilling, then many men suppose or conceive. 11 Then the Father mervailed much
at the distinct expressions of the child, and said, O my son, hold they self iu silence, lest you dig too deep into the works of God. I will relate the matter to our spiritually learned (which are our advisers)or instructers they shall well instruct thee therein (to the belt) for I my selfe, doe not understand this bu∣siness, nor thou neither as I suppose, and besides, thou art yet too much young to be able to comprehend such things, there∣fore let us hearken to our Advisers, and simply beleeve them herein. 12 Then said the child, Father it is well, let it be so, I submit my selfe al∣wayes to your authority, and so in that evening) there was no more talke of it. 13 But all the night after the Father was much perplexed with the sayings of his young sonne. And (being of himselfe plaine and simple) went the next day to the Minorie-brethren to his Confessor (for he thought in his judgement that these brethren of the Minories (which were called also the Observators) were the most holy and most judicious in the God∣ly things and able to give good instructi∣ons to him and his sonne) and intima∣ted to his Confessor (confiding in him most) the whole businesse of his sonne.
14 And his Confessor gave to him this answer, That he should bring his sonne to him, then he would take to him∣selfe a good brother, and would resolve them of all these matters. 15 The Father did according to the di∣rection of his Confessor, and at a con∣venient time he went with his young sonne H. N. to the Minorie-brethren, That both of them (the Father and the child) might heare and understand the right instruction, (of what the child had spoken) and therein might be * pacifi∣ed. CHAP. II. NOw when both of these came to the Confessor of the Father of H. N, then the Confessor looked on the child, which was very young and lit∣tle, and said to the Father, Is that the lad thou told'st me of. That hath such strange whimses in his head? Surely, he is to childish yet, as to trouble himself with such things as you told me of. Thou shouldest of right (with a rod) cha∣stise him from the same, & neither to hear nor answer him in his sayings, for it is not otherwise then the madness of a child.
2 Then said the Child, hold there Sir, why do you speak forth such words? It is true that I am yet young and childish, and am still under the Rod and Disci∣pline of my Father, and stand under his doctrine and instruction, And if my Fa∣ther (at his convenient time) doth instruct me, And I cannot conceive or compre∣hend (in my apprehension of my Fathers saying, should it not be granted or per∣mitted me to aske for the sense and true meaning thereof? 3 When the Confessor observed the Lad's so modestly answeared him, he be∣gan to be somewhat moved in himself; And answered then to the child more dis∣creetly, and said, yea, in truth my sonne it behoveth, you indeed, to aske what the right understanding is, but you are yet much too young and too small of capa∣city, to search into theSp. 9. e. Rom. 11. deep profound mysteries of the godly things, or to fa∣thom them. 4 Then said the Child because I am young and of a small understanding in the mysteries of divine matters, there∣fore am I the more inclined for that rea∣son to aske, and not to search thereafter out of my owne power, but desire to be
instructed and taught therein (from my youth) of my Elders and Teachers. 5 Then said the Confessor it is well done my sonue if you keepe there, but me thinketh, that thou makest a doubt, (as thy father informeth me) of the satisfaction of Christ, for the transgression of Adam and for all our sins. 6 Then said the childe: no Sir, thereof I doubt not: but my saying is, that I do plainly see,Rom 6. 8. a. That the satisfaction in Christ for our redemption or deliverance from the sinue, (for which Christ suffer∣ed death on the CrosseRom. 6. a. Phil 2. a. Heb. 5. 9. b. 12. a. and made satis∣faction) is not performed as yet in us, and that we have not followed Christ in his Passeover to his Father, and if I per∣eeive this, and find it to be so. Is it ill done that I akse whether the satisfaction or the upright fruits of repentance be still owing, or howLuke 1. 8. Eph. 1. a. Col. 1. b. we shall be delivered from the sinnes, and be brought to the up∣right righteousnesse? 7 And when I inquiring after this, and likewise have and hope that it be performed in us, and that the righteousness in which Adam was created and set into shall be re∣stored unto us, and that we also shall be delivered from the fall and transgressi∣on of Adam, this is (I hope) no doubt of
Christ satisfaction, but I may iustly doubt of our satisfaction; for I conceive in my understandings, that we are still indebted to God concerning our satisfacti∣on in Jesus Christ. 8 Then said the Confessor, O my sonne thou runnest out too far with thy young understanding, for after that, thou mayest not search so deepe, nor no man else, but simply beleeve all that concerneth Christ and our salvation. 9 Then said the child, well Sir, I will simply beleeve all as you say, yet must I aske somthing of thee out of my simplici∣cy, & desire for the love of Jesus Christ, that thou wouldest answer to my simple que∣stion. 10 Then said the Confessor, well my sonne, aske and I will answer thee. 11 Then said the child. if Adam had li∣ved simply according to the command∣ments of God, and had not falne off from God, & had not transgressed the com∣mand of God, should then he, and we, have lived, in the sinne or in the righteousnes? 12 The Confessor said, Adam and we all should have lived eternally in the right∣eousness, and no sin norGen. 2. a. Sap. 1. b. death should have reigned over us. 13 Furthermore the child asked and
said, when God created Heaven and Earth and all that is thereinGen. 1. c. 2. a and the man al∣so, whom he made after his owne Image, did not God then make all chings good and perfect, and came it not to passe as he would have it? 14 The Confessor said O, yea, my son, Gen. 1. 2. what ever God hath made, he made it well, and good, and all what God said andPsal. 32. b. 140. a. John 1. a. commanded to be, it stood there present: and all things had their progresse or forthgoing towards perfection, according as God would have it, and even so the man in his upright being. 15 Then said the child, Seeing the man was created from the begining, good, and upright, andGen. 1. a. Sap. 1. b. 2. c. to live eternally in Gods upright righteousnesse, and that he re∣mained not steadfast therein. And that God (for to reduce the man to his right estate againe) hath given up his beloved Son Jesus Christ to the death of the Crosse1 Joh. 3. b. Rom. 8. d. and so (through the death of the Crosse of Jesus Christ to re-establish Act 1. a. 3 c. the man and all that was fallen, in his right state and condition; Therefore all must then beLuke 24. c. restored to the same, in his right form, (through Jesus Christ and his death of the Crosse) even as it was from the begining, the transgression
of Adam must be mended, and we must beHeb. 9. b. justified or cleansed from the sinne, and must beMt 19. d. John 3 b. 1 Cor. 15. 4. borne again unto the I∣mage of God. 16 Behold Sir, in my understanding I conceive it soe, and that we ought to take heed to this mercy of GodCor. 6. a. Gal. 6. a. and to follow our Lord Jesus Christ (in hisMat. 16. c. 1 Pet. 2. c. death of the Crosse) and to be wholy in∣corporated into him (with hisRom. 6. a. Phil. 2. . Col. 2. b. like death) where through in us also, theRom. 6. b. sinne of Adam (and our sinne) becomes amended and blotted out in us from the death of sinne, her1 Cor. 15. 2 Tim. 1. b. Heb. 2. b. power and domini∣on taken away, and the upright righte∣ousnesse & simplicity, and the eternal life (to which Adam was createdGen. 2. b. and set, and was ordained to live therein eternal∣ly) be raised up again. 17 Now if all (as you say) should be fulfilled or satisfied, then, as I conceive, nothing should be wanting in Gods work nor in mans upright life, and obe∣dience to God, and all things must be re∣stored to his right forme. And seeing there is yet defect therein, thereupon I aske where doth the fault lie, (in God or in us) that the worke of God and his will is not performed in all, on us and in us, and that not the righteousnesse and the good
life of Jesus Christ, but the sinne and the death reigneth and hath dominion over us, for me thinks, that the right ground of this (whereof we now speak) is not yet by many entred into, nor rightly un∣derstood, and that the most necessary part of our Godlinesse in Jesus Christ, and the Mat. 16. a. 19. a. 1 Pet. 2. c. 4. a. Heb. b. 12. a. obedience which God requireth of us, through his Son Jesus Christ, is still to be performed by us and in us. CHAP. III. WHen the Confessor had heard all these words from the young child, he could answer nothing to it, but said to his fellow brother that was pre∣sent and had heard all the speech of the child, I know not what I shall say of the child and his sayings, I know not whe∣ther it be childishnesse or Godly under∣standing it speaketh of. 2 Then said his fellow brother, surely thou art bereaved of thy wit, doest thou not perceive that it is foolery and child∣ishnesse the boy speaketh, and I wonder also very much why thou exchangest so many words about it, for if men of judg∣ment were present, they would say that you were more childish then the boy him∣selfe,
because thou hearest and answerest him in all his foolish words whereas they are meerly unprofitable things, after which he diggeth and searcheth, and should with these matters (if he be let a∣lone) bring himselfe into weaknesse of minde. Therefore it is most needfull that he be punished for these things, and make him to forget them. This he spake that the Father and the childe should heare and spake it so loud, to that end, that neither the Father nor the childe should observe, that they were not able to answer to the childs que∣stions or informe him therein, and so these two fellow brethren tooke the childe be∣tween them, and in the presence of his Fa∣ther rebuked the childe with many hard words, and among the rest, the Confessor said to the childe, do'st thou know what evill thou hast committed, that thou trou∣blest thy selfe with the matters of the my∣steries of God? the child said no Sir. 4 Then said the Confessor, O my son, thou hast nigh committed the greatest sin that man can do on Earth; for thou hast with thy thoughts digged and searched and troubled thy selfe (which is not per∣mitted to any man upon theWisd. 9. c. Mat. 11. c. 1 Co. . b. Earth, let him be never so judicious) to know the
secrets of God; I scarce know whether this sin may be forgiven to thee, or whe∣ther thou shalt for this go to hell; and he made the child quite astonished, so that he spake no more of the same, nor asked af∣ter any more instruction, but fell on weeping; and said: Oh that I and all men might be saved. Then said the Confessor. 5 O my sonne seeing thou art now sory for thy sinne, I promise salvation unto thee, and that thy sins are forgi∣ven. 6 Then said the child I thank you Sir, and will commit the cause to God let it come to passe according to his will: And so his Father thanked the Minory brethren for that they had well taught and instructed his sonne, and so departed from each other, and the Minory brethren went their way and thought no more on this businesse, or gave little respect unto it. 7 But child was not appeased with the sayings of the Minory brethren nor satisfied in his understanding but went up and down with a sad heart, and seeing could not forget the things he had spake off; So kept he all the same within him∣self, and imparted the businesse no more to any man, till he came to the day of his
manly oldnesse with the gray haire, and was stil more and more an earnest lover of Service and Ceremonies of the Roman Catholique Church, and the requiring of it, and being alone busied himselfe dayly with divine matters, and with the fulfil∣ing of the Godlinesse in Jesu Christ. CHAP. IV. IN the ninth yeare of the age of H. N. (in the days of the Emperour Maxmilian the first) there was revealed to H. N. after midnight near upon day breaking (by Gods grace) a great wonderous work of God, and wonderful vision of a heavenly mystery out of the heavenly being, for he was compassed about with a mightyMat. 17. a. Acts 9. a. great being of the glory of God, and the same was ad a very great Mountain of glorious Beauty. And when he was surrounded by this huge great Mountain, and was through∣ly illuminated in all his being with the glory thereof, then this great Mountaine wholly united it selfe with him in his whole spirit and mind, so that his spirit and mind, with the same great and glori∣ous Mountaine, became so great and broad, that he became also of an equal
greatness and like being, with the same, in altitude, latitude, and profundity. 3 With which revelation and won∣drous work of God, it was declared to H. N. That the same and the uniformity thereofJohn 17. c. within the man is the true ac∣complishment of the Godlinesse in Jesus Christ, and the righteous4 Esd. 7. d. Iudge∣ment of God, or the great dayMat. 4. a. of the Lord, (which for righteousnesse) is pro∣mised to come upon the Earth. 4 And as then that great Uision and wonderfull Revelation of God vanished wholly from his eyes and sight, so found he himselfe awakened lying on his bed, and was very much troubled and weari∣ed in all his being and mind, and in re∣spect of that wearinesse he had a mind to sleep. 5 And whilst H. N. lay thus on his bed (near the breaking of the day) he fell into a slumber. 6 And being fallen asleep, there were then revealed unto him in his sleep won∣derfull things, which should befall him, and the Saints of God; for at that time understood he it not so well, as he did when the same befell him. 7 In this sleep he saw in a Uision, That many Saints of God were with
him on the Earth, and that the same Saints of God and he, joyntly rejoyced much with one another in the Godliness of our Lord Jesus Christ, And that he lo∣ved all men highly to the same Godliness, and called and invited them all thereto that they with him should rejoyce in the same, and that he also (out of great Love) shewed to manifold men great friendship and many kindnesses, & for that he might likewise rejoyce (in the same Godliness) with men like as with the Saints of God. And that he held forth unto them (with all pleasantnesse ad discreetnesse and lovely speech) the transcendant wor∣thy nobleness of man and the most peace∣able life of Godlinesse, to whichGen. 1. c. 2. a. Sap. 1. b. 2. c. Ecclus 17. a. God hath created, man and chosen him thereto through Jesus Christ. 8 And he saw also in this Uision, that many men (which did not accept or take to heart the friendship and love which he shewed unto them (thereby to bring them to a peaceable life of Godlinesse, and did not repeut (were withered and changed into dry and excicated treesJude. and that many of these Trees, were wholly eaten hollow (by knawing wormes) and inwardly were mouldredPsal. 1. a. 37. a. b. c. Isaiah 29. a. away to dnst and consumed away to nothing, and
hat there was not left the leastPsal. 9. b. monu∣ment or being of greennesse or blooming. 9 He saw also in the same Uision, that many good thinking men did oppose him, and that the same and sch as were offended at him, and at all that love, and goodness which he shewed unto men, and for which they mightily envyed and reproached him, and hardned their hearts against his sayings, and the Grace and Mercy, which he offered unto them, were changed into several terrible, hurtful, and tearing wolves or devouring beasts, and they were inclined to bite and toSap. 2. c. teare, ad wholly to devoure him, and the Saints of God, and that they joynt∣ly together, (with great bitternesse and and hardnesse of heart) exceedingly bel∣lowed and foamed against him and the Saints of God, and (with clamour and extream horrible noise) came on against him, and railed and raged very terribly against him and the Saints of God, for to destroy and consume them. 10 In which horrible and terrible out cryings and fury of these horrible beasts, awakned H. N. out of his sleep (through great feare that they should teare and de∣stroy him and all the Saints of God that were on earth with him) and at his a∣waking
he cryed out aloud, Oh how long shall these yet judgeor reign. over my soul? 11 When he thus cryed out and a∣wakened from his sleep he found him∣self much disquieted and perplexed at his Uision. 12 His Father and Mother (being af∣frighted at the noise of his out-crying) ran hastily to him, to his bed, and said, God blesse thee my Sonne, what ayleth thee? what is is come on thee? my dear, what is hapned to thee? that thou thus cryedst out, Oh how long shall these yet judgerign. over my soul? 13 But H. N. out of a heavy mind did sigh, and said, I ayle nothing, but I am somewhat sorrowfull, and a little weaknesse is upon me. And he remain∣ed in all silence and stilnesse, and related nothing of all what had hapned unto him, however (by the commotio in his Uision) he found himselfe not well in his body, and was made very weake and feeble in all his joynts from that commotion. 14 When he was recovered in his joynts, and got his health againe, yet would he say nothing of any thing that befell him in his Uision, and spake not at all of that heavenly Revelation, (which awakened him on his bed) nor of the Ui∣sion
that appeared to him in his sleep, but kept all this in his heart. CHAP. V. IN the nine and thirtieth year of the age of H. N. (in the dayes of Charles the fifth, being made Roman Empe∣rour by vertue or power of the Electo∣ral Princes of the Roman Empire, and the German Nation) there was revea∣led to H. N. from the high heavens a mighty revelation of the living God∣head: and by the same was shewed and manifested unto him, the upright Truth and Righteousnesse of God, together with the faithfull love of his dear Sonne Jesus Christ. 2 Which heavenly manifestation of the living Godhead together with all that was shewed unto him, descended to H. N. and wholly comprehended him to it selfe. 3 And the same God of heaven, excited and revealed in H. N. his holy and gra∣cious word, even as he of old had promi∣sed toJer. 33. c. raise up the same through his holy Prophets, and with the same word, and out of the same word the LordJoel 2. c. Acts 2. a. poured upon H. N. his holy Spirit of the of the Love of Jesus Christ.
4 With this heavenly glory and out∣flowing of the same holy Spirit of the true Love of Jesus Christ upon H. N. the Lord chose him to be a Minister of his holy and gracious word which He (the Lord) had excited and revealed in him. 5 And the Lord prepared or ordained to H. N. for his assistance in the same mi∣nistration, Daniel, Elidad, & Tobias which continued allwayes with him, and assi∣sted him in all his ministration of the the gracious word of the Lord. 6 And at that time also (through the power of God and impulse of the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ) H. N. was driven in his whole spirit & mind for to administer (ont of the holy and graci∣ous word, and holy spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ) the most holy Office of the Love, according to the command of God, and to attest and set down in writing the godly truth of God and of Christ, and the4 Esd. 7. a. Mat. 7. 16. c. 1 Pet. 2. c. 4. a. upright way of the through-going or Passe-over which reacheth to the npright righteousnesse, and to the eternalllife, and to publish and express writingly in letters, before all eyes of understanding. 7 H. N. being thus chosen of the God of life to the ministration of his gracious
word, and was impulsed by the holy spi∣rit of the Love of Jesus Christ, to setTo write or describe. forth the manefestatton of the Truth of God and of the Godlinesse of Jesus Christ, and let the Sonnes of men to know their er∣rours, (that they repenting of their sins Acts 2. c. 3. c. 17. d. may turn from their errour, and sincerely endeavour to keep the truth of God, and the godliness of Jesus Christ. So he gave himself obediently at that time to that service and work of the Lord, and carefully endeavoured to set down all, that the Lord revealed and commanded him, and that should be most profitable and necessary for the Sonnes of men, to their Salvation and Peace, and to the en∣trance of the upright life. 8 But in his beginning of the same ser∣vice and writings the word of the Lord came to him and said H. N. stay thy hand from writing in this place, and get thee up and travel out of this land, where∣in now thou livest, that thy soul may be preserved alive, in my service and worke; and be not devoured by bloud-thirsty men, and in thy going out from this land, take thy journey Eastward, and dwell there, till I my selfe (by the hand of my Angel) bring thee from thence. 9 For whilest thou livest there, thou
shalt apply thy selfe for the most part to be in the land Pietas, that thou mayest be diligent there, (rightly and according to the truth, to manifest my honour and Love, and to reveal the same to those who are worthy of love. 10 For there, in the manifesting of mine honour and Love, thou shalt testi∣fie and figure forth in writing, the god∣ly and heavenly things, which I do re∣veal and make known unto thee, and that profitable for the children of men, unto Godliness. 11 To thee shall also (from henceforth) many mysteries of my heavenly King∣dome (which hitherto have been kept and concealed from theMat. 3. b. Ephes. 3. a. Col. 1. c. world and her wise and letter-learned) be revealed and made known, for to bring the same to light. 12 At the time (according to the word and command of the Lord) H. N. instant∣ly took his journey Eastward, and be∣came an Inhabitant in the land of the East, and was for the most time iu Pie∣tas, even as the Lord had commanded him. ae3 And the Lord (the God of heaven) revealed to him in Pietas many godly mysteries, and in these revealed myste∣ries
H. N. excereised himselfe, in Gods holy understanding, to the serviceable benefit or utility of the children of men, and to all their good knowledge of their Salvation and peace in Jesus Christ. 14 There were revealed unto him also many wonderfull Acts or Workes of God, many of which are testified and brought to light in the writings of H. N. to the knowledge of the upright Godli∣ness in Jesus Christ. 15 But in all this, which the Lord hath revealed to H. N. he was rejoyced too ex∣ceedingly, insomuch that he forgot all the sore wayes, which he in great sadnesse had passed through. 16 And the Lord afflicted him heavily through his enemies, for the Lord suffe∣red him to fall into the hands of the wick∣ed (his enemies) whose ungodly being is the false destruction, which hath brought on the Earth death, orSap. 1. b. mortality, namely, the Kingdome of the Devil and of hell, which God hath not willed that it should be in the Earth, but be condemn∣ed in theApoc. 17. b. 19. c. 20. c. bottomlesse pit and the ever∣lasting darknesse, from whence it also came; And that theNuml. 14. c. Jsaia 340. a. Glory of Jesus Christ should be revealed on the earth, and raigne over it eternally.
17 Yea the same wicked Beeing must be abolished in the condemnaion, at the appearing of Jesus Christ in his glory, for that same is theMat. 13. c. 2 Thes. 2. c. envious man a∣gainst God and his righteousnesse, and against all that is Godly, andreligious. God-ser∣vice Apoc. 18. b. c. and wherewith the man practi∣seth his whoredome and adultery, to the disobeying and resisting his God, so that thereby the man every whereSap. 14. b. Rom. 1. c. turneth or inclineth to himselfe, and to things which are vaine and unprofitable, where∣by also the same ungodly being in the false light (of the mans disobedient knowledge) is become predominant. 18 Behold into this Abysse or Depth, the Lord let fall his chosen servant H. N, and suffered him to tast and feel the con∣demnation of all ungodly ones in the hellish fire, the most horrible perdition, and the most ugly abomination of deso∣lation. 19 But, when now H. N. found himself thus captived in misery; where∣in hee was sorely vexed by his ene∣mies, so there came on him a great and mighty sadnesse, and he could find no comfort at all, insomuch that by rea∣son of his great heavinesse of mind, he wringed his hands and exceedingly be∣wailed
his sinnes, and cryed aloud to God, and besought him for his Grace, and continued therein day and night; And in this his misery he composed these Psalmes of mourning and lamentati∣on, and did not hide his sinnes, and thus calling on, and praying to the Lord he spake forth his mourning Psalmes with weeping and lamentati∣on. Here follow the Psalmes of H. N. and the declaration of his weeping and pray∣ing in his chastisement. The Rod and punishment giveth wis∣dome. Pro. 29. For whom the Lord lo∣veth, he chastiseth and delighteth in him, as a Father doth in his sonne. Pro. 3. Therefore shall the eare which barkeneth to the correction of the Lord, dwell among the wise: but he that letteth go the cha∣stising Instrction, or turneth away from it, he rejecteth his own oul. Pro. 2. CAAP. VI. Psalme I. 1 O My Lord my God,Psal. 6. a. my heart qua∣keth before thee, for though thy pu∣nishment
upon my sinnes, my bones do shake, and greatEsay 13. a. sadnesse, pain and smart fall on me. 2 Thus I fear, O Lord, thy punish∣ment, for with the same tho makest known unto me my sinnes, and thou lettest me see the evil things which have ensnared me. 3 O God, wilt thou not deliver me from these evil things, so must I conti∣nue in misery, and must feare thy hand continually. 4 But thou O Lord art he, whichPsal. 146. a. Hosea 6. a. woundest, and healest againe, help me as thou usest to doe. 5 Let my sighingsPsal. 130. a. out of the bot∣tome of my heart come before thee, and turne not thy mercy from me. 6 For, O Lord, I do notPsal. 119. a. forget thee, but wait dayly for thy goodnesse. 7 LookPsal. 25. b. 129. a. on my misery, and leave me not in death, nor let me be lost for e∣ver. 8Psal. 51. a. Take away (O Lord) the sinne from me, and let thy Spirit of life re∣fresh me, otherwayes (O Lord) O Lord of Lords, I have no life in me. 9 Therefore (O Lord, of life) when thou art my life, then I live, and my bones must rejoyce.
10 When I find mercy in thine eyes, then is comforted the inward mind of my soul. 11 But, O Lord, when thou artHosea 13. c. 1 Cor. 15. f a death to me and art angry with me, then am I like unto the dead, and goPsal. 88. a. down to hell as the wicked that are dam∣ned. 12 Out of whichPsal. 13 c. . depth now my foul sigheth and calleth, O Lord, unto thee, for in the same I remember (with anguish of mind) my sinnes past, and must bewaile with tears my evil actions. 13 For thou, O Lord, art the strength andPsal. 18. a. Saviour of men from the sinne, he that taketh hold on thee,Psal. 125. a. falleth not into transgressions. 14 But the man which relyeth on hs owne strength, he falls soonest, and then must he confess, that thou alone, O Lord, art the life of his Salvation. 15 When thou takest pity on him, and raisest him again, then he obtaineth mer∣cy, and must praise thy goodnesse conti∣nually. 16 For what is man? (O Lord) with∣out thy grace; is he any thing? ah no, he is nothing of himselfeJohn 15. a. 2 Cor. 4. a. 17 Therefore let thy mercyPsal. 79. a. Isaiah 64. c. shine a∣bout me, and doe not think on my trans∣gressions.
18 Therefore my ioy O God is in thee, and with thankfullnesse must I praise the grace of thy Love. 19 For thou comfortest the lowPsal. 46. a. Esay 66. a. mind∣ed and those which be forsaken, thon blot∣est out their sinnes, and takestEzech 36. c. away the evil heart of their misdeedes. 20 When thou O Lord, givest the bles∣sing, then is thy consolation present, and then with a joyous song of praise is thy holy name praised. 21 But in case thou dost hide thy selfe, then is the sinne active, and when thou doest rise up to punish, (O Lord) who can thenPsal. 76. a. 130 Mal 3. a. Nahum 1. a. stand before thee. 22 Is not a man like untoJob 14. a. Psal. 90. 103. b. Esay 40. a. 1 Pet. 1. c. the blos∣some of the field which thy heat causeth to wither, and like untoPsal. 1. b. Esay 29. a. Ecclus 17. d. dust and ashes which the wind doth catter here and there. 23 Therefore have thou mercy on me (O my God) and Father, and let thy good spirit support mePsal. 51. b. otherwayes I shall vanish into nothing. CHAP. VII. Psalme II. 1 O Lord let thinePsal. 89. a. anger be turned about, and punish me not conti∣nually
in thy displeasure.Psal. 6. 3. a. Jeremy 10. c. 2 O LordPsal. 18. c. punish me not according to my sinnes, but chastise me unto a∣mendment, andPsal. 119. d. teach me also thy Lawes, and hide not thy mercy from me. 3 Reject me not O Lord, nor wholly Psal. 5. br forsake me; but bring to my know∣ledge my transgressions. 4 And chastise me even so O my God, with aProv. 3. a. Heb. 12. fatherly correction, so shall I turne unto thee. 5 But if thou totally rejectest me, to whomPsal. 139. b shall I then goe, O God and King of all righteousness? for thou alone art myPsal. 61. a. 91. 142. b. comfort. 6 For vain is the comfort ofPal. 68. 61. b. 10. b. ma, and all the Treasures of the world, are (O God) no joy to me. 7 The sinne is an abhomination unto me, the worlds joy with the pleasures thereof, are all dead unto me. 8 If thou LordPsal. 69. b. hidest the lovely be∣ing of thy countenance from me, O Lord what is then my life. 9 Therefore, O God, remember notPsal. 79. a. Esay 64. c. alwayes my sins but guide myPsal. 119. c. feet in the way of life. 10 Then shall I praise thy mercy (O Lord) among thePsal. 114. d. living, and spread thy praise among the upright.
11 For I acknowledge myPsal. 32. a. trans∣gressions, and my sinnes are aPsal. 38. a. heavy burthen unto me. 12 O howPsal. 38. a. Sap. 5. a. heavily was I wearied in the wayes of my errors what cumbersome wayes did I go through. 13 Now sinne with its death hathPsal. 18. 116. a throughly pierced me, the Devil with his bands ruled over me, and Hell with its power, hath shut me into the stocks, to devoure me. 14 But thou O Lord. that canst deli∣ver from death, deliverPsal. 59. a. 143. b. me from all mine enemies. 15 Helpe me out of my misery, and forsake me not in my sorrow. CHAP. VIII. Psalme III. 1 O Lord Almighty God, art thou not he thatDeut. 32. d. 1 Kings 2. a. Wisd. 1. 16. b. Toby 13. a. killest and makest alive a∣gaine. 2 Art thou not a God who condemnest and1 Kings 2. a. Toby 13. a. bringest into hell, and from thence bringect again and savest. 3 How Long, O Lord, shall I go on in∣to perdition? how long yet shall sinne raigne over me.
4 How long shall thePsal. 18. a. 116. a. bonds of death hold bound? How long shall the power of the Devil and of Hell captive me? 5 If thou deliver me (O Lord then am I freed, but if thou forsakest me, then am I desolate, and must remain comfortless e∣ternally. 6 Therefore, O Lord, be thou my aid, and from the bottomlessPsal. 51. a. mercy of thy love succour me; and according to the multiplicity of thy grace, blot out mine iniquity. 7 For I am filled up with sins, and lie in the deep under them, and feel no power of comming outDeut. 32 c. by my self. 8 Seeing I am impotent, therefore have my enemies bound me, and brought guil∣tiness upon me to condemn me? 9 And those which were sometimes my Psal. 88. a. Job 19. b. friends, now set their mouthes horribly against me, and make a terrible face at me, and shew all their hatred towards me. 10 I lookt every where up and down for a faithfulPsal. 69 c. Esay 63. a. friend, but there is not one of all my friends (as a faithful friend) ad∣hered to me, but they have all made up themselves in enmity against me, and whetted theirPsal. 57. a. 4. a. Eccus 12. b. teeth at me, and sharpned their swords to destroy me. 11 O God, seeing thou punishest mee
now and art against me, therefore are all become enemies to me, that are round a∣bout me, and all fall on me, there stayeth not one with me, to my defence. 12 But they all cry,Psal. 35. 40. b there hee lieth, there he lieth, he is faln and shall never rise again. 13 O Lord, reward them according as they haveJob 14. b. Psal. 28. a. 62. b. Jeremy 17. b. ren. 3. g. Rom. 2. a. Apoc. 2. c. deserved recompence to me, let thy fierce wrath fall upon them, and root out all my enemies totally. 14 Destroy and bring them all to shame, which imagine evil against my soul, and which lie in wait for my life. 15 Yea, let them be condemned toPsal. 9 b. hell eternally, which profess themselves friendly to me, and there under mix their poisonous falshoods therewith to destroy me. 16 O Lord, (my God root out all thePsal. 37. c. d. wicked ones, for they have spoiled the earth and made it wast, that thy Saints may take in the land, and inherit the same in truth and righteousness forever. 17 O my Father and my God, thou,Psal. 46. a. 61. a. 71. a. who art my strength and Saviour, sup∣port me, for I lie faln among the midst of the wicked. 18 They have bound me with their cords or snares, and deal very unmerci∣fully with me.
19 Look on myPsal. 9. b. sorrows, & how mi∣serable my enemies have made me: I loved them all, and have declared my love unto them. 20 But they have in hate rewarded me with wickedness, they have wounded me deadly, and they have pierced through all my inward parts with poison. 21 They fed me withPsal. 69 c. wormwood or bitterness, when I was in the snares of death, and have poured me forth poison, and bitter drink for wine, when I thirsted after a little refreshment, and sought com∣fort in my soul. 22 O Lord, heal thou my soul lest I pe∣rish, and let thy Word of life shine about me, then shall my soul recover her health. 23 O Father,Psal. 27. b. 71. a. forsake me not for e∣ver in thy displeasure, but let thy mercy be a comfort to my soul. 24 When I called thus long and the Lord did not hearken unto mee, then I thought in my heart, I am as nothing, and as one that goeth forsaken: [or as a lost one.] 25 O Lord, shall thy punishment upon me not cease? can there no grace be found for me in thine eyes? O thou most high God, thou that art full of all mercy.
26 Therefore (O God) chastise me yet to amendment, & let me know what thy plea∣sure is, andPsal. 25. b. 27. a. 86. b. guide me in thy way which thou wouldest have me to walk. 27 Strengthen, O Lord, my bones, and Psal. 5. b. create in me an upright heart & mind. 28 Then shall I be able to walk upright∣ly in thy ways, else my undertakings are without strength, as nothing. CHAP. IX. Psalme IV. 1 OH Lord, how are my sinnes over∣weighty, andPsal. 38. a. how heavy stand be∣fore me, my transgressions. 2 For the anguish of them over-burthen me exceedingly, O Lord, if thou doest not ease me, I must consume to nothing. 3 O Lord, doest thou delight in the death of sinners? doest thou not rather desire that we shouldEzek. 18. turn and live. 4 Thou hast no pleasure in our destru∣ction, thereforePsal. 22. 35. c. arise, O God, and help me that I may praise thee, and may tell a∣mong all the Congregations of thy mer∣cy, to the honour & praise of thy holy name. 5 O Lord, be gracious unto me, andPsal. 51. a. let the great bounty of thy mercifulness come upon me. 6 Forgive me, O Lord, mine iniquities,
and guide me in thy righteousness, let not (O Lord) thy wrath devour me. 7 But poure forth thysal. 79. b. anger upon the ungodly, and destroy them before mine eyes, which imagine nothing but mischief against me, and their delight is onely to destruction. 8 And let thy goodness, O Lord, assist me, prepare my heart according to thy will, and have compassion upon any ignorance and weakness. 9 My ignorancePsal. 25. 79. a. and my conversati∣on with the iniquity, remember not (O Lord) forever, but deliver thy servant out of their hands. 10 For thou (O Lord) hast made known unto me the wayes of my errours, but to come again into the right way, the know∣ledge nor the power is not in me. 11 Therefore O Lord, make them4 Kings 6. d. all blind and feeble that are against me, and give me the sight of thy life, the power of thy righteousness. 12 Deliver mePsal. 140. a. out of the hands of the crafty, for they have no good in their minds. 13 If so be, O Lord, that I find mercy be∣fore thine eyes, then is my soul rejoyced. 14 Then will I (O Lord) with thy power rule over all mine enemies, and break them to pieces as earthen vessels.
15 But now (O Lord) heal me of my torment, and take away all ignorance from my thoughts, andPsal. 119. a. teach thy ser∣vant thy Statutes. 16 O God by reason of my sius, hast thou (with chastising) humbled me, reiect me not now wholly, but draw my soul a∣gain unto thee. 17 Thereby is made known thy great mercy, that thou shewest mercy again to those, who wereIer. 5. a. estranged from thee, and have sinned against thee. 18 For I (O Lord) have transgressed, and turned my back on thee, and feared not thy great power nor glory. 19 But seeing thou now chastifest me (O God) for my errours, my soul sub∣mitteth before thee, confessing that I am worthy of death and damnation. 20 Therefore, O God of life, (thou who art an errour to the erring, and a deathosea 13. 1 Cor. 15. c. unto the dead, for to prepare a conquest of death for the living, and to lead the upright (out of all errour into thy wayes) take me now by thine hand, and lead me out from among the wicked, who all sur∣round me like so many Bears and fierce Psal. 7. 17. b. Wolves. 21 O Lord, make hast before they devour my soul, for thy GoodnessPsal. 136. endureth for ever.
CAAP. X. Psalme V. 1 AH why is it thus woful with me? what aileth me? how hard do my sinnes presse me? how am I thus over∣whelmed with the wickednesse? 2 That which I would not, that must I endure: and that which IRom. 7. c. desire, flyeth far from me. 3 The evil presseth and tormenteth me, the devils power tyrannizeth over me. 4 O Lord, deliver me from these snares, and let thy life be gracious to me, and re∣fresh my minde. 5 Grant, O Lord, that my soul be re∣freshed in thee, and be thou my comfort in this desertion. 6 For what am I that I should be able to standPsal. 56. a. 130. a. Mal. 3. a. Nahum 3. a. when thou, O Lord, pourest forth thy wrath upon me? 7 Or wilt thou quite destroy me O God of life, and no more reveal salvation to me. 8 What is then my life? if I may com∣mend them for happy, which neverJob 10. b. Jer 20. b. li∣ved: and that never knew thee nor thy Glory.
9 For who, O Lord, shall praise thee most, but he whom thou hast delivered out of great misery, and freest him from all vex∣ation of his soul. 10 Therefore, O Lord, bePsal. 51. a. merciful unto me: mercy (O Lord) mercy, & through the great abundance of thy mercies, deliver me from my torments. CHAP. XI. Psalme VI. 1 O Lord (thou which art the God of all the World) let thy mercy shine upon me, and deliver me out of the pit of death, and out of the hellish fire. 2 For sadness compassethPsal. 18. a. 88. a. b. me above measure, and the snares of death have en∣viron'd me, my sins stand in my sight, a∣gainst Psal. 51. a. me, and the Devil1 Pet. 5. b. roareth to devour me. 3 Hell taketh hold on me, and thePsal. 88. a. sor∣rows of my mind oppress me. 4 My heart is cut through withLuke 2. b. the sword of anguish, and my thoughts bring forth all perplexities. 5 Therefore must my soul now lament Esay 59 b. as one that is forsaken without com∣fort
6 O Lord, wilt thou not once look down, and wilt thou quite turn away thy loving countenance from me, what is then my soul which thou hast begotten &Gen. 1. 2. Wisdom 2. c. Eclus 17. d. brought forth to life. 7 Or, O Lord, doest thou try my Man∣hood, or searchest thou the strength of my creature, which is but earth and ashes,Psal. 1. 103. c. Ecclus 17. d. and is able to do nothing, as a thing which is nothing. 8 For it is now become as a spoiled in∣strument which is unprofitable to thy ser∣vice. 9 Therefore, I must confess, unto thee my weakness and impotency, be thou, O Lord, my power, my life, and my ability. 10 For if thou hidest thy self from me, then am I asPsal. 88. a. b. the dead in the grave. 11 And I find my self in great misery, Ps. 18. 16. a. like to those that are in Hell. 12 Therefore, O Lord, consider my mi∣sery, and refresh the soul of my mnd, then O Lord, will I praise thee, magnifie thy glory, and will sing praises unto thy name for ever. 13 For who is he among thePs. 6. a. 130. d. 88. b. 115. b. Esay 38 b. dead which remembreth thee? in Hell there are no prai∣ses sung unto thee. 14 But when thou (O Lord) doest af∣flict, then the sighs of the poor come before
thee, and when thou makest glad again, then they sing with joy, a song of praise where∣by thy name is magnified as holy. CHAP. XII. Psalme VII. 1 OH Lord, how am I thus perplexed? how long shall my soul endure sad∣ness? how long shall the wickedness as an over-lorder triumph over me. 2 That thou, O God, would'st guide me in thy wayes, and would'st lead me in thy Psal. 99. c. paths, and would'st deliver me from my adversaries, and from allPsal 7. 142. a. mine ene∣mies which have made up themselves a∣gainst me: Then would I, O God, out of the whole minde of my soul, bring unto thee an offering of joy, and offer up a sacri∣fice of thanksgiving. 3 O Lord, let not my adversaries have their pleasure over me, let not my ene∣mies prosper against me. 4 O that the wicked might give up them∣selves to flight, and not reign over me for ever: to the end that myPsal. 35. c. enemies boast not, that they have destroyed me. 5 O Lord, assist me, and rise up against mine enemiesPsal. 35. c. 70 8. 71. b. that they may all be put to shame that assault me.
6 O Lord, let thy goodness imbrace me, clense me from my sins, and deliver me from the murtherousPsal 7. 69. a. 115. a. 142. b. persecutors of my soul: that my soul may dwell in thee thee (O my God) in peace and without care. 7 Ah, how long shall I yet endure mine enemies? how long shall they torment my soul with disquietness? 8 Well: I will be of good chear, in the confidence of my God, that my soul may get some refreshment. 9 Oh my soul (thou oppressed onePsal. 2. b. 42. 43. 1. a. be of good chear in thy perplexity, and expect the comfort of the Lord in long-suffering. 10 For he will comfort thee in peaceTren. 3. c. James 5. a. if thou takest patience to thee as a precious treasure. 11 He will bring unto thee meek-mind∣edness for an ornament, and the burthen of the wicked shall be lightened in thee, andIsa. 61. d. Luke 1. 8. thy mind shall be refreshed in God. CHAP. XIII. Psalme VIII. 1 WHy art thou so troublesome to me Psal. 43. a. O thou unbelief and distrust: for my hope is in the living God, that he will yet heal my soul. 2 O Lord,Psal. 6. a. heal me, and take away from me the evil nature, namely, all the opposition of thy goodness.
3 Ah, I am doubtless very deeply wounded, there isPsal. 38. a. Esay 1. a. no soundness in my soul. 4 O God, I am very miserable by rea∣son of my torments, is there any sosay 53 a. di∣stempered as I am. 5 I am not now like unto anyPsal. 22. 49. d. man but to those which have changed their hu∣mane form and shape. 6 Wherefore was I bornJob 3. b. 10. b. Jer. 20. b. upon the earth, for I perish in great misery, and am good for no use. 7 O that my Father had let fall the seed of which I was begotten (like Onan the sonneGenes. 38. of Juda) that I had never been. 8 Or that I for or to my Fathers sinne (like the first born son of David2 Kings 12. by Bash∣sheba) had died. 9 Ah, that the earth would open it self, & receive me, that theIsaiah 2. b. Hosea 10. a. Luke 23. c. Apoc. 6. b. 9 a. hils would fall on me, and cover and smother me in the earth, that I might no longer see this horrible ab∣omination. 10 For I am bereaved of all comfort, riches, honour, and wisdom. 11 All unsoundness, torment,Psal. 18. a. 88. a. 116. a. sinne, death, Devil, and Hell is faln upon me. 12 Ah myPs. 31. b. 55. a. 1. b. heart is thus afflicted, and my mind is so much disquieted. 13 My onesPsal. 6. a. quake, my feet trem∣ble,
and my jaw-bone is shaken. 14 My teeth chatter, my hands are wrung about [or turned round] my eyes weep, and my thoughts affright me. 15 All evil spirits domine over me, and and my enemies drive me upon doubt∣ings. 16 Anguish andIsaiah 13. a. Wisdom 5. a. perplexity more heavily oppress me, then if the whole world lay on me. 17 Doubt of deliverance, and all despair Luke 21. c. assault me, the unbelief bringeth despe∣ration before me, as if I were forsaken e∣ternally. 18 There is no where any refreshment Luke 16. c. for my soul that I might revive my self a little. 19 Ah how hard doth the punishment of my God laid hold on me, his stripes fall on me (asPsal. 83. b. burning coals and flames of fire. 20 I am afraid that the heat of his fire Deut. 4. c. Heb. 12. c. will consume me to nothing. 21 Or that he will hold his fierce coun∣tenance continually over me, and hide his lovely face for ever from me. 22 Ah, I must bewail my sins continu∣ally, for these hard stripes torment me.
CHAP. XIV. Psalme IX. 1 WHile I was thus wounded, stricken & chastised my friends alsoJob 19. b. Psal. 38. b. 55. b. 88. a. b. made up themselves against me, and became my enemies. 2 And they also cried out against me with great accusation: and said,Job 20. 27. b. O yea, that is his reward: the accursed. 3 Kill him,Psal. 41. a. away, away with this wicked one, condemn him for ever into hell. 4 His sins are manifested to be beyond mercy, for his evil deed is as of the most ungodly wicked one. 5 Yea, God thus rejecteth all those which fall off from him, and never more come to his favour again. 6 Therefore let all shame, reproach, and the eternal death befal him, & let not God help or succour him for ever. 7 O Lord, let that perdition which they have wished to me, and also themselves have framed against me, let it fall onPsal. 59 71. b. themselves, and when they are smitten down let them never rise again. 8 They have intended mischief against mePsal. 55. 64. a. O Lord, repay them that they have Psal. 28. 6. b. deserved on my behalf. 9 For why should the wicked rule over
thy Sanctuary, and drive out thy beloved ones? 10 Yea, let themselves be cursedGen. 27. c. which intend me evil, and let them with thee (O God) find no mercy. 11 Let them be totally rooted out with root and branch, for they fall on me very heavily, and bring an evil report on me a∣mong the people. 12 Yea, they are such which appeared as friends,Psal. 41. b. did eat bread with me daily, and are become secret Traytors to me. 13 For those which somtimes praysed me, and were friendly when I was in pro∣sperity, now reproach & hate me most of all. 14 Yea, my wifeMicha 7. a. which lyeth in my arms, (who is one flesh and bone with me) where all my heart, delight, comfort and mind was fixed, bringeth also all wicked out-cryes against me, with all accusations for to condemn me. 15 Now when I consider all this, and that all things are averse, and fall contra∣ry to me, which formerly I loved, so it affli∣cteth me much more then the rebuking of God. 16 But seeing all my love is thus re∣quited with malice, therefore all my op∣pression, misery and anxiety is a heavy burthen above measure.
17 Now when I (out of my heavy bur∣then) call on God then mine enemies (which sometimes were my friends)Job 19. b. Psal. 38. 53. b. 88. a b. rise up a∣gainst me. 18 They reproved andJob 8. contested with me, why I was so bold and presumptuous, as to call to God for mercy. 19 They all cryed against me with one voice: Thou hast neither help norPsal. 3. 41. a. 42. b. com∣fort with the Almighty, for he hath poured forth his wrath on thee everlastingly. 20 There stood my soul before the Tri∣bunal, and I was very much perplexed in my heart, and strongly bound with the cords of sinne, and was heavily accused of the enemies of life. 21 I look't up to the highest, and down again to the lowest, and round about me, far and near: whether any one did take to heart my cause for to defend me,Psal. 69. c. Isaiah 63. a. but I found none. 22 But my enemies (which sought my life, aud were against mePsal. 22. stood in great multitudes (even as grass in the field) round about me to condemn me. 23 And my wayes, which sometimes they commended for good, they presented before me as evil to a great accusation, and I beheld them all as anMatth. 24. b. Mark 13. b. Luke 21. b. abomination of desolation.
24 This same grieved me exceedingly: and I suffered great great sadness with heavy oppression in my heart. 25 Where-ever I did go or standPsal. 22. 86. 68. b, 109. b. c. there was I surrounded with my enemies: and they speak nothing but evil against me. 26 And I was full of wo in my soul: sadness, and out of great anguish I called on the Lord for help, or else I had perished. CHAP. XV. Psalme X. 1 O God,Psal. 39. b. hearken to my crying and sighing: let my lamentation come into thine eares, and let me notPsal. 7. 25. a. 71. a. remain ashamed. 2 I am now faln in the sin,Psal. 38. b. and am estranged from thy light: and go up and down as one that is condemned and lost. 3 I am as the weakest among the chil∣dren of men:Psal. 31. b. for there is no strength of any vertue in me. 4 Those that look on me according to the judgement of mine enemies, abhor me, Psal. 22. a. for my enemies cry all shame and dis∣grace upon me. 5 But thou, O Lord, (in whom I hope)
let me not perish in the darkness: butPsal. 13. a. in∣lighten me with thy light, and take away my shame and reproach. 6 For my sins and transgressions are a loathing to me: and to do any thing which thou hast prohibited, or is against thy will, is no pleasure to my soul. 7 But I remember thee in my anguish: and take aPsal. 119. c. delight in thy righteousness. 8 Therefore, O Lord, take not the rod of thy correction from me until that I love thy law, and forget not that which thou hast commanded. 9 O God, my mouth is made dumbe Psal. 39. b. to speak of thy truth through shame∣fastness of my sin. 10 For they stand as an abomination in my sight: and have made me dismaid in my mind. 11 The ungodly reigned over me, and would draw me from thy law: that I (O God) should no more think on thee and thy law. 12 They have presented lies before me, as a snare, and had honey in their lips,Psal. 55. c. wherewith they kissed me friendly. 13 ButPsal. 140. a. Rom. 3. b. poison was under their tongue, and they mingled that same in my soul: and they, O God, stirred up thy wrath against me.
14 For those which were friendly in their falshood, and made a shew as if they loved me, have brought me to shame. 15 But they themselves must fall into the pit,Psal. 7. 9. b. 35. a. 141. b. Prov. 26. b. c. Ecclm 28. a. Eccles. 10. a. and perish in the destruction which they have prepared for my soul. CHAP. XVI. Psalme XI. 1 O God,Psal. 40. b. 70, 71. a. make hast to come unto me, that my enemies (which wait to de∣stroy my soul) may be destroyed: that I may highlyPsal. 140. a. praise thy Name in the landPsal. 27. d. of the living. 2 Root out the ungodly, make thy sal∣vation break forth: and let thy Name be glorious over all thine enemies. 3 O Lord, thou Eternal and Almighty God, forsake me notPsal. 25. a. for my ignorance: remember not O God) for ever mine er∣rours in the time of my youth. 4 But teachPsal. 88. a. b. in thy truth, that I may praise thy goodness, and may highly esteem of thy correction: and not forget thy righ∣teousness. 5 I rejoyce me in my soul: when as thy hand of correction hūbleth me under thee. 6 And that I endure my punishment for the folly and ignorance of my youth.
7 That I might have my walking a∣mong thePsal. 113. a. Elders in Israel, and have my habitation among the Citizens of Jerusa∣lem.Zach. S. a. 8 Therefore, O God, circumciseJer. 4. a. the fore-skin of my heart: to me, and take a∣way from me the fore-skin of my evil thoughts. 9 That I may come up to worship with thy peoplePsal. 43. a. into thy holy Temple or Tabernacle,Isa. 12. 56. a. and withMicah 4. a. offerings and gifts (which may be acceptable and well pleasing unto thee) for an eternal joy upon mount Sion. 10 O Lord, help: yea, (O God Iesu) help and draw my spirit to thee, in thy holy heaven, in thy appearing to me in glory. CHAP. XVII. Psalme XII. 1 HOw long shall I, O God, want thy goodness? or when shall I be delivered from the sin? 2 Have I hoped in thee in vain? or hi∣dest Isaiah 57. b. thou thy goodness for a while from me? 3 Let me intreat thee, O God,Psal. 5. 8. b. 139. b. streng∣then me, and lead me aright. O God, lead
me aright otherwayes, must I perish by reason of my sin. 4 O Lord, hear thy servant, who is full of sorrow and misery. 5 Ah: how long shall I be deaf, before I shall hear? how long shall I yet be blind before I shall see? how long shall I be dy∣ing, before that I live? 6 Is there thenKings 19. b. no remnant unto righ∣teousness left for me?Isaiah 1. a. O God, must I then perish in my sins?Rom. 11 a. 7 O God, (thou who art the God of all the world) turn thee in mercy to me, that the enemy destroy me not: and let not thy Psal. 69. b. wrath abide upon me for ever. 8 My sins make me fearful: and my transgressions make me timerous to speak of thy righteousness. 9 Therefore am I become dumbPsal. 39. a. as if I had no speech in my mouth. 10 I am become ashamed of my self, be∣cause of the multitude of my sins. 11 O God, support me under thy rod, Pov. 3. a. 5. c. and chastising instruction, that I for∣get not thee,Heb. 12. b. 13. nor thy law. 12 ClensePsal. 51. a. me O God, from my sins: from the Heathenship, and from all un∣godly being. 13 O how presumptuous are the despi∣sers! & the gain-sayers of thy holy Name?
14 How long must I (O God) endure thy reproach and thy adversaries. CHAP. XVIII. Psalme XIII. 1 O How long shall I yet suffer thee thou dissembling nature, which hast as it were honey in thy mouth: but there under Psal. 140. a. shootest thou forth thy poison,Pro. 5. a. according to the nature of the Serpent.Rom. 3. b. 2 Thou allurest forth my soul as to a life of sweetness: and embracest meProv. 5. 7, a. as with a faithful love. 3 Thou walkest before me in shew of a Lambe: thy wayes are laid forth, as if they led to a peace of good rest. 4 Thou risest up, as a light unto life: and among the impenitent, thou art asIsiah 14. b. a morning star, to the uprising of the day. 5 The sound of thy voice is delightful, Prov. 2. b. 5. a. 7. a. and thy speech seemeth very pleasant. 6 But thou art a false nature, which drawest the souls of men to thy own pro∣priety or interest: and then thou shewest forth thy evil fruits, and rulest over them with thy good-thinking know∣ledge.
7 Thou fallest a roaring as a Lion1 Pet. 5. b. that would tear in pieces: and spewest out thy fiery flames as a Dragon. 8 Thou destroyest as a Wolfe, and shewest there through thy robbing as a ThiefJohn 10. a. and so indevourest thee as a Murderer to destroy my soul. 9 O God, Father, thou Almighty Lord, how long shall I be set with the wicked, and be judged or accused by them? How long shall I tast of their poison, and en∣dure their false testimonies against me? 10 In all my ways where I go, theyPsal. 35. a▪ 140. a. lay their snares for me: and use all subtil∣ty, to takePsal. 38. b. my soul, and to bring an ac∣cusation against it. 11 For in my presence many of them shew as if they were my friends, and ac∣count me for one of their kindred and bre∣thren. 12 O God, make their dissimulation to be an abomination to me, and make me an enemy to them: poure out thy fiercePsal. 69. 79. a. wrath on them, that they may flie farre from me. 13 That my soul may seek for her com∣fort onely in thee: and may be delivered from her plagues.
CHAP. XIX. Psalme XIV. 1 O Lord, take away theRom. 7. c. inclination of my own will: and purge my heart from the offence. 2 Let (O Lord) no bitterHeb. 12. b. root grow in me, lest envy take possession in my heart. 3 But, O Lord, my God change my being, and refresh my miude. 4 For the taking on of my ownIsaiah 58. a. will, plant in me the submission. 5 Instead of perversness and bitterness, 1 Cor. 1. 13. a. plant thy nature of the love, and the vertuous being. 6 That I also, O Lord, may walk up∣rightly before thee, and shew thy mercy to me, that I may tell it forthPsal. 26. b. continually, and forever. 7 For I am faln down in sins, and there is no comfort in my heart, for there is no power in me of rising. 8 Therefore, O Lord, let thy grace shine on me, and help those that are weak. For I am smitten down even unto Hell. 9 Aud now is my soul afflicted: and I mustJob 7. a. 10. b. Jer. 15. 20 b. lament my untimely birth.
10 Because I am born upon the earth, such a disobedient one to thy truth. 11 Therefore, O Lord, consider that I amPsal. 51. a. brought forth in sin, yet will I love thy goodness: but without thee and thy powerJohn 15. a. 2. Cor. 3. a. I am not able to inherit any thing of thy goodness. 12 All the intentions of my own coun∣sel [or mind] are vain: and my ownIsa. 55. 59. a. thoughts meditate nothing but folly. 13 There is no strengthRom. 7. c. 2 Cor. 4. a. nor under∣standing in me to do good: how shall I then, O Lord, be able rightly to turn unto thee. 14 Therefore, O Lord, consider me, and appear unto me in my misery. 15 Turn me to thee through thy light: Jer. 31. d. then, O Lord) am I rightly turned un∣to thee? 16 And give unto me [such] a portion of faith:☜ as I may through thee (O Lord) conquer the iniquity. 17 For I have kept nothing by me) nei∣faith, nor spirit whereby I may live. 18 For all my portionLuke 15. b. which I have received of thy goodness, have I spent, wa∣sted and consumed upon strangers. 19 And now seek I here and there, my feeding [or food:] but I finde no comfort
n my soul among strangers to my satis∣faction. 20 As I ponder of all this in my heart, then sigheth my soul out of great distress. 21 Because I perish for hunger and thirst in misery: and that there is such a∣bundance of goods in the house of the Lord my Father. 22 When I consider this, that I, (of my own accord) have wandred from thence, then suffereth my soul far greater sorrow. 23 Forasmuch now (O my God and Father) as I have consumed all thy good gifts, therefore am I not worthy to be cal∣led after thy name. 24 But let me find from thee the favour of a stranger, and that I may stand in thy favour (as one of the meanest of the ser∣vants of thy servants) and that my sins might be forgiven me. 25 For I (O Father) have dealt more unjustly with thy goods, then theMat 25. b. e. un∣faithfull servant, which buried his talent in the earth which he received from thee. 26 O God, I have yet done more un∣faithfully with thy goods, for I have not done so well as to bury thy goods: but have made them away: and therewith commit∣ted unrighteousness.
27 Therefore I am ashamed of my self: and desire now (O God) nothing else from thee, but onely thy mercy, that thou would'st pardonPsal. 51. a. Mat. 6. b. mine iniquities, and blot out my transgressions. 28 And that I mayLuke 15. b. walk in thy house among the meanest of thy servants, and might feed upon a morsel of thy bread. 29 But now (O Lord) I lie down be∣fore theePsal. 110. a. Esay 66. a. as a footstool of thy feet: and submit to thee in the greatest humiliy of my heart: receive mee, O God, into thy mercy. 30 Plant in mine inwardnessPsal. 40. a. Jer. 31. d. Heb. 9. 10. thy law, and write it in the minde of my thoughts: and hide not thy will from me. 31 But take away from me the per∣verse minde and thoughts, which are a∣gainst thee. 32 And guide me, O Lord, in thy truth Psal. 25. a. 27. 86. 114. b. in the way in which thou wilt have me to walk. 33 And give then (O my God and Fa∣ther) such anPsal. 51. b. heart and mind, in which I may live and praise thee.
CHAP. XX. Psalme XV. 1 WHen I now for a long time confes∣sed my sins (before the Lord and his Saints) sought for mercy, praying for comfort to my soul, and had suffered the chastising instruction in following after Christ inRom. 6. a. Phil. 2. a. his death of the cross: and thus did manifest that I was humbled, and willing to all obedience: Then the good∣ness of God the Father appeared to me a∣again: And I spake with great thankful∣ness in my heart and said. 2 O well and happy is he which hun∣greth andMatth. 5. a. thirsteth after the righteous∣ness, and is no mans enemy therein: and soProv. 3. b. boweth himself under the rod of his God, and endureth his correction: And waiteth inJames 5. a. patience on the goodness of the Lord and his compassion. 3 For, behold, the punishmentPsal. 30. a. Mich. 7. b. last∣eth onely for a short time, which cometh to an end: but the mercy of the Lord, and his goodnessPsal. 103. b. endureth for ever, and his love hath no end.Psal. 32. 85. a. 103. a. Ezech. 18. d. Joel 2. b. 4 Hee forgiveth and blotteth out the sins of the people which turn unto him with
all their heart: for they meditate upon that which is holy and good, and learne also to practise that which isGen. 18. b. right and reasonable. 5 Yea, this the Lord turneth away his fury and displeasure from his Elect, and turns his wrath on his enemies, which must perish through his indignation asPsal. 1. a. chaffe and dust. 6 Therefore, O God, my soulPsal. 103. a. 104. a. d. shall praise thee for ever, for thou seekest the life to the preservation: but the enemies of the lifePsal. 21. a. b. must be brought to nothing. 7 O Lord, how is thy Goodnesse and Mercy out of thy love so great!Ezec. 34. b. that thou settest them free, who were taken and bound by others. 8 And thou makest that good againe, which was spoiled and corrupted by ano∣ther. 9 Againe thouMatth. 15. c. 28. b. Luke 19. b. John 10. a. seekest and findest that which was lost by another even unto no∣thingnesse. 10 Thou bringestEzek. 34. c. to right againe, that which was mis-led by another. 11 Thou revivest thatDeut. 22 d. 1 Kings 2. a. Job 31. a. which was put to death by another. 12 Thereby is known (O Lord) thy Almightinesse, for this (O God) is thy Love, Power and Mercy.
CHAP. XXI. Palme XVI. 1 GIve thanks to the Lord with Hymns: forPsal. 105. a. 106. Great and wonderfull is his mightinesse. 2 Where is there such a God as the God ofDeut. 32. d.  Kings 2. a. Wisdom 2. a. Israel who maketh the dead alive, and delivereth his Elect, out of thePsal. 30. a. 86. 116. 4. con∣demnation and judgement of hell. 3 And bringeth them away out of all the straights of their enemies, to his ho∣ly inheritance of rest and peace: accor∣ding as he hathJer. 30. 51. promised and sworne of old. 4 For be is Potent who1 King. 18. 21 29. a. Ecclus 47. a. killeth Thousands and hath killed ten Thou∣sand for to deliver his. 5 He riseth early against his enemies, which are oppressors of his, who out of anguish call upon him for the injustice sake. 6 Therefore is the Lord aPsal. 47. a. King of all Glory: an over ruler of all Powers. 7 For with the Arme of his strength he taketh in the land, and treads down his enemies, as if they were loame or lay. 8 With his breath or wind, hePsal. 104. d. scat∣tereth them away, as if they were dust and chaff.
9 And he delivereth thePsal. 72. a. poor and mi∣serable, which call upon him. 10 Therefore is the Lord great & migh∣ty aPsal. 47. 39. a. 96. b. King, and God in Eternity Allelu-ia, Allelu-ia. CHAP. XXII. Psalme XVII. 1 THerefore exalt our God and praise his holy Name. 2 Because he hath taken the Kingdome, and the Scepter of his Kingdom is made manifest. 3 For the Lord isPsal. 47. 93. a 96. 97. a. become King, wherefore let his people rejoyce, 4 His Word hath shewed power: his righteousness is become manifest. 5 His Spirit hath appeared like a light, and confirmeth his salvation forever. 6 The same God hath renewed us in him, and given us a new understanding. 7 A newEphes. 4. c. Col. 5. b. creature hath he brought forth, the image of God, the upright righ∣teousness. 8 Therefore the people speak with new tongues: the new song is in our mouth. 9 Lord,Jude 13. b. Psal. 72. b. 77. b. 136. a. wonderful are thy works: for thou hast done marvellous acts among us.
10 The evil that was in us, is now no where to be found amongst us; that which we knew not in the death, is now appa∣rent to us in the everlasting life. 11 The sinne is now, with us con∣demned in the sinneRom. 8. a.: The righteous∣nesse is declared unto us in righteousness. 12 The death is now among us swal∣lowed up in the deathHosea 13. b. 1 Cor. 15. f.: the everlasting life is come unto us in the renewing of our lives. 13 The hell is judged or condemned in theApoc. 17. 20. b. pit of hell: the heaven is shewed un∣to us in the heavenly being. 14 The lye is come to shame; the Truth is risen up unto us in the Truth. 15 The darknesses are gone into the bottomlesse pit to the darknessesPsal. 30. a.: the light hath illuminated us in the light. 16 The Idol is fallen in his Idolatry: the living God is become known unto us in the Diety, or Godhead. 17 Therefore we confesse the maiestie of our God; and the sanctification of his peo∣ple eternally.
CHAP. XXIII. Psalme XVIII. 1 O Lord, thou almighty God, Great and Psal. 139. b. Apoc 17. a. Wonderful are thy Works. 2 RighteousPsal. 24. b. 119. c. and true are thy ways thou Prince and King of Saints. 3 Who should not fear and love thee, O Lord, of life, and praise thy Name. 4 For there is no holiness but thou: for thou only (O Lord)1 Kings a. art holy. 5 All people shall worship thee, inPsal. 72. b. 87. a. thy thy presence where thou becommest manifest in thy holy Temple. 6 For thy righteousnessPsal. 98. a. are known, and thy holiness inherited by thy people. 7 But not a holiness by mens hands: but an holiness which is from Eternity, and shall continue forever. 8 Therefore do'st thou (O Lord) re∣main a God for ever, a King which shall reign eternally. 9 Thus are we now joyful in this por∣tion, and sing Heja, Heja, 10 Play to the Lord a newPsal 33. 96. a. 98. 104. a. d. song, and sing Allelu-ja, Al elu-ja.
CHAP. XXIV. Psalme XIX. 1 REjoyce ye with joy, yePsal. 48. b. 97 Esay 62. b. 66. Zeph. 3, b. Zach. 2. b. 8. a. 12. b. c. daughters of Sion: an refresh you, ye Citizens and inhabitants of the City Jerusalem. 2 Shout nowEsay 44. c. 49. b 65. d. with triumph, all ye Generatious of Israel: And rejoyce you in all love the children of peace. 3 Behold, your KingZach. 9. a. Mat. 21. a. John 12. b, appeareth unto you in meeknesse: and he comethMat. 25. d. with majestie. 4 For that he should establish you heire like in his Sanctuary for to possesse his Kingdome for ever. 5 But to his enemies, (the resisters of the Love)Jer. 23. b. 25. d. 30. c. Mat. 4. a. Rom 2. a. hee appeareth in wrath and severity. 6 For to thrust them from him, and to Mat. 25. d. shut them without his Kingdome eter∣nally. 7 For he will put a periodZeph. 1. b. to iniqui∣ty, and cast all falshood ad offencivenesse out of hisApoc. 21. 22. Kingdome. 8 He will disperse the deceitfull thoughts: his life, disposition and nature he will bring to light. 9 He will establish his Kingdome in
peace: and theEsay 9. a. Dan. 2. c. 7. b. peace of his Kingdome shall have no end. 10 Behold, this is the spiritual King∣dome of Christ the heavenly King for ever. Allelu-ja, Allelu-ja. CHAP. XXV. Psalme XV. 1 WHerefore (O yee souls)Psal. 95. a. shout now in your God for joy, and let your mind rejoyce in his Salvation. 2 From whom you were turned away, and are turned to him againe. 3 Behold, that is the stonePsal. 118. c. Esay 28. b. Mat. 21. c. 1 Pet. 2. a. which sa∣veth you, the eternal God of Israel, who the hath made heaven and earth. 4 His anointing is at his right hand: out of his spirit of Salvation commeth faithfulnesse and Truth unto us. 5 That which he hath smitten and wounded, he hathEzech. 34. c. healed and made whole againe. 6 He canDeut. 32. d. 1 Kings . a. Wisd 16. b. kill, and make alive again, he leadeth into hell and bringeth thence a∣gain. 7 He thrusteth away and condemneth, as it were in cursing: he calleth to him a∣gaine in blessing as his best e loved.
8 He bringeth dov to dust, earth, ad ashes: He exaltethPsal. 67. a. Luke 1. . again above all Ce∣dar trees. 9 He suffereth to fall into sorrow, as if it were nothing, and as if he esteemd it not. 10 He maketh it glad again, ad esteem∣eth it more precious then Gold, Silver and and precious Stones. 11 Where is their such a God,er 10. a. Mich. 7. b. as the God of Israel which moveth [or overspread∣eth] above all Heavens. 12 He hath founded the earth upon his WordG. u. 1. a. Prov. 3. c. the Firmament is comprehend∣ed in him. 13 Sun and Moon stand obedient to his commandment: all hearts of the living hath he in his hand. 14 HePsal. 114. b. doth all what ever he pleaseth: he respectethMat. 22. b. no man, neither wise, nor simple. 15 When he ariseth, all must stoop to him, and fear his mighty hand. 16 He chastiseth or rebuketh for a cer∣tain time:Psal. 30. a. Mich 7. b. but his goodnessPsal 136. endureth for ever. 17 Praise him all ye Kings, andPsal 148. b. all ye Counsellors in the Land: fear his Ma∣jesty all ye people. 18 Hee that worketh Wonders among the Heathens, and taketh a delight in his Elect.
19 He hath a pleasure in the house of Is∣rael, that he may plant the Generation of Jacob in righteousness. 20 He will notEsay 57. b. Jer 3. . for ever be angry with his people: their punishment shall not al∣wayes indure. 21 He punisheth them for their sins: he saveth and justifieth them for his holy Name sake. 22 Hee will not forget his Covenant, thatPsal. 105. a. Luke 1. . g. he hath made with Abraham Isaac, and Jacob. 23 He will not forsake his mercy, which he hath promised by his Servants and Prophets. 24 Yet once again will hee move the Earth,Agge 2. a Heb. 12. d. and gather his people together, Mat. 24. d. from all ends of the Earth, and be2 Mch. 2. b. gracious unto them. 25 A newJe. 31. d. covenant he will establish with them, he will give them a new name: Esay 56. 62. b the everlasting free ones, the redeemed of the Lord. 26 To whom the Law of the Lord, his Statutes and Rites, shall no more stand written in Tables of stone. 27 But God will write them in their hearts, in the innermostPsal. 40. a. Esay 31. a. Jer. 31. d. of their minds, in the ground of faith after the manner of Father Abraham.
28 Rejoyce yee then that have been re∣jected among all heathen. 29Psal. 47. a. Clap then with your hands, and dance then with your feet. 30 Make then your songs of joy at Sion: sing then Allelu-ja,Zach. 8. a. Tobir 13. a. in all the streets and lanes of Jerusalem. 31 Then cast from you the mourning garment: for that is the end of your shame and contempt. 32 Then put onEsay 61 b. the ornaments of joy: sing, play, andPsal. 81. 98. a. 149, 150. a. praise the Lord in triumphing. 33 Play upon Harpes, upon Lutes, upon Cymballs, Flutes, Tabors, Uialls, and upon all manner of Instruments with strings. 34 For then will God be your King, your head and onely Shepherd. 35 NoJer. 38. c. Zeph. 3. b. sinne shall any more destroy you: no Prophets shall any more seduce you. 36 Then shall you allJer. 31. d. know the Lord your God, as also his Statutes and Or∣dinances. 37 Hope now thereon O Israel: the same shall come unto you all yee children of Ja∣cob. Allelu-ja, Allelu-ja, Amen. 38 Give perpetual thanks to the great God of Israel, for besides him there isDeut. 4. a. Esay 42. 44. no other God.
CHAP. XXVI. THus hath the Lord who forsaketh not Ecclus 2. a. Elect, likewise, not forsaken, his chosen servant H. N. in his misery, lamen∣tation ad prayers. For like as he bring∣eth his own even into the death, andCeut. 12. d. Tobit 13. a. Wisd. 16. b. maketh alive againe, carrieth into hell, and bringeth from thence againe, permits theBaruch 5. a. enemy to carry away into captivi∣ty, and againe delivereth them out of the hands and captivity of their enemies: and exalteth or honoureth them among his li∣ving ones: So likewise the Lord delivered H. N. out of his misery, and out of the bonds of his enemies: and brought him also with Gladnesse (with his children of the Kingdome) againe to his most holy be∣ing, which is full of all pure beauty and heavenly riches: and revealed unto him the whole Tabernacle of his Sanctua∣ry, and the requiring of the service there∣of. 2 And H. N. praised and thanked the most highest, for the abundance of his mer∣cy, because that he replenished him with all fulnesse of his godly understanding, and H. N. diligently endeavoured himselfe againe to the obedience of his Service:
And the Lord revealed all things to him in the understanding, that was needful for the children of men to know for their sal∣vation. 3 And so in all these things that were re∣vealed and given him to understand from the Lord, hee was very zealous and dili∣gent (out of the revelation of God) to set down in writing the godly understand∣ing, and the right knowledge thereof. Al∣so for to describe the godly Testimonies (as far as the Lord revealed unto him, and might be profitable to the children of men) and to declare to the lovers of the Truth, and before all understadding (according to the true Being of Jesus Christ and his ho∣ly Spirit of Love) to publish the same in writing: And he hath done the same and (through the help of God) in some mea∣sure accomplished it. 4 But after that this ministration of the same godly Testimonies had had their forth-going thus for some years through H. N. (in writing and Printed Letters.) So were there some Writings of the same godly Testimonies come into the hands of Whoremongers, into the hands of Trai∣tors, and into the hands of self-conceited wise ones, also into the hands of the generation of Cain, and of the false hearts
of the Letter-learned, whoseMat. 23. c. 26 Acts 7. s. fore-fathers persecuted Christ, and his Witnesses, ac∣cused him falsly, and killed him. 5 Which wicked generation of false hearts, have dealt most shamefully with the Writings of H. N. and the same testi∣monies of God: and have also out of their evil deeds manifestedLuke . the wickedness of their hearts: and that the good nature of Christ dwelleth not in themGen. . . but the false nature of Cain, who murthered his bro∣ther Abel: also the evil spirit of1 Kings 18, 19 Saul, who persecuted the holy Prophet David: and the envious heart of the Letter-learn∣ed, whoMat. 26, 27. Acts 2. 7 &c. betrayed and killed Christ and his Witnesses. 6 These wicked Generations of the said wicked Fathers have not rested toMat. 23. ac∣complish the most horrid wickedness of their Fathers: but with their envious hearts have they (with great diligence) en∣devoured to resist the godly Testimonies of God, and his commiserating mercy, together with the love of the holy Spirit of Jesus Christ, and Gods elect Servant, with all false testimonies, lyes and reproach: So that they are most fearfully faln, against Gods commiserating grace [which he on the earth to the commiseration of all men (through his elect Minister H. N.) hath te∣stified,
and published] and gainst the Love of the holy Spirit of Jesus Christ, into all blasphemie of God, and into con∣tempt of his Truth. 7 These said false hearts likewise with the children of the Devil or the false Chri∣stians of the Devils School, have also with all manner of wickedness defamed H. N. (who yet was no mans enemy, nor con∣temned any man (in particular) for his re∣ligion: but heartily wished to all Religion urgers (that they might have the true light of life in the Lanthorn of their Service) hath loved all people (to the godliness in Jesus Christ) and behaved himself courte∣ously to all men in all upright conversati∣on) & have also secretly exclaimed against him to the Magistrate (when hee was not there present) for a Seducer and Malefa∣or, when he was not heard, or not at all speaking with him (although he yet walk∣ed openly) very falsly accused him: and have also contrived a matter, [or charge] very cunningly with all subtilty, against Law and all Christian Ordinances, to the end that H. N. (through their accusation, and clamour) might by the Magistrate be prosecuted or rooted out: And thereunto t Magistrate condescended.
CHAP. XXVII. 1 BUt at the same time in the nine and fiftieth year of the age of H. N. (in the time of Maximillian the first, being made Roman Emperour, by vertue [or power] of the Electoral Princes of the Roman Em∣pire and the German Nation) then sought the Magistrate where H. N. dwelled in the East (through the false relations of the enemies of H. N. (and through the false slanders which they had spoken against him among the people) to lye in wait for H. N. for to lay him fast in Prison: And so with the consent of the same aforesaid Magistrate) was H. N. (in the same Land where he dwelled) very vehemently perse∣cuted. And many ambushes were laid for him, for to bring him into prison. But the Lord smote them all withKings 6 b. great blind∣ness, who were his enemies and persecuted him: insomuch that they could by no means apprehend H. N. 2 Now when the Officers of the said Magistrate, had used all their diligence, to bring H. N into their hands: then the Lord manifested his mercy and assistance to him, carried him (by the hand of hisActs 12. a. b. Angels) openly before the eyes of his perse∣cutors away from that land without hurt:
And no man knew him, or could finde out which way he travelled. 3 Now when H. N. (for the uprightMat. 5 . righteousness of God, and the Godliness of Jesus Christ, and because that he attested and published the same under the obedience of the Love) was thus (through persecuti∣on) driven away through the hand of the Lord) he travelled away before the eyes of his persecutors: scaped. notwithstanding they writ very earnestly after him to several places, and his enemies made very dili∣gent search after him, to find him out, ne∣vertheless he kept on in his journey (in the way of Patience) towards another land, which the Lord shewed him, and wherein it should be more quiet and peaceable for him to inhabit. 4 He was sometime also in his journey (through his persecutors and through all false aspersions, and undecent contume∣lies, which were cast after him) much per∣plexed and bnrthened: and that for the most part, because those which were Letter∣learned, and did seem to be so wise: And to whom he had shewed all love and friend∣ship, were yet so ignorant, blind, and mis∣understanding, that they envied him, and unadvisedly resisted theRom. 2. a.  Thss. 2 b. Truth of God: and shamefully despised the fulfilling of the
godliness in Jesus Christ; and undecently reproched theMat 12. b. Hb. 18. c. holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ: and also persecuted him with wicked hearts ofPsal. 5 a. Je. 9. a. Rom. 3. a. lying slanderous lips, whom they had most cause to love, for as much as hee shewed all love and all mini∣strations to the Godliness in full explana∣tion to them.) 5 And so in his travelling and sadness, H. N. took unto him to read the Psalms of David: especially that Psalm, which the holy Prophet David (the anointed of the Lord) had formerly spoken, when1 Kings 16. b. 1S. b. 19. a. Saul (after the good Spirit of the Lord was de∣parted, and was much disquieted with an evil spirit from the Lord) persecuted him: and sought to take away his life: and when he was betrayed by1 Kigs 12. b. Doeg the Edomire: and first he made his preface to the Lord, and said. 6 O Lord God (heavenly Father) how perverse and wicked of heart, have theExod. 1. 3 Kings 22. c. Mat. 21. 23. wise of the World alwayes been, who do not fear thee, O God, with an humble heart, nor walk uprightly before thee. 7 And how imbitteredActs 7. s and hardned of heart, and how bloud-thirsty in their spirits and minds, have alwayes been the Letter-learned, and also the urgers of ce∣remonial Services, who have not (O God)
believed thee in the Word of thy holy Pro∣phets, nor been obedient thereunto: And also all those who forsake the Doctrine of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, andMat. 1. c. his hu∣mility and meekness, and have not learned the upright righteousness to the cleansing of their hearts, but framed and chose to themselves (out of the letter, counterfeit ceremonial services, and invented holi∣nesses, and have neither known, nor recei∣ved John 14 c, the holy anointing of thy holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ. 8 For like as Saul1 Kings 16. 18, 19. (with his evil and restless spirit) envyed and persecuted thine anointed David (who walked uprightly, and without deceit before thee: and like as the false hearts, of the Letter-learned have despised, belyed, reproached, and with fal∣shood defamed, and persecuted as evil do∣ers and seducers, thy3 Kings 22 c. Jer. 28. a. 26. holy Prophets, and thyMat 23. 26. deare sonne (thine anointed Jesus) and hisAct. 4. 7, 9, 12 14, 16, 21. witnesses, and had an intention to root them out: Even so (O God) this wicked Generation of the same wicked seed, and nature of the aforesaid false-hearts, have persecuted, reproached, and belyed me H. N. thy chosen servant because (O God) I love all people to the Godlinesse in Jesus Christ, And attest and set forth before them, thy commiserating
Grace and Love, and the upright righte∣ousnesse Luke 1. f. Ephes. 1. a. b. Col. 1. . 3. b. and holinesse of thy beloved Sonne Jesus Christ, (out of thy holy and gracious Word and Spirit of Love) and call and invite them all thereunto: And they have resisted andMat. 12. c. Heb. 10. c. reproached also thy holy Spirit, whom thou now in these last times, hast sent to declare the Truth of thy Christ. 9 Therefore must I now also with thy Prophet David take up a speech against mie enemies, and persecutors, and ut∣ter forth the same against their wicked deeds: And will (O God) abase my selfe before thee:Job 12. a. glory in thee and thy Good∣nesse: Supplicate and pray unto thee, and give thanks and praise to thee O God, for all the Goodnesse, which thou O heavenly Father hast bestowed on me H. N. thy cho∣sen servant. 10 And thereupon when H. N. had spo∣ken these words before the eares of the most high, then he began this speech against his enemies out of the Psalme of David and said.
CHAP. XXVIII. 1 OYePsal. 52. Tyrants: why do ye boast be∣cause ye can do mischief? whereas the goodness of God endureth yet daily. 2 Your tongues follow mischief, and with lyes ye cut, as a sharp Razor. 3 Ye rathhr speak evil then good: and rather falshood then truth. 4 Ye willingly speak, all that tendeth to destruction with false tongues. 5 Therefore will God also confound and totally consume you, remove you out of his Tent, [or Tabernacle] and root you out of the land of the living. 6 And the righteous shall see it, and fear: and laugh at you, and say. 7 Behold,Psal. 49 a. these are the men, that held not God for their comfort▪ but trusted one∣ly in theirEcclus 5. a. great riches: and were migh∣ty to do mischief. 8 But I shall continue as a green Olive tree, in the house of God: for I trust in the goodness of God constantly and for e∣ver. 9 I thank thee (O God) for ever: for thou art able to do it: I will relie on thy Name, for therein have thy Saints joy. 10 HelpPsal. 84. me (O God) through thy
Name: aud let me have justice through thy power. 11 Hear (O God) my prayers: hearken to the voice of my mouth. 12 Proud men set themselves against me, and Tyrants lay wait for my soul, aud have not God before their eyes. 13 Behold, God standeth by me: the Lord supporteth my soul. 14 He will reward the wickedness of mine Enemies:Deut. 32. d. cast them out through thy faithfulness. 15 Then will I (O Lord) bring unto to thee an offering of joy, and thank thy name, because it is so comfortable. 16 For thou delivere me out of all my misery, so that mine eyes see their desire on my enemies. 17 Deliver mePsal 59. a. my God from mine enemies: and protect mee from them that set themselves against me. 18 Deliver me from the evil doers, and help me from the bloud-thirsty. 19 For behold (Lord) they lie in wait for my soul: the strong ones gathered them∣selves against me, without any crime or mdeed of mine. 20 TheirPsal. 59.  doctrine is meer sin, & they persevere in their pride: they preach meere curses, gain-sayings, and detractions.
21 They think to extinguish him that is simplePsl. 62. 8. and are diligent to lye: give fair words, but they curse in their hearts. 22 But my soul waiteth upon God a∣lone: for he is my hope. 23 For they have opened theirPsal. 19 a. wicked and false mouthes against me, and speak against me with false tongues. 24 They speak every where poisonous∣ly against me, and fight without a cause. 25 Because I love them, therefore are they against me: but I do pray. 26 They requite me evil for good, and hatred for love. 27 Lord (O God)Psal 64. heare my voice, in my complaint: preserve my life from my cruel enemies. 28 Hide me from the gatherings of the wicked: from the multitude of evil doers. 29 Which whet their tongues as a sword: they aime with their poisonous words as with arrows, 30 SecretlyPsal. 11. c. to shoot at the upright: hshly they shoot at them without fear. 31 They are bold in their evil attempts, and say, how that they will lay snares, and say,The policy of all opposers of  Truth of God. who can see it. 32 They invent deceit, and keep it se∣cretly: they are destroyers and exercise fal∣shood subtily.
33 But God will suddenly shoot them, that woe shall come upon them: their own tongues shall overthrow them, and he that beholds them shall deride them. 34 And all men that see it, shall say: God hath done this: and shall perceive that it is his work. 35 But the Righteous shall rejoyce in the Lord, and trust in him: and all upright hearts shall glory thereat. CHAP. XXIX. 1 I Thank thee, O Lord, and King, and praise thee,Ecclus 52. O God, my Saviour. 2 I praise thy Name, that thou art my helper and protector. 3 For thou hast preserved my body from destruction, and from the snares of false treacherous tongues and lying lips: and thou ha helped me against mine ene∣mies. 4 And according to thine abundant mer∣cy, thou hast delivered me from the roaring of them which would devoure me: and out of the hands of such, as sought after my life: out of many sorrows which had sur∣rounded me, and out of the middest of the fire, that I should not be therein consu∣med.
5 Also out of the depth of Hell, and from the false praters and lyers: and also hast delivered me from the King or Magistrate, and from the unrighteous judgement of false tongues. 6 I was neer to death, and my life was almost going down to Hell: for I was compassed about on every side, and there was no man to help me. 7 I hoped indeed for the help of man: and behold there was none. 8 Then I remembred (O Lord thy mer∣cy, and how thou hast helped constantly: Thou deliverest all those which wait upon thee, and releasest them out of the hands of the heathen or uncircumcised. 9 Against their fierceness I prayed unto God, and intreated for deliverance from death: and called to the Lord my Father and Ruler, that he would not forsake me in my trouble, for the proud have lifted up themselves, and when I had no hope. 10 I will praise thy Name continually, and I honour and give thanks unto thee: for my prayer is heard, and thou hast de∣livered me from the destruction, and from all evil. 12 Therefore will I (O Lord) thank and praise thee, and extol or magnifie thy Name.
12 When I was yet but young, and be∣fore any errors took hold to seduce me, I very earnestly sought for wisdom in my prayer. 13 I went therefore into the Temple, and here, even until the last: and she was unto me an early ripe Grape. 14 My heart rejoyced in the wisdome, and I went presently in her way: and thus from my youth I sought after her. 15 I hearkned, and inclined my ears af∣ter her, and took her to me, or united me with her. 16 Then found I much wisdome, and through her I increase greatly, and praised him who gave me wisdome. 17 I was resolved to do accordingly, and to endeavour carefully after the good: and I was not there at ashamed. 18 I wrested there after with all my heart, and was diligent to do accordingly. 19 I lifted up my hands to Heaven, and my soul was enlightned through the wis∣dome? that I knew my follishness. 20 I ordered my heart to wisdome, and found her pure in all things: and I joyned in all things: and I joyned my heart with her, even from the beginning. 21 Therefore shall I not be forsaken, for my heart exceedingly longeth after her:
And therefore also have I obtained a good Treasure. 22 For the Lord hath given me through her, a new tongue, that I, with her, should praise him. 23 Come hither to me, ye that are un∣learned, and assemble you to me, in the house of instructio: and what you want that may ye learn, if your souls be very thirsty after it. 24 Behold, I have opened my mouth, & teach: therefore come now and buy wis∣dome for your selves: forasmuch as ye can have her without money: and bow your necks under her yoke: and be instructed: for she is now found neer at hand. 25 Look on me: how I have had for a little time labour and trouble: and have found a great comfort. 26 Therefore embrace the doctrine of wisdom as a great treasure: and keep her as a great heap of gold. 27 Rejoyce in the great mercy of God, and be not ashamed to praise him. 28 Do what is commanded you, whilst ye have time, and he will well recompence you, in his time.
CHAP. XXX. 1 IN the 65 year of the age of H▪ N. in the 12th moneth of the yeer, (in time of Ma∣ximilian the second was made Roman Em∣peror, by the power of the Electoral Prin∣ces of the Roman Empire, and the Grman Nation) the Word of Lord came to H. N. and said. 2 H. N. Arise, and be diligent to perform thy journey towards the land which will be convenient & peaceable for thee to dwell in, and conceal thy self very carefully from thy despisers: and keep thy self apart for a time from thine acquaintance and friends, according to the lesh: especially from those with whom thou hast (outwardly) most friendship. 3 But from thy despisers, and from the lascivious whoremongers & from all slan∣derous Traitors, accusers, and false cen∣surers of the testimonies of the holy Spi∣rit of my Love, together also from all im∣penitent ones, which have heard the same testimonies, and do not obediently take to heart (to the reforming of their lives) the requiring of my holy and gracious word: but have their conversation with the light-minded
and mockers, and with the enemies of my house of Love, and from all perjured and unfaithful ones which will not repent, Thou shalt (as much as possible thou mayest) wholy and altogether separate: And shalt keep thy self altogether separated from such so long as they do not obedient∣ly humble themselves under my gracious word, and ministration of Love, and bear not sorrow for their sins, neither confess, nor repent. And so proceed in thy journey till [thou commest] to another land that I will shew thee, which is full of blessing: which I have prepared from the beginning, for myMat. 25. d. chosen ones, with abundance of all my riches, toHeb. 3. b. 4. a▪ a land of rest and peace. 4 In which land it will be very conve∣nient and peaceable for thee to dwell in, & all those which love my gracious word and service of Love (unto Obedience) and bring forth sincere fruits of repentance, likewise all those which desire to assemble with thee, to the gracious Throne of my Majesty, & have faithful hearts, and do mind righte∣ousness and Love; will indeed willingly follow thee, and be joyned to the requiring of my Testimonies and obedience, for to becomeJohn 17. c. Acts . c. one in their heart and minde, in me.
5 They shall likewise, (for to come into the same land, and there to have their walk∣ing in thy fellowship) willingly heare and believe, the out-flowing words of thy mouth or of the Elders in the houshold of Love, and will obediently perform the re∣quiring thereof. 6 Therefore thy journey also and the way of thy Passeover to the same land, (as a preparation to theJohn 3. b new birth in Jesus Christ) shall continually be kept in re∣membrance, and plainly declared, shewed and proposed to the lovers of the Truth, and the upright Righteousness, and he thus passed through by the On-comming Elders, to the end that all those (who are inclined to the new birth in Jesus Christ, and desire to have their fellowship with thee, and with the Elders of the houshold of Love) pass through the same way of preparation, to the entrance of the4 Esd. 4. a. Mat. . b. same good Land, and to the new Birth in Jesus Christ, uprightly, and obediently, with an upright understanding of the Truth, and that they might be assembled to thee, and thy heart and mind, in my hereditary land of rest, and of peace) And should not erre through their good thinking opinion) nor yet suppose themto be therein before they be gone through the same way of the Passe∣over,
and in any wise not deceive them∣selves. 7 And when thou thus separatest thy self (for an example or glass to all good willing hearts unto the righteousnes) from thy kindred after the flesh, (for a time) and be takest thee to the journey, then shalt thou not eparate thy self, nor by no means esteem thy self severed [or disjoyned] from the Ancients thy fellow Elders in the Fa∣mily of Love: nor from the faithfull ones: but take advise, keep friendship and all love∣liness with them even to eternity: For of them shall travel with thee 24, and they shall be called unto meSeparated, crowned, sanctified. Burning, or fiery. NazaraeansNumb. 6. 8 Further there shall travel with thee four of the chiefest. Seraphims in the hous∣hold of Love, who shall alwayes be about and with you to the preservation of you all. 9 Behold, with these four and twenty Elders, and the four chiefest Seraphims, which I have ordained or joyned to thee, shalt thou travel forwards till that thou commest into mine holy land of the living, 4 Esdras 10. f where there are no buildings of men. 10 Thou shalt also out of all the testimo∣nies of thy Writings which thou hast pub∣lished, take of each one with thee, and bring it with thee into the holy land of the living: For there shalt thou with the said Elders,
(through the light of my wisdome) renew all the said testimonies of thy Writings, to make them more plain to the understand∣ing: and also testifie the same in fuller ex∣planation, and write them again more di∣stinctly. 11 For the Whoremongers, and the A∣dulterous generation, as also the earthly and fleshly minded, and the enemies of my houshold of Love have out of the testimo∣nies of thy former Writings judged ma∣ny sentences very unjustly, to their own seducing, therefore shalt thou now renew them all, in a more plain declaration, and bring forth and publish the same to the wel-willers of my Love. 12 There shall also be renewed to all those (with the same declared testimonies to the upright knowledge of the requiring of my word & service of Love and of the entrance to the upright life) namely, unto such who (out of a good intention) apply them to the testimonies of thy Writings, and have not rightly understood nor observed the requi∣ring thereof, and therefore have not shewed the upright obedience to their requirings, nor performed the first School-rule of the Christian Doctrine of the Service of my Love, yet notwithstanding are well incli∣ned, to bring forth upright fruits of repen∣tance)
to the intent that to every one, who will permit himself to be renewed, and re∣penteth, the truth of my word may be known: And the Whoremongers and im∣penitent ones, or any of the enemies to the house of Love, should understand theMat. 11. c 13. b.  Cor. 2. b. of the godly sayings. 13 I will yet also reveal unto thee in the land of the living, many of my wonderful works, and will give thee to understand yet truth many mysteries. 14 I will also declare and shew unto thee the appearing of my Glorie, theMat. 24. 25. Acts 1. b. 2 Thess. 1. a. Titus 2. b. glo∣rious comming of my Christ, and the Re∣surrection of my Saints, among the right believers, and obeyers of my word or Christ: and also how the right beleevers and obeyers, shall be renewed in theirRom. 12. a. Ephes. 4. spirit and mind, in this same day ofActs 17. d. my righteous Iudgement, and how the same renewing in the inward man, is the true accomplishing of the Priestly Office of my Christ under the obedience of the Beliefe: And how also in accom∣plishing the same, The said Priestly Of∣fice reacheth into the obedience of my Love, & to the inheriting of the spiritual & hea∣venly riches of the holy spirit of my Christ. 15 And thereupon H. N. praysed and thanked the God of heaven for his great
mercy and compassion, and for his righ∣teous judgement at the last time: And called to the Lord aud said. 16 O my Lord and God, now reveal unto me also which way I shall travel on, with thy chosen Saints & chiefest Elders in thy Family of Love, and with thy ho∣ly Testimoies of our writings, to per∣forme thy holy will, and to come to thy holy land, of which thou hast told me, and also that I might doe as thou hast commanded me. 17 Then said the Lord to H. N. the same way of the * suffering of my Christ, and of all my Saints, (wherei thou now al∣so walkest) thou shalt goe on to travel through it; and from the same way shalt thou not turne theeNmb. 10 b. neither to the right hand nor to the left, for the same way is the true way4 Esd. 7 b. Mat. 7. b. to my holy land of the living; where no4 Esd. 10. f. manner of building of men are found, 18 Therefore travel on in the same, even as I have told thee: and in the passing over the same, take good heed to the doctrine of my truth, the true preparation to the en∣trance of my land of the living. For so in the fulfilling of the same way, thou shalt find thy selfe in the holy place; wherein I the Lord dwell, live and raigne eternally.
19 Be of good courage in the same way of thy forth-going, for in the same way shall, nor can any selfishnesse nor humane conceited wisdome or subtiltie follow thee, nor by no meanes endamage thee. 20 And although they would seemingly travel thorow with thee the same way, yet shall they not be able, but shall fail therein, and become unbelieving, and so (through their stumbling or dislike) turn aside there∣from either to the right hand or the left. 21 But whosoever proceedeth in the sameMat. 10. c. 4. b. Heb. . a. (till to the end) constantly, and faithfully, andMat. 16. 19 c. Luke 9 14. c. forsaketh all for my sake, and simply and faithfully in the requi∣ring of the obedience of my service of Love) followeth thee, will I, (through my holy and gracious Word and Service of Love) lead them rightly, into my holy land of the living, and notJer. 31. c. Heb. 8. 10. b. remember their sins, nor their slumbling and falling any more. 22 Therefore, endevour thee deligent∣ly with these my holy-ones (which I have set before thee and with the godly te∣stimonies of thy Writings to accom∣plish more and more the foresaid way of Patience. 23 Likewise consult thou not with theGal. 1. c. flesh or bloud of men, nor with any mans craft or subtilty, but travel upon theHeb. 11. a. be∣lief
or trust of my word, till thou with the four and twenty Elders, and four chiefest Seraphims, be come to the holy place, where I shall reveal and shew unto thee my hea∣venly workings, where no4 Esd. 10 f. works of man can remain standing. 24 For there in my Inheritance of the living will I give thee an heritage for e∣ver. And confirm thee also in the Testa∣ments of the holy Fathers (Abraham, I∣saac and Jacob) to the end that thou mayest administer the same TestamentsRom. 6. b. to the death of the sin, and till to the life of the righteousness among the believers of my gracious word, and that then, all they also may be confirmed in the same Testaments and be made heirs with thee in my heredi∣tary land of the living, and so know and understand, that my testaments of the holy Fathers, are not administred forth of the knowledge of men, according to their con∣ceiving: butIsaiah 1.  Mich. 4. a. out of my true being, ac∣cording to the requiring of my gracious word and service of Love. 25 That also my Inheritance of the li∣ving, is not like unto the earthly Inheri∣tance of the dead, nor my life and joy to the the earthly life, nor to the joy of the earthly man, nor my mind: andIsaiah 55. a. meaning, to the thoughts and meanings and plausible conceiving of men.
26 But all these words which the Lord did speak to H. N. he laid up in his heart for to do accordingly, and he took himself to his journey (according to the requiring of the Word of the Lord) with the 24 Elders and the four Seraphims, and with the godly testimonies of his Writings. 27 And in this our travelling forward into the hereditary land of the living, we were seven times seven dayes, that is nine and forty dayes. 28 And in this our iourney in (all these nine and forty dayes) we eat4 Esd. 9 c. 12 f. no kind of food or creature, which had any breath of life in it self, or had received any. 29 Neither did we drink in all this same time of our travel anyNumb. 6. a. wine or strong drink for to rejoyce our hearts, nor to re∣fresh our minds, that we might not forget diligently to apply our selves to our jour∣ney. CHAP. XXXI. In this Chapter is plainly figured forth and declared the true preparation of the believers of the Word, to the Passeover of the new birth in Iesus Christ and to be∣come profitable and meer Elders and Ministers of the Word in the houshold of the Love of Iesus Christ.
1 NOw the beginning of our journey to the accomplishment over of the way of our passage to the heritable land of the living came thus to passe. 2 First of all (before we gave up our selves to travel forwardOr Gods mi∣nistry. to the service-ablenesse) we earnestly endeavoured us willingly and obediently, out of intire Love, to fulfill the Lords will and allMat. 3. c. righteousnesse: and remembring the Law of Moses theMat. 4. b. servant of the Lord, which the Lord commanded him on the mount The mount Horeb is the requiring of the obedience in the Laws & Ordinances of the Lord. Horeb, we gave our selves and all that was in our power, wholly over (as a free willing offering) to the Lord and his gra∣cious word: and committed our heart and mind (to obedience) unto the same graci∣ous word and his requiring: And prepa∣ring ourEcclus 2 a. soules for assaulting, we prayed the Lord which dwelleth in the hea∣vens. 3 And this (with willing hearts) we undertook our journey forward (like as the Lord had said to us. And travelled the the first six dayes upon the assurance or promises of the Lord) with cheerfull
minds, and we had in all these six dayes of our travel no kind of griefe nor assault∣ing, and we came on the first sixth day to the view of the upright Righteousnesse as to the Glasse of the same Righteousnesse. In which Glass is represented unto usLuke . f. Ephes. . a. 4. c. the upright Righteousnesse, before God and man: unto which the man was createdGen. 1. c. 2. a. . c. from the beginning, and is, in his e∣stranging from God, called and invited thereto through Jesus Christ. 4 In the same Glasse, was also repre∣sented to us the unrighteousnesse or sinne, Isaiah 59. a. whereby the children of men estrange themselves and turn away from God and his truth deal deceitfully one with another. 5 There was also figured forth, unto us, the right confession of sinnes, andMat. 3. a. Luke 3. a the upright fruits of repentance, which all sinfull men ought to bring forth, And also earnestly to endeavour themselves (in reforming their liues) unto the upright righteousnesse. 6 Now when all this was thus repre∣sented unto us, we were very earnestly carefull to have a right regard on the up∣right righteousness, & also of the upright fruits of repentance, and amendment of life, That we might keep all that in our hearts, unto a fruitfull life in the same
upright righteousnesse. 7 And therefore, that we might al∣wayes uprightly endeavour our selves to all this, so gave we our selves conti∣nually thereto, into a good watchfulness namely, into theHeb. 11. 1 Pet. 1. b. c. true Beliefe and Hope to the Righteousnesse, and into theMat. 3. a. Luke 3. 13. a. be∣wailing and confessing of sinnes unto an a∣mendment of life. 8 And being in all friendship received by the Belief and Hope to the Righteousnesse, and by the contrition for, and Confession of sinnes to the amendment of life, and endevoring, and wholly submitting our selves to their will and requiring, we rest∣ed with them the first seventh day. 9 The first day thereafter (next to the first seventh day) we travelled forward on our way, and rested us not in all the other six dayes of our journey, to do our work and diligence, And to inable us uprightly (in the Beliefe and Hope to the Righteous∣nesse, and in the Bewailing and Confessing of the sinnes to the amendment of life) to excercise our selves in the understanding, and to be instructed and taught in all these uprightly and according to the Truth. And so we came on the second sixth day to the Teaching of the Righteousnesse, In which Teaching we were fundamentally taught
and rightly instructed in the upright right∣eousnes and in the Belief and Hope to the same, and in the upright bewailing aud confessing of sins to the amēdment of life. 10 And that we might rightly and obe∣diently endevour us to the same doctrine and instruction, so thereupon gave we our selves continually to a goodWatchful∣nes. observation, namely, intoPsal. 40. a. Heb▪ 8. . the Delight to do the will of God, and in the Freewilling obedience. 11 Being most friendly received of the Delight to do Gods will and of the Free∣willing obedience, and endeavouring and wholly giving over our selves to their will and requiring, we rested with them the second seaventh day. 12 On the first day followinng, next to the second seventh day we went on in our journey, and we rested us not in all the third six dayes to do our worke or en∣deavour, and with diligence to excercise our selves, in the delight to do the will of God, and in the Free willing obedience, and to performe or to accomplish,Mat. 3▪ c. all righteousnesse, even as we were instruct∣ed and taught by the Elders in the doctrine of Righteousnesse. 13 In which exercising in the delight to do the will of God, and in the free willing obedience to accomplish all Righteous∣nesse,
we were (in all the three six dayes of our travel) stronglyEphes. . c. James 1. a. b. assailed with di∣vers manner of false humaneOr tempted desires (for to doe the will of the flesh) and with all selfe willed obedience,Or lust. (for to performe mens opiniated or good conceited Righ∣teousnesse) And so wholly to withdraw us from the delight to doe the will of God, aud from the willing obedience, to ac∣complish all Righteousnesse, and from the doctrine and instruction of the Elders in the Godly understanding unto the up∣right Righteousnesse. 14 For we did in all these third six dayes of our journey all our best indeavour and earnestnesse to overcome the assailing of the averse desires, against the desire to do the will of God, and the disobedience against Gods requiring, together with the false selfe will'd obedience, and (with the free-willing obedience unto Gods re∣quiring) to be preserved there fromEcclus 2. a. Gal. 6 Mat 22. And humbly praying to the Lord for it, we came on the third sixth day, to the right Fasting and Praying, In which FastingMat. 17. c. and Praying, we observed, how that men through the rightMat. 17. c. Fasting and Praying, and through the constant [or ear∣nest] willingnesse to the good life) delive∣red from all false lusts or desires, and
from all selfe-willed inclinations toDeut. 6. 10. a. Mat. 4. b. serve the Lord alone in his upright Righ∣teousnesse and holinesse. 15 And that we might uprightly endea∣vour thereunto, and overcome all that, which is against the will of the Lord and his Righteousnesse, And (with the will of the Lord and his Righteousnesse) obtaine the upper hand there against,Or watchful∣ness. we gave our selves continually into a good observa∣tion: namely, unto theGal. 5. b. 1 Pet. 2. b. fasting and for∣bearance, of all that the flesh lusted after, and that which the man selfishly conceived, and into the hungerMat. 5. a. and thirst after the Righteosnesse. 16 And being in all friendship admitted by the fasting and abstaining from all that the flesh desired and the man selfishly con∣ceived, and the hunger and thirst after Righteousnesse, and earnestly endeavou∣ring, and wholly submitting us to their will and requiring, we rested with them on the third seventh day. 17 The first day to it (next the third se∣venth day) we travelled on our way: and rested us not, in all the fourth six dayes of our journey, to performe our labour,
or industry, and (with all our diligence to fall and abstaine from all that the flesh, and the mans good conceiving lusted af∣ter, and became also very hungry and thirsty after the Righteousness: for to ob∣taine the same, and that it might ever∣lastingly remaine stedfast upon the2 Pet. 3. b. earth. 18 In which fasting and absteining, hungring and thirsting, wee were (in all the fourth six dayes of our travelling) most vehemently assailed [or tempted with all manner of things which the flesh lusted after, and which the man concei∣ved to be good and wherein hee loved his own life: and withall manner of un∣decent food (for to esteem the same free for the believers) to eat or feed upon, so in all the fourth six dayes of our journey, wee most humbly besought the Lord (in fasting and absteining, and in hungring, and in thirsting) that he would keepe us, from all deceitfull, or sweet tast∣ing-lusts of the lesh, and the Mans good-thinking, that wee yet might al∣wayes Mat. 16. Gal. 5. b. 1 Pet. 2. b. (in the fasting and absteining from the lusts of the flesh, and wherein the man loveth his owne life, and in
our hungring and thirstingMat. 5. a. after the Righteousness) remain stedfast unto the end, and at no time to live after the lusts of the flesh, nor the Mans selfe will, nor take on or choose any false righ∣teosnesse, according to the good-think∣ing of men: And thus we came on the fourth sixth day into a Straightness, in which Straightnesse we perceived that the way to the upright life (which men goe thorough or passe over in fasting and ab∣staining from all selfe lusts, and selfe minded life of men, and in hunger and thirst after Righteousness) is2 Esd. 7. a. Mat. 7. b. very nar∣row and straight: especially for those which are turned to themselves, and have placed their love and pleasure upon their own life. 19 Notwithstanding that we full well perceiving that to pass through the straightness is an narrow Gate, and small Path, yet wee feared not its pas∣sage: but instantly betook our selves to a good observation, namely,Mat. 26. Luke 12 d. Heavi∣ness of heart and in Sorrowfulness of the mind to accomplish the way unto the life uprightly. 20 Of this heaviness of heart, and
perplexednesse of mind, for to pass through the way unto the life uprightly, we were (in our sighing and praying to the Lord) very willingly received: and obteined of them a good promise to our comfort. For through the Elder Neemias, we were told (to our comfort) that we should in no wise fear: but remember in all our heavi∣ness and sadnesse. That all those which de∣sire to draw nigh to the living Godhead, and will be united with him in the herita∣ble land of the living, must enter through manyActs 14. c. tribulations, straightnesses, and sadness into the heritable land of the li∣ving, and into the Kingdome of the God of Heavens. And comforting us in this saying, and earnestly endeavoring, and wholy submitting our selves to the will and requiring of heavi-mindedness, and perplexedness of thoughts to pass through uprightly the way unto the life, we rested together with them on the fourth seventh day. 21 The first day to it (next to the fourth seventh day,) we travelled forward on our way, and rested us not at all in the fifth six dayes of our journey, to performe our la∣bour or watchfulness, and in all our hea∣viness
of heart, and encumbrance of mind, we (in sighing and praying unto God) re∣mained constant till to the endMt. 10. c. 24. b.. 22 In which heaviness of heart and encumbrance of mind, to passe over the way to the life uprightly, we wereWisd. 2. b. ex∣ceedingly assaulted, with allOr tempted. light-mind∣ednesse [or inconstancy] and carefulness a∣bout worldly and corruptible things,Or incon∣stancy. and with the love of the flesh to joyn our hearts thereto,O cumber∣smnes. and that we in all light-heartednes, and with confidence in worldly and corru∣ptible matters rest our selves pacified, for∣getting heavy-mindedness, and the care∣fulness of the Godly life, and (in respect of the love of our own lives) should accept of all wordly wisdom, light-heartedness, and foolish joys, or good thinkings, to our releasing from the same perplexitie [or hea∣vinesse.] 23 WhichOr tempta∣tion. assaulting, we all the fifth sixth days of our journey (in sighing and praying unto God) patiently indured, and always readily inclining us for to pass through the smallMat. 7. b. Luke 13. c. or narrow way to the entrance of the godly life: (in all obedience of the requiring of the gracious Word, and
his service of Love) andMat. 10. 24. b. till the end to remain stedfast therein. And so we came on the fifth sixt day into the Perseverance in the sameOr perplexi∣ty. Heaviness, In which Perseverance we observed the uprightOr stedfast∣ness. Constancy in the obedience of the Gracious Word of the Lord & hisOr God-ser∣vice. divine Worship, uprightly to pass the narrow way to the vertuous life: without hurt and hinderance, and enter into the Good and Godly life. 24 And for to endeavour us more per∣fectly to the same Constancie, we betook our selves continually in a good Watchfulness, namely,Psal. 45. b. Deut. 33. a. to a forgetfulness of all what is for∣saken, and to a Remembrance of the Good Life, which is to be travelled after. 25 Of the forgetting of all that which is forsaken, and of the remembring of the Good Life which is to be travelled after, we were in all friendly manner received: and uprightly endevoring us, in the forgetting it all that was to be forsaken, and in the re∣membring of the good life which ought to be wholy after, and wholy submitting to their will and requiring, we rested together with them on the fifth seventh day. 26 On the first day to it, next to the fifth seventh day we travelled on in our journey, and ceased not in all the sixt six dayes of our travelling to perform our labour and dili∣gence,
totally to forget it all, that which men are to forsake in respect of the good (or vertuous) life. And thus were we careful∣ly mindful of the good life, that we travel∣led after, that we might (with upright re∣newed hearts and minds) enter into the same good [or vertuons] life. 27 In which forgetting of all that is to be forsaken, and in remembring of the good life that ought to be travelled after, we with all unprofitable and unedifying things (which men ought to forsake, and to let in to the silence of oblivion) and withall those things, which we for the good life's cause had forsaken, and departed from, we were very vehemently tempted, to remember and to take on the same again: And to set all our comfort of life and welfare there∣upon according to the flesh. 28 For the corruptible things, and the taking on of all these things, whereto the natural minds & thoughts, & the destructio∣nable lusts of errors, of the unrepentant & unregenerate men do incline, wereOr figured forth. repre∣sented (or figured forth) in all our labour or travel (in all the sixth six dayes of our iourney) as upright things (which rightly belong to the good & upright ones, in pro∣priety to possess, & in freedome to enjoy be∣fore our good-willing minds & thoughts to
the good life of the upright righteousness, that we should call to mind, and take hold of the corruptible & destructionable things to our pleasure of life, to moil or cumber our selves therewith, and so forget the ever∣lasting uncorruptible good, & the doctrine and administration to the same, and no more to think or set our minds thereafter. 29 Which temptation we (in all the sixth six dayes of our travelling)Luke 12 c. in the Pa∣tience passed by, and daily forsaking all corruptible thingsMat. 16. 10 c Luke 19. 4. c. and wholy forget∣ting them, we came on the sixth six day to the Supper of the Lord Jesus Christ where∣in we perceived in what manner the Sup∣per of our Lord Jesus Christ isJohn 6. f. up∣rightly kept: And how that all those who rightly keep that same Supper with the Lord Jesus Christ enter with ChristJohn 5. a. (out of the death) into the good life, and to∣tally delivered or freed from all the ene∣mies of the life, and from all their temp∣tations. 30 Now when we observed all this, & ob∣teined an intire desire of heart to the same Supper, we then (forOr celebrate to keep uprightly the same Supper: according to his requiring) submitted our selves to a goodOr deence, safeguard, namely, to the Body and to the Bloud of Jesus Christ: and having assembled us to
the same Body and Bloud of Jesus Christ, we committed our selves wholy to the Bo∣dy of Jesus Christ, and his requiring, and to the Bloud of Jesus Christ, and his requi∣ring. 31 And thus were kindlyOr enter∣tained. received of the Body and of the Bloud of Jesus Christ: and were also on the same day, earnestly invited to the Supper of the Lord Jesus Christ, that in us, with us, and through us also (with the Lord Jesus Christ)Mat. 3. c. all righ∣teousness should be accomplished and esta∣blished, whereto God the Father hath cho∣sen and loved Mankind. 32 Now for toOr celebrate keep [or celebrate] rightly that same supper of the Lord Jesus Christ to which we were invited by the Grace of the Lord, and his commiserating Love, we endevored us earnestly for the same, and joyned our selves humbly, (as Or guests. invited ones, to the Table of the Lord, where at first were uttered forth great praise and thanks to the Lord.Or said. 33 Now when all this was done, then theMat. 26. c. Mark 14. c. Luke 22. b. 1 Cor. 11. c. good food of the same Supper was administred to us: And then to it, the most precious cup with the costly pure drink of the same Supper. 34 And so we did eat of the most worthy good food, and did drink: out of the excel∣lent
cup of the precious pure drink, of the same Supper of the Lord. 35 And moreover also, when we had fed upon this good food and pure drink of the same Supper, there was made known un∣to us (in the understanding) that all must so beLuke 24. 2. Acts 3 c. accomplished and fulfilled (in Jesus Christ with the manhood) which was fore-appointed and written of Christ, and of the salvation of theOr mankind. manly Gene∣ration. 36 But this good food which was admi∣nistred unto us in the same Supper, was Mat. 26. a. John 6. c. 1 Cor. 10 11. 5. the Body of Jesus Christ, and the good drink was the Bloud of Jesus Christ. And that same Body and bloud of Jesus Christ, was the good meat and pure drink of which we did joyntly eat and drink and the Cup out of which wee drunk the precious pure drink was theMat. 20. c. 26. d. Luke 22. c. Suffering [or Passion] of Jesus Christ. 37 Now when we (in the Supper of the Lord) had fed upon the body and bloud of Jesus and had received [or drawn] it in to our Body and bloud. and we having submitted us wholy to it & to the will, and requiring of the same Body and bloud of Jesus Christ (as unto a goodOr safeguard conserver. And thus being come with our body and bloud) oneJohn 6. . 1 Cor. 10. b. body and bloud with the bo∣dy,
and bloud of Jesus Christ, so rested we with the same body and bloud of the Lord Jesus Christ on the sixth seventh day. 38 The first day to it, (next the sixth se∣venth) day we travelled (as of one being with the body and bloud of Jesus Christ) forward on our way: & rested us not in all the seven six dayes of our journey, to do our labour & diligence, for to live and walk with the body and bloud of our Lord Jesus Christ (with which we were one body and bloud) inLuke 1. f. ppes. 1. a. 4. b Col. 1. c. all upright righteousness and holiness of our Lord Jesus Christ: and to conquer with him and his armour of righ∣teousness all enemies of the godly being of Jesus Christ, and toApoc 5. 22. a. reign and to tri∣umph with him eternally in the everlast∣ing life and kingdom of his heavenly Fa∣ther. 39 For at that time, when we had fed on the body and bloud of Jesus Christ, and were (with our body and bloud) become oe body and bloud with the body and bloud of Jesus Christ, and with him (as a Wife with a Husband) become one flesh andGen 2. b. bone, of his flesh and bone, and en∣devored us with all diligence to go forth with him, in all upright righteousness and holiness, to his true being according to the
Spirit: then we observed how that all ene∣mies of the Godly life, and all those who were turned away from the obedience of the requiring of our service of Love rose up very resistingly. 40 For all those who were turned to themselves, and their opinion and ima∣gination of the knowledge became our enemies together with the enemies of the Godly Life, and upright being of Jesus Christ, all did resist [or strive] (every one with his particular power and malice) a∣gainst the body & bloud of Jesus Christ, and against us. Namely, the worldly hearts, with their worldly pride, or lusts1 John . . of the flesh, lust of the eyes, and haughtiness of life: The false hearts of the Letter-learn∣ed with their scribling knowledge.Or Letter. The hy∣pocrites withCol. 2. c. 2 Pet. 2. b. Jude . b. their self made holiness, and counterfeit ceremonial God-service: The self Seekers, with their profit-seeking andOr coves∣ness. greediness: The self-conceited toge∣ther with the Apostates from the obedience of the doctrine of the service of Love, with their opinion of the humane Self-conceit∣edness, and with the fals freedom of impe∣nitent unregenerate men: The lascivious sinners and sinneresses with their ungod∣ly and unchast life: The envious and slan∣derers, with their persecuting, and speaking
lyes: and all spiteful and wicked doers, with their malice and falshood, &c. 41 All these and such like, with their con∣sorts, adherents, or companions, used all their subtilty totally to destroy, and from the sight of their eyes to put away, or root out from the earth, the holy Body & pure bloud, or life of Jesus Christ and his good or upright being, and so then to live free by themselves in the separateness from the obedience of the doctrine of H. N. and the service of the love of Jesus Christ. 22 For the eyes of the wicked hearts can by no means endure2 Tim. 4. a. the Goodness, nor the true doctrine of the love of Jesus Christ, nor also the obedience to the entrance of his upright being, asOr to esteem it for good. to cast a good lookon it, or to think well on it, but to make the worst construction of it, and to despise, and to de∣stroy his Body and bloud. 43 Yea, they say one to another, he boast∣eth himself too highly, and giveth himself out, that he is of one being with God, and John 10. f. is the Son of God, and the heir of Gods spirituall and heavenly treasures, and that there belongeth not to us (though we yet know how to talk of it) to have any Or potion. share in the inheritance of the Lord: Let us accuse Him,Wisd. 2. c. that is his body and bloud, or his Fellowship of Love) with
all manner of malignity or unjust acti∣ons: and let us charge him with most wicked things, let us destroy or kill him with the most shamefullest sufferings, or let him be delivered up to the Iudge (to his Or destincti∣on. slaughter, or destruction): So, remain Ma. 21. d. we in the Inheritance, & in the estimati∣on among men that we are pure & upright; and have right in our cause or demands a∣gainst him & his Communialty of Love. 44 Thus we observed (in the union with the Body and bloud of Jesus Christ that the wicked & hardened) hearts against us, & the Body & bloud of Jesus Christ, likewise the apostates from the obedience of the Truth did all their endeavour [or diligence] to have the estimation amongstMat. 6. 23. a. Luke 16. c. Iohn. 3. 6. men, as if they against that Body and bloud of Jesus Christ, and against us, were Or just and innot. upright, and did well therein, al∣though they earnestly endevoured wholy to dishonour Jesus Christ and us: and to make us detestable before men: and like∣wise that precious pure bloud of Jesus Christ (that was (to the forgiveness of sinnes)Mat. 29. c. Luke 22. . shead for many, & wherewith we with our bloud are become one bloud) to defame as impure before all men, so that the same isOr . despised for unclean among many. And, as unclean, might
be poured forth and trampled upon. 45 Now when we thus observed the ri∣sing up of the wicked, and all Hypocrites, and enemies of the Godly Life, against the Body and bloud of Jesus Christ: And be∣held that the Body & bloud of Jesus Christ (wherewith we were become one body and bloud) was suffering all that with lowly and meek hearts (without resisting: so we saw and observed, that the same Body and bloud of Jesus Christ (in all his suffering and reproach (openedIsaiah 43. b.  Pet. 2. c. not his mouth, e∣ven as a Lambe that is led to the slaughter-house, and as a sheep that is dumbe before his shearer. Where through we also in all our sufferings (wherewith we were one Body and bloud with him) were wholy moved with his sufferings: So that we also in our whole Body and bloud obtein∣ed an inclination to suffer with them, & we found our selves wholy prepared, rather to suffer & to die with him (forasmuch as we knew him righteous, & then to live in sin with the falshood of the false hearts: & with the sin of sinners, and enemies of the God∣ly life. 46 And thus travelling forth (in this-Good-willingness) with Jesus Christ,Mat. 27. we came on the seventh sixth day, to theOr perform∣ing▪ ac∣complishing of the sufferings of Jesus
Christ: wherein we observed the whole summe of the finishing and fulfilling, or satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and his Be∣lievers, unto the true Godliness. 47 For in this fulfilling, or [or accom∣plishing] we perceived in the understand∣ing, That all men who will live and reign with the Lord Jesus Christ, (in his Glory) must alsoAct. 14. d. Apoc. 7. b. suffer with Christ: and then likewise with Christ, enter into the Glory of Christ, and inherit the same. 48 Furthermore, wee observed also in this accomplishment, to what end this Gospel of the Kingdom isMat. 24. b. Apoc. 14. . published in all the World, and from thence cometh the accomplishment and fulfilling of all that is written of Christ, and the salvation of man. 49 There was also in the sameOr . ac∣complishment fully revealed, and in clear∣ness made manifestOr . unto us. The whole Scripture, which testifieth of Christ and of his Sufferings or Passeover, and of the upright righteousness of men in Jesus Christ AndLuke 24 . Act. 2.  13. d. how that Christ (like as we have heard and seen of him (in his suffe∣rings) and passed through with him) must suffer all these things, and so to enter into his Glory, and thusJohn 14. . Acts 1. b. go before all sinful men in to the entrance of the eternal life,
and the Kingdom of Heavens, that they also should follow after him therein, and inherit with him the eternal life. 50 For ChristActs 3. c. must thusOr fulfil, or perform. suffer, and accomplish his love to us: and so go before us (as anUnguilty one. Innocent) and that he also by his guiltless sufferings should be an example [or patern] to all sinful men, and thereby to shew unto them, that they (by reason of their sins) are debtors to the same sufferings, and (as debtors) to 1 Pet 2. c. 4. a. follow him therein, and to draw unto him all men who are loaden with sins: and also to acquit them (though his Body and bloud,Or dischardg and through his like sufferings) from their sins, to deliverHos. 13. b.  Co. 15. f. Heb 2. c. them from the bonds of death and to save them: and restore, or bring them again with him (in all upright righteousness and holiness) to their God (his heavenly Fa∣ther) and to his glory in the kingdom of God, and in the everlasting life. 51 And that wee might uprightly en∣deavour us to this aforesaid accomplish∣ment (with the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Or manhood. humanity) and rightly enter into, and inherit the same with the Lord Jesus Christ according to the truth of Jesus Christ, and according to the requiring of the obe∣dience of his belief▪ So gave wee up our
selves there (on the same seventh sixth day of our travelling) into a goodOr watch∣fulness. custody, with the Body and bloud of Jesus Christ, which standeth upon the Mount NeboDeut. 32. c. on the uppermost height, top, or firmness, from whence we obtein'd the sight of the ho¦ly inheritance, of God, & of his living ones. 52 And on the same MountThe Mount Nebo is the ap∣pearing or de∣claring of the inheritance of the Righteous in their rising from the death. Nebo, there was revealed and made known unto us also2 Mach. 2. a. the secret place where the Pro∣phet Jeremian, had hid the true Taberna∣cle and Ark, and the true Altar of the Of∣ferings of Incense: And the time also was come or accomplished, in which the Lord should be merciful unto his people, and bring them to his rest. 53 And the same goodOr safeguard watchfunless to which we betook our selves (on the Mount Nebo) was the trueIohn 11. a. Rom. 6. a. Col. 2. b. implanting with Christ in his like death: and the right im∣planting with Christ in his like burial. 54 Of this implanting with Christ in his like death, and of the implanting with Christ in his like burial wee were very firmly embraced. 55 At the same instant in the embracing of the implanting with Christ in his like death and burial, we offered to the God of Heaven (on his Altar of In∣cense in the Holy of the true Tabernacle)
our free willing Offering in the Of∣fering Or confor∣ here to. of the High Priest, Jesus Christ: And 9. b. c. the Offering of the High Priest Jesus Christ, kindled or fired our Offering: And thus our Offering was a hollowed burnt Offering before the Lord. And the Lord Jesus Christ made this our Offering, (through his Offering) acceptable before God his Father: and the holy of his Tabernacle was full of sweet perfumes, and the. 27. s.  5. d. veile opened asunder, and the most holiest in his pure and perfect beauty was revealed, and Christ also according to the Spirit, as High Priest in the same most holy, as a minister of the spiritual and heavenly Goods. 56 Thus had the Lord (our heavenly Father) through the Offering of our High Priest Jesus Christ, to the accomplishing of the dayly God-service (in the holy of the true Tabernacle) a great delight in the ac∣complishing of our Offering and God-service in the holy of the true Taberna∣cle of Jesus Christ under the obedience of the Beliefe. 57 Which freedom to the entrance into the said holy (for to perform to the living God of heaven such acceptable Offering and pleasing Service of God) we have ob∣tained
and purchased through the bloud of Jesus Christ Yea, verily, to the accomplish∣ing of the same, hath Jesus Christ prepared for us the entrance into the Holy by a new and living way theHb. 10. c. veil▪ that is, through his flesh. 58 And thus when we had finished or fulfilled our Offering and God-service (un∣der the obedience of the Belief) in the offer∣ing and God-service of our LordRom. 6. Col. 2. b. Jesus Christ, wee rested us with Christ in his like death and burial, on the nine and for∣tieth day of our journey. 59 And thus on the nine and fortieth day resting us in our Lord Jesus Christ, from our work and labour we have perfected or Or finished. fulfilled our journey, and our offering and God-service, with Jesus Christ in the holy, under the obedience of the Belief: And thus through Christ according to the Spirit wee have gotten and obteined the ministration of the spiritual and hea∣venly Goods, and the everlasting life. CHAP. XXXII. 1 BUt on the fiftieth day of our journey, on the fifteenth day of the first moneth [on the day of Phase or Pasche] came into us a
still, soft, silent voice, wind or Spirit: And we were enlightned in Christ, with theMat. 17 a. Mark 9. a. Luke 9. d. clearness [or brightness] of Christ: And thus in our illuminatingIlluminated. on the same fif∣tieth day, there appeared to us in a cloud the living God-head of our Lord Jesus Christ, and became altogether of one being with us, and gathered us to the Mercy-Seat of his divine Majesty, and also to the holy Mount Sion,Isaiah 2, a. Micah 4 a. Mount Sion is the Peection. where the Law or Ordinance of the Lord is promised to go forth at the last time: And to the true Jeru∣salem, where the Word of the Lord at the last time is likewise promised to go forth. 2 And the Lord gave his mighty great sound out of Sion, and caused his voice to be heard out of Jerusalem. And soIsa 2. a 59. a. Jer. 25. d. Amos 1. a. Amos 1. a. Mich. 4. a. Rom. 11. 1. d. flow∣ed the Law or Ordinance of the Lord out of Sion. And his Word forth of Jeru∣salem. And the Scripture of the Godly Testimonies, were accomplished in us, and with us in Jesus Christ: And the for∣mer kingdom full of all pure beauty, and heavenly riches, and full of all vertues ad upright righteousness, (which God from the beginning4 Esd. 6. f. Mat. 25. d. hath prepared for the man) was shewed unto us in his perfect adorning, and we were inherited therein eternally: and it was allActs 3. c. restored again
to us, in us and with us, what God had spoken, wrought, and appointed, and pro∣mised through the mouthes of his holy Prophets from the beginning of the World. 3 And that same is the new day, and the manifestation of the kingdom of Heavens and his righteousness, wherein all Belie∣vers of Jesus Christ, (who follow after Je∣sus ChristMat. 29. d. John 3. a Rom. 6. a. to the second birth) do inherit: And the same new day with the fulnesse of his beauties, riches, and vertues, is the day of which the Kingly Prophet David hath of old Evangelized: like as there standeth written, this is thePsal. 118. d. day the Lord hath made, let us rejoyce and be glad therein. 4 And thus in these wonderfull works of God, the word of the Lord came to H N, and said: This holy Land; which thou here at this present beholdest, and wherein thou art now everlastingly inherited, is the holy inheritance of my living-ones:Psal. 15. 24. a 132. b. Heb. 3. b. 4. a. and is my rest, and the holy place of my dwelling; it is also the true Rest, which I have promised my people Israel, and all the holy-ones of my Christ, and have given it for an eternall inheritance. 5 It is my true Building2 Cor. 5. a. Ephes. 2. c. that I my selfe have prepared, (for all those who love mee) and whereinto I gather all my
Lovers to mee, and to my people: and it is my holy and godly understanding, wherein I live eternally, and in which I illuminate and endue all the Believers of my Christ, (in their second birth) with such an abounding godly understanding, That they far excel all humane and Letter-learn∣ed knowledges, and in the life of my godly clearness, far surmount the same. 6 It is my durable kingdomDaniel 2. c. Luke 1. c. Heb. 12. d. wherein I will for ever plant, and firmly settle, all mine Elect (to an eternal rest, and perfectly joy) now in the last times. 7 And I have from everlasting ordained them thereunto, to manifest therein for e∣ver and ever, my heavenly wonders, and also to declare the same from thence upon the earth, for a witness. That I the Lord (who am an eternal and living God) live from everlasting to everlasting:Mat. 22. d. Luke 20. g. And that I now at the last time,Jer. 9, c. bring upon the earth the judgment and the righteousness, and the Majesty of my divine Glory. 8 Therefore shalt thou H. N together with the four and twenty Elders, and the four Seraphims dwell with me, and all my holy ones, in this my holy place eternally. 9 And the declaration of my upright Godliness, which thou here hast received from my1 Cor. 13. b. 2. Cor. 3. b. uncovered face, shalt thou al∣so
make known upon the earth: And (with the testimonies of my righteousness, and with the publication of the joyful message of my Kingdome) enlighten the whole World: and so declare, that now my true kingdom of heavens, (with the fulness of it's pure beauty and heavenly riches) is appeared, manifested, and comne upon the earth, according to the promises: to the salvation and blessing of all men, who with their whole hearts seek the same, and the righteousness thereof. 10 I also will yet shew unto thee, in this holy place of my living-ones, more of my heavenly workings: and give thee also to understand, many mysteries, which hither∣to hath not bin known to theMat. 13. b. Rom. 16. c. Ephes. 3. a. Col. 1. c. world. Also what my last Will or Testament is, of the ministration of my most holy Priestly Of∣fice under the obedience of my Love. 11 For from hence-forth in this day, will I look upon the estranging of men, from my Truth, with the eyes of compas∣sion, to give unto them out of my Priestly Office of Love,Mat. 3. a. Luke 3. 13. a. Acts 2. 3. c. the true repentance for their sins, and shew forth the true entrance of the Goodlife. 12 And because that all men in their e∣stranging, or before they out of the doctrine of my grarlous word, and out of the holy
Spirit of my love are renewed, or born a∣gain, beareDeut. 10. b. ler. 4. a. a veile or covering before their hearts (betwixt them and my face) so will I also now in this last time, be gra∣cious unto all those (who believe my gra∣cious Word in its doctrine, and obedient∣ly enter into its requiring) and they shall all (through the good exercising in myadministra∣tion Or∣dinances) be nourished up unto my upright righteousness, and unto my Love, and be brought in, unto the peace of my Christ. 17 And like as I have in former times through my servant MosesExod. 20. Deut. 5. a. upon the Mount Horeb, given to my people good Ordinances andStatutes. Exercises, which extend and bring in to my Christ, and to his belief of the salvation from their sins, so will I now at the last time, through thee H. N. from the moūtIsaiah 2. a. Mich. 4. a. Sion, give to the welaffected ones to my righteousnes, good Ordinances, and godly Exercises, whichOr each. extend & bring into me, & to my Love, & upright righteousness, to the peace of my Christ, to the renewing of their lives & minds, and into this my king∣dom of Heaven: unto the inheriting of all these my spiritual and heavenly treasures, and my upright lovely being, in the same kingdom, and everlasting life: as also that I may raign (now at this last time,) e∣verlastingly with my people (in the righ∣teousness)
2 Pet 3. b. Apoc. 5. 21. a. over the whole World, unto all unity and peace on earth, and to a bles∣sing of all the Generations of the earth, ac∣cording to my promises. 4 Seeing then I now declare on earth though my Love, and through the service and the good exercise thereof, the upright righteousness of my Lawes, the true faith of my Christ, and the upright being of my holy Spirit: Therefore it is my will and command, that all people on earth, shall o∣bey the requiring of my Love and her ser∣vices, likewise the good Ordinances and Exercises thereof, and live therein. 15 For all those who live and walk obediently in the service and ordinance of my Love, the same are truly the right DisciplesIohn 8. b. Iames 1. c. x 4 Esd. 6. f. Heb. 12. c. of my gracious word and service of Love, also my first-born in my Covenant or Testament of the holy Fathers. 16 For thus in their obedience, the do∣ctrines and services of the Priestly Office of my Love, shall be unto them, a foregoing testament, which bringeth them to my new Jer. 8. 10. b. Heb. 8. 10. b. & true Testament [that is to the new life of the mind of God which is full of Love, and full of all spiritual & heavenly riches]☜ and all they who are led therein shall be to me, my second born in the new Covenant
of the holy Spirit of my Love in the hea∣venly being: as I have in former times (in the accomplishing of my fore-going Te∣staments and Priestly Offices) brought to my people the same new Covenant, to the end that all now in this last or newest day, Acts 31 c. be restored or established (under the obe∣dience of my Love) which I from the be∣ginning of the World have spoken, wrought, and required: and my word, work, and will continueth on the earth un∣changeably for ever and everMat. 6. b. even as it is in the Heaven: and also that for ever and ever, (through the Ministers and Priests of my Famlly of Love). The Disciples of my gracious Word (with the Testimo∣nies of my holy Spirit of Love) may be Rom. 10. a. Gal. 3. 4. a. preserved and susteined to the Godly lifeMat. 13. f. taught to the kingdome of Heavens, and brought up (to Elders) in all Godly wisdom and holy understanding. 17 And therefore will I here through thee H. N. setInstitute or erect. up my most holy Priestly Office of Love: & will also declare the same over the World (through its Ministery un∣der the obedience of my Love) to an ever∣lasting Jer. 35. b. c. Priestly Office of the holy Spi∣rit of my Christ: for renewing of life in my love in them all through my love to them, who are implanted into my Christ with
hisRom. 6. a. Col. 2. b. like death and burial, or are fal a∣sleep in him, 18 In the same Priestly Office, will I also (under the obedience of my Love) be merciful to all penitent sinners, also to those who submit themselves to the Family of my Love, That they may all now rejoyce themselves (in this day of my divine glory: appear with my Christ in Glory: and shew forth my praise, and wonderful great works. 19 Furthermore I will declare, and make known unto thee, and to all them who Or submit. humble themselves under my Love, and Priestly Office, that the same Priestly Of∣fice of my Love, (which I will here present∣ly set up with thee) is the eternal fast-stand∣ing Kingly Priesthood1 Pet. 2. a. Apoc. 1. a. of my holy Spi∣rit, and the everlasting peaceableIsaiah 9. er. 31. c. Daniel 2▪ c. Apoc. 12. b. king∣dom of my Christ, which shall never be destroyed [or moved] neither shall it fall to any other: but shall of it self and by it self remain in my truth everlastinly. 20 Whoever resisteth the same Priest∣hood of my holy Spirit of Love in his of∣fice and requiring, the same, (if he do not repent) shall procure the judgement ofDout. 27. . the curse, & the eternal2 Thes. . a separation from the beholding of my face: But my Grace and mercyPsal. 30 c. Isaiah 54. a. shall be alwayes and for e∣ver
upon all men, who (through the same Priestood and its office, under the obedience of my Love) turn themselves to me, and repent them of their sins. 21 Again the Word of the Lord came to H. N. and to us the Elders and said, See∣ing I my self, with all that which con∣cerneth myOr Godhead Godhead, and the judgament of my Righteousness have fully united with thee H. N. and with the Elders: There∣shall ye also, and all they who are born of you and your doctrine shall judg upright∣ly, out of my righteous judgment, accord∣ing to the Truth. 22 And all what ye out of the same my judgment curse, separate, and condemne Mat. 18. b. John 20. c. shall be accursed, separated, and into the Hell condemned: And all what ye bless or give a benediction unto, shall be also bles∣sed in the Heavens. 23 Therefore all whatever shall con∣tinue in your doctrine, shall beJohn 17. b. Acts 4. d. one heart and mind with you in my Godhead: but what separateth it self from you and your doctrine shall likewise be separated from me and my Grace: find no way to the eter∣nal life, but shall die in hisn sin: and also be estranged from me everlastingly. 24 But all those who through you and your doctrine and turned to me, and also
areMat. 13. f. taught to the kingdom of my hea∣venly being shall inherit the spiritual and heavenly riches of my kingdom, andMat. 25. Rom. 6. c. thereunto the eternal life. 25 At the same time when we thus heard the Word of the Lord, and had well under∣stood all his sayings: and were assembled with Christ our Saviour to the Majesty of God, and were entered into his Glory, and also (in the presence of the Lord) beheld and and inherited the peace,Apoc. 21. a. beauties and ri∣ches of God, all our hearts were fully de∣lighted and made glad: And so with joyful hearts we lauded & praised the most High in his holy Land of the Living: and the four Seraphins gaveApoc. 4. 45. all Honour, Laud, and Praise, unto him who liveth therein from Everlasting unto Everlasting. 26 After this our Thanksgiving and Praising the Lord, the Word of the Lord came to H. N. and said: 27 Hast thou H. N, well observed in thy journey into this my holy inheritable land of the living, That the most part of the peo∣ple, despise thy ministration of my holy & gracious Word, and blaspheme my holy Spirit of Love: And also that they despi∣sing [or contemning] the offerings of my Grace bring upon themselves myRom. 2. a. 2. hess. 1. a. wrath and displeasure and the judgement of their eternal condemnation.
28 Besides hast thou also well observed that the many Godly Testimonies of thy Writings (which thou with great diligence and care out of my holy Word and Spirit of Love, hast written & brought to light (are come among many Whoremongers, for∣sworn, or unfaithful ones, & among many enemies reprochers of my House of Love, & how falsly they do judge the same: and how disorderly & shamefully that theyOr mention. handle and deal with the same: For with the same they commit their Whoredoms: prophane my holy Name: and break the mariage, of fidelity of the Covenant of myconjunction. Wed∣lock: and so after the nature of Harlots, and of impudent adulterous ones). They manifest against me and my holy Word, and Spirit of Love all unfaithfulness: So that they wholy contemn my upright Righteousness and Love, and make a mock at it, and so continually procure upon themselves, the horrible vengeance of the hellish fire. CHAP. XXXIII. 1 AGain the Lord spake to H. N. Foras∣much as thy writings of my holy and godly Testimonies (which thou hitherto with great care and diligence hast written and published) are now come into so ma∣ny
hands of the Enemies of my house [or Family] of Love, and into so many hands of Whoremongers unfaithful-ones: And also that some impure hearts which for a time haveOr deaft. medled therewith, have ming∣led therewith, their impure sense and good∣thinking knowledge, also many (to the co∣vering of their selfishness, and to their own destruction) have therewith defended and covered the unclean minds of their wicked justs and desires: and have not believed theMat. 22. d. Ephel. 1. a. b. upright Righteousness of my Love (according to the requiring of the Godly Testimonies of thy Writings: So shalt thou now the Godly Testimonies of thy Writings (which thou broughtest of each one with thee) with the twenty four ancient Supra 30. c. Elders carefully peruse: & have a sharp regard upon all sayings with careful con∣sideration. 2 I the Lord will enlighten thy heart,Or most Anci∣ents. and the heart of the four and twenty Elders (who are with thee, and who are to per∣form the laborious Service with thee) with my Godly Wisdom, and with the true light of my Godly cleerness, more & more with my aboundingApoc 21. d. 22. . Illumination. 3 And after the same perfect Illumina∣tion of my Godly cleerness, ye shall then al∣so renew, all the same Testimonies of thy
Writings, to a more plainOr explana∣tion. declaration: and witness all the same in a more perfect O plainness cleerness, and write them more plainly then they have been: and likewise that the Whoremongers remainMat. 13. b. Luke 8. b. Apoc. 21. 22. c. without the mystery thereof: and also without the mar∣riage of my unity or conjunction. 4 For now is the time nigh at hand, that all whoremongers and all unfaithful ones in the covenant of my we dlock or matri∣mony, and all such who delight in whore∣dome and adultery, and are enemies of my Family of Love, and who (with their pru∣dence out of the flesh) conceive themselves Isaiah 5 c. to be wise, shall in their whorishness, unfaithfulness and envious nature (before all the believes and obeyers of my graci∣ous word and service of Love) be made ma∣nifest, and made known: In their whore∣dome and enmity and in all the good∣thinking shal be wholy blinded,1 Cor. 4. a. scattered, laid waste, or hardned in their hearts: and also (if they repent not) shall be excluded from my unity and heavenlyMat. 25. b. Apoc. 21. d. 2. c. tiches. 5 And on the other side all believers and faithful obedient disciples of my gracious word, and all penitent sinners, together with all those who preserve in [or defend] the Service of my Love, aud wish all good and prosperity, shall be illuminated in the God∣ly
life of my Love, and be made heirsMat. 25. Ephes. 1. a. in my spiritual and heavenly riches. 6 And further, on the same fifteenth day of the first moneth (when the Lord had spo∣ken all these words with us) we took to us the same Testimonies of our Writings, which we had brought with us, and so we began the same (with all devoutness to God, and to his Truth and upright righ∣teousness) very seriously to peruse, and the same (according to Gods most perfect cleer∣ness and wisdome, and the knowledge of his upright righteousness, and so much necessary or profitable for the children of men to know) to declare and write in the plainest manner, and to set it in the best or∣der, so that the same and the requiring thereof may the better or easier, in the plai∣nest or simplest manner be understood, ac∣cording to the mind and will of God, and according to the true ministration of his Gal 2. 4. He. 7. 8, 9. b. Testaments which tend into the up∣right being of Jesus Christ. 7 And for to observe out of it what God (through the ministration of his gracious word and Testament) requireth, and to what end that God himself. hath created and chosen the man, and to what an up∣right and lovely or single-minded Godli∣ness, that he (in his fall and estranging
from God) hathMat. 23. 25. d. Acts 2. 3. c. &c. called and invited him again through Jesus Christ: and whereun∣to be now in these last dayes is loved through the Holy Spirit of the Love of Je∣sus Christ, and through H. N. Gods Elect Minister. 8 (The Lord grant to all men (who hear or read the Godly Testimouies of our Writings) his Grace and mercy that they may understand rightly the requiring of the saving testimonies of God, and of his Christ, and of the holy Spirit of his Love, and that they may endeavour themselves rightly thereafter. 9 For all what God doth to the man, (to reduce him to his upright Righteous∣ness, and to save him) cometh all out of the Grace of the mercifull Love of God, for to bring the fallen and straying man againe into theMat. 3. c. 7. b. 19. b. n. d. right way of Life, to the Love of his God, and to the Love of his neighbour: And then to deliver him also from all his sinnes: And to set him aright, and make him faithful in all unity and Peace with God and his neighbour: and to inherit him in all his spiritual and heavenly goods, and alsoMat. 25. c. thereunto his Kingdom of Heaven and eternal life.) 10 Now when we together with each other (according to the word and comand
of our Lord and God) had begun, persued and transcribed all the godly testimonies of our Writings, so neglected we no time, to endevour with great diligence, the same Godly Testimonies of our Writings which we had brought with us, to read and to transcribe, and according to the re∣quiring of the Lord, out of his true light to declare it in the plainest manner, and desisted not to proceed in the same work of the Lord till all was accomplished, &c. Take it to heart. Charitas extorsit per TOBIAS.
