24577 99837122 1432
Enchiridion Medicum: CONTAINING, AN EPITOME OF THE WHOLE COVRSE of Physicke: WITH THE EXAMINATI∣on of a Chirurgion, by way of Dialogue betweene the Doctor and the Student. WITH A TREATISE CON∣taining a Definition of all those Disea∣ses that do chiefly affect the body of man: AND AN ANTIDOTARY OF many excellent, and approued remedies for all Diseases. Published for the benefit of young Students in Physicke, Chirurgions, and Apothecaries. Herophilus. Morborum remedia si ab indoctis, vsurpentur veue∣na, si verò à doctis & exercitatis, Deorum auxillaces manus. LONDON, Printed by Henry Ballard for George Potter, and are to be sold at his shop at the North door: of Paules.
Faults escaped in the first Booke. Fol. 7. linea vlt. read distributiuum f. 38. l. 10. r. Auicen. f. 40. l. 22. r. Animi. f. 54. l. 3. r. volet. f. 57. l. 17. r. Drag. ij. halfe Rhubard. f. 58. l. 9. r. tragea. f. 63. rea pul. holand. Drag. halfe. f. 66. l. 8. r. Astringents. f. 71. l. 10 r. vein. f. 87. l. 6. r. drithe. f. 92. l. 6. r. Vales∣cus. f. 93. vlt r. neruos. f. 98. l. 25. r. the right. f. 99. l. 19. r. aliquo. f. 101. l. 25. r. tapsus barbatus. f. 101. l. 16. r. folliorú, cod. l. 22. r. priuatiuely. f 102. l. 13. r. af fect. f. 104. l. 4. r. nympheae. cad. l. r. alimentary. f. 107. l. 4. r Zedoaria. f. 109. l. 21. r. strife. f. 118. l. 13. 1. course. f. 124. l. 12. r. sambuci. In the Discourse of Chirurgerie. Fol. 25. l. 1. read virga. f. eod. l. 11. summitatum. f. 27. l. 12. r. Diachilon. f. 44. l. 13. r. alcacengi. f. 46. l. 12. r. altheae. f. eod. r. minij. f. 51. from sense to Ce∣phalalgia supersluous. In the Antidotarie. Fol. 4. Lin. 2. r. enulae. f. 12. l. 16. r. citrinorum. f. 23. l. 2. r. betonicae. f. 35. l. r. galangae, f. 41, l 21. r. amili.
AD ZOILVM. Dēte Theonino quid carpis Zoile? nostra Si tibi displiceant, fac meliora precor.
ORNATISSIMIS VI∣RIS GHORGIO BAKERO AR∣migero, Thomae Thorney, Iohanni Gerardo, Christophero Frederico, Iosepho Fentonio, Richardo Maps Chirug. peruiss. Londinens. caeteris{que} e∣iusdem artis in eadem ci∣uitate professori∣bus Dignis∣simis. CVm huic dere medica li∣bello (qualiscunque tan∣dem iste siet) mei excer∣cendi gratia colopho∣nem addidissem (viri dignissimi) non deerant ex interioribus meis nonnulli qui à me haud ignauè contendebant hunc prelo committere: quorum petitiones cum à me minimè frustratas iri denique curas∣sem, mihi mecum consulenti, quem patro∣num huic libellulo deligerem, eccè, vos ip∣sioccurristis:
quorum patrocinio eum statim dicare decretum habui. Illudque ipsum lubens ago, in vestramque tutelam hune accipi cò magis postulo, quòd vnius eiusque (ni fallor) anti quissimae medici∣nae partis vos professores estis longè dig∣nissimi. Nec me fugit vobis pernotum esse, ad exercendam praeclaram illam Chi∣rurgiae artem neminem aptum fore, qui ad hanc medicinae partem aliquandiu non instructus fuerit. Quocirca vobis ipsis, caeterisque condignis rei Chirurgicae alumnis, inclytae ciuitatis huius incolis has meas exercitatiunculas deuouere o∣peraepretium existimani. A vobis iterum contendens, eas à vestro patrocinio pro∣tectas iri: quas si bene consultas gratéque habitas intellexero, ad maius aggredien∣dum opus, vtilitatis vestrae gratiâ ani∣mum certè mihi dederitis. Quos interim cum pijs vestris conatibus, omnipotentis dei tutelae commendare non desistam.
AN EPITOME of the whole course of Physicke. PARS I. Doctor. SEeing you are desirous to bee admitted to the practise of phy∣sicke; let mee heare how you know your selfe fitte and able to pra∣ctice in so noble an Arte; for euerie man is not sitte to be a Physition, accor∣ding to the prouerbe, Ex quolibet ligno non fit Mercurius: therefore tell me first, what manner of man a Physition must be. Student. A Physition must be lear∣ned, Medici Dores. iudiciall, sober, of honest conuer∣sation,
not full of wordes, but secret, chaste, truely Religious, not couetous, or giuen to wine; and finally, hee must be a Philosopher, according to the say∣ing, vbi desinit Philosophus, incipit Medicus. Doct. It is most true, and that is it which Hippocrates crieth out on, when hee did perceiue how hard a matter it was to bee a perfect, Physition: vitae breuis, ars longa, occasio praeceps, experi∣mentum periculosum, iudicium difficile. As if he should haue said, the whole life of man will not suffice to attaine vnto a full knowledge of the Arte of Physick; for it spreadeth it selfe so large, that if it bee compared with the course of mans life, the life is so short, that it is not sufficient to attaine to a full know∣ledge of the whole Arte. And Galen himselfe affirmeth, in Libro De pulsibus, that hee had spent many yeares in the practise thereof, and yet could not at∣taine to a perfect knowledge of the same. If then this happened vnto the Prince of Physitions (Hippocrates excep∣ted) what may we thinke our selues able to attaine vnto? If, I say, hee spent so much time and labour in one part of
physicke, how much time and labour may bee required to attaine to a fulll knowledge of the whole art? And ther∣fore it is a great error in such men, that doe dreame that the art of physicke may be easily attined vnto: so that if they haue gotten two or three Chimical me∣dicines, without any other grounds; they professe themselues to be great Doctors and cunning Physitions. But to let that passe; let me heare your definition of physicke: tell me, what is physicke? Stud. Physicke is an arte that doth preserue the body of man in health; and being sicke, cureth the diseases of the same. Or physicke, according to Hippocra∣tes, is adiection, and subtraction: or according to Galen in his Arte paerua; It is the knowledge of things healthfull, of things vnhealthfull, and of neither. Doct. Shew me how that may be. Stud. It may bee three waies, as the body, the cause, and the signe: as that is a healthful body which enioyeth health; a healthful cause which worketh or con∣serueth health: that is an healthful signe which doth demonstrate health to bee
present: and that is said to bee an vn∣healthfull body which is sickely: and vnhealthfull cause, which worketh the disease: an vnhealthful signe, which she∣weth the kind and greatnesse of the di∣sease, or doeth premonstrate the euent thereof. We call that a neuter, that nei∣ther enioyeth health nor sickenes, which is not perfectly sound, nor yet sicke. Or physick is the study of things na∣tural, of things not natural, and of things against nature. Doct. Into how many parts is physick diuided? Stud. There re in generall fine parts of physicke: the 1. is Physiologia, and sear∣cheth out the whole nature and constitu∣tion of man: th 2 is Hugiena, and doth study in the preseruation of the health of man: the 3. is Pathologia, and is exerced in searching out the sickn & the cause: the 4 is Semcoue, and is exercised in he∣wing the signe either o ife or death: the 5. is Therapeutica, and that teacheth the order of curing, affects besides na∣ture: and vnder this last part is compre∣hended three other parts, Dieta, compositio medicamentorum, and Chirurgia.
Doct. I see you are reasonably wel ac∣quainted with the definition, and diuisi∣on of the art. But you told me but now that physick was the study of things na∣tural, of things not natural, and of things against nature: tell mee, what are those things that you terme naturall? Stud. Those things that are termed Res natu∣rales. naturall are seuen: Elements, tempera∣ments, humours, spirits, parts, faculties, and functions: in the knowledge of which Physiologia, or the knowledge of naturall things is exercised. Doct. Tel me then, what is an Element? Stud. Element is a body most pure, and simple, & the least part of the same wher∣in Elementum quid. it is: which c not be diuided into a∣ny other kind, and of it all things natural haue their originall beginning. This de∣finition is taken out of Galen and Aristo∣tle, and therefore cannot be denied. Doct. How many Elements are there? Stud. There are are foure Elements: viz. the fire, which is extreame hotte and moderately drie: the aire extreame moist and moderately hot: the water extream cold and moderately moist: the earth extream drie & moderately cold. In heat
the fire with the aire, and in drines with the earth, in moisture the aire, with the water, and in heat with the fire; in cold∣nesse the water with the earth, and in moisture with the aire; the earth in dri∣nes with the fire, and in coldnesse with the water, doe all consent and agree. And as the water to the fire is extreame contrary, so is the aire to the earth: of the mixture of these Elements all natu∣rall bodies haue their composition. And yet it is nothing necessary that they be equally mingled in the body, but accor∣ding to that that hath dominion, the bo∣dy is named cholerick, sanguin, phleg∣matick, or melancholick; and haue their denomination of the foure naturall hu∣mors: viz. choler, blood, flegme, and melancholy, which take their qualities of the Elements: for choler is hot & drie according to the nature of the fire, and blood is hot and moist according to the nature of the aire, flegme is cold & moist according to the water, & melancholy in no point doth disagree from the earth. Doct. You haue well declared how naturall bodies are framed by the mix∣ture of the Elements: let me heare how
briefly you can shew me the differences of temperatures. Stud. Temperatures are in number Tempera∣mentum. nine, whereof there are eight do exceed; and therefore they may be better called distemperatures, then temperatures: the ninth is temperate, for it doeth exceed in no quality. Of distemperatures there be foure simple, and foure compound: the simple are heat, cold, drines, & moisture, of the which ioyned together distempe∣ratures are made. The ninth is neither hot, cold, dry, nor moist, & it is framed of them all: and that is it which the Greci∣ans do call , that is, Bene tempera∣tū, or according to the Arithmeticians, . Tēperamentū ad pondus, a cōplexion mea∣sured by weight; because there are as ma∣ny degrees of heat as there are of cold, of drines as there are of moisture: the other which be distemperatures, be not measu∣red by weight, but by dignity; as in the heart wel tempered, heat doth exceed; in the braine well tempered, moisture doth exceed; in the fatte wel tempered, cold; in Tempera∣mentum se∣cund. iusti∣tiam distri∣butiuam. the bones wel tempered, drines: and this is called temperamentum secundùm iustiti∣am distributiuam, a temperature rightly
measured or disposed with equality. Doct. But is it possible to find a body so complexioned that we may say, here is a body framed of the foure Elements, ad pōdus, that is, to a iust & equal proportiō? Stud. I am perswaded that it is altoge∣ther impossible for any man to find such a body, that the soure Elements may be said to be equally proportioned in him: for either heat or moisture hath still the predomination, or coldnes and drines. And yet I thinke it not to be impossible, but that there may be such a body. but hard to be found, as hard to come by as Quintilians Orator, or the wise man which the Stoicks defined: a man hard∣er to come by then the rich Iewell, the Philosophers stone, which although di∣uers brag that it may be framed, yet it can neuer be attained vnto: so we may ima∣gine such a man to bee, as by the consent of nature was neuer framed, nor is euer like to be. But if there be any that can find a man that is neither too grosse nor Definition of a tem∣perate man. too slender nor very ful of haire, nor yet smoth & without haire, nor soft, nor yet hard, blacke nor white, hot nor cold, drie nor moist: and to be brief, such a one that
keepeth a meane without al excesse, if, I say, we can find such a one, then are we sure we haue a body complexioned ad pondus, and to just proportion. Doct. Then you conclude there can be found no body so framed, that it may be termed Corpus temperatum an pondus Stud. It is very true. Read fer∣nel. Lonar. Tuc. & Iohn Rolanus. Doct. Then shew me the iudgement and signes of Temperaments. Stud. That was I minded to performe if you had not spoken thereof: for it is to no end to know the differences of temperatures if we know not the signes of the same also. First then we know by the touching, heate from cold, moysture from drithe: and those that are of a soft disposition of body, the flesh being laxe and thinne, them wee iudge to bee moyst: those that haue a thicke and a hard skinne, them wee iudge to be drie. Then wee proceed as well to physicall actions, as to morall, neither doe wee account physicall onely naturall, but vitall, and the animall also. Morall actions are assects of a body concu∣piscible, angry, and rationall: for Galen in one booke doth teach that
Animimores sequuntur temperamentū cor∣poris: that the disposition of the mind doth follow the temperature of the bo∣die. In men that by nature are hot, the heart, and the Artiers beate vehe∣mētly: but in men of a cold disposition, the heart and pulse beate remisly and slowly: men of an hot dispositiō, are very much inclined to lust and venerie; the cold disposition is for the most part ve∣ry flow or vnable: notwithstanding it sometimes doth happen, that the hot complexion proueth vnfit for Venus, be∣cause the members of generation are o∣uer cold. The hot complexion is prone vnto anger, they are of a proud and hautie stomack, but the cold are feareful, sober, and of an abiect mind: the hot com∣plexion is crafty, subtill, and ingenious, but the cold is dull, slowe and obtuse in vnderstanding: the hot complexion hath swift motions of the mind, but the cold is of a slow and dull spirit: In like manner in hot complexions, the teeth doe soner grow and increase, then in the cold. We must also consider the forme and
shape of the body, whether it bee fat or leane, because that leauenes doth argue an hot body, and the fatnes a cold bo∣die: which is to bee vnderstood by na∣ture, not by disease, or by custome, as in extraordinarie cares, immoderate vse of Ʋenus, too vehement and often exercise, and long fasting, all these cause a leane and a thin body: so in like manner idle∣nes, much banquetting, and delicious li∣uing, doth sometimes cause, that a body naturally giuen to bee leane, may grow fat: And so also a cold disposition may grow leane, by greefe, by cares, by hunger, & such like, for the body may be so macerated, that it may waxe leane contrary to nature. Besides, the cold complexion is not so hairy as the hot, as may be perceiued by Eunuchs and women which are of a glaber and smooth skinne. The signe that is taken from the colour of the haire is deceitful, because that the colour of the haire is chāged with the age by the dominiō of a red, yellow, black, or white humor: for in the first age the haires that Calidi sunt vilosi et birsuti. are yellow, heate increasing through age, they waxe black at the length, the
same heare vanishing, and much slegme increasing, they waxe white. In like manner, by things receiued into the bo∣dy, the constitution is discerned: for the hot complexion is offended with hot things, as wine not delayed, ve∣hement exercise, meates with hot spi∣ces, and they fall quickly into hot dis∣eases, as into Feuers, and other chole∣rick diseases; but those hot things are beneficiall vnto cold complexions. Moreouer the temperatures of the principall parts, as of the heart, the li∣uer, the braine, and the testicles, and of those necessarie parts of life, as the stomach, and the lungs are knowne by their proper signes, as Galen teacheth in his Arteparua, of which, for the most part Oribasius, and Paulus, haue written and set forth in their Synopses. Doct. Well, I would haue you as Def. hum. Humor esl succus na∣turalis guo corpus to∣tum nutri∣tur, souetur et conserua∣tur. briesly discourse of humors, to the in∣tent wee may not stand ouer long about this first part, which is called Physiologia. Stud. I haue already sayd that there are foure principall humors, bloud, choler, slegme, and melancholy, & these are called Primogeniti filij quatuor elemēto∣ruin:
for choler is of the nature of the fire, Omne liqui∣dum & fluxile cor∣pus humi∣dum. flegme of the water, the melancholick humor of the earth, bloud of the aire, for bloud is hot and moist, as is the aire. Doct. Wee will not stand long to dis∣course of humors, because I am perswa∣ded that you are sufficiētly studied there∣in: but tell me your opinion, is bloud the onely nourishment of the body or no? Stud. It is the opinion of Aristotle, that Sanguiaem solum my∣ire. bloud is the only nourishment of the bo∣dy, & preseruer therof. Although some are of opinion, that because some parts are spermatick, and other fleshie, that therefore the fleshie parts are nourished with the blond, & the spermarick parts with the seed, and the bones with the marrow, & the stomach with that which is called Chilus, that therefore blood is not the only nourisher. To which I answere, that al those parts are nourished with the bloud, some immediatly, as the sleshie parts, some mediatly, as the solid parts: for the seminal liquor is nothing but bloud, made white by the coctiō altera∣tiue of the solid parts. The marrow also is framed of the bloud, and therefore according to the Logici∣ans, Causa causae sit causa causati: for
the bloud is the materiall cause both of Causa cau∣sae sit causae causati. the marrow and the seed, and therefore it is not to bee doubted but that all the parts are nourished with the bloud; but the stomach to be nourished with Chilus, is affirmed by Galen tertīo de naturalibus facultatibus: But there it is abused by the name of Nutrition: for it satisfieth the a∣nimall appetite by his quality, that is to say by his sweetnes: but not the natural quality by his substance. And it may very well be perceiued by the infant in the mothers wombe, whose stomack is nourished and doth grow, not by Chi∣lus, because hee receiueth no such nou∣rishment by the mouth, but materno san∣guine, which the liuer draweth by the veines of the nauell: and therefore the stomach is nourished with that bloud, which it doth containe in his veines, and not by Chilus. Doct. I am also of your opinion, but I pray you go forwards, and declare vn∣to mee the differences of humours. Stud. I will in no wise omit the diffe∣rences of humours, which be in number eight, foure naturall, and foure vnnatu∣rall: I haue alreadie shewed that the na∣turall
is bloud, flegme, choler, and me∣lancholy, the vnnatural is the same, tur∣ned by putrefaction, or else some other∣wise from their natural qualities; but as for the generation of them, it is by the vertue of the liuer, working vpon the matter and substance of food receiued into the stomack for the nourishment of Generatio humorum. the body: And euen as there is percei∣ued in new wine, foure differences of humours, viz. the flower or boyling of the wine, secōdly the watry substance of the wine, thirdly the feces or dregges thereof, and lastly the pure and sincere wine: so of Chilus in the liuer part is made bloud, part watrish flegme, part yellow choler, and part grosse or blacke choler. Doct. What is bloud? Stud. Bloud is a temperate humor, hot, and moist, sweet, the apt and conue∣nient nourishment of the body. Doct. What is flegme? Stud. Flegme is a cold humour, moist and without sauour, as it were bloud . crude, somwhat white, which is carried about with the bloud, to the end to miti∣gate the heate of the same, and that it
may bee conuerted into bloud, by the last digesture it helpeth the distribution of the humors, and doth nourish those parts that are agreeable or like vnto it selfe. Doct. What is choler? Stud. Choler is an humour hot, dry, and bitter, which as it were the froth of the bloud, is carried together with the same, that it may nourish the like mem∣bers vnto the same: it openeth the Mea∣tus, and penetrateth: it is prositable to the nourishment of those parts, that haue the like temperament. Doct. What is melancholy, or black choler? Stud. Melancholy or blacke choler is a naturall humor, cold, and dry, thick, Melan∣choly. grosse, blacke, and sharpe part of which is carried with the bloud, to the end to make the same the thicker, and to nou∣rish the bones and the spleene, and it is as it were the dregs and sediment of the bloud. All these foure humours, as I haue said, being made vnnaturall, they turne to the hurt of the body, as when melancholy is burned, it becōmeth viti∣ous, and causeth madnes: when it is
mingled with too much flegme, it causeth a doltish disposition, and worketh cold diseases. When blood becommeth vn∣naturall, it is made wheyish and watrish, and is very hurtfull, as in the hydrop∣sic: when red choler is burned, it becom∣meth vitious and biting: when flegme is made vnnaturall through a weake di∣gesture, it is made a watrish humor, and so hurtfull to the body. There is also another natural humor, and is Primogenius, the first and chiefe humor, called Humidum radicale, which is Humidum radicale. ingendred in the similer parts or insited in nature: for from the first beginning the members of the whole body are fil∣led with a certaine dewie humor, or only moistnesse: truely the first thing that is ingendred, hauing its beginning from the blood monstruall. This humor yeel∣deth nourishment to the naturall heate; and therfore by the same it is consumed, and needeth restauration; which is per∣formed by the accession of nourishment. Galen termeth this humor the solid sub∣stance of the similer parts. Doct. Now it resteth that you shew me the seat or place of euery one of these
humours. Stud. These 4. humors which are in∣gēdred in our bodies, being mixed, they are contained in unamassa sanguinis: that is, in the fountaine of blood which is said to be the better part of it selfe; and be∣ing exactly confused, they rest in the veines; which the Physitions doe consi∣der as it were the chiefe Elements of the bodie: but those humors which are by nature deriued without the veines, whe∣ther it be yellow choler in the gaule, or melancholy which the splene draweth, or flegme which is ingendred in the sto∣macke through crudities, or the matter which distilleth from the braine to the nostrils, and such like, they are in no wise to be accoūted elements of our bo∣dy, and therfore they be not humors but excrements, and so they are called: which nature, whiles it is in strength doth expell as vnprofitable vnto places conuenient and the excramentall seat of yellow choler is the gaule, from whence it is purged by vrine and the stoole: the receptacle of the melancholick humor is the splene, by which being drawne, it is spartly cōncertd into the nature therof, &
partly it is deiected to the stomacke. Doct. Proceed now to spirits, and let me know what a spirit is. Despiriti∣bus. Spiritus definitio. Stud. A spirit is a subtile flame, or ra∣ther an airy substance, giuing strength and power to exercise proper actions in euery member. Spirits be two fold, the one vitall, the other animall; the vitall spirit is a subtill flame engendred from the blood, and is dispersed by vertue of the heart into all the body, to giue vnto the same liuely heat, and a power of motion and action. The efficient cause is a naturall power in the heart; the matter from whence it proceedeth is blood, for it is ingendred of the blood, which is in the left ventricle of the heart: the forme is the flame it selfe, flying through all the Artiers. The finall causes are two: the first is that it might giue liuely heate vnto the body: the second is, that it may be the instrument of action and motion in the whole body. The animal spirit is as it were a starre∣beame which is sent from the braine by the Nerues into all the body, to giue mo∣tion, and sense, and all other animal ac∣tions vnto the same.
Doct. From whence is the Animall spirit ingendred? Stud. It is ingendred of the vitall spi∣rits, by the vertue of the braine elabora∣ting and concocting the same. There are some that adioyne a third kind of spirit: that is Spiritus naturalis, in gendred in the liuer; which is the thin substance of the blood, and is like vnto a vapour: this spirit is carried by the hollow veine, together with the blood into the heart; where it is wrought by the naturall strength of the heart, and so is made a vi∣tall spirit; and so the naturall spirit is as it were the matter of the vitall spirit, and the vitall spirit is the matter of the ani∣mall spirit. De partibus. Doct. Goe forward vnto the parts of mans body, and tell me first what a part De parti∣bus. is. Stud. Euery member of the bodie is accounted for a part of the body: and Membra principalia. they are of two sorts; some principall, and some officiall: the braine, the heart, and the liuer are accounted principall members; some also account the testicles amongst the principall members.
The officiall members are the sinews, and they doe serue to the braine: the ar∣teries Membra officialia. which doe serue to the heart; the veines which doe serue to the liuer; the spermaticke vessels, which be inserui∣ent to the stones. There bee also some parts that be called partes similares, or Homogenae; and some Dissimilares, or Hete∣rogenae. The Similar parts are so called, for being diuided, they remaine in them∣selues such as they were before; and those are the bones, cartilagies, ligaments, tendons, fibres, membrans, the skinne, and the flesh, with the fatte, and such like. The mem∣bers or parts Dissimilar, are the contrary. Some members are called instrumentall, as the stomacke, the reines, the bowels, with all the great sinews. Doct. It followeth that we speake of De faculta. tibus & po∣tentijs. faculties, or powers. Tell me therefore how many sorts of faculties or powers are there? Stud. There are three sorts of powers, that is to say, Animal, Spiritual, and Na∣turall: the Animall facultie (according to Plato, whom the Physitions do follow) is placed in the braine: the vitall or spi∣rituall is placed in the heart; the natural
in the liuer. Aristotle in secundo De Anima, rehearseth fiue faculties or powers of the soule: viz. Potentiam vegetatiuam, sentien∣tem, Appetitiuam, loco motuam, and Rationa∣lem. Doct. What is that vegetatiue pow∣er? Stud. The vegetatiue power is that which doth nourish, increase, & streng∣then the body; and therefore it doeth containe these foure faculties; that is, fa∣cultatem nutritiuam, auctricem, generatri∣cem, and formatricem. Doct. What is that nutrition or nou∣rishment? Stud. It is the conuersion of meate and drinke into a spirituall substance, performed by the force of heate, that there may bee a restoring of the same, which began to be decayed. The efficient cause of nourishment is naturall heat. Materia ex qua, or the mat∣ter from whence it springeth, is the meat and drinke receiued into the body. Materia in qua, or the subiect, is mans liuing body. The formall cause is the same Assimilation or conuersion of meate and drinke into the similitude of enerie
member to be nourished: for one part is turned into the substance of the bone, another into the substance of the flesh, &c. The end, is the restoring of the same which began to be consumed: for when the naturall heate doeth consume any thing, that same must be restored againe by nutrition: euen as in a Lamp, the oyle being consumed, the same must be again increased. Therefore the finall cause is Conserua∣tio indiui∣dui. the cōseruation of that thing, which can not be diuided: that is, of a man, or of any other liuing creature. Doct. What are the Organs of Nu∣trition? Stud. It is the mouth which receiueth and cheweth the nourishment: the Oe∣sophage, that conueieth it: the stomacke turning it into Chylus, by the worke of the liuer: to which are admixed the rest of the humours, the veines carrying and conueying the blood to euery member, in which there is made Assimilation, and application of nourishment. Doct. Let me know the faculties and powers of euery member. Student The common Faculties
which resteth in euery member, are said 4. Faculta∣tes in singu∣lis membris, Attractrix Retentrix, Concoctrix, Expultrix. to befoure: viz. the attractiue, the re∣tentiue, the concoctiue, and the expul∣siue; for euery member hath a faculty to draw, to retaine, to alter, and expell. As for example: the stomacke doth first draw the meat: secondly, it retaineth it: thirdly, it doeth alter it, that is, it turn∣eth it in to Chilus: and fourthly, it doeth expell it. Doct. What is hunger and thirst? Stud. Hunger is a desire of meate, when as the veines Mesariaces beeing Fames. empty of nourishment, doe draw from the stomacke by a kind of sucking, and haling; the stomacke is as it were Culina communis totius corporis, a common Kit∣chin of the whole body. Doct. What is thirst? Stud. Thirstines is an appetite of hu∣mectation, & cooling in drithe or heat: Sitis. the Organ of hunger and thirst is the mouth of the stomacke, in which the same irritation or prouoking is felt. Doct. Now shew me how nourish∣ment is made. Stud. The stomack doth concoct the meat, and turneth it into Chilus; the same
Chilus, is sent per  in to the intestins, Duodenum, and Ieiunum; from thence the veines Mesaraices plucketh it, and tur∣ning it into a more pure and liquid masse, sendeth it vnto the liuer, but the excrements slippe downe to the inferi∣our intestins: the liuer turneth the Chi∣lus into the masse of bloud, which con∣sisteth of the foure humors, bloud, cho∣ler, flegme and melancholy. And the bloud is sent by the veines, from the liuer part vpwards, and part into the right ventricles of the heart, to nourish the heart and the lungs, and to ingender vitall spirits; part discendeth downe∣wards, to nourish the inferiour mem∣bers: but the other humours which are separated from the bloud, part floweth into the gall; as yellow choler; part in∣to the spleene, as black choler: the watry Aquosa supersluitas or wheyish matter slippeth to the reines and bladder, and so becometh vrin, or else it doth transpire by sweat. These be the excrements of the second decocti∣on or digestion, which are made in the liuer and the veines. Last of all, the third Decoction is made in those parts, to the which excre∣ments
do flow: which, as I say, do passe by insensible transpiration of the skin, and part with the vrin and excrements. The bloud doth nourish the members by apposition, and assimilation that is, when it sticketh to the members, and is adglutinated and waxeth warme, and so at the length, after many changes, it is made like vnto the part, and is as it were turned into the same substance, and then it is called the second humi∣dity: the Arabians doe call it Cam∣bium. From hence the digestions, or con∣coctions are numbred to bee three, the first is performed in the stomack and intestins, the second in the liuer and veines, the third in all the members and solid parts; and the rule is, Vitium prioris concoctionis, non potest corrigi per sequen∣tes. Doct. I see you doe briefly run ouer this first part of physick concerning things naturall: let me heare you deliuer the rest in as short a manner; and let me know how many things there bee that are called not naturall?
The second part of things not natural, called Hugiene, and doth respect the conserua∣tion of mans health. PARS 2. Stud. THere are six things necessarie to the nourishment and preseruatiō of mans life, and are called, not natural. 1 The Aire. 2 Meate and Drinke. 3 Sleepe and watchfulnes. 4 Exercise and rest. 5 Emptines and repletion. 6 The affects of the mind. Doct. Why are they called things not naturall? Stud. Because they are not natural parts
of a man, they are not within, but with∣out the man, they are a necessary matter, and helpe for the preseruation & keep∣ing of the body of man, they are called non naturales, viz. such things as are not borne with vs. Doct. What doth the Aire concerne the health of our bodies? Of the Aire. Stud. THe Aire by it selfe is hot and moist, and the At∣traction thereof is so necessarie to all li∣uing creatures, that to whatsoeuer thing the way of respiration is wanting, it presently dieth: and experience teach∣eth vs, that the temperature, or distem∣perature therof, doth change the consti∣tution of the body; the aire being sweet and wholesome, doth refresh and nou∣rish the spirits. A grosse Aire maketh the body fat and strong, but the wit dull, and slow, such as Cicero writeth the Thebans to be: but a pure cleare aire, such as was at Athens, maketh men liuely, and sharp witted.
That is the best Aire, that is pure, cleere and thin, not grosse, troublesome or cloudy. Hip. in lib. de flatibus, affirmeth that the aire is not onely the author of life vnto mortall men, but also the author of dis∣eases, and death. Galen in Arte medicinale, saith, Ab Aire afficitur, mutatur corpus, quia aut caelefit, aut frigesit, aut exucatur, aut humectatur. Doct. What say you to meate and drinke? Of meate and drinke. Stud. OVr bodies are nourished and refreshed with meate and drinke, euen as the lampe with oyle, or waxe: but in the vse thereof there are two things to be obserued, the first, that meat and drinke be receiued at accusto∣med and conuenient times: for whereit is too long deferred, the stomack being emptie, is filled with euill humours: for the stomack doth not suspend, or inter∣mit his naturall action, wherefore, where it wanteth meat, there it falleth backe a∣gaine vpon excrements.
The second obseruation is, that wee take so much meate and drinke as may refresh the natural strength of the body, and not oppresse it: for as Cicero in Ca∣tone Maiore saith: Nam cibi & potionis ni∣mia copia menti & corpori obest. And how can a man haue a good disposition of mind, whose body is ouermuch filled with meat and drinke? For which cause temperance doth very much auaile for the garnishing both of the minde and of the body; for it is a mother and a sweet nurse both of health, wisedome, and ma∣ny other vertues. Hippocrates saith, that abstinence is Mater sanitatis, the mother of health, and that labour and exercise doeth cause a strong body. Syracke saith in Cap. 17. that abun∣dance of meat beggetteth diseases, and that gluttony doeth fill the body with vitious humours. Plato in his second Booke De legibus doth forbid the vse of wine, and especi∣ally vnto children, vntill they be eigh∣teene yeares of age, and giueth a reason, that, Non decetignem, igni adijoere. And these verses are worthy the consi∣deration:
Immodici sensus perturbat copia bacchi: Inde quis enumeret quot mala proueniant? Corporis exhaurit succos, animi{que} vigorena Opprimit, ingemum strangulat, atque necat. Doct. That is very true: for wee see what drowsie sots those common tos∣pots, & tauerne haunters are, and how vnfit to euery good action, subiect to e∣uery kind of disease, as Palsies, Apo∣plexies, Hydropsies, Epelipsies, gouts, & such like besides they are turned for the most part from men to monsters, and their minds are as full of filthie disires, as their bodies of soule diseases. But I pray you proceed vnto the next, which is sleepe and watchfulnes: let mee know how you doe define the same. Of Sleepe and Watchfulnes. Stud. SLeepe is a rest and quietnes of De sonnio. the vertue animall, which hapneth when the profitable vapours of the nourishment doe ascend vp
into the braine, where they doe sweetly moysten, and euery where flowing in the braine, doe obstruct the Meatus and passages of the senses and moouing Nerues, thorow which the vertue of the seness doe by little and little faile. The Efficent cause is heate, which as Hip. saith, in sleepe it flieth more in∣wards, to the end to helpe concoction, from whence it hapneth that the out∣ward members doe easily waxe cold in sleepe, and doe require to be more war∣mer couered. The Material cause is a sweet vapour ascending from the nourishment into the brain, and stopping the Meatus of the senses and spirits, that the members for∣sake their motion. The Formal cause is the rest of the outward senses, that is, hearing, and see∣ing, in like manner local mouing, as nei∣ther the hands, nor the feet doe moue a∣ny more, or performe their office. The Finall causes are first a moyst∣ning and a recreation of the braine, and of the heart. According to Virgil: Fes∣sos Virgilius. soporirrigat artus. Secondly, that the action of the sto∣macke,
and of the liuer in concoction may be the stronger; drawing inwards the heat and the spirits: for to that end doth the animall faculties rest in sleepe, to the end the natural may more strong∣er performe their office. Thirdly, that it may be the image of death, according to Ouid: Stulte quid est somnus, gelidae nisi mortis imago? Galen calleth it frater mortis, the bro∣ther of death: for as in sleepe the body taketh its rest, and the soule watcheth; so also in death the body resteth, but the soule and spirit liueth. As concerning the order and length of sleepe; we must consider how much and how long is conuenient to euery body: for long sleepe is more conueni∣ent for them, that as yet haue not attai∣ned to a perfect digestion; whether it happeneth through the eating of euill meats, or through the wrakenes of the vertue digestiue. And forasmuch as sleepe doeth slac∣ken, and make laxe the animall powers, it is not so necessary for those that be fasting, or to such as do suffer much hun∣ger;
for thereby the head is filled with fuines and euaporations eleuated from the feces, & supersluities retained in the stomack. But on the contrary, too much watching is hurthfull to the braine: it doth debilitate and weaken the senses: it doth burne the humors, and is the cause of sharpe diseases: sometimes of frensies, of madnesse, melancholy, and deliriums. In this therefore we must be carefull to consider how much is sufficient: for as Hippocrates saith, both sleepe and watch∣fulnes, which soeuer it be, if they be im∣moderate, are hurtfull. For the length of sleepe, the most part of Physitions do a∣gree, Length of sleepe. that to strong bodies seuen houres in the night is sufficient (for in the day time it is generally disallowed) and to those that are weaker eight houres at the most. Plato in Timaeo saith, when the world shutteth vp hereie, we also should shut Plato. vp our cies: the eye of the world is the sunne: therefore sleepe is not long to be deferred after the setting of the sun, neither presently after supper can sleepe be wholsome: for, as Galen saith, Lib. 4.
Abhorismorum, Commentario 67. à cibis ad somnum connersis, caput impletur. A certain great man was wont to say, that he found nothing better for the preseruation of his health then to read nothing after supper, to write nothing, nor to be long out of his bedde: so, said he, I am very wel able to arise in the morning, & with cheerefulnesse to follow my busines. He that hath a strong stomacke, let him lie first vpon the right side; but he that hath a weake digestiue facultie, should first lie vpon the left side; and af∣terwards vpon the right; for to lie vpon the left side, doth better helpe digestion, and vpon the right side it helpeth better for the distribution of the meat. Doct. The next thing not naturall, is exercise and rest: how may that auaile Motus & quies. for the benefit and health of the bo∣die? Of exercise and rest. Stud. A Great part of the preserua∣tiō of the health of mans bo∣dy doth consist in due exercise and rest; for both these are necessary both to the
body and the minde; of which Ouid saith: Cernis vt ignauum corrumpant ocia corpus, Vt capiunt vitium nimoue antur aqua. In these verses the similitude is of the body and the water. For as water that doth not mooue doth easily putrifie; so the body also groweth to corruption without exercise. In like manner of the mind and vn∣standing, Outd. V. Trist. Elegia 12. saith: Adde quòd ingenium long a rubigine laesum, Torpet, & est multo, quàm fuit amè munus. Where he calleth it Longam rubiginem, & otium ignauum, he meaneth that, wher∣by the whole force of the wit and vnder∣standing is ouerthrowne; or at the least doth languish and is diminished: euen as by the contrary it is refreshed and made sharpe. There are three profits and commo∣dities that ariseth by motion and exer∣cise: the first is, it maketh the bodie strong. Secondly, it doth excite and increase naturall heate.
Thirdly, the spirits and the senses are thereby made more stronger and shar∣per. As concerning the times of exercise, the Aphorism of Hippocrates doth teach Lib. 6. Epi. Sect. 4. A∣phoris. vlt. vs  labours before meate, he calleth motion or exercise of the body, labours. Therefore before meate, and not after, the body must bee exercised; for quietnes after feeding, or very litle exercise is to be vsed: lest that the naturall heat which should be exer∣cised about concoction and digesture, should be dispersed and so made weak∣er. Of Rest the same Ouid saith: Quod caret alt erna requie, durabile non est, Haec reparat vires. fessa{que} membra leuat. And in his first booke De Ponto: Ocia corpus alunt, animus quo{que} pascitur illis: Immodious contra carpit vtrum{que} labor. Here is to be vnderstood rest, that is fitte and conuenient, both to the body and minde; whether it be by re∣laxation and recreation, liberal or mean: for there is no man of so great strength, that he is able to endure continuall stir∣rings,
watchings, cares, and labours: but at the last both body and minde is dri∣ed and wearied, vnlesse there be remissi∣on vsed. Of the manner of vsing exer∣cise and rest, Cicero speaketh in the first booke of his offices: Ludo, & Ioco, vti quidem licet, sed sicut somno & quietibus cae∣teris tum, cùm grauibus serijs{que} rebus satisfe∣cerimus. It is a true saying, that confecto labore, dulce est quiescere. And Auicem saith, that whosoeuer he be that is of an hotte and drie complexion, and by exercise is fal∣len into any notable disease, he is forth with recouered with rest. Doct. The next in order is, Emptines Inanitio & Repletio. and Repletion. Stud. It is true, and looke how much we may offend to defraud an hungrie stomacke; so much shall we offend to offer meate vnto a ful stomacke; as Aui∣cen saith in primo Can. sen. 3. Cap. De regi∣mine Auicen. cibi & potus. For as the want of meat doeth fill the stomacke with euill hu∣mors; so that same plethoria and con∣tinuall fulnesse causeth opilations, pu∣trifaction, apostumes, leprosie, and
feuers. But this is to be obserued, that if the Attractiue faculty, and the Retentiue doe remaine in their naturall strength; that then repletion cannot by any meanes be hurtfull: especially if a right order of meats and drinkes be obserued. And so in like manner, if the vertue di∣gestiue and expulsiue be strong, empti∣nesse cannot be hurtfull; for thereby the body is auoyded of his burdensome and hurtfull humours, of which it is requisite that it should bee clensed and pur∣ged. But when these faculties are hurt and become weake, so that an empti∣nesse cannot bee suffered, and a reple∣tion cannot nourish or profit the bodie: we must then take heed how we vse the one or the other. Doct. But how are diseases procee∣ding of fulnes remedied? Stud. By vomit, by flux of the belly, by flux of blood, at the nose, by vrin, by spittle, by sweate, by insensible transpirations; which beeing vnfelt by vs, doth happen through the strength of
nature. Moreouer, sometimes there must be vsed the incision of a veine, sca∣rification, the application of leeches, of cupping glasses and vesecatories. But sometimes it happeneth that none of these aforesaid euacuations may bee vsed; then must be supplied exercise, la∣bour, srication and rubbings, baths, ab∣stinence, sleepe, and such like (especially in the times of famine:) but in euery of these there must be had a due considera∣tion how much and how little is conue∣nient, according to the state of euery bo∣die. Doct. Now proceed vnto the last of Animi Affectus. things not naturall: which you say is Animi Affectus, the perturbations and af∣fections of the mind. Of Affections of the mind. Stud. AFfects are the motions of the mind, by which it is either exhilarated, or disquieted for sor∣row and anguish, with such like; are as it were Carnifices, & tortores annimi & cor∣poris, the very torturers and murderers of the mind and bodie: but on the contra∣rie,
ioy, hope, and a good conscience, are the sweet nurces of life and health, as Plato speaketh in 1. De Repub. Therefore it very much auaileth both to the health of the body, & of the mind, to be able to moderate these affects in that order, that nature may not be hurt: for we haue read of some, that with sud∣den ioy haue suddenly died, as Valerius reporteth of two women in Rome. And what affects arise by anger, may easily bee perceiued, when that some by extraordinary fury and rage doe fall into the Apoplexie, the palsie, spasms, and conuulsions, with diseases of the ioynts, and sometimes into a trembling of the whole body; nether doth there happen lesse euill vnto bodies through terrour or feare, as the syncop, & falling∣sicknes: euen as on the contrary in some kinds of diseases, it is profitable to bee terrified and made afraid. Sadnes and anguish of mind worke no small affects, and especially waighty cogitations, for it induceth vnquietnes, and watchfulnes, which hurteth the sen∣ses, and diminisheth the strength of the whole body: wherefore as Hip. saith, a
moderation in all those affects is very healthfull and profitable. Pars 3. Doct. YOu told mee in the begin∣ning, that the Art of phy∣sicke Pathologia was concluded vnder three things, which you termed natural, not natural & against nature: of the two first we haue briesly spoken; let vs proceed vnto the third in like manner: and let mee know of you what those things are, which are against nature. Stud. Those things that are sayd to bee against nature, are in number three, viz. Sicknes, the Cause of sick∣nes, and Accidents that doe follow sicknes. And generally euery disease is either of an euill complexion, an euill com∣position, or a solution of the conti∣nuitie, which hapneth either in the si∣miler members, or in the instrumentall, or in both. And first a disease of an euill com∣plexion hapneth sometimes from the excesse or defect alone of some quali∣tie,
as if either heate or cold doth a∣bound in the body, then there is want∣ing the more of moysture and drithe. Sometimes also a disease hapneth from the abundance or defect of some humor: as if the bodie doe abound with melancholy, or slegme, it hath the lesse of choler and bloud, and so on the contrary. Secondly, a disease rising through an euill composition, is either from the forme and figure of the parts of the body, from the quantity, from the num∣ber and situation of the same parts. Thirdly, the solution of the continni∣tie hapneth through some Apostume, wound, dislocation, rupture, fracture, conuulsion, or excoriation. Furthermore, euery disease is either Morbi acu∣ti atque chronici. 2. Aph. 23. acute, or chronical. Al acute diseases are hot, & are iudged in 14. dayes, as Hip. doth testifie. The latter sort of Physitions doe call those acute diseases that haue their ter∣mination in foureteene dayes, and those peracute which haue their termination in 7. and those perperacute, which haue their termination in foure.
Chronicall diseases are cold and dull, and are of longer continuance. In like Hip. 6. epid. li. partic. 1. Aph. 7. manner acute diseases are termed , and sometimes they are changed into a Chronicall disease, as the Plurisie, into the Gout, the Cholick into the Palsie. And Chronicall diseases for the most part are determined with a daily con∣sumption. Doct. What is Crisis? Stud. Crisis is a swift and vehement  quid motiō of a disease, either to life or death: and it happeneth about the supreme in∣tention of a disease, that is, the Akmin or state. And wee must obserue that there are 4. Tempora morborum. foure times of diseases, that is, the begin∣ning, the encrease, the Akmin or state, and the declination. The which times are so distributed of Hip. that if the increase bee in the fourth day, the change hapneth in the seuenth; but if the increase be in the filt, and seeuenth, the Crisis happeneth in the ninth or the eleuenth day: but if the disease doe increase in the tenth day, the deliuerance hapneth in the foureteenth day.
In like manner saith the same Hip. the Physition should not be ignorant of the day that the Patient fell sicke, nor of the houre in the which the body fell into an heate, or to waxe cold &c. From whence it doth manifestly appeare, that other times also are not to bee neglected: for a little after, he sayth, For this cause, sayth he, shalt thou recken the daies vnto thee, in which thou shalt expect eruptions, or apostums, in those times prescribed. 3. Prog. 3. & 4. Aphor. There is also a quaternall number of dayes to bee obserued in all diseases, which doth promise an end either to life or death, as the same Author witnesseth. Moreouer, euery disease is either in the superiour or inferiour venter, or in the veines, whose Crisis hapneth by spittle, by vomit, by flux of bloud at the nose, by Apostūs, by seege, by haemor∣rhods, by menstrous, and by vrin. And sometimes also a Crisis doth happen by sweate: and many diseases doe transpire by insensible euaporation. 1. Of the know∣ledge of the dis∣ease. 1 Doct. How shall wee come to the knowledge of the disease? Stud. Euery disease is knowne either from things substantially inhering, as
in the composition of members, what doth abound, or what doth want, or whether it bee not sited in his right place. 2. From the operation of the member being hurt. 3. From the qualitie changed. 4. From things going out of the body. 5. From the times of the yeare. Wee must know also that euery dis∣ease is either by essence, or by colligance and consent. Morous per essentiam & per con∣sensum. It is by essence if the disease be of it selfe in some member. It is by consent, if it be deriued from some member into another, by reason of the vicinitie and colligance of the same; as the affect of the head from some va∣pour arising from the stomack: neither must we be ignorant, that sometimes a disease is not only essential, but acciden∣tal also, & a companiō of other diseases, so sometimes a feuer is an accident of A feuer an acci∣dens of a disease. many diseases, and of it selfe no disease: and so often times there hapneth Apo∣stums, and Tumors. Doct. How shall we know the cause of the disease?
Stud. Hip. affirmeth that there are three causes and beginnings of all disea∣ses: for euery disease springeth either from repleton, or from the intempera∣ture of the heanens, or through some ex∣terne violence happening vnto the body. Doct. What must we doe, when wee know the cause of the disease? Stud. The cause being knowne, we must proceed to medicines, and diet, and if need be to topicall meanes and chirur∣gery, prouiding alwaies a contrary medicine to the cause of the dis∣case. Wee must therefore at the begin∣ning vse vniuersall remedies, then wee must proceed to particular, as the dis∣case shall require; and the Physitian must remember, that contraria con∣trarijs curantur: & similia similibus sibi Contraria contrarijs carantur. praebere adiumentum: so any kind of dis∣ease that doth proceede of repletion, will require emptines, and so on the contrary: and a disease that doth pro∣ceed of drinesse will require hu∣mectation and moystning: euen as that same which doth proceed of
heate will require refrigeration and cooling &c. Notwithstanding, we must take heed Repercussi∣ua vitanda. that we doe not apply any thing that is extreame contrary, especially Reper∣cioussius, lest we cause hurt to some prin∣cipall member. PARS 4. Doct. WHen we haue found out a fit remedie for the dis∣ease, how must we proceed to the cure? Stud. It is to no end to find out a re∣medie, vnles the same bee vsed and ap∣plied wisely: for wee may find some Physitians that are furnished with a world of remedies, and yet apply them without either wit or reason: there be o∣thers that bee of good iudgement, and yet notwithstanding are very barraine of helpes, but those which they haue are very choice and good: and truly I know not how it doth happen, that there are so few sound and iudiciall Physitions in this our age. But to let that passe, in the administration of physicke, these three circumstances are to be considered, viz.
Quantum, Quando, Quomodo. For sup∣pose Quanto, Quando, Quomodo. the remedie be hotte or cold, a pur∣ger of flegme, melancholy, or choler: it is the worke of inuention, the cause and kind of the disease being considered, to dispose the remedy in a iust quantity: to prescribe the same in a conuenient form, and when it becommeth to offer the same according to iudgement and rea∣son. And surely, there is nothing so hard, or so obscure in the practise of physick, as to deliuer a iust dose of medicine: nei∣ther can the quantity of a remedy be de∣fined, except wee take the indication from things natural, as from the strēgth, nature, and temperature of the sicke, the habit of the body, as fatnesse, leanenesse, thinnes, fleshines, age, sexe, and custome; Consuetu∣do, altera Natura. for that is another nature. In like ma∣ner from things not naturall; as the time, the aire, the region: from things a∣uoyded, and from things retained; and those things which are praeter naturam, a∣gainst nature; as sickenes, the cause, and the symptoms. For what wise man will giue one & the same medicine to a weak man & to a strong, to a woman and to a
man, to a child and to a yong man, to an Englishman and to a Moore? The time of the yeare is also to be regarded, the month, the disease, the Paroxisme; the cause also is to be considered; besides the vehemency and violence of the symp∣toms; and according to the same, the dose of the remedy is to be increased or diminished; for great diseases require re∣medies in a greater dose. But common∣ly vnto an Infant ij drag of Cassia is suf∣ficient, of Manna iij. drag. of Rhubarbe infused ij scruples; but to those that be of strength may be giuen j ounce of Cassia; and of Manna an ounce and a halfe: & of Rhubarb ij. dra wil scarcely suffice. But as I haue said, these things can hard∣ly be defined by art, but must be refer∣red to the iudgement and discretion of the learned Physition. Doct. Let me now know your medicins that you haue to purge choler. Chologogon. Stud. I haue to purge choler, Rhubarb, Cassia, Manna, Myrabalans Citrine, Aloes and such like. Doct. These are simple medicines; let me know your compounds.
Stud. Then I haue Diaprunum sim∣plex, and Solutiuum, Elect. de succo ros. hie∣ra piera Galeni, &c. Doct. What purgers of flegme haue you? Stud. I haue Agaricke, Turbith, Colocin∣this, Phlegme∣gogon. Carthamus, &c. Of compounds I haue Benedictalax, hiera Ruffi, hiera picra, hiera logadij, Diacarthanni, Diaturpeti, Ele∣ctuarum decitro, Diaphoenicon, Indum Ma∣ius, & Minus, &c. Doct. What Pils haue you for that purpose? Stud. I haue pilulas exagarico, cochiae, Pils. Lucis, Arthreticae, ex hermodactilis, ex cupa∣torio, è hiera, Alephanginae, ex euphorbio è castorio, è quin{que} myrobolanis, ex mezerco, &c Doct. Now proceed to your purgers of melancholy. Melanago∣gon. Stud. Sonaorientalis, Epithymus, Elebo∣rus niger, Lapis Lazuls, and Lapis Armeni∣acus, doe purge melancholy. The compounds are Diasena, Diaca∣tholici, hiera Ruffi, and trifera sarasenica. And it is to be obserued, that hiera Ruf∣fi doeth purge the head, the stomacke, and the whole bodie from grosse and viscid humors, and withal black choler:
wherefore it is giuen in Mania, in Epi∣lepsia, in oris tortura, paralyss, & melancholia, flatus discutit, stomachi concoctionem innat, & est medicamentum conferens fistuiis, vlce∣ribus cancrosis, & Lepra. Doct. What pils haue you to purge melancholy? Stud. Pilulae è fumo-terrae, ex ellebero, ex Lapide Lazuli, ex epithymo, pil. foetidae. All these purge melancholy. Doct. Tell me now the iust dose of euery one of these medicines. Stud. I haue said already that that can hardly be declared, but must be re∣ferred to the discretion of the Physition: which for the most part doe not exceed six drammes of purging Electuaries; in which is no Scamony, nor aboue foure drammes of those Electuaries, in which is Scamony. As for pils, they neuer giue more then a dram or foure scruples. But we must note, that the colder the Region, the greater may the dose of pur∣ging medicines be. Doct. Doth not Confectio hamech purge melancholy? Stud. I must confesse that Confect. hu∣mech, is good against sicknesses procee∣ding
from blacke choler, and humours adusted, as in mania, melancholia, vertigine, obliuione, and in aegritudinibus cutanijs, as Scabbes, Morphue, Leprosie, and such like. Doct. With what waters must wee giue those Electuaries that do purge me∣lancholy? Stud. We giue them in aqua fumo-ter∣rae, and in aqua lupulorum; both which doeth respect the melancholicke hu∣mour. Doct. With what pils doe you purge mixt humors from the stomacke? Stud. To purge mixt humous from the stomacke, I vse: Pil. De tribus fernelij. Pil ex hilicacabo, &c. And when I purge generally all hu∣mours, I vse Pil. Aggregatinae, and Panchi∣magogon, &c. Doct. Let mee know your remedies that you giue in a liquid forme: as Apo∣zems, Syrups, Iulips, Potions, and infusi∣ons. Stud. You shall, and first it is to bee obserned: that the Arabicks did inuent Medica∣menta liquida. those kind of remedies, rather to open
then to purge. And this is the counsell of Hippoorates, Corpora cùm quis purgare vo∣le, toportet fluida reddere. And if the di∣sease be not too acute, and the humour doe not abound, it is then the worke of Physicke to purge that which is di∣gested and concocted; and not that which is crude, tough, and raw. The body is made fluxible by opening of the meatus and passages; by which the hurt∣ful humors are drawne, and those grosse humors are incided and made thin: for otherwise the expelling of crude and vn∣digested humors, might cause a fretting and erosion of the intestines and bo∣wels, and sometimes bloody fluxes: nei∣ther is any thing sent forth to any pur∣pose; for when as all the humours are crude and dull, and vnsit to be moued, by reason of the thickenes and coldnesse thereof; it hapneth that all the narrow passages descending vnto the belly, re∣maine obstructed and stopped: neither is the grosse matter it selfe auoyded, but it is also an hinderance vnto that which is attenuated & made fluxible: for which cause, as I haue said, these kind of medi∣cines were first inuented. An Apozem may be made with roots, hearbes, seeds,
fruits, & flowrs, with water and hony or sugar boiled together: or in this order, which is easie: Rec. Guaiacilib. ss Coqua∣tur lento igne in vj. libris aquae ad tertias, Co∣laturae adde Si vis parum Sacchari, ad grati∣am & hydroticum Apozema feceris. For some inward grief, of which there is no manifest cause. Rec. Florum Cha∣momeli Aposmatis exemplum. Pij more or lesse Coquantur, Co∣laturae ℥ iij you may ad if you wil Saccha∣ri ℥ j. Anodmum crit Apozema. And this is the difference betweene a syrup, & an Apozem; that the syrupe is more grosse in consistence, then an Apozem, for that is more cleere and liquid: for syrups are made with more hony or suger, & so boi∣led together, vntill it be brought into a light body, that it may hang vpon the naile; or sticke being dropped vpon a marble stone. An Apozem is made by adding of lesser suger hony, or syrups to a decoction; for they must not be boi∣led together, but to the intent it may be the cleerer, and more gratefull to sight: it is to be clarified with the white of an egge. In Sūmer time whō plants & herbs are in their strēgth & green, we vse Apozoms:
In the winter time we vse Syrups, and therefore it is the duety of the Apothe∣cary to prepare Syrups in the Summer time, against the Winter season. And the dose of an Apozem is foure ℥ of de∣coction, adding thereunto ℥ j. ss of Sy∣rupe. In framing of Syrups we ad as much Suger as Ioyces, and boile it to a consi∣stance, as before. There is no great difference between a Iulep, and an Apozem; for vnto ℥ ij, or ℥ iij. of distilled water or decoction, we dissolue ℥ j. of Syrup, and so make a Iulep. As for example, if I do prescribe Syrupus. a Iulep, or an Apozem, in an hot cause, I say, R. Rad. Graminis & acetosae ana ℥ ij. Cichorij totius an M. ss Scariolae. an M. ss Endiuiae. an M. ss Lactucae. an M. ss 4. Sem. frigid maior. an ℥ ij. Florū violarum & nympheae an p. j. Fiat decoctio in colaturae ℥ iiij. Dissolue Sy∣rupi de Cichortosimpl. ℥ j. ss siat Apozema.
Potus doth not differ from the same in matter, nor forme, but in the end, because Potus. it is prepared to purge humors, but the Apozems and Iuleps to prepare them: as for exāple, if to the former decoction a∣gainst choler, in the place of the syrup of Cichorie, wee dissolue halfe an ounce of Daiprunum solut. or so much of Electuarie de succo rosarū, we haue made a potion to purge choler. Infusion is when diuers medicines are beaten to powder, or whole, are laid Infiasio. to steepe a certaine space in some kind of liquor, or decoction: as for example in ℥. iij. of the decoction of Cichorie; or if you had rather in Sero Lactis, macerate for an whole night, ʒ. ij. ss of Rhubarbe, in the morning it is to bee strained, and to the strayning may bee added if you please a little suger, or syrup of violets, and so there is a sit potion to purge choler. Againe, if you dissolue any purging electuary, in any kind of liquor, as bar∣ly water, broth, decoction of pruins, or some distilled water: wee may make a purging potion; as for example: (potus. Re. Catholici X. dr. Dissolue in ptizanafiat
Or Rec. Diaphoenici ℥ ss dissolue it in byaromel, or in the decoction of some o∣ther conuenient hearbes, as cephalicis, or spleniticis, fiat potus to purge flegme. And after the same order, wee frame potions to purge melancholy. Rec. Confectionis hamech Dr. ij. Dissolue in Dococto polypodij, in quo Dr. iij. fol. sennae hullierine cum Drageta cummuni. addendo Syrups de Epithymo, velde fumaria ℥. j. fiat potus. Of medecines giuen in a dry forme, viz. in pouder, Trochisks, Lozengies and pils. Doct. LEt me know what those me∣dicines are, that are giuen in a dry forme. Stud. Those are pouders, Trochisks, Lozenges and pils; as for pouder, it is the cōmon matter of all dry medicines, and of a meane consistence, and thereof are made Electuaries, as well solid, as li∣quid; Trochicks, and pils: as for exam∣ple, if you will haue a powder to stay euaporations and ascensions into the braine, A powder against the theume. I say Rec. Coriandr. praep. an. Dr. j. Coralli. rhub. an. Dr. j. Cornu Cerui vsti. an. Dr. j.
Sacchari ros. tabulat. ℥ j ss. Misce & fiat pul. subt. This powder is to be taken presently after meate. In like manner, a powder for to break wind is prepared in this order. Rec. Anisi cond. ℥ iij. Feniculli ℥. ss Coriand. praep. ℥ ss A powder against wind. Cumini Carui. Sesel. in vino gene. mace. an. ℥ j. Cort. Citri Sicc. Cinamom. Crassian. Scr. iiij. Sacchariros. tabulat. ad pondus omntum. Misse, fiat puluis. Let the Patient take a spoonefull af∣ter meales. But the Apothecaries should be very careful of those powders which they re∣serue in their shoppes, as well for their owne profit, as their patients: for it is manifest, that the aire doth diminish and decay the vertue and strength thereof, if it bee of long continuance, or not close and warme kept, for which cause it is thought farre better to preserue the Species, in the forme of Trochisks
and solid electuaries, as the speceis of Dia margariton frigid. diarrhodon Abbatis, trian Santalorum, Aromatici ros. and such like which may bee better preserued in tro∣chisks, then by any other waies, as some very good Apothecaries at this time do vse, or taking. dr. j. of the species to an ounce of suger, with some conuenient liquor or distilled water, they frame a solid Electuarie, diuiding the same in Tabellis, Rotulis, Lozengis, or in the forme of Manus Christi. In like manner may be framed solid Electuaries, to purge, as a drag. of the species of Diacarthamum, to purge slogme, de succo Rosarum to purge choler. &c. Doct. How must wee administer these medicines being thus prepared? Stud. We giue trian santal for a hot li∣uer, Diarrhodon to strengthen the sto∣mach: and if we purge as aforesaid, then we say, Rec. Electuarij Diacarthami, ca∣bellam. j. pondore ℥. ss. more or lesse as it shall seeme good to tho Physitian; let it bee taken in the morning, being dissol∣ued in some Ptisan or broth. In like manner, Rec. Pulueris Diamargarits frigd. dr. ij.
Trochiscor. De camphura scr. j. Lozenges in an hot distempe∣rature. conseruaviolarum. ℥. j. With suger dissolued in aqua bu∣glossae, make an Electuary solid in Lozen∣ges, of the weight of j. Dragm. a peece. In like maner, we may take species, or any kind of pouder, & with some iuice, syrup, liquor, or distilled water, make a masse to be formed in to pils, whose dose at the vttermost doth not exceed aboue ser. iiij: as for exāple, if you take powder of Rhubarbe or Agarick, the waight of a dragm. with syrup of violets, you may make it into six pils. But our Physitians in these dayes doe vse pils ready prepa∣red P. b. Agar. purgeth grosse and flegmatick humors. and corrected in the Apotheca∣ries shops, which they prescribe after this manner: Rec. Massae pill De agarico vel de Rha∣barb. scr. iiij. De Rhaharb obstructi∣ons of the liuer, & contrahy∣dropem. Malax it with syrup of violets, and make V. pils. Rondoletius doth prefer water, before either inyces, or syrups, because that by the two latter, the quantity is increased, which groweth lothsome to the Pa∣tient.
Of those things that are ta∣ken in a meane forme, and consistance. Doct. PRoceed to those medicines that are taken in a meane forme. Stud. Those medicines that are giuen Electuaries and Opiats. in a meane forme, are Electuaries liquid, which are commoly called Opiats: not because they consist of opium, but be∣cause they haue that body that Opiats haue, and they are prepared partly for purging, and partly for alteration of hu∣mors. And such Electuaries are Diapru∣num simplex, and solutiuum, Diaphaenicon, confectio hamech Catholicon, which doth purge putrisied and rotten humors, euen as Mithridat & Treacle which are great opiats, not onely for their consistence, but also because it is confected with opi∣um, & haue a property to resist venom and putrifaction. Doct. How may these Electuaries bee prepared? Stud. Vpon necessitie they may bee prepared, taking some pouder or species with some kind of syrup, as of conserues
and Tabels, Trochisks, and such like; as for example: Rec. Conseruae Anthos ℥ j. Opiata ad frig dam intemperi∣em vertri∣culi. Corticis catri condit. ℥ ss Spec. Aromatici. ros. Spec. Diagalangaean Dr. ij. Cum syrupo conseruationis citri q. S. Ficut optata ad frigida intemperiē ventriculi. To this kind also appertaineth those Bolus ad renes. Medicamēta mollia, which are giuen in the forme of Bolus: as cassia, and Catholicon. As Rec. Cassiae ℥ j adde si vis Rhubarbari Dr. j. Cum saccharo q. S. fiat bolus. Which tender bodies may take out of a spoone with some syrup of violets, ne∣nuphar, Aithaea and such like or Rec. Cassiae nouiter tract. ℥ ss Bolus ad gouorrheam Pul holand. ℥ ss Tereb. ven. lot. in aquae plant. Sor. j. Cum sacchar. q. S. fiat bolus. Of Clysters and their administration. Doct. THere remaineth that you De Clyste∣ribus. shew me the order of Clysters & their administration: what is a Clyster? Stu. A Ciyster is a certaine liquor, inject∣ed into the belly for the remedy of some kind of disease: & this kind of medicine
is not a particular, but a common reme∣dy, not only for the diseases of the bow∣els, but it draweth from all other parts, as from the hollowes of the liuer, it draweth per vonam portam, it draweth melā choly from the splene by his brāch∣es. In like manner it doth dinert, and draw from the vpper parts; it cleanseth and scoureth the intestines, it is the best and safest medicine that can bee giuen, especially being well appointed, for it purgeth without any trouble. Doct. How is that medecine to be prepared? Stud. In time past, they would take one pound of liquor, as hydromel to scoure, milke, or the decoctiō of camo∣mell to cease paine: in this age they pre∣pare their cly sters of roots, hearbs, and seedes, being artificially boyled, which they cal decoction: in a pound of which decoction, they put one ounce of hony, of rose. to cleanse, of red suger, to stir vp excretion, with a dram of common salt, besides iij ounces of some kind of oyle, to make it more lubrick and stipperie, and with all some cathartick medicine to purge: as for example, if you will
purge the belly: we say Rec. Decoctionis clyster is commin. or remodientis. lib j. Dissolue mellis & Sacchar. rub. an ℥ j. Catholici. ℥ j. ss Olei communis. ℥ iij. Fiat clyster. This I declare for examples sake, not to the intent that the matter should be followed but the maner; for sometimes wee adde in stead of the purging medi∣cines those that be astringent, as Contino∣dium, Plantago, Tapsi barbat an M j. and so make a decoction. In one pound of the strayning you may ad some oyle, iuice: or if the patient be rich, some a stringent syrupe, as of Myttels or Quinces, iij, ounces: and so make an astringent cly∣ster, contrary to the former. And we must obserue, that somtimes the liquor is to be increased or diminish∣ed, according to the discretion of the Physition; as when the bowels are op∣pressed, as in the dropsie, and in women great with child: also when they are ex∣tended with wind; as in the Colick, and Enterocele, &c. Also when wee would haue the patient to retain the mat∣ter longer then ordinary, we diminish
the quantity. When we would haue the clyster to ascend, as in the vlcers of the Ilions, and paine of the reines; also in the Apoplexie, lethargic, the quātity is to be increased, & to be made more shar∣per. Sometimes also oile is hurtfull: as Disenteria. in Dysenteria, where it maketh the vl∣cers soule and filthy; for then astringents, as oyle of roses or quinces, ought to be added to comfort and strengthen. Doct. It hath beene thought of some that clysters may be administred for nourishment; especially being made of broth, milke, egs, wine, and other com∣fortable things, when as the patient is not able through weakenesse or some other accident to swallow: let me heare what your opinion is in that point. Stud. It seemeth that Galen was of the contrary opinion, when he denied that the substance of the clyster was not car∣ried beyond the intestinum Ieiunum, from whence some haue supposed that the ficke patient hath beene refreshed with the vapour onely. It is true indeede, that the animal appetite may be satisfied with the vapor of the nourishmēt, but the na∣tural, wil not bee so satisfied, which de∣lighteth
only with substance, & not with vapours, which suddenly and speedily perish, and waste: but it is manifestly proued that the matter of the clyster to transcend the Iemnum intestinum, euen to the stomack, from whence the Mezerdi∣call veines doe draw nourishment: and in thacapassio it hath bin seene that often∣times the clyster hath beene cast vp by vomit: who is hee then that will denie that clysters nourish not, or come vnto the stomacke? Matthaeus Grad. an interpreter of Ani∣cen doeth affirme, that he had seene a maid, that had taken Suppositories, and forth with with the violent attraction of the stomacke, fell into exceeding vo∣mitings; whereby they were compel∣led to minister vnto her fatte broths and juyces to dull the attractiue facultie, whereby she was recouered. Doct. I am of your opinion, that cly∣sters may be giuen to nourish, and haue obserued in diuers patients; who through weakenesse could take no nourishment by the mouth, yet by Clysters nature hath beene well refreshed, and the Patient in the end as well recouered.
But I would now know of you the order that must bee obserued as well by the Physition in the administring of the cly∣ster, as by the patient in receiuing of the same. Stud. You shall, and first for the time; it is thought that in the morning be∣tweene Clysteria quomodo adnuni∣stranda. seuen and eight of the clocke, the stomacke being fasting, or in the after∣noone about fiue of the clocke, as the Physition shall thinke conuenient, is the fittest time; hauing a great care that it be not administred too hotte for the sen∣sibilitie of the intestines. I haue knowne some that haue brought great torments to the patient, by ministring of a scal∣ding clyster. But after the patient hath receiued the clyster let him by little and little turne himselfe vpon either side; and if the affect bee in the head or vpper parts, let the patient lie vpon his backe; if in the right side, let the patient lie so much the longer vpon the same, and so in like manner vpon the left; retaining the clyster if it be possible the space of an houre. Afterwards when the clyster shall be sent forth with the excrements; let the
patient refraine meate the space of an houre, that so by that time the vapours dispersed through the body may be set∣led; otherwise, the fumes of the excre∣ments may be hurtfull, &c. Doct. Proceed now to the choice of De remedij delectu. the Remedy. Stud. The end of preparing physick is two fold: the first is, to preserue the present health of the body: the second, to reduce that which is lost. Health is preserued by a good diet, and sickenes is recouered by physicke: diet supplieth that which is wanting by the vse of like things; and Physicke being the curer, doth remoue those things that are hurt∣full vnto the faculties, by remedies that are contrary. There are three things Triasent quae actio∣nem laedunt. that doeth hurt the action that is, the cause, sickenesse, and the symptoms, or accidents that doth follow sicknes. The cause doe precede the disease, euen as the shadow doth the body: the symp∣toms doth follow the disease; therefore the Physition must first endeuour to re∣moue the cause, for otherwise there is lit∣tle hope to cure the disease: and the out∣ward cause doth profit very much to the
knowledg of the inward: & as I haue al∣ready said, the scope of the Physition must be onely to remoue the same. And this cause is twofold, either coniunct or remote; which is commonly called an∣tecedent and consequent: we call that coniunct which imediatly and forth with causeth the disease; as some humor praetor naturä affixed to the part, either by fluxi∣on of congestion: we cal that remote and antecedent, from whence the same con∣iunct cause springeth, and is nourished: that is to say, Plethoria or Cacochymian. Doct. What is that Plethoria or Ca∣cochymian? Stud. Wee call that Plethoria when there is an imoderate fulnes, through a∣būdāre of blood, or of the 4. humors: the cure wherof doth consist in cuacuation; Vt enim duae, sant pri∣ma & com∣munes cau∣sae morbo∣rum: ple∣thea, & ca∣cochymia, sicremedia, sum mssio Sanguinis, & purgatio either by opening of a veine or purgatiō. Cacochymia is a vitious quality of all the foure humours, or of some one of them: for either blood is distempered, or choler, or flegme, or melancholy; and that body which is so distempered, is cal∣led corpus cachochymicum, a body of an e∣uill complexion, iuice or disposition. First therefore in the choice of the re∣medie,
we must first be carefull to deale with the cause, before the disease, or the symptom: the antecedent before the con∣iunct: the antecedēt cause, as I haue said, springeth from plethoria, or cacochymian: and the former is remoued by phlebotomi, and the latter by purgation. In the choice of the remedy also wee must consider in opening of a vein, what Remedy  weine must be opened, as the Cephalica for the head; the Basilica for the naturall parts; the Epalica, for the middle parts, and the diseases of the stomacke and the splene. In the choice of the remedy, we must also diligently consider the seate of that cacochymia, & whether it may be re∣moued with Aloes & Cassia, or with some cōmon Clyster, for to purge from the first region as from the stomack, from the lu∣testims, from the hollows of the liuer, from the Mesenterio, and the splene, it is sufficiēt oftentimes to vse Rhubarb, Sen∣na, & Agarick, with such like: but where it resteth in the parts more remote, we are then to vse a stronger means, as Scammo∣mack medicins, coloquintiáa, hermodactils, black helebor, & others of the same kind. In the choice of the remedy we must
also consider the greatnes of the disease: for a great disease doeth require a great remedie; and a lighter, the lighter reme∣die: sometimes a small disease is cured onely by abstinence, frication, exercise, and with light remedies. In the admi∣nistration of a remedy, we must also con∣sider the strength of the sicke, and so dis∣pose the medicine accordingly. And this is an obseruation, that the remedy must be alwares greater then the disease; and before the opening of any veine a cly∣ster must precede, lest the crude humor which for the most part is contained in the first region, be carried into the places that are empty of blood. Doct. You haue satisfied me well in the Theorick part: let vs now come to the practise. Shew me your method in the Therapeuticke, part: let me know how you will remedy diseases that proceede of blood; which we will comprehend vnder Synochus, or a continuall feuer. Go to, let me know your method for the curation of a continuall feuer. Stud. That shall I most willingly per∣forme, and I hope to your full satisfacti∣on and contentment.
General remedies against dis∣eases proceeding of bloud vnder the example of a continuall Feuer. SYnochus is a continuall Feuer procee∣ding Signa. from bloud: the signes are an vnseparable rednes in the face, an infla∣tion or puffing vp of the veines, artires, and temples, with lassitude and weari∣somnes of the whole body, with a sleepy disposition; the vrin is red and grosse, the patient hath a difficultie of breathing, a full pulse, high and swift. The cause and the kind of the Feuer being perspected, the cure wil easily fol∣low. Purgatio. The first intention is with a clyster, or some gentle purgation: only I except cassia, partly because of his humectati∣on it increaseth the putrifaction, and partly because head-ache is familiar to this Feuer, and by the vse of cassia is in∣creased, by reason of the abundance of vapours that ariseth from the same. Secondly, I open the basilica of the right arme, and according to the coun∣sell Venae sectio.
of Galen, I draw blood euen to the fainting of the patient. And because it sometimes hapneth that in a full body, a veine is hard to be found, and therefore blood cannot be drawne: I then cause your sanguisugae to bee applied to the thighs, legs, & shoulders, or otherwise I prouoke the Hemrrhods, the Menstrus, or bleeding at the nose. Then to resist pu∣trification, I giue syrupus de acetositaet. citri, De limonibus, De granatis, Oxysacharum sim∣plex, with the waters of roses, sorrell gra∣men, and Cichory: Or, Rec. Syrupi de acetositate Curi. ℥ ij. Aquae graminis. ℥ viij. Fiat Iulep: which must be giuen inter pastu. The Syrups of Buglosse, De lupulis, De fumaria, giuen in the waters aforesaid doeth clense the blood. And forbeause the thinner blood by heate is apt to be turned in to choler, and the grosser into melancholy; we purge with Cholagogo, as Rhubarb, and with Melanagogo, as Sena with some refrigerant decoction, which doth also open and clense the blood; as for example: Rec. Radicum graminis. Acetosaean. Drag. iij.
Cichorij totius. Endiuiae. Scariolae an. M. j. 4. Sem. frigid. malor. an. Drij. (sunt Diuretica.) Florum cordialium an. . j. Fol. Sennae mundat. ℥. j. Fiat decoctio. In colaturae ℥. viij. infunde Rhabarbari Drag. iij. in lein expressione dissolue syrupi De Cichorio simplicis syrupi de fumaria compos. an. ℥ j. ss. fiat apozema in duas Doses. In the whole course of the cure must be repeated clysters that haue a cooling facultie; as for example: Rec. Lactucae. Endiuiae. Scariolae. Portulacaean. M. j. Fiat decoctio in collaturae lib. j. dissolue mel∣lis & sacchari violati an. ℥. j. Diapruni solut. Drag. vj. or confectio hamech. ℥. ss. velv∣triusq Drag. ij. olci violati ℥ iij. fiat clyster. And because the blood in the great veins doth putrifie, and is wont to moue great heat and paine about the loynes: we doe apply ceratum refrigerans Gaseni, or that which is prescribed against the hot distemperature of the reines.
The diet of the Patient must be thin, ctus. and such as may not increase bloud, for bodies that are full and impure, by how much the more they are nourished, by so much the more are they hurt: in stead of wine, he must vse aqua horaij, or aqua graminis: & if the patient haue dif∣ficultie of breathing, you may ad there∣vnto liquorish, iniubes, or the roote of vngula cabalina, to strengthen the heart, buglosse, burrage; for the heat of the li∣uer cichorie, lettice, purslan; for the heat of the reines, the cold seedes and Alcecen∣gi, for costiuenes, violets, pruna acida, Ta∣narinds. He must obstaine from egges, wine, & if it possible may be from flesh, because it doth increase the bloud, and so consequently the cause of the disease. Of diseases proceeding of cho∣ler, with their cure, vnder the example of a Feuer tertian. Doct. PRoceed now to the cure of cholerick diseases, which wee Febrister∣tiana. will comprehend vnder a tertian Feuer. Tel me how wil you cure a tertian Feuer?
Stud. As there is a common cause of all diseases, so for the most part there are common remedies: the heate of cho∣ler is first to al to be asswaged by the vse of cooling medicines, as syrups of Cicho∣rie, De endiuia, De granatis, violarum Rosa. De lymomb. De nymphaa: and if the heat be great, we giue thē with the water of Le∣ctis, Purssan Plātine, Cuscuta, Sorrel, and such like: Afterwards wee purge with Rhubarb, infused in a decoction that doth both coole and open, as Rec. Rad. graminis. Acetosae an. dra. ij. Cichorij. Fndiute. Cuscutaean. M. ss. 4. Sem frigid maior. an. dra. j. Florum viol., rum & Nenupharis an. P j. Fiat decoctio: in collaturae ℥. iiij. infunde Rhubarb. dra. ij. an leui expressione dissolue sy∣rupirosarum solut ℥ j. ss. fiat polus. In a ter∣tian, we administer opening medicines rather cold then hot: Galen commendeth the decoction of Pulegium, and origanum Ad Glau∣conem. And towards the end it shalbe profita∣ble to vse Syrupus de quinque radioibus cum
aquacichorij, or the syrup of cichory, with the decoction of the opening roots (and if you would temperate the heate) they must first be macerated in viniger. Clysters must be prepared ex sero La∣ctis, Clysters. in which is boyled Letice, purslan, & violets: in the strayning we dissolue Dia∣pruni solutini, Drag vj. mellis & sacchari vio∣lati, an. ℥. j olei violacet & nenupharis, an. ℥. j. ss. if the heat be great; otherwise oyse of violets ℥. iij. will serue. Galen in the most hottest feuers giueth counsell to draw blood euen ad lypothi∣miam; Venae Seclio. because there is no better remedy for cooling. Howbeit, it is not expedi∣ent to open a veine before the third sitte be past: and then if the vrin appeare red, high coloured, and grosse, we shall commit no error to open the Basilica of the right arme: wherby the blood com∣mixed with choler and putrifaction may be auoyded: and although the v∣rin be not grosse and, yet high, it shal be necessary to draw bood, to auoid choler, & to coole the ebullition therof. But this must be obserued in bood-letting that at the first opening of the veine we may draw more blood then at the second; for
the first is for euacuation: and the latter but for refrigeration and cooling. And this blood-letting is most fittest for yong persons, such as haue plethoricke and full bodies, and strong; in whom this feruor & ebullition, by this meanes is easily asswaged. We must obserue also, that vomiting, being not prouoked, doth very much profit in the beginning of the Vomitus spontaneus. fit; neither is to be restrained, vnlesse the patient be debilitated & made weak thereby: and if it happen at sometimes that nature is flow to expell by vomite; the Physition is then to helpe nature, by administring of some medicine that may procure the same: which must be (as I Vomitus prouocan∣dus in va∣rum simi prmipro Vomitus. haue said) in the beginning of the sit; as for example: Rec. Aquae communis. ℥. iiij. Aceti & sacchaeran. ℥. j. Alisce. Mix it, and giue it being warme vn∣to Oximel. the patient. Some giue vnto the pa∣tient Oximell ℥. iij. somewhat warme. But sometimes it happeneth that the pa∣tient doth vomit too much; that nature is thereby very much weakened: against which, we must giue such things as may
corroborate, and strengthen the sto∣mack: As Rec. Syrup. de agresta. ℥ vj. Syrupus. Which shal be giuen by little and lit∣tle to the patient in a spoone ij. houres before meat: but if that stay not the vo∣miting, prepare this powder: Rec. Puluis.Corallij rubei. Drag. iij. Zacchar. Drag ij. Canamomi. Scr. ss Misce. Of which powder let the patient take Drag. j. mixed with two spoonefuls of the foresaid Syrup. A Sacculus may also be prepared to Sacculus contra vo∣mitum. apply vnto the stomacke after this man∣ner: Rec. Rosarum rubearum. Drag. iij. Coriandri praeparat. Menthaean. Drag. ij. ss Coraliijrubei. Balanstiorum an. Drag. j. Conquassentur, & fiat sacculus. In like manner we take for the same Empla∣strum ad stomach. matter bread tosted and infused in rose vineger, beaten in a morter; to which may be added of myrtels and redde cor∣rall ana Drag. j. of Cinamon Drag. ss and
so applied like a plaster vpon the sto∣mach. It is the dutie of a carefull Phy∣sitian to obserue diligently the motion of nature and to follow it as a guide, as Naturae motus. if it will helpe it selfe by vomit, by the stoole, by vrin, or by sweate; yea some∣times by haemorhogia to assist nature in her worke. In the meane time we must re∣gard the liuer, for now hee is in himselfe altogether hot, the gaule in its vessell is fried and adured, so that we must apply an Epethem ex aqua cichorij ℥. iiij. cum e∣electuarij triv Santali drag. ij. Doct. But sometimes it falleth out, that with all this labour, the Feuer cea∣seth not: what must we doe then? Stud. Then we giue this Apozem or the like, twice a day, in the morning and euening. ℥. xij. Rec. Tamarindorum subt. incis. ℥ ij. Hordei contus. Passularum mund. an. P. iiij. Pruna incisa & contus. num xv. Conseruae nenusaris. Conseruae viotrae. ana ℥ ij. Fiat Decoctio S. A. In libris. xij. aquae quoad lib. octo reliquae ficte Let it be strayned, to which strayning
adde of syrup of violets, and oxysacchari solut. & syrupi de auabus radicibus ana ℥ iij. fiat Apozema. Afterwards wee administer this cly∣ster Clyster. following, or the like: Rec. Succi becae lib. j. Oletros. ℥ ij. Salis drag. j. Sacchar. rub. ℥ ij. Cassiae sistulae ℥ j. misce & fiat en∣ema. Also if the Patient hee dry or thirsty, Ad Aridi∣tatem lin∣guae. you may suffer him to bold in his mouth Electuarium Diadr agacanthi frigidi, or Da∣mask pruins, or a cold apple, or to gar∣garise with rosewater and vinegar mix∣ed together, or to lick some syrup of li∣mons of the citren, violets, or such like. In the Patient bee greeued through the heate of the summer, or because the fumes of choler doe offend the heart, we may giue him some cordial confectiō: as Rec. Conseruae rosaeros. rub. ℥ j. Conseruae borrag. Confectio cordialis. Buglossae, Violarum an. ℥ ss Dioscordij drag. j. Boti or rentalis drag. ss Syrupi acetocuatis citriq. S. fiat in
forma opitae. Or for the richer sort: Rec. Diamargarit. frigid. drag. j. ss Sem. citri, Sem. acetosi & bombacis ad drag. ij. Cum syrupo buglossi fiat confectio. Or Rec. confectionis hyacinthorum drag. j. ss specier. Diamargarit. frigid. drag. iij. misce cum syrupo violarum fiat confectio. Of which you shall giue vnto the sicke a spoonful, with water of buglosse & roses Sometimes it hapneth that the Patient is affected with exceeding headach, by reason of the sumes that doe arise from the stomach; wherefore the foresaid cly∣sters must be often repeated, and fricati∣on and rubbings of the legs must be v∣sed: besides the feet must be oftē washed before sleepe with this lotion following: Pedum lotio. Rec. Florum ros. rubrarum, Foliorum vitis & Camomillae an. M. ij. Florum chamomelae &. Meliloti, an. P. j. Let al boyle in common water, where∣with let the Patients feet be washed eue∣ry night, the thighs, & hips, are also to be bound, to the intēt the sumes may be re∣tracted
& so the paine of the head eased. The feet may also be rubed with some peece of course līning cloth, which may be moystned in some vinegar and salt. Also for watchfulnes wee may apply this vnguent. Rec. Vnguenti populeonis ℥ ss. Contrae Vigilam. Requies Galeni. drag. iij. Misce & annoint the temples. But if the Patient sleepe not with this meanes, you may administer this potion, two houres before midnight. Rec. Syrupi papauoris an. ℥. j. Syrup. nenufaris Aquae Lactucae. ℥. ij. Misce, & bibat. Also may be administred this Nasale. Rec. Aquaenenufaris ℥ ss.Nasale Somnise∣rum. Requiem Galenigran. iij. Opij gran. iiij. Acctimodicum. This being mixt togither, wet cotten or bumbast, & put them into the nostrels It often times hapneth, that in this ter∣tian Feuer, the reines to be inflamed, to amend which, we vse this vnguent. Rec. Ole rosati magistri Arnoldi. ℥ j. Aceti modicum. Vnguentum prorenbus.
Misce. Or we may vse vnguēto rosato santalato. And thus by the helpe of Almightie God, and the due administation of these medicines, the cure of a cholorick or tertian Feuer shall bee effected. Doct. I like this method very well, let me see how you will proceed in the cure of diseases proceeding of slegme, which we will comprehend vnder a quotidian Feuer: let mee know your method for the cure of a quotidian Feuer? Generall remedies for diseases proceeding from flegme vnder the example of a quotidian Feuer. Stud. EVery Feuer that repeatith it selfe euery day, may not be ter∣med a quotidian, for duplex tertiana, and triplex quartana, doth returne daily, but the tertian with rigor, and exceeding cold, the quartan with horror, shaking, and shiuering, and the quotidian with cold of the extreame parts. The quotidi∣an doth not end in  neither doth the fitte of the quotidian end with sweate,
as that of the tertain, because that slegme is hardly resolued into sweats, but cho∣ler is very easily and quickly: also the accesse of the quotidian is wont to bee longer then that of the tertian. The cause and kind of the Feuer is chiesly to be iudged from things antece∣dent, as if the sicke were giuen to glutto∣ny, of a slegmatick constitution, & such a one that hath lead an idle life; whether it taketh him in the winter, or whether he liueth in a cold and moyste ayre, or if he be a child or an old man; if it be a wo∣man, or a fat man; for children through much feeding, old men, women, and fat men, through the defect of nature, doe gather much flegme. Also the Feuer is to be adiudged from the adiuncts: as if the Ab adiun∣ctis. A conse∣quentibus. heate bee felt with moysture, although through putrifaction it bee some what sharpe: also from the consequence, as the hurt action: if the pulse bee small, flegme oppressing the heat, both in quā∣titie and qualitie. The Feuer is also to be adiudged by its excrements: as if the vrin bee thin (for so it hapneth through obstructiō, because the thin matter doth onely passe away) also if it bee white through rawnes and cruditie, or at the
length turbusēt, through the permixture of some grosse humor The stools are also to be cōsidered, whether they be liquid, crude, and fleg matick: no thirst, because the stomack abounding in flegme doth represse heate and dirthe, which are the causes of thirst, vnles it happē the slegme to be salt with putrifaction or admixion of choler. And as the cure doth proceed from Art, so we must be careful to distin∣guish the Spocies of the flegme from the effects; as if it bee sharpe it prouoketh hunger; if it be salt, thirst; if it be sweet, drowsimes, quia acida coquenda salsa mox vacuanda, dulcis naturae committenda. Therefore when we perceiue that the Feuer doth proceed from the dominatiō of flog me, the first intention for the cure, is to prepare a clyster fit to draw the same from the stomach & intestins, the forme whereof is in this order: Rec. Parietariae Enemae ad pituitam. Mercurialis Chamomeli Meluloti Puleqij an. M. ss adde sivistantun∣dem Hyssopi Thymi
Origani Calamenthae Sem. anisi Sem. femiculian. drag. ij. Fiat decoctio, in colaturae libra vna dis∣solu mellis anthosati, & Sacchari rubri an. ℥ j. Diaphaenici aut Hiaerae aut Benedictae laxatiuae drag. vj. Ole chamomeli & Anethiniana. ℥ j. ss. The humor is to be prepared with sy∣rups de hyssopo, de marrubio, de absynthio, de duabus de quinque radicibus, de Staechade, oxemebte composito, Scillitico cum decocto ra∣dicum. Aperientium, or with the waters A∣pij. saemiculi, Asparagi, petrosilins, Absintbij, menthae, salutae, afterwards must bee ad∣ministred such things as doe purge slegme, as Agaric. Diaphaenicon, Dia∣carthanīs, or if you please, wee may pre∣pare an Apozē purging grosse slegme, as Rec. Radicum aperientium, or Apzema purgans pituitam. Rad. enulae campanae Rad peoniae an. drag. ij. Ilissopi Thimi
Absynthij. Gentianae. Chamedrios. Chamepitios an. M. ss Seminum anisi. Sem feniculi an. Drag. iij. Florum anthos & Staechados an. P j. siat decoctio. In colature ℥. viij. infunde & bulliant a∣garici Drag. iiij. in expressione dissolue Dia∣phaenici Drag. vj. oximelitis aut cuiusuis dicto∣rum syrup. ℥. ij fiat Apozema in ducas doses. But because it happeneth sometimes that the patient cannot take a potion, but Pil. pur∣gantes puu∣itam. had rather take pils: then for that pur∣pose may be giuen Pil. Aureae, cochiae, de a∣garico, aggregatiuae; of those that are lesse purging, as hierae, stomachicae, & Alephan∣ginae, which may be prescribed by them∣selues or which the others, whose dose is Drag. j. Or, Rec. Massae pil. aurearum an. Sor. ij. Pil. de hiera. Cum syrupo de absynthio siant pillulae molles num. vj. Or, Rec. Agaricitrochiscati Sor. iiij. or of the Masse of pillulae de agarico Drag. j. cum sy∣rupo De menthae vel De hyssopo siant vj. pil.
molles. About the beginning of the cold the fit approaching, it shall not be amisle to prouoke vomit, to euacuace the flegme which is contained in the stomacke; e∣specially if nature shall seeme to require the same. To which purpose: Rec. Syrupi acctosi aut oxymèlitis simpl. ℥. ij. Vomitus. Cum decocto corticis raphani & seminis Atriplaces rapham, in quo dra. ss. agari∣ci bullierit, Fiat potio, Detur tepidè. Hippocrates doth very much commend vomit in this feuer and writeth in Epide∣nijs, that the wife of one Theotimus was perfectly cured by the same. Also it is profitable to anoint the back with oile of flowerdeluce or Dil: the pa∣tiēt may also vse hydromel in the decocti on wherof shal be boyled a litle hyslop, as Rec. Hyssoppi P. ss. bulliat in tribus libris aquae ad perfectam despumatienem, seu con∣sumptioneni tertie partis, audendo mellis ℥. j. ss. cuius quantitas mir uatur siat{que} mulsa di∣lutior sicalor in praecordijs auctus videatur, ne bilescat. In the whole progresse of the disease, our cheefest care must be for the stomacke, that it may be strengthened by taking of
some tables of Aromaticum rosatum, or E∣lectuary of Diarrhodon, applying vpō the the same Emplastrū stomachicū, with oile of nutmegs, Chimical oile of wormwood, & such like: also to giue inwards is verie much cōmended syrup of mints or syrup of worme wood. Some do affirm, that the iuice of Gentian with warm wine taken before the fit, doth cure the feuer: but it is most certain, that a Dr. of old treacle, or mithridate (the body purged) giuen in white wine one houre before the fit to cure the same. There be some that haue sworne that onely with the instilling of 3. drops of the iuice of Mercury into the right eare, or nostrill, to haue done the same: but as it is an indifferent medicine, so those that are disposed may proue it; so that they neglect not other meanes: some others will, vpon the drawing on of the fit to hold the feet in hot water, wherin haue bin boiled herbs of an hot quality. To a quotidiā appertaineth that feuer which is called Epiala, contrary to Lypiria, for Epiala Ly∣priiam. whē the inward parts wax cold, the out∣ward do burn, because the vitrios & glas sie flegm in what part it doth putrisie, is incended, but the other grosse sort doth
waxe cold, which requireth to be well prepared by such medicines as doe ve∣hemently incide and attenuate before it be purged. Gordomius counselleth in feuers proceeding of slegme, to giue the patient wine diluted: for, saith he, if Va∣lesius doe allow of opening rootes, if of peper, if syrups, De mentha, and De absyn∣thio may be allowed, why not wine? And this is the method which I haue obserued for the cure of a quotidian fe∣uer; by which method I suppose all phlegmaticke diseases of what kind soe∣uer, may be remoued and perfectly cu∣red. Doct. Tell me what difference there is betweene a quotidian, and an haemi∣tritaeon, or halfe a certian. Of an Haemitritaeon or Semitertian. Stud. HIppocrates, primo Epidenion, De semeter∣tiana. doth call a semitertian, hor∣risicam; not onely because it doeth in∣uade with horror, but also because in the whole course of the disease the sick doth
altogether tremble and shake: this feuer is framem of a continuall quotidian, and of an intermittent tertian. Flegme pu∣trified in the greater vessels, causeth a quotidian, and choler putrisied in habi∣tu, causeth a tertian; but it troubleth dai∣ly: besids also the third day the sick cō∣plaineth himself to be tormēted for cer∣tain houres with watchings, vnquietnes, with thirst, with bitternes of mouth, with a feeling of lassitude, and wearisomenes: therfore frō flegme proceedeth the cold, & from choler a light succession, or sha∣king of the extern parts; but frō both of them trembling: It is called a semiterti∣an, not because we say he is halfe putri∣fied; but he is farre more grieuous then a tertian. Hippocrates saith, that this di∣sease is deadly, for many causes: first, for the diuers conflict of contraries: second∣ly, because it leaueth no time to nature to nourish the body, to concoct hurtfull humours, and to repaire the strength; by which cause it must needes heape vp a great heape of excrements: thirdly, be∣cause it is twofold, and is framed from contrary causes: lastly, because it exer∣ciseth the stomack and the Nerues parts;
from whence arise often syncops, and soundings: notwithstanding, the reme∣dies must be mixed against choler, and flegme; the stomack must be strengthe∣ned with inward and outward meanes: the liuer must also be cooled: for I know not how it happeneth that it taketh one heat from another, & the lesser is drawn from the greater. Doct. So, now you haue satisfied my desire, proceede to diseases arising from melancholy, which we wil comprehend vnder a feuer quartan: let me know your method you haue for the cure of the same Of diseases proceeding of melancholy, with their remedies, under the example of a quartan feuer Stud. AFeuer proceeding from me∣lancholy is called a quartan, Do morbis melancholi∣cis. because that melācholy moueth euery 4. day, as choler doth euery 3. day, & slegm daily. That quartan is the safest, which doth inuade of itselfe, and doth not pro∣ceed from some other disease. For those feuers that degenerate into a quartan, doe somtimes continue for many yeres. Valescus reporteth, that he saw a man that had a feuer euery 30. day, & that feuer
did continue for the space of 30 yeares. The feuer is chiefly to be known from things antecedent; as if the sicke were Digmtio. melancholy, & in his declining age, and whether it took hold of him in Autumn; although that Hippocrates in libro De heb∣domadibus writeth, that that feuer doth chiefly inuade in the flower of age: that is to say, from 25. vnto 45. but hee hath written many other things of a quartan, which daily experience doth shew to be contrary. But to proceed: if the fit doth begin with trembling & shaking, & that his bones seeme to be bruised, & feeleth paine in his lower parts, because the hu∣mor is cold, drie, & grosse and therefore cannot be thrust out to the skin. Also from the adiuncts, as by the heat which doth not appeare sharp & biting except the humor be of burnt choler. From the consequents, as the hurt a∣ction, a small pulse by reason of cold; & Actiu lesa. slow by reason of the grossenesse of the humour. The feuer is also to be ad∣iudged from the excrements, as by little sweat, because the humour being earthy is very hardly resolued into sweats: the vrine is thinne and watrish, and the
stooles and drie. We must proceede in this feuer as in others, in concocting the matter offen∣ding, and in purging; because he is of the kind of putrified feuers; therefore we must begin with euacuation of com∣mon superfluities; and if the belly be bound, wee giue this or the like gly∣ster: Rec. Fol. Maluae. M. j. Polypod quer. ℥ j. ss. Epithimi. Apozem. Contra me∣lancholiam. Carthami an. ℥. ss. Sen alex. ℥. j. Sem. anisi. Femculi an. P. j. Bulliant in sero Lactis adlib j. in colat. dis∣solue mollis ros. ℥. j. ss. olei violarum ℥. iij. & fiat enema. Also we may administer this Apo∣zem. Rec. Radicum capparis. Tamaricis an. Drag. iij. Polypodij. ℥ ss. Lupuli, cuscutae, melissae, buglossae. Borraginisan. M. j Som. anisi, feniculi an Drag. ij. Florum genistae. P. j.
Fiat decoctio, in colat. ℥ viij. Dissolue Syrupi Defumaria simplicis vel compositi, syrup. de pomis aut regis sabor an ℥ j. ss. fiat Apozema clarum in duas doses. In the same decoction may bec boyled Foliorum Sennae drag. iij in colla∣tura ℥ iiij. dissolue catholici duplati, sy∣rupy de Epithymo compsoti an. ℥ j. fiat potus. The humor being prepared, ought to bee purged with light and familiar medicines often repeated, for strong medicines doe rather exasperate the humor, being before stubberne, then otherwise anoyd it, but for poore men, and strong bodies, may be giuen this medicine. Rec. confectionis hanicch. Drag. iij. Dissolue in decocto lupuli & scabiosae in quo ℥ ss foliorum sennae buluerint, Ad∣dendo oxymelitis Galeni ℥ j. fiat potus. The pouder of Sennae oriental, or of E∣pithymum cretensis Drag. ij. drunck in white wine, may suffice, or Drag. vj. thereof infused in sero lactis, or aqua viola∣rum, if the humor be of black choler. Atrabil t∣rius. If the body bee full, the vrin appea∣ring red, we may open the basilica of the
left arme, which if the blood flow cleane and red, shall be forth with stayed, but if it appeare black, we may draw in more aboundance: in women we are to moue the monstrus, and in men the haemorods, if it may possible be done: some there bee that giue councel to open the saluatella (which is a veine between the little fin∣ger, and the next adioyning to the right hand, but in this case it must bee opned in the left) in the paroxisme it selfe. Calen giucth vs warning to looke vnto the splene, as well by things in ward as out∣ward, the remedies whereof hee setteth forth in capite de obstructione Genis: for in the splene saith he is the seate of melan∣choly, which is indeed focus febris. But Trallianus and Aetius ex Ruffo: saith that in a quartan proceeding of black choler we ought to haue regard to the liuer, ra∣ther then the splene, which being ob∣structed, and by long heate of a cholo∣rick Feuer, is growne into a scirrhus hard∣nes, which may bee perceiued when the hypocondre of the right side by the very touch it selfe is perceiued to be stretched out and very hard. Vomit doth auaile very much to auoid Vomitus.
the humor offēding, if it be prouoked by fit medicines, two houres before the sit. White wine being giuen luke warme in the beginning of the sit, doth procure vomit, and in the declination sweate. There be many that do commend ba∣thing, because that the skin astricted and dry may be relaxed: but this I think not to be good in a cold quartā but in a hot. There be some also that do giue coun∣sell, a little before the sit, to annoint the spine of the backe, and the feete (because from thence beginneth this fit) with the oyle of iuniper, of Scorpions, of Coste, of Castoreum, cum vnguēto Arragonio, or with that wherin hath bin boiled green frogs, for that is an alexteriū of a maligne humor sōe also prefer this medicine following. Rec. Theriacae árag. j Nardi & caryophil∣lorū an. Scr j. cum aliquo ex dictis oleis aut cum vino generoso fiat lin mentum pro spina dorsi, for so the trēbling which is the fore∣runner of the quartan is diminished, be∣cause that by heat nature is strengthned, & better able to resist cold, & also som∣times sweat followeth, whereby the ac∣cesse is diminished, & aportiō of matter of the disease auoided Confectio alcermes,
being giuen one houre before the accesse the body being before purged, doth profit very much. In like manner, the decoction of Agrimony, to which is ad∣ded a little white wine, at the end of the decoction, is giuen in the accesse itselfe. I wonder of Rondoletius which doth so often perswade vs that the vse of white wine wherein sage is steeped for a night, to cure the quartan, and to bee a certaine remedy for all diseases which proceed of melancholy. But that is more wonderful, that Tral∣lianus doth affirme, that a line Bitle hung Scarabcus. about the necke in a peece of linnen tincted with saffron, should bee a sure experiment to take away a quartan: some there are that doe commend the worme that is found in the thistle cal∣led Labrum veneris, to bee very good against a quartan, being hanged about the neck, of which you may read more in Trallianus. Trallianus. Valescus doth write, that the iuyce of Tapsus Harbatus being giuen three times an houre before the fit, to remoue the Quartan. There are certaine that do vse this se∣cret.
Take the heart of an Hare, prepa∣red as the lungs of a Foxe, let it be deui∣ded into three equall parts, wherof giue one part vnto the sicke, with wine, be∣fore the fit, and by the fourth fit he shall be cured. Things that doe heat very much, as Diospoliticon, pepper, mustard, Diatrion piperion, and such like, must be auoyded in a hot quartan, in a cold also they must be carefully and warily vsed. For those that vse these remedies, as Aetius doth affirme, doth increase the force of the disease, for they make of a simple quar∣tan, a double, but in the state before the fit may bee giuen this medicine. Rec. Myrrhae piperis, & felliorum rutae viridum an. partes aequaìes cum melle, fiant pill. quarn̄ Scr. j. detur ante accessionem. Of diseases of Inanition or emptines, vnder the example of a Feuer hectick. A Feuer Hectick is an equall distem∣perature, and therefore without Febris Hectica. paine, for hee that is hectick doth not feele the disease but priuatly: quia solitas actiones obire non potest: besides the altera∣tion
groweth by little and little, neither hath it any essence in motion: when this disease doth begin, a fenerous heate doth inuade the dewy or almentary humor, called Cambium, and it is sayd to be con∣firmed when it hath consumed the natu∣rall moysture, and the fixed spirits. This Feuer hectick, followeth very of∣ten burning Feuers, colliquations, great euacuations, as aimorragiā. Diarrhaeā, lien∣teriā, & also Empiomae, and Pthisis: that is lesse dangerous, which doth succeed some effect of the stomack, the liuer, the splene, the mother, and the reines. This disease is knowne by his heate, Dignotio. the vrin is thin, crude, white, & at the last oily, from the colliquation; there is a dry cough, the pulse slacke, hard, and it is called hectick by reason of the dry arte∣ry: they feele presently after dinner heate, especially in the hands and feete, because the dry heate is perfused in the nourishing humor, euen as lime in water. The stomack almost sticketh to the ribs the face is leddy, because of the smalnes of heat, & spirits; at the last he groweth like a ghost, the eyes hollow, the nose sharpe, and then when the haires do fal, the legges swell, and a slux of the belly
hapneth: then iudge that death is nic. The cure rather cōsisteth in diet, then in Curatio fere tota analeptica. Physick, but if the belly be bound, there may bee administred a gentle clyster, or some calsia newly drawne, his meate should be hens fed with frogges, or with barly boiled with frogs, of which being beaten together, may be made a paste, & so cast vnto the hennes. Some there are that do very much commend the yelks of egs poched, and coxe-stones boyled in milke, but that is more fitter for the cause which is emptines) then to the Fe∣uer, the Patient must vse decoctions of french barly, a yong cocke stusfed with barly, clensed and boyled, for broth is very good, if hee shall be wearie of the vse of pusans, he may vse white wine be∣ing made thin by delution. The Patient must auoid watchfulnes, venery, and all other perturbations of the mind, which doth dry & attenuate, as anger, sorrow: bathing is thought to be good lukewarm so that it hath a cooling faculty, especi∣ally before the disease be confirmed, he may tarry in this bath 3. or 4. houres gi∣uing vnto him therein Asses milke tem∣pered cum saccharo, violato, or rosato, after
he is out of his bath, he may be annoin∣ted with cerato refrigirante galeni, or vn∣guento rosato, mesue oyle of roses, violets, or Mympheae. Marasmus is not to bee cured, and those that make their Marasmus. brags that they cure consumptions, doc much mistake: for it is rather leannes, and thinnes of body, then any Hectick passion: for euen as to poure oyle into a lampe where is no weeke nor match, is nothing else but oleum & operam perdere, euen so in vaine doe wee striue to restore to nature that solid substance, being by heate consumed & taken away, because that through nourishment, a watry hu∣mor, & not an angry is rather supplyed to the sicke Patient. Common remedies for maligne diseases, and contagious vnder the example of the Pestilence. THe Pestilence is a disease which De Tesie. doth happen vnto many, and hath his beginning from a pernicious & vnu∣sual putrifactiō, which doth very much exceed the condition of vulgar pu∣trifaction. Sometimes this pernicious quality hath it begining in our selues, for
it happeneth that sometimes the humors I could wish that our com∣mon Gar∣deners a∣bout Lon∣don might be inhibi∣ted from planting such mul∣tituds of Cabbages, or at the least might be com∣pelled to bury deep vnder ground their rot∣ten stalks and leaues from whence a∣riseth a pe∣stilent va∣pour and vnusuall putrifacti∣on at the latter end of the yere of our bodie doth so much degenerate from the natural temperature, that at the length it taketh vnto it self a pernitios & venemos quality, & so is constrained to striue with deadly venoms. Somtimes it ariseth frō outward means, as malign & putrified exhalations which are commu∣nicated to the aire; sometimes from dead fennes, pooles, and standing waters cor∣rupted, such as is the waters in Moore fields at London, where no man was wont to walke in the euenings for stench, stinking channels, venemous dens, and mettalin spirits arising out of the earth: often times also it happeneth from the variable commistion of the Planets; and then it is the hidden and admirable scourge of the most iust God for our sinnes; and then it is properly called the pestilence: but when it hath hit beginning from other causes, it is cal∣led Morbus malignus, or Febris maligna: those feuers that haue their originall from Venom are for the most part deadly, but not pestilential, because they are not contagious.
The part affected is the heart, by Pars affect. meanes of the pestilent aire which cree∣peth vnto the same by the lungs; through necessity of respiration, where∣by the vitall spirits are assailed; and the humidum radicale, and solid substance cleane ouer throwne. We must in the beginning resist the ex∣ternall cause; the aire is to be purged by fire, both abroad & in the house, for that doth separate & remoue the putrifaction many waies: if it be prepared of sweete woods, as of Iuniper, it is more better & doth more refresh the vitall spirits. The vitall faculty it selfe is to be strengthned by cordials, as well inward as outward, the better to resist venom. Rec. Conseruae buglos. & borrag. an. ℥. j. Corticis, & semenis citri, an. Dr. ij. Diamargirits frioidi. Alexiphar macon. Troch scorūde Camphora, an. dr. j Adde si vis. boli armeni terrae sigillatae, tan∣tundē, Rasurae Vnicornis smaragdt, ambrae an. gran. ss. cum syrupo conseruationis citri fiat opiata, vel cum saccharo in aqua violarum Buglos. scabiosae, cardut benedicti soluto fiat e∣lectuarum per tabellas: but if these things shail seeme too hot for the summer; they
may be temperated with adding of Ro∣ses, violets, and sanders; for the poorer sort may suffise the rines and seeds of the citren, cornu, cerui zedoaria dictaminus, angelica, tormentill, gentian, taken the quantity of Drag. j. in aquae cardui or bor∣ragini To the heart must be applied Sac∣culus, fotus, Epithemita; the sacculus may be prepared with red roses, violets, flowres of buglosse, & the citren rine, & of their decoction or distilled waters, may bee made fotus: and with adding of cordiall powders may be framed an Epithema. There are alwaies ready in the Apo∣thecaries shops two Alexiteriās against al venoms and venemous diseases: that is, treacle, & mithridate, the which our an∣tients haue vsed with great profit, as wel for preseruatiue, as for expelling presēt sicknes: they were wont to giue one Dr. by it selfe, or else in some cordiall water, and also to apply it outwardly in the forme of a Linament vpon the region of the heart, with some mice of Lymons, or mixed with some Cordiall conserues, in the forme of an Emplaster. Some learned men doe agree that the same ca∣cochymia is to be diminished by some gentle purge, which must be vsed with
some cordial decoction; as for example: if choler be accended, and a poison may seeme to possesse all the humours, the signes shew presently a cholerick feuer, although by reason of the same cacoethes and conioyned poyson, it be increased: we may say, Rec. Radicis acetosae. ℥. ss. Scabiosae. Cichorij. Pimpinellae an. M. j. Decoctio cordialis. Sem. citri & Cardui benedictian. Drag ij. Flor. cordialium an. P. j. Fiat decoctio, in colaturae ℥. iiij. infunde Rhabarbari Dra. ij. ss. in expressione leui dis∣solue syrup. rosarum Solutiui ℥. j. ss. adde Camphorae grana quatuor & fiat potus: I dare not vse any stronger purge as Diapru∣num solutinum, and Electuarium, Desucco rosarum; least nature should be distur∣bed: and therefore we must farre lesse vse Diacrydium, or Antimoni. Yet there be some Physitions that doe affirme, that iiij. or v. graines of Antimoni being infu∣fed in some cordiall waters, to haue been giuen with good successe. In all Epidimicall diseases one doeth
administer this medicine: Rec. Diascordij. Drag. j. Syrup. Delymonibus. ℥ ss. Aquae cardui benedict, ℥ ij. Spirit. vitrioli gut. 4. Misce & fiat haustus. Capiat & fudet. and so let him take ij. Nota. or iij. of the same draughts: if the feuer seeme to be a synochus, and the patient haue a plethoricke body, a veine may safely be opened, but if it be but an E∣phemera or hecticke, then at no hand must it be enterprised. From hence ari∣riseth that great complaint of letting of blood in a pestilent feuer: one defending one way, and another, another way; and all striue by probable reasons: some do affirme, that no man doeth escape that hath a veine opened: another saith, that very few die that doe bleede, and that there is no more present remedy, then the same; but this first is to be ended by the distinction of feuers. Celsus doeth commend bathing, and hydrotick meanes, that the Venum may haue its passage thorow the skinne: and therefore they hold it good to anoint the groine and arme holes, with the other
Emunctuaris, with oyle of Scorpions, that therby the venom may bee drawn forth. De Lue Venerea, or the Pox. Doct. PRocced now and tel me, what disease is the Pox? Stud The Pox is a contagious euill, which for the most part is gotten by the vse of veneric. In times past we had no knowledge of that disease, but now it is growne to bee the most commonst that raigneth; and it bringeth with it many detestable cuils, and trouble some acci∣dents. In the beginning it is but small, but in time, it groweth to that greatnes, that it doth not only corrupt the humors and spirits, but also it doeth offend the nerues, membrans, tendons, the flesh and bones: and at last it doth ouerthrow and consume all the other parts of the bo∣die, and peruerteth the tempeature and whole substance thereof: from whence proceedeth diuers and many kindes of excrements: it may well be called the plague of Venus, because that for the
most part it is not gotten but by the vse Let vene∣rians look to them∣selues. of vncleane bodies. This disease hath beene knowne to lurke in the bodie many moneths together before it hath beene mistrusted, and sometimes a whole yeare together. Doct. What part is there affected in the Pox? Stud. In this disease the part affected Pars affect. principally is the liuer, as doth appeare by the naturell actions hurt; for in the stomacke there is euill concoction, whence ariseth a great alteration of co∣lour, and dulnesse of the whole bodie: the appetite of venerie is cleane ouer∣throwne; and it is a disease peruerting the whole substance, with the tempera∣ture; and by that meanes there ariseth diuers kindes of excrements: it hath an analogie to the whole substance of the liuer, rather then to the heart or braine; for it doth oppugne rather the naturall spirits then the vitall or animall; which beeing corrupted, must needes infect the Liuer: from whence ariseth that same Pilorum Deflautum, or shed∣ding of haire; and also sometimes there ariseth itchings about the priuy parts,
vlcerations, virulent Gonorrheas, and such like. Doct. What are the signes of this di∣sease? Stud. In the beginning of the disease there doth appeare those venerious bu∣bos Signa. Bubones venerei. in the groine, and maligne pustuls in the yard, and vlceration of the vrina∣rie passages; which after a time doeth yeeld a kind of light sanies, and causeth a kind of distilling, and burning of v∣rine: and withall there is adioyned a gonorrhea, and shedding of seede. Som∣times there doth appeare certaine small spots ouer the whole body, now yellow, now redde, and filthy; and as it were warts, which wil not a way til the disease be cured. Finally, paine of the nerues, head-ach, paine of the shoulders, and the necke are common companions. Sometimes also those spots doe vanish, and after a time doe rise againe, and in time doe proue to be virulent, and doe erode and eate the skinne; so that there doeth arise manie foule fordid, and virulent vlcers and pu∣stles, and they doe very often grow in the pallat of the mouth, and in the iawes,
and the nose, and in time doth exulce∣rate the tongue, and the nostrils, because those parts are more tender then others. Often times in this disease also the Desantium pilorum capitty at∣que barbs. haire of the head and beard do fal away, the Patient cannot sleep by reason of ex∣ceeding paine, for this disease doth tor∣ment more in the night, then in the day. There doth also appeare in the ioints, & vpon the shin bone, certaine tophies, & tumors, hardly to be dissolued, and espe∣cially in the forehead, and other parts of the head, and sometimes also vpon the shoulders, from whence arise vleers, of very hard curatiō, which in time doth erode and corrupt the bone, bringing to the Patient in tollerable paine, especi∣ally in the night time, as I haue before sayd. And these are the common sigues of this disease of the poxe, which in some bodies doe appeare after one manner, & in others after another, more or lesse, and not in euery body alike. Doct. Tell mee, what is the cause of this disease? Stud. The cause of this disease is a Causa. fordid and maligne qualitie, containing in it selfe, a very deepe contagion, com∣municated
from one infected body vnto an other, by vncleane touching, wherby for the most part, the parts of generation are affected, by reason of their rare and tender substance. In like manner this maligne qualitie is communicated to the apparell, to the mouth, and also to the skinne: and sometimes it doth so much the sooner infect, by how much the na∣tural vertues & faculties of the liuer are the weaker. From thence also it doth somtimes happen, that many vsing one vncleane woman, are in a manner al in∣fected, but those that haue their naturall faculties strong, are very seldome infect∣ed. As in the pestilence, although the pestilent aire be communicated to al, yet all are not alike infected, and the reason is, because some men haue their vitall spirits more stronger then others. Doct. What prognosticks haue you vpon this disease? Stud. This disease being but newly ta∣ken, doth admit an easie cure, but being Prognest. old & confirmed, is very seldome or ne∣uer cured, & the disease is contagious & infectious, to which womē are more ap∣ter then men: and in this euill it hapneth that the infected cānot sleep, & they are
troubled with continual sorrow & grief, and in the end doe perish with a Feuer. This disease also is transferred from the parents to the children, & bringeth with it often times, phtisis, the dropsie, asthma, and such like. Doct. Let vs now heare what cure you haue for this disease? Stud. I haue sayd, that if the disease be Luis vene. reae cura. not very old, that then the cure is very easie: and therefore first of all I open a veine, afterwards I attenuat the grose humors with medicines appropriate for that purpose, especially such as may re∣serate and open the meatus & passages. Then I doe purge the body, as neces∣sitie shall require, either with pils, or po∣tions, afterwards I expell the reliquis of the disease, with such things as may pro∣cure Diaphoreti∣ca. sweate, and when the sicke doth be∣gin to sweate, hee must cleanse and wipe himself with cleane clothes, & before he entreth into his sweate, he must drinke a draught of some decoctiō that hath pro∣pertie to open the passages of the neruos parts, in which the matter of the disease doth chiesly lurke, and so driue the mat∣ter from the inward to the outward and
to that purpose we may vse Decocto radi∣cum feniculi, enulae campanae, lentium, vuarū, passarum sicuum. To this decoctiō may be added treacle, or mithridate: as if wee take iiij. ounces of decoction wee may adde Scr. ij of mithridat, or treacle, with two drops of spirit of vitrioll, and so may he sweat the space of iij. houres together: afterwards the sweate being cleane wiped, hee may commit himselfe to his bed, in which hee may more plea∣santly sweate at his pleasure: and this or∣der of sweating is often to be repeated. Doct. But what if these courses taken bring no profit to the patient? Stud. Then wee proceed to a more stronger kind of cure, as after bloodlet∣ting, to vse the decoction of Guiacum, or of sarsaparilia, or of the roots of China: alwaies prouided, that the body be first well purged: and this decoction must be giuen hot, and the Patient wel & closely couered with clothes, that hee may the better sweate: after his sweate, hee may rise and walke in his chamber, so that he keep himselfe from the iniury of theaire: he may also 4. or 5. hours after the recei∣uing of the medicine dine & sup, either with a chickin, or a little rosted mutton.
But if for busines or pouerty the Patient may not vse the decoction, we may in the place vse the vnction of mercury, & that with very good successe, and also sometimes after the vse of the decoctiō with great profit, for thereby shall the reliques of the disease bee throughly ex∣pelled, & we continue the decoction for the space of 30. daies together. This euil also will require somtimes stronger en∣gines, as suffumigijs of Cinabrium, which may be performed euery third or fourth day: but this medicine is neuer to be put in vse, vnlesse we haue in vaine assaied al the former meanes: notwithstanding in the armes & legs it may safely be perfor∣med if there be either pain, aches, nodes, tophies, or vlcers: & for those which by reason of their busines cānot keep home, we may vse emplasters spread vpon lea∣ther or vpon new linnen cloth, & place them vpon the ioints, which implaster may be remoued twice a weeke. Doct. Shew me what plaster it is that may be applied for that purpose? Stud. Rec. Emplastri de meliloto pro splene lib. ss. Argentiviui ℥ ij. olei laurini, petrolei, terebinthinae an. Q. S. fiat cerotum.
For the hard tumors, you may take the roots of Althea, figs, and fenugreeke, which being boiled in wine, with capōs grease make an emplaster, & so apply it. And this may suffice for a discreet stu∣dent, as cōcerning the cure of that foule contagious disease called the Frēch pox. Doct. There is one disease more, which we call Scorbutus: let vs finish our dis∣comse with that disease: tell me, what is that Scorbutus? Of the Scorbie. Stud. Scorbutus is a disease obstructing De Scorbu∣to. the splene, wherby the course & passage of melancholy is hindred: which being mingled with the rest of the bloud, in∣fecteth all the body with vild wastings and corruption, the groster part wherof falling downe, staineth the legges with spots, like vnto the couler of pomgra∣nets, and the thinner patt being carried vp, doth desile the gummes with sharpe fretting, and loathsome ouergrowing of the flesh. This disease is thought to bee that which Plinie maketh mention of in lib. 25. of his naturall history calling it 25. Lib. hist. natu∣ralium. Stomocace and Sccletyrbe. Doct. What is the cause of this disease?
Stud. The cheife cause of this disease, is grosse and corrupt diet, as may be per∣ceiued cap. 3. Strabo geograph lib. 16. Grosse di∣et the cause of the Scor∣by. by those that trauell by sea, by long voyages; and our fishers that trauel to the Newfound-lands, wanting fresh and sweet waters, and vsing corrupt and stincking waters, & especially in an hot aire, in which the waters will most spee∣dely corrupt: in like manner, flesh tain∣ted, and stinking, lard putrified, and mouldie, venson tainted, fish of grosse substāce, bread twise baked and sub mu∣cid, garlick, drinkes ingendring cuill iuice, bacon, martlemas beefe, fish dried in the smoake, being ouer-salted, & such like. But aboue al things, a full diet, and delicate, vsing no exercise is the cause of this disease; and somtimes this disease doth follow the quartan Feuer. Doct. What are the certaine signes of this disease? Stud. The signes of this disease, is first Signa Sborbuti. an euill sauor of the mouth, swelling and bleeding in the gummes, loosnes of the teeth, black & leadie spots of the legs, & somtimes in the face, also weaknes of the joints, & disability to walke; difficulty of breathing, & chiefly when they moue or
stir, and when they offer to rise, or set vp right, they are ready to die, and their spi∣rits faile them, but when they lie downe they are refreshed & breath more freely. In like māner the sicke for the most part are greedy of meat, and do desire to eate often, & for the most part their stomack neuer faile them, also the belly for the most part is bound and the patient go∣eth hardly to stoole, and yet there are some that are subiect to a continual slux. Moreouer, the spots of the legs do some∣times swell and tumisie, in some the legs are so vlserated, that the shinbone doth often lie bare. And in a word, this disease in some bodies doth turne into a kind of leprosy, for the spots resolue into a black kind of scales, as is wont to bee in the morphue, and leprosie of the Greeks: al∣though in other some, it is but light, e∣quall and shining. Lastly, those that die of this disease, are sound to be spotted ouer all the body, & veins of the legs, & about the tongue are filled & swolen with melancholy blod: & these are propper signs of this disease. Doct. Let me now know the manner of of your cure of this disease? Stu. Letting passe general remedies I wil
shew you the particular cure of this dis∣ease, which must if there be Plethoria Cura. and fulnes be begun with blood-let∣ling, if strength, age, and other things permit: but it is not thought good to draw blood in abundance; but if it be possible to draw blood from the haemor∣rhodial veines, it is more conuenient; and if the splene be particularly affected, the veine called Lienaris or middle veine of the left arme is to be opened: but if the liuer be more affected, and that the bo∣die is perceiued to abound with blood, then we must open the liuer veine of the right arme, or the Basilica or middle veine. But where the Physition is neuer or seldome called, vntill the disease hath Nota. taken deepe roote, and is become despe∣rate: that is, when it hath spread it selfe into the legges, and other parts of the body; we must then altogether abstaine from blood-letting. Doct. What course must wee then take? Stud. Then we must purge the body lightly with sena, & such like; as for ex∣ample: Rec. Senea Alex. Drag. iiij.
Epithymi cretens. Drag. iij. Passular. Corinth. ℥. ss. Som. feniculi. Zuinziberian. dr. ss. Fiat infusio in ℥. viij. Seri lactis per noctem super cineres calid & mane fiat colat. & capiat. In like manner may be giuen halfe an ounce of this powder following: being infused as aforesaid. Rec. Senae ℥. j. E∣pithymi, tartarivini albi an. ℥. ss. Cinamomi, Gariophil. galangae, sem. anisi an. Drag j. ss. fiat puluis subt. & seruatur advsum. In like maner pils De fumoterra, and Diasena, are also profitable in this disease. Some vse pils ex Lapide Lazuli, and Ar∣meno: but they are not thought to be so good. Some giue Confectio hamech, but with good caution: for this disease doth not admit any vehement purgations; for thereby the heart is easily affected and hurt. The body being lightly purged, wee giue the patient twice a day: viz. in the morning, and at iiij. of the clocke in the afternoone, the quantity of iiij. ounces of these iuices following: Rec. Chochleariae, menthae aquat. Cardamines, sysimbriae, an. partes aequales: Bechabungae partem semis.
These hearbs being greene, let them be beaten in a stone morter with a pestle of wood, and then strained, and to euery dose may be added a quantity of suger to make it pleasant: & if it be possible let the patient sweat after the taking therof Doct. How may this profit in this disease? Stud. The Chocheleria, water-mints, and Cardamines, doeth deuide and exte∣nuate and also purge by vrin, and the Cresses doth moderate the strength of the rest: and these hearbes may be di∣minished or increased, as the Physition shall thinke good according to the dis∣ease and body of the patient: It may be giuen also in goats milke, or for want thereof in Cow-milke, so that euery day it be made fresh. It is approued to be very good when the hearbes haue beene boiled in whey, & also in whit wine; but yet the ioyces being giuen, is much to be preferred aboue the rest. There may also be added amongst the said herbs, of our common wormewood, and sometimes fumoterra, and German∣der: also to strengthen the bowels & the ioynts may be admixed Numularia. If the Physition will, he may make a
greater mixture: they may make their choice of these things following: Myrobalan: Indorum: cort. radicis capparis corticis fraxinae: Cuscutae, Asari, Thymi: Epi∣thymi, Capilli veneris, Matricaricae, Chelido∣niae, Betonicae, Hyssopi, Agrimoniae, Scabiosae, Pimpinellae, Phyllitis, Cetrarchae, Tamarisci, acetosae, Radicum Valerianae, Bistortae, Enulae Campanae, Polypodij, Lapathi acuti, Peniculi, Petrosilini, Cichoriae, Borraginis, Buglossae, Rhapontic. Aristolochiae rotund. Lequiritiae, passularum florum genistae, florum sambuci, Anisi. sem. feniculi, 4. sem. frigid. viticis, and such like. Also diuers haue been cured by this remedy following: Rec. Fol. absint hij siccats gran. Iunip. an. M. j. Lactis Caprini lib. iiij. Let al boile vn∣till the third part bee consumed, then straine it, and mixe with the strayning of Saffron one Drag. then let it boile ouer the fire for ij. or iij. walmes, and againe straine it: of this decoction you shall giue three times in a day warme: viz. in the morning, and at three of the clock in the afternoone, and at the entrance in∣to bedde. In like manner Syrupus Sceletyrbicus described by Forestus shall much auaile
in this disease. Rec. Succichochleariae succi Becabungea an. lib. iij. sacchar. albis. lib. ij. clarificetur succus cum albumine oui, and then boiled to the forme of a syrupe, and so let the patient receiue thereof in a spoone euery day thrice. And thus haue we finished our dis∣course of the scuruy; of which disease if any man desire more knowledge, let him read Forestus his ob∣seruations in diseases of the Splene. FINIS.
THE EXAMI∣NATION OF A CHI∣rurgion, wherein is handled the whole course of Chirurgerie by way of Dialogue betweene the Doctor and the Student. By S. H. Imprinted at London by H. B. for George Potrer.
❧ THE DISCOVRSE of Chirurgerie. Doctor. AS I haue dealt with you in phy sicke, so now I wil examin you in Chirurgerie: toll mee, what gifts must he be endued with, that will take vpon him to practise as a Chirur∣gion? Student. He that will take vpon him to practise as a Chirurgion, must be of honest and vertuous manners: he must be faithful and secret: he must be a wise man: and he must haue a perfect know∣ledge of the figure, the situation, and connexion of all the parts of mans bo∣die, by knowledge in Anatomy: he must be well experienced in the Art, and such
an one as hath gotten experience as well by the workes of others as of himselfe. Doct. You haue truely said: for such an one is indeed a fit man to be admitted to the practise of the art, that is indued with all those qualities: and I would to God that this citie of London were al∣together furnished with such Chirurgi∣ons; then should there not be so many ignorant and vnskilfull suffred to abuse so noble an art, and withall the Kings liege people; in taking vpon them the profession of that wherein they haue no knowledge at all: but I leaue that to them that haue and onty to amend it. And as you haue told me the inward qualities of a true Chirurgion, so tell me how his bodie must be framed to be fit for the same profession. Stud. As concerning his body; it must be comely, well proportioned, and strong, his hand must be steddy, not sha∣king; and be as ready with the left hand as the right; he must not want any of his senses, and especially his sight, that must be quick, for otherwise he shalbe accoun∣ted but a blind Chirurgion, and not a∣ble to iudge aright of his Patients
griefe. Doct. What other things shall a Chi∣rurgion haue need of in his practise? Stud There are many things which belong to a good Chirurgion, as instru∣ments of all sorts, medicines, a fit place to performe his workes, light, apparell, seruants, and some other assistants as ne∣cessity shall require. Doct. What instruments shall a Chi∣rurgion need? Stud. Those instruments that a Chi∣rurgion may not want, but must haue alwaies in a readines, are these: Nonacula. Scalpellum. Forfices. Volsetla. Specicium. Latum specillum. Stylus. Acus. Canalicula forata. Habena ad membra laqueo inter∣cipienda. Fascia. Pannicuh lmei ad vnlnera a abligan∣da. Lintea concerpta.
Auriscalpium. Forcipes ad dentes euellendos. Ferramemtum quo erosi dentes. eradun tur. Vncinus, or (as Colsus calleth it) Hamulum retusum. Doct. What Medicines must the Chirurgion haue alwaies in a readi∣nesse? Stud. A good Chirurgion must haue in a readinesse Powders, Vnguents, and Emplasters; they serue to stoppe blee∣ding, or to conglutinate wounds, or to clense foule and rotten vlcers, to mollisie hardnesse, to produce a cicatrix, and skinne, to remooue away excrescent and corrupt flesh, to cease paine, to strengthen Fractures and Luxati∣ons. As for powders which he ought to haue in a readinesse, they are of three sorts: one to stay bleeding, as that which is framed of Bolus Armeniae, Rosis. Mastiches, and Pollin. The second is for fractures of the
scull, and hurts of other bones, and is called iuluis cephalicus and is framed ex Radicibus ireos, Ar sto lichae. Ex myrrha. Atoe, and such like. The third powder is to remooue a∣way excrescent, and corrupt flesh: as Alumen vstum. Pul. praecipit. Mercury, and such like. Doct. Well, goe forward, and tell me, what be the vnguents proper to a Chirurgior? Stud. The Vnguents that a Chiror∣gion ought alwaies to haue about him, are these: Vnguentum Basilicon, which doth hu∣mect, digest, and cease paine. Vnguentum Aurcum, called of some Regis, which doth incarnate and conglu∣tinat wounds to ether. Vnguentum Dtaithea simplex, which doth calesie, soften, humect, and also cease paine. Vnguentum album Rhasis, which doeth refrigerate, coole, and drie. Vnguentum apostolorum, which doeth
deterge, mollifie, drie and remoue away corrupt and superfluous flesh: and of that facultie almost is Mundificatinum ex apio, and Aegyptiacum. Doct. Proceed, and tell me what the Emplasters are that are fit and necessary to a good Chururgion. Stud. The humplasters are these fol∣lowing: Diachilon composium, which doth ripen Apostumes, and doth mollifie and resolue hardnes, and doth digest, and al∣so absterge. Diacalciteos commonly called Diapal∣ma, which doth conglutinate vlcers, pro∣duceth cicatrix, and skinne, and accor∣ding to the opinion of Galen, is very sit in the curing of Phlegmon. Emplastrum de betonica, which is also called De lanua it doth vnit and ioyne together the fractures of the skull; it couereth the bones with flesh, it draw∣eth out spleets and splinters of bones, it doth absterge, digest, and drie, with such like. Doct. You must tell me now what Chirurgery is; and afterwards your me∣thod that you haue for the curing of wounds and vlcers: goe to, tell me,
what is Chirurgerie? Chiturgerie is an arte which doth re∣moue and cure diseases, by the artificall worke of the hand, which is called Chi∣rurgicall operation. Or Chirurgerie is a right orderly taking away of affects be∣sides nature, with the worke of the hand. Doct. How many parts hath Chirur∣gerie? Stu. Chirurgerie hath two parts: that is, Synthesis and analysis, composition & re∣solution: by composition things that were separated and disioyned against nature, are conioyned again and sited in their naturall places, as happeneth in wounds, fractures, dislocations, & rup∣tures. By resolution, things that were conioyned and vnired together, are se∣parated and diuided; either for preser∣uing of health, or for the recouery of the same: and the species thereof are, fecti∣on, punction, dimulsion, and vstion. There are some that adde a third part of Chirurgerie, which they call Fxaeresis; and that is exercised in extracting and drawing forth of such things as are sent into the body, as bullets, darts, arrowes, and other warlike engins; of which
parts it shall not be needefull to make re∣petition at this time. Doct. Tell me, what is an wound? Stud. An wound is a solution of the continuity, newly made, fresh, and blee∣ding; and of wounds there are two sorts, simple, and compound. Doct. What is a simple wound? Stud. A simple wound is that which is made with some kind of weapon. onely in the flesh, without either cutting of bones, sinews, muscles, or veines. Doct. What is a compound wound? Stud. A compound wound is a solu∣tion of the continuity, diuiding or cut∣ting the bones, sinews, muscles, veines, or Artiers: in which hapneth for the most part dolour inflammation, tumour, and oftentimes Apostomation. Doct. Let me know your method for the curing of a greene wound. Stud. Euery good Chirurgion doeth set downe a fiuefold scope or intention for the curing of wounds. The first is, to draw out that which is sent into the body, whether ballet, wood, bone, or stone, arrows, darts, & such like. The second is a coniunction, and v∣niting of parts diuided.
The third is a retaining of those parts vnited in their proper seate. The fourth is a conseruation of the parts of the substance. The fifth is a prohibition and miti∣gation of accidents. Doct. How is the first intention per∣formed? Stud. The first intention is perfor∣med, either with instruments of iron, or attractine medicines, where by things that are infixed are drawne out. A wise Chirurgion will consider the forme and difference of things infixed, and the na∣ture of the parts affected: of which mat∣ters Taugatius hath written at large, and many others. The medicines attra∣ctiue are: Radix aristolochiae. Arundinis. Anagallis. Thapsia. Ammoniacum. Saga penum. Liclamnum. Ranae combustae. Or, Emplastrum Auicennae, so much commended by Guydo.
Doct. How is the second and third intention performed? Stud. The second and third intention is performed by binding & ligature, if the wound be simple and small, and in a place where it may sitly be performed, yea, although it be large so it may be ea∣sily bound, as in the museles of the arme, and such like; but if it happen that liga∣ture will not serue, then must bee added the helpe of the needle, being carefull to handle the partie gently, & to place it in his due seate. Doct. How is the fourth intention performed? Stud. The 4. intention is accōplished by appointing of a sit & cōuenient diet, according to the strength of the patient and greatnes of the affect & dispositiō of the whole body: for a thin diet & cold, doth very much ar aile in resisting of Sypmtōs, we also ad blood letting & pur∣ging of humors to auoid accidents; also the part is to be contained in this due place, and a cataplaesme framed with the whites of egs, and other cooling things are to be applied, and sometimes to be fomented with astringent wine.
Doct. How doe you finish the fift in∣tention? Stud. The fift intention is in the cor∣recting of accidents, which is flux of blood, dolor, tumor, paralysis, conuul∣sion, feuer syncope, delirium, and itch∣ing. But this is to bee obserued in the flux of blood: whether it hath flowne suf∣ficiently or no; if otherwise, the flux is to be suffered; for after a sufficient flux, the wound doth remaine drie, and is so much the nerer cured and the lesse symp∣toms follow, as phlegmon and such like: and if the wound bleed not sufficient, wee must open a veine for reuulsion, according to the greatnesse of the affect, and the nature of the wound: especially when through paine or o∣ther cause wee feare inflammation or a Feuer. Doct. So, you haue now satisfied mee reasonably in woūds: let me know your method in vlcers: tell mee first what is an vlcer? Stud An vlcer is a solution of continu∣itie, yeelding forth sanies, pus, & matter.
Doct. How many sorts of vlcers bee there? Stud. As there are of wounds two sorts, so there are two sorts of vlcers, simple and compound. Doct. What is your method and inten∣tion of curing of an vlcer? Stud. The common indicanon and intention of curing of all vlcers, if onely we consider, the vlcer, is exiccation; but if we consider the cause from which it is ingendred or nourished, and symptoms, without remouing of which it cannot be cured, it hath foure intentions of curing. The first, that we prescribe a fit diet. The second, that wee intercept the matter antecedent. The third, that we remoue the symp∣toms, and dispositions ioyned with the vlcer. The fourth, that we dry the thinne re∣crement of the vlcer, and deterge the grosse. Doct. How will you performe your first intention, as concerning a sit and connenient diet? S. I prescribe a diet to the patiēt either smal or large, according to the strēgth of
the patient or aboundance, or fewnes of humors; in the qualitie of meates I haue consideration, of the temperament and humors redounding as wel in the whole body, as the part affected: as if the hu∣mors be sharp & hot those we alter vn∣to coldnes, and with all correcting the Acrimony and sharpnes. Doct. How do you finish the second? Stu. The 2 scope I also performe when I consider as wet the qualitie as the quā∣titie of humors offending, as well in the whole body as flowing to the part af∣fected, and so by euacuation and imersi∣on, partly by purging medicines, partly by bloud letting, if strength, age, and o∣ther things doe agree: partly by bind∣ing, frictions, & fomenting of the parts opposite to the vlcer: partly by repel∣lent medicines to intercept the fluxe, such as is vnguentum ex boro and such like. Doct. How is the third scope finished? Stud. We performe the third intenti∣on when wee remoue, as I said, the ma∣nifold, and diuers Symptoms, and euill dispotisions ioyned with the Vlcer: for sometimes there is ioyned distempera∣ture,
sometimes paine, somtimes tumor, and swelling, and somtimes contusion, often times Hypersareosin, but more often thicknes of lippes corruption of bone, virulent excrement, foule matter, hol∣lownes, crooked windings, as in Fistu∣laes with cacoethia and euil disposition, all which haue diuet scure. Doct. What is the difference betweene a Fistula and an Vlcer? Stud. A Fistula is a deepe and hallow Vlcer, indurated with a strict and nar∣row orifice, which doth require handie operation as the common Vlcer doth; and the difference is, that the ore hath callositie and induration, and the other hath not. Doct. Well, now wee must proceed to tumors against nature: tell mee, how many tumors be there against nature? Stud. The Physitions prescribe foure kinds of tumors against nature, accor∣ding to the foure humors; the first is called Phlegmone, and is an inflamati∣on, or collection of blood, and as Galen saith, is a simple tumor, and an affect of the fleshie parts, proceeding of a fluxe, which sweateth through the coats of the
veines like vnto a dew, wherein they gather together to themselues a tu∣mor with heate, rednesse, stretching, pulsatine, or beating paine, which is proper to great inslammations. The second is called Erysipilas, and is properly an affect of the Skinne, and doth proceed of pure choler, and is much hotter then phlegmon, and therefore is of some Physitions called ignis sa. or ignis S. Anthonij, and of some ignis Persicus, which names may also be applied vnto or to his kinds. The third is called Oedema, and is soft, loose, and without paine, spring∣ing of thinne slegme or vaporous spi∣rits. The fourth is called Scirrhoi, or Scirrhus, that is induration or hard∣nesse, and is a tumor proceeding of a grosse melancholick humour, and is hard without paine, and sometimes without sense, and sometimes also it happeneth of grosse and tough slegme, and of the dregges of blood, sometimes also slegmon is turned in∣to
scirrhus by the application of me∣dicines that doe vehemently coole and binde. Doctor Let mee know your method for the curing of flegmon. Student The curing of Flegmon, doth consist in a fourefold intention: the first doth consist in prescribing of fit and conuenient diet, which is in the due vse of those sixe things that bee called not naturall: In this af∣fect therefore wee must bee verie carefull to make choice of a pure, cleere, and cold aire: also the diet must bee cold, and a little drying, and that which doth procure and in∣gender little blood; and therefore wine, egges, and nourishing brothes must bee refrained, or very little v∣sed: the part affected must in no case bee exercised: and there must al∣so a meane bee kept and obserued in sleepe and watchings; sleeping in the day time, and after meales
must be auoided, the belly must be kept loose, either by clyster, or otherwise, the patient must auoid anger, clamour, & contention, & withal, he must flie from venery, and the vse of women, as from a most deadly enemy. The second scope is in the restraining of the Fluxe of humors, which is per∣formed as well by reuulsion, as by me∣dicines repelling: therefore presently in the beginning we must open a veine in the beginning we must open a veine in the opposite part, so that the Patient haue a plethorick and a full body; but where there is no fulnes of body, and yet notwithstanding we feare the vehemen∣cy of the disease, through the greatnes of the cause, and that withall the disease is in his augmentation, then for reuulsion we cuta veine not far from the affect: so likewise when the disease draweth to his state, if it be possible we open a veine neere the effect. But this wee must be carefull of, that before phlebotomy the belly must be emptied, and the common excrements auoided, either by clyster, or some bole of Cassia, or otherwise. The third scope is in curing of the matter, now coniunct and impacted to∣gether,
for that must be auoided. Ther∣fore in the increase we haue a twofold scope of curing: the one in repelling of the matter flowing, the other in dis∣cussing of the matter inhering vnto the part. Doct. What medicines haue you that doe discusle and resolue? Stud. Medicines that doe discusse which be of the gentler sort, are: Aqua calida, Vinum giluum ac tenue, Panis furfuraceus fermentatus, Adeps suillus, gallinaceus, anserinus, Anatinus, Oleum vetus, Oleū chamoemeli Oleum anethinum, Lana sordida, butyrnm, Furfur, hordeum, Lentes, althea, Malua agrestis, chamoemeli, meliloti, Parietaria, Absynthium, brassica, Caricae pingues, The stronger medicines are: Farinae seminis lini: faenegraeca, lupinorum, Orobi; adipes, taurinus, vrsinus, Leoninus; Olea larinum, Rutaceum, irinum, sicynium Nucum, Radices Ireos, aristolochiaero∣tund. Bryoniae gentianae, follia Hyssopi, Mario∣ranae,
Saluiae, Rutae, obrotan. pulegij, calameti, Origani, sem anisi, faeniculi, anethi, Dauci, carui, flores, sambuci & Anthos, Gummi, Ammoniacum, B dellium, galba∣num. Opoponax. But in all hotte tumours wee are to vse the gentler remedies beforesaid, and in the increase we mixe discussiue medi∣cines with those that bee astringent. As for example: in a cataplasme we say: Rec. Farina seminis lini. ℥. j. ss. Far. hordij. ℥. ij. Flor. cham. P. j. Rostrub. Drag. iij. Fol. & bacchar. myrti. an. Dr. j. ss. Let al be boiled in vineger to the con∣sumption thereof; then adding therunto Pinguedinis gal. ℥. iiij. olei rosacei & chamaem. an. ℥. ij. fiat cataplasma. Doct. But what if the tumour wil not giue place to resoluing medicines? what must we doe then? Stud. Then we applie medicines to bring the tumour to suppuration, such as are framed with aqua calens. oleum dulce, butyrum recens; adipes, Medulla oesypus, pix
sicca, resina, colophonia, thus, cera, Ladanum, styrax pinguis galbanum, crocus, farina triti∣cea, viscum, caricae pingues, cepe coctum, ra∣dix lilij althea, malua, branca ursina, tetra∣pharmacon ex farma triticea, oleo, & aqua mediocriter coctis cum tantillo croci. In like maner Vnguentum de althea, de meliloto, ba∣silicum, Diachilon simplex, and such like. Or for examples sake: Rec. Rad. lil. bryoniae, lapathi acutt, sub cineribus coctarum singul∣quartum ss. Bruise them, and mixe them with the muscelage of Althea, malua, and Figges an. ℥. j Farinae triticeae, hordij, & linian. ℥ ss. Auxungiae suillae sas expertis. Q. S. Fiat cataplasma, and apply it. Doct. Whē it is come to suppuration & matter, what must wee doe afterwards? Stud. When the abscessus or tumor is come to suppuration, we then applie in the most conuenient place some actu∣all cauterize; or else we open it with a penknife: or this medicine following, althogh it were safer to vse the cauterie. Rec. Fermenti acris. ℥. ss. Cepae sub prunis coctae. ℥. ij. Stercoris columbim. Seminis canabis an. Drag. j.
Limaces num. iij. Saponis nigri. Auxung. suillae singul. Q. S. Make a plaster of the bredth of a groat, which must be applied vpon the most eminent and softest place of the Apo∣stume. Doct. After the Apostume is opened, how must we proceed? Stu. The Apostume being opned, we vse a digestiue framed ex olco ros. & vi∣tellis ouorum, for three whole daies toge∣ther; for that asswageth paine, and hel∣peth to bring the residue to matter: af∣terwards wee vse medicines detergent and mundificatiue. Doct. Goe now to the fourth intenti∣on, which is to remoue accidence; and especially dolor and paine: how shal we doe when the patient crieth out for ex∣ceeding paine? Stud. Then wee apply whites of egs, or the whites and yelks together, being well wrought together with oyle of Ro∣ses: or else we take Mieae panis triticei aqua calenti mace∣rati & expressi lib. j. vitellos ouorum num. ij. Lactis caprini ℥. iij. misce &
fiat cataps. Doct. But what if the naturall heate be extinct by application of narcoticke and stupefactiue medicines? what must we doe in that case? Stud. Then we presently scarifie the place, and wash it with salt water; after∣wards applying a cataplasme framed cum farine fabarum, and orobian. ℥. ij. boiled in Oximel. Doct. Go now to the cure of Erysipe∣las: what is your method for the same? St. Erysipelas hath a fourfold scope of curing: the first is in a cold order of di∣et, moist and in grossing: all fat things, sweete, sharpe, and hotte must be auoi∣ded, because they easily turn into choler. The patiēt may vse in his broths, lettice, purslan, sorrel, & such like, ptisans, made with the decoctions of barlie, and cremor hordij is good to be takē in drink for coo∣ling: rice may also be giuē to ingrosse the blood: exercise watchings, anger, noise, and such like affects, and venery must be auoided. The second scope is in turning backe of the matter; wherein wee must dili∣gently consider where the affect be smal
or great: for if it be small, and the bodie not very cholerick, it shall not be amisse to open a veine; but if choler do much a∣bound, it shalbe far better to auoid it per secessum, then by cutting a veine. And before the veine be opened, we must minister some Lenitine Cly sler; wherin I would wish the Chirurgion to vse the aduice of the learned Physition. The third scope is in the application of topical medicines; as in the beginning, semperuiuum, portulaca, lactuca, lenticul. pa∣lustris, vmbilicus veneris, psyllium, glaucium, crassula solnnū: of which we take the iuices or distilled waters, & there with mix opi∣um, or the iuice of poppy, or henbane, or of mandragora, & such like; especially in the summer time. In like maner Galen & Auicen doth approue cold water & Oxy∣cratum. We may also adde to those iuices the flower of barly or lentils, with some vineger, and so make a cataplasme: or else Vnguentum Rosaceum ℥. j. aquae ros. ab∣luto: adding thereunto whites of egs, for it hindereth inflammation, and is one of the best remedies. We may also mixe with the same vn∣guent, muccag seminis psyllis & cydō. cum suc∣co
in frigidante. Doct. What if Erysipilas should pos∣sesse the face? what may we then doe Stud. Then we are wont to take aqua∣rum vel succorum plantaginis, rosarum, Ia∣ctucae, semperuiui, of euery one equall parts: mixing therewith a little wine vi∣neger, and so wetting linnen clothes therein, apply them to the part affected; oftentimes moistning thē that they drie not with the heat of the disease. Doct. But what if it wil not giue place to so easie medicines? Stud. Then we adde to one pound of the waters or iuices aforesaid, v. grains of opium, & of saffron vj. graines; or in the place of the opium, of the iuice of hen∣bane ℥. j. And if it chance the head to be affected, wee vse Vnguent. rosarum, with oyle of violets, and such like. Doct. What if the pain be so vehement that the patient cannot indure the same? Stud. Then we take roots or leaues of henbane, being rosted vnder the hotte embers, and mixed with Vnguent. populion, or else we take sem. hyosciams Drag. j. sem. pap. albi Drag. ij. cum vnguent. popul. with the iuice of henbaue, or semperuitsum, or
of Virgo Pastoris. Doct. Sometimes it happeneth, that by applying of ouer-cooling medicines the life of the part is extincted: what course must we take then? Stud. Then we scarifie the place, and wash it with Sea-water or salt water. Doct. But what if Ery sipalas doe ex∣coriate and turne into vlcers? Stud. Then we make a linament af∣ter this forme: we take Sunimitatum Rubi, & solani an. ℥. j. olei ros. ℥. iij. cerusae & Li∣thargirijan. ℥. ss. aceti paurum, and so make a linament. Or else we take Tro∣chis. albar. Rasis Drag. j. ss plumbi vsti, & lo∣ti Drag. j. caph (if there be any great in∣flammation) Ser. ss. olei rosarum ℥. iij. ce∣rae quantum sufficit: & so make a linament. The last scope is in the correction of symptoms, which arise through the di∣sease, as a feuer, & through a feuer, head∣ach, watchfulnes, and thirst: of all which the remedie is to be sought for from the learned Physition. Of Oedema. Doct. The next of tumours against
nature is Oedema: let me know your me∣thod in curing of the same. Stud. The method in curing of Oede∣ma is performed first by a dry order of diet, a little hot, and somthing attenua∣ting; the aire must be cleere and drie, ei∣ther naturally, or so framed by Art: no sleeping by day is allowed, & at night as little as may be: exercise before meate is commendable, and frications of the parts opposite to the part affected; the belly must be kept laxe and soluble. As concerning topicall meanes, in the beginning we may vse those things that doe meanly repell: for the humour for the most part being grosse and thick by medicines that doe ouermuch repell, is made more thicker and grosser, & there∣fore we must mixe with repercussiue me∣dicines, discussiues: as when wee apply to strong bodies, Oxicratum of two partes of vinegre, and one of water, moistning therein some new spunge, or prepared with Aphronitro; or some kind of salt; for the vinegre doth not only re∣pell by his coldnesse, but it doth incide and attenuate, and by his drines doth re∣solue: the spunge also either new, or
prepared doth resolue. There be some that doe apply bolar∣monick, nuts of Cypres, & Alum: which they ought not to do without discussiues, for the cause aforesaid. The same consi∣deration is to bee had of other Astrin∣gents, in the cold gout, which is an Oe∣domatous tumor. Wormwood boiled and heaten into the forme of a cataplasm, is found to doe very much good. The tumor is resolued cum oleo Irino, succo Ebuse, Diacholon by itselfe or mixed: Emp. de melitoto malaxed with the oile of camomel. You may ad if you wil Storax, or Ammoniacum dissolued in vinegre. If need require we may make a fotus ex hyssopo, thymo, pulegio, origano, calamentha, Ebulo, seminibus anisi, faeniculs, faemagraeci: fiat decoctio profotu The residēce may be bru∣sed, & there may be added vnto it olcum chamomelinū, Irinū, Anethinum, or ex farina fabarum, orobi, lolij: with the iuyce of Ebu∣lus sambucus, brassica, or with the foresaid oyles, and so make a cataplasme. Stercus vaccae with butter or oile fried together, adding a 4. part of sulphure of slercu caprarum, columbarū, with vinegre and the lees of wine, doth very well,
Doct. What if the tumor will not bee discussed, but grow into abscessus, what must we doe then? Stud Then as much as we may, pro∣cure it to suppuration, taking Rad. altheae ℥ iiij. Rad. lil. ℥ ij, caricarum par v. florum chamomels, & meliloti, sing. P. j. farinae hord. & faenugraeci sing. ℥ j. coquantur, terantur, addendo pinguedints, gal. butyri recent. olei lil. & chamo. sing. ℥ j. make a cataplasme & apply it. When the abscessus is opned, we may giue inwardly treacle cum aquis cardiacis, by which the heart is strength∣ned, & doth repell from it selfe the hurt∣full humor. When this tumor is a Symptom of an other disease, as of the dropsy, the phti∣sick, cacexia, it hath then no proper cure, for it is impossible to cure the same, vnles the affect from whence it spring∣eth be first cured. Doct. Goe now to the last of those tumors against nature, which is called Scirrhus, and be as breefe therein as the former: well, how will, you deale against that grosse, hard, and melan∣colick tumor?
Of the true Scirrhus. Stud. The first intention for the cure of Scirrhus is referred to a due order of diet, which must bee but little, attenua∣ting & somwhat hot & moist. The nou∣rishment must bee such as may breed pure and good blood, such as the Greci∣ans call Euchyma. The bread must bee of pure wheate, not too stale or hard ba∣ked. Wine that is thinne and pure, such as Gascoigne or white wine, may be al∣lowed. New laid egs, chickins, capons, cockrels, partridge, veale, & lambe may bee eaten: also broth may bee made with spinage, beets, borrage, & buglosse. Al goates flesh, beefe, buls flesh, hares flesh, brawne, bacon, and all salt fish must be auoided. In like manner, col∣worts, cabbage, beanes, and peason, and such like pulse; old cheese, salt meates, and sharpe with pepper, mustard, gar∣lick, and onions must be refused: so the Patient must auoid anger, griefe, vehe∣ment cares, with immoderate exercise, and watchings, for those are exceeding driers of the body; the belly must bee
alwaies kept laxe and soluble. The second intention is to purge the matter antecedent, to performe which may be prescribed some emollient cly∣ster, or some bolus of cassia, and catholi∣con: also a veine may be opened, especi∣ally if the body bee altogether melan∣cholik, taking heed that the melancho∣lick humor bee not altogether alienated from the nature of the blood, for then we must abstaine from blood-letting, & minister purging medicines. Doct. What medicines are fit to purge melancholy? Stud. To purge melancholy, Thymus, Epithym. Senna oriantalis, polypodium, quer∣cinum, lapis lazuli, veratrum nigrum, catho∣licon, Diasenna, triphera, persica, confectio hamech, and hiera Ruffi, and such like, as we haue before declared. Doct. Well, we will leaue out the pur∣ging medicines, and in the meane time proceed to your topicall medicines: tell mee, what is your first intention or ap∣plication? Stud. At the first application, I doe not as some common Chirurginos doe, to vse repellent medicines, and so make
that which is of it selfe cold, and grosse, to bee more cold and grosser, but I ap∣ply mollients and resolutiues, and such things as may discusse and incide, by which the part is made strong and com∣forted: neuertheles, I doe auoid those medicines that doe too much mollifie, lest the tumor thereby bee turned into a cancrous vlcer. Wee must also beware of immoderate discussiues, lest wee dis∣cusse the thin matter, and leaue only the grosser substance of the humor remai∣ning, & so the tumor become vncurable. Doct. Tell me then, with what medi∣cines that tumor is mollified? Stu. Mollifying medicines are Oesypus, lana succida, butyrum, oleum Amigdalarum, oleum chamomels, anethinum, liliorum, adeps Gallinaceus, ansermus, anatinus, suillus, ursi, medullae vituli, cerui, and the fats of other liuing creatures. Muccagines, propolis, cera, malua, althea, hlūs, brāca ursina, caricae pingues Doct. Giue me a stronger sort. Stu. The stronger sort is Ammoniacum dissolued in vinegre, bdellium, molle & pin∣gue. styrax liquida, galbanum, & such like: to which may be added semen apij, cumini, ra∣dix ireos, anethum, ruta slos genistae, &c.
Doct. Giue me a composition or two, fit for that purpose. Stud. I will giue you a plaster. Rec. Caricas pingues 12. coquantur & te∣rantur, ammoniaci, bdellij galbani in aceto dis∣solut. sing. ℥ ij. styracis liquid ℥ j. muccag. althea sem. lins & faenugr. sing. ℥ ij. aesypi & butyrirecentis sing. ℥ j. olci recint, vel de lilio ℥ iij. cerae Q. S. make an Emplaster. Or this oyntment following. Rec. Rad. genistae, hyperici fol. cupressi, & scrophul. siccor. sing. Drag. v. Litharg. auri, ℥ j. muccaginis sem. lini, & saenugraecae. sing. ℥ ij. olei vulp. & de li∣lio sing. ℥ iiij. cerae Q. S. fiat unguentum, adding thereunto a little vinegre. Also vnguentum de althea, to which may be added of the gummes aforesaid, is very conuenient. Doct. You haue satisfied mee reaso∣nable well as concerning tumors against nature: I will now examine you in some particular cures, and then I wil leaue off to trouble you any farther. I am now to deale with you about the pūcture of a nerue: what are your intentions in the same cure?
Of the puncture of a nerue or sinew. Stud. There is a twofold scope in the curing of a puncture of a nerue, the first that we preuēt phlegmon, or inflāmati∣on: for which purpose I prescribe to the sicke a thinne diet, cold, and dry; yet notwithstanding the aire must bee hot and moist, for a cold aire is very hurtfull to the sinewes, and an ouer hot ayre may cause phlegmon. I cause him also to lie in a soft bed, placing the part softly and fitly, that the body may bee quiet: also if need bee, I open a veine, I cause him to goe freely to the stoole, ei∣ther by giuing a clyster, or some other laxatiue medicine, sit for the nature of the humors resting in the body. Then I proceed to topical medicines, in which I do obserue the largenes of the orifice, which if I perceiue to be but lit∣tle & smal, I delate and inlarge, to the in∣tent the matter may more freely auoid out: if any thing remaine therein, that I draw forth; then I remoue accidents and especiall dolor and paine, which I per∣form
with somentations of wine and wa∣ter, wherein is boiled some flowers of comomell: also I apply vnto the wound and round about, oleum terebinth. or ole∣um hypericon, as hot as the patient may indure: al which doe remoue the paine, and auoid the matter. In the beginning also it is very good to apply Emplast. Auicennae, framed ex fa∣rina horaij fabarum, orobi, of either equall parts boiled together with syrupe of vi∣negre and sixinium, or in stead thereof new wine. In like maner oleum Rutaceum partes 5. terebinth. partem unam & dimidi∣am. Or this medicine following: Rec. Musci quercini M. ij furfuris M. j. Oubani ℥. j. Let them be boiled in a little wine with halfe so much vinegre, to the forme of a pultisse, and so applied to the place. Doct. Oftentimes there followeth Great dolor and pain, what must be done then? Stud. Then we apply fitly oleum de uitellis Ouorum, or oleum terebinthmae, mixt with oyle of Roses, or with oleum Lum∣bricorum terrest. Or else a cataplasme fra∣med of crumbs of bread, and milke with oyle of Roses, Camomell, yelks of egges
and a little saffron. Doct. But sometimes all these meanes will not serue to cease the exceeding paine: what shift will you vse then? Stud. Then if there be no remedie, we flie to stupefactines, as a pultisse framed with the crums of bread and papauere alb. yea and if need be cum opio. Or, Rec. Farinae tritici ℥ ij. succi foliorum hyos. ℥ iij fiat puls quaecalens applicetur. Doct. What if conuulsion should follow? what must be done then? Stud. If the patient be in danger of conuulsion, or that there be conuulsion: then presently we foment or anoint the head, the necke, the spine of the backe, the shoulders, and arm holes if the wound be in the hand; or if the wound be in the foote, wee anoint the slanckes priuities, and the knees with hot oyle of lillies; or cum oleo Laurino, vel costino, vecspicato, vd oleo ex pulegio, or with common oyle wherein is decocted some Castoreum, or Euphorbium. Doct. But what if there be inflamma∣tion? how shall we remoue that? Stud. In that case Guydo teacheth vs to make an Emplaster ex farina orobi, fa∣barum,
& hordij cum Lyxiuio & syrupo aceto∣so, coctis, or with wine and a little vinegre: or to make a cataplasme ex lumbricorū ℥ ij. porrorum tritorum ℥. j. & olei sufficienti quantitate. Which must be applied hot. Doct. After the generation of matter, what must be then done? Stud. Then to clense the wound we vse this vnguent following: Rec. Farinae hordij & fabarum an. ℥ ss farinae lupinorum & orobi an ss ij. pui. lum∣bricorum Dra. j. vinidecoctions. caudae equina & prassiac matricariae Q. S. Let all boile together, & then ad of melrosarum ℥ ij. sarcocol, sagap. in praedict. vino dissol. fing. Dra. j. and so make an ointment. Sometimes it happeneth that through these punctures of the nerues there pro∣ceedeth exceeding putrifaction; so that we are driuen to applie caustick medi∣cines; as vnguentum Aegyptiacum forrum candens, and such like. Of wounds in the head. Doct. I will now proceed to wounds of the head: tell me your method to cure those wounds. Stud. For the curing of wounds in the
head, we prescribe to the patient a thin diet, vntill such time that we be safe from inflammation and other accidents: and if necessity be, wee open the Cephalica veine, if strength may suffer it; so that a gentle clyster be first iniected. We are alwaies careful to keepe the belly loose: we also forbid the patient such meats as doe cause fumes and vapours; and while we are curing the wound we cause the aire to be warme; neither do we suffer the patient to lie vpon that side of the head that is wounded, vntill such time as there flow sufficient matter. Digested, then we admit him to lie on that side; for by that meanes shall the matter auoid more easily. Doct. What if the scull be fracturde? how shall we perceiue that? Stud. To trie that, if the wound be not large enough, we open it with a raser or fit knif for that purpose, in the form of the letter X. and being discouered, wee applie stuphs moistned in vinegre to stay bleeding; then we search diligently where the rift or scissure be there or no; which being doubted of, we frame a li∣nament with the white of an egge, & ma∣stich,
which we doe apply; and at the next dressing wee obserue diligently whether the linament be drier in one place then in another; which if we find so to be, then we iudge vndoubtedly that there is some rift, or scissure in the skull. In like manner in a confusion without a wound, the head being first shaued, we apply the same medicine: which if we perceiue to be drier in one place then in another, we may then suppose that there is some fracture. Or, Rec. Cerae, thuris, Ladani, an. ℥. ij. terebinth. farinae fabarum, acetising. ℥. j. and so make a cataplasme, which must be applied to the part that is shaued, and there will appeare the same signes as before. Doct. What must be done when the skull is fracturde? Stud. Then if the fracture be large enough that the matter may auoid, we haue no need to apply the trepan, or o∣ther instument to make it larger. But if it be so small that the matter cannot flow out fitly, then we must make passage by some instrument, and so prouide that the rough fragments of the bone may not hurt the crassa meninx, wee may make
way in the form of the letter X. or in the forme of a crosse; which being perfor∣med, and the scull discouered, we applie stuphs moistned in the white of an egge, & so let them rest for a day: the next day following we apply the trepā; declaring first, the danger and perall of the patient. Neither doe we vnaduisedly apply the trepan, in the ful of the moone, nor vpon the commissures; & we open the scull in the most decliningst place, if there be no∣thing that may hinder it. If the fracture be great, we do not disseuer al, but as the matter may flow out; we draw forth by degrees the fragments of the bones that are likely to hurt the meninx, and that we do with as much speed as possibly may be; neither must we defer that busines be∣yond the 3. or 4. day, lest we be inter∣cepted with a feuer & other symptoms. Doct. When these fragments are re∣moued, how must we proceed? Stud. That worke, as I haue said, be∣ing performed, we dip a piece of red sars∣nat in hony of roses, made hot, & we ap∣plie it between the meniux & the craniū, Guydo in the beginning doth admixe one part of hony of roses, with 3. parts of oile of roses; but that is in great pain: but be∣ing
free from paine, he vseth hony as a∣foresaid. Iohan. De Vigo, in strong bodies doth mix in the beginning hony with a∣qua vitae, for neither oyle nor any other humecting thing is cōueniēt to the head, as Hip. doth witnes. Afterwards we apply ouer the rest, stuphs moistned in melie ro∣sarū, & to the other parts of the woūd we apply linamēts framed ex vitello oui & olio rosaceo to digest the woūd: & if perhaps some spel or fragment of the bone stick, so that it cannot be drawn out with ease, then we perfuse oyle of roses, the more easier to draw it out. Doct. Must not the head be kept ex∣ceeding warme during the cure? Stud. There be many that bind the head with the application of many clo∣the, which is nothing else but a burthen & load to the head, which doth increase the heat, & hinder transpiration: but it is sufficiēt to apply so much warmth as may keep the brain frō the iniury of the aire; and the ouerwarme keeping of the head was found fault with by Hip. Doct. This is the first intention of the cure: how must we proceed to finish it? Stud. After the first two or three daies
as aforesaid, we leaue our digestiues (vn∣lesse there be great pain & dolor) & pro∣ceed to other medicines, and so apply this vnguent: Rec. Vngnent. Regis ℥ iij. mellis rosacei ℥. j. terehinthiuae lotae ℥ ss Pulueris myrrhae, corticis thuris, sacocoilae, i∣reos singul. Drag. ss olei hiperici aliquantum, fiat vnguent. With which we must dresse the wound: alwaies prouided, that we apply a peece of red sarsnat betweene the Crassa meninx and the Cranium: but when the mennix shall be couered, we may vse the powder of myrrh, Aloes, thus, mastich, & sarcocol mixt together; as for example: Rec. Kad aristoloch i∣ridi, slorent. corticis thuris, sarcocol. sangu. Draconis sing. Drag. j. Nucis cupressi, myrti sing. Dra. ss centaurij minoris Scr j. coralli Scr. ij farinae orobs Dra. j fiat puiuis tenuis∣simus: which must be applied with the li∣naments & Emplast. de betonica laid ouer, or else Emplostrum de caprifol. of which I will speake afterwards. Doct. But what if the crassa meninx tumi∣sie and swell, and arise through the pas∣sage made by the trepan? what remedie haue we for that? Stud. Then we apply oleum de uiteslis auorum, & a peece of linnen or a spunge
dipt in a decoction of roses, camomel, & melilot: but if there be an excresence of flesh, then we apply vpon the same Alu∣men vstum, or puluis mercury praecip or her∣modact. or else unguentum apostotorum; but the best medicine to cleanse the wounds of the head, is mell rosarium mixt with a∣quavitae, terebinthin, or the oyle thereof, with the powder of sarcocol, and gran. tinctorum, as much as shall bee thought meet; but that which is more gentle is framed of melros. ℥ ij farinae hordei ℥ j sar∣cocol. drag. ij vitello oui, & oleorosato. But when there is but a smal contufion with∣out a wound and the scul not fractured, the head is first to bee shauen, and then fomented with oyle of roses warmed, vpon which shalbe sprinckled the pow∣der of mirtles, and so remaine for that day, and the next day shall bee applyed this cataplasme following: Rec. pulueris myrti ℥ j. nucum cupressi, sumach Balanst. rossing. drag. ij. olei ros. vel camon, quantū sufficit: make a cataplasme which is also profitable to a contusion, with a smal fracture in the scull, or where the same is suspected. It shall be suffici∣ent to resolue and discusse, if in the end we adde squinantium, absynthium, lentium,
farinam fabar. for then we haue an excel∣lent medicine, both to discusse and strengthen: neither in the meane time must be pretermitted. Reuulsions and Di∣riuations, with the opening of a veine, & applying of cuppings if need shall re∣quire. Sometimes also through a cōtusion, the scull is rather depressed then fract∣ure, as may be often seen in children by reason of their tendernes. Doct. How do you proceed then? Stu. Then we do apply this Emplaster. Rec. Cerce nouaesordidae & mellis commu∣nisan. ℥ iij. lapidis magnetis ℥ ss. lapidis pu∣micis drag. iij. absinthij. cumlui, sulpher. sing. Drag. salis ℥ j. furfur's P. j. vin opti∣mi ℥ iiij. mixe them and make an empla∣ster which shall be applied hot, the head being shauen in that place where the de∣pression is, and so let it rest for 15. dayes. It hath a marueilous vertue in raising vp, and reducing the scull that is depressed: or else this emplaster following: Rec. Mellis communis lib. ss fermenti lib. j. furfuris drag. ij. salis ℥ ss cuniut, absinthij sing. ℥ iiij. fiat Emplastrum, which must be applied as aforesaid. Doct. But somtimes it happeneth that the head is growne very weake, by reasō
of the wound, so that it receiueth many excrements, and somtimes 40. dayes af∣ter there happeneth inflammations, and other symptoms, yea & death also: what shall be done in that case. Stud. Then towards the end of the cure (not in the beginning) we administer this decoction following, which maketh the humor thin, and auoideth it by vrin. Rec. Raà Graminis Rusct, Asparagi, & fe∣niculi, sing. ℥ ij. fol. beton. scorphil. philipend pilosel, sing. M. j. Rad. ireos & aristoloch an. ℥. j chamed. M. ss sem. halicacabi, aloecen∣gi nūcupant ℥ ss sem. milij solis drag. ij. semi∣nis anisi ℥ j. quatuor sem. frigid. maiorū sing. drag. vj. florum stachaà. & ros. sing. P. j. ma∣cerontur diem & noctem in libris iiij. vini albi & aquae, & coquantur, addendo mellis lib. v. then straine it, and let it bee aromatized with cinamō, & let the Patient take ther∣of ℥ iiij. in the morning, & so much at the entrāce into bed for the space of 9. daies. And here I cannot but reprehend the error of some Chirurgions, which in a smal sissure or rifit in the scul, although it doth not penetrate, will presently apply the trepā, & looke how much of the scul he doth take away, so much the more he glories, as if hee had performed some
great and excellent matter. The most part are so blind and igno∣rant in their operations, that they per∣ceiue not that they protract the cure by the same application; and withall, they bring to the sick manifold symptoms, by reason of the aire offending the braine, and finally they bring death to the Pa∣tient. But as I haue said before, when the woūd is large enough, so that the matter may be freely auoided, there shal be no other need of section, but to remoue the sharpe spels, and splinters of bones, and other things which are against nature. Doct. I will now end my discourse with you in fractures and dislocations: tell me how many intentions be there in the curing of a fracture? Stud. There be foure scopes or inten∣tions in the curing of a fracture: the first is, that wee reduce the parts of the bone fractured into its naturall forme: the se∣cond is, that being so reduced, they may so remaine, being laid straight without remouing: the third is, that the broken bone being reunited, may be adglutina∣ted with Callos: the fourth is, that wee defend the part from symptoms, and ac∣cidents
which doe vsually happen. Doct. When the bones are reduced into their forme, what must wee doe first? Stud. Then we apply a defensiue for certaine daies, of oile of roses, & mirtles, of each a like, with the white of an egge. Doct. What afterwards? Stud. Then we comfort the member with that cerot described by Vigo, whose descriptiō is as followeth. Rec. Olei myr∣tini, olei rosati, omphacini an. lib. ss succi ra∣dicis althoae lib. ij. Rad. fraxini & foliorum eius, Rad. Zymphiti minoris & fol. mirthi. fol. salicis an. M. i. j. bulliant omnia aliquan∣tulum contusa in vini nigri, & aquae aequals mensura ad medias, cum mirrhae, thuris ana Drag. ss colaturae adde seu hircini liquefacti lib. j. ss terebinthin: ℥ ij. mastiohis drag. j. bulliant ad consumptionem decoctionis. Colatu∣rae adde lithargirij auri & argenti an. ℥ iij. boli Armeni triti terrae sigillat. an. ℥ ij nonis drag. X. coquantur lento igne & conunuo agi∣tentur spatula, & fiat cerotum cum cera. Doct. It is very good; I haue knowne that cerot to haue holpen many: but is this all the order that is to bee obserued in fractures?
Stud. I truly, so that first wee be care∣ful in placing and reducing the bones in∣to their right seate: secondly, that we de∣fend the member from defluxtion of humors and inflāmation: and thirdly, as I haue sayd, that wee comfort the same part fractured. Doct. Are there any hearbes that haue an hidden propertie to cure Fractures? Stud. Sophia, as well crude as decocted doth that, so doth Radix Symphiti boy∣led in wine, and applyed, cause a callos, and Aristolochia and Serpentaria. FINIS.
A Definition of all those Diseases that do chiefly affect the body of man. And first of the head, De Apopiexia. APoplexia, is a disease, wherein the fountaine and originall of all the sinewes are affected, whereby euery part of the body doth suddain∣ly lose both mouing & sense. It is caused of a phlegmatick humor that is cold, grosse, and tough; which doth at one time abundantly fill the ventri∣cles of the braine; which humor o∣uermuch crudittie and drunkennesse doth ingender: somrimes it is caused
by a fall or a blow, which doth shake and bruse the braine, and so causeth hu∣mors to flow thither. Also a very cold aire, which doth thicken and congeale the humidities and excrements of the braine: it may come also of a grosle me∣lancholick humor. Paralysis, or Resolutio, in English the Palsie, it is a disease wherin the one halfe of the body, either the right side, or the left doth lose both sense and mouing, & then it is called generall: also sometime the palsie chanceth in one member only, as in the hand, the legge, or the tongue, and such like, and then it is particular: but wee must note, that whereas in the Palsie somtimes sense onely is lost, and somtimes mouing alone, and somtimes both sense and mouing, it is especially called Resolution of the sinewes or palsie: this disease is caused through abun∣dāce of grosse & clammy humors which stop the sinewes, and hunder the animall facultie, that it cannot come from the fountaine of the members. It may also be caused through immoderate cold. It may be caused also by an inflammation, or some scirrbus chauncing in the backe
bone, or in parts nigh adioyning, or in o∣ther sinew parts wherby the sinewes are crushed and pressed, and so stopped that the animal facultie cannot passe: some∣times it is caused through a Feuer, and is chiefly ingendred of melancholy oc∣cupying the mind, and changing the temperature of it. It is caused three kind of waies, for somtimes it is caused of melancholy it selfe, somtimes by the alteration of the blood in the braine, and lastly it may spring through inslāmation and euill affect about the stomack and sides; as for the signes they are many, as fearefulnes, sadnes, hatred, strange imaginations, and such like. Vertigo or Scotoma, is a disease where∣in the Patient doth imagine that his head is turned round about. There is another disease not much vnlike vnto the same, which is called tenebricosa vertigo, and then the Patient doth thinke, that al that he seeth turneth round, and so dainly his sight doth faile him, supposing that he is incompassed about with mist and darknes, and that is it which the Phy∣sitians do cal Scotoma. It is caused through the braine it selfe, being either distempe∣red
or euill affected, or of the mouth of the stomack, offending the braine. Ephialtes, or incubus, it is a disease, whereas one thinketh himselfe in the night to bee oppressed with a great waight, and doth beleeue that some∣thing doth come vpon him, and ly∣ing heauie vpon his stomack, so that the Patient doth thinke himselfe strang∣led: it is called in English the Mare; and is caused of excesse of drinking, and euill diet, by which proceedeth cruditie, and rawnesse of the sto∣mack, from whence doe ascend grosse vapours, and cold, filling the ventri∣cles of the braine, and so doe let the faculties of the braine to be dispersed by the sinewes. Epilepsia, called also morbus comiti∣alis, morbus sacer, morbus herculens, and morbus lunaticus: it is a conuulsi∣on, drawing and stretching all the whole parts of the body, with hurt of the mind and sense. There bee three differences in this sicknesse or disease, the first is, when it is caused from cephalalgia, as an vniner∣sall paine of the head; the Arabicks do
call it soda, and it doth containe vn∣der it as well cephalia as hemicrania. It proceedeth either of the primary affect of the head, or by the consent of some o∣ther member, or by both; but the mat∣ter of the disease, is either blood, choler, flegme, or melancholy, or else sometimes vapours arising from the same. Achor, or Furfur, it is a kind of vlceration of the head like a scurffe, or dandruffe and is like vnto branne or oatmeale. It springeth through too much humiditie and moistnes of the braine, and somtimes through melancholy, or some salt humor: it is not much dif∣ferent from Fauus, which is also a kind of scaly matter in the head. Phrenitis, or Frenisis, is the Frensie or madnes: some affirme that it is bred in the pellicles of the braine, called Pia mater, either by inflammation, or impo∣stumation: it causeth alienation of the mind, and losse of memorie. There is an other kind of Frensie, which doth fol∣low as accidents of some disease, as with a Feuer, the Plurifie, and such like. Lethargus, , an other disease
which doth take his name from the for∣getfulnes of all things. It hapneth with the alienation of the mind, and a slee∣pines not to bee resisted. It is caused of flegme which cooleth the braine ouer∣much, and moistneth it, and therby doth prouoke sleepe: it is deriued of Lethe ob∣liuion, and of argos hebetudo, that is, dull obliuion. Caros, or subeth is a depriuation of a mans sense and motion. It doth differ from Lethargus, because that those that be affected with the Lethargre will an∣swere to a question demanded; but those that are affected with this disease, are oc∣cupied with a deep sleep; and if they be stirred or pricked, although they feele, yet they will say nothing, nor once open their eyes. It is caused of a cold grosse and viscous flegmatick humor, filling the braine. Melancholia, and mania, is an alienati∣on of the mind, troubling reason, and waxing foolish, so that the Patient is almost besides himselfe. It doth come without a wound, or an vlcer, either in the braine, or in the marrow of
the backe, or in any particular si∣newes. Torturaoris, called of Almansor con∣tractio: it is vntruly named the palsie, for it is more neerer a crampe, for because it doth contract the sinewes of those partes. The chiefe cause of this disease springeth as of that of the Palsie, or else of cold, or some angry pas∣sion. Spasmus, or conuulsio, in English the Crampe, it is a disease in the which the sinewes are drawne and pluckt vp against ones will: there bee of it three kindes; the first is called by the La∣tines Distentio, and is when the neck doth remaine altogether immoueable, and cannot bee turned any way, but must bee holden right forth: the second is called in Latine Tensio ad anteriora; in this disease, the head and the neck bee drawne downe to the breast: the third is called tensio ad posterioria; in this disease the head is drawne downe backward to the back and the shoulders. The causes by Hippocrates are said
to be two, that is, fulnes and emptines of the sinewes in the body, & somtimes it doth come with the biting or stinging of some venemous beast: some are also of opinion, that the extraordinary vse of Venerie, and vsed vpon a full sto∣mack may cause this desease: also debili∣tie and weaknes, and the want of blood, may be an occasion of this disease. Catarrhus, is a distillation of some rheumatick matter, vnto the lower parts; as when it doth discend to the nostrels, and cause oppilation, it is called Coryza; or when it doth descend to the parts of the throat, it is called Branchus; or when it doth descend vnto the brest, or to the lungs, then it is called the catarrh: from whence this verse doth arise: Si fluit ad pectus Rheuma, tuicc dico catarrhū: Ad fances, branchon, ad nares dico coryzam. The catarrh is also caused either through some outward coldnesse, or heate, sometimes by euaporation of meats, sometimes by the smell and odor of hot and cold things, by the immode∣rate vse of Venerie, oucrmuch sleepe, violent exercise, or too much rest or re∣pletion.
There are many other diseases which do spring from the braine, as palpitatio mem∣brorum, tremor, and stnpor, with such o∣ther like, which for breuities sake I doe omit. CHAP. II. Of the affects of the eyes. THe affects of the eyes are opthalmia, the cataract, lippitudo, leucoma, glau∣coma, Aegilops, suffusiones, and such like. The opthalmia is an inflammation, or an hot impostume in the eye. It is caused of some distillation from the braine, or else of the corruption of blood mixt with choler, and somtimes accidentally by a stripe, or blow, the smoake, dust, the sunne, &c, The cataract, of some called suf∣fusio, is a disease in which the Patient doth imagine oftentimes that he seeth black things: it is a corrupt water, congealed like a curd, ingendred of the humors of the eye, distempered be∣twixt the tunicles, & set before the sight of the eye, & the Crystaline humor.
The causes hereof may bee a fall, stroake, heate, cold, paine, by whose meanes the humor is drawne and ga∣thered together; or the cause may bee vapours, and humours ascending to the braine, and from thence discending to the eyes, which in processe of time, and by reason of cold are changed into wa∣ter, and in the end is become thick and congealed. Lippitudo, bleare-eyes, it is when the vnder lidde of the eye is sub∣uerted. Rasis doeth affirme that to be lipitudo when the white of the eie is turned to rednesse. It is caused of some salt humor, or of superabundance of rheume, with corruption of blood. Leucoma, a kind of webbe, the which is rooted in & vpon the eies. The cause is a viscous humor, or some rheumatick matter: sometimes also it may come of a stripe or bruise. Glaucoma is vsed in two senses: for it is taken vnproperly for a webbe, cata∣racte or spot which is gathered and dri∣ed round about the apple of the eye: but there is a difference betweene the cata∣ract
and Glaucoma; for the cataract is a collection and an heap of other humors then of those which are naturall in the eye, slowing vnto it from some other place: but Glaucoma is properly vsed when the crystaline humour is drie and thicke, and the colour of it is greene, whereupon the eyes seeme greene or pale. Aegilops, is a little fistula in the corner of the eie neere vnto the nose, out of the which doth issue continually flegme or a thinne humor arising of some former disease, as of anchilops suppurated, but ei∣ther not speedily opened, or negligent∣ly dressed; or rather it doth arise of some slimie matter, or moist medicines, or the aire which hath altered and rotted the bone in that part. CHAP. III. Of the diseases of the eares. DOlor aurium, paine in the eares, is caused of some, through cold taken in iournying by cold winds: somtimes it is caused of cold bathes, and medici∣nall waters; also it doth chance to many
through hotte distemper: sometimes through inflammation: sometimes sharpe and biting humours doe cause paine in the eares. Sovitus aurium, sound and noyse of the cares, is for the most part ingendred of a windie vapour, or of grosse and clammy humors: sometimes it is caused through weakenesse of the members. When it doth chance in the recouery of a disease, some humour is taken into the sinews of the cares; it may be caused also of out∣ward things, as of cold, heat, or a blow on the head. Surditas & grauis auditus, deafnes and slow hearing: it doth begin sometimes at ones birth, and sometimes afterwards, which doth chance either through cho∣lericke humours flying vpwards, or through crude and grosse humors stop∣ping the hearing. Parotides, be inflammations which are wont to issue out in the kernels which be by the eares. It is caused of abun∣dance of hot blood, which is either mix∣ed with choler, or flegme, or melancho∣lie: and sometimes it is caused of humors compact in the head; and sometimes of
the rest of the body by sickenesse, and e∣specially by feuers. CHAP. IIII. Of diseases of the nose. OZenae, are certaine vlcers in the nose that be deepe and rotten, out of the which doth breath a lothsome and stincking sauour: the cause is sharpe and rotten humours, which flow to the nostrils. Profluuio sanguinis ex naribus, flux of blood at the nose is caused by a two fold meanes, as internall and externall: ex∣ternall as some fall, a stripe, vehement exercise and tarying in the sunne. In∣ward causes, as plenty of blood, or thin∣nes of the same, and sometimes great drinking of wine. Polypus, is a fleshie matter growing in the nostrils, like vnto a kind of caruncle. Hippocrates doth affirme, that it is incu∣rable: sometimes it is caused through grosse humours descending to the no∣strils, and sometimes it ariseth through a melancholicke humour. Coryza. Read before in the descrip∣tion of Catarrhus.
CHAP. V. Of the affects of the mouth and teeth. Foetor oris, stinking of the mouth: it is caused for the most part through putrifaction of the gummes or teeth, or through meat sticking still in the teeth: many times it commeth through hotte distemper of the skinne of the mouth: sometimes also through corrupt and rot∣ten humours sticking in the mouth of the stomacke: sometimes vlceration of the mouth or lungs, is the occasion of the stinking of the breath. Acola, and apthe, are certaine vlcers bredde in the vppermost part of the mouth, and haue a certain burning heat: some are whitish, and some are of a red colour, and some are blacke, and they are the most perillous: they ingender for the most part in infants and sucking children, when either the nurses milke is naught, or the child cannot wel digest it. These vlcers sometimes chance to them that be of perfect age, as well through great flux of vitious and corrupt humors
to the mouth, as also through sharpnes of those things that are eaten and drunke. Dolor Dentium, the tooth-ach: it is caused sometimes through hot or colde distemper: sometimes through flowing, of humours out of the head vnto the rootes of the teeth; which through their sharpenes either doe gnaw about them, or else with their abundance they ingen∣der greefe in the teeth: as if inflammati∣on be about the fleshy parts. Paine in the teeth is sometimes without inflam∣mation of the gummes: sometimes in the sinew wherein the rootes be plan∣ted. Dentes denigrati & molles: teeth that be black and loose, happen through the flowing of vitious humours, and some∣times through a stripe or fall: sometimes through flowing of moisture, which doth loose the sinews and ligaments, and so doeth make the teeth loose; or else gnawing and weakenes of the gummes in which the teeth are set, are the cause of loosenes. There are many other infirmities of the teeth and mouth; as Apostumes in
the tongue, inflammations, chaps, and such like, vlcers of the gummes, with the excrescence of flesh: all which I ouer∣passe for breuities sake. CHAP. VI. Of the affects of those parts that serue to the voice. TVmer vnulae, the swelling of the vuu∣la: sometimes the vuula is infla∣med, and sometimes it falleth downe. It is caused either of rheume, or else of some hot humour; but if the vuula doe fall, it doth proceed either through great la∣bour, or heat, or else through great sick∣nes or weakenes. Squinantia or angina, it is an Apostume of the throte. Hippocrates in 3. prog. 17. describeth foure kinds, and Celsus doth approue but three kindes; and the first kind doeth seldome appeare outward, and for the most part is mortall: the three other be not so dangerous. It is caused through some flux of humours that doe descend from the head to the
throte; and sometimes it doeth come through euaporations, ascending from the stomacke to the throte. Bocium, the Greekes call it Broncho∣celen, the Latines call it Hernia gutturis: it is a great round tumor in the throte: it setleth it selfe between the skin and the sharpe Arterie, in the which sometimes grosse flesh is included, as it were a kind of humour like vnto hony, fatnesse, or like to cheese and egges sodden toge∣ther. Tonsillarum inflammatio, the inflam∣mation of the Tonsils: some doe call them amygdalae, the Almonds; they are often times inflamed, for their places are hotte and moist. Those which are most vexed with this euill, haue a∣bundance of blood, and children and infants which doe sucke, through the drawing of the milke: sometimes it happeneth to men and women by the drinking of strong wines, and through greedie deuouring of meate; especially if they bee eager or sharpe: sometimes there are vlcerati∣ons of the Tonsils, which hapneth vnto
those that doe abound with vitious hu∣mours. CHAP. VII. Of the affects which are incident vnto the breast and lungs. OF the Catarrhe we haue alreadie spoken of, in the infirmities of the head. Tussis, the cough: Galen in lib. 1. cap. 2. de symptomatum causis, doth affirme, that a cold distemper of the instrument of breathing, to be the cause of the cough. Also a humour distilling from the head to the trachoea arteria, and sharpnes one∣ly of the vpper skinne of trachaea arteria going about within, doeth prouoke the cough: sometimes it is caused through cold or flegme, descending vpon the lungs: sometimes it happeneth through heate, dissoluing the superfluous matter of the braine and so through a catarrhall distillation the cough is excited. Asthma, is a disease in the which the patient hath difficultie of breathing; and it is caused when as grosse and clammie
humors in abundance be gotten into the gristles & lappats of the lungs; or when as there is some swelling, like vnto a botch: sometimes a pestilent aire, and the fumes of quick siluer may be the cause. The disease hath a threefold divisi∣on; for first when it is but small, and that there is no danger of suffocation, at is called Dyspnaea: secondly, when it doeth grow more vehement, and that the patient cannot breath without wheesing or difficultie, it is called Asth∣ma: thirdly, when the patient is not able to lie in his bedde for feare of swounding, or suffocating, it is then cal∣led Orthopnaae. Pleuritis, the Plurisie, or Laterau do∣lor. It is an inward inflammation or apostumation of the vpper skinne gir∣ding the ribbes, called Pleura. It is caused of abundance of hotte blood, flowing vnnaturally. To the aforesaid vpper skinne within there is adioyned difficultie of breathing, the cough, a continuall feuer, a vehement prick∣ing paine, and a hard and sharpe pulse. Peripneumonia, is an inflammation
of the lungs with a sharpe Feuer and difficultie of breathing. It is caused of strong distillations, falling to the lungs, or else of the Squinancie, or the Asthma, or of the plurisie, or of other di∣seases: sometimes a simple inslammati∣on is the cause of this disease. Sputum sanguinis, spitting of blood. It is caused many times of an outward cause; as of falling from an high place, or a stroake, or with riding, or leaping, or of some heauie thing fallen vpon the Breast: Sometimes immoderate colde or heate breaketh the veines, as Hippocrates doeth wit∣nesse: sometimes fulnesse and abun∣dance of naughtie blood doeth gnaw asunder the veines, and breaketh open the heads of them: sometimes also sharpe humours falling from the head to the lungs doeth gnaw asunder the veines. Empiema, or suppuratio, it is a spit∣ting of a kind of matters caused when an apostume or botch, beeing in the vpper skinne of those which doe girde the ribbes inwardly, or else in
some vpper skinne of the brest; and being broken, it is shedde and powred into the emptie place of the brest, which is betweene the lungs and the vpper skinne girding in the ribbes. It is sometimes caused through some erup∣tion of blood; and sometimes through fluxe of the head and other parts falling thither, which doth sometimes change into the squinancy. Ptisis, or Tabes, it is an exulceration of the lungs vntill there followeth spit∣ting of bloody matter. It is caused through a sharpe and gnawing humour, flowing to the lungs from the head. It is caused also through blood and matter that doeth remaine after the bursting out of it in them that haue the Plurisie, Peripneumonia, or Empiema. They which haue this disease, their flesh doth wash away, their eies are hol∣low, they are vexed with a cough, and the feuer hectick, they haue difficulty of of breathing, with a pale and sware countenance.
Chap. VIII. Of the affects of the heart and breasts. PAlpitatio and tremor cordis is the panting and trembling of the heart: it is a corrupt motion of the heart, or a stretching out of it against na∣ture: our moderne Physitions doe call it Cardiaca. It is caused through some distemperature or an euill hu∣mour which doeth rest in the celles about the heart, or else some tu∣mour or swelling against nature: some∣times imbecillitie and weakenesse may cause this disease; and sometimes it ari∣seth through a grosse melancholicke blood. Syncope, is a swift failing of the strength, and is caused through much excretion and auoyding of blood; also throngh infection about the braine and the heart, causing oppi∣lations; or else through some great sickenesse: it may also come through great heate, and suddaine cold: it may
come through vehement sweating and other immoderate euacuations: some∣times also feare, dread, and such like per∣turbations of the minde may cause swounding. Chap. IX. Of the tumour of the Pappes. THE tumour of the Paps is of ma∣nisold causes; for sometimes it pro∣ceedeth of cold: somtimes through con∣cretion of milke: sometimes through in∣flammation: somtimes through a stroke or blow: sometimes there is an hard tu∣mor which is cancerus, and doth arise of some inward cause, as the stopping of Menstrus, vnnaturall melancholy, and such like. Concretio lactis, curding of milke, is caused through abundance of milke, which is not drawne forth. It is caused also of some hotte distemper, when that through ouer-much heate the thinner part of the milke is digested and dissolued, and the rest grow∣eth together and turneth into curds: it may also bee caused of colde
which may cause the milke to congeale and turne to curds. Inflammatio mammarum, the inflamma∣tion of the Pappes, is caused of abun∣dance of hotte blood flowing to the Pappes: sometimes through milke cur∣ded and turned to suppuration and mat∣ter. CHAP. X. Of the affects of the stomacke. DOlor stomachi, paine of the sto∣macke, is caused when naughtie, venemous, and gnawing humours bee kept in the stomacke, whereby it doeth chance that through intollerable gnaw∣ing, they cause swounding, which they call stomachica. Imbecillitas stomachi, weakenes of the stomacke, is caused through distemper of the working qualities, without any flowing of humours: sometimes it is caused of an humour being contained in the bosome and large space of the stomacke, which hath power either to heate, or coole, or to moisten, or drie, or
two of these qualities mixed toge∣ther. And sometimes also it is caused of an humor stuffed and drowned in the films and coats of the stomacke. Vomitus & nausea, vomiting and dis∣position thereunto, proceedeth of a naughtie and wicked motion of the ex∣pulsiue facultie of the stomacke. It is caused of a vitious humour contained in the stomacke, being either hotte or colde: which humour either swimmeth in the concauity and hollownes of the stomacke; or it is stuffed in the filmes thereof, cleauing like bird-lime: some∣times great exercise after meates, sailing on the seas, and ouer-fat meates may be the occasion of vomit. Eructatio, belching, is caused either of ventositie, or of some sharpe and fo∣wer humour: sometimes it proceedeth of an hotte cause, and that is perceiued when either there is bitternesse in the mouth, inflammation, thirst, or that the patient receiueth remedie by cold cau∣ses, as Gal. affirmeth, Si à materia calida sunt cum siti si à frigida cum fame. Singultus, yelking or hicket, is a motion
of the stomacke, as it were a crampe raised of the expulsiue facultie, which goeth about to expulse euill and hurt∣full things. It is caused for the most part either of fulnesse or emptinesse, as is affirmed by Hippocrates: also some∣time it is caused through the biting and gnawing of sharpe humours: also cold∣nesse of the mouth of the stomacke, is oftentimes the cause of yelking: some∣times it is ingendred in feuers, when ei∣ther the stomack or some other bowel is inflamed. Sitis, thirst, hath a two fold cause: the one is through want of moisture, and partly through abundance of heat; also through much drinking of olde strong wine: sometimes it is caused through salt humours, or eating of very salt meates: and sometimes the stomack is dried by the consent of the whole body, as it happeneth in burning Fe∣uers.
CHAP. XI. Of the affects of the liuer and splene. Imbecillitas Iecinoris, weaknes of the li∣uer, is caused of distemper, either hot, cold, moist or drie: a hot distemper doth burne vp, as wel the humors which were before in the liuer, as also those hu∣mours which are carried to the liuer, by the veines mesenterij. But cold distemper doth make the flegmatick and raw humor, which is al∣readie contained in the liuer, tough and hard to bee moued, and the humors that be carried to the liuer, it doth leaue them halfe digested. A dry distemper doth make the hu∣mours drier, and thitker. Moist distemper doth make the hu∣mors thinne, & more watery, therefore those which haue a weake facultie of the liuer, are called Hepatici. Obstructio Iecinoris, obstruction and stopping of the liuer, is caused of va∣pours & windinesse, hard to digest: som∣times it is caused of grosse and viscous
humours in the ends of the veines, spring∣ing from the flat part of the liuer, by which veines, nourishment is sent from the stomack and bowels to the liuer. Inflammatio Iecinoris, Inflammation of the liuer, is caused as other inflammations in other members. Apostema hepatis, the Apostume of the liuer, hath a twofold cause, as externall, and internall: external, as a fall, bruse, and such like; internal, as gluttony, indigesti∣on of the stomack, weaknes of the vertue digestiue of the liuer, humors gathered to∣gether in the liuer: somtimes it hapneth through inperfect clensing of the gall, splene, raines, and intestines. Scirrhus lienis, hardnes of the splene, it is caused of a certaine humor, which cleaueth stubbornly to the splene: and sometimes it happeneth after an inflāma∣tion of the splene, if it bee not rightly cured. Obstructio lienis, stoppings of the splene, is not caused onely of the weaknesse of the attractiue vertue which is in the splene, but also through stopping of the
passage, by which the dregges of me∣lancholy are deriued from the liuer vn∣to the splene; by which meanes, the same vnpure excrements of blood are dispersed into all the parts of the bo∣die, which causeth a kind of corrupt and vnnaturall colour in the whole bodie, which doth incline to black∣nes; and if there be not speedie remedie, there doth not onely follow the blacke Iaundes, but also that same most dan∣gerous disease called Scorbutus, after the which doe follow most dangerous and vncurable vlcers. Scorbutus, the Scuruie, is caused through obstruction of the splene, whereby the course and passage of me∣lancholy is hindred, which being ming∣led with the rest of the blood, infect∣eth all the body, with vile wasting cor∣ruption; the grosse part whereof fal∣ling downe, staineth the legs with spots like vnto the colour of pomgranets; and the thinner part being carried vp, doth defile the gums, with sharp, fretting, and lothsome growing out of the flesh. This very disease is thought to be that which Plinie maketh mention of in lib. 25. of
his naturall history, calling it stomacaco, and sceletyrbe. Icteritia, the Iaundes, which is a shed∣ing of yellow choler, or melancholy all ouer the body: sometimes there chan∣ceth shedding of choler to the skin, the liuer being safe, as in the crisis of disea∣ses: many times the iaundes is caused, & doth chance when the blood is corrup∣ted, without a Feuer, of some externall cause, as it falleth out by the biting of some venemous beast. Also it may bee caused through inflammation or change of the naturall temperament of the liuer. Somtimes it is caused through weaknes of the bladder, that receiueth the choler, which doth not draw it from the liuer vnto him, and so doth leaue the blood vnpure: also sometimes it is caused through obstruction and weaknes of the vessells, whose mouths are deriued from the gall to the liuer, and for that cause cannot draw the cholerick humor. Som∣times it is caused through obstruction of the passages that doe goe to the bowels. Cacexìa, euill state of body, which is a waterish disposition of the whole bo∣dy, whereby it waxeth loose and soft, it
is ingendred for the most part, of some long sicknes, after the scirrsosyti and hardnes of the liuer and splene. Hydrops, the dropsie: there are 3. kinds of them, the first is called Ascites, the se∣cond Tympanites, and the third is called Anasarca, yposarca, Sarcites, and Leuco∣phlegmatia. Ascites is when much watery humor is heaped vp betweene the skin, or filme called Peritoneum and the bow∣els. Tympanites is when much windines and superfluous vapour is gathered in the aforesaid places of the belly. Ana∣sarca is when the humour is dispersed throughout the whole body, that all the flesh doth appeare altogether moist and wet like a spunge. The dropsie is caused through great coldnes of the liuer, or through other parts ouermuch cooled, which doth bring the liuer into the same affect. The liuer is affected through the splene, being cold, and by the stomack and the bowels; also by the lungs, the raines, & the midrisse; also it doth chance through vnmeasurable auoiding of the haemorrhoas, or through womās fluxe, or retention of the menstrus, or through some other great affect of the wombe.
Some fall into the dropsie after the gout, and the great paine called Sciatia: and sometimes also the dropsie doth follow the Iaundes; but howsoeuer, it is the coldnes of the liuer, & weakenes there∣of, that doth cause the dropsie. CHAP. XII. Of the affects of the belly and intestines. DIarrhea, is a great flux of the womb, without exulceration, and inflam∣mation. It is caused through weaknes of the instruments that serue to digesti∣on, also through abundance of nourish∣ment, and meat that is moist and viscous, and through corrupting of the same meate. Moreouer, gnawing and biting of those things that are contained in the bellic: also flowing of some things from aboue to the belly, and also weaknes of the retentiue vertue. Lienteria, is a certaine lightnes, or smoothnes of the bowels, or a flux of the belly, in which those things that are ea∣ten and drunke are auoided, euen in the
fame order that they were receiued, that is, before it be changed or digested: it is caused often times through a grieuous flux, Dysenteria preceding, which cau∣seth deepe exulceration of the bowels: also somtimes it is caused through weaknes of the vertue retentiue, for be∣ing weakned, the meates bee neither digested, nor distributed, but they are cast forth crude, moist, and nothing changed: also somtimes it doth ingen∣der after long flux of the wombe: some∣times also when dropsie water is auoi∣ded by the bellie. Dysenteria, is an exulceratiō of the bow∣els, the Latines call it tormina, because through it the bowels are tormēted and fretted very much with paine: there is ioi∣ned with this inflāmation & excretiō of bloody matter, & dreggie; the belly and the intestines are vexed with griefe. Gor∣donius saith, that it is a bloody flux, with excoriation, & exulceration of the inte∣stines. It is caused through exulceration of the bowels, also through drinking of naughtie medicines, as scamonie and such like; also through eating of fruit, & sower meats, or through sharp & gnawing hu∣mours
flowing, from the whole body to the belly, or ingendered in the belly it selfe. Tenasmus, is a continuall desire to goe to the stoole or siege, which the Patient cannot auoid, and yet there is no excre∣ments auoided, except it be a little blood, or filthie matter, like vnto sniuel. It is of∣tentimes caused through cold, or sharpe and cholerick humors, or salt slegme, or impostumation, or inflammation ingen∣dred in the rectum intestinum: sometimes excrements baked in the blind gutte, doe cause Tenasmus. Colica passio, the cholich or paine which is bred in the gut called colon: it is caused many waies; for sometimes it is ingendred through grosse and slegmatick humors fallen downe within the thinne skinne of the gut colon. Also sometimes through windines, which may not goe out. Some∣times it is ingendred through sharpe and gnawing humours, which doe afflict the foresaid bowels vehemently. Sometimes the baking of the excrements in the inte∣stines, is the cause of that greefe. Iliaca passio, the Iliac passion is a disease, causing most greeuous paine in the small
guttes: this disease is called of the La∣tines Voluuius and Conuoluulus. It is cau∣sed through continuall corruption and crudity of meats, but especially of fatte meates, which doe ingender obstructi∣ons in the small guttes; also vehement colde, restraining and withholding of the excrements. In like manner much drinking of cold things; especially if it be taken when they sweat. CHAP. XIII. Of the affects of the reines and bladder. MIctus sanguinis, pissing of blood, is caused through weakenes of the reines which be not able to diuide the v∣rine. Sometimes blood is pissed forth through breaking of a veine in the reines, as sometimes it doth happen to those that haue lifted some great waight, or leapt vi∣olently, or fallen from some high place. Sometimes it doth chance through gnaw∣ing of the veines of some sharpe humours flowing from aboue.
Renum inflammatio, inflammation of the reins. It is caused through corrupt humors and medicines that doe engender inflam∣mation of the reines, and especially con∣tinuall and vehement ridings. Calculus renum the stone in the reines, is caused through continuall crudity and rawnes of the stomacke, whereby a∣bundance of grosse and earthy humours are heaped together, and burning of fiery heate about the reines parcheth the hu∣mours, and so baketh them together, and hardneth them into a stone. Diabetes, is a continuall disease about the reines, causing much thirst; and also whatsoeuer is drunke, euen as it is taken, is pissed out againe. It is caused of weak∣nes of the retentiue facultie of the reines; but there is such strength of the attractiue vertue, that it sucketh from the whole bo∣die through immoderate heate. The pati∣ent is troubled with a marucilous thirst, neither is it auoyded by receiuing of any kind of liquor. Vlcers of the reines is caused through rupture and breaking of the veines in the reines: also it is caused through rotting of inflammations, and through sharpe and
gnawing humors carried into the reines. Inflammation of the bladder is a most grieuous and mortal disease: it proceedeth for the most part as other inflammations. Stillicidium urinae, the strangurie, is a di∣sease when as the vrine doth distil downe by drops, or by little and little, and causeth a continuall prouoking and desire to pisse. It is caused through the sharpenes of the vrine, or by the exulceration of the blad∣der, or by an impostume of the iiuer or the reines, which being broken doth send the filth & matter to the bladder, through the sharpenes wherof it doth cause a con∣tinuall desire to pisse. Dysuria, is a disease wherein the vrine is hardly pissed out. It is caused through weakenes of the bladder, and through a cold distemper, which hurteth the actions thereof. Sometimes it is caused of grosse and slegmaticke humours, which do stop the neck of the bladder. Iscuria suppressio vrinae, it is a disease in the which the vrine of the patient is altoge∣ther letted and stopped. It is caused some∣times through weakenesse of the bladder: sometimes it chanceth by the stop∣ping of the nether passages of the blad∣der, or of grosse humours, or of a stone
congealed. Sometimes it is caused through inflammation, or of or hardnes of some swelling against nature, as the ca∣runcle, and such like; which doth make the passage straiter, or stoppe it altoge∣ther. Also matter sent downe from the liuer and reines, or some other place cau∣seth stopping of the vrine. Sometimes grosse and clammy humours fill vp and stop the passage, so that the vrine is stop∣ped and hindered. Priapismus, is a disease wherein the yard is extended in length and bignesse, without any lust or desire to the acte of generation at all. It is caused either through immoderate opening of the mouth of the Arteries, or of some vapo∣rous spirit, ingendred in the hollow and sistulous sinew. Sometimes this disease chanceth to them which haue abstained long from carnall copulation contrary to their custome, especially to those in whom blood doth predominate, and vsing little or no exercise. Satyriasis, is a continuall erection of the yard, with a desire and appetite to car∣nall copulation: the causes are as of that of Priapismus.
Gonorrhaea, is a disease in which the seed or sperme is shedde against the patients will. It is caused through imbecillitie and weakenes of the retentiue vertue in the vessels containing the sperme, or through some other disease that moueth the parts of the vessels of sperme: also sometimes it is caused through flux of the spermaticke vessels: the seed that commeth forth is wa∣terish and thin, without appetite of carnall copulation and for the most part without feeling of it: but sometimes it doth come forth with a certaine pleasure. There is another kind of Gonorrhaea, which those men are subiect vnto, whose liuer, reines, and seminarie vessels abound with heat: full bodies like to goats, who in their nightly dreames lying vpon their backes, shed forth a spermatick matter, and effusion offeede: of which the Poet Lucretius speaketh: Irritata tument loca semine, fit{que} voluptas Eijcere id quo se contendit dira libido. Incitat, irritans loca turgida semine multo. Id{que} petit corpus, mē unde est sancia amore. There is yet another kind of Gonorrhaea, and that is virulent, and is a symptom that doth follow lues venerea.
Ischias, called sciatica, is a grieuous paine of the huckle-bone, which the Greekes call Ischion. It is caused through a grosse slegmatick humor, which being congealed abideth in the ioint of the huckle-bones. For which cause crudities and raw∣nes, with vnmeasurable vsing of venere∣ous acts must be auoided. Also violent exercises and walkings, with stopping of the haemorrhodes, with other accu∣stomed euacuations, as the purgation of the menstrues, & other ordinary exerci∣ses may be an occasion of this disease. Arthrites, weakenes and paine in the ioynts, is ingendred of continuall cru∣dities and drunkennes, with the immo∣derate vse of lechery: also through ve∣hement and swift deambulations, and walkings, through long standing and of∣ten riding, also by suppression and stop∣ping of accustomed excretions, and fluxes, and of letting slip of accustomed exercises; sorrowes, cares, watchings, and other perturbations of the mind, do not onely engender this euill, but doe also breed hurtfull and corrupt humors. Sometimes also the colicke is turned in∣to
the goute when it is not well cured. Thus haue I breefly touched those chiefe diseases that are incident to mans body. I will now proceed to the definiti∣on of feuers, and so draw this booke to an end. Febris, a feuer: the originall or matter of a feuer in generall, is from the abun∣dance of the foure humours, for from the redundance of blood is engendred a continual feuer. From the superfluity of choler is ingendred the feuer tertian. From the domination of slegm is ingen∣dred the feuer called Ephemera or quoti∣dian; and from melancholy putrisied is ingendred a continuall quartane. And generally the Physitions do define a fe∣uer to be an vnnaturall heat kindled in the heart and liuer, distempering the whole body and hurting the same. Some define a feuer to be an vnnatu∣rall heat kindled in the heart and liuer, distempering the whole body, and doth proceede from the spirits and blood by the artiers and veines into the whole body, and so doth hurt and let the ope∣ration of it. This we must note, that there be 3. kinds of simple feuers.
The first is called Ephemera, and doeth continue but one day, for if he continue any longer, he is changed into some other kind. The second is called Putrida, and Hu∣muralis, or rotten feuer, and is in the foure principall humors, as blood, choler, flegm, and melancholy. The third is Febris hectica, and is in the solid and radicall members, and of all o∣thers is most dangerous; for it doth con∣sume the naturall humidity in man: that is to say, the blood, and so conse∣quently nature. From these three are deriued al o∣ther kinds of Feuers. FINIS.
The Antidotarie. Pilles for Alopecia, proceeding of Phlegme. Rec. ALoes Hepatici Diagridij an. Scr. ij. Pulpae colocynthidos Scr. j. Mastiches, bdellij, an. ℥. ss. With the iuyce of wormwood make a masse, of which you may giue one dragme, or halfe a dragme in three pilles, according to the strength of the Pati∣ent, after midnight. Rec. An vngueut for alopecia. Euphorbij. Seminis Nasturlij an. Scr. ij. Sulphuris viui. Ellebori
Elleborialbi velnigri, an. Scr. j. Cerae Scr. vj. Olei laurini Q. S. make an vnguent, with the which annoint the place. Pilles for Cephallagia, and paine of the head. Rec. Pil. aurearum Scr. ij. Pil. de fumo terrae drag. ss. Mixe them with the sirup of violets, and make v. pils. And if it chance that the paine doe proceed from morbus Galicus, you shal af∣ter the takiug of these pils, take this po∣tion following, for the space of twentie dayes together, and so sleepe vpon it. Rec. Decocti ligni guiaci Secundum artem facti. lib. vi. Fol. senae alex. an. M. ss. Betonicae an. M. ss. Staecados Arab. an. M. ss. Polypodij querc. an. M. ss. Tū bith boni an. Drag. Agarici elect. ij. ss Mixe them, and boile them al toge∣ther, vntill the third part bee consumed,
then let it be strained; and take of the straining ℥. vj. Oximellis simplicis Drag. ij. Let them be mixed for one dose. Let him continue this manner, and there is no doubt but he shall grow well. Vnguents for achor, and Vlcerati∣ons of the head. Rec. Sulphuris, foliorum Parietariae. an. ℥. ss Saponis Galici ℥. j. Mixe them with the iuyce of Parieta∣ria, and make an vnguent. An other. Rec. Litargirij ℥. ij. Foliorum rutae virid. ℥. j. Staphisagriae ℥. ss Vitrioli Drag. ij. Mixe them together in a morter, with vinegre and oile of mirtles, vntill it come to an vnguent, and there with annoint the place.
A water called aqua Booeoartica, or a wa∣ter against the Pestilence. Rec. Cardui benedicti Radicum cnulae an ℥. j. Zedoriae Imperatoriae Carlinae Diptami albi Angelicae an. ℥. j. ss. Gentianae Pimpinellae Tormentillae Sandalorum omnium an. drag. vj. Petasite Serpentariae an. ℥. j. Valeriana ℥. ss. Let all these be brused very finely, & then adde Musci optimi Ser. j. & gra. v. Camphorae Scr. ij. & ss Theriacae Mithridati an. ℥. ij. ss. Let all bee infused for two dayes in vij. pintes of aqua vitae or of wine twice distilled, and then let it bee distilled in a lembeck, with a gentle fire, and then wil
it be a most perfect water against the Pe∣stilence, and other venom, whose dose is Some make an infusion for 3. or 4. dayes, making af∣terwards an expres∣sion, and it is more delectable. ij. ounces, or one ounce and a halfe, with sorrell water and the water of Cardu: be∣nedictus, and for a presetuatiue, halfe a spoonfull is enough at a time. A distilled water against the falling sicknes, called aqua Epileptia. Rec. Florum lilij conuallij. M. vj. Infuse them in one measure of the best white wine, and so let it stand for tenne dayes; then let it be distilled at a gentle fire in a lembeck, in balneo mariae, after∣wards take Florum lauendulae M. j. Florum anthos M. ss. Garyophillorum Scr. ij. Macis drag. ss. Cubebarum Scr. j. Visei quercini Radicis diptami alb. an. drag. ij. ss Let these be infused for foure dayes in the aforesaid distillation, then let all bee distilled againe by a lembeck. The dose for preseruation is one or two spoonefuls to be taken once or twice in a weeke, the
day before the new moone, and the full of the moone, and in or after the Pa∣roxysme or fit, so much also. And with this water and suger may be made Ma∣nus Christi, against the falling sicknes, caros, subeth, and the Apoplexie. A distilled water againg the Apo∣plexie and Palsie. Rec. Florum primulae veris. an. M. j. Florum rorismarini. an. M. j. Florum maioranae. an. M. j. Florum iuae artheticae. an. M. j. Speciarum Diamusciamar. an. ℥. ss. Diapliris. an. ℥. ss. Diambrae. an. ℥. ss. Confectionis anacardinae. ℥. j. Cubebarum. Ligni alocs. Nucis Muscatae. Gariophillorum. Macropiperis. Carpobalsami an. Drag. j. Radicum acori Ireos Aristologiae rotund. an. ℥. j. ss. Seminum sileris montani,
Poeoniae Faemiculian. Drag. j. Aquarum herbae paralyfis Saluiae. Betonicae an. lib. j. Aquae florum tiliae lib. j. ss. Serapini, opoponacis Myrrhae Gummi Iuniperi. an. Drag. j. ss. Let al be brused and mixed together, and let to stand in infusion for eight daies: afterwards let there bee a three∣fold extraction in hot ashes, or by va∣pour, or Balneo sicco. It is of marueilous vertue, in the preseruation from the A∣poplexie, and all other cold sicknesses of the nerues. It cureth the Palsie, tortura oris, spasmus, and doth marueilously re∣store speech. A water that doth strengthen the memorie. Rec. Aquarum buglossae Betonicae Florum tiliae an. lib. j. Aquae ardentis opt. lib. ss. Florum anthos
Rosarum rubearum Maioranae Buglossae an M. j. Specierum confectionis Anacardinae ℥. ij. A Cordial water. Rec. Rosarum rubearum M. ij. Florum Borraginis M. ss. Cinamomi drag. ij. ss. Xyloaloes drag. j. Spicae Indicae Garyophil. an. drag. ss. Radicum ireos ℥. j. ss. Ben albi & rubei, an. drag. j. Sandalorum rub. & citri. an. drag. ss. Corallorum rubeorum drag. j. Corticum citri drag. ss. Seminum ocimi Garyophi lati drag. ss. Galliae muscatae drag. ij. Margaritarum Scr. ij. Zedoriae drag. j. Zinziberis albi drag. ss. Camphorae gra. vij. Croci orientalis Scr. ij. Moschi Scr. ss. Aquae rosarum lib. ij.
Vini maluatici lib. ss. Aceti ros. lib. ss. Let all be finely bruised and mixed for viij. daies, and afterwards distilled in Balnea mariae. A water against the syncope or swounding. Rec. Aquae rosat. lib. ij. Acetirosati lib. j. Maluatici lib. ss. Florum rorismarinae Maioranae an. Dra j. ss. Zedoariae Dra j. Coriandrorum Scr. ij. Cubebarum Nucis Muscatae Macis Garyophillorum singl. Dra. ss. Cinamonti Scr. ij. Ligni aloes Dra. ss. Specierum Diamusci Drag. j. Camphorae Scr. ss. Ambrae Gran. iiij. Let all bee bruised and mixed toge∣ther with the liquors, and let it infuse to∣gether for foure daies: then let it be
distilled in Balnea Maria. You may adde to these: Aquarum nympheae Violarum Lauendulae an. ℥ ij. Aquae vltae ℥ iij. It is a most effectuall remedie astainst swounding in the pestilence. In like manner three branches of pentiy-royall, infused in two ounces and a halfe of vineger of Roses, and one ounce of Rose water: for onely with the smell of this the spirits are reui∣ued. A restoratiue water. Take a Capon or Phesant or a Pert∣ridge, the bowels being pulled out, and let him be cut into small pieces & wash∣ed: then with Rose water and vineger, adde one dragme of Cinamon. Of Cloues Ser. ij. Manus Christi Cum perlis ℥. ss. Succiarantiarum ℥ ij. Acetositatis citri ℥ iij. Let all be put into a glasse, or into
some earthen vessell, and let it be boiled with a strong fire in Balneamaria, vntill halfe becōsumed; & then strain it, & pre∣serue it, and drinke thereof twice a day. A Cinamon water. We make Cinamon water either by distillation: the Cinamon being grosse∣ly bruised, and infused in as much Bor∣rage water, or Rose water as shall suf∣fice, and so distilled in Bolneamaria. Or else we take two dragmes of Ci∣namon, being finely powdred with sine ounces of the best suger, being put into a measure of the water of the decoction of Barlie, beeing very hotte, and so to remaine vntill it bee cold; or else with three dragmes of Cinamon, one hand∣full of Barly, Reasons of the sunne being washed, one ounce, Anisseed two drag. of white suger Candie two ounces and a halfe, running water sixe pints: and so let it bee boiled at a gentle fire vntill halfe be consumed, and then straine it.
A water in the opilation of the Liuer and Iaundes. Rec. Caponem Deplumatum. Et euisceratum being cut into small pieces and boiled, and then bruised with the flesh and bones in a morter: then adde thereunto Aquaeviolarum Betonicae Endiuiae Lupulorum Cuscutae Sichorijan. ℥. iij. Succipomorum Redolentium ℥. iiij. ss. Decoctionis caponis Macri lib. j. Sandalorum citrimorum Dr. j. Scr. ij. Spodij Drag. j. Cinamomi Dra. ij. Camphorae Gran. v. Let all be put into a vessel of tin close stopt, and placed in a vessel of water, and so boiled for foure houres space, then let it be strained, and put the straining into a Lembecke, and so distilled by Bal∣nea
Marinae. A wine against the oppilation of the liuer, splene, reines, and the e∣uils of the bladder. Rec. Scolopendriae M. vij. Adianti M. iiij. Chamae pyteos M. iij. Roris Marinae M. ij. ss. Cyperi ℥. ss. Radicis liquiritiaerasae ℥. ij. Rhapontici ℥. j. ss. Passularum lib. ss. Alkakengi M. iiij. ss. Let all be put into an earthen vessell well glassed, and being close stopped, and so let there bee put into a peece of fine linnen, of Calamus aromaticus Drag. iij. Gariophillarum Drag. ij. And so let it hang in the vessell in the middest of the wine for foure and twentie houres: then distill it by filter as we vse to distill hipocras, stil letting the Calamus aromaticus, and cloues hang in the vessell.
A wine that is laxatiue. Rec. Fumiterrae M. j. Foliorum scolopend. M. ij. Fol. senae alexandr. ℥ j. Polypodij Drag. v. Turbith electi Drag. ij. Cinamomi Drag. j. ss. Garyophillorum Scr. iiij. Zinziberis Drag. j. Rhabarbari cum scrupulo Vno squinanti in petia. Ligati Scr. v. Florum violarum Borraginis an. M. ss. Let all boile in an earthen vessell with three pints of white wine, and so let it stand for a night; in the morning let it be strained, in which shall be dissolued foure ounces of sine white suger, one white of an egge, and with ij. scruples of Cinamon, and halfe a dragme of Cloues tied in a peece of fine linnen, in the boi∣ling let it be clarisied. The dose for those that be of ripe yeares is iiij. ounces and a halfe, in which may be dissolued fiue scruples, or two dragmes of Diaturbith.
Against the retention of the Menstrus. Rec. Baccarum Lauri ℥ ss. Roris marini M. ss. Granorum Iuniperi num. xi. Cinamomi fracti Scr. v. Croci integri in petia ligati Gran. v. Let all be boiled in one pinte and a halfe of white wine, and let the patient drinke euery morning a good draught hotte against the time that nature seek∣eth to expell the matter. In like manner you may take Trochis. de myrrha subt. pu∣lu. Drag. j. in a cup of white wine be∣ing warme, in the morning fasting. Or, Rec. Boracis mineralis. Dra. ij. Cassiae ligneae Scr. ij. Croci Graen. iij. Let al be made into fine powder, and with v. ounces of aqua matricaria. Let it be giuen once in a weeke. A Diuretic decoction in the stone. Rec. Capillorum veneris M. j. ss
Crithami marini M. ss. Radicum apij & remorae an. ℥ i. Liquiritiae rasae Drag. ij. Corticum radicis scolymi ℥. j. ss. Seminum saxifragiae Dra. j. ss. Damasonij Drag. ij. Alcacengi num. xvij. Radicum graminis Drag. iij. Let all bee cutte bruised, and boiled at a gentle fire in three pints and a halfe of running water, vntill the third part be consumed; then make a strong expression, in which shall be dissolued one ounce and a halfe of syrupe of Vio∣lets, & of fine Rhubarb two ounces: then let it be clarified with the white of one egge. The dose is ℥ iiij. & ss. A decoction against the stran∣gurie and burning of the Vrin. Rec. Flordei integri M. j ss. Liquiritiae Drag. j. Seminum anisi Drag. ij. ss. Dactilorum incisorum num. v. Sebesten incisorum num. xv.
Let all be boyled in two measures and a halfe of running water, in an earthen vessell being glased, vntill the barly breake, then let it bee strained, and take three ounces and a halfe of this de∣coction. Syrupi de papauere ℥. j. Syrupi liquiritiae ℥. ss. Pulueris glandum Drag. j. Let it bee mixed, and giuen at the en∣trance into bed. A Iulep against the Apoplexie and Vertigo. Rec. Florum Lauandulae M. j. Violarnm Rosarum Sticados Arabici Origani an. M. ss. Radicum Poeoniae Acori Pyrethri an. ℥. ss. Squilla Drag. ij. Cubebarum Drag. j. Cardamomi Cinamoni Gariophillorum an. Scr. j. Let all bee boiled in one pint and a
halfe of Betony water, and one point of Marioran water, and let it bee strained, and with seuen ounces of suger, make a Iulep according to Art. Or if you will, you may dissolue in your decoction for your daily vse, the syrup of Sticados. A pectoral Iulep. Rec. Cinamomi Scr. iiij. Thymi P. j. Liquiritiae drag. j. ss. Radicumireos drag. ij. Enulae drag. j. Passularum euucle. ℥. ss. Let all bee boiled in a double vessell, with eight ounces of fennell water, iij. oūces of hyssop water, half a pint of Sca∣bios water then let it be strained, & in the straining dissolue 7. ounces of fine suger. Cinamomi Scr. ij. Gariophilorum Scr. j. Ireos drag. ss. in Petia ligati boile the Iulep to a thicknes and with the white of an egge let it bee clarified.
A Cordial Iulep of wine. Rec. Vini Rhenensis lib. j. Aquaerosarum ℥. ij. ss. Gariophilorum Contus. Ser. ij. Cinamomi drag. ss. In petia ligatorum Saccharisim. ℥. iij. Let it bee boiled at a gentle fire, to a thicknes of a cleere Iulep, & let it be gi∣uen in the morning, and euening, two spoonefuls, against swounding. A Iulep for the stomack. Rec. Foliorum scolopendriae M. iiij. Cuscutae M. ss. Menthae P. j. Galangae Xyloaloes an. drag. ss. Seminum anisi Scr. ij. Gariophilorum drag. ij. Cinamomi drag. j. ss. Vini albi lib. j. Aquae absinthij lib. ss. Aquae chamomillae ℥. iij. Let all bee boiled in a double ves∣sel, then let it stand for a night;
afterwards make a strong expression, then with v. ℥. of fuger let it be boyled to the thicknes of a Iulep: it is vsed in the paine of the stomack, through the oppilation of the entrals, and from a cold cause. A Iulep in the intollerable paine of the stomack, and cholick. Rec. Conseruae rosarum ℥. j. Opij the baici opij. gr. ij. iusti ponderis Croci orientalis. gra. iij. Let it be dissolued in foure ounces of chamomel water, and then strained and drunke three houres before supper. It doth extinguish heate and paine of the stomack and colick without any harme: it doth also prouoke sleepe, especially if the cause proceedeth of heate. A Iulep for melancholy, a quar∣tan Feuer, and the French Poxe. Rec. Fumiterrae M. j. ss. Scolopendriae Cascutaean. M. ss. Adianti M. j. Foliorum & folliculor.
Senae Drag. vi. Polypody ℥. ss. Corticum myrobalanor. Indorum Drag. ij. Paffularum enulcat. ℥. j. Florum borraginis Buglossae an. pugil. j. Epithymi Drag. j. Ellebori nigri Drag. ij. ss. Radicum capparorum Drag. ij. Let all boile in three pintes of com∣mon water, to the consumption of the third part, then let it stand for two houres, and then make a strong expressi∣on, which shall bee afterwards twice di∣stilled by filter, then afterwards with two Scr. of cloues, and one dragme, and a halfe of cinamond tied in a linnen cloth, and with Sacchari ℥. ij. Syrupi de pomis Velregis sabor. ℥. j. ss. Let it bee boiled to the thicknes of a cleere Iulep: the dose is v. ℥. and for strong bodies there may be in petia ligati Agarici Drag. j. ss. Cum duobus scrupulis zinziberis, in the last decoction.
A Iulep for Dysenteria, and the bloody fluxe. Rec. Rosarum rubearum M. ss. Sumach Balaustiarum an. drag. j. ss. Seminum lappatiae Acutae drag. j. Myrtillorum drag. ij. Antherae drag. ss. Radicum tormntillae drag. ij. Let it boile for the space of halfe an houre, in one pint of the water, of the flowers of the slow tree, & seuen oūces of plantane water, then let it stand eight houres, and make a strong expression, in the which shall bee dissolued one ounce and a halfe of the iuyce of plantane be∣ing purified, three ounces of fine white suger, with two scruples and a halfe of the powder of nutmegs, and halfe a dragme of cloues, tied in a peece of fine linnen, and so boiled to the thicknes of a cleere Iulep. A Iulep for the Sciatica, goute, and paines in the ioynts. Rec. Chamaepyteos M. j. ss.
Asari M. j. Betoniae Chamedrios Sticados Arab. an. M. ss. Capillorum veneris Rutae an. M. j. Turbith alb. gumosi drag. ij. ss. Polypodij querc. ℥. ss. Foliorum, & folliculorum Senae sine stipitibus drag. vj. Hermodactilorum drag. iij. Seminum anisi Faniculi an. drag. j. Passularum enucleat. ℥. j. Let all boile in three pintes of run∣ning water, vntill the third part be con∣sumed; then let it stand for an houre, and make a strong expression, which shal be twice distilled by filter, in which at the last shal be put of Agarick Scr. iiij. Zinziberis Scr. v. Caryophilorum Scr. ij. ss. Being brused & tied in a peece of lin∣nen, with three ounces of fine white suger, and so againe boiled to the thick∣nes of a cleere Iulep: the dose is ℥. v.
A powder against poison, and the Pestilence. Rec. Zedoariae Euphorbij Corallinae Tormentillae Gentianae Diptami vulgaris Terrae sigillatae Boli armeni Corallorum rubeorum & alborum Spicaenardi Masticis Herbaegaryophillatae Centaurij minoris Sandalorum rubeorum Ossis de corde cerui Camphorae an. partes equales Let all bee made into fine pouder, of which giue one dragme with the water of sorrel, or of wine and sorrel boyled together. An experimented powder, in the fitte of the falling sicknes. Rec. Seminum nigellae Scr. j. gra. v. Maioranae gra. vj.
Nucis muscatae Radicum poeoniae Mumiae an. Scr. ss Make all into fine powder, and let it be blowne vp into his nostrels. For the Vertigo, Palsie, Apoplexy, Scotoma, & for the memory lost. Rec. Radicum acor Pyrethri Poeonia an. Drag. j. ss. Galanga Costi an. Drag. ss. Cileris montani Drag. ij. Roris marini Drag. j. ss. Florum saluiae Lauendulae Betonicae an. Scr. j. ss. Cubebarum Cardamomi Baccarum lauri an. Scr. ij. Macis Scr j. Nucis muscatae Ganyrphillorum an. Drag. ss. Cinamomi Drag. j. Sticados Arab. Foliorum rutae an. P. j. Seminum amisi
Sem. faeniculi Ameos Caruian. Scr. ss. Piperis longi Carpobalzami an. Scr. j. Let all be mixed and made into a fine powder, and with suger dissolued in the waters of maioram and sage, make Lo∣zenges, or with the syrup of sticados, or hony clarified, you may make an E∣lecturie. Lozenges for the same. Rec. Specierum Diambrae scr. iiij Cinamomi Drag. j. Garyophillorum scr. j. Musci gra. j. Ambrae gra. ij. Cubebarum scr. ss. Pinearum praeparatarum Drag. iij. Sacchari ℥. iij. ss. All being made into fine powder, and with as much of the Epileptick water before written, and rose water as much as shall suffice, make Lozenges. Lozenges comforting the braine, and the heart Rec. Ambrae griseae. scr. ij.
Cinamomi Drag. ij. Sacchari candi ℥. iij. Aquae rosarum Q. S. make Lozenges they are of a most pleasant tast. Lozenges for paine of the head, singing of the eares, and Vertigo. Rec. Nucis muscatae nu. i. Cimini Seminum anisi Faeniculi Carui Cubebarum Piperis longi Garyphillorum an. Drag. i. Pulegij sicc Foliorum maioranae an. scr. i. Specierum diacimini ℥. ss. Mixe all together, and make a fine powder, giue one dragme with fennell water: or with fiue ounces of suger, and aqua epilleptica, and rose water, Q. S. make Lozenges. A Pectorall confection. Rec. Cinamomi Drag. i. ss.
Liquiritiae Scr. ij. Thymi P. j. Radicum ireos Scr. iiij. Let all be brused, and let it boile Cum aqua foeniculi ℥. ij. Scabiosae ℥. j. Rosarum ℥. j. ss. Then let it stand one quarter of an houre, and straine it, and take so much of the same straining as shall suffice to dis∣solue ii. ℥. ss. of white suger candie, and of Pennidice j. ℥. and so let it boile to a thicknes, and then mixe therein, of ci∣namon in sine powder halfe a scru∣ple. Radicumireos Scr. j. Dragaganti alb. Scr. ss. Margaritarum Praparat gra. vi. Seminis bombicis Enucleati Scr. ss. Fol. aurinum. 4. And therewith make pectorall roles. Roles for the cough and Asthma. Rec. Pinearum praep. Drag. ij.
Radicum ireos Liquiritiae rasae au. Scr. ij. Dragaganti Drag. ss. Seminum anisi Scr. j. Feniculi Vrticae an. Scr. ss. Rad. angelicae Drag. ss. Cinamomi Scr. iiij. Storacis calamitae Scr. ss. Sacchari Penidij & candi an. ℥ j. ss And with the water of Scabios, and fe∣nell, as much as shall suffice, make roles. Restoratiue Lozenges. Rec. Pinearum praepara. Drag. ij. ss. Fisticorum viridium Drag. ij. Specierum Diambrae Scr. ij. Cinamonu Drag. ss. Galangae Scr. j. Garyophillorum Drag. ss. Nucis muscatae Scr. ij. Zinziberis albi Drag. ss. Xiloaloes Scr. ss. With iiij. ℥. and a halfe of suger, dissol∣ued in rose water, with the species and o∣ther things, make a confection in Lo∣zenges.
Lozenges for the oppilation of the Liuer, euill state of body, and the Dropsie. Rec. Specierū aromatici rosati. Drag. j. sc. ss. Specterum Dialaccae Drag. ss. Macis Scr. j. Squinanti Carui Radicum asari an. scr. ss. Cinamomi scr. iiij. Sandalorum citrin Rubeorum an. Drag. ss. Cyperi scr. j. Limaturae eboris scr. j. Fisticorum viridium scr. iiij. Seminum melonum Excorticat. scr. ij. With vj. ℥. of suger in the water of Agrimony and roses Q. S. dissolued, make a confection in Lozenges. A Tragea for Dysenteria, and the blody Fluxe. Rec. Margaritarum scr. ij. Carabe Xyloaloes an. scr. j. Chermes
Garyophillorum an. Dra. ss. Nucis muscatae Corallornm praeparat an. scr. j. With one ounce and a halfe of manus Christi sandalini, being finely powdred, make Tragea: it is also very good against Abortion. Manus Christi sandalini. Rec. Specierum trium sandalorum dr. j. ss. Margaritarum praep. Scr. ij. Corallorum amborum an. Scr. j. Seminum mclonum Excorticat. Drag. j. Conseruae rosarum ℥ j. Sacchari in aqua Rosarum dissoluti Q S. Make a confection in roles; it is good against a hot distemper of the liuer and stomacke, and other diseases that spring thereof. Tragea. Against inuoluntarie pissing. Rec. Coriandri Drag. j. Carabae Drag. ss Corallorum rub. Xyloaloes an. scr. j. Glandium quercus Drag. ij.
Nucis muscalae Scr. v. Sandalorum rubeor. Scr. ij. ss. With v. ℥. and a halfe of suger, make Tragea, and let it be giuen at the entrance into bed. Against the superfluous flux of the Menstrus, and of the wombe. Rec. Granorum chermes Scr. v. Sandalorum rubeorum Drag. ss. Carabe Scr. j. Nucis muscatae Scr. ij. Fragmentorum sinaragdi. gra. v. With three ounces of fine white su∣ger make Tragea. Against ache and paine of the ioints. Rec. Chamedrios Chamepitheos Gentianae an. Drag. iij. Foliorum rutae siccae ℥. iiij. Make all into fine powder, this must be administred after euacuation, the bo∣dy being well purged, and there is vsed to be giuen, one spoonefull in the winter time with white wine, and in the summer with some distilled water.
Her mes composed the like powder ex Chamedrios. Gentianae an. ℥. iiij. Aristologiae rotund. ℥. j. Seminum rutae siccoe lib. ss. The dose is one spoonefull, with Hy∣dromel. Vide Gal. 14. meth. &c. Tragea de tartaro. Rec. Foliorum senae ℥. j. Tartari albi de vino potenti ℥ ss Turbit albi & gummosim. ℥ ss Cinamomi Zinziberis an. Dra. ss. Gariophillorum Drag. j. Sacchari ℥. j. Fiat tragea A laxatiue powder. Rec. Polypodij Scr. ij. Zinziberis Scr. j. Agarici trochiscat Drag. ss Rhabarbari Drag j. Folliculorum senae Scr. j. Garyophiliorum Turbit Cinamomi an. Dra. ss
Make all this into powder for the de∣licater sort of people. For those that be stronger there may be added of Diagridium one scruple. The dose is one Drag. giuen in foure ounces of Claretum laxatinum. Laxatiue Lozenges. Rec. Foliorum senae mund. scr. ij. ss Cinamomi Zinziberis Garyophillorum an. scr. ij. Hermodactilorum scr. iiij. Rhabarbari Drag. j. Turbit electi Drag. ij. ss Diagridij Drag. i. scr. ij. ss Squinantij Gran. v. Galangae Nucis muscatae an. scr. ss With eight ounces of suger dissolued in the water of Endiue, make a confecti∣on in Lozenges. The dose is from three Drag. vnto sixe Drag. An Electuarie against the Epilepsie and vertigo. Rec. Diacori ℥ j. ss
Conseruae maioranae Lauendulae Rorismarini an. ℥ j. Conseruae sticados ℥ ss Specierum diambrae scr. v. Caryophillorum Cinamomi Cardamomian. scr. ij. Cubearum Drag. ss Nucis muscatae Golangae an. Drag. ss Visci quercini scr. ij. Corallorum rubeorum scr. j. With suger dissolued in the water of Lauender, make an Electuarie. An Electuarie for the conserua∣tion of the sight. Rec. Conseruae Euphragiae ℥ j. ss Conseruae rosarum ℥ j Galangae Drag. ss Macis ser. ij. Cubebarum scr. j. Garyophillorum Drag. j. Cinamomi scr. iiij. Seminum rutae Faniculi an. Drag. ss
Nucis muscatae Scr. ij. Pulpae Chebulorum Conditorum Dra. iij. Nucis muscatae. Conditae ℥ ss Let all be brought into fine powder & cum Brodio emblicorum conditorum, or of Ginger condite, make an Elexuatie. An Electuarie for spitting of blood. Rec. Conseruae rosarum vet. ℥ ij. ss Betonicae ℥ ss Electri albi Scr. iiij. Corollorum praeparat. Drag. j. ss Cornu cerui vsti Drag. j. ss Gummi Arabici Scr. ij. Rob. deribes Dra. vi. With the syrupe of purslane, as much as is sufficient make an Electuarie. An Electuarie for trembling of the heart. Rec. Conseruae rosarum ℥ iij. Conseruae florum Tunicae ℥ j.
Conserua melissa ℥ ss Specier um margariti Frigidi Scr. iiij. Galangae Scr. j. Cinamomi Scr. iiij. Garyopbillorum Scr. ij. Doronici Scr. j. Succini alb. Drag. ss. Nucis muscatae conditae Drag. ij. Zinziberis conditi ℥ ss Corticum citri Pinearum praeparat. an. Drag. ij. Seminum melonum Drag. j. Manus Christi cum Perlis ℥ ss Margaritarum prap. Gran. v. Foliorum aurinum. iiij. With the syrupe of Acetosus cirri make an Electuarie. A restoratiue Electuarie. Rec. Conseruae rosarum ℥ ij. ss Conseruae cichorij ℥ ss Sandalorum citrinorum Xyloaloesan. Scr. ss Galangae Scr. j. Cinamomi Scr. ij. ss
Calomi aromatici Conditi Drag. ij. Radicum cichorij conditi Drag. iij. Zinziberis conditi ℥ ss Fisticorum viridium scr. v. Seminum melonum excort. Dra. j. With the syrup of the roots of Cicho∣rie condit. make an Electuarie. A restoratiue Electuarie for those that are hectic, and in a consumption. Rec. Carnis de pectore perdicis optimè Decoctae lib. ss Which being cut into pieces, let it be well beaten in a stone morter; then let there be added. Cinamomi an. Drag.j. Cardamomi an. Drag.j. Garyophillorum an. Drag.j. Folij an. Drag.j. Cubebarum. an. Drag.j. Zinziberis an. Drag.j. Draganti an. Drag.j. Gummi Arabici an. Drag.j. Galangae an. Drag.j. Nucis muscatae an. Drag.j.
Croci an. Drag.j. Macian. sor. ij. Let all be beaten together, then adde Amili. Liquiritiae Pinearum mund. Amygdalarum dulc. Passularum Sebesten Fisticorum viridium an. ℥ ss Incisorum grosso modo Seminum cucurbitae Melonum Cucumeris. Papaueris albi Lactucae Portulacae an. Drag ij. Penidiarum ℥ ij. ss Let all be mixed together with the flesh in a morter; then afterwards take Sacchari albissimi lib. iij. ss being dissol∣ued in the broth of a Partridge, or a fat yong Cockrill, and being added to the rest, make an Electuarie. An other, called Eiectuarium regale. Rec. Conseruae rosarum ℥ j.
Conseruae violarum ℥ ss Fisticorum viridium Drag. vi. Pinearum mund. ℥ j. Amygdalarum dulc. ℥ ss Galangae Scr. ij. ss Cinamomi Garyophillorum an. Drag. ij. scr. ss Macis Ligni aloes an. Scr. ij. And with suger dissolued in Malm∣sey. the nuts being finely beaten, make an Electuarie. A Loch for the Catarrh, procee∣ding of an hot cause. Rec. Conseruae rosanum recentium ℥ iij. Conseruae violarum ℥ j. Muscillaginis psilly Et maluae an. ℥ ss Seminum maluae ℥ j. Pinearum praep. Dra. iij. ss Fisticorum Dra. ij. Passularum Drag iij. Seminum melonum Succi liquiritiae an. Drag. ij. Seminum faeniculi Seminum vrticae an. Drag. j. ss
Draganti Gummi Arab. an. sor. v. Carnem vnius dactili Cinamomi Drag. iij. Rad. ireos Drag. ij. ss Let all be cut and beaten together, and with syrupe of Scabios make a loch. Rec. Loch ad catarrhum subtilem. Capillorum veneris M. j. Seminum papauer is albi ℥ ss Let is bee macerated for a night in running water, then let it be strained, and boile the strayning to the one halfe, cum Aqua de semini bus psisij. Cidoniorum Portulacae Dragagantian. Drag. ij. Gummi Arab. Scr. v. Make a Muscilage, in the which dis∣solue Anili Drag. vi. Sacchari candi ℥ j. ss And make a Loch.
An Electuarie for paine of the sto∣macke, proceeding of a cold cause and wind. Rec. Conseruae rosarum ℥ j. ss Specierum Diagalange Drag j. ss Seminum anisi Carui an. Scr. ss Caryophillorum Scr. j. Xyloaloes Scr. ss Calami aromatici Conditi Drag ij. Zinziberis condit. Drag. iij. Cinamomi Drag. ss Seminum melonum Scr. iiij. Cum Brodio Zinziberis: make an E∣lectuarie. For paine of the stomacke procee∣ding of wind. Rec. Theriacae Drag. iij. Diptami Drag. ss Amcos Daucian. Gran. vi. Galangae Garyophillorum an. Scr. j.
Lignialoes Corallorum an. Scr. ss Conseruae rosarum ℥ j. Conseruae menthae ℥ ss Make a mixture with the syrupe of Mints. There may be added, if need require, two graines of Opium. For the oppilation and obstructi∣on of the Liuer. Rec. Mellis passularum ℥ ij. Fisticorum viridium Drag. ij. ss Seminum melonum Scr. iiij. Cinamomi Drag j. ss Garyophillorum Scr. ij. ss Limaturae eboris Raccepraep. an. Drag. ss Radicum asari Scr. ij. Cyperi Scr. ss Seminum anisi Macis an. Scr. j. Cardamomi Squinanti an. Scr. ss Calami aromatici Conditi Drag. iij. Zinziberis conditi ℥ ss Diacalamenti in
Rotulis fracti ℥ j. With the syrupe of Agrimonie and Calament minus amar. make an Electuary effectuall in Cacexia and Hsposarca. An Electuary for the dropsie and oppilation of the Liner. Rec. Rhabarbari electi Drag. j. Laccaepraeparat. Drag. ij. Xyloaloes Cinamomi Aristologiae longae an. Dra. ss Passularum enucleat. Fisticorum an. ℥ j. Squinanti Asari an. Dra. j. Croci Scr. ss With the syrupe of Cichorie cum Rha∣barbaro, make an Electuarie. For the supersluous fluxe of the Menstrues. Rec. Athanasiae Nicolai Drag. ss Philonij Persici Scr. iiij. Garyophillorum Nucis muscatae
Cinamomi Smaragdi an. Scr. ss Granorum chermes Scr. j. Cum modico acetositatis Citri, make an Electuarie. The dose is from one scruple to two, to bee taken at the entrance into bedde with wine of the infusion of Chermes and Sanders. Pilles for the plague. Rec. Aloes rasatae Drag. iij. Agarici trociscat. Scr. ij. ss Zedoariae Angelicae an. Scr. j Garyophillorum Dra. ss Radicum eryngij Scr. ss Rhabarbari Scr. ij. Croci Smaragdi an. Oran. v. Trochiscorum Alhandal Scr. j. Cum theriaca in aqua vitae aurea dissolu∣ta fiat massa. Pillulae de tribus. Rec. Aloes Rosati Agarici trociscat.
Rhabarbari an. partes aequal. Cum syrupo de Rhabarbaro nostro fiat massa. Pilles for the dimnesse of sight and weakenes of the braine. Rec. Calami aromatici Cubebarum Nucis muscatae Spicae Squinanti Carpobalsami Epithymi. Macis Masticis Asari Garyophillorum Myrobalanorum citrini an. Drae. j. Euphragiae Dra. ss Rhabarbari Sor. v. Turbit. Colocythidis an. Drag. j. ss Agarici Drag. ss Aloes Drag. iij. ss Cum succo faeniculifiat mossa. The dose is from one Dragme to siue scruples.
Pilles against melancholy, and the French Pocks. Rec. Eleborinigri Drag. iij. Turbit albi & gummosi Drag. ij. Agarici albiss. Sor. v. ss Polypodij quere. Epithymi cretens. an. Scr. ij. Dtagridij Drag. ij. ss Trociscorum alhandal. Drag. j. Specierum hierae simpl. Drag. ij. Garyophillorum Scr. j. Let al be incorporated with two Dra. ss of olde treacle and a little water of Fu∣miterra, and make a masse. The dose is from a Drag. vnto soure scruples. Pilles to prouoke the Menstrues. Rec. Corticum cajsia lignae Myrrhae Cinamomi Aristologiae long. an. Drag. j. Borracis Scr. ij. Croci Scr. j. Nigellae Drag. ss Let al be incorporated cum succo sabinae,
and giuen in the water of penny-royall or Camomell; it is an expert medicine. Pilles against the wormes. Rec. Aloes Scr. ij. Rhabarbari Myrrhae an. Scr. ss Trociscorum alhandal gran. iij. Pulueris corallinae Drag. ss With the iuyce of Wormewood make ix pilles; one scruple is sufficient for a child. Trocisci sub lingua in Paralysi. Rec. Radicum acori veri Drag. j. Pyrethri Scr. ij. Zinziberis Garyophillorum Nucis muscatae an. Drag. ss Cubebarum Scr. ss With Sage or water of Lauender make Trocisks of the bignes of a Lu∣pin. To make oyle of Hypericon. Rec. Florum hypericonis ante.
Solis ortum M. iiij. Let them be bruised, and boyled in three pints of redde wine, almost to the consumption of the wine. Then let the iuice be strained out, and put into a glassen vessell; and let it stand in the sunne for eight daies space, and then ad thereunto, Olei veteris lib. j Terpentinae ℥. iiij. Succi scabiosae Succi millefolij Centaurij minoris Agrimonie Barbae siluanae an. ℥ ij. Sanguinis humani Rec.nt extracti ℥ iiij. Vermium terrestrium lot. Vino num. xv. Myrrhae Masticis Sarcrcollae Opoponacis an. Drag. ij. Let all be mixed together, and boiled to the consumption of the iuices. Oleum ranarum. Rec. Ranas maiores excoriatas
Cum capitibus num vij. Florum Camomillae M. j. Let it be boiled in one pint of com∣mon oile vntill the flesh be dissolued from the bones, then let it be beaten, and adding a little more oile, let it be againe boiled. Then make a strong expression, to the which shall be added of Turpen∣tine washed ℥ iiij. Let it be mixed hotte in a morter one ounce and a halfe of this oyle, with so much of Vnguentum de suc∣co Ebuli, mixed together, is good against the goute, paines of the ioynts, and Nerues. An oyle for the Sciatica and paines of the ioynts. Rec. Petrolei Olei philosophorum Succi Ebuli Terebenthinae an. ℥ ss Lumbricorum Drag. vi. Vini matuatici ℥ ss Boile all together at a gentle sire and anoint the place greeued hot.
Vnguentum de succo Ebuli. Rec. Succi radicum ebuli Succi rutae an. ℥ iij. Lumbricorum lot. lib. j. Olei Camomislae lib. ss Olei rosati lib. j. Let the wormes be cut and boiled to the consumption of the iuices; then let it be strained, and adde vnto the strai∣ning Terebinthinae ℥ ij. Cerae ℥ iij. Make an vnguent for the paine of the backe and Nerues, the goute, & sciatica. An vnguent for the French pocks. Rec. Auxungiae canis ℥ j. Auxungia porc. ℥ j ss Theriace veteris ℥ ss Mithridati Drag. iij. Argenti viui cum succo Mercurialis extincti Drag. vij. ss Masticis Olibanian. Drag. ij. Pimpinellae Drag. j. ss
Succi Lap alij acut. De radice expressi Olei laurinian. ℥. j. With a little waxe make an vnguent. Some vse to mix with these kinds of vn∣guents Oleum de euphorbio, because that then there is no euacuation by fluxe at the mouth or vomit, but by feege and sweate. An other vnguent for paine of the ioynts and muskles, procee∣ping from Lues venerea. Rec. Olei irini De keiri Laurini an. ℥. iij. Auxungiae porc. Mascul. lique fact. & colatae ℥ ix. Succorum Radicis ebuli Absinthij Rutae agrestis an. ℥. iiij. Vini maluatici aut. Albi odoriseri & opt. lib. j. ss Let all boile together, to the consump∣tion of the iuices and wine at a gentle fire, then let it be strained, and adde to the straining Bdellij dissoluti in
Aceto Drag. ix. Olibani pulis. sub. ℥ ij. Drag. ij. Euphorbij Pyrethri subt pul. an. Drag. vj, Cerae Q. S. Let all be put toge∣ther, and placed vpon the fire vntill the waxe be liquified, then remoue it from the fire, and still stirre it vp and downe vntill it be cold: then adde Mercurij extincti ℥ j. ss And being well mixed together, make and vnguent; of which, being hot, anoint the members grieued, or tumours, in the morning: then let the patient rest in his bedde being well couered, for the space of three or foure howers, and let him sweate thorowly: then let the sweate be wiped away, and so let him rest for an hower, vntill be he somewhat coole. The patient must be of a spare diet vn∣till the cure be ended, which will be in renne or twelue daies. This vnguent is of such excellency, that it doth not pro∣cure any paine in the throte or month; so that the bodie be well clensed before by purgation and phlebotimie.
Emplastrum de succo Ebuli. Rec. Vnguenti de succo ebuli ℥ ij. ss Olei hypericonis Drag. v. Terebenthinae cum vino Lotae ℥ ss Make an Emplaster: it is good against the paine of the Nerues, conuulsion in the muscles, armes, and feette. An other Emplaster for paine of the Nerues. Rec. Oleorum Camomillae ℥ iij. Hypericonis ℥. j. ss Verbasci ℥ j. Benzoi ℥ ss Croci Drag. j. ss Masticis Drag. ij. ss Camomulae Scr. v. Pingedinis caponis ℥ j ss Medullae vituli Drag. v. Storacis liquidae ℥ ss Terpentinae ℥ ij. Picis colophoniae ℥ j. ss Cerae albae ℥ ss Make an Emplaster. S. Ae.
An Emplaster for the Squinancie and Apostumes of the throte. Rec. Lithargirij ℥ j. Vpon which poure as much oyle of Violets, and Oleum sesaminum as may make it in the forme of an vnguent: then take Muscilaginis psyllij Seminum altheae & Marubij an. ℥ ss Gummi amygdalarum In fusi in aqua coriandri Dic ac nocte, & colati ℥ j. Put thereunto of the flowres of Ca∣momell and Melilot finely powdered, of either Dragme two: at the last let all be mixd wel together, and adding ther∣unto three new laid egges, being well mixed together, and so apply it. An Emplaster that doth conso∣lidate and mundifie. Rec. Tute praeparat. Drag. ij. Cinabaris aut minij ℥ ij. ss Lithargirij auri ℥ j. ss Cerusae ℥ ij. Sanguinis draconis ℥ ss
Camphorae Scr. v. ss Olei rosati lib. j. Cerae albae ℥ iiij. Make an Emplaster, and let it be ma∣laxed with Rose water. Rec. Cerotum stomachale. Masticis pul. ℥ iij. ss Terbenthinae cum aqua Mentae lotae ℥ j. ss Crae albae ℥ iij. These being mixt in a hot morter, let it be spread vpon leather; then cast this following powder thereon. Rec. Garyophillorum Scr. v. Xyloalos Drag. j. Calami aromatici Nucis muscatae an. Dra. ss Corallorum rubeorum Scr. ij. Menthae Scr. ss Make it into powder, and then let it bee couered ouer with redde sarsnat, and inter-bast it▪ and so apply it. In like manner Mastix being wrought in a hot morter with a pestell, may be spread for a Cerot to be applied for the stomack: but it is best if there be added a quantity of oyle of mints, to bring it into the form of a Cerote.
A Declaration of the quality of certaine seedes, hearbes, flowres, rootes, and waters. The foure greater hot seedes. ANisseede. Fenelseed. Cominseed. Caraway seed. The foure lesser hot seedes Yellow Caret seed. Smallage seede. Ameos and Amonie. The foure greater cold seedes. The Gourd seed. The Cucumber seed. The Melon seed. And the Citron seed. The foure lesser cold seeds
Endiue seed. Cichorie seed. Lettisse seed. And purslan seed. The foure hot ointments. Vnguentum martiaton. Vnguentum de althea. Vnguentum Aragon. Vnguentum Agrippae. The foure cold ointments. Vnguentum album. Vnguentum citrinum. Vnguentum populion. Vnguentum resumptiuum. The fiue opening rootes. The Smallage roote. The Fenell roote. The Parsly roote. The Sperage roote. The Kneeholme roote. The foure waters that doe comfort the heart. The water of Endiue. The water of Cichorie. The water of Scabios. The water of Buglosse. The eight hearbs that are laxatiue. Mallowes. Mercurie.
Holyhock. Parietarie. Violets. The Colewort. Branckursin, and Beetes. The three common hot flowres. Camomell. Melilot. And the Lillie. The foure common cold slowres. Violets. Red Roses. Borrage. And Buglosse. ¶ A Table of those simples that are appropriat for all the cheefe parts of the body. Comforters of the head and braine are: CVbebes, Lignum aloes Balme cal∣led Melissa, Acorus, nux Misti∣ca, Roses, Peonia, Spicke, Melilot,
Francumcense, Castoreum, Galengall, Maioran, Staphy sagre, Muske, Rosema∣rie, Stoechados, Hyssop, Camomel, Rue, Ladanum, Capparis, and such like. Things good for the eyes. Eye-bright, Fennel, Cloues, Agrimo∣nie, Celendine. Things good for the heart. Chyperus, Safferne, Cloues, Lignum Aloes, Macis, Myrobalans, Nutmegs, the bone of the Stagges heart, Rosema∣rie, Spodium, Terra Sigillata, Buglosse, Maioran, Cinamon, Corall, Amber, Perels, Balme, Muske, Olibanum, Pista∣cia, Roses, Stoechados, Zedoaria, Borage, and such like. Thing good for the Lungs. Enula campane, Horehound, Liqui∣rish, Iuiubes, Figges, Penidice, Dates, Hyssope, Scabios, Reasons of the Sunne, Maydenhaire, Sebesten, Tragacantum, Almonds, Pistacia, and such like.
Things comforting the stomacke. Wormewood, Cassia lignea, Calamus aromaticus, Cyperus, Safferne, Cuscuta, Fumus terrae, Cloues, Lacca, Lignum a∣loes, Mints, Nutmegs, Origanum, the in∣ward skinne of the stomack of a Cock, Spodium, Olibanum, Corrall, Agrimo∣nie, Galengale, Gallia muscata, Leuisti∣cus, Mastech, of Balme, Myrobalans, Pi∣stacia, Quinces. Things profitable for the liuer. Wormewood, Safferne, Agrimonie, Cloues, Origanum, Liuerwort, Cichory, the greater Plantane, both kindes of Dragons, Spicke, Fenell, Cassia lignea, Cuscuta, Fumus terrae, Gallia muscata, Pistacia, Endiue, Schaenanthos, Polium, Reasons of the Sun, Anisseeds, Sanders. Things profitable for the splene. Walwort, Iuie berries, the Ashe-tree, Harts tongue, Tamarix, Polytrichon, Calament, Cyperus, Acorus, the yellow
Caret; Madder, Capparis, Asarum, the Elder tree, Agrimonie. Things good for the obstruction of the Liuer. Cassia lignea, Maydenhaire, redde Phetches, Dodder, Agrimonie, Fumus terrae, Horehound, Draggons, Aspara∣gus, Stechados, Polium, Rhaponticke, Rhubarbe, Smallage. Things good for the obstruction of the Splene. Rhapontick, Maydenhaire, Cappa∣ris, Dodder, Agrimonie, Fumus terrae, Horehound, Tamariske. Things profitable for the Matrix. Sauin, Sothernwood, Iuniperburies, Maioran, Penniroyall, Staphy sagre, Hypericon, Acorus, Fenell, Saxifrage.
Things profitable for the reines and bladder. Asparagus, Saxifrage, Milium solis, Asarum, Acorus, Filipendula, Genista, Parsly, Polium, Dodder, Fennell. Things profitable to the ioynts. Polium montanum asarum, Aco∣rus, Amonium, Sage, Calament, Pellito∣rie of Spaine, Stoechados, Coste. Of syrups concocting Choler in the head. Syrupus De Nymphaea simplex. De Nymphaea compos. Head. Choler. Syrupus De Papauere simpl. De Papauere compos. Of syrups concocting yellow Choler in the brest. Syrupus Infusionis violarnm. Brest.
De succo violarum. Syrupus violarum. De Imubis. Syr. granatorum Dulc. In the stomacke. Syrupus acetosus simpl. Stomack. Granatorum acid. Oxisacchara simpl. Oxisacchara comp. Syrupus De agresta. Syrupus insusionis rosarum. Syrupus De succo rosarum. Mitta cotoneorum. Syrupus De succo myrtil. Syrupus myrtinus. In the heart. Syrupus De succo acetosae. Acetositatis citri. Heart. Arantiarnm, & limonum. These syrups purge choler simply. Infusion of Roses. Purgers of choler. Infusion of Violets. Ex Floribus Persicorum. De Cichorio cum Rhabarbaro. De Rhabarbaro solutiuus. Mel. mercuriale.
Syrupus De Bryonia. Purgers of phlegme. Syrupus De Hermodactylis. Oxymel Iuliani. Oxymel Elleboratum. Syrupus Diasereos. Syrupus Diacnicu. In the head. Digesters of phlegm. Head. Syrupus De Betonica compos. Syrupus De Staechade Mel anacardinum. De Hyssopo. De prassio. In the brest. Capillorum veneris. De Betonica. Glycyrhizae. De Calamentho. Syrupus. Scabiosae, &c. In the heart. Syrupus Bisantinus. Heart. In the stomacke. Stomacke. Aqua mulsa. Syrupus De absinthio. Syrupus De mentha. Mel Rosarum colatum. Oxymel simplex. Oxymel compositum. Oxymel scilliticum.
In the Liuer. Syrupus Acetosus simplex. De Duabus radicibus. Liuer. De quinque radicibus. De eupatorio. The Matrix. Syrupus De Artemesia. Matrix. Syrupus De Calamentho, &c. Syrups concocting melancholy in the heart: are Syrupus De pomis. Melan∣cholie. Syrupus De succo Borraginis. Syrupus De succo Buglossae. Digesters of melancholy in the Liuer and Splene. Syrupus De Epithymo. Liuer and Splene. Syrupus Lupulorum. Syrupus Splenicus. Syrupus De fumo terrae. Electuaries that doepurge Choler. Electuarium De succo rosarum. Choler. Electuarium rosarum mesuae. Electuarium De psislio. Diaprunum solutiuum. Purgers of phlegme. Benedicta laxatiua. Phlegme.
Diaphaenicon. Electuarium Indum maius, & minus. Electuarium Elescoph. Diaturbith maius. Diaturbith minus. Hiera picra. S. Hiera picra Constantini. With all the other kinds of Hieros. Purgers of melancholy. Diasena, confectio hamech. Melan∣choly. Diapolypodion magistrale. Hieralogodium. Purgers of mixt humours. Catharticum imperiale. Diacarthamum. Diaturbith cum Rhabarbaro. Hiera ruffi. Hiera abbatis. Electuarium de eupatorio. Vomitorium Andreae. Vomitiuum Nicolai. Pilles purging Choler from the head. Pilulae aureae. Head Pillus. Pilulae Arabicae. &c.
From the Liuer. Pilulae ad bilem. Liuer. Pilulae ad febres, Pilulae ex Rhabarbaro. Pilulae sabelliae. Pilulae De eupatorio. Pilles purging phlegme. From the head. Pilulae cochiae. Pilulae hiero cum Agarico. Pilulae ex colocynthide. Pilulae alhandal. Pilulae ex sex rebus. Pilulae ex octo rebus. From the brest. Pilulae hierae cum Agarico. Pilulae ex Agarico. Pilulae Bechichae, &c. From the stomacke. Pilulae Alephanginae. Pilulae ante cibum. Pilulae mastichina. Pilulae stomachicae. Pilulae ex turbith. Pilulae communes. Pilulae contra pestem, &c.
From the ioynts. Pilulae De hermodactilis. Pilulae arthreticae. Pilulae foetidae Pilulae ex sagapeno. Pilulae ex oppanace. Pilulae De sarcocolla. Pilulae benedictae. Pilulae De nitro, &c. Pilles purging melancholy from the Liuer and Splene. Pilulae ex Fumaria. Melan∣choly. Pilulae Inde. Pilulae De Lapide lazuli. Pilulae De lapide armeno, &c. Pilles purging serous and wa∣trish humors. Pilulae De mezaereo. Watrish humors. Pilulae De euphorbio, &c. Pills purging mixt humours from the head: as Pilulae sine quibus. Pilulae Lucis maiores. Pilulae Lucis minores. Pilulae cochiae, &c.
Pil. de hiera simplici Gal. From the stomack. Pil. Assaieret. Pil. Ex turbith. Pil. De aloe & mastice. Pil. imperiales. Pil. pestilentiales. Pil. Aureae ex turbith, &c. Pil. De tribus. Pil. Ex halicacabo, &c. Liuer. Pilles purging all humours: are Pilulae aggregatiuae. FINIS.
A Table expressing the signification of the weights and measures contained in this Booke. A Barley corne. Gran. A Scruple Scr. ℈ A Dragme Drag. ʒ An Ounce ℥ A Pound Lib. A Halfe ss A Handfull M Of euery one a like ana.
