258.5 20179185 23693
❧ The boke of secretes of Albertus Ma∣gnus, of the vertues of Herbes, stones, and certayne beastes. ❧ Also, a boke of the sa∣me author, of the maruay∣lous thinges of the world: and of certaine effec∣tes, caused of cer∣taine beastes. Anno. M. D. LX.
❧ To the reader. SYth it is manifestlye kno∣wen, that thys boke of Al∣bertus Magnus, is in the Italyon, Spanysh, Frenche, and Duche tounges, it was thought if it were trāslated into English tounge, it woulde be receyued wt lyke good wyll and frendshyp, as it is in those partes. Wherefore vse thou thys boke, to mitigate, and alacreate, thy heauy & trou∣blesome mynde, as thou hast ben wont to do, with the boke com∣monly called the boke of For∣tune: for beleue me, what∣soeuer is promysed in ther of thē both, thys, or that, is alonely to ye ende.
❧ The fyrste boke of the vertues of certayne Herbes. ARistotell, the Prince of Phylosophers, say∣eth in manye places, that euerye science is of the kynde of good thynges. But notwithstandyng, the operation sometyme is good sometyme euell: as the science is chaunged to a good, or to an euel ende, to whiche it worketh. Of the whiche sayinge, two thinges be cōcluded: the one, and the first is, that the science of magike is not euell, for by the knowledge of it, euel may be eschued, & good folowed. The secōd thing is also concluded for asmuche as the ef∣fecte is praysed for the ende, and also the ende of science is disprai¦sed, whanne it is not ordeyned
to good, or to vertue. It folo weh then, that euery science, or operation, is sometime good, so∣metime euill, Therfore, because the sciēce of Magike, is as a good knowledge (as it is presupposed) and is somewhat euyll in behol∣ding of causes, and natural thin∣ges, as I haue considered, & per∣ceaued in auncient aucthors: yes and I my self, Alberte haue foūd the trouth in many thinges, & I suppose the truth to be in some parte of the boke of Chirander, & of the boke of Alchorat. ¶ Fyrst therfore, I wil declare of certayne hearbes. Secondlye, of certayne stones. And thyrdely, of certayne beastes, & the vertues of them. Elitropia Marygolde. Urtica Nettell.
Virga pastoris Wylde tasyl. Celidonia Celendyne. Prouinca Perwynke. Mepeta Calamīt or peniroyal Lingua canis Hondes toūge. Jusquianus Henbane. Lilium Lylye. Viscus querci Misseltoe. Centaurea Centorye. Saluia Sauge. Verbena Veruin. Melysophylos Smallage. Rosa Rose. Serpentina Snakes grasse ¶ The firste herbe is called with the men of Chaldea, Elios with the Grekes, Matuchiol, with ye Latynes, Elitropium, with En∣glish men, Marygolde, whose in∣terpretation, is of Elios, that is the Sonne, and Tropos, that is alteration, or chaunge, because
it is turned according to  sunne The vertue of this herbe is mar∣uelous: for if it be gathered, the Sunne beyng in the signe Leo, in August, and be wrapped in the leafe of a Laurell, or baye tree, & a wolues to the be added therto, no mā shalbe able to haue a word to speake against the bearer ther∣of, but woordes of peace. And yf any thing be stolen, if the bearer of the thinges before named, lay them vnder hys head in ye nyght, he shall see the thefe, & all hys cō∣ditiōs. And moreouer, yt the for∣sayd herbe be put in any church, where women be, whyche haue broken Matrymonye on theyr parte, they shall neuer be able to go forthe of the churche, excepte it be put awaye. And thys last poynte hath bene proued, and is
very true. ¶ The seconde herbe is called of the men of Chaldea Roybra, of  Grekes Olieribus, of the Laty∣nes, or Frenchemen Vrtica, of English men, a nettell. He that holsteth this herbe in hys hāde, with an herbe called Mylfoyle, or yarowe, or noseblede, is sure from all feare, & fantasye, or vy∣sion. And yf it be put with the iuyce of houselyke, and the bea∣rers hande be anoynted with it, and the residue be put in water, if he entre in ye water where fys∣shes be, they wil gather together to hys handes, and also ad piscel∣lum. And if hys hande be drawē forth, they will leape agayne to theyr owne places, where they were before. ¶ The thyrde herbe is named of
the Chaldeis Lorumboror, of the Grekes Allamor, of the Latines Uirga pastoris, of English men, Dylde tasyll. Take this herbe, & tempre it with the iuyce of Man∣drake, & geue it to a bytche, or to another beast, & it shall be greate with a yonge one in the owne kynde, and shall bringe forth the byrth in the owne kynde, of the whiche younge one, yf the gome to the be taken, & deped in meate, or drinke, euerye one that shall drynke therof, shall begin anone battayle, and whan thou woulde put it away, geue to him y• iuyce of Ualeriā, & peace shalbe anone amonge them, as before. ¶ The fourthe hearbe, is named Aquilaris, of Chaldeis: because it sprīgeth in the time, in whiche the Egles buylde their nestes: It
is named of Grekes Ualis, of La tines Celidonia, and of English∣men Celendyne. This hearbe springeth in the time, in yt which the swallo wes, and also y• Egles maketh their nestes. If any man shal haue this herbe, with y• hart of a molle, he shall ouercome all his enemies, and all matters in suit, & shall put a waie all debate. And if the before named hearbe, be put vpon the headde of a sycke man, if he should dye, he shal sing anone with a loude boyce, if not, he shall wepe. ¶ The fyfte herbe is named of y• Chaldeis Iterisi, of the Grekes, Uorax, of the Latynes Prouēta∣lis, or Prouinsa, of English men Perwynke, whā it is heatē vnto pouder with wormes of y• earth, wrapped aboute it, and with an
herbe called Semperuina, in En glyshe houslyke, it induceth loue betwene man and wyfe, if it bee vsed in their meates. And if it shalbe put too the mouthe of the beast, called the Bugill, he shall breahe anone in the middes. And this was proued of late tyme. If the sayde confection be put in the fyre, it shalbe turned anone, vnt blue coloure. ¶ The sixt herbe is named of the Chaldeis Bieith, of the Brekes Retus, of the Latines Nepeta, of Englishe men Calamynt, other∣wyse Penyroyal. Take this her∣be and myxe it with the stoone, founde in the nest of the byrd cal∣led a lapwyng, or blacke poluev, and rubbe the bealy of any beast, and it shalbe with byrth, & it shal haue a yong one, very blacke in the
owne kynde. And if it be put to their nosethrylles, they shall fall to the grounde anone as deade, but a litle space after they shal∣be healed. Also if the foresayd cō∣fectiō be put in a vessel of bees y• bees wil neuer fle a wai, but the shall gather together there. And if the bees bee drouned and lyke as they were dead, if they be put in the aforesayd confection, they shal recouer their lyfe after a lit∣tle tyme, as by y• space of one hou re, for it is proporcioned to y• qua litie loste. And for a sure profe, if drowned fl yes bee put in warme asshes, thei wil recouer theyr lyfe aftev a litle space. ¶ The seuenthe herbe is named of y• Chaldeis Algeil, of y• Grekes Drū, of y• Latins Lingua canis,
of English men, Hondes tounge, put thou this herbe with y• hart of a yonge frogge, & her matrice, and put them where thou wilte, and a fter a littel tyme, all y• dog∣ges of the whole town shalbe ga¦thered together: And if yu shalte haue the afore named herbe vn∣der thy formest toe, al the dogges shall kepe silence, & shal not haue power to bark. And if thou shalt put the aforesayde thinge in the necke of any dogge, so y• he maye not touche it with his mouthe, he shalbe turned alwayes round about lyke a turning whele, vn∣till he fall vnto the grounde as dead, and this hath bene proued in our tyme. ¶ The eyghte herbe is named of Chaldeis Mansesa, of y• Greekes Uentosin, of the Latines Jus∣quianus,
of English men Henba¦ne. Take thou this herbe, & mixe it Cum realgalis and Hermoda talis, and put them in the meate of a madde dogge, & he will dye anone. And if thou shalt put the iuyce of it with the aforesayde thinges in a syluer cuppe, it shall be broken very smal. And if thou shalt mixe the aforesayde thinge, with the bloude of a young hare and kepe it in y• skynne of a hare all y• hares will be gathered ther vntill it be remoued. ¶ The nynth herbe, is named of the Chaldeis Ango, of y• Greekes Amala, of the Latines Liliū, of the English men a Lyly. If thou wilt gather this herbe, the sonne beyng in the signe of the Lyon, & wilt myxe it with the iuyce of y• Laurel, or baye tree, & afterward
thou shalt put that iuyce vnder y• dunge of cattell, a certayn tyme, it shalbe turned vnto wormes, of the whiche, if poulder be made, & be put about the necke of ani mā or in hys clothes, he shall neuer slepe, nor shal not be able to slepe vntyll it be put a waye. And yf yu shalt put the aforesaide thing vn∣der the dunge of cattel, and wilt anoynte any man with the wor∣mes bredinge thereof, he shalbe brought anon vnto a fenex. And yf the aforesayd thynge be put in any vessel, where there is comes mylke, and be couered with the skynne of anye cowe of one col∣lour, all the kye shall loose their mylke. ¶ The tenth herbe is called of y• Chaldeis Luperax, of the Grekes Aifena, of the Latines Uiscus querci,
of Englishe men Myssell toe. And it groweth in trees, be∣ynge holed through. This herbe with a certaī other herbe, which is named Martegon, that is Sil¦phion or Laserpitiū, as it is writ¦ten in the Almaynes language, it openeth all lockes. And if the aforesayde thinges, being put to∣gether, be put in the mouthe of anye man, yf he thynke of anye thyng, yf it shoulde happen, it is set on hys harte, yf not, it lepeth backe from his hart. If the afore sayd thyng be hāged vp to a tree with ye wyng of a swallow, there the brydes shalbe gathered toge∣ther wrihin the space of fyue my∣les. And this laste was proued in my tyme. ¶ The eleuenth herbe is named of the Chaldeis Isiphilon, of the
Grekes Orgelon, of the Latines Centaurea, of English men Cen¦tory, which sayth that ths herbe hath a marualous vertue, for yf it be ioyned with the bloude of a female lapwyng, or black plouer and be put with oyle in a lampe, all they that compasse it aboute, shal beleue them selfes to be wit∣ches, so that one shal beleue of an other, that his head is in heauen and his fete in the earth. And yf the aforefayd thing be put in the fyre whā the starres shyne it shall appeare, y• the starres runne one agaynst an other, and fight. And if the aforesayde playster be put to the nosethrilles of any mā, he shall flee away sharpely, through feare that he shall haue, & thys hath ben proude▪ ¶ The twelft herbe is named of
the Chaldeis Colorio, or Colori∣con, of the Grekes Clamor, of the Latines commonlye Saluia, of Englysh mē Sauge. Thys herbe beyng putrified vnder dunge of cattell, in a glasyn vessell, bryn∣geth forthe a certayne worme or byrd, hauyng a tayle after the fas¦shion of the byrde, called a blacke macke or owsyll, wt whose bloud, yf any man be touched in ye brest, he shall lose hys sence or felynge the space of .xv. dayes and more. And yf the aforesaid Serpent be burned, & the asshes of it put in ye fyre, anone shall there be a rayne bowe, with an horrible thunder. And yf the aforesayde asshes be put in a lampe, and be kyndled, it shall appeare yt al the house is ful of serpentes, & thys hath ben pro¦ued of men of late tyme.
¶ The .xiii. herbe, is named of ye Chaldeis Olphanas, of ye Grekes Hiliorion, of ye Latines Verbena of the English mē Veruyn. This herbe (as witches say) gathered, the Sunne beyng in the signe of the Ram, & put with grayne or corne of pyonie of one yeare olde healeth them y• be sicke of ye fal∣lyng sykenes. And if it be put in a fatte ground, after .viii. wekes wormes shalbe engendred, which yf they shall touche any man, he shall dye anone. And if the afore∣sayd thing be put in a doue house or a culuer house, al the doues or culuers shalbe gathered together there. And if the poulder of them be put in ye sunne, it shal appeare that the sunne is blue. If ye poul∣der be put in a place where men dwell or lye betwen two louers,
anone there is made stryfe or ma¦lyce betwene them. ¶ The .xiiii. herbe is named of ye Chaldeis Celayos, of ye Greekes Casini. of ye Latines Melisopho∣los, of English men Smalage: of the which herbe Macer floridus maketh mention. This herbe ga¦thered grene, and tasten with the iuyce of the Cypresse tree of one yeare, put in gruell, maketh the gruell to appere full of wormes, and maketh ye bearer to be gētle & gratious, & to vanquish his ad∣uersaries. And yf the aforesayde herbe be boūden to an oxes neck, he wil folow the whether soeuer thou wilte goo. ¶ The .xv. herbe is named of the Chaldeis Glerisa, of the Grekes Isaphinus, of ye Latines Rosa, of English mē a Rose. And it is an
herbe, whose floure is verye well knowell. Take the grain or corne of it, & the corne of musterd seede and the foote of a Wesel, hanged vp these in a tree, and it will not beare fruyte after. And yf the a∣foresayde thinge be put aboute a nette, fysshes will gather toge∣ther there. And if Magaris shall be dead & be put in the aforesayd commixtion halfe a daye, it shall recouer the lyfe, althoughe it be not forth with yet gotten. And yf the aforesayde poulder be put in a lampe▪ and after be kind led, all men shall appeare blacke as the deuell. And yf y• aforesayd poulder be myxed with oyle of y• Olyue tree, & with quycke brym∣stone, & the house anonted with it, the Sunne shyning, it shal ap∣peare all inflamed.
¶ The .xvi. herbe is called of the Chaldeis Carturlin, of the Gre∣kes Pentaphyllon, of the Laty∣nes Serpentina, in English sna¦kes grasse. Thys herbe is well ynough knowen with vs. Thys herbe put in the grounde, wyth the leafe of the thre leafed grasse engendreth read & grene serpen∣tes, of which if poulder be made, and put in a burnynge lampe, there shall appeare aboundaūce of serpentes. And if it be put vn∣der the head of ani man, frō thēce forth he shall not dreame of hym selfe. ¶ The maner of workg all these aforenamed thinges, that y• effect may be good in their planets is, in their houres, and dayes.
THere be .vii. hearbes, y• haue great vertues, after y• mynd of Alexander the Emperour, and they had these vertues of the in∣fluence of the planets. And ther∣fore, euerye one of theym taketh theyr vertue from the hygher na¦turall powers. ¶ The first is the herbe of y• pla∣net Saturnus, whiche is called Affodillus, Affodilly, the iuyce of it is good agaynst the payne of y• reynes, and legges: let them that suffer payne of the bladder, eat it the roote of it beinge a litle boy∣led. And if mē possessed with euel spirites, or madde men beare it, in a cleane napkyn, they be dely∣uered from their disease. And it suffere th not a deuel in y• house. And if chyldrē that breede theyr teeth, beare it aboute them, they
shall breede them without pain. And it is good that a man beare with hym a roote of it in y• night for he shall not feare, nor be hurt of other. ¶ The seconde is y• herbe of the Sunne, whiche is called Poligo¦nia, or Coraligiola. Thys herbe taketh the name of the Sanne: for it engēdreth greatly, & so this herbe worketh many wayes. Other hath called this herbe Al∣chone, which is the house of the Sunne. Thys herbe healeth the passyons, and griefe of the harte and the sto macke. He that toucheth thys hearbe, hathe a vertue of hys sygne, or Planete. If any man drinke the iuyce of it, it maketh hym to do often, the acte of generation.
And if any mā beare ye rote of it, it healeth the griefe of the eyes. And yf he beare it with him befo¦re he haue anye grief, there shall come to him no grief of his eyes. It helpeth also theym yt be vexed with the phrenesy, yf they beare it with them in theyr brest. It helpeth also theym▪ that are diseased with an impostume in ye lunges, & maketh them to haue a good breath, and it auaileth also too the flyxe of melancholyous bloude. ¶ The thyrde is the herbe of the Moone, which is called Chyno∣states. The iuyce of it purgeth the paines of the stomake, & bre plates, the vertue of it declareth that it is the herbe of ye Moone. The floure of this herbe purgeth great splenes, & healeath them, because this herbe encreaseth &
decreaseth as the Moone. It is good agaynst the sickenes of the eyes, & maketh a sharp sight. And it is good agaynst the bloud of ye eyes. If thou put the roote of it brayed vpon the eye, it will make thy eye merualous clere, because the light of the eyes Propinqua∣tum mystion, is of the substance of the Moone. It is also good to them that haue an euell stomake or whiche can not disgeste their meat, by drinkyng the iuyce of it moreouer it is good to them that haue the swyne pockes. ¶ The fourthe hearbe is called Arnoglossa, plantayne. The rote of this herbe is merualous good agaynst the payne of the headde, because the signe of the Ramme is supposed to be the house of the planete Mars, which is the head of the whole worlde. It is good
also agaynste euell customes of mans stones, and rotten & fylthy byles, because his house is yt sign Scorpio, because a part of it hol¦deth Sparma, that is the seede, which cometh against the stones wherof all lyuyng thinges be in∣gendred, and fourmed. Also the iuyce of it is good too them that be sycke of ye peryous flyxe, with excoriation or raysyng of the bo∣wels, continuall tourmentes, & some bloud yssuyng forth. And it purgeth them that drinke it, frō the syckenesses of y• flyx of bloud, or emoraudes, & of the disease of the stomacke. ¶ The fyft is the herbe of the pla¦nete mercurius, which is named Pentaphillō, in English cinque∣foyle or the .v. leued herbe▪ of o∣thers Pentadactilus, of others
Sepe declinans, of certayn Cali∣peolo. The roote of thys herbe brayed & made in a plaster, hea∣eth woūdes & hardenes. More∣ouer, it putteth away quickely ye swyne pockes, if the iuyce of it be drōken wt water. It healeth also the passiōs or griefes of the brest, if the iuyce of it be drōkē. It put∣teth away also y• to the ache. And if the iuyce of it be holden in the mouth, it healeth al ye griefs of ye mouth. And if any mā beare it wt hym, it geueth wark & help. Mo∣reouer if any man will aske any thing of a king or prīce, it geueth aboūdāce of eloquēce, if he haue it with hym, & he shal optayn it yt he shal desire. It is also good to haue ye iuyce of it, for the grief of the stone, & the syckenes whiche letteth a mā that he cā not pysse.
¶ The .vi. is the hearbe of ye pla∣net Jupiter, & it is named Acha∣ron, of certayn Jusquianus, Hē∣bane. The roote of it, put vppon botches, healeth thē, and kepeth the place from an inflamation of bloud. If any man shall beare it before the grefe come vpon hym he shall neuer haue a botche. The roote of it also is profita¦ble agaynst the goute in the fete whan it is brayed, and put vpon the place that suffereth the payn or grief. And it worketh by ver∣tue of those signes, whiche haue ete, and loke vpon the fete. And if the iuyce of it be dronken with hony, or with wyne & hony soddē together, it is profitable against the griefes of the lyuer, & all hys passiōs, because Jupiter holdeth the lyuer.
Lykewyse▪ it is profitable to thē that woulde do often the acte of generation, and to them yt desyre to be loued of women, it is good that they beare it with them, for it maketh the bearers pleasaunt and delectable. ¶ The .vii. is the herbe of y• pla∣net Venus, and is called Pisteriō of some Hierobotane, id est, Her∣bo colūbaria & verbena, veruen. ¶ The roote of this hearbe put vpon the necke, healeth ye swyne pockes, apostumes behynde ye ea∣res, and botches of the neck, and suche as can not kepe theyr wa∣ter, It healeth also cuttes, & swellīg of the euell, or foundament, pro∣cedyng of an inflamation, which groweth in the foundamēt, and the Emauraudes. If the iuyce of
it be dronken with hony & water sodden, it dissolueth those things whiche are in lunges or lightes. And it maketh a good breath, for it saueth & kepeth the lūges and the lyghtes. It is also of greate strength in venerial pastymes, ye is the acte of generation. If any man put it in hys house or vyne∣yarde, or in the grounde, he shall haue abundātly reuenues, or ye∣rely profytes, moreouer the rote of it is good to all them whyche will plante vynyardes or trees. And infantes bearing it, shalbe very apte to learne, & louing ler∣nynge, and they shalbe glad and ioyous. It is also profitable, be∣yng put in purgations, & it put∣teth abacke deuels. Yet thys is to be marked, that these herbes he gathered fro the .xxiii. daye of
the Moone vntyll the .xxx. daye, beginnyg the gathering of them frome the signe Mercurius, by the space of a whole houre, and in gatherynge make mention of the passion or griefe, and the na∣me of the thynge, for the whiche thou doest gather it, and the selfe herbe, notwithstandinge, lay the herbe vppon wheate, or barleye, and vse it afterwarde too thy nede. ¶ Here beginneth the second boke of the vertues of certayne stones. BEcause I haue spokē now before of ye vertues of cer∣tayn herbes, now in thys present chapter, I will speake of certayn stones, their effectes and maruaylous operations.
Magnes, the lode stone. Ophthalmus Onyx. Feripendamus Sylonites. Topazion Medoria, Memphitis, lapis iuxta mēphim vrbem in Egypto. Abaston Adamas, diamōd. Agathes Alectoria. Esmundus Amaristus. Berillus Celonites. Corallus Cristallus. Elotropia Epistrites. Calcedonius Celidonius. Bagates Bena. Istmos Tabrices. Chrysolitus Gerattides. Nichomai Quirim. Radianus Luperius. Vnces Lazuli. Smaragdus Iris Gallasia Galerites. Draconites Echites.
Tepristites Hyaciuthus. Orithes Saphyrus. Saunus. ☞ If thou wilt knowe whyther thy wyfe is chaste, or no. ❧ Take the stone, which is cal∣led Magnes in English, the lode stone, it is of sadde blw coloure, and it is foūde in the sea of Inde sometime in partes of Almaine, in the prouince, which is called East Fraunce. Laye thys stone vnder the head of a wyfe, & yf she be chast, she wil embrace her hus∣bande, if she be not chaste, she wil fall anone forth of the bedde. Moreouer, yf thys stone be put brayed, and scattered vpon coles, in foure corners of the house, they that be sleapynge, shall flee the house, and leaue all. If thou wilt be made inuisible.
¶ Take the stone, which is called Ophethalmius, and wrappe it in the leafe of the Laurell, or Baye tree, & it is called Lapis obtelmi∣cus, whose colour is not named, or it is of many colours, and it is of such vertu, that it blindeth the sightes of them that stand a∣bout. Constantinus carying this in hys hande, was made inuisy∣ble by it. ¶ If thou wilt prouoke sorowe, feare, terrible fantasyes, & debate. Take the stone, which is called Onyz, which is of black coloure. And the kynd is best which is ful of whyte vaynes. And it cōmeth from Inde, vnto Araby, and if it be hanged vpon the necke, or fyn¦ger, it styrreth vp anone sorowe or heauynesse in a man, and ter∣roures,
and also debate, and this hath bene proued by men of late tyme. ¶ If thou wilt burne any mans handes without fyre. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Fetpēdamus, which is of yelow colour, which if it be hanged vpō the necke of anye man, it healeth Areticū, and also if this stone be greped straytly, it burneth ye hād anone, & therfore it must be tou∣ched lightly, and gently. ¶ If thou wilt kyndle the mynd of any man too ioyes, and make hys wytte sharpe. ¶ Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Sylonites, & it groweth in y• bosome of a snayle of Inde, cal∣led Corcuses, and there is of dy∣uers kyndes of it, of whyte, read,
and purple colour. Other saye, that it is grene, and found in the partes of Parsia. And also olde Philosophers saye, if it be tasted, it geueth knowledge of certayne thinges to come. If it be put vn∣der the tounge, specially in ye first mone, it hath a vertue onely for an houre. Therfore beyng in the x. moone, it hath thys vertue in the fyrst, or tēth houre. But there is mouyng of the order, because, whan it is vnder the tung, if our thought be of any busynes, whe¦ther it oughte too be or no, if it oughte to be, it is fixed stedfastlye to the hart, so that it may not be plucked awaye, if not, the harte leapeth abacke from it. Also Phi¦losophers haue sayd, that it hea∣leth Ptificos, and weake men.
¶ If thou wilt that seething wa¦ter come furth anone, after thou hast put in thy hand. ❧ Take the stone, which is cal¦led Topazion, fro the Ile Topa∣sis, or because it shesheth a simili∣tude of golde. And there be twoo kyndes of it: one is vtterlye lyke golde, and thys is more precious The other kynde is of the colour of saffron, of bryghter colour thā golde is, and thys is more profita¦ble. It hath ben proued in oure time, that if it be put in seething water▪ it maketh it to rūne ouer but if thou put thy▪ hande in it, the water is drawen out anone, and one of our brethren did thys at Paryse. It is good also a∣gaynste Emothoicam et stima∣ticam, or lunatyke, passion or griefe.
¶ If thou wilt pluck of ye skynne of thyne, or an other mans hande. Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Medora, of the region Media in the which the people dwelling are called Medi. And there bee two kyndes of it, blacke & grene. It is sayde of olde Philosophers and also of Phylosophers, beyng in thys tyme, if the blacke be bro∣ken, and resolued in hote water, if any man wathe hys handes in that water, the skynne of his hā∣des shalbe plucked of anone. Philosophers say also, that it is good agaynste the goute, and blyndnes of the eyes▪ and it nou∣risheth hurte and weake eyes. ☞ If thou wilte that a man suf∣fer no payne, nor be tour∣mented.
Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Memphitis, of ye cytye which is called Memphis, & it is a stone of suche vertue, as Aaron & Her∣mes saye: if it be broken, and mix¦ed with water, and geuen to him to drynke, whiche should be bur∣ned, or suffer any tormētes, that drinke induceth soo greate vna∣blenesse too fele, that he that suf∣fereth, feeleth neyther payn nor tormentynge. ¶ If thou wilt make a fyre con∣tinually vnable to be quē∣shed or put out. Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Abaston, & it is of the colour of yron; and there is founde very muche of it in Arabia. If that stoone be kyndeled or inflamed, it maye neuer bee putte oute,
or quenched, because it hath the nature of the fyrst fethers of the Salamandre, by reason of moy∣stye fatnesse, which nourissheth y• fyre, kyndled in it. ¶ If thou wilte ouercome thy enemyes. ❧ Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Adamas, in English speache, a Diamonde, and it is of shyning colour, & very harde, in so muche that it can not be broken, but by the bloud of a gote, & it groweth in Arabia, or in Cypres. And if it be bounden to the lefte side, it is good agaynst enemies, madnes, wyld beastes, venomouse beastes and cruell men, and agaynst chy∣dyng & brawlynge▪ & agaynst ve∣nyme, and inuaston of fanta∣syes, and some call it Diamas.
¶ If thou wilt eschew all peri and all terrible thinges, & haue a stronge harte. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Agathes, & it is blacke, and hath whyte vaynes. There is another of the same kynde, lyke to whyte colour. And the thyrde groweth in a certayn Ile, hauynge blacke vaynes, & that maketh too ouer∣come peryls, & geue strength to y• hart. & maketh a man mightye, pleasaunte, delectable, & helpeth agaynst aduersities. ¶ If thou desire to optayne any thing from any man. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Alectoria, & it is a stone of a cock, & it is whyte as the Christal, and it is drawen out of the cockes gy∣sar, or mawe, after that he hathe ben gelded more th ā four yeares
and it is of y• greatnes of a beane It maketh the bealy pleasaunte and stedfaste, and put vnder the tunge, it quencheth thyrste. And thys laste hathe bene proued in oure tyme, and I perceyued it quickely. ¶ If thou wilt ouercome beastes and interprete, or expounde all dreames and prophe cye of thynges to come. Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Esmundus or Asmadus, it is of diuers colours, it putteth out all poyson, and maketh a man to ouercome hys aduersaries, & ge∣ueth Prophesieng, and the inter∣pretation of all dreames, & ma∣keth a man to vnderstande darke questions, harde to be vnderstād or assoyled.
¶ If thou wilt haue good vnder standing of thynges that may be felte, and that thou maye not be made dronked. Take the stone, whithe is cal∣led Amaristus, and it is of purple colour, and the beste is founde in Inde, and it is good agaynst drū∣kennes, and geueth good vnder∣standynge in thynges that maye be vnderstande. ¶ If thou wilt ouercom thy ene∣myes, and slee debate. Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Berillus, it is of pale coloure and may be sene through as wa∣ter, bear it about with thee, and thou shalt ouercome all debate, & shalte dryue a waye thy enemies and it maketh thy enemye meke. It causeth a manne too be well manuered, as Aaron sayethe, it
geueth also good vnderstādinge. ¶ If thou wilt foreiudge, or coniecture of thynges to come. ¶ Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Celonites, it is of purple, & di¦uerse other colours, & it is foūde in the head of the snayle. If any man will beare thys stone vnder hys tunge, he shal foreiudge, and propheci of thinges to come. But notwithstanding, it hath no ver¦tue, but shynynge, Prima cūfue∣rit accensa, et crescens monoytes in vltima descendente, soo mea∣neth Aaron, in the boke of ver∣tues of herbes, and stones. ¶ If thou wilt pacifie tempestes and go ouer fluddes. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Corallus, Corall, & some be read and some whyte▪ And it hath ben
proueth that it stemmeth anone bloude, and putteth away the fo¦lishnes of hym that beareth it, & geueth wysedom. And this hath ben proued of certayn mē in our tyme. And it is good agaynst tem¦pestes, and perils of fluddes. ¶ If thou wilt kendle fyre. ¶ Take the Christal stone, & put it nygh vnder the cirkle of ye Sū∣ne, that is to sai, against ye sunne and put it nygh any thing yt may be burned, & incontinētly, ye heat of the Sunne shyning, will set it a fyre. And if it be dronke with hony, it encreseth mylke. ¶ If thou wilt that ye Sunne ap¦peare of bloudy colour. ¶ Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Elitropia. It is grene like to the precious stone called the Eme¦raude. And it is sprynkled wyth
bloudy droppes. The necroman∣cers call it Gemma Babylonica, the precious stone of Babylō, by the propre name. But if it be a∣noynted with the iuyce of an her be of the same name, and be put in a vesselful of water, it maketh the Sunne to seme of bloudy co∣lour: as if the Eclypse were sene. The caus of this is, for it maketh al the water to bubble vp vnto a little cloude, which makyng the ayre thycke: letteth the Sūne to be sene, but as it were read, in a thicke color, a little after: ye cloud goeth away, by droppyng doune lyke dew, as it were by droppes of rayne. Thys also borne about maketh a mā of good fame, hole: and of longe lyfe. It is sayd of old Phylosophers: that a man an ointed wt an herbe
of thys name, as we haue sayde before: excelleth with vertue, & Elitropia is found oftētymes in Cypres and Inde. ¶ If thou wilt make sething wa¦ter too be colde, whiche standeth vpon the fyre. Take the stone, whych is cal∣led Epibretes, which put in wa∣ter agaynst the eye of the Sūne, putteth forth fyery beames of ye Sūne. And it is sayd of olde, and new Philosophers, if it be put in seethyng water, the bublyng vp, or seethyng will sone cease, and a litle after, it will waxe colde▪ and it is a shynynge and ruddye stoone. ¶ If thou wilt eschewe il∣lusions and fantasies & ouercome all causes or matters.
¶ Take the stone, which is called Calcedonius, & it is pale, brown of coloure, & somewhat darke, yf thys be perced, & hanged about ye necke, with ye stone which is cal∣led Sinerip, it is good against al fantastical illusions, & it maketh to ouercome all causes, or mat∣ters in suyte, & kepeth thy bodye agaynst thy aduersaries. ¶ If thou wilt be acceptable, and pleasaunte. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Celidonius, & of it there is some blacke, & some some what read, & it is drawen out of the bealye of swallowes. If that whiche is somewhat read, be wrapped in a lynnen cloth, or in a calues skyn, and borne vnder ye left arme hole it is good agaynst madnesse, and olde syckenesses & diseases, & the
sleping, or forgetfull sicknes, and Contra epidimiam, whiche is a scabbe that runneth thorough y• hole bodye. Euax sayth, that thys stone ma∣keth a man eloquent, acceptable and pleasaunt. The blacke stone is good agaynst wylde beastes, & wrathe, & bringeth the busynes begonne to an ende. And if it be wrapped in the leaues of Celydō, it is said that it maketh the sight dull. And they should be drawen out in the moneth of August, and twoo stones are founde oftenty∣mes in one swallowe. ¶ If thou wilte be victorious a∣gaynst thy aduersaries. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Bagates, & it is of diuerse colors The auncient phylosophers say that it hathe bene proued in the
prince Alcides, which how longe he dyd beare it, he had alwayes victory: and it is a stoone of dy∣uerse coloures, lyke the skynne of a kydde. ¶ If thou wilt know before any thyng to come. Take the stone, which is cal∣led Bena, which is lyke a beastes to the, and put it vnder thy tung. And as Aaron and the old Phy∣losophers sayth, how longe thou wilt holde it so alwayes coniec∣turing, thou shalt prophecy thin∣ges to come, and thou shalte not erre in any wyse for iudgyng. ¶ If thou wilt that thy garmēte be vnable to be burned. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Histmos, which as Isidorus say∣eth, is lyke to saffron. And it is founde in a parte of Spayne.
Thys stone bloweth like a payre of bellowes, by reason of y• wyn∣dinesse in it, it is found nygh the Gades of Hercules, that is twoo Iles, by the further partes of Spayn beyond Garnade, and yf thys stone be set in a garment, it can be burned in no wyse, but it shyneth lyke fyre. And some men say: that y• whyte Carbunkle stone, is thys kynde. ¶ If thou wilt haue fauour and honour. ¶ Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Tabrices, and it is lyke too the Chrystall stoone. The aun∣ciente Phylosophers, as Euax, and Aaron, saye of it, that it geueth eloquence, fauoure and honoure, and it is sayde more∣ouer, that it healeth euery drop∣sye.
¶ If thou wilt dryue away fan∣tasies and folishnes. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Chrysolitus, and it is of the same vertue with Attemicus, as Aarō & Euax say, in the boke of the na¦tures of herbes, & stones: this sto¦ne set in golde, & borne, dryueth away folishnes, & expelleth fan∣tasies. It is affyrmed to geue wysedome, and it is good against feare. ¶ If thou wilt iudge the opyni∣ons and thoughtes of others. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Geratides, & it is of black colour let one holde it in his mouthe, it maketh hym that beareth it me∣ry and in sauour, & well estemed with all men. ¶ If thou wilt haue victory and amitie.
¶ Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Nichomai, & it is thesame yt is called Alabaster, and it is of a kynde of Marble, & it is whyte, and shynynge. And oyntmentes are made of it to the buryenge of the dead. ¶ If thou wilt that a man slea∣pyng tel to y• what he hath done. ¶ Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Duirim, this stone is founde in the neste of the lap wynke or blacke plouer. ¶ If thou woulde optayne anye thinge of any man. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Radianus, & it is blacke, shyning through, which whan the heade of a Cocke is geuen to Emotes, or Pysmeres to eate, it is founde a longe tyme after, in the head of the Cocke. And thesame stone is
also called Conatides. ¶ If thou woulde make, that ne∣ther dogges, nor hunters maye hurt any beast, which they hūte. ❧ Put before them the stoone, which is called Luperius, and it will runne soone to the stoone. Thys stone is found in Lybia, & all beastes runne to it, as to their defender. It letteth that neyther dogges, nor hunters maye hurt them. ☞ If thou wilt burne any mās hande without fyre. ❧ Take the stone, which is cal¦led Unces, which we called before Principē apti, whiche is fyre, & it is as fyre. If any mā strayn hard thys stone, it burneth soone hys hande, lyke as it ware burned wt a materiall fyre, whiche is a mer¦uaylous thynge.
¶ If thou wilt cure melancoly, or a feuer quartaine, in any mā. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Lapis lazuli. It is like to the co∣lour of the heauen, and there is within it little bodyes of golde. And it is sure and proued, that it cureth melācholye, and y• feuer quartayne. ¶ If thou wolde make any m witte sharpe and quicke, and aug¦mente hys ryches, and also pro∣phecy thynges to come. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Smaragdus, in English spache an Emeraude. And s very cleare, shynynge throughe and playne, but it that is yerowe is better. It is taken out of the nestes of grypes or grystons, it doth bothe comforte and saue, and beynge
borne, it maketh a man to vnder∣stande well, and geueth to hym a good memory, augmēteth the ry∣ches of hym that beareth it, & yf any man shall holde it vnder hys tung, he shall prophecy anone. ¶ If thou wilt make a rayne bowe to appeare. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Iris, & it is whyte lyke the Cri∣stall, four square or hauinge hor∣nes. If thys stone be put in the beame of the Sunne, by turning backe it maketh a rayne bowe soone to appere in the walle. ¶ If y• wilt make a stone, whych maye neuer be made hote. ¶ Take the stone which is called Gallasia it hath ye figure of hayl▪ & the colour and hardnesse of the Dyamonde, If this stone be put in a very great fyre, it will neuer
be hote▪ And the cause is, for it hath the holes so strat together, that the heate may not enter in the body of the stone. Also Aaron & Euax say, that this stone borne mitigateth, wrathe, lecherye and other hote passions. ¶ If thou wilt knowe whether thy wyfe lyeth with anye other marryed man, or no. ¶ Take the stone called Galeritis whiche is the same that is called Catabres, & it is foūde in Lybia & Brytannia, the most noble yle of the worlde, wherin is contey∣ned both countreis, Englande & Scotland. It is of double colour blacke, & of the colour of Saffrō, & it is founde gray coloured, tur∣nynge to palenesse. It healeth y• dropsey, & it byndeth the bealyes that haue a laske. And Auicēna
sayth, that if thys stone be brokē and wasshed, or be geuē to a wo∣man to be wasshed, if she be not a vyrgyn, she wil pysse soone, if she be a birgyn, she will not pysse. ¶ If thou wilte ouercome thy enemyes. ❧ Take the stone, which is cal∣led raconites, frō the Dragons head, and yf the stone be drawen out from hym alyue, it is good a∣gaynste all poysons, and he that beareth it in hys lefte arme, shal ouercome all hys enemyes. ¶ If thou wilt ingēder loue be∣twene any two. ¶ Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Echites, & it is called of some Aquileus, because the Egles put these in their nestes. It is of pur¦ple color, and it is found nygh ye bankes of the Ocean sea, & some∣tyme
in Persia, and it cōteyneth alwayes an other stoone in it, whiche soundeth in it, whan it is named. It is sayde of aunciēt Philosophers, that thys stoone hāged vp in the left shoulder, get¦teth loue betwene the husbande and hys wyfe. It is profitable to women great with chylde, it let∣teth vntymely byrthe, it mitiga∣teth the peryll of makyng a feard & it is sayd to be good to thē that hath the fallyng syckenes. And as the mē of Chaldea saye, if poy¦son be in thy meat, if the afore∣sayd stone be put in, it letteth y• that meate maye be swallowed doune. And if it be taken out, the meat is sone swallowed doune, & I did see that thys last was exa∣myned sensiblye of one of oure brethren.
¶ If thou wilt make a mā sure. ¶ Take the stone which is called Tepistites. It is founde in ye sea it is shyninge & ruddy. And it is sayde in the boke of Alchorath, yt if it be borne before the harte, it maketh a man sure, & refraineth & mitigateth all seditions, & dis∣cordes. It is sayd also, that it mi∣tigateth the flyes, with lōg hyn∣der legges, which bourneth corn with touching of it, & deuoureth ye residew, soules, cloudes, hayle, and such as haue power of ye frui¦tes of the earth. And it hath ben proued of philophers of lat time and of certayn of oure brethren, that it being put against ye beam of the sunne putteth furth fiery beames. Also yf this stone be put in seething water, the seethinge will soone cease, and the water
wilbe colde a litle after. ¶ If thou wilt that straungers walke sure and safe. ¶ Take the stone, which is cal∣led Hyacinthus, in English a Ja∣cinct, it is of many colours. The grene is best, & it hath reade vay∣nes, & should be set in syluer, and it is said in certain lectures, that ther is two kyndes of it, of ye wa¦ter, & of ye Saphyre. The Jacinct of ye water, is yelow, whyte The iacinct of ye Saphyrs, is very shy¦ning yelowe, hauing no watrish¦nesse, & this is better, & it is writ∣ten of thys, in lecturs of philoso¦phers, that it beyng borne on the fynger, or necke, maketh straun∣gers sure, & acceptable, to theyr ghestes. And it prouoketh sleape, for the coldnesse of it, & y• Jacinct of Saphyre hath properly thys.
¶ If thou wilt be saued from di∣uers chaūces and pestilēt bittes. ¶ Take the stone, which is called Orithes, of whiche there be .iii. kindes, one black, an other grene and the thyrde, of the which, one parte is roughe, and the other playn, and the colour of it is like the colour of plate of yron, but y• grene hath whyte spottes. Thys stone borne, preserueth from dy∣uerse chaunces, and perilles of death. ¶ If thou wilt make peace. ¶ Take the stone, which is called a Saphyre, whiche commeth frō the Easte vnto Inde, & it that is of yelowe coloure is best, whyche is not verye brighte, it maketh peace and concorde, it maketh ye myndepure and deuote toward God, it strengtheneth the mynde
in good thynges, & maketh a mā to cole from inwarde heate. ¶ If thou wilt cure a vyrgyn. ¶ Take the stone, whiche is cal∣led Saunus, frō the Ile Sauna It doth make firme or cōsolidate the mynd of the bearer of it. And beynge bounde to the hande of a woman, trauayling with chydel it letteth the byrth, and kepeth it in bealye. Therefore it is forbid∣den in suche a busynes, that this stone touche a woman. ¶ Thou shalte fynde many other lyke thynges: in the boke of Mi∣nes, of Aaron and Euar. ❧ The manner of doynge these thinges, consisteth in this, that ye bearer for a good effecte, be clears from all pollution, or defylynge of the bodye.
❧ Explicit. ISidorus semeth to saye, ye Licania hath in ye heade  a stone of most noble ver∣tue, & is of whyte colour, whych brayed, geuen to them that haue the strangulion, to drinke, it lou∣seth perfectly the vryne▪ & shortly healeth, it putteth awai the feuer quartayne. Also it taketh awaye a whyte spot or perle in the eye. Also yf a woman with chylde, beare it on her she shall not loose her byrth. Also the fleshe of them sodden, and eaten, is good to thē that haue an exulceratiō, or sore in the lunges, with a consump∣tion of all the body, and spitting of bloude. Also the poulder of the beastes, with the rynde, or barke of trees
with some greynes of pepper, is profitable against the Emerodes and growinge out of flesh about the buttockes. Lykewyse they beynge rawe, brayed with ryn∣des or barkes of trees, breake ry∣pe impostumes. ¶ The thyrde boke of Albertus Magnus, of the vertues of certayn beastes. FOrasmuche as it hath ben spoken in the boke before, of certayne effectes, caused by the vertue of certayne stones, and of their maruelous vertue or operation: nowe we will speake in thys Chapter of certayne effectes, caused of certayn beastes.
Aquila An Eagle Casso   Bubo A shricke owle Hircus A gote bucke Camelus A camell Lepus An hare Expetiolus   Leo A lyon Foca A purpays Anguilla An eele Mustela A wesel Upupa A lapwīg, or black plouer Pellicanus A pellicane Cornus A crowe Miluus A kyte or gleyde. Turtur A turtell Talpa A molle Merula A blacke macke, or owsel ¶ Aquila, the Eagle is a byrde knowen ynough of men of Chal¦dea, it is called Vorax, and of the
Grekes Rimbicus. Aarō & Euax saye, that it hathe a meruaylous nature or vertu. For if the brain of it be turned into poulder, & be myxed with the iuyce of the hem locke, they that eat of it, shal take themselfes by the hear, and they shall not leaue the holde, as long as they beare, that they haue re∣ceyued. The cause of thys effecte is, for that brayne is verye colde, in so muche that it engendreth a fantasticall vertue, shuttinge the powers by smoke. ☞ Casso is a beaste knowen well ynoughe, it is called Rapa, of the Chaldeis, and of the Gre∣kes Orgalo. Aaron sayeth of this. If the feete of it be borne of any man, he shall neuer be vex∣ed, but he shall desyre alwayes
to go for the. Also he that beareth the feete of it, shal alwayes ouer∣come, and shalbe feared of hys enemyes. And he sayde that hys ryght eye, wrapped in a wolues skynne, maketh a man pleasaūt, acceptable and gentle. And yf meat be made of the aforesayde thinges, or poulder geuen to any man in meat, the geuer shalbe greatly loued of hym that recey∣ueth it. Thys last was proued in oure tyme. ¶ Bubo, a shricke owle, is a byrd well ynough knowen, whiche is called Magis of the Chaldeis, & Hysopus of the Greekes. There be meruaylous vertues of thys fowle, for yf the hart and righte foote of it, be putte vpon a man sleapyng, he shall say anone to y• whatsoeuer thou shalte aske of
hym. And thys hath ben proued a late tyme of our brethren. And yf any man put thys vnder hys arme hole, no dogge will barke at hym, but kepe silence. And yf these thinges aforesayde, ioyned together with a wynge of it, he hanged vp to a tree, byrdes wyll gather together to that tree. ¶ Hircus, ye gote bucke is a beast well ynough knowne, it is called of the Chaldeis Erbichi, of y• Ere kes Massai. If the bloud of it be taken warme with vineger, and the iuyce of fenyll, & sodden toge∣ther with a glasse, it maketh the glasse soft as dowe, & it maye be caste agaynst a walle, and not be broken. And if the aforesayd con∣fection be put in a vessell, & the face of any man be anoynted wt it, meruailous & horrible things
shall appere, and it shall seme to  that he must dye. And if the aforesayde thing be put in y• fyre and there be there any man that hath the fallinge sycknes, by put tyng to the lode stone, he falleth anone to the grounde as dead, & if the water of eeles bee geuen to hym to drynke, he shalbe cured anone. ¶ Camelus, the Camel is a beast knowen well ynough. It is cal∣led of the Chaldeis Ciboi, of the Grekes Iphim. If the bloude of it be put into the skyn of y• beast called Stellio, & then set on any mās head, which is lyke a lysard, hauing on his backe spottes like stetres, it shall seme that he is a gyant, & that hys head is in hea∣uen. And thys is sayd in the boke of Alchorath, of Mercury, And yf
a lantern anointed with y• bloud of it, be lyghtenned, it shall  that all men standynge aboute haue Camelles headdes, so that there be no outward light of an other candeil. ¶ Lepus, the hare is a beast wel ynough knowen, of the Chaldeis it is called Ueterellū, and of the Grekes Onollosa, the vertue of it is shewed to be merualous, for Euax and Aaron sayd that y•, fete of it ioyned with a stone or with the head of a blacke owsell, mo∣ueth a man to hardines, so that he feare not death. And if it be bounden to hys lefte arme, he may go whether he wil and he shall returne saufe with∣oute peryll. And yf it be ge∣uen to a dogge to eate, with the hart of a Mesell, fro thens, forth
he shall not crye oute, althoughe he should be kylled. ¶ Experiolus, is a beaste welly. nough knowen, yf the cloue of it be burned & consolidated, & be gy¦uen in meat to any horse, he will not eate for y• space of thre dayes. And yf the aforesayde thinge be put with a littell turpentyme it shalbe cleare, & secondly it shalbe mayde as a cloude & bloud, and if it be casten a litle in water, an horrible thunder shalbe made. ¶ Leo, a Lyon is a beaste well y∣nough knowen, of the Chaldeis called Balamus, of the Greekes Beruth. If thonges of lether be made of the skynne of hym, & a man gyrded with theym, he shall not feare hys enemies. And yf any man will eate of the flesh of hym, & will drynke of hys water
for thre dayes, he shall be cured from the feuer quartaine. And if any parte of hys eyes be put vn∣der a mans arme hole & borne, al beastes shall flee away, bowynge doune their hade vnto their low belyes. ¶ Foca, purpays is a fysh well y∣nough knowen, of the Chaldeis it is called Daulaubur, of y• gre∣ciās Labor, this fysh is of diuers nature. If the tung of it be takē, and be put with a litle of y• harte of it in water, for a suerty fyshes will gather there together. And yf thou wilte beare it vnder thy arme hole, no man shalbe able to haue victorye againste the, thou shalt haue a gentle & pleasaunte iudge. ¶ Auguilla, an eele, it is a fysshe sufficiently knowē. The vertues
of it are meruaylous, as Euar & Aaron saye, for if it dye for fault of water, the harte remaynynge hole, and strong vyneger to takē and it be myxed to the bloude of the fowle, called in Latine Uul∣tur, which some call in English a Grype, and some a rauyn, and be put vnder dūge in any place, thei shall all how many soeuer they be, recouer their lyfe, as they had before. And if the worme of thys eele be drawen out, and put in y• aforesayd confection, the space of one moneth, the worme shalbe chaunged into a very blacke eele of whiche, if any man shall eate, he shall dye. ¶ Mustela, the Wesell is a beast sufficiently knowen. If the hart of thys beast be eatē yet quaking it meketh a man to know thin∣ges
to come, and yf anye dogge eate of the harte wyth the eyes and tūge of it, he shall soone lose hys voyce. ¶ Upupa, y• Lapwynke or blacke plouer, is a byrd sufficiently kno∣wen, of the Chaldeis it is called Boridicta, of the Grekes I son, y• eyes of it born, make a mā grosse or great. And if the eyes of it be borne before a mās breast, all his enemies shalbe pacefied. And yf thou shalt haue the heade of it in thy purse, thou canst not be decei¦ued of any merchaunt. Thys hath ben proued this daye of our brethren. ¶ Pellicianus, the Pellicane is a byrd sufficiently knowen, it is called of the Chaldeis Uoltri, & of the Grekes Iphalari. The ver¦tue of it is meruaylous. If
yonge byrdes be kylled and their harte not be broken, & if a parte of her bloud be taken and be put warme in the mouth of the yōge byrdes, they wil receyue soone a∣gayn lyfe as before. If it be han∣ged vp to the necke of any byrde, it shall flye alwayes, vntyll it fal dead. And the right fote of it vn∣der an hote thyng, after thre mo∣nethes shalbe engendred quycke, and shall moue it selfe of the hu∣moure and heate, which ye byrde hath. And Hermes in the boke of Alchorath, & Plinius doth wit∣nesse thys. ¶ Coruus, called of some a rauē, and of others a crow, the vertue of thys fowle is meruaylous, as Euax and Aaron reherse. If her egges be sodden, & be put agayne in the nest, the rauen goeth sone
to the read sea, in a certayne Ile where Aldoricus or Alodrius is buryed, and she bryngeth a stone where with she toucheth her eg∣ges, and the egges be soone rawe as they ware before. It is a mer∣uaylous thynge to styrre vp sod∣den egges. If thys stoone be put in a rynge, & the leaf of the laurel tree put vnder it, & a man beyng bounden in chaynes, or a doore shutte, be toucheth therwith, he that is boundē shall sone be low∣sed, and the doore shalbe opened. And yf this stone be put in a mās mouth, it geueth too hym vnder∣standing of all byrdes. The stone is of Inde, because it is foūde in Inde, after certayn wyse men, & sometyme in the read sea. It is of diuerse colours, & it maketh a man to forgete all wrathe, as we
haue said aboue in the same stone ¶ Miluus, a Kyte or gleyde is a byrde sufficiently knowen, of the Chaldeis it is called Bysicus, of the Grekes Melos. If the heade of it be taken, and borne before a mans breast, it geueth to h loue and fauoure of all men & womē. If it be hanged too the necke of an henne, she will neuer cease to runne, vntyll it be putte awaye. And yf a cockes combe be anoyn∣ted with the bloud of it, he will not crowe frome thens forthe. There is a certayn stone founde in the knees of thys byrde, if it be loked craftely, whiche if it be put in the meat of two enemies, they shalbe made frendes, and there shalbe made verye good peace a∣monge them. ¶ Turtur, a Turtel is a byrd wel
ynough knowen, it is called Mu∣lon of the Chaldeis, of the Gree∣kes Pilax. If ye hart of thys foule be borne in a wolues skynne, he that beareth it, shall neuer haue an appetyte to committe lechery from thence forth. If the harte of it be burned, and be put aboue ye egges of any fowle, there can ne∣uer yong byrdes be engendred of them from thenceforth. And if ye feete of thys fowle be hanged to a tree, it shal not beare fruite frō thenceforth. And yf an hearye place, and an horse bee anoynted wyth the bloudde of it, and with water where in a Molle was sodden, the blacke heares wyll fall of. ¶ Talpa, a molle is a beast well ynough knowen. The vertue of thys beast is meruaylous, as it
is rehearsed of Phylosophers. If the fore of it be wrapped in ye leaf of a Laurell tree, & be put in the mouth of an horse, he wil flee for feare. And if it be put in the neste of any fowle, there shal neuer co∣me forth yong byrdes of these eg∣ges. And if thou wilt dryue awai molles, put it in a pot, & quycke brymstone kyndled, all the other molles shal come together there. And the water of that decoction maketh a blacke horse whyte. ¶ Merula, a blacke macke or ow sell, is a fowle well ynough kno∣wen, and the vertue of it is mer∣naylous. For if the fethers of the righte wynge of it be hanged vp in the myddes of an house, with a read leafe, which was neuer oc∣cupyed, no man shalbe able too sepe in that house, vntyll it be
put awaye. And yf the harte of it be put vnder the heade of a man slepyng, & he be inquired, he will saye all that he hath done wyth an hye voyce. ¶ The maner of doyng all these beforesayd things, that the effect may be good & profitable is that it be doone vnder a fauourable planet, as Jupiter and Venus, & thys is in their dayes & houres. If any mā therfore will do these thynges truely, withoute doubt he shall fynde truth, & very great effect or vertue, in the before said thynges as I haue proued, & sene oftentymes together with oure brethren in oure tyme. Therfore let hym consider here, which shal fynde plentye of the beforesayde thinges, that he possesseth a lord∣ship and vertues. For if they be
done in their contraries, as a good effect in a maliciouse signe, hys vertue and effecte shoulde be letted for his contrarie, & so good and true thinges should be dispi∣sed. We see very many to be decei∣ued, in sure & true things, which if they hadde knowen, and kepte the qualities of signes or tymes they should haue obteyned their will and effecte, in the aforesayd thynges. ¶ Isidorus semeth to saye, that the asshes of a great frogge, born at a womans gyrdle, restraineth greatly the commynge of a wo∣mans naturall purgation, ¶ And in a probatio, yf it be bost den too an hennes necke, there shall come forth no bloude of her or of an other beast. ¶ Also if it be tempered with wa¦ter,
& the heade or an other place be anoynted with it, heare wyll no more growe there. ¶ If anye man beare a dogges hart on his left syde, all yt dogges shall holde their peace, and not barke at hym. ¶ If any man will bynd yt right eye of an Wolfe on his right sleue neyther men nor dogges maye hurte hym. ❧ Here are ended some secretes of Albertus Magnus of Colone vpon natures, vertues, and ef∣fectes of certayne herbes, stones and beastes, and here foloweth in what hour eue∣ry planet hath hys domi∣nion.
ANd that al thynges which hath ben sayd before, and also shalbe sayd after, may be ap∣plyed more easely, to the effectes of their desire, whiche haue not nning of the sterres. Fyrst thou shalt note, that an houre is takē two wayes, that is equall & vne∣quall. The equall houre is the houre of the dyall or clock, which is always equall. The vnequall houre is considered, after that ye dayes be langer or shorter. For ye Astrologies consider alwayes the tyme, in the whiche ye Sūne standeth vpon hys halfe sphere, and they call it the day or ye bow of the daye, and by the contrarie the might. They diuide that ty∣me whych they cal the day, in. xii equall partes, which be the hou∣res of the same dai, & whatsoeuer
is sayde of the day, thou must vn∣derstand cōtrariwyse of ye nyght. And that thou mayst vnderstāde more clerely, let vs put the case, the Sunne cometh oute frō hys halfe sphere, at .viii. of the dyall▪ we haue vnto the goynge doune of the Sunne .xvii. houres of the dyall, which we maye multiplye by .lx. as there be .lx. minutes of euery houre of the dyal, & we shal haue nyne hundreth, & thre score minutes, whiche we may deuyde by .xii. as there be .xii. houres of the day, applying to euery houre hys portion, & we haue .lxxx. mi∣nutes in an hour. Therfore eue∣ry houre of a daye shal haue. lxxx minutes, which shall conteyn .i. houre & one third of an houre of the dyall. And in all that tyme y• dominion of the planete of that
houre shalbe cōsidered, as the ta∣ble beneth written shall shewe. Euery houre of hys nighte shall not haue but .xl. minutes, which thou shalt vnderstande lykewise of others, according to the rising of the Sunne vpon the ground, because that houre which is in ye myddes betwene nyght and day, which is called the dauning of ye daye is not called the daye, but the daye is properlye vnder∣stande, whan the Sunne may be sene. ¶ Therefore thou wyllynge too consyder the dominion of euerye Planet, for in euery houre, euery Planete hathe hys dominion, thou shalte consider the houres themselfes, after the way aboue written, and so thou maye come to the ende of thy purpose. Also
the begynning of the daye is con∣sidered from one of the clocke of the day, goyng before after noo∣ne. So let the Sondaye be diui∣ded into two equall partes, and it is of .xii. houres, diuide it into two, then the halfe daye shalbe .xviii. and ye fyrst houre folowing shalbe the beginninge of Mon∣daye. ¶ Wherfore, thou shalt consider that Sonday hath his sygne vn∣der the Sunne. Mondaye hath hys signe vnder the Moone. Tuesdaye hathe hys signe vnder Mars. Wednisday hath his signe vnder Mercurius. Thursdaye hath his signe vnder Jupiter. Fryday hath his signe vnder Ve∣nus.
Saturday hath his signe vnder Saturnus. ¶ It is too be noted that euerye true acte must be done vnder his planete. And it is better, if it be done in the propre daye of yt pla∣nete, & in hys owne proprie hour as for an example. Vnder Saturnus, lyfe, building doctrine, mutation. Vnder Jupiter, houor, thing de∣sired, ryches, apparel. Vnder Mars, warre, pryson, ma¦trimony, enemy. Vnder the Sūne, hope, lucre, for tune, he yre. Vnder Venus, frende or felowe∣shyp, way, louer, straunger. Vnder Mercury, losse, det, feare. Vnder the Mone, polayse, dream marchaundyse, thefte.
¶ Of the houres of the dayes and nyghtes. ❧ And fyrst of the houres of Sō daye, in hys fyrst hour, the Sūne in the seconde Venus, in y• thyrd Mercurius, in the fourth y• Mo∣ne, in the fyfte Saturnus, in the vi, Jupiter, in the .vii. Mars, in ye viii. the Sūne, in the .ix. Venus, in the .x. Mercurius, in the .xi. the Moone, in the .xii. Satur∣nus. ¶ But in the fyrste houre of the nyghte Jupiter, in the seconde Mars, in the thirde the Sunne, in the fourth Venus, in the fifte Mercurius, in the .vi. ye Moone, in the .vii. Saturnus, in the. viii Jupiter, in the .ix. Mars, in the x. the Sunne, in the .xi. Venus, in the .xii. Mercurius. ¶ In the first houre of Monday
the moone, in the second Satur∣nus, in the thyrde Jupiter, in the fourth Mars: in the fyft ye Sūne in the .vi. Venus: in the .vii. mer¦curius, in the .viii. the moone, in the .ix. Saturnus, in the .x. Jupi¦ter, in the .xi. mars, in the .xii. the Sunne. ¶ But in the first houre of Mon¦dayes night Venus, in ye seconde mercurius, in the thyrde y• mone, in the fourthe Saturnus, in the fifte Jupiter, in the .vi. Mars, in the .vii. the Sunne: in the .viii. Venus: in the .ix. Mercurius: in the .x. the Moone: in the .xi. Sa¦turnus: in the .xii. Jupiter. ¶ In the fyrst houre of Tuesday Mars, in the second the Sunne, in the thirde Venus, in the .iiii. Mercurius, in the fift the mone in the .vi. Saturnus, in the .vii.
Jupiter, in the .viii. Mars, in y• ix. the Sunne, in the .x. Venus, in the .xi. Mercurius, in the .xii. the Moone. ¶ But of Tuesdayes nyghte in the fyrste houre Saturnus, in the seconde Jupiter: in the thyrde Mars, in y• .iiii. the Sūne: in the fyfte Venus: in the syte Mercurius: in the seuenthe the Mone: in the .viii. Saturnus, in in the .ix. Jupiter: in the tenthe Mars: in the .xi. the Sunne, in the, xii. Venus. ¶ Of the Wednisday, in his first houre Mercurius, in the seconde the Moone, in the thyrde Satur¦nus, in the fourthe Jupiter, in fift Mars, in the sixt the Sunne in the seuenthe Venus, in the eyghte Mercurius, in the nynth the Moone: in the .x. Saturnus
in the .xi. Jupiter, inye .xii. Mars. ¶ But on Wednisday at nyghte, in the fyrste houre the Sunne, in the seconde Venus, in ye .iii. Mer∣curius, in the .iiii. the Moone, in the .v. Saturnus, in the .vi. Jupi¦ter, in the .vii. Mars, in the .viii. the Moone, in the .ix. Venus, in the .x. Mercurius, in the .xi. the Moone, in the .xii. Saturnus. ¶ On Thursdai in the fyrst hour Jupite, in the second Mars, in y• iii. the Sunne, in the .iiii. Venus in the .v. Mercurius, in the .vi. ye Mone, in the .vii. Saturnus, in the .viii. Jupiter, in ye .ix. Mars, in the .x. the Sūne, in the .xi. Ve∣nus, in the, xii. Mercurius. ¶ But on Thursday nyght in ye fyrst houre the Moone, in ye secōd Saturnus, in the. iii, Jupiter: in the .iiii. Mars: in ye▪ v. the Sūne:
in the .vi. Venus: in the .vii. Mer¦curius: in the .viii. the Moone: in the .ix. Saturnus: in ye .x. Ju∣piter: in the .xi. Mars: in the .xii. the Sunne. ¶ On Fryday at one of the clock Venus: at .ii. Mercurius: at .iii. the Moone: at .iiii. Saturnus: at .v. Jupiter: at .vi. mars: at .vii. the Sunne: at .viii. Venus: at. ix Mercurius: at .x. the Moone: at xi. Saturnus: at .xii. Jupiter. ¶ But on Frydayes night at one of the clocke Mars: at .ii. ye Sūne at .iii. Venus: at .iiii. mercurius at .v. the Moone: at .vi. Satur∣nus: at .vii. iupiter: at .viii. mars at .ix. the Sunne: at .x. Venus: at. xi, Mercurius: at twelfe the Moone. ¶ On Saterday at one of ye clock Saturnus: at, ii. Jupiter: at .iii.
Mars: at .iiii. the Sunne, at .v. Venus: at .vi. Mercurius at .vii. the Moone: at .viii. Saturnus, at .ix. Jupiter: at .i. Mars, at .xi. the Sunne: at .xii. Venus: ¶ But on Saturdayes night at one of the clocke Mercurius, at ii. the moone, at thre Saturnus at .iiii. Jupiter, at. v, mars. at. vi the Sunne, at .vii. Venus, at viii Mercurius, at .ix. the Moone, at .x. Saturnus, at .xi. Jupiter, at .xii. Mars. ¶ And not that Jupiter and Ve∣nus be good, Saturnus & Mars, euell, but the Sunne and the Moone in a meane, and Mercurius is good with good and euell wt euell. (*)
¶ Here beginneth the boke of ye meruayles of the world, set forth by Albertus Magnus. AFter it was knowē of Phylosophers, that all kyndes of thinges moue and inclyne to them selfe, because an actiue and rationable vertue is in them, whiche they guyde, and moue aswell to them selfes as to others, as fyre moueth to fyre, & water to water. ¶ Also Auicenna sayde, when a thyng stādeth longe in salte, it is salte, & if any thynge stande in a stynkynge place, it is made styn∣kynge. And yf anye thynge stan∣deth with a bold man, it is made bolde, yf it stande with a feare∣full man, it is made fearfull.
And if a beast companieth wt mē, it is made tractable & famyliar. And generally, it is verefied of them by reasons, and dyuerse ex∣perience, that euery nature mo∣neth to hys kynde, and their vere fyenge, is knowen in the firste qualities, and lykewyse in the se¦conde and the same chaunceth in the thyrde. And there is nothing in all dispositiōs, which moueth to it self, according to his whole power. And this was the rote, & the seconde begynning of ye wor∣kes of secretes, and tourne thou not a way the eyes of thy mynde. ¶ After that thys was graffed in the myndes of the Philosophers and they founde the disposition of naturall thynges. For they knew surely that greate colde is graffed in some, in some greate boldenes,
shulde not deny any meruaylous thing although he hath no rea∣son, but he ought to proue by ex∣perience, for the cause of meruai∣lous thinges are hidde, and of so diuerse causes goyng befor, that mans vnderstandyng after Pla∣to, maye not aprehende them. Therfore the lode stone draweth yron to it, and a certayne other stone draweth glasse. So meruay¦lous thinges are declared of phy¦losophers to be in thinges by ex∣perience, whyche no man ought to denye. And that is not proued after the fashion of philosophers whych founde that, for the phy∣losophers saith, that the palme is a tree, and it hath the male and the female, therfore whan the female is nygh the male, thou seest that the female, bowe
doune to the male, and the leafe & braunches of it are made softe, and bowe doune to the male. ¶ Therefore whan they see that, they bynde ropes fro the male to the female, Reddit ergo erecta, su¦per seipsam quasi adepta sit Mas¦culo per continuationem umis Virtutem masculi. Not withstā∣dinge many of the auncient auc∣thors, hath shewed meruaylous thynges, receyued now of the cō∣mon people, and takē for a truth. Therfore I shal shewe to the cer∣tayn thynges, that thou mayste stablish thy mynde vpon them, & to knowe it for a certayn truthe, which reason can not stablish by feling, because the foresaid helpe in them. And therfore it is, that the sonne of Messias sayde in the boke of the beastes. It a woman
great with chylde, put on the ap¦parell of a man, & a man put it on after, before he wasshe it, if he haue the feuer quartayne, it wil departe from hym. ¶ And it is sayde in the boke of beastes, that the Lybarde eeth ye pryuy membres of a man, and in an other place it is sayde t Car∣neum, yf an olde man be buried in a doue or culuer house, or be put where doues or culuers inha¦bite or reste, there they are multi¦plyed, vntill it be full of them. ¶ And in the boke De cyriaca of Galene, it is sayde that the Ser∣pent which is called Regulus in Latin, a cokatryce in Englishe, is some what whyte, vpō whose head there be thre hayres, & whā any mā seeth them he dieth sone And whan any mā or any other
lyuing thing heareth his whiste lynge, he dyeth. And euery beaste that eateth▪ of it beinge deade, dieth also. And aristotel sayde, where there is sommer .vi. Mo∣nethes and lykewise winter, the¦re is a floud in the which adders are founde, whose property is, that they neuer se them selues but they dye, but whan they be dead, they hurt not. And aristo∣tele put craftly in the mind of A∣lexander, that he shoulde take a greate glasse, and walke wyth it towarde them, & whan they dyd beholde them selues in the glasse they dyed▪ This sayng of Aristo∣tel was not beleued of some men For Auicenna sayd agaynst Ari∣stotel, yf any man dyd see it, he dy¦ed, wherefore there is no truthe in his speache. And they sayde, if
anye man wolde take of the myl¦ke of a woman, gyuing souke to her owne doughter of two yere olde, and let it be put in a glasen bessel, or hanged vp in a doue or culuer house where they goe in and forth, doues will abyde & be multiplyed there, vntyll they bee innumerable. And thei said, whā the mouth of a deade man is put vpon hym whiche complayneth of hys beallye, hys beally is hea∣led. ¶ And Alexander sayd, whā any¦thing is taken out of the nauyl of an infant, which cometh forth if it be cut, and be put vnder the stone, of a rynge of syluer or gold than the passion or grief of the o like cometh not in any wyse too hym that beareth it. ¶ And Galen saith, whā ye leafes
of Sorell be eaten, they louse the beally. And whan the sede of it is dronken, it louseth the beally. And it is sayde, that the roote of Sorell hanged vppon hym that hath the swyn pockes, it helpeth hym. ¶ And Philosophers saye, whan thou wilt that a beast returne to hys lodging, anoint his forehead with Sepesquilla, and it wil re∣turne. ¶ And Aristotel sayd in the boke of ye beastes. If any mā put wrou¦ght wax vpon the hornes of co∣wes calfe, it wil goo with hym whersoeuer he wil wtout labour And if any man anointe the hor¦ne of kye with waxe and oile or pitche ye payne of their fete goeth away. ¶ And if any shall anoynte ye tun¦ges
of, oxē with any talowe, they neither taste nor eate meate, but thei shal die for hūger, except it be wyped away wt salte & vyneger. ¶ And if any man anoynte ye ne∣ther partes of a cocke with oyle, he nether wil, nor may treade an henne. ¶ if thou desire that a cocke ro∣we not, anoynte his head & fore heade with oyle. ¶ It is said in ye boke of Archige nis quando cam illa, of ye hare is hanged vpon him that suffereth the colike, it profiteth hym. ¶ And Aristotel sayd ye Emerau∣des goeth away frō hym, whiche sitteth vpō the skynne of a Lyō. ¶ And if the dunge of an hare be broken vnto poulder and caste abrode vpon a place of Emotes or Pismeres, than the Pismeres
leaue there place. ¶ Phylosophers sayd, if the head of a goote be hanged vppon hym which suffreth swyne pockes, he is healed by it. If thou wylt that a woman be not viciate nor desy¦re men, take the priue member of a wolf, and the heares which do grow on the chekes or eye bright of him, and the heares whiche be vnder his berde, and burn it all, & geue it to her in a dryncke whē she knoweth not, and she shall desyre no other man. And they said, whan a wom ādesyreth not her husbande, then let her hous∣bande take a lytle of the talowe of a bucke gote, meane betwene lytle and great, and let hym ano∣ynte his priuye member with it, and do the acte of generacion she shal loue hym and shal not do the
acte of generation afterwarde wyth anye ¶ And they sayd yt whē the snail is poysened, it eateth the herbe called organy, and is healed, and therfore thei know that the her∣be called organny, hath lyen vn∣der poyson. Also it is sayd when the wesel is poynsoned of a ser∣pent it eateth rewe, & they know by this, that rewe is contrarye to the vemyne of serpentes. ¶ And a mouse put vnder the prickynge of scorpyons, delyue∣reth a man bycause she is contra¦rye and feareth not hym. ¶ And philosophers haue inuen¦ted, that if anye womā is barray¦ne whā ther is put to her a thīg that maketh a woman barrain, the woman is not barayne, but fruteful, and contrariwyse.
¶ And it is sayde that when a sponge is caste in wyne mixed wt water and after drawen forthe & strayned and wrynged, the water commeth sorth of it, & the wyne remayneth, yf it be not mixed, nothynge commeth forth. ¶ Taberencis sayd, yf a stone be hanged vppon a sponge, on the necke of a chylde, whiche cou∣gheth with a vehement or great cough, hys cough is mitigated & restrained. And whā it is put on the heade of an asse, or in to hys foundamente, Scarabeus, that is a flye with a blacke shelle, y• breadeth in coweshardes and is blacke, called a bitel, cutteth him and he turneth, vntyll it be dra∣wen from hym. ¶ It is sayde also, that yf anye stone be bounden to the tayle of
an asse, he wil not bray nor rore. ¶ If the hayres of an asse be ta∣ken, whiche are nyghe hys priuy membre, and be geuē to any mā, brokē in with any kynd of wyne in a dryncke, he beginneth anone to fart. Like wyse yf any man ta∣keth the egges of Pysmeres and breaketh them, and casteth them into water, and geue thē to any man in a drincke, he ceaseth not anone to farte, they do lyke wyse with wyne. ¶ And it is sayde, yf thou wilte make a ryng of a rodde of a fresh myrte tree, & put it on thy rynge fynger, it mitigateth or extine∣teth the impostume vnder the arme holes. ¶ In the boke of Aristotel, it is sayde that the roote of whyte henbane, whan it is hanged vpō
a man suffring the colyke, it is profytable to him. And whā, sal¦te Peter is put in a vessel, and by neger vpō it, it wyl boyl or seeth mightely without fyre. ¶ It is sayd also in the boke of hermes, whan leeke sede is castē vpon vineger, the eigrenes or so∣wrenesse of it goeth away ¶ Belhinus saide, whan thou ta¦kest the white of an egge, & alu∣me & anoyntest a clothe with it, and washest it of wyth water of the sea: being drye, it letteth the dyre to burne. ¶ An other sayde, whā redde Ar∣senicum, and alume are taken, & broken, and confected, or made with the iuyce of the herbe cal∣led houslyke, and the galle of a bull, and a man anoyteth hys handes wyth it, and after taketh hote
quyckened. And whan thou bu∣ryest the flye called a bytel amōg roses, it dyeth, if thou burye it in dunge, it quyckeneth. ¶ And philosphers sayde that whan the fethers of Eagles be put with y• fethers of other fow∣les, they burne and mortefye thē for as he ouercometh in hys lyfe all byrds, & hath rule ouer them so y• fethers of Eagles are deadly to all fethers. ¶ And Phylosophers say, yf the skynne of a shepe be put in anye place with the skynne of Adib, it gnaweth and consumeth it. And he that putteth on him clothe of the wolle of a shepe whiche hath eaten Adib, itchyng ceaseth not from hym, vntyll he put it of. ¶ And yf thou parfume an house or place with the lunges or ligh∣tes
of an Asse, thou clengest it frō euery Serpente and Scorpion. And of thys Philosophers know that it is good agaynst poyson. ¶ Tabariences sayth: yf the tūg of the Lapwynge or blacke plo∣uer be hanged vpon a walle Ob∣liuionem reddit eum memorē et alienationes. ¶ And it is sayde in the booke of Cleopatra. If a woman haue no delectation with her husbāde take the marro we of a wolfe, of hys lefte foote, and beare it, and she will loue no manne but him. And it is sayde, whanne the lefte hyppe or haunche of a male ostri¦che is taken and boyled, or see∣thed with oyle, and after the be∣gynnynge or grounde of hayres are anoynted with it, they grow neuer agayne.
¶ Architas sayd, yf the hart of a serpent be taken, whan he liueth and be hāged vpon a man, being sycke of the feuer quartayne, it plucketh it vtterly awaye. And ye Adders skynne, whan it is strayt bounded vpon the ankle of a wo¦man, it haisteth the byrth, but af¦ter the byrth, it must be remoued away anone. ¶ The tethe of all serpētes, whā thou pluckest them furthe by the rootes, as longe as the serpente lyueth, yf they be hanged vpon a man, sycke of the feuer quartain they take awaye the feuer quar∣tayne from hym, and yf the Ser∣pent be hāged vpon a roth aking it profiteth. And yf a serpēt mete with a woman wyth chylde, she bryngeth furth her chylde before it be perfecte. And yf it meete
with her when she trauayleth of chylde, it hasteth her byrthe. ¶ And they sai, if thou wilt take the eye tothe of the beaste called Crocodilus in Latine, in english a Crocodile out of ye vppermore palase of the lefte side of his mo∣uth, and hange it on a mā being sicke of ye feuers, it healeth hym, and the feuers will not returne agayne to hym. And they haue sayde, that the Lyon is afrayde of a white cocke. And again that he feareth the fyre. And he that is anoynted with the talowe of the reynes of the talowe of y• rey nes of the Lyon, feareth not too go amonge beastes, & all beastes are afrayed of the Lyon. And he that anoynteth hys bodye with hares dunge, wolfes be farayde of hym.
¶ Et si teritur atsenicum citri∣num, and be myxed with mylke if a flye fall vpon it, it dyeth not. ¶ If thou wilt take y• right fote of a snayll, and hange it vpō the right fote of a diseased mā wyth the gout, it profiteth it: like wise if thou hange vp the lefte fote of a snayll to thy lefte fote, diseased with the goute. And so the hāde of it is profitable to the hande & the fynger, to the fynger. And yf a fyre be kendled before a man yt is brosten of grene woode of fygge trees, his stoones will make a noyse or bounsinge. ¶ And it is sayde in the booke of hermes, whan bothe the eyes of the Ber bee bounden in lynen cloth, vppon Sinistrum adiuto∣rium, they put awaye the feuer quartayne. And it is sayde, if the
wolfe se a man and the mā se not hym, the man is astonyed & fea∣reth, and is hoorse. And therfore if anye man beareth the eye of a wolfe, it helpeth to victorye, too boldenes, vanquyshing and fear of hys aduersary. And it is sayde, if a ryng be made of the whyte houfes of an Asse, & he that hath the falling syckenes putteth it on, suffreth not the fal∣lyng syckenes. ¶ And they sayde, whan y• wylte that flyes come not nyghe thy house, than put Condicim et op∣pium, in white lyme, and after make thy house whyte with it, thanne flyes shall in no wyse en∣ter. ¶ Whan thou wilt that thy wife or wenche, shew to the al that she hath done, take the hart of a doue
and the head of a frogge, and dry them both, and braye them vnto poulder, and laye them vpon the breast of her sleping, and she shall shewe to y• all that she hath done, but whan she shall wake, wype it awaye from her breast, that it be not lyfted vp. ¶ And they saye, yf any man put a Diamonde vnder the heade of a woman sleapinge, she manife∣steth, if she be an aduoutrer, for if it be so, she leapeth backe out of y• bedde afrayde, and yf not, she em∣braceth her husband with great loue. ¶ And they say, that an Asse skyn whan it is hanged vpon chyldrē, it letteth them to be afrayde. ¶ Architas sayth, yf the waxe of the left eare of a dogge be take n, and be hanged vppon men sycke
in the feuers that come by cours or fyttes, it is verye profitable, and specially to the feuer quar∣tayne. ¶ And Phylosophers saye, that some kynde or singulare, whiche neuer had sickenesse, is profita∣ble to euery sickenes, and he that had neuer payn, helpeth and hea¦leth a man from it. ¶ And whan the house is perfu∣med with y• lefte houfe of a mule, flyes remayne not in it. ¶ And yf the harte, eye or brayne of a lap wynge or blacke plouer, be hanged vpon a mans necke, it is profitable agaynste forget∣fulnes, and sharpeth mās vnder∣standynge. ¶ If a womā maye not conceyue take an heartes horne, turned in∣to poulder, & let it be myxed with
a cowes gall, let a woman kepe it about her, and let her do y• acte of generation, and she shall con∣ceyue anone. ¶ A grosse and styffe hayre of a mares tayll, put vppon a doore suffereth not zauzales to enter. ¶ The tothe of a fole or colte of one yeare olde, put in the necke of a chylde, maketh hys tethe to breede without payne. ¶ The tothe of a mare put vpon the head of a man, being madde, deliuereth hym anone from hys furye. ¶ If a woman may not conceiue let a mares mylke be geuē to her, not knowing, let her do the acte of generation in that houre, and she shall conceyue anone. ¶ The houfe of an horse perfu∣med in a house, dryueth awaye
myse. Thesame chaunceth also by the houfe of a Mule. ¶ That all the hote water come furth of a caldrō. Take or blache, that is Terra francisca, wt pitch caste it in water, and it shal come forth all. That▪fyre may come forth of water, take the shel of an egge and put in it quycke brym∣stone & lyme, & shyt the hole & put it into water and it will kendle. ¶ And it is sayd, if the herbe Cā∣phere, be put vpō water, it is kēd led and burneth in the water. ¶ That thou maye take byrdes with thy handes, take any corne very well steped in the dregges of wyne and in the iuyce of hēlocke and caste it too the byrdes, euery byrde that tasteth of it, is ma∣de droncken, and looseth her strength.
¶ And they say, yf any man be a∣noynted with y• mylke of an Asse, all the flyese of the house wil ga∣ther to hym. ¶ To write letters or bils, which be not readde but in the nyghte, take the gall of a snayle or mylk of a so we, and put it too the fyre, or with water of a worme shy∣nyng late. ¶ If ye myngell together many whites of hēnes egges, a moneth after they are made glasse, & hard as a stoone, and of thys beynge after thys fasshion is mayde a Sophisticall precious stone, cal∣led Topasius, yf it bee conioy∣ned before wyth Saffron or read earthe. ¶ Like wise, if the fome which is found about the stones of a hart, or horse, or asse, beynge weery,
be myxed with wyne, and ye wyne be geuen to any man to drynke, he shall abhorre wyne for a moo∣neth. ¶ And yf any manne shall haue many eeles in a wyne vessell, and they be suffered to dye in it, if any man drynke of it, he shal abhorre wyne for a yeare, and by chaūce euermore. ¶ And it is sayde, yf a rope be ta∣ken, with whyche a theefe is or hath ben hanged vp with, and a litle chaffe, which a whyrle wind lifted vp in the ayre, and let them be put in a potte, and set among other pottes, that pot shal breake all the other pottes. ¶ Also take thou a litle of the aforesayd rope, and put it on the instrument, with which y• breade is put in the ouen, whan he that
shoulde put it in the ouen, should put it in, he shall not be able too put it in, but it shall leape out. ❧ That men maye seme with∣out heades. TAke an Adders skynne and Auri pigmētum, and greke pitche of Reuponticum, and the waxe of new bees, and the fat or greace of an Asse, and breake thē al, and put them in a dul sething potte full of water, and make it to sethe at a slowe fyre, and after let it waxe colde, and make a ta∣per, and euery man that shall see light of it, shall seme headlesse. ¶ That men maye seme to haue the visage or countenaunce of a dogge. Take the fatte out of the eare of a dogge, anoynte with it a litle newe sylke, put it in a new
lampe of greene glasse, and put ye lampe amonge men, & they shall see the vysage of a dogge. ¶ That men maye seme to haue thre headdes. ¶ Take of the hayr of a dead asse, and make a rope, & drye it, & take the mary of the principall bone of hys ryght shoulder, and myxe it with virgyns waxe, & anoynte the corde, and put it vpon ye thras sholdes of the house, they yt come into the house shall seme to haue thre headdes, and they that be in the house shall seme Asses to thē that enter in. ¶ If thou wilt that a mans head seme an Asse head. ¶ Take vp of the couering of an Asse & anoynte y• mā on his head. ¶ If thou wilt that a chicken, or other thing leape in the dyshe.
¶ Take quycke syluer and y• poul der of Calamite, and put it in a bottel of glasse wel spotted, & put it with in a hote thing. For se∣ynge quycke siluer is hote, it mo∣ueth it selfe, & maketh it to leape or daunce. ¶ If thou wilt se that other mē can not. ¶ Take of the gall of a male cat, and the fat of an henne al whyte and myxe theym together, and a∣noynt thy eyes, and thou shalt se it that others can not see. ¶ If thou wilte vnderstande the voyces of byr∣des. ¶ Associate with the two felows in the .xxviii. daye of October, & go in to a certayne woode wyth dogges as too hunte, and carye home wyth that beaste, whyche
thou shalt fynd first, and prepare it with the harte of a Foxe, and thou shalt vnderstand anone the voyce of byrdes or beastes. And if thou wilte that any other lyke∣wise vnderstande, kysse hym, and he shall vnderstande. ¶ If thou wilt louse bondes. ❧ Go into the woode, and loke where ye Pye hath her nest with her byrdes, and whan thou shalt be there, clymme vp the tree, and bynde about the hole of it wher∣soeuer thou wilt. For whan she seeth the, she goeth for a certayn herbe, whiche she will put to the binding, and it is broken anone, and that herbe falleth to ye groūd vpō the cloth, which thou should haue put vnder the tree, and be y• present, and take it. ¶ In the nest of the lap wyng or blacke
vnder the earth within, al which be in the lodgene, shall seme as thei ware great men in the shape of horses and Elephantes, and it is a very meruaylous thynge. ¶ An other perfuming, which whā thou makest, thou seest out∣wardly grene men, and men of many shapes and infinite mer∣uayles, whiche are not discerned for their multitude. ¶ Take Timar, that is ver∣milion, and the stoone Lazulus and Peneroyall of the moūtains and beate it all to poulder, and syfte it, myxe it with the fat of a Dolphyn fyshe, horse or Elephāt make graynes or cornes after ye fasshion of ryse and drye them in a shado we, perfume in it whan thou wilt and it shalbe don, that is sayde.
¶ A perfumynge too see in oure seape what thing is to come of good and euell. ¶ Take the bloude of an Asse congeled, and the fatte Lupi ceri¦ni, and a swete incēse or gumme called Storax and also Storax, & also styrax, gather it altogether by equall weyghtes, and let thē be mixed, and graynes or cornes be made therof, and let the house be perfumed with thē, than thou shalt se hym in thy sleape, yt shall shewe to the all thynges. ¶ A maner of makyng a matche of a candell, or cādel weke, which whan thou shalt kendle, yu shalte see men, in what shape soeuer thou wilt. ¶ Take the eyes of an shriche owle, the eyes of a fyshe, which is called Affures, and the eyes of a
fyshe, whiche is called Libinitis, and the galle of wolfes, breake theym with thy handes, & myxe them together, and put them in a vessell of glasse, than whan thou wilt warke it, take ye fatte of any beast thou wilt, that this may be made in the shape of it, melte it, and myxe it perfitely with that medicine, and anoynte ye matche or candel weke, whatsoeuer thou wilt wt it. After kēdle it in ye mid∣des of the house, and the mē shall seme in the shape of that beaste, whose fatte thou did take. ¶ An other matche of a candell or a candell weke, that men may appere in the shape of aungels. ¶ Take the eyes of a fyshe, & the eyes of Filoe, that is of a brea¦ker of bones, and breake them wt thy handes, and make them soft,
and put them in a vessell of glasse vii. dayes After put some oyle in them, and lyghten it in a greene lampe, and put it before menne, whiche be in the house, they shal see them selfes in the shape of aū∣gels by the lyght of the fyre. ¶ An other matche or weke of a candell, makyng men to appeare with blacke faces. ¶ Take a black lampe, and pour in it oyle of the elder or alder tree or quycke syluer, and poure in that oyle or quycke siluer a parte of the bloude of them that bee in lettynge bloude, and put in that bloudde oyle of the elder or alder tree (some sayth of the bur tree) or quycke syluer. ¶ A meruaylous lāpe, in whiche appeareth a thynge of terrible quantite, hauyng in the hande a
rodde and afrayeth a man. ¶ Take a grene frogge, & stryke of the headde of it vpon a grene clothe, make it wette with ye oyle of burtree or elder tree, and put in the weke and lyghten it in the grene lampe, than shalt thou see a blacke man standing, betwene whose handes there shalbe a lāp and a meruaylous thyng. ¶ An other weke which whan it is kendled, & water is poured on it, waxeth strong, and whan the oyle is put in, it is put out. ¶ Take lyme whiche water hath not touched and putte it with an weight, equal to it of waxe & the halfe of it of the oyle of baulm & Napta citrina, with equall to it of brymstone, and make a weke of it, & drop doune lyke dewe vpō the water and it shalbe kendled,
and droppe doune oyle vppon it, and it shalbe put out. ¶ In other weke, which whan it is kēdled, all thinges seme white and of syluer. ¶ Take a Lyzarde, and cut a∣way the tayle of it, and take that which commeth out, for it is like quycke syluer. After take a weke and make it wette with oyle, & put it in a new lampe and kendle it, and y• house shall seme bright and white, or gylted with stluer. ¶ A meruaylous operation of a lampe, whiche yf anye man shall holde, he ceaseth not to farte, vn∣tyll he shall leaue it. ¶ Take the bloude of a snayl, drye it vp in a linen cloth, & make of it a weke, and lyghten it in a lampe, geue it to any man thou wilt, & saye lighten thys, he shall
not cease to farte, vntyll he let it departe, and it is a meruaylous thynge. ¶ A weke which whan it is ligh∣tened, women cease not to daūce and be gladde and too playe as they ware madde for great ioye. ¶ Take the bloude of an hare and the bloude of a certayn fo wl which is called Solon, & is lyke a turtell doue, and of the bloude of the turtell male, equale to the halfe of it. Than put in it a weke, and lighten it in the myd∣des of the house, in whiche are syngers and wenches, and a mer¦uaylous thynge shalbe proued. ¶ If thou wilte make that lyce maye appeare runninge abrode in a mans bedde that he mai not sleape, than cast in hys bedde the weyghte of one or halfe vnce of
Alcakengi, and if thou shall take pilos asturis, therof shalbe made a weke, which whan it is lighte∣ned, euery sicke man seeth other by the vehemencye of the sycke∣nesse, and mynyshinge or exte∣nuation. ¶ Whan thou wilte that yu seme al inflamed, or set on fyre frō thy head vnto thy fete & not be hurt. ¶ Take white great malowes or holy hocke, myxe them with the whyte of egges, after anoint thy body with it, and let it be vntil it be dryed vp, and after anoint the with alume, and afterward caste on it smal brymstone beatē vnto poulder, for the fyre is inflamed on it, & hurteth not, and yf thou make vpon the palme of thy hāde thou shalt be able to holde y• fyre without hurt.
¶ If thou wilt that a thinge be casten in the fyre and not burne. ¶ Take one parte of glew of fish & an egual quantitie to it of alu∣me, let it be perfitely myxed, & let vyneger be poured vpon it, lette whatsoeuer thinge that wilte be confected with it, cast it in y• fyre, anoynt it with this anoyntemēt it shal not be burned. ¶ If thou wilt make a contrary, that is any image or other thing and whan it is put in the water it is kendled, and yf thou shalte drawe it out, it shal be put out or quenched. ¶ Take lyme not quenched, and mixe it perfitely with a litle wax and the oyle of Sesanum, & nap∣ta, that is whyte earth and brim¦stoone, and make of it an yma∣ge, whanne thou shalte put it in
water, the fyre shalbe kendled. ¶ If thou wilt make that whan thou openest thy handes vpon a lampe, the light of it is put out, and whan thou closest them vpō it, it kēdled, and it ceaseth not to do that. ¶ Take a spice, which is called Spuma, after bray it, and after make it with water of Cāphere, and anoynte thy handes with it, after open them in the mouth of the lampe, the lyghte of it shalbe put out, and close thē, & it shalbe kendled agayne. ¶ If thou wilt see a thing drow∣ned, or se depe in the war in the nyghte, and that it shall not bee more hyd to the than in the daye and readde bookes in a darcke night. ¶ Anoynte thy face with the bloude
