4699 99840626 5150
¶ A SHORTE AND briefe narration of the two Nauigations and Discoueries to the Northweast partes called NEWE FRAVNCE: First translated out of French into Italian, by that famous learned man Gio: Bapt: Ramutius, and now turned into English by Iohn Florio: Worthy the rea∣ding of all Venturers, Trauellers, and Discouerers. IMPRINTED AT LON∣don, by H. Bynneman, dvvelling in Thames streate, neere vnto Baynardes Castell. Anno Domini. 1580.
¶TO THE RIGHT VVOR∣shipful Edmond Bray Esquire, High Sherife within hir Maiesties Countie of Oxenford: I. Florio vvisheth much encrease of worship in this life, and in the Worlde to come, eternall happinesse. THe olde saying is: None so bolde as blynd Bayard: nor anye so readye to vndertake, as the leaste able to performe: Euen so (right Worshipfull) it nowe fareth with me, who (at the requests and earneste solicitations of diuers my very good frends heere in Oxforde) haue vndertaken this translation, wher∣in I holde my selfe farre inferiour to many. Howbeeit, forasmuch as that seruaunt was of his Lord and Maister most highly discommen∣ded, whiche hiding his Talent in the grounde, had thereby profited nothing: my selfe being very loath to incurre the same faulte, and so to become worthy the like reprehension, haue the rather aduentured to translate this parte of Nauigation, whiche (I assure my selfe with other mens trauel and diligence) may be an occasion of no smal com∣moditie and benefite to this our Countrie of Englande. And heerein the more to animate and encourage the Englishe Marchants, I doe onely (for breuitie sake) propose vnto them the infinite treasures (not hidden to themselues) whiche both the Spaniardes, the Portugales, and the Venetians haue seuerally gained by their suche nauigations and trauailes. Nowe (right Worshipful) when I had well considered with my selfe, that hir Maiestie hathe deemed your Worship a very meete man for that aucthoritie wherein you nowe presently remaine, I my selfe coulde not but accompt your Worship (for the present) the fittest man within the shire, to patronize and defende this my simple labour, whereby any benefite maye either happen to hir Maiesties person, or commoditie, to hir highnesse common weale: and if the wealthe of a Prince be any cause of the safetie of his person, (which, who doubteth? it may be (and not vntruly) saide to be bothe. But to the ende your Worshippe haue not altogither so muche cause to con∣demne
me for this my bolde attempt vpon no maner of acquaintance, I thought it not vnfit vnto you, that I haue the rather herevnto pre∣sumed, vppon the request and warrant of my deare and welbeloued friend Maister H. Leigh, who (no doubt) is a man verie mindfull of al your Worships courtesies from time to time shewed toward him. Thus not willingly desirous to be herein more tedious than is re∣quisite, I cease from troubling your good Worship, hartily praying the Almightie, to encrease the same, with abundaunce of all other vertues, to his good wil and pleasure: and withall, wholly committe my selfe vnto your Worships good disposition. From Oxenford the 25. of Iune. 1580. Your Worships most humble at commaundement. I. Florio.
¶To all Gentlemen, Merchants, and Pilots. WHen I had taken in hande to tran∣slate thys Treatise, which I did for the benefite and behoofe of those that shall attempt any newe disco∣uerie in the Northweast partes of America, I thought good brieflye to touch the vse of my translation, that the Reader may see and con∣sider the drift of my trauell. For, al∣though this Discourse may seeme very barraine, and not to containe suche matter as is pretended, as beyng a particular Relation of certaine Prouinces whyche haue beene hitherto of all men rather contemned than throughly knowen: yet if the Marchant Venturer, or skilfull Pilot, or whosoeuer de∣sirous of newe Discoueries, haue the readyng and perusing thereof, for whome especially I haue done it into Englishe, they will find matter worthy the looking, and consequently, gratefully accept my paines herein. For here is the Descrip∣tion of a Countrey no lesse fruitful and pleasant in al respects than is England, Fraunce, or Germany, the people, though sim∣ple and rude in manners, and destitute of the knowledge of God or any good lawes, yet of nature gentle and tractable, and most apt to receiue the Christian Religion, and to subiect themselues to some good gouernement: the commodities of the Countrey not inferiour to the Marchandize of Moscouy, Danske, or many other frequented trades: the voyage verye shorte, being but three weekes sayling from Bristowe, Plym∣mouth, or any commodious Porte of the Weast Country, with
a direct course to the coast of the Newe found land. Al which oportunities besides manye others, mighte suffice to induce oure Englishemen, not onely to fall to some traffique wyth the Inhabitants, but also to plant a Colonie in some conueni∣ent place, and so to possesse the Countrey without the gain∣saying of any man, whiche was the iudgement and counsell of Iohn Baptista Ramusius, a learned and excellent Cosmogra∣pher, & Secretary to the famous state of Venice, whose words, bicause they are not impertinēt to this purpose, I haue here set downe. Why doe not the Princes (saieth he) whyche are to deale in these affaires, sende forth two or three Colonies to in∣habite the Country, & to reduce this sauage natiō to some ci∣uilitie? considering what a battle and fruitfull soyle it is, how replenished with all kinde of graine, how it is stored wyth al sortes of Byrdes and Beastes, wyth such faire and mighty Ri∣uers, that Captaine Carthier and his company, in one of them sayled vppe a hundreth and foure score leagues, findyng the countrey peopled on both sides in greate abundaunce. And moreouer, to cause the Gouernors of those Colonies to send forth men to search and discouer the North lands about Ter∣ra del Lauorader, and toward Weast northweast to the Seas whiche are to saile to the Country of Cataya, and from thence to the Ilands of Molucke. These were enterprises to purchase immortall praise, which the Lord Anthony di Mendoza Vice∣roy of Mexico, willing to put in execution, sent forth his Cap∣tains both by Sea and by Land vpon the Northweast of Nuo∣ua Spagona, and discouered the Kingdome of the seauen Cities about Ciuola▪ And Franciscus Vasques de Coronada, passed from Mexico by lande towarde the Northweast 2850. miles, in so muche, that he came to the Sea, whyche lyeth betweene Ca∣taya and America, where he met with the Catayan shyppes. And no doubt, if the French men in this their newe Fraunce, would haue discouered vp further into the land towards the Weast northweast partes, they shoulde haue founde the Sea, and might haue sayled to Cataya. Thus much out of Ra∣musius, where you may see this learned mans iudgement con∣cerning
the planting of Colonies, and inhabiting these coun∣tries, whych might be a meane, not only to discouer the Sea on the backe-side, as he desireth, but also to come vnto the knowledge of the Countries adiacent: and namely of Sague∣nay, whiche aboundeth with Golde and other Mettalles, as in the seconde Relation is to be seene. All whyche thyngs, ex∣cepte they builde and inhabite, can neuer be atchieued, for as Fraunciscus Lopez di Gomara, and dyuers other Spanishe Au∣thors affirme, the Spanyards neuer prospered or preuailed, but where they planted: whych of the Portingales maye al∣so be verifyed, as in the Histories of all theyr Conquests and Discoueries doth manifestly appeare. And as there is none, that of right may be more bolde in this enterprice than the Englishmen, the land being first found out by Iohn Gabot the Father, and Sebastian Gabot, one of hys three sonnes, in the yeare 1494. in the name and be halfe of King Henry the sea∣uenth, as both by the foresaide Ramusius in his first Volumes, and our owne Chronicles, and Sebastian Gabots letters pa∣tents yet extant, and in his Mappe maye be seene: so there is no nation that hath so good righte, or is more fit for this pur∣pose, than they are, who trauayling yearely into those partes with 50. or 60. saile of shippes, might very commodiouslye transporte a sufficient number of men to plant a Colonie in some conuenient Hauen, and also might yeeld them yearly succour, and supply of al things necessary, receyuing againe such commodities as the country doth produce. And this the Frenchmen had done long since, if first their warres with the Spanyardes, and since their cruell dissentions at home, had not hindered them. And Iohannes Varrozzana a Florentine, if he had not beene preuented by death, purposed (as the fore∣sayde Ramusius writeth) to perswade Francis the French King to send forth good store of people to inhabite certaine places of these coastes, where the aire is moste temperate, and the soyle moste fruitfull, with goodly Riuers and Hauens suffici∣ent to harborough any nauie, the inhabitantes of which pla∣ces might be occasiō to bring many good purposes to effecte,
and amongest manye others, to reduce those poore rude and ignorant people to the true worship and seruice of God, and to teache them how to manure and till the ground, transpor∣ting ouer Beastes and Cattell of Europe into those large and champion countreys, and finally, in time they might discouer vp into the land, and search, whether among so many Ilands as are there, there be any passage to the Sea of Cataya. And thus much oute of the third Volume of Voyages and Naui∣gations, gathered into the Italian tongue by Ramusius: whi∣che Bookes, if they were translated into English by the libe∣ralitie of some noble Personage, ou Sea-men of England, and others, studious of Geographie, shoulde know many worthy secrets, whiche hitherto haue beene concealed. For, the beste Cosmographers of this age (as I am by the skilfull in those Sciences informed, and as to him that doth diligently consi∣der their Mappes, it shall plainely appeare) haue described Asia, Africa, and America, chiefly by the help of those bookes. But to returne to that from whence I did digresse, althoughe some attemptes of oure Countrey-men haue not had as yet suche successe as was wished, they ought not therefore to bee the slower in this enterprice, for if they were of late conten∣ted in their voyage, to haue stayed al the Winter in those col∣der Countries, if their store of victualles had beene sufficient, howe muche rather ought we nowe in a farre more tempe∣rate clime, where Iames Carthier, accompanyed wyth 120. men remained a whole Winter contrary to hys determinati∣on when he set out of Fraunce? Thus beseeching God, that this my trauel may take that effect for the which it is meant, I commende the diligent consideration to al such Gentlemen, Merchants, and Pilots, as seeke Gods glory, the aduaunce∣ment of their Countrey, and the happy successe, to the proui∣dence of the Almighty, who in my opinion hath not in vaine stirred vppe the mindes of so many Honourable and Wor∣shipfull persons to the furtheraunce of these commendable and worthy Discoueries. In Oxford▪ I. F.
¶ The first relation of Iames Carthier of the new land called New Fraunce, nevvly discouered in the yeare of oure Lorde, 1534. ¶How Maister Iames Carthier departed from the Port of S. Malo, with two Ships, and came to the new land, and howe he entred into the Porte of Buona Vista. AFter that Sir Charles of Mouy, Knight, Lord of Meyleray, & Vice-admirall of Fraunce, had caused all the Captaines, Maisters, and Ma∣riners of the Shippes to be sworne to behaue themselues truely and faithfully in the seruice of the most Christian King of France, vnder the charge of the sayde Carthier, vpon the 20. day of Aprill. 1534. we departed from the Porte of S. Malo with two Ships of thrée score tun apéece burden, and by well appointed men in eche one, and with suche pros∣perous weather, we sailed onwardes, that vppon the 10. of May we came to the newe found land, where we entred into the cape of Buona Vista, which is in Latitude 48. degrées and a halfe, and in Longitude. *. But bicause of the great store of Ice that was alongest the sayde lande, we were constray∣ned to enter into a Hauen called, Saint Katherins Hauen, distaunt from the other Porte aboute fiue leagues towarde South southeast: there did we stay ten daies, looking for faire weather, and in the meane while we mended and dressed our boates.
¶ Howe we came to the Ilande of Byrdes, and of the greate quantitie of Byrdes that there be. VPon the 21. of May the wind beyng in the Weast, we hoised saile, and sailed toward North and by east from ye Cape of Buona Vista vntil we came to the Iland of Birdes, which was enuironed about with a banke of Ice, but brokē and crackte. Notwithstanding the saide banke, our two boa∣tes went thither to take in some Birdes, whereof there is such plentie, that vnlesse a manne didde sée them, he woulde think it an incredible thing; for albeit the Ilande (which con∣taineth aboute a league in circuite) be so full of them, that they séeme to haue béene brought thither, and sowed for the nonce, yet are there a hundreth fold as many houering about it as within, some of the which are as big as Iayes, blacke and white, with beakes lyke vnto Crowes: they houer al∣waies about the sea, they cannot flye very high, bycause their wings are so little, and no bigger than halfe ones hand, yet doe they flye as swiftly as any birdes of the ayre leuell to the water, they are also excéeding fat: we named them Aporath. In lesse than halfe an houre we filled two boats ful of them, as if they had béene with stones: so that besides them which we did eate fresh, euery ship dyd powder and salt fiue or sixe barrels ful of them. ¶ Of two sortes of Byrdes, the one called Godetz, the other Margaulz: and how we came to Carpunt. BEsides these, there is an other kinde of Birdes, whyche houer in the aire ouer the sea, lesser than the others: and these doe al gather thēselues togither in the Iland, & put thē∣selues vnder the wings of other byrds that are greater: these we named Godetz. There are also of another sorte, but big∣ger, & white, who bite euen as Dogges: those wée named Margaulz. And albeit the said Iland be 14. leagues from the maine lande, notwithstanding Beares come swimming
thither to eate of the saide Byrdes: and our men founde one there as greate as any Cowe, and as white as any Swanne, who in their presence leapt into the sea, and vpon Whitson∣monday (folowing our voyage towarde the lande) we mette hir by the way, swimming towarde lande as swiftly as wée coulde saile: so soone as we sawe hir we pursued hir with our boates, and by maine strength tooke hir, whose flesh was as good to be eaten, as the fleshe of a Calfe of two yeares olde. The Wednesday following beyng the 27. of the moneth, we came to the entrance of the Bay of the Castels, but bycause the weather was ill, and the greate store of Ice wée founde, we were constrayned to enter into an harborough about the saide entraunce called Carpunt, where, bycause wée could not come oute of it, we stayed till the 9. of Iune, that thence wée departed, on hope with the aide of God to saile further than the said Carpunt, which is in latitude 51. degrées. ¶ The description of the newe founde lande, from Cape Razo, to the Cape of Degrade. THe lande from Cape Razo, to the Cape of Degrade, whi∣che is the point of the entrance to the Bay that trendeth from head to head toward North northest, and South south∣weast, al this part of land is parted into Ilands, one so néere the other, that there are but small riuers betwéene them, tho∣rowe the whyche you may passe with little boates, and ther∣fore there are certaine good harbourghs, among whyche is that of Carpunt, and that of Degrade. In one of these Ilands, that is the highest of them all, béeyng on the toppe of it, you maye playnely sée the two lowe Ilandes, that are neare to Cape Razo, from whence to the Porte of Carpunt, they counte it twentie and fiue leagues, and there are twoo entraunces thereat, one on the East, the other on the South side of the Iland. But it is to be noted, that from the side, and pointe of the Easte, bycause that euerye where
there is nothing else but shelues, and the water is very shal∣lowe: you muste goe aboute the Ilande towarde the West the length of halfe a Cable or thereaboute, and then to goe towarde the South, to the said Carpont. Also you are to take héede of thrée Shelues that are in the Chanel vnder the wa∣ter: and towarde the Iland on the Easte side in the Chanell, the water is about two faddome déepe, and cleare grounde. The other trendeth toward East northeast, and on the West you may go on shoare. ¶ Of the Ilande whiche now is called Saint Katherins Ilande. GOing from the Point of Degrade, and entring into the sayde Baye towarde the Weast, and by North: there is some doubt of two Ilandes that are on the right side, one of the whiche is distant from the saide pointe 3. leagues, and the other 7. either more or lesse than the first, beyng a lowe and plaine land, and it séemeth to be parte of the maine lande. I named it Saint Katherines Ilande: in which, toward North∣east there is verye drye soile: but aboute a quarter of a lea∣gue from it, very ill ground, so that you muste goe a little a∣bout. The saide Iland, and the Porte of Castelles trend to∣warde North northeast, and South southweast, and they are about 15. leagues asunder. From the saide Porte of Castels to the Porte of Gutte, whyche is in the northerne parte of the said Bay, that trendeth towarde East northeast, and Weast southweast, there are twelue leagues and an halfe: and a∣boute two leagues from the Porte of Balances, that is to say, the thirde parte, athwarteth the sayde Bay: the deapth be∣ing sounded it is about 18. faddo and from the said Porte of Balances to the White Sands  Weast southweast there is 15. leagues, but you must ike héede of a shelfe that lyeth about 3. leagues outward from the sayd White Sands on the Southweast side aboue water like a Boate.
¶ Of the place called White Sandes: of the Ilande of Brest, and of the Ilande of Byrdes: the sortes and quantitie of Byrdes that there are founde: and of the Porte called the Islettes. WHite Sandes is a Roade in the whiche there is no place garded from the South, nor Southeast. But towarde South southweast the said roade there are two Ilandes, one of the which is called Brest Iland, and the other the Ilande of Byrdes, in whiche there is great store of Godetz, & Crowes with red beakes and redde féete: they make their néestes in holes vnder the ground euen as Connies. A point of land be∣ing passed about a league from White Sands, there is a Port & passage found, called the Islettes, a better place than White Sandes: and there is great fishing. From the saide Porte of the Islettes, vnto another called Brest: the circuite is aboute ten leagues. This Porte is in latitude 51. degrées and 55. mi∣nutes, and in longitude. *. From the Islettes, to that place there are many other Ilandes: and the saide Porte of Brest is also amongst those Ilandes. Moreouer the Ilands doe com∣passe more than 3. leagues from the said Brest, beyng lowe, and ouer them are the other landes (aboue mentioned) séene. ¶ Howe we wyth our Shippes entred into the Porte of Brest, and sayling onwarde towarde the Weast, we past amidst the Islettes, which were so many in number, that it was not possible to tel them: and how we named thē the Islettes. VPon the 10. of Iune we with our Ships entred into the Port of Brest, to furnish our selues with water and wood, and to make vs readye to passe the saide Bay. Vpon Saynt Barnabas day, seruice being heard, we with our boates went beyond the said Porte toward the Weast, to sée what harbo∣roughes were there: we passed throughe the midddest of the
Islettes, which were so many in number, that it was not pos∣sible they might be told, for they continued about 10. leagues beyonde the saide Porte. We to rest our selues stayed in one of them a night, and there we found greate store of Duck egges, and other byrdes that there doe make their neastes, we named them all, the Islettes. ¶ Of the Porte called S. Antonies Porte, S. Seruans Porte, Iames Carthiers Porte: of the riuer called S. Iames: of the customes and apparell of the inhabitors in the Iland of White Sandes. THe next day we passed the saide Ilandes, and beyonde them all we found a good Hauen, whyche we named S. Antonies Hauen, and howe one or two leagues beyonde, we founde a little riuer toward the Southwest coast, that is be∣twéene two other Ilandes, and is a good harborough. There we sette vppe a Crosse, and named it S. Seruans Porte▪ and on the Southwest side of the said Porte and riuer, about one league, there is a small Ilande as round as any Ouen, enui∣roned about with many other little Ilandes, that giue notice to the saide Portes. Further about two leagues, there is an other greater riuer, in whiche they tooke good store of Sal∣mon, that we named S. Iames his Riuer. Beyng in the sayde riuer, we sawe a Shippe of Rochell that the night before had passed the Porte of Brest, where they thought to haue gone a fishing: but the marriners not knowing where they were, we with our boates approched neare vnto it, and did directe it to another Porte one league more toward the Weast than the saide riuer of S. Iames, which I take to be one of the beste in all the Worlde, and therefore wée named it Iames Carthi∣ers Sound. If the foile were as good as the harboroughes are, it were a great commoditie: but it is not to be called the new Land but rather Stones, and wilde Furres, and a place fitte for wilde beastes, for in all the Northe▪ Ilande I didde not sée a Cartoade of ood earth: yet went I on shoare in many
places, and in the Iland of White Sandes, there is nothyng else but Mosse, and small Thornes scattered here and there, withered and drye. To be shorte, I beléeue that this was the lande that God allotted to Caine. There are men of an indifferent good stature and bignesse, but wilde and vnruly: they weare their haire tyed on the top like a wreath of Hay, and put a woodden pin within it, or any other such thing, in steade of a naile, and wyth them they binde certaine birdes feathers. They are clothed with beastes skinnes, as wel the men as womē, but that the womē go somwhat straight∣lier and closer in their garmentes than men doe, wyth their wastes gyrded: they paint themselues with certaine Roan coloures: their Boates are made of the barke of a trée cal∣led Boul, wyth the whyche they fishe, and take greate store of Seales, and as farre as we coulde vnderstande since oure commyng thither, that is not their habitation, but they come from the maine lande out of hotter Countreys, to take of the sayde Seales and other necessaries for theyr ly∣uing. ¶ Of certaine Capes, that is to say, the double Cape, the poin∣ted Cape, Cape Roiall, and the Cape of Milke: of the Moun∣taines of Barnes: of the Ilandes of Doe▪ houses; and of the greate fishing of Cods. VPon the 13. of that moneth we came to our Shippes a∣gayne with our boates, on purpose to saile forwards, by∣cause the weather was faire, & vpon Sundaye we caused ser∣uice to be saide: then on Monday being the 25. of the moneth, we departed from Brest and sailed toward the South to take a viewe of the landes that there we had séene, that séemed vnto vs to be two Ilandes: but when we were amiddest the Bay, we knew it to be firme lande, where was a greate double Cape, one aboue the other, and therfore wée named it the Double Cape. In the entrance of the Bay we sounded, and founde it to be an hundred faddome rounde aboute vs.
From Brest, to the double Cape, there is about 20 leagues, and aboute fiue, or sixe leagues beyond we sounded againe, and founde 20 faddome water. The saide lande lyeth Northeast, and Southweast. The nexte day being the 16. of the moneth, we sailed along the saide coaste towarde Southweast, and by South, aboute 35 leagues from the double Cape, where wée founde very stéepe and wilde hilles, among the whyche were séene certaine small Cabbans, whyche we in the Countrey call Barnes, and therfore we named them the Hilles of the Barnes. The other Lands and Mountaines are all craggie, cleft, and utte, and betwixt them and the sea, there are other Ilandes, but lowe. The day before, through the darke mists and ogges of the weather, we coulde not haue sighte of any lande, but in the euening we spyed an entraunce into the lande, by a ryuer, among the saide Hilles of Barnes, and a Cape lying toward the Southwest about 3. leagues frō vs. The saide Cape is on the top of it blunt pointed, and also towarde the Sea, it endeth in a pointe, wherefore we named it the pointed Cape, on the north side of whiche, there is a plaine Iland. And bycause we would haue notice of the said entrance, to sée if there were any good Hauens, we stroke saile for that night. The next day being the 17. of the Moneth, we had stormie weather from Northeast, wherefore we tooke our way toward the Southwest vntil Thurseday morning, and we went about 37. leagues, til we came athwart a Bay full of rounde Ilandes like Doue houses, and therefore wée named them the Doue houses. And from the Bay of Saint Iulian, from the whyche to a Cape that lyeth South and by weast, which we called Cape Riall, there are 7. leagues, and toward the Weast Southweast side of the saide Cape there is another that beneath is all craggie, and aboue round. On the North side of whiche about halfe a league there lyeth a lowe Ilande,Cape Latte. that Cape we named the Cape of Milke. Be∣twéene these two Capes there are certaine lowe Ilandes, a∣boue whiche, there are also certaine others, that shew that there  some riuers. About two leagues from Cape Roiall,
we sounded, and found tenne faddome water, and there is the greatest fishing of Coddes that is possible: for staying for our companie, in lesse than an houre we tooke aboue an hun∣dred of them. ¶ Of certayne Ilands that lie betweene Cape Roiall, and the Cape of Milke. THe nexte daye, being the eyghtenth of the Moneth, the winde with such rage turned against vs, that we were constrayned to go backe toward Cape Royall, thinking there to find some harborough, and with oure Boates wente to discouer betwéene the Cape Royall, and the Cape of Milke, and found, that aboue the low Ilands there is a great, and very déepe Gulfe, within which are certaine Ilands. The sayd Gulfe on the South side is shutte vp. The foresayd low grounds are on one of the sides of the entrance, and Cape Royall is on the other. The sayde lowe groundes do stretche themselues more than halfe a league within the Sea. It is a playne Countrey, but an ill soyle: and in the middest of the entrance thereof, there is an Iland. The sayde Gulfe in latitude is fortie eyght degrées and an halfe, and in Longi∣tude. *. That night we found no harborough, and therefore we launched out into the Sea, leauing the Cape toward the Weast. ¶ Of the Iland called S. Iohn. FRom the sayde daye vntill the 24. of the moneth, being S. Iohns day, we had both stormie weather and winde against vs, with such darknesse and mistes, that vntill Saint Iohns day, we could haue no sight of any land, and then had we sight of a Cape of land, ye from Cape Royall lieth South∣weast, about 35. leagues, but that day was so foggie and mi∣stie, that we could not come néere land, and bycause it was S. Iohns day, we named it Cape S. Iohn.
¶ Of certayne Ilands called the Ilands of Margaulz, and of the kinds of beastes and birds that there are found. Of the Iland of Brion, and Cape Dolphin. THe nexte daye being the 25. of the moneth, the weather was also stormie, darke, and windie, but yet we sayled a part of the day toward Weast North-weast, and in the eue∣ning we put our selues athwart vnto the second quarter that thence we departed, then did we by our compasse know that we were North-weast, and by Weast about seauen leagues and an halfe from the Cape of S. Iohn, and as we were aboute to hoyse sayle, the wind turned into the North-weast, where∣fore we went toward North-east, about fiftéene leagues, and came to thrée Ilands, two of whiche are as stéepe and vp∣right as any wall, that it was not possible to climbe them: and betwéene them there is a little clift. These Ilands were as full of Birds, as any fielde or meddow is of grasse, that there do make their nestes: and in the greatest of them, there was a great and infinite number of those that we cal Mar∣gaulz, that are white, and bigger than any Géese, which were feuered in one part. In the other were only Godetz Isoli, but towarde the shoare there were of those Godetz, and greate Apponatz, like to those of that Ilande that we aboue haue mentioned: we went downe to the lowest part of the least I∣land, where we kild aboue a thousand of those Godetz, & Ap∣ponatz. We put into our Boates so many of them as wée pleased, for in lesse than one houre, we might haue filled thir∣tie such boates of them: we named them the Ilands of Mar∣gaultz. About fiue leagues from the sayde Ilandes, on the Weast, there is another Iland that is about two leagues in length, and so much in breadth: there did we stay all night to take in water and wood. That Ilande is enuironed rounde a∣bout with sande, and hath a very good roade about it thrée or four faddome déepe. Those Ilands haue the best soyle that e∣uer we saw, for that one of their féelds is more woorth, than all the new land. We foūd i all full of goodly trées, medowes,
champaines full of wild peason blomed, as thicke, as ranke, and as faire, as any can be séene in Brittayne, that they séemed to haue bin plowed and sowed. There was also great store of gooseberies, strawberies, damaske roses, parseley, with other very swéete and pleasant hearbes. About the said Iland are very great beastes, as great as Oxen, which haue two great téeth in their mouths like vnto the Elephant, and liue also in the Sea. We saw one of them sléeping vpon the banke of the water: we thinking to take it, went to it with our Boates, but so soone as he heard vs, he cast himselfe into the Sea. We also sawe Beares, and Woolues: we named it Brions Iland. About it towarde South-east, and North-weast, there are great medowes. As farre as I could gather and comprehend, I thinke that there be some passage betwéene the new land, and Brions land, if so it were, it would be a great shortning, as well of the time, as of the way, if any perfection coulde be founde in it. Aboute foure leagues from that Ilande to∣warde West South-weast, there is firme lande, that sée∣meth to be as an Ilande, compassed aboute with little Ilands of sandes. There is a goodly Cape, which we named Cape Doulphin, for there is the beginning of good groundes. On the seauen and twentith of Iune we compassed the said landes about that lie Weast South-weast: a farre off they séeme to bée little hilles of sande, for they are but lowe landes: we coulde neyther goe to them, nor land on them, bycause the winde was against vs. That daye we wente fiftéene leagues. ¶ Of the Iland called Alezai, and of S. Peeters Cape. THe next day we went along the said land aboute tenne leagues, till we came to a Cape of redde lands, that is all craggie, within the which, there is a bracke looking toward the North. It is a very low Countrey. There is also betwéene ye sea & a certain poole a plaine fielde and frō that Cape of land and ye poole, vntill to another Cape, there is about 14. leagues▪
The land is fashioned as it were halfe a circle, all compas∣sed about with sand like a ditch, ouer which, as farre as ones eye can stretch, there is nothing but marrish groundes, and standing pooles. And before you come to the first Cape, very néere the mayne lande, there are two little Ilands. Aboute fiue leagues from the seconde Cape towarde South weast, there is another Iland very high and poynted, which we na∣med Alezai. The first Cape we named S. Peeters Cape, by∣cause vpon that day we came thither. ¶Of the Cape called Orleans Cape: of the Riuer of Boates: of wild mens Cape: and of the qualitie and temperature of the Countrey. FRom Brions Iland to this place, there is a good sandie ground, and hauing sounded toward South-weast euen to the Shoare, about fiue leagues, we found 12. faddome water, and within one league 6. and very néere the shoare rather more than lesse. But bycause we would be better ac∣quaynted with this stonie and rockie ground, we stroke our Sayles lowe and athwart. The nexte daye being the last of the moneth saue one, the winde blewe South and by East. We sayled Westwarde vntill Tuesday morning at Sunne rising, béeing the last of the moneth, without any sighte or knowledge of any lande, except in the euening to∣warde Sunne sette, that we discouered a Land, whiche sée∣med to bée two Ilandes, that were beyond vs West south-weast, about nine or tenne leagues. All the next day till the nexte morning at Sunne rising we sayled Westward about fortye leagues, and by the way we perceyued that the lande wée hadde séene like two Ilandes, was firme lande, lying South south-east, and North north-weast, till to a ve∣rye good Cape of lande called Orleans Cape. All the sayde lande is lowe and playne, and the fairest that may pos∣sibly be séene, full of goodly meddowes and Trées. True it is that we could finde no harborough there, bycause it is
all full of shelues and sandes. We with our boates went on shore in many places, and among the reste we entred into a goodly riuer, but very shallow, which we named the riuer of boats, bycause that there we saw boats ful of wild men, that were crossing the riuer. We had no other notice of the sayde wilde men: for the winde came from the Sea, and beate vs againste the shore, that we were constrained to retire oure selues with our boates toward our shippes, till the next day morning at Sunne rising, being the firste of Iuly, we sayled Northeast, in which time there rose great mystes & stormes, and therefore we strucke our sayles till two of the clocke in the after noone, that the weather became cleare, and there we had sight of Orleance Cape, & of another about seuē leagues from vs, lying North and by East, and that we called Wilde mens Cape. On the Northside of this Cape aboute halfe a league, there is a very dangerous shelf, and banke of stones. Whilest we wer at this Cape, we saw a man running after our boats that were going along the coast, who made signes vnto vs that we shoulde retourne towarde the sayd Cape a∣gaine We séeing such signes, began to tourne toward him, but he séeing vs come, began to flée: so soone as we were come on shoare, we set a knife before him, and a woollen girdle on a little staffe, and then came to our ships again. That day we trended the sayde land about nine or ten leagues, hoping to finde some good harborough, but it was not possible, for as I haue sayd alreadie, it is a very low land, & enuironed round about with great shelues. Neuerthelesse we went that day on shore in foure places to sée the goodly and swéete smelling trées that there were: we founde them to be Cidrons, Ewe-trées, Pines, white Elmes, Ashes, Willowes, with manye other sortes of trées to vs vnknowen, but without any fruit. The groundes where no wood is, are very faire, and al full of peason, white and red gooseberies, strawberies, blacke∣beries, and wilde corne, euen like vnto Rie, that it séemeth to haue bene sowen and plowed. This Countrey is of better temperature than any other that can be séene, and very hote.
There are many Thrushes, Stockdoues, and other byrdes: to be short, there wanteth nothing but good harborough. ¶Of the Baie called Saint Lunario, and other notable Baies, and Capes of lande, and of the qualitie, and good∣nesse of those groundes. THe next day being the seconde of Iuly we discouered and had sight of land on the Northerne side towarde vs, that dyd ioyne vnto the lande abouesayd, all compassed about, and we knewe that it had about * in déepth, and as muche a∣thwart, we named it Saint Lunarios Baie, & with our boates we went to the Cape toward the North, and founde the land and grounde so lowe, that for the space of a league from land there was but halfe a faddome water. On the Northeast side from the sayde Cape about seauen or eight leagues there is another Cape of lande, in the middest whereof there is a Baie fashioned triangle wise, verye déepe, and as far as we could ken from it lieth Northeast. The said Baie is compas∣sed about wt sands and shelues about ten leagues from land, and there is but one faddome water: from the saide Cape to the banke of the other, ther is about fiftéene leagues. We be∣ing a crosse the sayde Capes, discouered another lande and Cape, and as farre as we coulde ken, it lay North & by East. All that night the weather was very ill, and great windes, so that we were constrained to heare a small sayle vntill the next morning, being the thirde of Iuly, that the winde came from the West: and we sayled Northwarde, to haue a sight of the lande that we had left on the Northeast side, aboue the lowe landes, among whiche high and lowe landes there is a Gulfe, or Breach, in some places about sixe and twenty fad∣dome déepe, and fiftéene leagues in breadth, with varietie of landes, hoping to finde some passage thyther, we went euen as the passage of the Castels. The sayde gulfe lyeth Easte Northeast, and West Southwest. The grounde that lyeth on the South side of the sayde gulfe, is as good and easie to
be wrought, and full of as goodly fieldes and meadowes, as a∣nye that euer we haue, as plaine and smoothe as anye die: and that which lyeth on the North, is a Countrey altogither hillie, full of woods, and very high and great trées of sundry sortes: among the rest there are as goodly Ceders, and Firre trées, as possibly can be séene, able to make mastes for ships of thrée hundered Tunne: Neyther did we sée anye place that was not full of the sayde trées, excepted two onlye, that were full of goodly medowes, with two very faire Lakes. The middest of the sayde Baie is seauen and fourtie degrées and halfe in latitude. ¶Of the Cape of Hope, and of Saint Martins Creeke, & howe seuen boats ful of wilde men, came to our boate, wold not retire themselues, but being terrified with our Colubrins and lanches we shot at them, they fled with great hast. THe Cape of ye said South land, was called The Cape of Hope, through the hope that there we had to finde some passage. The fourth of Iuly we went along ye coast of ye sayd land on the Northerly side to finde some harborough, where we entred into a Créeke altogither open on ye South, where there is no succour against ye wind: we thought good to name it S. Martines Creeke. Ther we stayed frō the fourth of Iuly, vntil the twelfth: while we were there, on Monday being the sixth of ye month, seruice being done, we wt one of our boates went to discouer a Cape & point of lande yt on the Northerne side was about seauen or eight leagues from vs, to sée whiche way it did bend, & being within halfe a league of it, we sawe two cōpanies of boats of wilde men going frō one land to the other: theyr boates were in nūber about fiue & fortie or fifty. One parte of the whiche came to the sayde pointe, and a great number of the mē went on shore, making a grét noyse, beckning vnto vs that we shoulde come on lande, shewing vs certaine skinnes vppon péeces of Woodde, but bicause we hadde but one onely boate, we woulde not goe to them;
but went to the other side, lying in the sea: they séeing vs flée, prepared two of their boats to follow vs, with whiche came also fiue more of them that were comming from the sea side, al which approched néere vnto our boate, dauncing, and ma∣king many signes of ioye and myrth, as it were desiring our friendship, saying in theyr tongue NAPEV TONDAMEN ASSVRTAH, with manye other that we vnderstoode not. But bicause (as we haue said) we had but one boate, we wold not stande to theyr curtesie, but made signes vnto them, that they should turne backe, which they would not do, but with great furye came toward vs: and sodainely with their boates compassed vs aboute: and bycause they woulde not awaye from vs by any signes that we coulde make, we shotte of two péeces among them, whiche did so terrifie them, that they put themselues to flight towarde the sayde pointe, makyng a great noyse: and hauing stayde a while, they began a new, euen as at the first, to come to vs againe, & being come néere our boate, we strucke at them with two launces, which thing was so great a terrour vnto them, that with greate hast they began to flée, and would no more follow vs. ¶How the sayde men commming to our shippes, and our men going toward them, both parties went on land, and how the saide wilde men with great ioye beganne to tra∣ficke with our men. THe next daye, part of the sayde wilde men with nine of their boates came to the point and entrance of the créek, where we with our ships were at road. We being aduertised of theyr cōming, went to the point where they wer with our boates: but so soone as they sawe vs, they began to flée, ma∣king signes that they came to traficke with vs, shewing vs suche skinnes as they cloth themselues withall, whiche are of small value. We likewise made signes vnto them, that we wished them no euil: and in signe thereof two of our men vē∣tured to go on lande to them, and carrie them kniues wyth
other Iron wares, and a red hat to giue vnto their Captain. Which when they saw, they also came on land, and broughte some of their skinnes, and so began to deale with vs, séeming to be very glad to haue our iron wares, and other things, stil dauncing with many other ceremonies, as with their handes to cast sea water on theyr heades. They gaue vs whatsoeuer they had, not kéeping any thing, that they were constrained to go backe againe naked, and made vs signes that the nexte day they would come againe, and bring more skinnes wyth them. ¶How that we hauing sent two of our men on lande with wares, there came about .300. wilde mē with great gladnes. Of the quality of the Country, what it bringeth forth, and of the Baie called The Baie of heate. VPō Thursday being the eight of the moneth, bicause the winde was not good to go out with our ships, we set our boates in a readinesse to go to discouer the saide Baie, and ye daye we wente fiftéene leagues within it. The nexte day, the winde and wether being faire, we sayled vntil noone, in which time we had notice of a great part of the sayd Baie, and how that vpon the lowe landes, there were other lands, with high mountaines: but séeing that there was no passage at al, wée began to turne backe again, taking our way along the coast, and sayling, we sawe certaine wilde men, that stoode vpon the shore of a Lake, that is among the lowe groundes, who were making fires and smokes: we went thither, and founde that there was a Chanel of the sea, that did enter into the Lake, & setting our boates at one of the banckes of the Chanell, the wilde men with one of their boates came vnto vs, & brought vs péeces of Seales readie sodde, putting them vpon péeces of wood: then retyring themselues, they woulde make signes vnto vs, that they did giue them vs. We sente two men vnto them with Hatchets, kniues, beades, & other such like ware, whereat they were very glad, and by and by in clusters they
came to the shore where we wer with their boates, bringing with them skinnes, and other such things as they had, to haue of our wares. They were more than thrée hundred men, wo∣men, and children: some of the women which came not ouer, we might sée them stande vp to the knées in water, singing and dauncing, the other that had passed the riuer where we were, came verye friendlye to vs, rubbing oure armes with their owne handes, then woulde they lifte them vppe to∣warde heauen, shewing manye signes of gladnesse: and in such wise were we assured one of another, that we very fami∣liarly beganne to trafficke of whatsoeuer they had, till they had nothing but their naked bodies, for they gaue vs al what¦soeuer they had, and that was but of small value. We per∣ceiued that this people might verie easily be conuerted to our religion. They go from place to place. They liue only with fishing. They haue an ordinarie time to fish for their proui∣sion. The Countrey is hotter, than the Countrey of Spaine, and the fairest that can possibly be found, altogither smooth, and leauel. There is no place, be it neuer so little, but it hathe some trées (yea albeit it be sandie) or else is ful of wilde corn, that hath an eare like vnto Rie: the corn is like Oates, small Peason as thicke as if they had bin sown & plowed, white & red gooseberies, strawberies, blackberies, white & red Roses, wt many other floures, of very swéete and pleasāt smel. Ther be also many goodly medowes ful of grasse, & Lakes where gret plentie of Salmons be. They cal a Hatchet in their tōg Cochi, and a knife Bacon: we named it The Bay of Heate. ¶Of another nation of wilde men: of their maners, liuing and clothing. WE being certified that there was no passage through the said Bay, we hoised saile, & went frō S. Martines Creeke vpon Sonday being the twelfth of Iuly, to go & discouer fur∣ther in the said Baie. and went along the sea coast Estward about eightéene leagues, till we came to the Cape of Prato, where we found the tide very greate, but shallow, and the sea
stormie, so that we were constrained to draw toward shore, betwéene the saide Cape and an Ilande lying Eastwarde, a∣bout halfe a league from the Cape, where we cast Ancker for that night. The next morning we hoised sayle to trend ye said coaste about, which lyeth North Northeast. But there rose such a stormie and raging winde against vs, that we wer cō∣strained to come to the place againe, from whence we were come: There did we stay all that daye till the nexte, that wée hoised vp sayle, and came to the middest of a riuer fiue or sixe leagues from the Cape of Prato Northward, and being ouer∣thwart the said riuer, there arose againe a contrarie winde, with great fogges and stormes. So that we were constray∣ned vpon Tuisday, being the fourtéenth of the moneth, to en∣ter into the riuer, and there did we stay til the sixtéenth of the moneth, loking for faire weather to come out of it, on which day being Thursdaye, the winde became so raging, that one of our shippes lost an Ancker, and we were constrayned to go vp higher into the riuer seauen or eighte leagues, into a good harborough and ground, yt we with our boates found out, and through the euil weather, tempest, and darkenesse that was, we stayed in the saide harborough till the fiue and twentith of the month, that we coulde not come out: in the mean time we sawe a greate multitude of wilde men that were fishing for Mackrels, whereof there is great store. Their boats wer about fortie, and the persons, what with men, women, and children, two hundred, which after they had haunted our cō∣panie a while, they came very familiarly with their boates to ye sides of our ships. We gaue thē kniues, combs, beades of glas, & other tries of smal value, for which they made many signes of gladnesse, lifting their handes vp to Heauen, daun∣cing and singing in their boates. These men may very wel & truely be called Wilde, bicause there is no poorer people in the world. For I thinke al that they had togither, besides theyr boates and nets, was not worth fiue souce. They go altogi∣ther naked, sauing their priuities, which couered with a little skinne, and certaine olde skinnes that they cast vppon them.
Neyther in nature nor in language, do they any whit agrée wt them we found first: Their heads be altogither shauen, except one bush of haire, they suffer to grow vpon the toppe of theyr crowne, as long as a horsse taile, and then with certaine lea∣ther strings binde it in a knot vpon their heades. They haue no other dwelling but their boates, which they tourne vpside down, and vnder them they lay themselues al along vpon the bare ground. They eate their fleshe almoste rawe, onely that they heate it a little vppon imbers of coles, so doe they theyr fishe. Vpon Magdalens day we with our boates wente to the bancke of the riuer, and fréelye went on shore among them, whereat they made many signes of gladnesse, and al their mē in two or thrée companies began to sing and daunce, séeming to be very glad of our comming. They had caused al the yōg women to flée into the wood, two or thrée excepted, that stay∣ed with them, to each of which we gaue a combe, and a little bell made of Tinne, for which they were very glad, thanking our Captaine, rubbing his armes and breastes with theyr handes. When the men saw vs giue something vnto those that had stayde, it caused all the rest to come out of the wood, to the ende they should haue as muche as the others: These women were about twentie, who altogither in a knot fell vp∣on our Captaine, touching and rubbing him with their hāds, according to their manner of cherishing and making muche of one, who gaue to eache of them a little Tinne bell: then sodainely they began to daunce, and sing many songs. There we founde great store of Mackrels, that they had taken vpon the shore, with certaine nettes that they make to fishe, of a kinde of hempe that groweth in that place where ordinari∣lye they abide, for they neuer come to the sea, but onlye in fishing time. As farre as I vnderstand, ther groweth like∣wise a kinde of Millet as bigge as small Peason, like vnto that which groweth in Bresil, which they eat in stead of bread. They had greate store of it. They call it in theyr ong RA∣PAIGE. They haue also Primes, (that is o saye Damsins) which they dry for winter as we do, they cal thē HONESTA.
They haue also Figges, Nuttes, Apples, and other fruites▪ and Beanes, that they cal SAHV, their Nuttes CAHEHYA. If we shewed them any thing that they haue not, nor knowe not what it is, shaking their heads, they will say NOHDA, whiche is as much to say, they haue it not, nor they know it not. Of those things they haue, they would with signes shew vs the way how to dresse them, and how they grow. They eate nothing that hath any tast of salte. They are very great Théeues, for they will filh and steale whatsoeuer they can lay hold of, and all is fish that commeth to net. ¶ How our men set vp a great Crosse vpon the poynt of the sayd Porte, and the Captayne of those wild men, after a long Oration, was by our Captayne appeased, and con∣tented that two of his Children should goe with him. VPon the 24. of ye Moneth, we caused a faire high Crosse to be made of the heigth of thirtie foote, which was made in the presence of many of them, vpon the poynt of the en∣trance of the Gulfe, in the middest whereof, we hanged vp a Shéeld with thrée Floure de Luces in it, and in the toppe was carued in the wood with Anticke letters this posse, VIVE LE ROY DE FRANCE. Then before them all we set it vp vpon the sayd poynt. They with great héede beheld both the making and setting of it vp. So soone as it was vp, we alto∣gither knéeled downe before them, with our hands towarde Heauen, yéelding God thankes: and we made signes vnto them, shewing them the Heauens, and that all our saluation dependeth only on him which in them dwelleth: whereat they shewed a great admiration, looking first one at another, and then vpon the Crosse. And after we were returned to oure Shippes, their Captayne clad with an old Beares Skinne, with thrée of his Sonnes, and a Brother of his with him, came vnto vs in one of their Boates, but they came not so néere vs as they were wont to do: there he made a long Ora∣tion vnto vs, shewing vs the crosse we had set vp, and making
a Crosse with two of his fingers, then did he shew vs all the Countrey about vs, as if he would say that all was his, and that we should not set vp any Crosse without his leaue. His talke being ended, we shewed him an Axe, fayning that we would giue it him for his skinne, to whiche he listned, for by little and little he came néere our Ships. One of our fellowes that was in our boate, tooke holde on theirs, & suddaynely lept into it, with two or thrée more, who enforced him to enter in∣to our Ships, whereat they were greatly astonished. But our Captaine did straightwayes assure thē, that they should haue no harme, nor any iniury offered them at all, and entertained them very frendly, making them eate and drinke. Then did we shew them with signes, that the Crosse was but only set vp to be as a light and leader which wayes to enter into the port, and that we would shortly come againe, and bring good store of iron wares and other things, but that we would take two of his children with vs, and afterward bring them to the said port againe: and so we clothed two of them in shirtes, and coloured coates, with red cappes, and put about euery ones necke a copper chaine, whereat they were greatly contented: then gaue they their old clothes to their fellowes that wente backe againe, and we gaue to each one of those thrée that wēt backe, a hatchet, and some kniues, which made thē very glad. After these were gone, and had told the newes vnto their fel∣lowes, in the after noone there came to our ships sixe boates of them, with fiue or sixe men in euery one, to take their fare∣wels of those two we had retained to take with vs, and brought them some fish, vttering many words which we did not vnderstand, making signes that they woulde not remoue the Crosse we had set vp. ¶ How after we were departed from the saide porte, follo∣wing our voiage along the sayd coast, we went to disco∣uer the land lying South-east, and North-weast. THe nexte daye, being the 25. of the moneth, we had faire weather, and went from the said porte: and being out of
the Riuer, we sailed East North-east, for, after the entrance into the said Riuer, the land is enuironed about, and maketh a bay in maner of halfe a circle, where being in our Ships, we might sée al the coast sayling behind, which we came to séeke, the land lying South-east and North-weast, the course of which was distant from the riuer about twentie leagues. ¶ Of the Cape S. Aluise, and Momorancies Cape, and cer∣tayne other lands, and how one of our Boates touched a Rocke and suddainely went ouer it. ON monday being the 27. of the moneth, about sunne set we went along the saide lande, as we haue sayde, lying South-east and North-weast, til Wensday that we saw ano∣ther Cape, where the land beginneth to bend toward ye East: we went alongst it about 15. leagues, then doth the land begin to turne Northward. About thrée leagues frō the sayd Cape we sounded, and found 12. faddome water. The said lands are plaine, and the fairest and most without woods that we haue séene, with goodly gréene féelds and medowes, we named the said Cape S. Aluise Cape, bycause that was his day: it is 49. Degrées and a halfe in Latitude, and in Longitude. *. On Wensday morning we were on the East side of the Cape, and being almost night, we went North-eastward for to ap∣proch néere to the said land, which trēdeth North and South. From S. Aluise Cape, to another called Momerancies Cape▪ about fiftéene leagues, the lande beginneth to bende North∣weast. About thrée leagues from the sayd Cape, we woulde néedes sounde, but we could finde no ground at 75. faddome, yet went we alongst the sayd land, about tenne leagues, to the Latitude of 50. degrées. The Saturday following, being the first of August, by Sunne rising, we had sight of certayne o∣ther landes, lying North, and North-east, that were very high and craggie, and séemed to be mountaynes: betwéene which were other low lands with Wooddes and Riuers: we wente aboute the sayde landes, as well on the one side as
on the other, still bending North-weast, to sée if it were either a Gulfe, or a passage, vntill the fifth of the moneth. The di∣stance from one land to the other, is about fiftéene leagues. The middle betwéene them both, is 50. degrées and a thirde part of one in Latitude. We had much ado to go fiue miles farther, the winds were so great, and the tide against vs. And at fiue miles end, we might playnely sée and perceyue land on both sides, whiche there beginneth to spreade it selfe, but by∣cause we rather-fell, than gote way against the wind, we went toward land, purposing to goe to another Cape of land, lying Southwarde, which was the farthermost out into the Sea that we could sée, about fiue leagues from vs, but so soone as we came thither, we founde it to be nought else but Rockes, stones, and craggie cliftes, such as we had not found any where that we had sayled Southwarde from S. Iohns Cape: and then was the tide with vs, which caryed vs against the winde Westwarde, so that as we were sayling along the sayd coast, one of our Boates touched a Rocke, and suddaine∣ly went ouer, but we were constrayned to leape out, for to di∣rect it on according to the tide. ¶ How after we had agreed and consulted what was best to bee done, wee purposed to returne from S. Peeters straight, and from Tiennots Cape. AFter we had sayled along the sayd coast, for the space of two houres, behold, the tyde began to turne againste vs, with so swift and raging a course, that it was not possible for vs with thirtéene oares to rowe or gette one stones cast far∣ther, that we were constrayned to leaue our Boates with some of our men to gard them, and tenne or twelue men went on shoare to the sayd Cape, where we found that the land be∣ginneth to bend South-weast, whiche hauing séene, we came to our Boates againe, and so to oure Shippes, whiche were still readie rigged, hoping to goe forward: but for all that, they were fallen more than four leagues where we had lefte
them, where so soone as we came, we assembled togither all our Captaynes, Maysters, and Marriners, to haue their ad∣uice and opinion what was best to be done: and after that e∣uery one had sayd, considering that the Easterly windes be∣ganne to beare sway, and blow, and that the floud was so great, that we did but fall, and that there was nothing to be gotten, and that stormes and tempestes beganne to puffe in those new Countreys, and that we were so farre from home, not knowing the perils and dangers were behind, for eyther we must agrée to turne and come backe againe, or else to stay there all the yeare. Moreouer, we did consider, that if an ex∣change of the Northerne windes did take vs, it were not pos∣sible for vs to depart thence. All which opinions being heard and considered, we altogither determined to addresse oure selues homeward. Now bycause vpon Saint Peeters day we entred into the sayde straighte, we named it Saint Peeters Straight. We sounded it in many places, in some we found 70. faddome water, in some 50. and néere the shoare but 30. and cléere ground. From that day till Wensday following, we had a good and prosperous gale of wind, that we trended the sayd land about on the North East South-east, Weast and North-weast sides: for such is the situation of it, excepted one Cape of low lands that bendeth towarde South-east, a∣bout 25. leagues from the straight. In this place we sawe certayne smokes, that the people of the Countrey made vp∣pon the sayd Cape: but bycause the winde blew vs towarde the coast, we went not to them, whiche when they saw, they came with two Boates and twelue men vnto vs, and as fréelie came vnto our Shippes, as if they had bin French men, and gaue vs to vnderstande, that they came from the greate Gulfe, and that Tiennot was their Captayne, who then was vpon that Cape, making signes vnto vs, that they were going home to their Countreys where we were come from with our Shippes, and that they were laden with Fish. We named the sayd Cape, Tiennots Cape. From the saide Cape all the lande trendeth East South-east, and West North∣west.
All the land lyeth low, very pleasant, enuironed with sand, where the sea is entermingled with marishes and shal∣lowes, the space of twentie leagues: then doth the land begin to trend from Weast to East, North-east altogither enuiro∣ned with Ilands two or thrée leagues from land, in whiche as farre as we could sée, are many dangerous shealues more than foure or fiue leagues from land. ¶ How that vpon the ninth of August we entred within White Sands, and vpon the fifth of September we came to the port of S. Malo. FRom the said Wensday, vntill Saturday following, we had a great wind from the South-weast, whiche caused vs to draw East North-east, on which day we came to the Easterly partes of the new land, betwéene the Barnes and the Doble Cape. There beganne great stormie winds comming from the East with great rage: wherefore we coasted the Cape North North-weast, to searche the Northerne parte, which is (as we haue sayd) all enuironed with Ilands, and being néere the said Ilands and land, the wind turned into the South, which brought vs within the said gulfe, so that the next day being the ninth of August, we by the grace of God entred within White Sands. And this is so much as we haue discouered. After that, vpon the fiftéenth of August, be∣ing the feast of the Assumption of our Lady, after that we had heard seruice, we altogither departed from the porte of White Sands, and with a happie and prosperous weather, we came into the middle of the Sea, that is betwéene the new land  Britanie, in which place we were tost and turmoy∣led thrée dayes long with great stormes and windie tempests comming from the east, which with the aide and assistance of God we suffered: then had we faire weather, and vpon the fifth of September, in the said yeare, we came to the port of S. Malo whence we were come.
The language that is spoken in the Land newly disco∣uered, called new Fraunce. God — the Sunne Isnetz the Heauen camet the Day — the Night aiagla Water ame Sand estogatz a Sayle aganie the Head agonaze the Throate conguedo the Nose hehonguesto the Teeth hesangne the Nayles agetascu the Feete ochedasco the Legges anoudasco a dead man amocdaza a Skinne aionasa that Man yea a Hatchet asogne greene Fish gadagursere good to be eaten guesand Almonds anougaza Figges ascond Gold henyosco the priuie members assegnega an Arow cacta a greene Tree haued an earthen dish audao a Bow — Brasse aignetaze the Brow ansce a Feather yco the Moone casmogan the Earth conda the Winde canut the Rayne nnoscon Bread cacacomy the Sea a met a Shippe casaomy a Man vndo the Heares hoc hosco the Eyes ygata the Mouth hach the Eares hntasco the Armes agesc a Woman enrasesco a sicke Man alouedeche Shoes att a Skin to couer a mās priuy mēbers nscozn vondico Flesh — red cloth cahneta a Knife agobod a Macrell Nuttes Apples onesta Beanes sabe a Swoord achesco Heere endeth the first relation of Iames Carthiers discouery of the new land called New France, translated into English out of Italian by I. F. Assai ben balla a chi fortuna suma.
¶ A shorte and briefe narration of the Nauigation caused to be made by the King of France, to the Ilands of Canada, Hochelaga, Saguenay, and diuers others, which now are called New France, vvith a discourse of the particulars, customes, and man∣ners of the inhabitoures therein. Chap. 1. IN the yeare of our Lord 1535. vpon Whit∣sonday, being the 16. of May, by the comman∣dement of our owne Captayne Iames Car∣thier, and with a common accord, in the Ca∣thedrall Churche of S. Malo, we deuoutely each one confessed our selues, and receyued the Sacrament: and all entring into the Quier of the sayde Church, we presented our selues before the Reuerend Father in Christ, the Lorde Bishop of S. Malo, who blessed vs all, be∣ing in his Bishops Roabes. The Wensday following, bée∣ing the 19. of May, there rose a good gale of winde, and there∣fore we hoysed Sayle with thrée Shippes, that is to say, the great Hermina, being in burthen about a hundreth, or a hun∣dreth and twentie Tunne, wherein the foresayde Captayne Iames Carthier was Generall, and Maister Thomas Fros∣mont chiefe Mayster, accompanyed with Mayster Claudius of Pont Briand, Sonne to the Lord of Monteceuell, and Cupbea∣rer to the Dolphin of France▪ Charles of Pomera, Iohn Pow∣let, and other Gentlemen. In the second Shippe called the little Hermina, being of thréescore Tunne burthen, were Captaynes vnder the said Carthier, Mace Salobert, and May∣ster William Marie. In the third Shippe called the Heme∣rillon, being of forti Tunne in burthen, were Captaynes M. William Brittan, and M. Iames Maingare. So we sayled with a good and prosperous wind, vntil the 20. of the said mo∣neth,
at which time the weather tourned into stormes & tē∣pests, ye which with contrarie winds, and darkenesse, endured so long yt our ships being without any rest, suffered as much as any ships that euer went on seas: so that the 25. of Iune, by reason of that foule and foggie weather, all our shippes loste sight one of another, neyther sawe we one another againe tyll we came to the newe lande where we had appointed to méet. After we had lost one another, we in the Generals ship were with contrarie windes tost too and fro on the sea, vntil the se∣uenth of Iuly, vpon which daye we arriued and came to the Iland called the Iland of Byrdes, which lyeth from the main lande .44. leagues. This Ilande is so full of byrdes, that all our ships might easily haue bin fraighted with them, and yet for the great number that there is, it wold not séeme that any were taken away. We to victual our selues filled two boats of them. This Iland hath the Pole eleuated .49. degrées, and 40. minutes. Vppon the eight of the sayde moneth we sayled further, and with a prosperous weather came to the Porte called The Port of white Sandes, that is in the Baie called The Baie of Castels, where we had purposed to méete and stay togither the fiftéenth of the said month. In this place therfore we loked for our felows, that is to say, the other two ships, til the .26. of the moneth, on which daye both came togither. So soone as our fellowes were come, we set our shippes in a rea∣dinesse, taking in both water, wood, and other necessaries. And then on the 29. of the saide moneth, early in the morning wée hoised saile to passe on further, and sailing alongst the Nor∣therne coast that runneth Northeast and Southwest, til two houres after Sunne set or there aboutes, and then we cros∣sed along two Ilandes, whiche doe stretch further forth than the others, whiche we called S. Williams Ilandes, bing di∣stant aboute 20. leagues or more from the Porte of Brest. All the coast from the Castels to that place lyeth East & Weast, Northeast and Southweast, hauing betwéene it sundrye lit∣tle Ilandes, altogither barren and full of stones, wythoute eyther earth or trées, excepted certayne Valleys onely. The
nexte daye being the laste of Iulye sauing one, we sayled on (Westward to finde out other Ilands) which as yet we had not founde, xij. leagues and a halfe, among whiche there is a great Baye towarde the North all ful of Ilandes and great créekes, where manye good harboroughes séeme to be: them we named Saint Marthas Ilandes, from which about a league and a halfe further into the sea, there is a dangerous shallow, wherin are four or fiue rocks, which lye from Saint Marthas Ilandes about vij. leagues as you passe into the said Ilands, on the East and on ye West side, to which we came the said day an houre after noone, and from that houre vntil midnight we sailed about fiftéene leagues athwart a cape of ye lower Ilands, which we named S. Germans Ilāds South-eastward frō whiche place about thrée leagues, there is a very dange∣rous shallow▪ Likewise betwéen S. Germans Cape & S. Mar∣thas, about two leagues frō the said Ilāds, there lyeth a bāck of sand, vpon which hanck ye water is but two fadome déepe, & therfore séeing ye dāger of ye coast, we struck saile & went no further ye night: The next day being ye last of Iuly, we wente al along the coast yt runneth East & west, West & by North, which is al enuironed about wt Ilandes & drie sandes, and in truth are very daungerous. The length frō S. Germans Cape to the said Ilands is about xviij. leagues & a half, at the ende of which ther is a goodly plot of grounde full of huge & highe trées, albeit the rest of the coast be compassed about wt sandes wtout any signe or shew of harboroughs, til we came to Thi∣ennots Cape, which tendeth Northwest about vij. leagues from ye forsaid Ilāds, which Thiennots Cape we noted in our former voyage, & therfore we failed on all that night Weast Northwest, til it was day, & then the winde turned again frō vs, wherefore we wente to séeke a Hauen wherin we might harbor our ships, & by good hap, found one fit for our purpose, about vij. leagues & a half beyond Thiennots Cape, and that we named S. Nicholas Hauen, it lyeth amidst foure Ilandes that stretcheth into the sea. Vpon the next we for a token set vp a woodden crosse. But note by the way that crosse must be
turned Northeast, and then bending toward it, leaue it on the left hand, and you shall finde thrée fadome water, and within the Hauen but two. Also you are to take héede of two shelues that leane outwarde halfe a league. All this coaste is full of quicke sandes and very daungerous, albeit in sighte manye good Hauens séeme to be there, yet is there nought else but shelues and sandes. We staide and rested our selues in the sayde Hauen, vntill the seauenth of August being Sundaye: on whiche daye we hoysed sayle, and came towarde lande one the neather side towarde Rabasts Cape, distant from the sayd Hauen about twentie leagues North Northeast, and South Southweast: but the nexte daye there rose a stormie and a contrarie winde, and therefore we coulde finde no Hauen there towarde the South. Thence we wente coasting along toward the North, beyonde the aboue-sayde Hauen aboute tenne leagues, where we founde a goodly greate gulfe, full of Ilandes, passages, and entraunces towarde what winde so∣euer you please to bend: for the knowledge of this gulfe there is a greate Ilande that is a Cape of the maine lande, stret∣ching somewhat further foorth than the others, and aboute two leagues wythin the lande, there is an Hill fashioned as it were an heape of corne. We named the sayde Gulfe Saint Laurence hys Baie. The twelfth of the sayde month we went from the sayd S. Laurence hys Bay, or Gulfe, sayling West∣warde, and came to finde a Cape of maine lande on the Northside of the Baye, that runneth from the saide Sainte Laurence his Baie about fiue and twentie leagues West and by South. And of the two wilde men whiche we toke in our former voyage, it was tolde vs that this was of the Band towarde the South, and that there was an Ilande, on the Southerlye parte of whiche is the waye to goe to Honguedo where the yeare before we hadde taken them in Canada, and that two dayes iourney from the sayde Cape, an I∣lande began the Kingdome of Siguenay, in the land North∣warde extending towarde Canada, and aboute thrée leagues athwart the saide Cape, there is aboue fiftie faddome déepe.
Moreouer I beléeue that there was neuer so many Whale séene as we sawe that day about the Cape. The next daye af∣ter our Ladie day in August, being the fiftéenth of the month, hauing past those straightes, where we had notice of certaine landes that we left toward the South, whiche landes are full of very high hilles, and therfore we named them The Ilands of the Assumption, and one Cape of the sayd high countryes lyeth East north-easte, and Weste south-west, the distaunce betwéene which, is about fiue & twentie leagues. The Coun∣tryes lying North, maye playnely be perceyued to be higher thā the Southerly more than thirtie leagues. We trended ye saide landes about towarde the South, frō the said day vntyl Twesday noone following, the winde being in the West, and therfore we bended toward the North, purposing to go and sée the land that we before had spyed. Being arriued there, wée founde the sayd Ilands, as it were ioyned togither, and lowe toward the Sea. And the Northerly mountaines that are vp∣on the saide lowe Ilandes stretching Easte, Weste, and by Southe. Our men tolde vs that there was the beginning of Saguenay, and that it was land inhabited, and that thēce com∣meth the redde Copper, of them named CAIGNETDAZE. There is betwéen the Southerly Ilands, and the Northerly about 30. leagues distance, and more thā 100. faddome depth. The saide men did moreouer certifye vnto vs, that there was the way and beginning of the gret riuer of Hochelaga, a ready way to Canada, which riuer the further it went the narower it came, euen vntil to Canada, and that then there was freshe water, which went so farre vpwards, that they hadde neuer hearde of any man had gone to the heade of it, and that there is no other passage but with small boates. Our Captayne hearing their talke, and how they did affirm no other passage to be there, woulde not at that time procéede any further, tyll he had séene and noted the other Ilandes, & coast towarde the North, which he had ommitted to sée, after Saint Larance his gulfe, bycause he would exquisitly know, if in the Ilandes to∣ward the South any passage had bin discouered.
¶ How our Captain caused the shippes to retourne backe again, only to know if in Saint Laurence gulfe there were any passage towarde the North. CHAP. 2. VPon the 18. of August being Wednesday, our Captain caused his shippes to winde backe, and bend toward the other shore, so that we trended the sayd Northerly cost, whi∣che runneth South-east, & North-west, being fashioned like vnto halfe a bowe, and is a very high land, but yet not so high as that on the Southerly partes. The Thursday following we came to seuen very high Ilandes, whiche we named The round Ilands. These Ilandes are distant from the others a∣bout fourtie leagues, and stretche out into the Sea aboute thrée or foure leagues. Aboute these there are goodly lowe groundes to be séene full of goodlye trées, whiche we the Fry∣day following, with our boates compassed aboute. Ouer∣thwart these Ilandes there are diuerse sandie shelues more than two leagues into the sea, very daungerous, whiche at a a lowe water remaine almost dry. At the furthest boundes of these lowe Ilands, that containe about tenne leagues, ther is a riuer of fresh water, that with such swiftnesse runneth into the sea, that for the space of one league within it the water is as freshe as anye fountaine water. We with our boates entred into the saide riuer, at the entraunce of whiche we foūd about one fadome water. There are in this riuer many fishes shaped like horsses, which as our wilde men told vs, al the daye long lye in the water, and the night on lande: of which we sawe therein a great number. The next day being the one and twentith of the month, by breake of day we hoy∣sed sayle, and sayled so long about the sayde coaste, that wée had sight of the Northerly partes of it, which as yet we had not séene, and of the Iland of the Assumption which we had founde, departing from the sayde land: which thing so soon as we had done, and that we were certifyed no other passage to be there, we came to our shippe againe, whiche we had left at
the said Ilands, where is a good harborough, the water being about nine or ten faddome. In the same place by occasion of contrarie winds and foggie mystes, we were constrayned to stay, not being either able to come out of it, or hoyse sayle til the four & twentith of the month. On which day we departed & came to a hauen on the Southerly coast, about 80. leagues from the said Ilands. This hauen is ouer against thrée flat Ilāds yt lye amidst a riuer, bycause on the half way of ye sayd Ilands, & the said Hauen toward the North, there is a verye great riuer that runneth betwéene the high & low Ilands, & more than thrée leagues into the sea: it hath many shelues, & there is not altogither one fadome water, so that the place is very dangerous: & from bank to bancke of the saide shelues, there is either xv. or xx. yardes. All the Northerly cost rūneth East Northeast and South Southwest. The saide hauen wherin we stayed, is as it were but a sluce of the waters that rise by the floud, and but of smal accompt, we named them S. Iohns Isleetes, bycause we founde them, and entred into thē the day of the beheading of that Saint. Aboute fiue leagues afore you come to the said hauen Westward, there is no pas∣sage at al but only with little boates. The hauen of S. Iohns Islettes, dryeth vp all the waters that rise by flowing, yea if it flowe a faddome. The best place to harborough ships ther∣in is on the South part of a certaine little Islande that is o∣uer against the sayde hauen, whereby the bancke or shore of of the Iland riseth. Vpon the first of September we departed out of the said hauen, purposing to go towarde Canada, and a∣bout 15. leagues from it towarde West Southwest, amidst ye riuer there are thrée Ilandes, ouer against the whiche the ri∣uer runneth swift, and is of a great depth, & it is that which leadeth, and runneth into the Countrey and kingdome of Saguenay, as by the two wilde men of Canada it was tolde vs. Thys riuer, passeth and runneth along very high and stéepe hilles of bare stone, where very little earth is, and notwith∣standing there is greate quantitie of sundrie sortes of trées that growe in the sayde bare stones, euen as vppon good and
fertile ground, in such sorte that we haue séene some so great as well woulde suffise to make a maste for a shippe of fortie Tunne burden, and as gréene as possible can be growing, in a stonie rocke without any earth at all. At the entraunce of the sayd riuer we mette with foure boates ful of wilde men, whiche as farre as we coulde perceyue, verye fearefullye came toward vs, so that some of them went backe agayne, & the other came as neare vs as easilye they might heare and vnderstond one of our wilde men, who tolde them his name, and then toke acquaintaunce of them, vpon whose word they came to vs. The nexte day, being the seconde of September, we came out of the riuer to goe to Canada, and by reason of the Seas flowing, the tide was verie swifte and daungerous for that on the South part of it there lye two Ilandes, about whiche more than thrée leagues compasse, lye manye greate stones, and but two faddome water: and the flowing amidst those Ilandes, is verye vnconstante and doubtefull, that if it hadde not bene for our boates, we hadde bene in great dā∣ger to loose our liues: and coasting along the saide dry sands, there is more than fiftéen fadome water. About fiue leagues beyonde the riuer of Saguenay Southweast, there is another Ilande more Northerly acrosse, whiche are certaine highe péeces of lande, and thereaboutes we thought to haue caste Ancker on purpose to staye the nexte tide, but we could sound no ground by thrée score fadome within a flighte shoote from shoare, so that we were constrayned to winde backe to the sayde Ilande, where wée sounded againe, and founde eightéene faddome. The nexte mornyng we hoysed saile and wente thence, sayling further on, where wée hadde notice of a certayne kinde of fishe neuer to-fore of a∣nye manne séene or knowen. They are aboute the big∣nesse of a Purpois, yet nothing like them, of bodye verye well proportioned, headed lyke Graye-houndes, altogi∣ther as white as Snowe, wythout anye spotte, within which Riuer there is great quantitie of them: they do liue altogyther betwéene the Sea and the freshe Water.
These of the Countrey call them ADHOTHVYS, they folde vs that they be very sauorye and good to be eaten. Moreouer they affirme none to be foūd else-wher but in that riuer. The sixth of the month, the weather being calme & faire, we went about fiftéene leagues more vpward into the riuer, and there lighted on an Iland that looketh Northward, and it maketh a little hauen or créeke wherin are many & innumerable great Tortoyzes, continuallye lying about that Ilande. There are likewise great quantitie of the said Aphothuys taken by the inhabitours of the Coūtry, so that there is as gret concourse and méeting in that place as is at Bordeous in Fraunce at e∣uery tide. This Iland is in length about thrée leagues, and in bredth two, and is a goodly and fertile plot of ground, reple∣nished with many goodly and great trées of manye sortes. A∣mong the rest ther are many Filburde trées, which we found hanging full of them, somewhat bigger and better in sauour than ours, but somewhat harder, and therefore we called it The Iland of Filburdes. The seuenth of the month, being our Ladies euen, after seruice we went from that Ilande, to goe vp higher into the riuer, and came to the Fourteene Ilandes, seauen or eight leagues from the Ilande of Filburdes, where the Countrey of Canada beginneth, one of which Ilandes is ten leagues in length, and fiue in bredth, greatlye inhabited of such men as onlie liue by fishing of suche sortes of fishes as the riuer affourdeth, according to the seasō of them. After we had cast Ancker betwéene the sayde Ilande, and the Nor∣therly coast, we went on lande and tooke our two wilde men with vs, méeting with many of those Countrey people, who woulde not at all approch vnto vs, but rather fledde from vs vntill our two men beganne to speake vnto them, telling thē that they wer Taignoagny & Domagaia, who so soone as they had takē aquaintance of thē, began greatly to reioyce, daun∣cing and shewing many sorts of ceremonies: and many of the chiefest of thē came to our boats & brought many Eles, & o∣ther sorts of fishes, with two or thrée burdens of great Millet wherwith they make their bread, & many gret mus milions.
The same daye came also manye other boates full of those Countreymen and Women, to sée and take aquaintance of our two mē, al which were as courteously receyued, & friend∣ly entertayned of our Captayne, as possible could be. And to haue them the better acquaynted with him, and make them his friends, he gaue them many small giftes, but of small va∣lue: neuerthelesse, they were greatly contented with them. The next day following, the Lorde of Canada (whose proper name was Donnacona) but by the name of Lorde, they call him Agouhanna, with twelue boates came to our Ships, accompanyed of many people, who causing tenne of hys Boates to go backe with the other two, approched vnto vs with sixtéene men more. Then began the sayde Agouhanna being néerest vnto our Shippe, according to their manner and fashion, to frame a long Oration, mouing all his bodie and members after a strange fashion, whiche thing is a Ce∣remonie and signe of gladnesse and securitie among them, and then comming to the Generals Shippe, where Taigno∣agny, and Domagaia spake with them, and they with him, where they began to tell and shewe vnto him what they had séene in Fraunce, and what good entertainment they had had, hearing which things, the Lorde séemed to be very glad of, & prayed our Captain to reach him his arme, that he might kisse it, whych thing he did: their Lord taking it, laid it about his necke, for so they vse to do when they will make much of one. Then our Captayne entred into Agouhannas boate, causing bread and wine to be brought, to make the sayd Lord and his companie to eate and drinke, which thing they did, and were greatly thereby contented and satisfyed. Our Cap∣tayne for that time gaue them nothing, bycause he looked for a fitter oportunitie. These things being done, each one tooke leaue of others, and the Lord went with his boates agayne where he was come from. Our Captayne then caused oure boates to be set in order, that with the next tide he might goe vp higher into the Riuer, to finde some harborough wherein to set our Ships: and the next tide we went coasting alongst
the said Iland, about tenne leagues, at the ende whereof, we found a goodly and pleasant sluce of water, where is another little riuer and hauen, where by reason of the flod there, is two faddome water. This place séemed to vs very fitte and commodious to put our ships therein, and so we did very safe∣ly, we named it the holy Crosse, for on that day we came thi∣ther. Néere vnto it, there is a village, whereof Donnacona is Lord, and there he kéepeth his abode: it is called Stadgona, as goodly a plot of ground as possibly may be séene, and there∣withall very fruitefull, full of goodly trees euen as in France, as Oakes, Elmes, Ashes, Walnut trées, Maple trées, Ci∣drons, Vines, and white Thornes, that bring foorth fruite as big as any Damsons, and many other sortes of trées, vnder which groweth as faire tall hemp, as any in France, without any séede, or any mans worke or labour at all. Hauing consi∣dered the place, & finding it fit for our purpose, our Captayne withdrew himselfe on purpose to returne to our Shippes, but beholde, as we were comming out of the Riuer, we met com∣ming against vs one of the Lords of that village Stadagona, accompanied with many others, as men, women, and childrē, who after the fashion of their Countrey, in signe of mirth and ioy, began to make a long Oration, the Women still singing and dancing vp to the knées in water. Our Captayne kno∣wing their good will and kindnesse towarde vs, caused the Boate wherein they were, to come vnto him, and gaue them certaine trifles, as kniues, and beades of glasse, whereat they were maruellous glad, for we being gone about 3. leagues frō them, for the pleasure they conceyue of our comming, we might heare thē sing, & sée thē dance for all they were so farre. ¶ How our Captayne went to see and note the bignesse of the Iland, and the nature of it, and then returned to the Shippes, causing them to be brought to the Riuer of the holy Crosse. CHAP. 3. AFter we were come with our Boates vnto our Shippes againe, our Captaine caused our Barkes to be made rea∣die
to go on land in the sayde Ilande, to note the trées that in hew séemed so faire, and to consider the nature and qualitie of it, which thing we did, and found it full of good∣lye trées like to ours. Also we sawe many goodly Vines, a thing not tofore of vs séene in those Countreys, and there∣fore we named it Bacchus Iland. It is in length about twelue leagues, in sight very pleasant, but full of woods, no parte of it wrought, vnlesse it be in certaine places, where a few hou∣ses be for Fishers dwellings, as before we haue sayde. The next day we departed with our Ships to bring them to the place of the holy Crosse, and on the 14. of that moneth we came thither, and the Lorde Dormacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, with 25. Boates full of those people, came to méete vs, comming from the place whence we were come, and go∣ing toward Stadagona, where their abiding is, and all came to our Ships, shewing sundrie and diuers gestures of glad∣nes and mirth, except those two that we had brought, to witte, Taignoagny, & Domagaia, who séemed to haue altered & changed their mind & purpose, for by no meanes they would come vnto our Ships, albeit sundry times they were earnest∣ly desired to do it, whervpon we began to mistrust somewhat. Our Captayne asked thē if according to promise they would not go with him to Hochelaga, they answered yea, for so they had purposed, and then each one withdrew himselfe. The next day being the fiftenth of the moneth, our Captaine wente on shore, to cause certaine poles and piles to be driuen into the water, and set vp, that the better and safeyer we might set our Shippe there: and to behold that, many of those Countrey people came to méete vs there, among whome was Donna∣cona, and our two men, with the rest of theyr companye, who kepte themselues aside vnder a poynt or nooke of lande that is vppon the shoare of a certayne Riuer, and no one of them came vnto vs as the other did that were not on their syde. Our Captayne vnderstanding that they were there, commaunded parte of oure menne to followe hym, and hée went to the sayd poynt, where he found the sayd Donnacona,
Taignoagny, Domagaia, & diuers other: and after salutations giuen on eache side, Taignoagny setled himselfe formost to speake to our Captayne, saying that ye Lord Donnacona did greatly gréeue and sorrow that our Captayne and his mē did weare warlike weapons, and they not. Our Captaine answe∣red, that albeit it did gréeue them, yet would not he leaue thē of, and that (as he knew) it was ye maner of France. But for all these words, our Captayne and Donnacona left not off to speake one to another, and fréendly to entertaine one another. Then did we perceyue, that whatsoeuer Taignoagny spake, was only long of himself, and of his fellow, for that our Cap∣taine departed thence. He and Donnacona entred into a mar∣uellous stedfast league of friendship, whereby all his people at once with a loude voyce, cast out thrée great cryes, (a hor∣rible thing to heare) and each one hauing taken licence of the other for that day, we wente a boord agayne. The day follo∣wing, we put our two great Shippes within the Riuer and harborough, where the waters being at the highest, are but one fadome and halfe déepe, and at the lowest, but halfe a fa∣dome. We left our Galion without the sluce, to the ende we might bring it to Hochelaga. So soone as we had safely pla∣ced our Shippes, behold, we saw Donnacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, with more than fiue hundred persons, men, women, and children, and the Lorde with tenne or twelue of the chiefest of the Countrey came a boord of our shippes, who were all courteously receyued, and friendly entertayned, both of our Captayne, and of all vs: and diuers giftes of small va∣lue were giuen them. Then did Taignoagny tell our Cap∣tayne, that his Lord did greatly sorrow that he woulde go to Hochelaga, and that he would not by any meanes permit that any of them should goe with him, and that the Riuer was of no importance. Our Captayne answered him, that for all his saying, he woulde not leaue off his going thither, if by anye meanes it were possible, for that he was commanded by his King to goe as farre as possibly he could: and that if he (that is to say Taignoagny) would go with him, as he had promi∣sed
he shoulde be very wel entertained, beside that, he should haue such a gifte giuen him, as he shoulde wel content him∣selfe: for hée shoulde doe nothing else but goe with hym to Hochelaga, and come againe. To whome Taignoagny aun∣swered, that he woulde not by any meanes go, and therevp∣on sodainely returned to their houses. The nexte day beyng the 17. of September, Donnacona retourned euen as at the firste, and brought with him many Eeles, with sundry sorts of other fishes, whereof they take greate store in the sayde Riuer, as more largely hereafter shall be shewed. And as soone as they were come to our Shippes, according to their wonted vse beganne to sing and daunce. This done, Donna∣cona caused all his people to be sette of one side, then making a rounde circle vpon the Sand, caused our Captaine with al his people to enter therein, then he beganne to make a long Oration: holding in one of his handes a Maiden child 10. or 12. yeares olde, whych he presented vnto our Captaine: then sodainely beganne his people to sende out thrée shréekes or howles, in signe of ioy and league of friendshippe, presently vpon that he did present vnto him two other yong Male chil∣dren one after another, but yonger than the other, at the gy∣uing of whyche, euen as before, they gaue oute shréekes and howles very lowde, with other ceremonies: for whyche pre∣sents, our Capitaine gaue the saide Lorde greate and hearty thankes. The Lord tolde our Captaine then, that one of the children was his owne brother, and that the Maiden childe was daughter vnto his owne sister, and these presents were onely giuen him, to the end he should not goe to Hochelaga at all, to whome our Captaine answered, that if they were onely giuen hym to that intent, if so he would he should take them againe, for that by no meanes he woulde leaue hys goyng off, for as much as he was commaunded of his King. But concerning this, Domagaia tolde oure Capitaine, that their Lorde had gyuen him those children as a signe and to∣ken of goodwill and friendshippe, and that he was contented to goe wyth him to Hochelaga, vppon whyche talke greate
wordes arose betwene Taignoagny and Domagaia, by why∣che we plainely perceyued that Taignoagny was but a craf∣tie knaue, and that he pretended but mischiefe and treason, as well by thys déede as others that we by hym hadde séene. After that our Captaine caused the saide chyldren to be putte in oure shippes, and caused two Swordes, and two copper Basens, the one wrought, the other plaine, to be brou∣ghte vnto hym, and them he gaue to Donnacona, who was therewyth greately contented, yelding most hartye thankes vnto our Captain for them, and presently vpon that he com∣maunded all his people to sing and daunce, and desired oure Captaine to cause a péece of artillerie to be shot off, bycause Taignoagny and Domagaia made great brags of it, and had tolde them maruellous things, and also, bycause they had ne∣uer hearde nor séene any before: to whome our Captaine an∣swered, most willingly: and by and by commaunded his men to shoote off 12. cannons charged with bullettes, acrosse the wood that was hard by those people and ships, at whose noise they were greatly astonished and amazed, for they thoughte that Heauen had fallen vppon them, and put themselues to flight, howling, crying, and shrieking, that it séemed hel were broken loose. But before we went thence, Taignoagny cau∣sed other men to tell vs, that those men whyche we had lefte in our Gallion at roade, had staine two men of theyr compa∣ny, wyth a péece that they had shotte off, wherevppon the reste had put themselues all to flight, as thoughe they should all haue bene slaine, whych afterward we found vntrue, bi∣cause our men had not shotte off any péece at all that daye. ¶ Howe Donnacona, Taignoagny, with others, deuised a pret∣tie slight or pollicie: for they caused three of theyr men to be attyred like Diuels, fayning to be sent from theyr God Cudruaigny, onely to hinder our voyage to Hoche∣laga. CHAP. 4. THe nexte day being the eightéenth of September, these men still endeauoured themselues to séeke all meanes
possible to hinder and let our going to Hochelaga, and deuised a pretty guile, as hereafter shall he shewed. They went and dressed thrée men like Diuels, beyng wrapped in dogs skins white and blacke, theyr faces besméered as blacke as anye coales, wyth hornes on theyr heads more than a yar long, and caused them secreatly to be putte in one of theyr boates, but came not néere our shippes as they were wont to do, for they lay hidden wythin the wood for the space of two houres, looking for the tyde, to the end, the boate wherin the Diuels were, might approch and come neare vs, whych, when time was, came, and all the reste issued out of the wood commyng to vs, but yet not so neare as they were wonted to do. There began Taignoagny to salute oure Captaine, who asked hym if he woulde haue the boate to come for hym, he aunswered, not for that time, but after a while he woulde come vnto our shippes: then presently came that boate rushing out▪ wherein the thrée diuels were with such long hornes on theyr heades, and the middlemost came making a long Oration, & passed a long our shippes without turning or looking toward vs, but with the boate wente to strike on land. Then dydde Don∣nacona wyth all his people pursue them, and lay holde on the boate and Diuels, who so soone as the menne were come to them, fell prostrate in the boate euen as if they hadde béene dead: then were they taken vppe and carried into the Wood, béeyng but a stones cast off, then euery one wythdrwe him∣selfe into the wood, not onely staying behinde with vs, where beyng, they beganne to make a long discourse, so lowde, that we myghte heare them in oure shippes, whiche lasted aboue halfe an houre, and beyng ended, we gan to espie Taignoag∣ny and Domagaia comming towards vs, holding their han∣des ioyned togyther, carying their hattes vnder theyr vpper garment, shewyng a greate admiration, and Taig∣noagny lookyng vppe to Heauen, cryed thrée tymes Iesus, Iesus, Iesus, and Domagaia dooyng as hys fellow had done before, cryed, Iesus Maria. Iames Carthier oure Capitaine hearing them, and séeyng their gestures & ceremonies, asked
of them what they ayled, and what was happened or chaun∣ced anew, they aunswered, that there were very ill tydyngs befallen, saying in French, Nenns est il bon, that is to saye, it was not good: our Captaine asked them again, what it was, then answered they, that theyr Lord Cudruaigny had spo∣ken in Hochelaga, and that he had sent those thrée men to shew vnto them that there was so muche Ice and Snowe by the way, that whosoeuer went thither shoulde dye, whych wor∣des when we heard, we laughed, and mocked them, saying, that their God Cudruaigny was but a foole and a noddy, for he knewe not what he did or saide: then bade we them shewe his messengers from vs, that Christ woulde defende them al from colde, if they woulde goe with him. Then did they aske of our Captaine, if he had spoken with him, he aunsweared, no, but that his ministers had, and that he had tolde them they shoulde haue fayre weather: whiche words when they had heard, they thanked our Captaine, and departed toward the woodde to tell those newes vnto their fellowes, who so∣dainely came all rushing out of the woodde, séeming to be ve∣ry glad for those wordes that our Captaine had spoken, and to shew, that therby they had had, and felt great ioy. So soone as they were before our Shippes, they altogither gaue oute thrée great shréekes, and therevpon began to sing and dance, as they were won to doe. But for a resolution of the matter Taignoagny and Domagaia tolde our Captaine, that theyr Lorde Donnacona woulde by no meanes permitte that any of them shoulde goe with him to Hochelaga, vnlesse he would leaue hym some hostage to stay with him, our Captaine an∣swered them, that if they would not go with him with a good will, they should stay, for he would not by any meanes leaue his going off, but woulde by all meanes possible endeauour himselfe to goe thither if he coulde.
¶ Howe oure Captayne▪ wyth all his Gentlemenne, and fiftie Marriners, departed wyth oure Gallion, and the two boates of Canada to go to Hochelaga, and also there is described, what by the way and vppon the riuer was seene. CHAP. 5. THe next day being the 19. of September we hoised saile, and with our Gallion and two boates departed to go vp the riuer with the floude, where on both shoares of it we be∣ganne to sée as goodly a countrey as possibly can with eye be séene, all replenished with very goodly trées, and Vines la∣den as full of Grapes as coulde be all along the riuer; why∣che rather séemed to haue bene planted and wrought by han∣dy worke than otherwise. True it is, that bycause they are not dressed and wrought as they shoulde be, theyr bunches of Grapes are not so great as ours, also we sawe all along the riuer many horses inhabited of Fishers, whyche take all kyndes of fishes, and they with great familiaritie and kind∣nesse came vnto vs, euen as if we had bene theyr Countrey∣men, and brought vs greate store of fishe, suche as they hadde with other thyngs, whyche we exchaunged with them for o∣ther wares, who lifting vp their hands toward heauen, gaue many signes of ioy: we stayed at a place called Hochela, a∣bout 25. leagues from Canada, where the riuer waxeth very narrowe, and runneth very swift, wherefore it is very dan∣gerous, not only for that, but also for certain gret stones that are therein: Many boates and barkes came vnto vs, in one of whiche came one of the chéefe Lordes of the Countrey, making a long discourse, who beyng come néere vs, did by e∣uident signes and gestures shewe vs, that the higher the Ri∣uer went, the more daungerous it was, and bade vs take héede of our selues. The saide Lorde presented and gaue vn∣to our Captaine two of his owne children, of whyche oure Captaine tooke one being a wench seuen or eight yeres old, the man child he gaue him againe, bycause it was too yong,
for it was but thrée yeares olde. Our Captaine as friendly and as courteously dyd entertaine and receyue the sayd Lord and his company, giuing thē certaine small trifles, & so they departed towarde shoare againe. Afterwards the said Lord, his wife, and his daughter, came to visite oure Capitayne at Canada, bringing hym certaine small presents. From the 19. vntill the 28. of September, wée sailed vp along the saide ri∣uer, neuer losing one houre of time, all whyche time we saw as goodly and pleasant a Country as possibly can be wished for, full (as we haue saide before) of all sortes of goodlye trées, that is to say, Oakes, Elmes, Walnut-trées, Ce∣drons, Firres, Ashes, Boxe, Willowes, and greate store of Vines, all as full of Grapes as coulde be, that if anye of our fellowes went on shoare, they came home laden wyth them: there are likewise many Cranes, Swannes, Géese, Duckes, Feasants, Partridges, Thrushes, Blacke-birdes, Turtles, Finches, Rebreastes, Nightingales, Sparrowes, with many other sorts of Birds, euen as in France, and great plentie and store. Vpon the 28. of September, wée came to a gret wide lake in the middle of ye riuer fiue or sixe leagues broade, and twelue long, all that day we wente againste the tide, hauyng but one faddome water, still kéeping the saide scantling: beyng come to one of the heades of the Lake, wée coulde espye no passage or going out; nay, rather it séemed to haue bene closed and shutte vppe rounde about, and there was but halfe a faddome water, lyttle more or lesse. And therefore we were constrayned to caste Ancker, and staye with our Gallion, and wente with oure two boates to séeke some going out, and e place we found four or fiue bran∣ches, whyche out of the riuer come into the Lake, and they come from Hocheaga. But in the saide braunches, bicause of the greate fiercenesse and swiftnesse wherewith they breake out, and the course of the water, they make certaine Créekes▪ and goings acrosse, yet at that time there was but halfe a faddome water. Those Créekes beyng passed, we found thrée fadome, and as farre as we could perceiue by the floud
it was that time of the yeare that the waters are lowest, for at other times they lwe higher by two faddomes. All these foure or fiue braches do compasse about fiue or sixe Ilandes very pleasaunt, and thereby riseth the end of the Lake, about 15. leagues beyond, they all do come into one. That day wée landed in one of the saide Ilands, and met with fiue men that were hunting of wild beasts, who fréely and familiarly came to our boates without anye feare, as if we hadde euer béene brought vp togither. Our boates beyng somewhat neare the shoare, one of them tooke our Captaine in his armes, and ca∣ried him on shoare, as lightly and as easilie, as if he had bene a child of fiue olde: so strong and sturdy are those people. We founde, that they had a greate heape of wilde Mice that lyue in the water, as big as a Conny, and very good to eate, which they gaue vnto our Captaine, who for a recompence gaue them kniues and glazen Beades. Wée asked thē with signes if that was the way to Hochelaga, they aunswered yea, and that we had yet thrée dayes sayling thither. ¶ Howe our Captaine caused our Boates to be mended and dressed to goe to Hochelaga: and bycause the way was somewhat difficult and harde, we left our Gallion behinde: and howe we came thither, and what enter∣tainement wee had of the people. CHAP. 6. THe nexte day our Captaine séeyng, that for that tyme it was not possible for our Gallion to goe on anye fur∣ther, hée caused oure Boates to bée made readye, and as muche munition and victualles to bée putte in them, as they coulde well beare  hée departed wyth them, accompanyed wyth manye Gentlemen, that is to saye, Claudius of Ponte Briand, Cup-bearer to the Lorde Dolphin of Fraunce: Charles of Poueray: Iohn Gouion: Iohn Pow∣let: with twēty and eight marriners; and Mace Iallobert, and
William the Britton, who had the charge vnder the Captain of the other two shippes; to go vp as farre as they could into that riuer: we sailed with good and prosperous weather vn∣till the ninetéenth of October, on whiche daye we came to the towne of Hochelaga, distant from the place where we had left our Gallion 45. leagues. In whych place of Hochelaga, and all the waye we went, we met with many of those coun∣trimen, who brought vs fishe, and suche other victualles as they had, still dauncing, and greatly reioycing at oure com∣ming. Our Captaine, to lure them in, and to kéepe them our friends, to recompence them, gaue them kniues, beades, and such small trifles, wherewith they were greatly satisfied. So soone as we were come néere Hochelaga, there came to méete vs aboue a thousand persons, men, women and children, who afterwarde did friendly and merely entertaine and receyue vs as anye father woulde do his childe, whiche he had not of long tyme séene, the men dauncing on one side, the women on an other, and likewise the children on an other: after that they brought vs great store of fish, & of their breade made of Millet, casting them into oure Shippes so thicke, that you would haue thoughte it to fall from heauen. Whiche when our Captaine sawe, he, wyth many of hys companye wente on shoare: so soone as euer we were alande, they came clu∣string aboute vs, making very muche of vs, brynging theyr yong children in theyr armes, onely to haue oure Capitaine & his company to touch them, making signes and shelves of great myrth & gladnes, that lasted more than halfe an houre. Our Captaine séeyng theyr louing kindnesse and entertain∣ment of vs, caused all the women orderly to be set in araye, and gaue them Beades made of Tin, and other suche small trifles, and to some of the men he gaue kniues: then he retur∣ned to the boates to supper▪ and so passed that night, all whi∣che while all those people stoode on the shoare as neare oure boates as they might, making great fiers, and dauncing ve∣ry merily, still crying, Aguiaze, which in their tongue signi∣fieth Myrth and Safetie.
¶How our Captayne with fiue Gentlemen, and twentie armed men, all well in order, went to see the Towne of Hochelaga, and the scituation of it. CHAP. 7. OVr Captayne the next day very earely in the morning, hauing very gorgeously attired himselfe, caused all his company to be set in order to go to sée the Towne and habita∣tion of those people, and a certaine Mountayne that is some∣what néere the Citie: with whome went also fiue Gentle∣men, and twentie Marriners, leauing the rest to kéepe and looke to our Boates: we tooke with vs thrée men of Hochela∣ga to bring vs to the place. All along as we went, we founde the way as well beaten and frequented as can be, the fayrest and best Countrey that possibly can be séene, full of as goodly great Oakes as are in any wood in France, vnder whiche the ground was all couered ouer with faire Akornes. After we had gone about foure or fiue leagues, we met by the way one of the chiefest Lords of the Citie, accompanyed with manye mo, who so soone as he saw vs, beckned and made signes vn∣to vs, that we must rest vs in that place, where they had made a great fire, and so we did. After that we had rested oure selues there a while, the sayd Lord began to make a long dis∣course, euen as we haue sayd aboue they are accustomed to do in signe of mirth and frendship, shewing our Captayne and all his company a ioyfull countenance, and good will, who gaue him two hatchets, a paire of kniues, and a Crosse, which he made him to kisse, and then put it about his necke, for whiche he gaue our Captayne heartie thankes. This done, we wente along, and about a league and a halfe far∣ther, we beganne to find goodly and large féeldes, full of suche Corne as the Countrey yéeldeth. It is euen as the Millet of Bresill, as great, and somewhat bigger than small Peason, wherewith they liue euen as we do with ours. In the midst of those féelde is the Citie of Hochelaga, placed néere, and as it were ioyned to a great Mountaine that is tilled round a∣boute,
very fertile, on the toppe of whiche, you may sée ve∣rye farre, wée named it Mounte Roiall. The Cittie of Hochelaga is rounde, compassed aboute with timber, with thrée course of Rampires, one within another, framed like a sharpe Spire, but layde acrosse aboue. The middle∣most of them is made and builte as a directe line, but per∣pendicular. The Rampires are framed and fashioned with péeces of Timber, layde along on the grounde, very well and cunningly ioyned togither after their fashion. This en∣closure is in heigth aboute two roddes. It hathe but one Gate or entrie thereat, whiche is shutte with piles, stakes, and barres. Ouer it, and also in many places of the wall, there be places to runne along, and Ladders to gette vp, all full of stones, for the defence of it. There are in the Towne aboute fiftie houses, aboute fiftie paces long, and twelue, or fiftéene broade, builte all of woodde, couered o∣uer with the barke of the woodde, as broade as any boorde, very finely and cunningly ioyned togither. Within the sayde Houses, there are manye roomthes, Lodgings, and Chambers. In the middest of euery one there is a greate Courte, in the middle whereof they make their fire. They liue in commons togither: then do the Husbandes, Wiues, and Children, eache one retire themselues to their Cham∣bers▪ They haue also on the toppe of their Houses cer∣tayne Garets, wherein they kéepe their Corne to make their bread withall: they call it CARRACONNY, which they make as héereafter shall followe. They haue cer∣tayne péeces of woodde, made hollowe, like those where∣on wée beate oure Hempe, and with certayne Béetles of woodde they beate their Corne to powder: then they make paste of it, and of the paste, Cakes, or else Tartes, then lay them on a broade and hote stone, and then couer it with hote Tiles, and so they bake their Bread, in stead of Ouens. They make also sundrye sortes of Pottage with the sayde Corne of Pease, and of Beanes, where∣of they haue greate store: also with other fruites, as
Muske Millions, very greate Cowcombers. They haue al∣so in their Houses certayne Vessels, as bigge as anye Boate, or Tunne, wherein they preserue and kéepe, their fishe, causing the same in Sommer to be dryed in the Sunne, and liue therewith in Winter, whereof they make greate prouision, as we by experience haue séene. All their viandes and meates are without any tast or sauoure of salt at all. They sléepe vpon barkes of Trées layde all along vpon the grounde, with the Skinnes of certayne wilde Beastes, wherewith they also cloth and couer themselues. The thing most pretious that they haue in all the Worlde, they call it ESVRONY: it is as white as any Snowe: they take it in the Riuer of Cornibotz, in the manner as héere followeth. When any one hath deserued death, or that they take any of their enimies in Warres, first they kill him, then wyth certayne great kniues they giue great lashes and strokes vp∣pon the buttockes, flanckes, thighes, and shoulders: then they cast the same body so mangled, downe to the bottome of the Riuer, in a place where it is, called Esurgny, and there leaue it tenne or twelue houres, then they take it vp againe, and in the cuttes finde those. Of them they make beades, and weare them aboute their neckes, euen as we do them of golde, accompting it the preciousest thing in the Worlde. They haue this vertue and propertie in them, they wyll stoppe or stench any bléeding at the nose, for we haue proued it. These people are giuen to no other exercise, but onely to husbandrie, and fishing wherewith to liue, they haue no care of any other wealth or commoditie in this world, for they haue no knowledge of it, and that is, bycause they neuer trauell and goe out of theyr Countrey, as those of Canada, and Saguenay do, albeit the Canadians with eyghte or nine Villages more alongst that Riuer bée subiectes vnto them.
¶ How we came to the Towne of Hochelaga, and the entertaynemente there we had, and of certayne giftes oure Captayne gaue them, with diuers other things. CHAP. 8. SO soone as we were come néere the Towne, a greate number of the inhabitoures thereof came to presente themselues before vs after their fashion, making very much of vs: we were by our guides brought into the midst of the Towne. They haue in the middlemost parte of their houses a large square place, béeing from side to side a good stones cast, where we were brought, and there with signes were commaunded to stay: then suddaynely all the Women and Maydens of the Towne gathered themselues togither, parte of which had their armes full of yong Children, and as ma∣nie as could, came to rubbe our faces, our armes, and what parte of the bodye soeuer they could touch, wéeping for verye ioy that they saw vs, shewing vs the best countenance that possible was, desiring vs with theyr signes, that it woulde please vs to touche theyr Children. That done, the menne caused the Women to withdrawe themselues backe, then they euery one late downe on the ground round about vs, as if they would haue shewen and rehearsed some Comedie, or other shew: then presently came the Women agayne, euery one bringing a fouresquare Matte in manner of Carpettes, and spreading them abroad on the ground in that place: then they caused vs to sit vpon them. That done, the Lord & King of ye country was brought vpon nine or ten mens shoulders, (whome in theyr toung they call AGOVHANNA) sitting vpon a great Stagges Skinne, and they layde him downe vpon the forsayde mattes néere to our Captayne, euery one beckning vnto vs that he was theyr Lord and King. This Agouhanna was a manne aboute fiftie yeares olde: he was no whitte better apparelled than any of the rest, onely ex∣cepted,
that he had a certaine thing made of beasts Skinnes (called Ricc) like a redde towell, and that was in steade of his Crowne. He was full of the palsey, and his members shronke togither. After he had with certayne signes and beckes saluted our Captaine and all his company, and by manifest tokens bidde vs all welcome, he shewed his legges and armes to our Captaine, and with signes desi∣red him to touch them, and so he did, rubbing them with hys owne hands: then did Agouhanna take the wreath or crown he had about his head, and gaue it vnto our Captaine, that done, they broughte before him diuerse diseased men, some blinde, some criple, some lame and impotent, and some so olde that the heare of their eyeléeds came downe and couered their Chéekes, and laide them al along before our Captaine, to the ende they mighte of him be touched: for it séemed vnto them that God hadde bene descended and come downe from Heauen to heale them. Our Captaine séeing the misery and deuotiō of this poore people, recited the Gospel of Saint Iohn, that is to saye, In the beginning was the word: touching eue∣rie one that were diseased, praying to God that it wold please him to open the harts of this poore people, and to make them knowe his holy worde, and that they might receiue baptisme and Christendome: that done, he toke a booke in his hande, & with a lowde voyce redde all the passion of Christ, worde by word, that al the bystanders might hear him, al which while this poore people kept silence, & were maruellously attentiue, loking vp to heauē, & imitating vs in gesturs. Thē h caused he men al orderly to be set on one side, ye womē on another, & likewise the children on another, and to the chiefest of them he gaue Hatchets, to the other kniues, and to the women beades, and such other smal trifles. Then where the children were, he caste rings, counters, and branches made of Tin, whereat they séemed to be verie gladde. That done, our Cap∣taine commaunded Shawes, and other musical instrumēts to be sounded, which when they heard, they were very mer∣rie. Then we toke our leaue and wente to our boate▪ the wo∣mē
séeing that, put themselues before to stay vs, and brought vs out of their meates that they had made readie for vs, as fishe, pottage, beanes, and suche other things, thinking to make vs eate, and dine in that place: but bycause the meats hadde no sauoure at all of salte, we liked them not, but than∣ked them, and with signes gaue them to vnderstand that we hadde no néede to eate. When we were out of the Towne, diuerse of the men and women followed vs, and broughte vs to the toppe of the forsayde mountaine, which we named Mount Roiall, it is aboute a league from the Town. When as we were on the top of it, we myght discerne, and plaine∣ly sée thirtie leagues off. On the Northe side of it there are manye hilles to be séene, running Weaste and Easte, and as manye more on the South, amongst and betwéene the whiche the Countrey is as fayre and as pleasaunte as possiblye can bée séene, being leauell, smoothe, and verye playne, fitte to be husbanded and tilled: and in the middest of those fieldes wée mighte sée further a greate way than where wée hadde lefte oure boates, where was the greatest and the swiftest fall of water that anye where hathe béen séene, as greate, wide, and large, as oure fighte myghte discerne, goyng Southweast along thrée fayre and rounde Mountaines that we sawe, as we iud∣ged aboute fiftéene leagues from vs. Those whiche bro∣ughte vs thyther, tolde and shewed vs, that in the sayde Ryuer there were thrée suche falles of water more, as that was where we hadde lefte oure boates: but bi∣cause we coulde not vnderstande theyr language, we coulde not knowe howe farre they were one from ano∣ther. Moreouer, they shewed vs wyth signes, that the sayde thrée falles being paste, a manne myghte sayle the space of thrée moneths more alongst that Riuer, and that a∣long the Hilles that are on the Northe side, there is a greate Riuer, whyche euen as the other commeth from the Easte, wée thoughte it to bée the Riuer that runneth
throughe the Countrey of Saguenay: and wythoute anye signe or question moued or asked of them, they toke the chayne of oure Captaines whistell, whiche was of siluer, and the dagger hafte of one of oure fellowe Marriners, hangyng on hys side, being of yellowe Copper, guilte, and shewed vs that suche stuffe came from the sayde Ri∣uer, and that there bée Agouionda, that is as muche to saye, as euill people, who goe all armed euen to their fingers endes. Also they shewed vs the manner and ma∣king of theyr armoure: they are made of coardes and woodde, finelye and cunninglye wroughte togyther. They gaue vs also to vnderstande that those Agouionda, doe continuallye warre againste them: but bycause we dyd not vnderstande them well, wée coulde not perceyue how farre it was to that Countrey. Our Captaine shewed them redde Copper, whyche in theyr language they call Caignetadze, and lookyng towarde that Countrey wyth signes, asked them if anye came from thence, they shakyng theyr heades aunsweared no: but they shewed vs that it came from Saguenay, and that lyeth cleane contrarye to the other. After we hadde hearde and séene these things of them, we drewe to oure boates accompanyed wyth greate multitude of those people: some of them when as they sawe anye of oure fellowes wearye, they woulde take them vppe on theyr shoul∣ders, and carrye them as on horssebacke. So soone as we came to oure boates, we hoysed sayle to goe towarde uer Gallion, doubting of some mischaunce. Oure de∣parture grieued and displeased them verye muche, for they followed vs along the Riuer as farre as they coulde: wée wente so faste that on Mondaye beyng the fourth of October wée came where oure Galli∣on was. The Twesdaye followyng, being the fifthe of the moneth, we hoysed sayle, and wyth oure Gallion and
boates, departed from thence toward the prouince of Canada, to the port of the Holy Crosse, where we had left our ships. The seauenth daye we came against a riuer that commeth from the North, and entred into that riuer, at the entraunce wherof are foure little Ilandes, ful of faire and goodly trées: we named that riuer The riuer of Fouetz: But bycause one of those Ilandes stretcheth himselfe a great way into the ri∣uer, our Captaine at the point of it caused a goodlye greate Crosse to be set vppe, and commaunded the boats to be made readie, that with the nexte tide he mighte goe vp to the sayde riuer, and consider the qualitie of it, whiche we did, and that daye wente vp as farre as we coulde: but bycause we founde it to bée of no importaunce, and that wée coulde sounde no bottome, we retourned down and back againe. ¶ Howe wee came to the Port of the Holie Crosse, and in what state we founde our shippes: and howe the Lorde of the Countrey came to visite oure Captaine, and oure Captain him: and of certaine particular customes of the people. CHAP. 9. VPon Monday being the eleuenth of October we came to the Port of the Holy Crosse, where our shippes were, & founde that the maisters and Mariners we had lefte there, had made and reared a Trench before the ships, altogither closed with great péeces of Timber set vprighte and verye well fastened togither: then had they beset the saide trenche aboute with péeces of Artillerie and other necessarie things to shielde and defende themselues from the power of all the Countrey. So soone as the Lorde of the Countrey heard of our comming, the next day being the twelfth of October, he came to visit vs, accompanied with Taignoagny, Domagaia▪ and many others, fayning to be verye glad of our comming, making muche of our Captain, who as friendly as he could, entertayned them, albeit they had not deserued it. Donna∣cona their Lord desired our Captaine the next day to come
and sée Canada, which he promised to do: for the next day being the thirtéenth of the moneth, he with all his gentlemen, and fiftie Mariners very wel appointed, went to visite Donnaco∣na and his people, about a league from our ships. The place where they make their abode, is called Stadagona. When we were about a stones cast from their houses, manye of the in∣habitours came to méete vs, being all set in a ranke, and (as their custome is,) the men al on one side, and the womē on the other, stil dauncing & singing without any ceasing: and after we had saluted and receiued one another, our Captaine gaue them kniues and such other slight things: then he caused all the women and children to passe along before him, giuing ech one a ring of Tin, for which they gaue him harty thāks: that done, our Captaine was by Donnacona and Taignoa∣gny, broughte to their houses (the qualitie considered) were very well prouided, and stored with suche victualles as the Countrey yéeldeth, to passe away the Winter withal. Then they shewed vs the skinnes of fiue mens heades spred vpon bourds as we do vse parchmēt, Donnacona told vs that they were skinnes of Toudamani, a people dwelling towarde the South, who continually doe warre against them. Moreouer they tolde vs, that it was two yeares paste that those Touda∣mans came to assault them, yea euen into the said riuer, in an Iland that lyeth ouer against Saguenay, where they had bene the night before, as they were going a warfaring in Hongue∣do, with two hundereth persons, men, women, and children, who being all asléepe in a ort that they had made, they were assaulted by the saide Toudamans, who put fire rounde aboute the ort, and as they would haue come out of it to saue them∣selues, they were al slaine, onely fiue excepted, who escaped. For which losse they yet sorrowed, shewing with signes, that one day they woulde be reuenged: that done, we came to our shippes againe.
¶ The manner how the people of that Country liue: and of certaine conditions: of their Faith, manners, and cu∣stomes. CHAP. 10. THis people beléeue no whit in God, but in one whō they ca Cudruagni: the say that often he speaketh with thē and telleth them what weather shall followe, whether good or badde. Moreouer they say, that when he is angrye wyth them hée casteth duste into theyr eyes: they beléeue that whē they die they go into the Stars, and thence by little and little descend downe into the Horizon, euen as the Stars doe, and ye then they go into certaine gréene fieldes full of goodly faire & pretious trées, floures, and fruites. After that they had giuen vs these things to vnderstand, we shewed them their errour, and tolde that their Cudruaigni did but deceiue them, for hée is but a Diuell and an euill spirite: affirming vnto them, that there is but one only God, who is in Heauen, and who giueth vs all necessaries, being the creatour of all himselfe, and that onely we must belieue in him: moreouer, that it is necessarie for vs to be baptized, otherwise we are dampned into Hel. This and manye other things concerning our faith and religion we shewed them, all whiche they did easly be∣lieue,A noughtie liuer. calling their Cudruaigni, Agouiada: so that very ernest∣ly they desired and prayed our Captaine that he woulde cause them to be baptised, and their Lorde, Taignoagny, Doma∣gaia, and all the people of the towne came vnto vs, hoping to be baptised: but bycause we did not throughely knowe theyr minde, and that there was no bodie coulde giue them our beliefe and religion to vnderstande, we excused our selues, desiring Taignoagny and Domagaia to tell the reste of theyr Countreymenne, that we woulde come againe ano∣ther time, and bring Ministers and Priestes with vs, for without them they coulde not be baptised: whiche they dyd easilye belieue: for Domagaia and Taignoagny hadde séene
many children baptised in Brytain while they were there. Whiche promise when they hearde, they séemed to be verie gladde. They liue in common togither, and of such commo∣dities as their Countrey yéeldeth they are indifferentlye well stoared, the inhabitours of the Towne of  cloath themselues with the skinnes of certaine wilde beasts, but ve∣rie miserably. In Winter they weare hosen and shoes made of wilde beastes skinnes, and in Sommer they goe barefoo∣ted. They kéepe and obserue the rytes of matrimony, sa∣uing that euerye one weddeth two or thrée wiues, whiche (theyr husbandes being deade) doe neuer marrye agayne, but for the deathe of theyr husbandes weare a certayne blacke wéede all the dayes of their life, besmearing all their faces with cole duste and grease mingled togyther almoste halfe a quarter of an inche thicke, and by that they are knowen to be Widowes. They haue a filthye and detestable vse in marrying of their maydens, and that is thys, they putte them all (after they are of lw∣full age to marrie) in a common place, as harlots frée for euerie manne that will haue to doe wyth them, vntill such tyme as they finde a matche. Thys I saye, bycause I I▪ haue séene by experience manye housen full of those Damosels, euen as our scholes are full of children in Fraunc to learne to reade. Moreouer, the misrule and riot that they kéepe in those houses is verie greate, for verie want only they sporte and dallye togither, shewing what soeuer God hathe sent them. They are no men of greate labour. They ploughe theyr groundes with certain péeces of wood, as big as halfe a sworde, on whiche grounde groweth theyr corne, The call it Offici: it is as bigge as our small Peason there is great quantitie of it growing in Brasil. They haue also great store of muske Milions, Pompons, Gourdes, Cowcom∣bers, Peason, and Beanes of euerye coloure, yet differing frō ours. There groweth also a certain kind of Herb, wherof in Sommer they make greate prouision for all the yeare,
making great accompt of it, and only men vse of it, and first, they cause it to be dryed in the Sunne, then weare it aboute their neck wrapped in a little beastes skin made like a little bagge, with a hollow péece of stone or wood like a pipe: then when they please they make pouder of it, and then put it in one of the endes of the sayd Cornet or pipe, and laying a cole of re vppon it, at the other ende sucke so long, that they ll their bodies full of smoke, till that it commeth out of their mouth and nostrils, euen as out of the Tonnel of a Chimny. They say that this doth kepe them warm and in health: they neuer go without some of it about thē. We our selues haue tryed the same smoke, and hauing put it in our mouthes, it ed that they had filled it with Pepper dust, it is so hote. The omen of that Countrey doe labour muche more than the men, as well in fishing, (wherto they are greatly giuen,) as in illing and husbanding theyr groūds, and other things: as wel the mē as women, and children, are very much more able to resist colde, than sauage beastes, for we with our own eyes haue séene some of thē, when it was coldest, (which cold was extreme raw, and bitter) come to our ships stark naked going vppon Snowe and Ise, which thing séemeth incredible to them that haue not séene it. When as the Snowe and Ise lyeth on the ground, they take great store of wilde beasts, as Funes, Stagges, Beares, Martons, Hares, and Foxes▪  diuerse other sortes, whose fleshe they eate rawe, ha∣uing  dryed it in the Sunne or smoke, and so they doe their fishe. As farre forth as we coulde perceiue and vnder∣stande by these people, it were a very easie thing to bring thē to some familiaritie and ciuilitie, and make them learne what one woulde. The Lord GOD for his mercies sake lesse there vnto his helping hande when hée séeth cause. A∣men.
¶ Of the greatnesse and deapth of the sayd Riuer, and of the sortes of Beastes, Birdes, Fishes, and other things that we haue seene, with the scituation of the place. CHA. 11. THe sayd Riuer beginneth beyond the Iland of Thassump∣cion, ouer against the high Mountaynes of Honguedo, and of the seauen Ilands. The distance ouer from one side to the other, is about 35. or 40. leagues. In the middest it is aboue 100. faddome deepe. The surest way to sayle vpon it, is on the South side, and towarde the North, that is to say, from the sayd seauen Ilandes, where from side to side, there is seauen leagues, where are also two great Riuers that come downe from the hilles of Saguenay, and make diuers very dangerous shealues in the Sea. At the entrance of those two Riuers, we saw many and great store of Whales, and sea Horses. Ouer∣thwart the sayd Ilands, there is another little Riuer that runneth along those marrish groundes about thrée or foure leagues, wherein there is great store of water fowles. From the head of that Riuer to Hochelaga, there is about thrée hun∣dred leagues: the originall beginning of it is in the riuer that commeth from Saguenay, which riseth and springeth among high and stéepe hilles: it entreth into that Riuer before it com∣meth to the prouince of Canada on the North side. That riuer is very déepe, high, and straight, wherefore it is very dange∣rous for any vessell to goe vpon it. After that riuer, followeth the prouince of Canada, wherein are many people dwelling in open boroughes and villages. There are also in the circuite and territorie of Canada, along, and within the sayd riuer, ma∣ny other Ilands, some great, and some small, among whiche, there is one that conteyneth aboue tenne leagues in length, full of goodly and high tre, and also many Vines. You may go into it from both sides, but yet the surest passage is on the South side. On the shoare or bancke of that Riuer West∣ward, there is a goodly, faire, and delectable sce, or Créeke, conuenient and fitte for to harborough Shippes. Hard by, there is in that Riuer one place very narrow, déepe, and swift
running, but it is not passing the third part of a league, ouer-against the which, there is a goodly high péece of land, with a Towne therein: and the Countrey about it is very well til∣led and wroughte, and as good as possibly can bée séene. That is the place and abode of Donnacona, and of our two men we tooke in our firste voyage, it is called Stadagona. But be∣fore we come to it, there are foure other peopled Townes, that is to say, Ayraste, Starnatan, Tailla, whiche standeth vp∣pon a hill, and Scitadin, and then Stadagona, vnder whiche Towne toward the North, the Riuer and Porte of the ho∣ly Crosse is, where we stayd from the fiftenth of September, vntill the sixtéenth of May 1536. and there oure Shippes re∣mayned drie▪ as we haue sayde before. That place béeing past, we found the habitation of the people called Teguenon∣dahi, standing vpon an high Mountayne, and the valley of Hochelay, whiche standeth in a Champaigne Countrey. All that Countrey is full of sundrye sortes of woodde, and ma∣ny Vynes, vnlesse it be about the places that are inhabited, where they haue pulled vp the Trées to till and laboure the grounde, and to builde their Houses and Lodgings. There is greate store of Stagges, Déeres, Beares, and other suche lyke sortes of Beastes, as Connies, Hares, Mar∣tons, Foxes, Otters, Weasels, Badgers, and Mice excée∣ding greate, and diuers other sortes of Venison. They cloath themselues with the Skinnes of those Beastes, bycause they haue nothing else to make them apparell withall. There are also many sortes of Birds, as Cranes, Swannes, Cignes, wild Géese white and gray, Duckes, Thrushes, blacke Birdes, Turtles, wilde Pigeons, Leuites, Finches, redde breastes, Stares, Nightingales, Sparrowes, and o∣ther Birdes, euen as in France. Also as we haue sayde before, the sayde Riuer is the plentifullest of Fish that euer hath of any man bin séene or heard of, bycause that from the head to the end of it, according to their seasons, you shall find all sorts of fresh water fish, and salt. There are also many Whales, Porposes, Seahorses, and Adhothuis, whiche is a kinde of
Fish that we had neuer séene nor heard of before. They are as great as Porpoises, as white as any Snow, their body and head fashioned as a gray hound, they are woont alwayes to abide betwéene the fresh and salt water, which beginneth betwéene the Riuer of Saguenay and Canada. ¶ Of certayne aduertisements and notes giuen vnto vs by those Countreymen, after our returne from Hochelaga. CHAP. 12. AFter our returne from Hochelaga, we haue dealte, traf∣fickt, and with great familiaritie and loue haue bin con∣uersant with those that dwelt néerest vnto our Shippes, ex∣cepte that sometimes we had strife and contention with cer∣tayne naughtie people, full sore againste the will of the o∣thers. We vnderstoode of Donnacona, and of others, that the sayde Riuer is called Saguenays Riuer, and goeth to Sa∣guenay, béeing somewhat more than a league farther Weast North-weast, and that eyght or nyne dayes iourneys be∣yond, it will beare but small Boates. But the right and readye way to Saguenay, is from that Riuer to Hochelaga, and then into another that commeth from Saguenay, and then entreth into the foresayde Riuer, and that there is yet one moneths sayling thither. Moreouer, they tolde vs, and gaue vs to vnderstande, that there are people clad with cloth as we are, very honest, and many inhabited Townes, and that they haue great store of Golde, and redde Copper, and that aboute the land the sayd first Riuer to Hochelaga and Saguenay, is an Iland enuironed rounde about with that and other Riuers, which beyond Saguenay enter into two or thrée great Lakes, and that there is a Sea of fresh water found, and as they haue heard say of those of Saguenay, there was neuer manne heard of that ounde out the way and end thereof: for as they tolde vs, they themselues were neuer there. Moreouer, they tolde vs, that where we had lefte oure Galion when
we ente to Hochelaga, there is a Riuer that goeth South∣weast, from whence there is a whole moneths sayling to goe to a certayne lande, where there is neyther Yse nor Snow séene, where the inhabitours do cōtinually warre one against another, where is great store of Oranges, Almonds, Nuttes, and Apples, with many other sortes of fruites, and that the men and women are cladde with Beastes Skinnes euen as they: we asked them if there were any Gold or red Copper, they answered no. I take this place to be toward Florida, as farre as I could perceyue and vnderstand by their signes and tokens. ¶ Of a strange and cruell disease that came to the people of Stadagona, wherwith bycause we did haunt their com∣pany, we wer so infected, that there died 25. of our com∣panye. CHAP. 13. IN the moneth of December, we vnderstoode that the Plague or Pestilence was come to the people of Stadago∣na, in such sort, that before we knew of it, according to their confession, there were dead aboue 50. wherevpon we forbad them neyther to come néere our Forte, nor about our Ships, or vs. And albeit we had driuen them from vs, the sayd vn∣knowen sicknesse beganne to spread it selfe amongst vs, after the strangest sort that euer was eyther heard of or séene, in so much, as some did lose all their strength, and could not stand on their féete, then did theyr legges swell, their sinnowes shrinke as blacke as any cole. To others, all their Skinnes was spotted with spottes of bloud of a purple couloure: then did it ascende vp alofte to theyr anckles, knées, thighes, shoul∣ders, armes, and necke: their mouth became stincking, their gummes so rotten, that all the flesh did fall off, euen to the rootes of the Téeth, which did also almost all fall out. With such infection did this Sicknesse spreade it selfe in oure thrée Shippes▪ that aboute the middle of February, of a hundreth and tenne persons that we were, there were
not tenne whole, so that one coulde not helpe the other, a moste horrible and pitifull case, considering the place wée were in, forsomuch as the people of the Country would day∣ly come before our forte, and saw but few of vs. There were alreadie eight deade, and more than fiftie sicke, and as wée thought, past al hope of recouerie. Our Captaine séeing this our misery, and that the sicknesse was gone so far, ordained and commaunded, that euery one shoulde deuoutly prepare himselfe to prayer, and in remembraunce of Christ, caused his Image to be sette vp vpon a trée, aboute a Flight shotte from the Forte, amidst the Ice and Snowe, giuing all men to vnderstande, that on the Sonday following, seruice should be saide there, and, that whosoeuer coulde goe, sicke, or whole, should go thither in Procession, singing the seauen Psalmes of Dauid, with other Letanies, praying moste hartily, that it woulde please the said our Christ to haue compassion vpon vs. Seruice beyng done, and as well celebrated as we could, our Captaine there made a vowe, that if it woulde please God to giue him leaue to returne into Fraunce, he would goe on pilgrimage to our Lady of Rocquemado. That daye Phi∣lip Rougemont, borne in Amboisa, died, being two and twen∣ty yeares olde, and bicause the sicknes was to vs vnknowen, our Capitaine caused him to be ripped, to  if by any means possible we might know what it was, and so séeke means to saue and preserue the reste of the company: he was founde to haue his heart white, but rotten, & more than a pottle of red wer about it: his liuer was indifferent faire, but his lungs blacke and mortified, his bloud was altogither shrūke about the heart, so that when he was opened, great quantity of rot∣ten bloud issued out from aboute his heart: his milt toward the backe was somwhat perished, rough as if it had bin rub∣bed against a stone. Moreouer, bicause one of his thighs was very black without, it was opened, but within it was whole and sounde: that done, as wel as we could he was buryed. In suche sorte did the sicknes continue and encrease, that there were not aboue thrée found men in the ships, and none was
able to go vnder hatches to draw drinke for himselfe, nor for his fellowes. Sometimes we were constrayned to burie some of the dead vnder the Snowe, bycause we were not able to digge any graues for them, the ground was so hard frosen, and we so weake. Besides this, we did greately feare, that the people of the Countrey would perceyue our weakenesse and miserie, whiche to hide, our Captayne, whome it pleased God alwayes to kéepe in health, woulde go out with two or thrée of the companye, some sicke, and some whole, whome when he saw out of the Fort, he would throw stones at them and chide them, faigning, that so soone as he came againe, he woulde beate them, and then with signes shew the people of the Countrey, that he caused all his men to worke and la∣boure in the Shippes, some in mending them, some in beating of chalke, some in one thing, and some in another, and that he woulde not haue them come foorthe, till their worke was done. And to make his tale séeme true and likely, he woulde make all his men whole and sound to make a great noyse, with knocking stickes, stones, hammers, and other things togither, at which time, we were so oppressed, and gréeued with that sicknesse, that we had lost all hope euer to sée France agayne, if God of his infinite goodnesse and mercie had not with his pitifull ye looked vpon vs, and reuealed a singular and excellent remedie against all diseases vnto vs, the best that euer was founde vpon earth, as héereafter shall fol∣lowe. ¶ How long we stayed in the Porte of the holy Crosse a∣midst the Snow and Yse, and how many dyed of the said disease, from the beginning of it, to the midst of March. CHAP. 14. FRom the midst of Nouember, vntill the midst of Aprill, we were kepte in amidst the Yse aboue one faddome thicke, and Snow aboue foure foote high, and more higher than the sides of our Shippes, which lasted till that time, in
such sorte, that all our drinckes were frosen in the Vessels, and the Yse through all the Shippes, was aboue a hande∣breadth thicke, as well aboue hatches as beneath, and so much of the Riuer as was fresh, vntill to Hochelaga, was frosen, in which space there dyed fiue and twentie of our best and chiefest men, and all the rest so sicke, that we thoughte they shoulde neuer recouer agayne, onely thrée or foure ex∣cepted. Then it pleased God to cast his pitifull eye vpon vs, and sente vs the knowledge and remedie of our healthes and recouerie, in such maner as in the next Chapter shall be shewed. ¶ How by the grace of God we had notice of a certayne tree, wherby we all recouered our health: and the maner how to vse it. CHAP. 15. OVr Captayne considering oure estate (and how that sicknesse was encreased and hote amongst vs) one daye wente foorth of the Forte, and walking along vppon the Yse, he saw a troupe of those Countreymen comming from Sta∣dacona, among whiche was Domagaia, who not passing tenne or twelue dayes afore, had bene very sicke with that disease, and had his knées swolne as bigge as a Child of two yeares olde, all his sinowes shruncke togither, hys téeth spoyled, his gummes rotten, and stincking. Oure Captayne séeing him whole and sound, was thereat maruellous glad, hoping to vnderstand and knowe of him how he had healed himselfe, to the ende he might ease and help his men. So soone as they were come néere him, he asked Domagaia how he had done to heale hymselfe, he answered, that he had takē the iuice and sappe of the leaues of a certayne Trée, and therewith had healed himselfe: For it was a singular remedie agaynst that disease. Then our Captayne asked of hym if any were to bée had thereabout, desiring him to shew it him, for to heale a ser∣uant of his, who whilest he was in Canada with Donnacona, &
was stricken with that disease: That he did, bicause he would not shewe the number of his sicke men. Domagaia straight sent two women to fetche some of it, whyche broughte tenne or twelue braunches of it, and therewithall shewed vs the way howe to vse it, and that is thus, to take the barke and leaues of the saide trée, and boile it togither, then to drinke of the saide decoction one daye, and the other not, and the dregges of it to be put vpon his legs that is sicke: moreouer, they told vs, yt the vertue of that trée was, to heale any other disease: the trée is in their language called AMEDA. Our Captaine presently caused some of that drinke to be made for his men to drinke of it, but there was none durste taste of it, excepte one or two, who ventured the drinking of it, onely to taste and proue it: the other séeyng that, did the like, and presently recouered their health, and were delyuered of that sickenesse, and what other disease soeuer, in suche sorte, that there were some hadde béene diseased and trou∣bled wyth the French Pockes foure or fiue yeares, and wyth thys drinke were cleane healed. After thys medi∣cine was founde and proued to be true, there was suche strife aboute it, who shoulde be firste to take of it, that they were readye to kill one another, that a trée as bigge as anye Oake in Fraunce, was spoyled and lapped bare, and occupyed all in fiue or sixe dayes, and wroughte so well, that if all the Phisitions of Mountpelier, and of Louaine, hadde béene there wyth all the drugges of Alexandrîa, they woulde not haue done so muche in one yeare, as that trée dydde in sixe dayes, and didde so preuaile, that as ma∣nye as vsed of it, by the grace of GOD recouered their health.
¶ Howe the Lorde Donnacona accompanyed with Taigno∣agny and dyuers others, fayning that they woulde goe to hunt Stags, and other wilde Deere, taryed out twoo moneths, and at theyr returne broughte a greate mul∣titude of people with them, that we were not wont to see before. CHAP. 16. WHilest that disease lasted in our ships, the Lord Donna∣cona, Taignoagny, with many others, fayning, that they would go catch Stags and Déere, which is in their tongue called Aiounesta, and Asquenoudo, bycause the Ice and Snow was not so broken along the riuer that they coulde saile, it was tolde vs of Domagaia, and others, that they woulde stay out but fortnight, and we beléeued it, but they stayed aboue two moneths, whych made vs mistrust that they had bin gone to raise the Country to come againste vs, and doe vs some displeasure, wée séeyng oure selues so weake and faint. Albeit we had vsed such diligence and pollicie in our Forte, that if all the power of the country had bin aboute it, they coulde haue done nothyng but looke vpon vs: and why∣lest they were forthe, manye of the people came daylye to our shippes, and brought vs fresh meate, as Stags, Déeres, Fishes, with diuers other things, but helde them at suche an excessiue price, that rather than they would sell them anye thing cheape, many times they woulde carry them backe a∣gaine, bycause that yeare the Winter was very long & they had some scarcitie and néede of them. ¶ How Donnacona came to Stadagona againe with a greate number of people, and bycause he would not come to visite our Captaine, fayned himselfe to be sore sicke, whiche he did onely to haue the Captaine come and see him. CHAP. 17. ON the one and twentith of Aprill Domagaia came to the shoare side, accompanyed with dyuers lusty and strong
men, such as we were not wont to sée, and tolde vs that their Lord Donnacona woulde the next daye come and sée vs, and bring great store of Déers fleshe, and other things with him. The next day he came and brought a greate number of men in Stadagona, to what end, and for what cause we knew not, but (as the prouerb saith) he that takes héede and shields him selfe from all men, maye happe to scape from some, for wée had néed to looke about vs, cōsidering how in nūber we were diminished, and in strength greatlye weakened, long of our sicknesse we had bene troubled withall, that we were con∣strayned to leaue one of our shippes in the sayde Port of the Holy Crosse. Our Captain was warned of their comming, and how they had brought a great number of mē with them, for Domagaia came to tel it vs, and durst not passe the riuer that was betwixt Stadagona and vs, as he was wonte to doe, wherevpon we mistrusted of some treason. Our Captain sée∣ing this, sent one of his seruantes to them, accompanied with Iohn Poulet being beste beloued of those people, to sée who were there, and what they dyd. The sayde Poulet and the other faygned onely to be come to visite Donnacona, and bryng him certaine presentes, bycause they hadde bene togither a good while in the sayde Donnaconas Towne. So soone as he hearde of their comming, he gotte hym∣selfe to bedde, fayning to be verye sicke. That done, they wente to Taignoagny hys house to sée him, and wheresoeuer they wente, they sawe so manye people, that in a man∣ner one coulde not styrre for an other, and suche menne as they were neuer wonte to sée. Taignoagny would not permitte oure menne to enter in anye other housen, but styll kepte them companye, and broughte them halfe way to our ships, and tolde that if it would please our Capitaine to shwe him so muche fauoure as to take a Lord of the Country people, whose name Agonna, of whom he hadde receyued some displeasure, and carrye hym wyth
hym into Fraunce, he shoulde therefore for euer be bounde vn∣to hym, and woulde doe for hym whatsoeuer he coulde possi∣ble, and would do for him whatsoeuer he woulde commaund him, and bade the seruaunt to come againe the nexte daye, and bryng an aunsweare. Oure Capitayne béeyng ad∣uertised of so manye people that were there, not kno∣wyng to what ende, purposed to playe a pretty prancke, that is to saye, to take theyr Lorde Donnacona, Taigno∣agny, Domagaia, and some more of the chiefest of them, pri∣soners, in so muche as before he had purposed, to bring them into Fraunce, to shewe vnto our King what he hadde séene in those Westerne partes, and maruailes of the worlde, for that Donnacona had tolde vs, that he hée hadde béene in the Countrey of Saguenay, in whych are infinite Rubies, Golde, and other riches, and that there are white menne, who clothe themselues wyth wollen cloth euen as wée doe in Fraunce. The sayde Lorde was an olde manne, and euen from hys chyldehoode hadde neuer lefte off nor cea∣sed from trauayling into straunge Countreys, as well by Seas and Ryuers, as by Lande. The sayde Powlet, and the other hauing tolde oure Capitayne theyr Embas∣sage, and shewed hym what Taignoagny hys wyll was, the nexte daye hée sente hys seruaunt agayne, to bidde Taignoagny come and sée hym, and shewe what ée woulde, for hée shoulde bée verye well entertayned, and also parte of hys wyll shoulde bée accomplyshed. Taignoagny sente hym worde, that the nexte daye hée woulde come and bryng the Lorde Donnacona wyth hym, and hym that hadde so offended hym, whyche hée dydde not, but stayed two dayes, in whyche tyme none came from Stadagona to oure Shyppes, as they were wont to doe, but rather fledde from vs, as if wée woulde haue slayne them, so that then wée playnely perceyued theyr knauery.
But when they vnderstoode, that those of Sidatin did frequent our company, and that we had forsaken the bottome of a ship whyche we woulde leaue, to haue the olde nailes oute of it, the thirde daye followyng they came from Stadagona, and moste of them wythout difficultie did passe from one side of the riuer to the other with small Skiffes: but Donnacona hée woulde not come ouer, Taignoagny and Domagaia stood talking togither aboue an houre before they woulde come o∣uer, at laste they came to speake with our Captaine. There Taignoagny prayed him that he woulde cause the foresayde man to be taken and carryed into Fraunce. Oure Captaine refused to doe it, saying, that his Kyng had forbidden hym to bring any man or woman into Fraunce, only that he might bring two or thrée yong boyes to learne the language, but that he woulde willingly carry hym to another lande, and there putte hym. Our Captaine spake this, onely to assure them, that they should bring Donnacona wyth them, whom they had lefte on the other side, whych wordes, when Taig∣noagny hearde, he was very glad, thinking he shoulde neuer retourne into Fraunce againe, and therefore promised to come the nexte daye, whych was the day of the holy Crosse, and woulde bryng Donnacona and all the people wyth hym. ¶Howe that vpon Holyroode day our Captaine caused a Crosse to be set vp in our Forte: and howe the Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, Domagaia, and others of theyr company came: and of the taking of the saide Lorde. CHAP. 18. THe thirde of May beyng Holy roode day, our Captaine for the solemnitie of the daye, caused a goodly faire crosse of thirtie foote in heigth to be sette vppe, vnder the crosset of which he caused a shielde to be hanged, wherein was the Armes of Fraunce, and ouer them was written in antique
letters: FRANCISCVS PRIMVS DEI GRATIA FRAN∣CORVM REX REGNAT, and vpon that daye, about noone, there came a great number of the people of Stadagona, Men, Women, and Children, who told vs, that their Lord Donna∣cona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, were comming, whereof we were very glad, hoping to retayne them. Aboute two of the Clocke in the after noone they came, and being come néere our Shippes, our Captayne went to salute Donnacona, who also shewed him a merrie countenance, albeit very feareful∣ly his eye were still bent toward the woodde. Shortly after came Taignoagny, who bade Donnacona, that he should not enter in our Forte, and therefore fire was brought forth by one of our men, and kinded where their Lord was Our Cap∣tayne prayed him to come into our Ships to eate and drinke as he was wont to do, and also Taignoagny, who promised, that after a while he would come, and so they did, and entred in our Shippes: but first it was tolde our Captayne by Do∣magaia, that Taignoagny had spoken yll of him, and that he had bid Donnacona he should not come aboord our Shippes, Our Captayne perceyuing that, came out of the Forte, and saw that onely by Taignoagny his warning, the Women ranne away, and none but men stayed in great number, wher∣fore he straight commanded his men to lay hold on Donnaco∣na, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, and two more of the chiefest, whome he poynted vnto: then he commanded them to make the other to retire. Presently after, the Lord entred into the Forte with the Captayne, but by and by Taignoagny came to make him come out agayne. Our Captayne séeing that there was no other remedie, beganne to call vnto them to take them, to whose crye and voyce all his men came foorth, and tooke the sayd Lord with the others, whome they had ap∣poynted to take. The Canadians séeing their Lord taken, be∣ganne to runne away, euen as Shéepe before the Woolfe, some crossing ouer the Riuer, some through the Wooddes, th one séeking for his own aduantage. That one, we reti∣red our selues, & laid vp the prisoners vnder good gard & safety.
¶How the saide Canadians the night following came be∣fore our Ships to seeke their men, crying and howling al night like Wolues: of the talke and conclusion they agreed vpon the next day: and of the giftes which they gaue our Captaine. CHAP. 19. THe night following, they came before our Shippes, (the Riuer being betwixte vs) striking their breastes, crying and howling like Woolues, still calling Agouhanna, thinking to speake with him, which oure Captayne for that time would not permitte, neyther all the next day till noone, wherevpon they made signes vnto vs, that we had hanged or killed hym. Aboute noone, there came as great a num∣ber in a cluster, as euer we saw, who wente to hide them∣selues in the Forest, excepted some, who with a loude voyce woulde call and crye to Donnacona to speake vnto them. Our Captayne then commanded Donnacona to be broughte vpon high to speake vnto them, and bade hym be mercie, for after he had spoken, and shewed vnto the King of France what he had séene in Saguenay and other Countreys, after tenne or twelue monethes, he shoulde returne againe, and that the King of France would giue him greate rewardes, whereat Donnacona was very glad, and speaking to the o∣thers, tolde it them, who in token of ioy, gaue out thrée great cryes, and then Donnacona and his people had great talke togither, whiche for wante of interpretours, can not be de∣scribed. Oure Captayne hade Donnacona, that he shoulde cause them to come to the other side of the Riuer, to the ende they might better talke togither without any feare, and that he shoulde assure them, whiche Donnacona did, and there came a Boate full of the chiefest of them to the Shippes, and there anew beganne to talke togither, giuing greate prayse vnto our Captayne, and gaue him a presente of foure
and twentie chaynes of Esurgny, for that is the greatest, and preciousest riches they haue in this worlde, for that they e∣stéeme more of that, than of any Golde or Siluer. After they hadde long talked togyther, and that theyr Lorde sawe that there was no remedie to auoyde hys goyng into France, hée commaunded hys people the nexte daye, to bring him sme victualles to serue hym by the way. Oure Captayne gaue Donnacona as a greate presente, two frying pannes of Copper, eyght Hatchets, and other small trifles, as kniues, and Beades, whereof hée séemed to bée very glad, who sente them to his Wiues and Children. Likewise, he gaue certaine small giftes to them that came to speake with Don∣nacona, they thanked him greatly for them, and then wente to their Lodgings. ¶How that the nexte daye, beeing the fifth of May, the sayde people came agayne to speake vnto theyr Lorde, and howe that foure Women came to the Shoare to bring him Victualles. CHAP. 20. VPon the fifth of May, verye earelye in the Morning, a greate number of the sayde people came agayne to speake vnto theyr Lorde, and sente a Boate, whyche in theyr tongue they call Casnoui, wherein were only foure Women, without any manne, for feare theyr menne should be retayned. These Women broughte greate store of victualles, as Millet, whyche is their Corne that they liue withall, Fleshe, Fishe, and other thynges after theyr fashion. These Women béeing come to our Shippes, our Cap∣tayne dyd very friendly entertayne them. Then Donnacona prayde our Captayne to tel those women that he should come agayne after ten or twelue monethes, & bring Donnacona to
Canada agayne with him, that hée did only to appeale them, which our Captayne did wherefore the Women, as well by words as signes, séeme to be very glad, giuing our Captaine thankes, and tolde him, if he came againe, and brought Don∣nacona with him, they would giue him many things: in signe whereof, eache one gaue our Captayne a chayne of Esurgny, and then passed to the other side of the Riuer agayne, where stoode all the people of Stadagona, who taking all leaue of their Lord, wente home agayne. On Saturday following, bée∣ing the sixth of the moneth, we departed out of the sayd Porte, and came to harborough a little beneath the Ilande of Orle∣ans, aboute twelue leagues from the Porte of the Holy Crosse, and vppon Sunday we came to the Iland of Fil∣berdes, where we stayde vntill the sixtéenth of that Moneth, till the fiercenesse of the waters were past, which at that time ranne too swifte a course, and were too dangerous to come downe alongst the Riuer, and therefore we stayde till fayre weather came. In the meane while, many of Donnaconas Subiects came from the Riuer of Saguenay to him, but bée∣ing by Domagaia aduertised, that their Lorde was taken to be caryed into France, they were all amazed, yet for all that, they would not leaue to come to oure Shippes, to speake to Donnacona, who tolde them, that after twelue monethes, he shoulde come agayne, and that he shoulde be very well vsed, with the Captayne, Gentlemen, and Mariners. Which when they hearde, they greately thanked oure Captayne, and gaue their Lorde thrée bundles of Beauers, and Sea Woolues Skinnes, with a greate knife of redde Copper that commeth from Saguenay, and manye other thyngs. They gaue also to our Captayne a Chayne of Esurgny, for whyche oure Captayne gaue them tenne or twelue Hatchettes, and they gaue hym hartie thankes, and were very well contented. The nexte daye, béeing the sixtéenth of May, wée hoysed Sayle, and came from the sayde Iland of Fil∣burdes, to another, aboute fiftéene leagues from it, which is aboute fiue leagues in length, and there, to the ende
we might take some rest the night following, we staide that day, in hope the next day we might passe and auoyde the dan∣gers of the riuer of Saguenay, which are great. That euening we went a land and found great store of Hares, of which we toke a great many, and therefore we called it The Ilande of Hares: in the night there arose a contrarie winde, with suche stormes and tempest, that we were constrayned to bende to the Iland of Filburdes againe, from whence we were come, bycause there was none other passage among the said Ilāds, and there we stayde till the one and twentie of that moneth, that faire weather and good winde came again: and then we sayled again, and that so prosperously, that we passed to Hon∣guedo, which passage vntil that time had not bene discouered: we caused our ships to course athwart Pratos Cape, which is the beginning of the Port of Cator: and bicause the wind was good and conuenient, we sayled all day and all night without staying, and the next day we came to the middle of Brions I∣lande, which we were not minded to do, to the end we might shorten our way. These two Ilands lie Northwest, & South∣east, and are about fiftie leagues one from another. The said Iland is in latitude 47. degrées and a halfe. Vpon Thursday being the 26. of the moneth, and the feast of the Ascention of our Lord, we coasted ouer to go to a land and shallow of low sands, which are about eight leagues Sowthwest frō Brions Iland, on which are large Champaines, full of trées & towns, and also an enclosed sea, of which neyther could we sée or per∣ceiue any gap, or any way to enter therein. On Friday fol∣lowing, being the 27. of the moneth, bycause the winde did change on the cost, we came to Brions Iland againe, where we stayed till the beginning of Iune, and toward the South∣east of this Iland, we sawe a land, séeming vnto vs as an I∣lande, we coasted it about two leagues and a halfe, and by ye way we had notice of thrée other high Ilands, lying toward the Sandes, after we had known these things we retourned to the Cape of the saide land, whiche doeth diuide it selfe into two or thrée very high Capes: the waters ther are very déep,
& the floud of the Sea runneth so swift, that it cannot possibly be swifter. That day we came to S. Laurence his Cape, whi∣che is 45. degrées and halfe towards the South, wée named it S. Paules Cape, it is at 47. degrées, and a quarter. The Sonday followyng, beyng the fourth of Iune and Whitson∣day, we hadde notice of the coaste lying East Southeast, distant from the new found land aboute 22. leagues: and by∣cause the wind was against vs, we went to a Hauen, which we named S. Spiritus Porte, where wée stayed till Tuisdaye that we departed thence, sayling along that coaste vntill wée came to S. Peters Ilandes. We found along the saide coaste many very dangerous Ilands and Shelues, whych lye all in the waye East southeast, and Weast Northweast about 23. leagues into the Sea. Whilest we were in the said S. Peters Ilands we met with many ships of France and of Britaine, we stayed there from S. Barnabas day, being the 11. of the mo∣neth, vntil the 16. that we departed thence and came to cape of Ras, and entred into a Porte called Rogaoso, where we toke in freshwater, and wood to passe the sea: there we lefte one of our boates. Then vpon Monday, beyng the 19. of Iune, we went from that Porte, and wyth suche good and prospe∣rous weather we sailed along the Sea, in such sorte, that vp∣on the 6. of Iune. 1536. we came to the Porte of S. Malo, by the grace of God, to whom we pray, here ending oure Na∣uigation, that of his infinite mercie he will graunte vs hys grace and fauoure, and in the end, bring vs to the place of e∣uerlasting felicitie. AMEN. Here foloweth the language of the Country, and Kingdomes of Hochelaga and Canada, of vs called Newe Fraunce: But firste the names of theyr Numbers. Secada. 1 Indahir. 6 Tigneni. 2 Aiaga. 7 Hasche. 3 Addigue. 8 Hannaion. 4 Madellon, 9 Ouiscon. 5 Assem. 10
Here followe the names of the chiefest partes of man, and other wordes necessarie to be knowen. the Heade aggonzi the Browe hergueniascon the Eyes higata the Eares abontascon the mouth esahe the Teeth esgongai the Tongue osnache the Throate agonhon the Bearde hebelim the Face hegouascon the heares aganiscon the Armes atayascon the Flanckes aissonne the Stomacke aggruascon the Bellie eschehendo the Thighes hetnegradascon the Knees agochinegodascon the Legges agouguenehonde the Feete onchidascon the Handes aignoascon the Fingers agenoga the Nailes agedascon a Mans member amoascon a Womans member castaigne an Ele esgueny a Snaile vndeguezi a Tortois heuleuime Wooddes conda leaues of Trees hoga God cudragny giue me some drincke quazahoa quea giue me to breakfast quasa hoa quasca∣boa giue me my supper quaza hoa quatfriā let vs goe to bed casigno agnyda hoa
good morrow aignag let vs go to play casigno candy come & speak with me assigniquaddadia looke vpon me quagathoma Holde your peace aista let vs go with the boate casigno casnouy giue me a knife buazahca agoheda a Hatchet adogne a bowe ahenca a darte quahetan let vs go a hunting quasign donnascat a Stagge aionnesta a Sheepe asquenondo a Hare Sourhanda a Dogge agayo a Towne canada a Man aguhuni a Woman agruaste a Boy addegesta a Wench agniaquesta a Childe exiasta a Gowne cabata a doublet caioza Hosen hemondoha Shoes atha a Shirte amgoua a Cappe castrua Corne osizi Breade carraconny Water ame Flesh quahouascō Paces. queion Damsons honnesta Figges absconda Grapes ozoba Nuttes quahoya a Hen sahomgahea a Lamprey zisto a Salmon ondacon a Whale ainne honne a Goose sadeguenha a Streete adde Cucumber seede casconda to Morrow achide the Heauen quenhia the Earth damga the Sunne ysmay the Moone assomaha the Starres stgnehohā the Winde cohoa the Sea agogasy the waues of the Sea coa an Ilande cahena an Hill agacha the Ise honnesca Snowe cama Colde athau Hotte odazani Fier azista Smoke quea a House canoca Beanes sah Cinamond adhotathny my Father addathy my Mother adanahe my Brother addagrim my Sister adhoasseue They of Canada saye, that it is a monthes sayling to goe to a lande where Cinamonds and Cloues are gathered. Here endeth the second Relation of Iames Carthiers discouerie & nauigation to the newe founde Lande, by him named New Fraunce, translated out of Italian into Eng∣lishe by I. F. Patisco il male sperando il bene. FINIS.
