7252 99841148 5710
FORTH FEASTING. A PANEGYRICKE TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAIESTIE. Flumina senserunt ipsa. EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO HART, 1617.
FORTH FEASTING. A PANEGYRICKE To the Kings most excellent Majesty. WHat blustring Noise now interrupts my Sleepe? What echoing Shouts thus cleaue my chrystal Deep? And call mee hence from out my watrie Court? What Melodie, what Sounds of Ioye and Sport, Bee these heere hurl'd from eu'rie neighbour Spring? With what lowd Rumours doe the Mountaines ring? Which in vnusuall Pompe on tip-toes stand, And (full of Wonder) ouer-looke the Land? Whence come these glittring Throngs, these Meteors bright, This golden People set vnto my Sight? Whence doth this Praise, Applause, and Loue arise? What Load-starre east-ward draweth thus all Eyes? And doe I wake? or haue some Dreames conspir'd To mocke my Sense with Shadowes much desir'd? Stare I that liuing Face, see I those Lookes, Which with Delight wont to amaze my Brookes? Doe I beholde that Worth, that Man diuine, This Ages Glorie, by these Bankes of mine?
Then is it true what long I wish'd in vaine? That my much-louing Prince is come againe? So vnto them whose Zenith is the Pole When sixe blacke Months are past the Sunne doth rolle: So after Tempest to Sea-tossed Wights, Faire Helens Brothers show their Chearing Lights: So comes Arabias Meruaile from her Woods, And farre farre off is seene by Memphis Floods, The feather'd Syluans clowd-like by her flie, And with applauding Clangors beate the Skie, Nyle wonders, Seraps Priests entranced raue, And in Mygdonian Stone her Shape ingraue▪ In golden Leaues write downe the joyfull time In which Apollos Bird came to their clime. Let Mother Earth now deckt with Flowrs bee seene, And sweet-breath'd Zephyres curle the Medowes greene: Let Heauens weepe Rubies in a crimsin Showre, Such as on Indies Shores they vse to powre: Or with that golden Storme the Fields adorne, Which Loue rain'd, when his Blew-eyed Maide was borne. May neuer Houres the Webbe of Day out-weaue, May neuer Night rise from her sable Caue. Swell prowd my Billowes, faint not to declare Your Ioyes, as ample as their Causes are: For Murmures hoarse sound like Arions Harpe, Now delicatelie flat, now sweetlie sharpe. And you my Nymphes, rise from your moyst Repaire, Strow all your Springs and Grotts with Lillies faire: Some swiftest-footed get her hence and pray Our Floods and Lakes, come keepe this Holie-day; What e're beneath Albanias Hills doe runne, Which see the rising or the setting Sunne,
Which drinke, Sterne Grampius Mists, or Ochelles Snows: Stone-rowling Taye, Tine Tortoyse-like that flows, The Pearlie Done, the Deas, the fertile Spay, Wild Neuerne which doth see our longest Day, Nesse smoaking-Sulphure, Leaue with Mountains crown'd, Strange Loumond for his floting Isles renown'd: The Irish Rian, Ken, the Siluer Aire, The Snakie Dun, the Ore with Rushie Haire, The Chrystall-streaming Nid, lowd-bellowing Clyd, Tweed which no more our Kingdomes shall diuide: Rancke-swelling Annan, Lid with curled Streames, The Eskes, the Solway where they loose their Names. To eu'rie one proclaime our Ioyes, and Feasts, Our Triumphes, bid all come, and bee our Guests: And as they meet in Neptunes azure Hall, Bid them bid Sea-Gods keepe this Festiuall. This Day shall by our Currents bee renown'd, Our Hills about shall still this Day resound: Nay, that our loue more to this Day appeare, Let vs with it hencefoorth begin our Yeare. To Virgins Flowrs, to Sun-burnt Earth the Raine, To Mariners faire Winds amidst the Maine: Coole Shades to Pilgrimes, which hote Glances burne, Please not so much, to vs as thy returne. That Day (deare Prince) which rest vs of thy Sight, [Day, no, but Darknesse▪ and a clowdie Night] Did fraight, our Brests with Sights, our Eyes with Teares, Turn'd Minutes in sad Months, sad Months in Yeares: Trees left to flowrish, Meadows to beare Flowrs, Brookes hid their Heads within their Sedgie Bowrs, Faire Ceres curst our Fields with barren Frost, As if againe shee had her Daughter lost:
The Muses left our Groues, and for sweete Songs Sate sadlie silent, or did weepe their Wrongs; Yee know it Meads, yee murmuring Woods it know, Hilles, Dales, and Caues, Copartners of their Woe; And yee it know my Streames, which from their Eine Oft on your Glasse recieu'd their pearled Brine; O Naïds deare (saide they) Napaeas faire, O Nymphes of Trees, Nymphes which on Hills repaire, Gone are those maiden Glories, Gone that State, Which made all Eyes admire our Hap of late. As lookes the Heauen when neuer Starre appeares, But slow and wearie shroude them in their Spheares, While Tithons wife embosom'd by him lies, And World doth languish in a drearie Guise: As lookes a Garden of its Beautie spoil'd. As Wood in Winter by rough Boreas foil'd: As Pourtraicts raz'd of Colours vse to bee: So lookt these abject Bounds depriu'd of Thee. While as my Rills enjoy'd thy royall Gleames, They did not enuie Tybers haughtie Streames, Nor wealthie Tagus with his golden Ore, Nor cleare Hydaspes, which on Pearles doth roare, Empampred Gange, that sees the Sunne new borne, Nor Acheloüs with his flowrie Horne, Nor Floods which neare Elysian Fields doe fall: For why? thy Sight did serue to them for all. No Place there is so desert, so alone, Euen from the frozen to the torrid Zone, From flaming Hecla to great Quincys Lake, Which thine abode could not most happie make. All those Perfections which by bounteous Heauen To diuerse Worlds in diuerse Times were giuen,
The starrie Senate powr'd at once on Thee, That Thou Examplare mightst to others bee. Thy Life was kept till the three sisters spunne Their Threedes of Gold, and then it was begunne. With curled Clowds when Skies doe looke most faire, And no disordred Blasts disturbe the Aire: When Lillies doe them decke in azure Gownes, And new-borne Roses blushe with golden Crownes; To bode how calme wee vnder Thee should liue, What Halcyonean Dayes Thy Reigne should giue, And to two flowrie Diadems Thy right, The Heauens Thee made a Partner of the Light. Scarce wast Thou borne, when joyn'd in friendlie Bands Two mortall Foes with other clasped Hands, With Vertue Fortune stroue, which most should grace Thy Place for Thee, Thee for so high a Place, One vow'd thy sacred Brest not to forsake, The Other on Thee not to turne her Backe, And that Thou more her loues Effects mightst feele For Thee shee rent her Saile, and broke her Wheele. When Yeeres Thee vigour gaue, O then how cleare Did smother'd Sparkles in bright Flames appeare! Amongst the Woods to force a flying Hart, To pearce the mountaine Wolfe with feathred Dart, See Faulcons climbe the Clowds, the Foxe ensnare, Out-runne the winde-out-running daedale Hare, To loose a trampling Steede alongst a Plaine, And in meandring Gyres him bring againe, The Preasse Thee making place, were vulgare Things, In Admirations Aire on Glories Wings O! Thou farre from the common Pitch didst rise, With Thy designes to dazell Enuies Eyes:
Thou soughtst to know, this Alls eternall Source, Of euer-turning Heauens the restlesse Course, Their fixed Eyes, their Lights which wandring runne, Whence Moone her Siluer hath, his Gold the Sunne▪ If Destine bee or no, if Planets can By fierce Aspects force the Free-will of Man: The light and spyring Fire, the liquid Aire, The flaming Dragons, Comets with red Haire, Heauens tilting Launces, Attillerie, and Bow, Lowd-sounding Trumpets, Darts of Haile and Snow, The roaring Element with People dombe, The Earth with what conceiu'd is in her Wombe, What on her moues, were set vnto thy Sight, Till thou didst find their Causes, Essence, Might: But vnto nought Thou so Thy Mind didst straine As to bee read in Man and learne to raigne; To know the Weight and Atlas of a Crowne, To spare the Humble Prowdlings pester downe. When from those pearcing Cares which Thrones inuest, As Thornes the Rose, Thou weari'd wouldst Thee rest, With Lute in Hand, full of Coelestiall Fire, To the Pierian Groues Thou didst retire: There, garlanded with all Vranias Flowrs, In sweeter Layes than builded Thaebès Towrs, Or them which charm'd the Dolphines in the Maine, Or which did call Euridicè againe, Thou sungst away the Houres, till from their Spheare Starrs seem'd to shoote, Thy Melodie to heare. The God with golden Haire, the Sister Maids, Left, nymphall Helicon, their Tempès Shades, To see Thine Isle, heere lost their natiue Tongue, And in Thy world-diuided Language sung.
Who of thine After-age can count the Deedes, With all that Fame in Times hudge Annales Reedes, How by Example more than anie Law, This People fierce Thou didst to Goodnesse draw, How while the Neighbour Worlds (tows'd by the Fates) So manie Phaëtons had in their States, Which turn'd in heedlesse Flames their Burnish'd Thrones, Thou (as ensphear'd) keep'dst temperate Thy Zones; In Africke Shores the Sands that ebbe and flow, The speckled Flowrs in vnshorne Meads that grow, Hee sure may count, with all the Waues that meet To wash the Mauritanian Atlas feet. Though Thou were not a crowned King by Birth, Thy Worth deserues the richest Crowne on Earth. Search this Halfë. Spheare and the opposite Ground, Where is such Wit and Bountie to bee found? As into silent Night, when neare the Beare The Virgine Huntresse shines at full most cleare, And striues to match her Brothers golden Light, The Hoast of Starrs doth vanish in her sight, Arcturus dies, cool'd is the Lyons ire, Po burnes no more with Phaëtontall Fire, Orion faints to see his Armes grow blacke, And that his blazing Sword hee now doth lacke: So Europes Lights, all bright in their Degree, Loose all their Lustre paragond with Thee. By just discent Thou from moe Kings dost shine, Than maine can name Men in all their Line: What most they toyle to find, and finding hold, Thou scornest, orient Gemmes, and flattring Gold: Esteeming Treasure surer in Mens Brests, Than when immur'd with Marble, clos'd in Chests;
No Stormie Passions doe disturbe Thy Mind, No Mists of Greatnesse euer could Thee blind: Who yet hath beene so meeke? Thou Life didst giue To them who did repine to see Thee liue. What Prince by Goodnesse hath such Kingdoms gain'd? Who hath so long his Peoples Peace maintain'd? Their Swords are turn'd in Sythes, in Culters Speares, Some giant Post their anticke Armour beares: Now, where the wounded Knight his Life did bleed, The wanton Swaine sits piping on a Reed, And where the Canon did Ioues Thunder scorne, The gawdie Hunts-man windes his shrill-tun'd Horne: Her greene Lockes Ceres without feare doth die, The Pilgrime safelie in the Shade doth lie, Both Pan and Pales (carelesse) keepe their Flockes, Seas haue no Dangers saue the Winds and Rockes: Thou art this Isles Palladium, neither can [While Thou art kept] it bee o're-throwne by Man. Let Others boast of Blood and Spoyles of Foes, Fierce Rapines, Murders, Iliads of Woes, Of hated Pompe, and Trophaees reared faire, Gore-spangled Ensignes streaming in the Aire, Count how they make the Scythian them adore, The Gaditan the Souldier of Aurore, Unhappie Vauntrie! to enlarge their Bounds, Which charge thēselues with Cares, their Frēds with woūds; Which haue no Law to their ambitious Will, But (Man-plagues) borne are humane Blood to spill: Thou a true Victor art, sent from aboue What Others straine by Force to gaine by Loue, World-wandring Fame this Praise to Thee imparts, To bee the onlie Monarch of all Hearts.
They manie feare who are of manie fear'd, And Kingdomes got by Wrongs by Wrongs are tear'd, Such Thrones as Blood doth raise Blood throweth downe, No Guard so sure as Loue vnto a Crowne. Eye of our westerne World, Mars. daunting King, With whose Renowne the Earths seuen Climats ring, Thy Deeds not only claime these Diademes, To which Thame, Liffy, Taye, subject their Streames: But to thy Vertues rare, and Gifts, is due, All that the Planet of the Yeare doth view; Sure if the World aboue did want a Prince, The World aboue to it would take Thee hence. That Murder, Rapine, Lust, are fled to Hell, And in their Roomes with vs the Graces dwell, That Honour more than Riches Men respect, That Worthinesse than Gold doth more effect, That Pietie vnmasked showes her Face, That Innocencie keepes with Power her Place, That long-exil'd Astrea leaues the Heauen, And vseth right her Sword, her Weights holds euen, That the Saturnian World is come againe, Are wish'd Effects of Thy most happie Raigne. That daylie Peace, Loue, Truth, Delights encrease, And Discord, Hate, Fraude, with Incombers cease, That Men vse Strength not to shed others Blood, But vse their Strength now to doe other Good, That Furie is enchain'd, disarmed Wrath, That (saue by Natures Hand) there is no Death, That late grimme Foes, like Brothers other loue, That Vultures prey not on the harmlesse Doue, That Wolues with Lambs doe Friendship entertaine, Are wish'd Effects of thy most happie Raigne.
That Towns encrease, that ruin'd Temples rise, And their wind-mouing Vanes plante in the Skies, That Ignorance and Sloth hence runne away, That buri'd Arts now rowse them to the Day, That Hyperiòn farre beyond his Bed Doth see our Lyons rampe, our Roses spred, That Iber courts vs, Tyber not vs charmes, That Rhein with hence-brought Beams his Bosome warmes, That Euill vs feare, and Good vs doe maintaine, Are wish'd Effects of Thy most happie Raigne. O Vertues Patterne, Glorie of our Times, Sent of past Dayes to expiate the Crimes, Great King, but better farre than thou art great, Whom State not honours, but who honours State, By Wonder borne, by Wonder first enstall'd, By Wonder after to new Kingdomes call'd, Young, kept by Wonder, neare home-bred Alarmes, Old, sau'd by Wonder, from pale Traitours Harmes, To bee for this Thy Raigne which Wonders brings, A King of Wonder, Wonder vnto Kings. If Pict, Dane, Norman, Thy smooth Yoke had seene, Pict, Dane, and Norman, had Thy Subjects beene: If Brutus knew the Blisse Thy Rule doth giue, Euen Brutus joye would vnder Thee to liue: For Thou Thy People dost so dearlie loue, That they a Father, more than Prince, Thee proue. O Dayes to bee desir'd! Age happie thrice! If yee your Heauen-sent-Good could duelie prize, But yee (halfe-palsey-sicke) thinke neuer right Of what yee hold, till it bee from your Sight, Prize onlie Summers sweet and musked Breath, When armed Winters threaten you with Death,
In pallid Sicknesse doe esteeme of Health, And by sad Pouertie discerne of Wealth: I see an Age when after manie Yeares, And Reuolutions of the slow-pac'd Spheares, These Dayes shall bee to other farre esteem'd, And like Augustus palmie Raigne bee deem'd. The Names▪ of Arthure Fabulous Palladines, Grau'n in Times surlie Brows in wrinckled Lines, Of Henries, Edwards, Famous for their Fights, Their Neighbour Conquests, Orders new of Knights, Shall by this Princes Name bee past as farre As Meteors are by the Idalian Starre. If Gray-hair'd Proteüs Songs the Truth not misse, And Gray-hair'd Proteüs oft a Prophet is, There is a Land hence-distant manie Miles, Out-reaching Fiction and Atlanticke Iles, Which (Homelings) from this little World wee name, That shall imblazon with strange Rites his Fame, Shall, raise him Statues all of purest Gold, Such as men gaue vnto the Gods of old. Name by him Fanes, prowd Pallaces, and Townes, With some great Flood, which most their Fields renownes, This is that King who should make right each wrong, Of whom the Bards and mysticke Sybilles song, The Man long promis'd, by whose glorious Raigne, This Isle should yet her ancient Name regaine, And more of Fortunate deserue the Stile, Than those where Heauens with double Summers smile. Runne on (Great Prince) Thy Course in Glories Way, The End the Life the Euening crownes the Day▪ Heape Worth on Worth, and stronglie soare aboue Those Heights which made the World the first to loue,
Surmount Thy Selfe, and make thine Actions past Bee but as Gleames or Lightnings of Thy last, Let them exceed them of Thy younger Time, As farre as Autumne doth the flowrie Prime. Through this Thy Empire range, like Worlds bright Eye, That once each Yeare suruayes all Earth and Skie, Now glaunces on the slow and restic Beares, Then turnes to drie the weeping Austers Teares, Iust vnto both the Poles, and moueth euen In the infigur'd Circle of the Heauen. O long long haunt these Bounds, which by Thy Sight Haue now regain'd their former Heate and Light. Heere grow greene Woods, heere siluer Brookes doe glide, Heere Meadowes stretch them out with painted Pride Embrodring all the Banks, heere Hills aspire To crowne their Heads with the aetheriall Fire: Hills, Bullwarkes of our Freedome, giant Walls, Which neuer Fremdlings Slight nor Sword made Thralls; Each circling Flood to Thetis Tribute payes, Men heere (in Health) out-liue old Nestors Dayes: Grimme Saturne yet amongst our Rockes remaines, Bound in our Caues, with manie Mettald Chaines: Bulls haunt our Shades like Ledas Louer white, Which yet might breede Pasiphaè Delight, Our Flocks faire Fleeces beare, with which for Sport Eudemion of Old the Moone did court, High-palmed Harts amidst our Forrests runne, And, not impall'd, the deepe-mouth'd Hounds doe shunne; The rough-foote Hare him in our Bushes shrowds, And long-wing'd Haulks doe pearch amidst our Clowds. The wanton wood-Nymphes of the verdant Spring, Blew, Golden, Purple, Flowers shall to Thee bring,
Pomonas Fruits the Paniskes, Thetis Gyrles Thy Thulys Amber, with the Ocean Pearles; The Tritons, Heards-men of the glassie Field, Shall giue Thee what farre-distant Shores can yeeld, The Serean Fleeces, Erythrean Gemmes, Vaste Platas Siluer, Gold of Peru Streames, Antarticke Parrots, Aethiopian Plumes, Sabaean Odours, Myrrhe, and sweet Perfumes. And I my selfe, wrapt in a watchet Gowne, Of Reeds and Lillies on my Head a Crowne, Shall Incense to Thee burne, greene Altars raise, And yearlie sing due Paeans to thy Praise. Ah why should Isis onlie see Thee shine? Is not Thy FORTH, as well as Isis Thine? Though Isis vaunt shee hath more Wealth in store, Let it suffice Thy FORTH doth loue Thee more: Though Shee for Beautie may compare with Seine, For Swannes and Sea-Nymphes with Imperiall Rhene, Yet in the Title may bee claim'd in Thee, Nor Shee, nor all the World, can match with mee. Now when (by Honour drwne) Thou shalt away To her alreadie jelous of Thy stay, When in her amourous Armes Shee doth thee fold, And dries thy Dewie Haires with Hers of Gold, Much questioning of Thy Fare, much of Thy Sport, Much of Thine Absence, Long, how e're so short, And chides (perhaps) Thy Comming to the North, Lothe not ro thinke on Thy much-louing FORTH. O loue these Bounds, whereof Thy royall Stemme More than an hundreth were a Diademe. So euer Gold and Bayes Thy Browes adorne, So neuer Time may see Thy Race out-worne,
So of Thine Owne still mayst Thou bee desir'd, Of Strangers fear'd, redoubted, and admir'd. So MEMORIE the Praise, so pretious Houres May character Thy Name in starrie Flowres; So may Thy high Exployts at last make euen, With Earth thy Empire, Glorie with the Heauen. FINIS.
